THE Blessed Estate Of them that die in the Lord, Opened in a SERMON At the
FUNERALS Of Mistress Jane Blackwel, Wife of Master Elidad Blackwel, Pastor of
Andrew Undershaft, LONDON.

By Tho. Manton, B. D. Minister of the Gospel at Covent Garden.

LONDON: Printed for Robert Gibbs in Chancery Lane, near Serjeants-Inne. 1656.

To my Reverend, and much Beloved Friend and Brother Mr. Elidad Backwel,
Preacher of Gods Word at Andrews Undershaft, LONDON.
SIR,
I Have at length sent you the Copy of the Sermon, Preached at your Wives
Funerals; dispose of it as you shall think good, either to your Closet or the
Press: My Judgment is for the former, but my Affection will not suffer me to
oppose, if you resolve upon the latter: If it may be any allay of your sorrow
for your great loss, or of any use to the Public, I shall not repent of the
Transcription of it. This I may say with modesty enough, That the Subject is
useful and proper to the occasion. At the Interment of my godly friend, who had
so long waited on my Ministry with savor and profit; what could I insist upon
more seasonably, for your comfort and mine own, then the Blessedness of those
that live and die in the Lord? Now the Blessing of the Lord go along with this
Discourse, whatever becomes of it; and make up this great breach to you, with
the more abundance of Spiritual Refreshings. Which is the unfeigned desire of.

Sir, Your true Friend and Fellow Servant in the Lords Work THO. MANTON.

Rev. 14.13. And I heard a voice from heaven, saying unto me, write, Blessed
are the dead, which dye in the Lord, from henceforth, yea, says the Spirit,
that they may rest from their labors, and their works do follow them.
THe chief wisdom of a man is to live well, and dye well, to live godly, and
dye blessed; the same corruption of nature that makes us unwilling to live
well, makes us unwilling to dye; To forsake our corruptions, and go out of the
world, are both displeasing to flesh and blood; therefore we need to be pressed
often both to the one, and the other, for the one makes way for the other.

Upon this occasion I know not a more seasonable Argument; in Autumn, when we
see one lease, or a few leaves fall, we conclude the rest will follow
afterward; every Funeral should put us in mind that our death is not far off.
Some of us have cause to expect the next turn: Old men in Scripture account are
as good as dead already, Heb. 11.12. Those that lived longest, dyed at last:
Enos lived 905, Kenan 910, Seth 912, Adam 930, Jared 962, Methuselah 969 years,
but they all dyed. All must dye; the great care should be to dye well; none can
dye well, but those that dye in the Lord, for they are blessed; so it is
proclaimed from heaven. Every divine truth comes from heaven; but some are more
solemnly proclaimed from thence; as the mortality of man, and the blessedness
of the dead; the mortality of man, Isa. 40.6. our affections are against the
thought of that. The blessedness of the dead, in this place, against which
carnal reason opposes Nature will so hardly bel^eve that the dead can be
blessed, that we need a voice from heaven to confirm it,

The context speaks of many troubles to try the patience of the Saints; now the
comfort propounded is the blessed estate of the departed; the worst that wicked
men can do to the Saints, is but to help them the sooner to heaven.

In the words observe a Preface, and a Doctrine; The preface shows it is a
matter of weight: here is a voice from heaven, and a command to write for the
more assurance, an open publication.

2 In the Doctrine you have an assertion, and an amplification; in the
assertion, the qualification, the dead which dye in the Lord; the privilege,
are blessed. In the amp^ification you may observe, 1 The season [(...), from
henceforth].

2 The confirmation [ says the spirit] the Holy Ghost makes Affidavit: --

3 The parts of this blessedness, which are two; a release, and a reward; a
release, [ they rest from their labours] a reward employed [ their works follow
them.] Death to the godly is not only an end of misery, but a beginning of
glory and happiness. Philosophers could look upon it as the end of misery; but
Christians look upon it as a beginning of Glory and happiness.

Because I shall not be able to discuss the amplification, let me open some of
the Circumstances.

[(...), from henceforth]. Those that dyed in the Lord in former ages were
blessed; but these times did require this singular comfort, because of the
dreadful persecution, and that from those who carried the name of Christians:
Now says the Holy Ghost, not only those that suffered by heathens are
blessed, and counted the Lords Martyrs* but those that suffer also under
Pseudo-Christians. Some indeed carry it in another sense, as if it were said,
before Antichrist can down, it will cost the Church such a world of trouble,
that from henceforth you will count the dead happy, as being taken from the
evil to come, Isa. 57.1. Others thus [from henceforth] that is, after salvation
offered to the Gentiles in the Gospel, the dead shall be known to be happy; as
the Apostle says, that 2 Timothy 2.10. Life and immortality is brought to light
in the Gospel. Others apply this [from henceforth] to the time of their death,
as if the Saints were here asserted to be immediately happy upon their
dissolution. But I think the first Exposition most simple and genuine.

[ Rest from their labours] troubles, services, the labors of their callings,
the troubles of their condition. The godly are taken away from evil, and the
wicked are taken away to evil. From glorifying and serving God they never rest,
but from wear^ness in serving God, from weakness, sin, and distraction.

[ Their works follow them]. As it is said of wicked men, their iniquity shall
find them out. We carry nothing out of the world with us but the Conscience
and comfort of what we have done for God; their wealth does not follow them
into the other world, but their works do.

Doct. The point which I shall prosecute is the assertion of the Text; That
they that dye in the Lord are in a blessed condition. I shall inquire,

1 What it is to dye in the Lord? 2 Show you how they are blessed. 3 Whence it
is that they who dye in the Lord, are sure to be in a blessed condition.

1 What it is to dye in the Lord [(...)] may be rendered for the Lord, or in the
Lord; as Ephesians. 4.1. Paul a prisoner in the Lord, we render it of the Lord or
for the Lords sake. 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. We render, the dead in Christ shall rise
first, and ver. 14. those that sleep in Jesus. Which is to be preferred? I
answer, neither is to be excluded; whether a godly man fall as a peace offering
or as a burnt-offering, he is still in a happy condition.

[To dye in the Lord] may relate either to the cause for which, or to the state
wherein, or to the manner how we dye.

1 The cause for which we dye. So the Martyrs dye in the Lord or for the Lords
sake; and are blessed of God, though, it may be cursed of men. The Text relates
to the time of Antichristian persecution, when usually they dyed excommunicate
or accursed by the Roman Synagogue. God has a special regard to his Champions
that love not their lives to the death.

2 The state, wherein we dye; so to dye in the Lord is to dye in the favor of
God; in a state of peace with him as members of Christ's mystical body; they dye
in the bosom of Christ; sleep in Jesus. 1 Cor. 15.18. are reconciled to God in
and through him. There are two notable expressions which I shall commend to you
upon this occasion; One is in the 2 Pet. 3.14. That we may be found of him in
peace; To dye before the quarrel be taken up between us and God, that is sad.
When a Town is surprised by force, they that are taken with their weapons in
their hands, dye without mercy; but blessed are they that dye in peace. The
other is in the 2 Cor. 5.3. that I may not be found naked. To be summoned to
come before God, and to have nothing to cover our nakedness, that is sad; it
should be our care to be wrapped in Christ's righteousness; that is the best
shroud for a dying Christian.

3 As to the manner; they are said to dye in the Lord, who dye in a gracious
manner; it much concerns us and the glory of God that we dye well; a
Christian is not only to live to the glory of God, but to dye to the glory of
God, for living and dying we are the Lords, Romans 14.7, 8. As to the manner [ to
dye in the Lord] signifies. 1 Our perseverance in communion with him, to
continue our blessed fellowship with Christ to the death and in the death. Into
the Vineyard, Mat. 20. Some were called sooner, some later, but all continued
to the end.

Elisha would not leave his master till he was taken from him into heaven. So
till all be finished, we should follow our work close. Let us take heed (says
the Apostle) lest we seem to come short ( Heb. 4.1. As we should not come
short, we should not seem to come short. Enoch lived a long while, but all that
while he walked with God, 365 years, a long age, but spent in communion with
God! Genesis 5.22. 2 It implies the solemn actings of grace at death, the
Scripture takes notice of the last words of Saints. 2 Samuel 23.1. the last words
of David. Death is a special season wherein to make use of Grace; of faith,
love, zeal, and obedience.

1 Faith. Heb. 11.13. All these dyed in Faith; it is not enough to live by
Faith, but we must also dye by Faith. This is a Grace always of use on this
side the Grave; in the other world there is no need of it, when we come to
enjoyment, Faith cease; at death it does us the last office; we see what it
is then to put the soul into Gods keeping. 2 Timothy 1.12. Luke 23.46. Act. 7.59.
Then do we dye in faith, when we can resi^n our souls to God, and send our
bodies to the Grave in hope. While we are alive, we find it harder to depend
upon God for daily bread, then for eternal life for herein faith is put upon a
present trial* but when we come to dye, the strength of our confidence is tried
about the blessed recompenses. This then is to dye in the Lord, when we can
look beyond the grave, and within the veil, into the glory of the world to come.

2 Love* In our readiness and willingness to be with Christ, Phil. 1.23. I
desire to be dissolved and be with Christ. The Spirit and the Bride say come;
now God takes you at your word, and you draw back, Let him be afraid to dye,
that would not go to Christ.

3 Zeal for Gods glory; It is the last time you can do any thing for God in the
world; put in a word for him; commend him to those about you; as Jacob does the
Mediator, or the Angel of the Covenant, of whom he had such experience in the
course of his pilgrimage, Genesis 48.16. and Joshua 23. Josh. 14. I am going the
way of all the earth, and you know in all your hearts, and all your souls, not
one thing has failed of all the good things, which the Lord your God has
spoken; all is come to pass, not one thing has failed thereof. Words of dying
men are of most efficacy and authority, as being spoken out of all their former
experience, with most simplicity, without self-seeking, or sinister ends, with
most seriousness* for men entering upon the confines of Eternity* are wiser and
more serious; it is no time to dally and dissemble at the last gasp; speeches
of living men are suspected of partiality to their present interests; or
neglected as having no weight in them; but the speeches of dying men are
solemnly observed; therefore Joseph's brethren to engage him the more, urge him
with his fathers dying charge, Genesis 50.16. Thy father, when he dyed, said etc.
Men, as they are returning (...) to the original Divinity, as Plotinus speaks,
are supposed to be more divine, and therefore their dying words are much
regarded. Put in then a word for God; an Amen to the Promises. Carnal men
cannot honor their Principles when they dye; the world fails them, when there
is most need, Job 27 8. what hope has a hypocrite, when God comes to take away
his soul * When they are going out of the world* then they fall a complaining,
how the world has deceived them; but a Christian when he dies, he may honor
his Principles; commend the Promises; give an account of the faithfulness of
the Mediator; and plead for God at the last gasp.

4 Obedience. A Christian is not to dye like a beast, to be merely passive, his
soul is not taken away, but yielded up; there is a resignation and consent on
his part. A carnal man suffers death; but a Christian gives up the Ghost. The
Scripture uses this distinctness of speech concerning them, as concerning the
wicked, God takes away their souls, Luke 12.19. Job 27.8. they would fain keep
them longer; but the Lord puts the Bond in suit, and per-force they are dragged
into his presence; but now death to the godly, it is a sweet dismission, Luke
2.26. When they see the will of God, they hold out no longer; their souls are
not taken away, but yielded up to God:

Thus you see Grace stands by us, when all things else fail; it makes us live
with comfort, and dye with comfort. When wealth fails, Grace fails us not. So
much of the first question.

2. How they are blessed. They are presently blessed upon the departure of the
soul out of the body; but more blessed at the general Resurrection of the just.

1 Presently the soul is where Christ is; carried by Angels to Christ, and by
Christ presented to God, as the fruit of his purchase. That the soul is where
Christ is, appears by that of Phil. 1.2, 3. I desire to be dissolved and be
with Christ, to be with him in glory; otherwise it were a loss, not a happiness
for St. Paul to be dissolved; it is a sorry blessedness to lie rotting in the
Grave; and only to be eased of present labors; for Gods people are wont to
reckon much of their present service and enjoyment of God, though it be
accompanied with troubles and afflictions. Paul was in a straight, and he says
it was [(...) much more better to be with Christ] A stupid sleep without the
enjoyment of God is not much more better then our present condition, but far
worse; what happiness were that to be in such a condition, wherein we do
nothing for God, enjoy nothing from God? Surely Paul would never be in such a
straight, if this drousie Doctrine were true, that the soul lies in such an
unactive state of sleep and rest till the Resurrection. This is to be no more
blessed then stones, and inanimate creatures, that feel nothing. Again Luke 23*
43. This day shall thou be with me in Paradise, says Christ to the good thief.
Some to evade that place, refer [(...)] to [(...)] as if it were, I say to them
this day; but the pointing in the Greek Copies contradicts it, as also the
sense of the place, [(...), this day] answers to the Thieves [when thou shall
come into thy kingdom]. Christ promises more then he asks (as God does usually
abundantly for us above what we can ask or think); He has reference to Christ's
words to the High Priest; the Son of man shall come in his glory; now says
Christ, I will not defer thy desire so long, for presently shall heavenly joys
attend thy soul. Others seek to evade it by the word [Paradise] it is a
Persicke word, but used by the Hebrews for Gardens and Orchards, and by
allusion for heavenly joys; and possibly the allusion might be taken not from
the delights of an ordinary Garden; but from Eden, or that Garden in which Adam
was placed in innocence. That by Paradise is meant heaven, and not those
secreta animarum receptacula and beatae seeds, some secret places for the
repose of souls departed, which some of the Fathers fancyed, appeared by Paul's
expression in the 2 Cor. 12.4. speaking of his rapture, I was (says he) caught
up into the third heaven, which he presently calls Paradise. Well then, out of
the whole we may conclude, that the souls immediately upon their departure out
of their bodies are with Christ. Again it is said Luke 16.22. The beggar dyed
and was carried into Abraham's bosom, presently, in the twinkling of an eye, or
turning of a thought. Thus it is with the Saints, which is a great comfort;
when we come to dye, in a moment Angels will bring you to Christ; Agonies of
death are terrible, but there are joys just ready; and as soon as you are
loosed from the prison of your body, you enter into your eternal rest, the soul
flies hence to Christ. Once more; as the wicked are in their final estate as
soon as they dye, and therefore they are called [ the Spirits now in prison] 1
Pet 3.19. so do the godly enjoy their glorified estate as soon as they dye; [
the spirits of just men are made perfect] Heb. 12.24. How can their spirits be
said to be perfect, if they lie only in a dull sleep without any light, life,
joy, delight, or act of love to God?

2 They are completely blessed at the Resurrection; what their blessedness shall
be then, we cannot now know to the full; we shall understand it best, when the
great voice calls us to come up and see; Only because our ear has received a
little thereof, let me endevor to lay it before you. In blessedness there must
be

1 A removal of all evils. 2 A coacervation, and complete presence of all goods.

1 A removal of evil; as long as the least evil continues, a man is not
blessed, only less miserable. Haman had all things that a carnal heart could
wish for; he guided the affairs of 127 Provinces; only he wanted Mordecals
knee; therefore he says, all this avails me nothing. Ahab had the kingdom of
Israel, and yet falls sick for want of Naboth's Vineyard. In engines of war, if
one peg be missing, or out of order, all stops. In the body of man, if one
humor be out of order, or joint broken, it is enough to make us ill at ease,
though all the rest be sound and whole: so if if there be the least evil, a man
cannot be a complete happy man. Well then; from this blessed estate of the dead
in the Lord, All evil is removed. Now evil is twofold; either of Sin or
Punishment: In heaven there is neither.

1 To begin with Sin, that is the worst evil; affliction is evil, but it is not
evil in it self, but only in our sense and feeling; but sin is evil whether we
feel it, or no; it is worst when we feel it not. 2 That is evil which separates
from the chiefest good, Affliction does not separate from God; it is a means
and occasion to make us draw near to him; many had never been acquainted with
God, but for their afflictions; but sin separates from God, Isa. 59.2. Your
iniquities have separated, etc. Let a man be never so loathsome, yet if he be in
a state of grace, he is dear to God; the Lord takes pleasure in him; though he
should be roughcast with Ulcers and sores in a prison, yet God will kiss him
with the kisses of his mouth; there is nothing loathsome and odious to God but
sin. This grieves the Saints most, Romans 7.23. Oh wretched man that I am, etc.
if any man had cause to complain of afflictions, Paul had; in perils often, in
perils by Land, in perils by Sea, in perils by enemies, in perils by false
brethren, whipped, imprisoned, stoned; but he does not cry out, when shall I be
delivered from these afflictions, but this body of death; Lust troubled him
more then scourges; and his captivity to the Law of sin, more then chains and
prisons. This is the disposition of the Saints, they are weary of the world,
because they are sinning here, whilst others are glorifying God; not only that
they are suffering here, whilst others are enjoying God. A beast will forsake
the place where he has neither meat nor rest; Carnal men, when they are beaten
out of the word, have a fancy to heaven as a place of retreat: but that which
troubles godly men is their sin; well now, in Heaven there is no sin; there is
neither spot nor wrinckle upon the face of glorified Saints, Ephesians. 5.27 They
were once as black as you; but now Christ presents them to God, as a proof of
the cleansing virtue of his blood; there they are freed from all sin; here with
much ado we mortify our lust, and yet nature will be ever recoyling; as the
Ivy in the wall, cut it never so much, it will be breaking out again: it is
much here if the Dominion of sin be taken away; there the being of it is
abolished; the glorified Saints displease God no more, and are freed from all
the immediate and inseparable consequences of original sin; from distractions
in duty; here love is not perfect, and therefore the soul cannot be fixed in
the contemplation of God, and that is the reason of wandering thoughts; but
there the heart cleaves to him without straggling; from pride, which lasts as
long as life, and therefore called pride of life, 1 John 2.16. we cannot have a
revelation now, but we grow proud of it, nor an influence of grace, but it
lifts us up, 2 Cor. 12.2 there is a worm in Manna; but there, when we are most
high, we are most hum^le. Christians, is not this a blessed hope, that tells
you of a sinless state, of being like Christ for purity and holiness? 1 John
3.2. We shall see him as he is, for we shall be like unto him: What is it that
you have struggled with and groaned under all your lives, but sin? Now that is
blotted out, when the days of refreshing come. And as there is no sin; so there
are no temptations; In Paradise there was a tempter, but not in heaven; Satan
was long since cast out thence; and the Saints fill up the vacant rooms of the
Apostate Angels: the world is a place of snares, a valley of temptations; it is
the devils circuit; where did he walk to and fro but in the earth? But into
heaven nothing enters that defiles. Rev. 21.27. No Serpent can creep in there.
Christians, lift up your heads, you will get rid of sin and displease God no
more; here we cry, Lord deliver us from evil; and there our cries are heard at
the full; Grace weakneth sin; but Glory abolisheth it; and old Adam is left in
the Grave never to rise more.

2 The next evil is the evil of affliction; whatever is painful and burthensom
to nature, is a fruit of the fall; a brand and mark of our Rebellion against
God; therefore affliction must be done away as well as sin if we be completely
happy. As in hell there is an evil, an only evil; a cup of wrath unmixed,
without the least temperament of mercy; so in heaven there is happiness and
only happiness; sorrow is done away as well as sin* it is said, he will wipe
all tears from their eyes. The afflictions of the soul are gone; there are no
more doubtings of Gods love, nor sense of his displeasure: here though we are
pardoned, and the wound be cured, yet the scarrs remain. As Absalom could not
see the Kings face, when he was restored; in wise dispensation God sometimes
hides his face from us; we need to be dyeted and to taste the vinegar and the
gall sometimes, as well as the honey and sweetness. The world is a middle place
standing between heaven and hell, and therefore has something of both; a
mixture of pleasures and sorrows, both good and evil are to be received from
the hand of God; but there there is fullness of joy for evermore* Psalm. 16.11.
here we complain that the candle of the Lord does not shine over us with a like
brightness, but there our Sun remains in an eternal high-noon; without clouds
and the shadows of this night. The afflictions of the body are done away;
heaven is a happy air, where none are sick; there is no such thing there as
Gowts and Agues, and the grinding pains of the stone: The body here is called a
vile body, Phil. 3.21. as it is the instrument of sin and the subject of
diseases; we have the root of diseases in the soul, and the matter and fuel of
diseases in the body, peccant humors and principles of corruption; as wood is
eaten out with worms that breed within it self, so are there in our bodies
principles of corruption that do at leng^h destroy them; but there we are
wholly incorruptible. Yea, because deformity in the body is a monument of Gods
displeasure, one of the inconveniences introduced by Adams fall, it is done
away; the bodies rise in due proportion; whatever was monstrous or misshapen in
the first edition, is corrected in the second. And for violence without, heaven
is a quiet place; when there are tumults in the world, God is introduced, Psalm.
2. as sitting in the heavens; a qu^et posture. There is nothing to discompose
those blessed spirits; the company of wicked men is a burden* Lots righteous
soul was vexed with it, 2 Pet. 2.7. but there they are bound hand and foot and
cast into utter darkness; as when men will not be ruled, they are sent to
prison: here the children of God are subject to a number of infirmities hunger,
thirst, nakedness, cold, want* but there we have a rich inheritance as well as
a glorious, Ephesians. 18. the distinctions of poor and rich, as understood in the
world, do not outlive time, we have enough of true riches, which is eternal
glory, and the full fruition of God: Labor cease, though there be a
continual exercise of grace; all things rest when they come to their proper
place; so do those which dye in the Lord; we still serve God, but without
weariness: yea, we are freed from the necessities of nature, eating, drinking,
and sleeping, to which the greatest Potentates are subject; though they are
exempted from hard bodily labor, they are not exempted from the necessities of
nature; meat is for the belly, and the belly for meats; but God shall destroy
both it and them, 1 Cor. 6.12. The use of meats* and of the stomach, and of the
belly is abolished; it is a piece of our misery, that our life is patcht up of
so many creatures, as a torn Garment is pieced and patcht up with supplies from
abroad; here the sheep or the silkworm afford us clothing; the beasts of the
earth and fish of the Sea serve for food, and all to support a ruinous fabric,
ever ready to drop about our ears; but then we are above meat and drink and
apparel; nakedness will be no shame, for glory will serve instead of a robe;
and it will be meat and drink enough to do our fathers will; the body will not
be a clog to the soul, but a help; that mass of flesh we carry about us is but
the prison of the soul, where it looks out by the windows of the senses; but
then it is no longer the prison of the soul, but the Temple. In short, all that
I have said upon this branch is comprised in Rev. 21.4. and God will wipe away
all tears from their eyes; and there is no more death, nor sorrow, nor crying;
neither shall there be any more pain, for former things are passed away, there
is quite another change, new dispensations; no distraction of business; our
whole employment will be to think of God, and study God, but without weariness,
satietie or distraction.

2 In blessedness there is a confluence of all good necessary to the happiness
of the creature; our blessedness is full for parts, full for the degrees, and
manner of enjoyment; and all this continues for ever without fear of losing it;
our Crown of Glory is a Garland that will never wither; it is an eter^^l state
of actual delights; we are blessed in our bodies* blessed in our souls, blessed
in our company: man is (...) a sociable creature, and therefore to his complete
happiness it is necessary that he should not be only blessed in his person, but
in his company and relations* we are brought into the presence of God, who is
blessedness it self, and to the sight and blessed fellowship of his blessed
son, and into the company of blessed Angels and Saints.

1 Let me speak of the happiness of his person; and then both of his body and
soul.

1 For his body, it is now a Temple of the Holy Ghost; he cannot leave his
mansion, and ancient dewlling place, and therefore he raises it up and forms
it again into a complete fashion, like Christ's glorious body, Phil. 3.21. for
clarity, agility, strength, incorruption. Solomon's Temple, when it was
destroyed, the latter house was nothing so glorious as the former; men wept
when they saw it, Ezr 2. but it is not so here; it is raised quite another
body* for the present there is to be seen a beautiful fabric wherein God has
shown his workmanship; every member, if it were not so common, would be a
miracle* all is ordered for the service and comeliness of the whole; but now it
is a vile body, subject to diseases, fed with meat, humbled with wants, many
times mangled with violence, dissolved by death, and crumbled to dust in the
grave, like a dry clod of earth, this is the body we carry about us: a mass of
flesh dressed up to be a dish for the worms; but this vile body shall rise in
another manner, like Christ's glorious body: when the Sun appears, the stars
vanish, their luster is eclipsed and darkened; but the Sun of Righteousness when
he appears at the last day, does not obscure, but perfect our glory. More
particularly. If you inquire, wherein our bodies shall be like Christ's glorious
body, the Apostle will tell us that in another place, 1 Cor. 15.40, 41, 42, 43,
44. Let me single out three expressions* it is raised in incorruption; it is
raised in glory, it is raised a spiritual body. 1 It is an incorruptible body;
now it yields to the decays of nature, and is exercised with pains and aches,
till at length it droppeth down like ripe fruit into the Grave, but hereafter
it shall be clothed with immortality wholly impassible; what a comfort is this
to those, that are racked with the Stone or Gout, broken with Diseases or
withered with age, to think that they shall have a body without aches and
without decays, that shall always be in the spring of youth; the Trees of
Paradise are always green. 2 It shall be a glorious body; here it is many times
deformed; at least beauty like a flower is lost, in sickness; daver'd or
withered with age, defaced by several accidents; but then we shall be glorious
like to Christ's body: the naked body of man was so beautiful in innocence, that
the beasts of the field admired it, and thereupon did homage to Adam; but we
shall not be conformed to the first Adam, but the second; Christ in the Mount,
when he was transfigured they could not endure the shining of his garments, it
astonished the Disciples, Mat. 17. His Garments could not vail, nor their eyes
endure those strong emissions of the beams of glory; Paul could not endure the
light that shined to him, when Christ appeared to him from heaven, Act. 9. but
was utterly confounded and struck blind; by this you may guess a little at the
glory of the body, when it is likened to Christ's glorious body: Moses by
conversing with God forty days, the complexion of his face was altered so, that
they were glad to put a vail upon it* In this low estate in which we are, we
must make use of these hints. 3 A spiritual body, either for agility; we shall
not be clogged as now; we shall be caught up in the air to meet the Lord; or
rather a spiritual body, because more disposed for spiritual uses, for the
enjoyments and the employments of Grace: Here it is a natural body, an unready
instrument for the soul; we are not in a capacity to bear the new wine of
glory; but there we are made more capacious, and stronger vessels to contain
all that God will give out. The Disciples fainted at Christ's transfiguration,
Mat. 17.6. we cannot receive such large diffusions and overflowings of glory as
we shall then have; every strong affection and raised thought does overset us
and cause ecstasy and ravishment; but there it is otherwise; God makes out
himself to us in a greater latitude, and we are more able to bear it.

2 For the blessedness of the soul, which is the heaven of heaven, our
happiness is called the inheritance of the Saints in light, Col. 1.12. for
which we must be prepared* it is not for them that know no other heaven, but to
eat, drink, and sleep, and wallow in filthy and gross pleasures: It is an
inheritance in light; and for Saints that know how to value intellectual and
spiritual delights. Wherein, you will say, lies the happiness of the soul! in
knowledge or love? Ans. Divines are divided; certainly in both; our happiness
consists in the love of God, and knowledge of God from whence results union
with God and fruition of God; it is hard to say which is to be preferred, to
know God, or love God; in one place the Scripture tells us this is life eternal
to know the only true God, Joh. 17. so that it seems to be the heaven of
heaven, to have the understanding satisfied with the knowledge of God, Psalm.
17.15. When I awake I shall be satisfied with thine image and likeness: On the
otherside, 1 John 4.16. he that dwells in love dwells in God, and God in him;
the embrace of the soul is by love, the possession of God is by acts of love:
one says (it may be not modestly enough) libentius sine aspectu and te
diligerem, Stella amore Dei.
quam te videndo non amarem. That he had rather not see God then not love him:
here in the world the hatred of God is worse then ignorance of him, and
therefore it should seem, love should have the pre-eminence: but we need not
make a faction between the Graces; by knowing we come to love, and by loving we
come to know; as light is, so is love and so is enjoyment; here we love little
because we know little, if thou know the gift, etc. Joh. 4.10. and the more
we love; the more we know: this is a fire that casts light. But to speak more
distinctly,

1 There is the perfection of knowledge; all the faculties must be satisfied,
before we can be happy; especially so noble a faculty as the mind is; there is
a natural inclination to knowledge; the soul takes a great deal of contentment
in the contemplation of any truth; the knowledge of wisdom to thy soul (says
Solomon) shall be as the honeycomb when thou have found it. Prove. 24 13, 14.
right and clear thoughts of God breed a rejoicing, Psalm. 19.10. Well then, this
is no small part of our happiness to have more light and knowledge of God and
of his ways; we shall know many mysteries of salvation, that we are now
ignorant of; as, the nature of God, Psalm. 17.15. I shall be satisfied with thy
image and likeness; the union of the two natures in the person of Christ, Joh.
17.24. they shall behold my glory; our union with Christ and by Christ with
God, Joh. 14.20. In that day they shall know that I am in the Father, etc. the
course of Gods Decrees and Providence for our good, 1 Cor. 13.12. We shall
know as we are known: that is, we shall be able to see how the unchangeable
counsels of God for our salvation have been carried on through all the Passages
of the present life, to bring us safe to the heavenly state. These are the
deeps of God, and now there is darkness upon the face of these deeps* the
Church is but a Grammer-School, heaven is the Universitie; we shall have other
eyes, and other light* prophecy is but in part now, our intuition shall be then
immediate, Joh 1.3.2. We shall see him as he is; now we see him not as he is,
but as he is pleased to reveal himself; now we see what he is not, not
corruptible, not mortal, not changeable, rather then what he is. Now we see him
as he is in us and as he is in other creatures; we track him by the effects of
his power and wisdom and goodness; but then we shall see him as he is in
himself, we shall see him face to face, 1 Cor. 13.12. In the creatures there is
vestigium, the track and foot-print of God, in the Law there is umbra* a
shadow; in the Gospel imago, an image; a fair draught of God as in a picture;
but in heaven face to face* we have excellent books to study, the large
manifestations of his Glory, the Majesty of Christ's person; we shall always sit
about the Throne, and behold God in the face of the Lamb; there God makes out
himself ^n the highest manifestation that we are capable of.

2 Complete love; there is a constant cleaving of heart to God without change
and weariness; a love that never cease working, and yet God in communion is
ever new and fresh to us; if we delight in any thing here, we soon grow weary
and have a change of objects; here are distractions and startings aside to the
creature; but there is an eternal solace and complacency in God; a continual
Sabbath that never grows burthensom; all the heart and bowels run out after
Christ, we never want the actual breathings of the spirit. The Spirit came upon
Sampson at times; so it does upon us here, motions are fleeting and vanishing;
but there Christ is a more Lovely object; and the delights of the soul are
carried out to him without any satiety; they are outward things that cloy the
appetite; as soon as we have them we despise them; we sip, as the Be does of
the flower, and then goes to a new flower; but there is an eternal complacency
in Christ; here we are troubled when we want outward comforts, and cloyed when
we have them, because curiosity is soon satisfied, and fruition discovers the
imperfections of the creature* so that the more injoyd they are, the less
beloved; as Amnon hated Tamar, etc. Imperfections that before lay hid, are then
laid open to view, and so our affections are confuted by experince; but there
the more we enjoy God, the more his infinite perfections are manifested, and
the pleasure is augmented by enjoyment.

3 Complete union with God and fruition of God. See 2 Cor. 5.6. Phil. 1.93.
Here we are united by Faith; but that is nothing to sight and immediate
tuition; we lay hold upon Christ, but have not such an absolute possession of
him; he is a head that gives out himself not by necessity, but choice and
pleasure; therefore our communion with him is not so high and sweet as then:
The iron that lies long in the fire seems to be changed into the nature of it;
we are then more conformed and changed into the likeness of Christ: All the
comforts that we have in this life, we enjoy in Gods absence, and by the
Ministry of the creatures; now the creatures are not vessels capacious enough
to convey so much of God to us, as we shall receive when he is all in all
immediately. 1 Cor. 15.24. There is no Temple, nor Ordinances; but God is
instead of all without means or the intervention of such supplies; we feed
among the Lillyes; but it is but till the day break and the shadows fly away.

3 In our company we must be blessed; there is God and Christ and Saints and
Angels, Heb. 12.26. we shall see God in Christ* The bodily eye, that cannot
look upon the Sun, shall be perfectly sanctified, glorified, though it cannot
see the essence of God, yet it shall see greater manifestations of Glory: How
will the father welcome us, as he welcomed Christ, Psalm. 2.8* Ask of me and I
will give thee, etc. So, well done good and faithful servant; we shall not come
into his presence with shame; sin causes shame, and makes us shye of God; as
the eye cannot endure the light if it be wronged; so wronged Conscience makes
us afraid of the presence of God: but when sin is done away, we shall have
boldness in that day: As we shall have the company of God, so of Christ, he
cannot be contented without your company, you should not be satisfied without
his, Joh. 14 3. I will come again and receive you to my self, that where I am,
you may be also. Oh what a joyful meeting will it be between us and our
Redeemer, much sweeter then the interview between Jacob and Joseph. Christ
longs for the blessed hour as much as you do: The wise men came from far to see
him in a manger; Zacheus climed up into a Tree to see him in the days of his
flesh: he is another manner of Christ in heaven, then he was in the days of his
abasement. When Joseph discovered himself to his brethren, I am Joseph, it
revived their hearts: when Christ shall say, I am Jesus, your brother, your
Savior, your Redeemer; when he shall lead us to God in a full troop and goodly
company, and say, Behold I and the little ones, which thou have given me, Heb.
2.13. What a blessed sight will that be! Then the Angels, what welcome will
there be between you and them; when Christ entered into heaven, Psalm. 24. they
entertained him with applauses and acclamations; stand open you doors, stand
open, here is the King of glory, the Lord strong and mighty in battle. So will
they welcome the Saints to heaven with acclamations. They delight in the good of
men; when man was created, the morning stars sang together and the sons of God
shouted for joy, Job 38.7. that is the Angels rejoiced and praised God: when
Christ came to Redeem man, an heavenly host fell a praising of God, Luke 2.13,
14. When man is converted, the Scripture tells, there is joy in heaven, Luke
15.7. So when we come to be glorified, Christ shall come with troops of them to
conduct us into those everlasting Mansions. The Saints; your acquaintance, with
whom you prayed, suffered familiarly conversed, memory is not abolished in
heaven, but perfected; those whom we knew here, we shall know aga^n; A Minister
shall see his Crown and the fru^t of his labors, 1 These* 2.19. you are our
crown, etc. And those that have been relieved by us, shall wellcom us into
heaven, who therefore are said to receive us into everlasting habitations, Luke
16 9. Yea, we shall know those, whom we never saw; why else is it made a part
of our privilege to sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob? Mat. 8.11. As
Adam knew Eve, and in the transfiguration Peter knew Moses and Elias, dead many
hundred years before; so shall we know one another, we shall not go to a
strange people, where we know no body: As men at a Feast are social and
familiar one with another; we shall be discoursing of Gods wisdom, mercy,
justice in the work of Redemption: So did Moses and E^ias with Christ, Luke
9.31. of the wonderful Providence of God in conducting us to glory; as
travelers in their Inn take pleasure to discourse with one another of the
dyrtiness and dangers of the way. And these Saints are clothed with Majesty
and Glory, more lovely objects then ever they were upon earth: and there is an
innumerable company of them; they were rapt for joy when they saw but two
Prophets, Moses and Elias; Mat. 17.4. but heaven is not only called a Palace,
but a City, a world to come; there is a multitude which none can number.

3 Whence it is that they who dye in the Lord are sure to be thus blessed: 1
From their union with Christ 2 From the Covenant of God with them.


First, From their union with Christ, which can never be dissolved; death
severeth body and soul, but not Christ and the soul. From this union there
result two things, Conformity with Christ in every estate, and the Communion of
the Spirit; both which do imply the blessedness of the Saints, even after
death. They that are united with Christ do share with him in every estate; in
grace here and in glory hereafter; as to both, they are predestined to be
conformed to the image of Christ: Romans 8.29. And where the Spirit once
dwells, there he dwells for ever; and therefore from the indwelling of the
Spirit of holiness does the Apostle infer our Resurrection to a glorious
estate, Romans 8.11. And that losing nothing which Christ speaks of, Joh. 6.39.
I would interpret of his not losing one member or joint of his mystical body.

Secondly, From the Covenant of God with them. Christ proves the Resurrection
from Gods being the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Mat. 22.32. the Argument
stands upon three feet. 1 To be a God to any is to be a benefactor, for the
tenor of the Covenant on Gods part is, I will be thy God, as on our part, you
shall be my people. 2 That God would be an everlasting benefactor, it implies
an eternal communication of grace and glory; as Christ proves from Exodus 3.6.
that God assumed this Title after their death. 3 This Covenant was made with
the whole man, not only with the soul but the body, and therefore they bore
the mark and the sign of it, which was Circumcision, in their bodies. And in
Heb. 11.16. the Apostle says that because God had a heavenly inheritance to
bestow upon the Patriarchs, therefore he was not ashamed to be called their
God, implying that if they had no other reward then what they enjoyed in the
present life, God could not with honor (such was the slenderness and
contemptibleness of their present condition) have owned such a glorious Title
and Appellation, as to be called the God of Abraham. What needs further
arguing? the phrase it self imports what we assert. When God promises to be a
God to any he makes over his whole self, his eternity and infiniteness for
their comfort and use; and so in effect says that he will be an everlasting
benefactor to their whole persons in the way of an infinite power.

Let us now apply all!

1 Because this privilege is expressed with a limitation, it informs us that
the wicked are excluded, they must expect a quite contrary estate; as they that
dye in the Lord are in a blessed, so all others in a cursed condition. It is a
sweet close when the body and soul part, but God and the soul meet; when
Conscience shall become our compurgator and bear us witness that we have spent
our time well, in fearing God and obeying God, then may the body and soul take
leave of one another with an expectation to meet again in Glory. But it is a
sad parting when Conscience falls a raving, and the body and the soul accuse
one another; the body accuses the soul, as an ill guide, and the soul the body
as an unready instrument. And at the day of their death, which is the time of
separation, they curse the day of their birth, which was the time of the first
union between them both, when they shall wish that they had been stifled in the
womb, and had never seen the light, rather then to have lived together in such
a fashion, and to part in such manner. Now this many times is the case of
wicked men at their death, death comes to them as a double evil, as a natural
evil, striking the body and dissolving the confederacy and union between it and
the soul; and as a penal evil, or the curse of the first Covenant, wounding the
Conscience and reviving their bondage and fears of a worse judgment to ensue.
And then though Physicians and Ministers be sent for, they may both prove of no
value either to prevent the dissolution, or to give ease to the Conscience.

2 It presses us to provide for this hour, that when we come to dye we may dye
in the Lord. Get an interest in Christ that you may dye in the Lord as to your
estate. Security will not hold out, when you lanch into the other world; a
wicked man comes to himself when he comes to dye. At his latter end he shall be
a fool, Jer. 17.11. he was ever a fool, but then he shall be one in the
conviction and acknowledgement of his own Conscience, his own heart will make
him cry out, Oh fool, madman, that I was to be contented with such slight
evidences for Eternity. You see then it is good to be upon sure terms, and to
get our union with Christ so clear and sensible, that when we walk in the
valley of the shadow of death we may not be afraid, Psalm. 23. As to the frame
of your hearts, it is a harder matter to dye well then you are aware of; if you
would dye well, live well, otherwise you do but provide matter of despair and
sorrow for your latter end. It is every ones wish, Oh that I might dye the
death of the righteous! Numb. 23. but it is not every ones happiness.

If you would dye in the Lord, you had need to have Promises ready and your
faith well exercised, that you may have good proof of it before it comes to
stead you in death. In bello non licet his peccare. As in war so in death there
is no erring twice, then you are to throw your last cast for everlasting woe or
weal; to do that which you never did before; you had need of armor of proof;
to deal with the last enemy. How foolishly do they deal that defer all to this
hour, and are then to get faith when they should reduce it into practice? Faith
is a Grace wrought by degrees to strength and perfection; now to put it to the
hardest trial at first is absurd and irrational. You should have your Evidences
clear, your promises ready, your experiences at hand, that you may be able to
comfort your selves, and too plead for God, and to speak to the standers-by of
the long proof you have had of his being a good Master, and a gracious father
to you. How is it then? Are all things set at rights between God and your
souls? Have you laid up comforts for this great day of expense? Is your dying
speech ready? Are you provided of experiences whereby to commend the
Mercifulness and faithfulness of your Redeemer. Can you say that you have tried
him often, and he never failed you all your days? If it be so, indeed your
great work is done.

3. Use. To encourage the children of God to be more willing to dye. Are you
afraid to enter upon your own blessedness and glory? Will you shun Christ's
company when he desires yours? Love brought Christ out of heaven, that he might
be with us; he thought of it before the world was, Prove. 8.31. and longed for
the time, in effect saying, When will it come? We are to go from earth to
heaven, from conversing with men to converse with Angels, and why so loath to
remove? What could Christ expect upon his coming into the world but hard usage?
but labor, and griefs, and shame, and death? he came to taste the Vinegar and
the Gall; we are called to the feast of love; to taste of hidden Manna, and the
Rivers of pleasure that flow in his presence. If you love Christ, why should
you be unwilling to be in the arms of Christ? to be there where he is beholding
his glory? love is an affection of union, it desires to be with the party
loved; and can you be unwilling to be dissolved and to be with Christ? Death is
the Chariot that is to carry you into his presence. Jacobs spirit revived when
he saw the Wagons which Joseph sent to carry him into Egypt, Genesis 45.27. what
is there in the world to be compared with heaven? either there must be
something in the world to detain us; or we are frighted at the terribleness of
the passage, or else there is a contempt of what is to come* You cannot say any
thing of the world is more worthy then Christ; in this sense you renounced
father, and mother, brothers and sisters, wife and children and friends, when
you were first acquainted with him. It was the language of your souls then,
whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none on earth that I desire
besides thee, Psalm. 73.25. Did you dissemble then? Or have you found cause
since to retreat and begrudge your affections to him? Christ puts you to the
trial when sickness comes, he has sent h^s wagons to see if you will stand to
your word. Is it the terribleness of the passage? does nature grudge at the
thought of a dissolution? where is your faith? death is yours 1 Cor. 3.18. Your
friend, your advantage; Christ has assured you of it; will you trust his word?
you love him little when you have no confidence in what he says. Or is it
contempt of things to come? Then why is all this cost? why came Christ to lay
down his soul to purchase that which you care not for? what needs all this
waste? Christians hear for the time to come, we know not how soon we may be
sent for, and put to the trial, it is good to be resolved, that we may say the
sooner the better.

4 Let this comfort us concerning our friends, that dye in the Lord. 1 Thessalonians.
4.18. Comfort one another with these words. This is proper, Christian,
Scripture comfort. Heathens to comfort one another, can only say that death is
the common passage out of this world, that all that are born must dye. But
Christians can comfort one another upon better terms that they that sleep in
Jesus are blessed, and shall we whine at their preferment? that we shall all
meet again in the other world; that a day will come when the Captain of our
Salvation will have his great rendezvous, and the head of the Church call all
the Saints into one Congregation; Psalm. 1.5. and the whole flock shall follow
the great shepherd of the sheep into their everlasting fold, triumphing and
saying, Oh death where is thy sting? Oh grave where is thy victory? These are
comforts proper for Christians; especially for Ministers that are messengers of
comfort to others that have more frequent advantages of meditation upon those
privileges then others have. Shall we murmur? and yield to sinkings of heart
when God has made a breach upon our relations? how will this disparage our
Doctrine, and make others suspect the comforts which we reach forth to them
upon like occasions? Thy words have upholden him that was falling, and thou
have strengthened the feeble knees; but now it is come upon thee and thou
faintest; it touches thee and thou art troubled, Job 4.4, 5.

To comfort others and faint our selves, is to bring a discredit upon what we
propound to them. Remember the glory of God is concerned in your behavior
under this trial, and the honor of your Ministry. Let your Christian friends
know there is a reality in what you have held forth for their support in like
case. Let them see you make it your care to practice your own Doctrine. We are
set forth for signs. Gods eyes and men's are upon us; do worthily and becoming
your station.

Its true, God comes near when he separates those that are so near and dear one
to another; and we ought to lay it to heart; but that wherein you are like to
err, is in too much sorrow and dejection of spirit; which may be your wisdom to
labor to prevent, as being seemly for a Christian and a Preacher, to show his
moderation. We find that Abraham mourned for Sarah; and he had great cause so
to do, for she was a very good companion to him in all his travels and
troubles; she was very pleasing in his eye, in regard of her beauty; she
brought him a child in his old age, the son of the promise; she is honored in
Scripture above all other women of her age; the time how long she lived is set
down, which is not done for any other woman. At her death Abraham mourns; but
very moderately; he wept for her, but we find no excess in the measure or in
the time of his grief; and he is a good pattern. David weeps for the death of
his child while it was alive; for he feared it would dye; and the thing he
feared came upon him: but when they thought that upon the death of his child
his tears would have risen to a flood, it was suddenly a low ebb, and he gives
herein instruction to all mourners, and to you, teaching you to say wherefore
should I now fast and weep any longer? I cannot bring her back again: I shall
go to her, but she shall return to me; and plainly asserts that none should
mourn more then they can give a good reason for, why should I now mourn? you
know its no other then we ought daily to expect and look for here below,
vicissitudes namely and changes. And you will soon meet her again in heaven,
where (as I conceive with Austin) she shall be Notissima tibi. And in the mean
time, in your enjoying Christ you enjoy her still in him; And all the helps,
advantages, sweetnesses, counsels, consolations satisfactions, defenses,
carings, cordials, contentments, whatever was lovely in her, whatever you loved
her for, you still enjoy in him, either by the administration of other mediums,
or immediately from himself; and what comes from God immediately, is much
sweeter. You have cause rather to be thankful you enjoyed her so long, then
sorrowful you can on earth enjoy her no longer. I know not whether her
Religion, worth and holiness will serve more to aggravate your loss, or to
allay your sorrow. It Is sad to think you have lost such a loving, humble, godly
and meet companion. But remember that Because she was such an one, you have the
more confidence that she is blessed, and is gone from you to better company;
even to the company of Saints free from all sin, and all sorrow; full of
holiness and happiness, of Angels too, of Jesus Christ too; the King of Saints,
the Lord of Angels, he that so loved us; he that did so much, suffered so much
for us; he whom the fathers before his incarnation so longed to see* he whom
every believing soul so pants and breaths after. Which that it may the more
sensibly appear, I shall here take occasion to subjoyn her just and true
Character.

The Character of Mistress Jane Blackwel.
SHe was a Gentlewoman born, of the house of the Wintringhams, a family of
eminency and note in Yorkshire; Educated and trained up from her childhood,
till married, under Dr. Chaderton, Master of Emanuel College in Cambridge,
that famous godly man, and her near Kinsman; by reason whereof she was even in
her younger years so grounded in knowledge, seasoned with Grace, and
accomplished with abiliments and endowments every way, that she was a most rare
and incomparable companion for a Minister.

Some things there were, wherein she was exceeding exemplary. As she was a
woman of a mavelous humble spirit; That all who knew her and conversed with
her, admired in her; and it was abundantly evident and apparent in her
countenance, speeches, gestures, apparel, and every way.

A simple, single, plain-hearted woman. An Israelite indeed, in whom there was
no guile.

A merciful, pitiful, charitable woman. Open hearted, open-handed too, to her
power; yea, and beyond her power: spared it from her own back and belly to
cloth and feed others; gladly embraced occasions when offered; yea, greedily
sought out occasions. Her love was not verbal only, such as that James speaks
of, Go and be clothed, go and be warmed, etc. But real, she refreshed the
bowels of many. The blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon her, and
she made the widows heart to sing for joy. When the Scots were shut up and
starved by thousands at Westminster, she very frequently visited them, and
ministered to them. Yea, bought diverse of them with her own money, gracious good
men, whom she fed and clothed, and disposed of into families and ways wherein
they live to this day very comfortably. When the Scotch Ministers and others
were under restraint in the Tower, she was not ashamed of their chain, but
diligently sought them out, as soon as she heard of them, and was all the time
of their long confinement a great support and comfort to them; she had not
only learned the Heathens lesson to lay up, but the Christians lesson too, to
lay out according as the necessities of the poor members of Jesus Christ called
for it.

A true Mourner. One that laid to heart, and was affected, deeply affected with
the sins and abominations of the times; with the miseries likewise and
distresses of the Church and people of God, made the Churches sorrows her own
sorrows; had bowels of compassion in her to lament and mourn over the afflicted
condition of the Church, as if it were her own condition. Remembered them in
bonds, as bound with them, and them that suffered adversity, as being her self
also in the body. The heart breaking miseries of poor Scotland, broke her
heart. She could not speak of them without many tears.

A fixed, established, grounded Christian: Not like those the Apostle speaks
of, Ephesians. 4.14. That were (...), like Clouds in the Air, or like Ships on the
Sea, tossed and hurried up and down with every wind and wave, driven to and
fro, this way and that way; but like a house built upon a Rock, like a tree
firmly rooted, a fixed Star; no wandering Star (wandering from one opinion to
another, and from one way to another, but a fixed Star) kept to her old
Principles, and to her old practices, the good old way, the way that the
Patriarchs and the Prophets, and the Apostles, and the holy men and women in
the old time (1 Pet. 3.5.) went to Heaven in, the way of sanctifying Gods
Sabbaths, the way of frequenting public Ordinances, the way of performing
Family and Closet-duties, the way of reading the Scriptures, Meditation,
Self-examination, etc. And for the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, she received
it constantly, as often as it was administered in the Congregation whereof she
was; never missed once.

One that filled up her relations to the very utmost that it is almost possible
to do. One that did abound in love to God, to his Ways, Ordinances, Truths,
People. Hereby shall all men know that you are my Disciples, if you love one
another, says Christ. And this Evidence she had in visible Characters; wherever
she saw Aliquod Christi, as Luther speaks, there her love was fixed; were it in
Rags, or Robes; poor, or rich, all one for that. All that were dear to God,
were dear to her soul.

No wanderer from house to house, and idle squanderer away of her precious
time, in complemental visits. Had learned to keep at home; and that is the duty,
the wisdom, the honor too of a woman. Sarah was found in her Tent still; and
Jael in her Tent.

This I mention, Because she was much blamed by many for not going to
Christenings and Burials, etc. as if she did it out of Pride and
Self-conceitedness, and contempt and disdain of others, or out of a sullen
retiredness and affected privacy; whereas she did it out of mere
conscienciousness of her duty. And she had many reasons why she did it, as
partly because her eldest daughter dying in Childbed, she and her child both,
about eight years since, she found that such meetings renewed upon her afresh
the remembrance of that very great loss. Partly because she saw so much
gallantry and bravery in apparel, etc. at such meetings, as did not a little
trouble her. But especially because she saw it to be so much a waster of much
precious time, which she knew how to make a better improvement of.

What shall I say? In a word, she was a pattern of Mortification; of
Self-denial; of contempt of the world; of strictness and holiness, and close
walking with God, both in her general and particular calling, to all that were
about her while she lived.

And in the time of her sickness -- so patient, so contented, so willing to be
at Gods dispose either for life or death, so fearful lest there should be so
much as in her heart, any the least risings against Gods dispensations; so full
of sweet, holy, heavenly instructions, exhortations, counsels to her husband,
to her children, to her friends, her lips were like a Well of Life, feeding
many, as Solomon speaks, dropping like a Honeycomb.

I might enlarge. But shall conclude all with that of our Savior ( John
14.28.) when his disciples sat blubbering, and weeping, and taking on, because
he had told them he must now leave them in regard of his bodily presence and go
to Heaven, go to his father, If you loved me (says he) if you loved me, you
would rejoice, because I go to the Father. Oh how well it were if you could do
so! And do it! You say you loved her, show it; and show it in this way, show it
in rejoicing rather then in mourning. In rejoicing in her gain, rather th^n in
mourning in your own loss. Its true the loss is great. The Family, the City,
the Nation, the whole World indeed has a loss: Good Men and good Women; such as
have an interest in God, and a heart to improve that interest, as they are a
public good whilst they live, so their loss is a public loss when they dye.
And in that resp^ct you have cause to mourn. But oth^rwise, in regard of her,
no cause at all, but rather to rejoice. For why? Though she is dead* she is
dead in the Lord. And this blessed condition we have been speaking of all this
while, it is undoubtedly her condition.

FINIS.

