A Short View Of the most Gracious PROVIDENCE OF GOD IN THE RESTORATION AND
SUCCESSION.

May 29. 1685.

LONDON, Printed for William Crook at the Green-Dragon, next Devereux Court,
without Temple Bar, 1685.

PSALM. 2. Why do the Heathen rage and the people Imagine a vain thing?
THis Psalm, as well as many other which were composed by the Prophet David,
has a double meaning; both literal and mystical: The one relating to himself,
and the History of his own life; the other relating to Christ, and the
Prophecy of his Kingdom.

As it relates to himself; we have the people of Israel, and the Heathen that
were round them, conspiring against his Government; The Tabernacles of Edom,
and the Ishmaelites, of Moab, and the Hagarens; Gebal, and Ammon, and Amaleck;
the Philistines with the Inhabitants of Tire; Assure also and the Children of
Lot, Psalm. 83.6. etc.

All these ten Nations were confederate against the Lord, and against his
anointed; they were so vain as to attempt the Alteration of the Decrees of
Heaven; whilst he who sat there, laughed them to scorn and had them in
derision. Their confusions did only make his Providence more conspicuous; for
notwithstanding all their united Counsels, and tumultuary rage, David was not
only King in Hebron, but in Jerusalem too.

Though they rage, though they meditate, though they consult, though they conquer, and
prosper for some time; yet have I set my King upon my Holy Hill of Sion, v 6.

As it is a Prophecy, and relates to the Kingdom of Christ, we have the first
Christians comforting themselves with this Psalm, and by an extraordinary
Spirit applying it to their present Concerns; Acts 4.25. Being assured that as
neither Herod, nor Pontius Pilate, so neither the Gentiles, nor the People of
Israel could prevail against the Holy Child Jesus: And about three hundred
years afterward the whole prophecy of this Psalm was more eminently
fulfilled, when Christianity became the Religion of the Empire; when
notwithstanding the malice of the Jews and Heretics, and the ten Persecutions
of the Heathen Emperors, like the ten Nations confederate against David; the
Kings and Judges of the Earth, became wise and instructed, kissed and Adored
the Son of God, and the Holy Child Jesus prevailed so far, till the extent of
his Enemies, was turned into the largeness of his Inheritance.

From the opening of the Psalm, you your selves will be ready to make this
Natual reflection, that no passions though never so furiously raging; and no
Imaginations, though never so cunningly contrived, are likely to prevail long
against a Government and a Religion approved of, and established by God.

You cannot but apply this observation to the occasion of the day, and find the
Truth of it most evidently confirmed by the great Revolution in this Kingdom,
and by your own Experience.

As this Psalm is a prophetical piece of Scripture, it holds infallibly true,
of nothing but the Universal Church of Christ; but yet particular Churches and
Nations may apply it as a Doctrine of Providence; and none more properly than
we, who have a Monarchy most Providentially Divine, as Divine as can be made
without an immediate designation from God; and a Religion as pure as Revelation
it self: It being nothing but the Holy Scriptures with the best
interpretations, and those guarded with some few prudential limits; which the
ignorant have complained of, the malicious have disturbed; but which the wisest
have ever approved, and the humble love to practice.

Could Men ever imagine, that things, so piously and so judiciously settled,
should not be the care of Providence one day, as they had been the long
contrivance of it?

Had our Government and Church always continued, according to their first
establishment, without any alteration or disturbance, we might have been
fortunate and at Ease, have sacrificed to our own Nets, and been proud of them,
as if they had been our own Inventions; but we had never so well known their
more remote and inward worth, or that the favor of God was so mingled with
them: But now they have been tried and searched by the malice of Devils, and
the subtilty of men, and in all this winnowing there was found but little
Chaff, they are returned to us with their excellency more discovered, and a
second approbation of Heaven.

He who reads our Civil Wars may lay aside all the Histories of Greeks and
Romans, Turks and Tartars, and not miss any one extravagance of humane
Barbarity: For there he may find the utmost Force and guile of passion and
hypocrisy; cruelty and Enthusiasm working together; and that not only in
single instances, but under a public National management; not as the product
of several Ages, but of one small Circuit of years.

There he may see with what noise and clamours the Laws were silenced: with
what fury and ignorance the multitude decreed Justice. With what pretended
Treaties and Pacifications the Armies were inflamed, and the differences always
widen'd: With what eager hostility, and open destruction, Rebellous Subjects
were for preserving their King: With what zeal and fasting Religion was
banished out of the Land: With what Tyranny their precious liberty was secured;
and with what unheard of impositions they were eased of Taxes.

There he may read of the most solemn sanctity robbing of God: Of the devoutest
eyes fixed upon the Churches patrimony: Of Prayers offered up to Heaven, worse
than downright Blasphemy: Of the rankest perjury scrupling a lawful Oath: Of
Atheists fighting for Religion; and Heathens for the pure Gospel of Christ: Of
Treachery undermining perfidiousness; Of Hypocrisy groaning against Lewdness:
Of Sacrilege abhorring Idolatry; and of a Covenant made with Hell.

Certainly that late Rebellion was the most busy Scene of the Devils
Tragi-Comedy here on Earth, and he can hardly furnish out such another: If
greater Judgments are alloted for Posterity, some other Angels sure must fall
from a higher Sphere, to add new malice unto Hell, and make that direful Polity
more Intelligent in mischief.

There were some good Persons in those times, who looked upon this Nation as
under a dreadful Anathema, as excommunicated by God, and delivered over to
Satan: And that which made it manifest, that we were only to be severely
disciplined, and not destroyed, was this; that at the same time when there was
the highest Villainy in this Land; there was the highest virtue too: The
rebellious party fought their King into that glory, which they never designed
him: Every Victory they wan, placed a new Star in his Breast: They overcame his
forces, and he their injustice: They were more prosperous, and he more patient:
They got the Field, and he an everlasting Crown.

Thus will our English Annals stand checkered to the end of Ages, with the
blackest Degeneracy of the worst of Traitors, and the whitest innocence of the
best of Princes.

Nay for all that we know, this Island may be always noted for its two contrary
Rivers, viz. the fiercest torrent of Rebellion, and the Noblest tide of
Loyalty, which in the late Wars were most conspicuously seen together.

And though the Loyal Stream ran under ground for some few years, yet it soon
came up again and filled its Chanel with a silent and an even course; and may
it for ever flow with equal peace and plenty; for ever keep within its known
and certain Banks of ancient Monarchy, of primitive and old Christianity.

If we except the people of Israel, who were Govein'd by a Theocrasie, never
any Nation could boast of a more remarkable Theater of the Providence of God,
then what this day afforded.

The passions of men were worn out with their own Rage: Their imaginations were
grown sick of new Models and experiments of Empire: Anarchy had changed through
all its monstrous shapes: Ambition was either divided into proportional parts;
or lost its force in unweildy matter: The Spirit of usurpation by often
shifting was become dead, and vapid; and there was no Novelty of Sect or
Rebellion to captivate the People: No one pretender had strength enough to get
uppermost, but only just so much as might keep another back.

So perplexed were the Civil affairs with various and contrary motions, so
disposed were the Hearts of many for their old Government: So stupify'd were
the guilty Traitors, and amazed like discovered Cheats: so infatuated were the
Councels of the public, and the Rage of the multitude so becalmed, that the
Restoration of the King seemed at that juncture of time the only effect in the
whole order of Providence ready to drop ripe from its causes by the least
humane endeavor: That most happy Enterprise being unexpectedly beset with such
close circumstances from a Divine hand, that for its accomplishment it seemed
to require not so much the experience and wisdom of an able Council, and the
ready compliance of an honest mind, that wills as God would have it: 'Twas like
the Rational Choice of an object appearing every way true and Good, and highly
eligible, where there is nothing to suspend or divert the consent, but the
frowardness or obstinacy of freewill. Why therefore did the Heathen rage, or
the people imagine a vain thing*

For thus we see how vain the imaginations of those men are, who set themselves
against established Constitutions, and the decrees of Heaven; how their
machinations unravel into folly; and shame and dishonor are their last
promotion.

How God permits the wicked to build a large Pile upon the Sand, that the ruin
may be great and conspicuous: To erect a Tower of ambition, that he may mingle
confusion with all such proud attempts: And that when such judgments are in the
earth the inhabitants thereof may learn Righteousness: May tremble to repeat
that abominable sin, on which the Lord perhaps has executed but half of his
Vengeance yet, even as to this Life.

The Almighty has been pleased to let this Nation see the utmost of Rebellious
Projects, whither they tend, what they produce, and what is the fruit of the
most prosperous sedition: That no well meaning Person can ever be engaged on
such a desperate design again, for which they is now no Color, no Apology
left; that henceforth, whosoever resists his King, must first remounce his God:

I know not what reflections those sufferers might have, who died in the
midnight of the late confusions, who savv the Viper fastened to the Government,
but did not live to see it shaken off: but we have seen the operation. of the
Lord, and by Events have read the main designs of Providence; that had God
permitted the Pacifications and Treaties to have taken effect, the Monarchy had
been divided and destroyed, and the Protestant Religion had lain gasping in our
land: We had lost an example of the highest Christian Virtues, and example
worth all the desolation we underwent, and which nothing but great Calamity
could have perfected and finished.

Many insurrections were made, many generous attempts to recover the Crown, but
God would not prosper impatient Loyalty; He reserved the managment and the
Honor to himself; and when all humane policy lay as it were dead, he came
forth, made his Arm bare, and brought about the wonderful Event.

He gave us a King, who, we are sure was his peculiar gift, because he came
adorned with all those gracious qualities, and all those sovereign Virtues,
which this distempered Kingdom so much wanted, and which our ruling Rebels had
not to apply.

They bred and countenanced a spawn of Sects, He practiced and established an
uniform Religion: They were most Tyrannous He most merciful: They delighted in
perfidiousness, War, and Blood; He in truth, and peace, and Love: They promoted
ignorance, and hated learning; He cherished all ingenious Arts and usesul
knowledge: They were implacable and revengeful; He made good Nature the
Character of his people, and the Ambition of his Court: He planted where they
had puck'd up; He built, where they had demolished: He every way repaired the
Ruins of the Civil War:

He was a gentle balm to heal our mutual wounds: The only Temper for a divided
Kingdom to unite in: He remained in banishment till the extreme misery of the
Nation made him the choice of his very Enemies; and then the Mountebanks of
State resigned up to his Cure the desterate Disease.

He was the delight of our Eyes, the breath of our Nostrils, the gladness of
our hearts. He was our wonder and our love; our dearest King, our Father, and
our Friend.

It is not easy to determine whether we received him with greater Joy, or were
deprived of him with greater grief: He came in with all the shouts and
acclamations of his people: He departed with all their Sighs and Groans

But has God forgotten to be gracious? and with him has he shut up all his
loving kindness; No: He is most propitious still; we may behold him working a
most plain and visible recompense to Charles the Martyr, in his extraordinary
Providence to his Posterity here on earth; in that he ordained, and has through
many Oppositions now effected, that two of his Sons should sit in peace upon
his Throne. In that he has so eminently blessed the Succession with a brave
and a resolute Prince, who has a Soul adorned with all those regal qualities,
which are adapted for the humors which he governs, and for the times in which
he reigns.

Whatever the persuasions of our gracious Sovereign are, in some particular
Points of Faith, or modes of Worship different from us; yet when we deserve it,
God will make him wholly ours.

However, this is most evident to all that know him well; that the goodness of
his inclinations is too strict for the licentiousness of the, Roman Casuists;
the mildness of his temper very contrary to the cruelty of their Zealots; and
the greatness of his Spirit most opposite to the ambitious designs of the Court
of Rome.

He had been pleased to promise, to promise often, and to pass his Royal word,
for the maintaining of our Religion, but he expects we should live up to it;
for he has not engaged to maintain our hypocrisy: If we truly value our
Religion, let us show it by our diligence, by our zeal, by our proficiency in
all solid Virtue, and by our eminency in all good examples.

We have sufficiently confirmed the Loyalty of our Principles by arguments and
disputes, let us now especially adorn them with our practice, and add the last
hand to their perfection by our humble actions and behavior.

God has now given us an Opportunity, let us manage it with that prudent
simplicity, and holy Wisdom; with that humble, but yet immovable integrity,
as may give God his Glory, and put all our Enemies to confusion.

Remember, that the perfect Subjection to Kings is the Glory of the Protestant
Cause; and that he that is Seditious is an Apostate to the Religion of this
Kingdom, be his pretenses never so devout.

However God in his Mercy may overruled Events, and turn the hearts of Kings as
it seems good to him, yet sure it is no such glory to the Protestant Cause,
and no great policy in a people, that they should so contrive to have a
Succession of injured Princes, who must forgive before they govern: How can
such Subjects ever think to merit of their King, when all their future Services
can hardly expiate? when they make it so difficult a matter to distinguish,
whether they are truly Loyal, or whether they are only willing in the Day of
his Power.

Surely our Republican Enemies might be content to be quiet after so many, and
so signal Demonstrations, that God is with us of a truth; and has not only
given us our Gospel but our Law: Since he has made it so evident, not only to
all haughty Usurpers, by the revolution of this Day; but to all the framers of
New Politics, by the perspicuous and undeniable reasons of our multiplied
Writings and Discourses; that the English Monarchy is not a model of the Brain,
or a few consequences drawn from an affected speculation of Humane Nature; but
a form of Government suited to the genius of a wise and Loyal People, founded
on a Power derived from God, politically guarded by a public successive
Prudence, and pronounced good by the experience of many Ages.

And shall a Constitution of such hereditary wisdom and strength be made the
sport of every Demagogue, that dares be eloquent against the Laws, and loves to
ride upon the passions of the Crowd? The worst I wish all such is this, that it
may ever be the peculiar Prerogative of this Government and Church to make even
those happy that would destroy them both.

What shall we render unto the Lord for all his benefits; what returns shall we
make for his Continual protections, for our Redemption on this day.

Had we no revelation to guide our worship and to raise our gratitude, the very
perusal of the History of our late times might do it: We might repeat the
Miracles which God has wrought for us, to quicken our obedience and Devotion,
for he has not dealt so with any of the Nations which are round us, neither
have they had such Experience of his care.

But not our Arm, not our power has gotten these victories; nor for our
Righteousness does this Land flourish; the Lord himself has wrought these
wonders for his Name sake, that it might not be polluted among the Heathen; and
if we our selves pollute it, where shall such Sinners appear?

If we would have him still to be our God, we must resolve to be his people; to
be as peculiar in our duty as he is in his blessings: Otherwise, his mercies
are our severest Judgments; and our prosperity only fits us for his final
vengeance.

FINIS.
Books Printed for William Crook at the Green-Dragon nigh Devereux: Court
without Temple Bar, 1685.
1. AN Institution of General History, or the History of the world; the first
and second Volum, in Folio 2. The Bucaniers of America, or an account of the
most remarkable Assaults committed of late years on the Coasts of the West
Indies, by the Bucaniers of Jamaica and Tortuga; both English French and Dutch;
the first and second Volum in Quarto, price bound 10 s. 3. The Protestant
Religion a Safe way to Salvation, together with the Apostolical Institution of
Episcopacy, also nine Sermons, etc. by W. Chillingworth, the Fifth Edition, to
which is now Added Mr. Chillingworths Arguments to his Friend Mr. Leiger to
persuade him to return from the Church of Rome, to his Mother the Church of
England, in Folio. 4. A Discourse about Conscience relating to the present
differences among us, in opposition to both the extremes of Popery and
Fanatism, in Quarto price 6 d. 5. The Doctrine of Passive Obedience in a Sermon
preached Jan. 30. last by J. Ellesby, Vicar of Cheswick in Quarto price 6 d.
1685. 6. A Sermon preached at the Spittle on Easter Tuesday last before the
Lord Mayor, Court of Aldermen, and Governors of the Hospital by Dr. Hascard
Dean of Windsor, 1685. 7. A Sermon preached at the Cathedral Church of Heresord
on the 29 of May by Richard Buckely Prebendary of that Church, 1685. price 6 d.
8. The grounds of Sovereignty and Greatness translated out of French into
English in Quarto, price 6 d. 1685. 9. A Discourse of Tangeir under the
Government of the Earl of Teviot by Dr. Addison Dean of Lichfield, price 6 d.
1685. 10. The manner of making, of Coffee, Tea, and Chocolate, as it is used in
most parts of the World, with the Virtues of them both as to Diet and Physic
in Twelves, price bound 1 s. 1685. 11. Megalopsichy being a particular and
exact account of the last seventeen years of Queen Elizabeth's Reign both
Millitary and Civil; written by Sir William Monson one of the Queens Admirals,
and H. Townsend Esquire, a member of her last Parliament, wherein is an exact
account of her seventeen years Wars with Spain; also the debates and
Discourses of the greatest States men in that Queens Reign, being the most
exact account, of the proceedings of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, that
is yet in print, in Folio, price 12 s. bound. 12. Compendium Geographicum being
the most exact and easy piece of Geography with two Alphabetical Tables or
Dictionaries, the one of the ancient the other of the Modern Names of all Towns
Cities, Countries, etc. in the world, in Twelves, price bound 1 s. 13. The
Tracts of Tho. Hobs of Malmsbury being an exact account of the Civil wars of
England from 1640. to 1660. and by what Councels and Artifices it was carried
on, printed now from the Original Manuscript with three Tracts more of the same
Authors, in Octavo, price bound 5 s. 14. The Souls Communion with her Savior:
or the History of our Lord Jesus Christ, written by the four Evangelists in
Devotional Meditations, in Twelves, price bound 1 s. 6 d.
FINIS

