To the Honorable the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses OF THE House of Commons
In PARLIAMENT Assembled, PROPOSALS Most Humbly Offered FOR Raising (in all
Likelihood) upwards of Five Millions of Money, without Charging the Poor, or
Burthening the Rich.

BY Such Ways and Means, that (for the greatest part thereof) the Payers will
voluntarily Tax themselves.

AS ALSO Some Objections answered, And a Method proposed for the easy
Collection thereof, with much Certainty and small Charge.

London: Printed for the Author, 1696

PROPOSALS, etc.
The Means are as follows, (viz.)

1. THAT the Sum of one Shilling be laid on every Thousand of Bricks and Tyles,
payable by the Buyer (except for such as shall be used in the King's Buildings
and Repairs, and of those used in Building and Repairing of Churches, Chapels,
Hospitals, and Almshouses.) And the Brick or Tyle-maker to pay Duty for what
he shall convert to his own Use in Building. This will chiefly, but easily
affect only Moneyed Men, infected with the Plaguey Itch of Building.

2. That for every Person who shall Learn Music, Singing, or Dancing, the Sum
of Two Shillings per Month or Quarter, payable at the beginning of each Month
or Quarter; one Moiety by the Master or Teacher, and the other by the Scholar.
This will as much affect the Moneyed Mechanic, as the Duke, Lord or Esquire.

3. That twelve Pence in the Pound be laid on the Price of all Gold Chains,
Rings, Pearl, and Jewels whatsoever, Clocks, Gold and Silver Watches: And three
Pence per Ounce on all Silver Plate Bought or Exchanged; and on Gold and Silver
Lace and Fringe, or any Lace or Fringe mixed with Gold or Silver, payable by
the Consumptioner. These, though not absolutely Necessary, will equally affect
from the Crown to the Moneyed Clown.

4. That twelve Pence in the Pound Value be laid on all China Ware, Cabinets,
Tables and Stands, Strong Boxes, and Escritoires, payable by the Consumptioner.

5. That the Sum of Five Shillings per Piece be laid on all Pictures Imported,
payable by the Importer: And the Sum of two Shillings in the Pound for all
Pictures sold by Auction or otherwise; and the like Sum of two Shillings in the
Pound on all Pictures Drawn by the Life or otherwise, in Oil, Water, or dry
Colors: The one Moiety by the Drawer or Seller, and the other by the Buyer:
Also two Shillings for every Engraved Sculpture on Brass or Copper, or
Meza-tinta Plate or Cut; payable by the Engraver before it shall be printed
off.

6. That the Sum of Twelve Pence in the Pound value be laid on all Hatts,
Peruques, and Commodes or Head-Dresses for Women, and on Muffs and Tippets
(except for Common-Soldiers Hatts, and such as are under the Price of Five
Shillings) to be paid by the Consumptioner. It is here meant, and so in other
things, that from Five Shillings, and under Twenty Shillings, to pay but
Sixpence, and so to advance and pay at the Rate of Sixpence for every Ten
Shillings in the Price of any Commodity; and all under Five Shillings for ease
of the Poor in paying nothing.

7. That Six Pence be laid on every Playhouse Ticket for Box or Pit, and so
proportionably for other places; and for all Stage Plays, and Shows at Fairs,
etc. payable by the Spectators, at their entrance into such Play or Show, etc.

8. That Twelve Pence in the Pound value be laid on every original Copy of
Book, Pamphlet or Play, that shall be printed; the one Moiety by the Author,
and the other by the Purchaser of such Copy; unless the Author shall at his own
Charge Print the same; In that case he to pay the whole Tax according to the
Value, to be adjudged by two or more Printers to be Sworn for that purpose,
before such Book shall be put into the Press. (Except for such Books of
Devotion as shall be given in Charity.)

In all the before Particulars all Persons Tax themselves according to such
Degrees as their Extravagancies shall prompt to exceed the Decent and Necessary
Uses of them: Several whereof not being at all absolutely requisite, (viz.)
Music, Singing, Dancing, Gold Chains, Rings, Pearl and Precious Jewels;
Clocks, Watches, Plate, Fringe and Lace, China, Pictures, etc. nor indeed the
Excesses in Perukes and Commodes, and particularly Extravagant Building,
especially in the middle and under Rank of People, during the present
Chargeable War: However, such whose Quality and Fortunes ought chiefly to have,
and that can afford them, and such others whose Pride, Humor, and Excesses in
those Vanities, do, and will far exceed such Decent and Necessary Uses (a thing
often wished and attempted to be restrained.) I think (with most Humble
Submission) are the Persons who with most Ease, and least Damage or Burden,
can, and ought most largely to contribute to the Extraordinary Expense of the
War, since every such Person may, and can abridge at pleasure.

But few Men are so Critically knowing in the Intrinsic Value of any Commodity
herein named (Plate excepted) as to tell within the Sums mentioned for Taxes,
whither they Buy Dear or Cheap, so by consequence cannot feel it.

And because very few Yeomen or Farmers will be concerned in any of the
aforementioned Particulars (who have as yet born but small share in the Charge
of the War, though seldom (if ever) better Markets for Corn, Butter, Cheese,
etc. than since the War. That if

9. One Shilling per Quarter were laid on every Plow of Horses or Oxen, whose
owner Farms or Rents above (...) Pounds per Annum (having regard herein for
such Freeholders who have paid the Land Tax for their Free-holds.) And one
Shilling per Quarter payable by all Persons who wear or pretend to wear Swords,
(Excepting the Army, and with other due Exceptions) together with twelve Pence
to be paid for every Motion at any of the Bars of His Majesty's Courts of
Record, and also Twenty Shillings for every Cause or Trial, etc. in any of the
said Courts; or at Assizes, upon a Verdict given for any thing above the Value
of (...) Pounds, to be first paid down by the Plaintiff, and allowed him in his
Bill of Costs by the Defendant, if cast, otherwise not; they would make
considerable Additions to the Fund.

It may probably be objected, That

'Twill be hard on the Buyer, who parts with his Money for any thing herein
named, to pay the Tax, when perhaps he may be out-reach'd in the price;
therefore more reasonable to be paid by the seller who gets pro^^i^^, etc.

The Answer hereunto is Obvious, if Considered, that first, none will be
Burdened with Taxes for any Commodity, that lies on hand dead and unsold:
Secondly the seller is debarred of any Just pretensions for Inhancing the price
thereof, beyond the usual Value, now common in all things Taxed, as Bottles,
Glass, Coals, Stamped Paper and Parchment, etc. But in the Manner here
Proposed, such pretensions are wholly taken away: And Lastly, the Tax will more
certainly be paid, for no seller will put himself at the Mercy of any
Informing Buyer, since it comes not out of his, but the Buyers Pocket.

Now the Method Proposed for the Easy Collecting a Tax thus laid, is Briefly
thus,
That in every House or Shop, where these Commodities are made, or sold, there
may be fixed, the Kings Box, so contrived, (which I can do), as not to be
picked or opened! whereof the King's head Receiver, of each Parish, Ward, or
Hundred to keep the Key: the Master of each such House or Shop to have Three
pence in the Pound for all Taxes put therein, and to be answerable as well for
the due payment as the goodness thereof: Having Books for that purpose, wherein
to be Entered, the Buyer and Sellers Name, and the Name of the Commodity, and
price sold for, with the Sum paid for Tax: which the said House or
Shopkeeper, shall be obliged to receive and put into the said Box, in the view
of such Buyer, before delivery of such Commodity, whether for ready Money, or
on Credit: And for avoiding all Fraud and Deceit therein, upon the Information
of any such Buyer, and proof thereof upon Oath before any Justice of Peace, or
two or more Commissioners for Taxes, within 48 hours after any Goods or
Commodity so Taxed, being sold and delivered, for which the Tax has not been
Demanded and actually paid into the Box, and fairly Entered in the Book as
aforesaid, the seller of such Commodity to forfeit the Sum of for every such
Omission, the one Moiety to the King, and the other to the Informer: And every
such House or Shop keeper, to be answerable for their Wife, Servants, and
Apprentices unfaithfulness therein: The said Box to be opened by such Receiver
at Pleasure, in the Presence of two or more of the Commissioners within that
Parish, Ward, or Hundred, and of the House or Shopkeeper: And being adjusted
with the Book of Entry's; the said Receiver to give Acquittance for the Sum
therein found, and a fair Copy thereof attested under the Hands and Seals of
the said Commissioners, and House or Shopkeeper, to be returned Quarterly into
his Majesty's Exchequer, so as the said Receiver may be charged to answer the
same.

The Teachers of Music, Dancing, and Singing, to be obliged not to Teach,
under a Penalty, until the Tax be first paid, at the next Box to the place
where such Scholar shall be Taught.

The Tax on Plows and Swords to be Collected and Assessed as the Tax on
Marriages, Christenings and Burials.

And if any thing herein named should be sold where no such Box shall be fixed
as aforesaid, or be sent to Persons Houses and there agreed for etc. It may be
very easy for such Persons to send a Servant with the Seller to the next place
where such Box is, and there to pay the Tax, and Enter the Names of Buyer and
Seller as aforesaid; which every House or Shopkeeper where such Boxes are, may
willingly, or be enjoined to do Gratis, by reason of the Three Pence in the
Pound to be allowed him as aforesaid.

One of which Boxes may be carried into any Court, etc. under the care of the
Clerk of the Crown, or Peace; or other Officer daily attending there. And one
also may be fixed at each Playhouse under the Care of him or them who give out
the Tickets, and



Glass, Paper and Parchment, etc. neither being possible to be even so much as
guessed at, till after some time for Trial, etc. However according to such
Estimates as I can make from Persons who are dealers in some of them, of what,
for Years past, have been spent therein; I shall give two or three Instances,
and submit them to better and more certain Experience.

l. s. 1. It Is Conjectured that there have been for several Years past, upwards
of 40 Millions of Thousands of Bricks and Tyles used yearly; However I will
only compute for the one third part thereof which at 1 s. per Thousand will
amount to 666,666 13 2. By several Computations, it is thought there are upwards
of Seven Millions of People (some say Eight) in England and Wales: Now suppose
one fourth part of Seven, one with another, to lay out for Hatts, Peruques,
Commodes, Muffs, Tippets, Music, Singing and Dancing, etc. Twenty Shillings
each yearly, which at 12 d. per Pound, amounts to 87,500 l. 3. If Disbursed for
China Ware, Cabinets, Escritoires, Pictures, Imported, Drawn, Bought and Sold,
at Plays. For Plate, Jewels, Clocks, Watches, Fringe and Lace, etc. to the
Value of 200,000 Pound yearly, at 12 d. per Pound that will amount unto 10,000
l. s. These three Heads amount to 764,166 13

Without Reckoning for Plows, Motions, Causes or Trials, or for Swords, etc.
l. s. Now this Tax being laid for Seven Years (for then no Persons would
suspend or alter Measures in their intended and accustomed Uses of any of these
particulars depending on the Expiration of this Tax) by the Computation as
above would raise the Sum of 5,349,165 11

But supposing some of the Particulars before mentioned be omitted, or that
some or all of them be over computed, and 349,165 l. 11 s. being struck off,
the remaining Five Millions, to me (with humble submission) seems very probable
to be raised with much more Ease, and Equality, than by any other Proposal I
have yet seen. And,

If the Mite here Humbly offered, in the whole, or in part, prove Useful to the
King and Public, I shall account my self very happy in being Instrumental
therein.

J. M.

FINIS.

