THE LOVING HUSBAND, And Prudent WIFE; Represented in the persons of St.
Eustachius and Theopista, Martyrs.

Written in Italian by John Baptista Manzini, and englished by John Burbery.

The History is confirmed by Baronius, with the testimony of Greek and Latin
Authors.

LONDON, Printed for J. Martin, and J. Allestrye, at the Bell in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1657.

To the most incomparable Pair, and no less happy in affection, than matchless
in worth, and honor, the Right Honorable Henry Howard of Arundell, my most
noble Patron, and the Lady Anne his Wife.
IT IS related of the River Alpheus, that by subterranean passages, it runs
awhile unseen through the Country of Elis, but afterward breaking out,
repairs to the Sea, though with no great stream. The rivulet of my thanks (for
your favor to me, all along my attendance on my Lords of happy memory, your
Grandfather, and Father, and since more abundantly expressed during my service
with your Honors) which long has been concealed, (it having no proportion
with the Sea of your bounty) now openly runs thither, though blushing all the
way, at the smallness of the stream. But since at any rate I desire to be
grateful to your Honors, (I publishing with my gratitude my own
imperfections) whom can I more worthily entitle to this Book, since the one is
so loving a Husband, and the other so prudent a Wife? The Dedication then by
right belonging to your Honors, (Valor and Beauty, with the virtues of both
Sexes, meeting in you, as lines in the center) what juster Oblation could be
made, if the Offering had resemblance with your Honors high deserts? But the
Sun not secluding the Valleys from the influence of his rays, invites me to
hope, your Honors (like the Sun in the luster of your Families) will descend
into this Valley, and seclude not from the influence of your favorable aspect,
the humble labors of

Your Honors most devoted, and most faithful humble Servant, John Burbery.

The Loving Husband, and Prudent Wife, etc.
The first Book.
THE merit of Virtue is so great, and so glorious with Man, that if Man owed
not Virtue to God, he would owe less to God than to Virtue. And what benefit
would Life be, if Life were nothing else but a bundle of evils? A good life,
said the Moralist, is a greater benefit than life it self. The merit of Virtue
(a Treasure we have happily gotten out of the Exchequer of Gods grace) is the
thing that has made Man admired many times above all earthly Creatures. And
what wonder is it, that an Angel, whose object is so blessed, and whose nature
so perfect, should always live burning in the love of that Creator he beholds
and enjoyes? A wonder it is, and a wonder for a Deity, that is seated on a
Throne of Omnipotency, to see that a worm of the earth, oppressed with the
weight of his carnal desires, wrestling with the distraction of so many
flattering objects, and opposed by Hells treacheries and power, should be every
where invincible, and triumphing over all dangers, by a heat of love, mount
above the sphere of all corporeal things on the wings of Charity; and flying
into the bosom of his Maker, miraculously engraff, and transform himself
wholly into his Creator. If the reverence (due to the profound depths of
heavenly wisdom) commanded not my silence, I should presume to say, that to so
rebellious an Angel as Lucifer, a man so pious as he I speak of, should in
reason have been Guardian. Perhaps his example might have kept him in his duty,
who has reared with a handful of Clay, an Altar to his God, to the shame of a
noble spirit, whose sacriledges lasted but a while, to make him more eminent in
his sin, than his nature.

Of such men renowned for Virtue, the Stories of Christian Religion relate
many. And because to arrive at the perfection of so holy a state, Virtue is
necessary, and cannot be better learned than by an Example, I have thought it
fit to give the Reader a Pattern, which we by imitation may improve to our
advantage.

In the life of Eustachius you will read the Idea of Perfection. His Heart was
Love's Forge; his Bosom a Shop of Martyrdom. Whatever we believe of all the
Unfortunate, we may pity in Eustachius alone. His life made him a Martyr,
perhaps too a greater than his death; yea nothing but only death has
contributed to his rest, among the intolerable and uncessant torments of so
painful a life. Whosoever has not read his life, knows not yet how God plays
at Tennis. Job in the old Testament would have been Envie's subject, if
Eustachius had not been born. Eustachius hindered Job from being singular, and
Job him from being the first. Whosoever gives not credit to Miracles, let him
forbear reading this Story; in which it is a Miracle to me, my heart does not
break in running it over, much more in writing it. He that denses Tribulation
in a good man is a gift of God, shall see by reading here, whether it were
possible a man of ill life could suffer, without despair, the thousandth part
of the disasters of this heart without heart. I call the heart of Eustachius a
heart without heart, supposing Christ did there the office of a heart. And I
cannot think it possible, that had not God assisted particularly, he could have
opposed, much more overcome the power of Hell, so much at liberty, and set on
to ruin him, who being only flesh, in the end would have showed his weakness.

Of the Father of Eustachius, his Nativity, and Country, we have no light at
all from Antiquity; were it that the Writers employed about the miracles of his
life, had no leisure to celebrate his birth; or were it, that God (being
always mysterious) would not let him be known to descend from the Earth, whom
he had predestined to be a great Ornament to his Heaven, and our Law. It Is the
fate of the famous Rivers, Euphrates and Tygris, to derive their springs from
Paradise.

He was born, and lived long in the errors of the Gentiles, and barbarous
Infidels: but true it is also, that in the whole carriage of his life, nothing
could be ever observed to be barbarous, but his Paganism. He lived in Trajan's
time, God would not permit him, or his Prince, to be born in an age of impiety.
Trajan deserved to be born in a time when the justice of his Faith must be
purged, as that of his Government. But Almighty God, who was pleased to try his
Church, to make it victorious, designed that age for Princes, the hardness of
whose hearts was to serve for a resemblance with the mines of a rising Faith.

He was called Placidus from his Cradle, perhaps with less expression of his
mildness than his happiness. Even his name assured him, he should be very
acceptable to God.

Being born in a Country (if we may believe his valor, which persuades us to
think he was a Roman) and in an age that reduced all Virtues to Courage, he
went to the Wars, to train up his Youth in the School of Mars. In a short space
of time, his Valor was so cried up by all, that he (like another Leonides) was
supposed to have a hairy heart in his breast. In dangers he was greater than
dangers, and less only than his own Gallantry, which was swayed by his
Prudence alone. The Soldiers had him always for a object to imitate, the
Commanders for a subject to commend, and the Enemy for a Thunderbolt to fear.

If he fought, he overcame; and if he conquered, he fought not. He never showed
more valor, than when he had occasion to pardon; and never more generously
pardoned, than when the Enemy despaired more of Pardon than Victory. He
rejoiced in conquering, not in killing; and only then killed, when Clemency
was Cruelty, or dangerous. He was not enamored of a great, but good report;
neither measured he his Victories by the space the Dead took up, but that the
Suppliants filled. To affirm, he had a calm mind; it is enough to say, his
mind would never yield to be conquered. He that is magnanimous, loves
Victories, and not Slaughters. Whosoever spills blood with delight, may well
boast of being a valorous Tiger, but cannot be a Soldier.

As he went not temerariously to the Wars, but was invited thither by Glory; so
his forward spirit never engaged him in their errors; who running more
impetuously than warily after Fame, fall into a thousand precipices. His good
service, and prudence, gave him presently the character of a worthy Commander;
which the Emperor hearing of, he was not long a Pretender to Employment for
the Armies, whose noblest part he was. His singular Valor more advanced him in
the end, to the highest Commands, than the favor of his Master. How he warred,
the Jews can tell, to whom was more terrible the sweet name of Placidus, than
were at other times the Chariots of Pharaoh.

As soon as the Wars were at an end, Placidus went to Rome, where by his mild
nature, his unblemished deportment, but more by his great charity, in releiving
all necessitous persons, he made himself so infinitely famous, and was by all
the Empire so beloved, that he made the Politicians rule fail, enjoying at once
the love of the People, and the favor of the Prince. I might speak something
of his inclinations, but let this suffice. He was such a man, that albeit an
Infidel, he got the love of God. His house was a very safe refuge to all that
were unfortunate. Whosoever was in misery, and came to him for succor, was
certain of releif. Whosoever wanted counsel, found him his surest Oracle. His
counsels were so wise, that his mouth seemed to be a womb of wisdom. They were
so candid and sincere, that Solomon would have called them, the sons of a
tongue of choice silver. They were so useful, and so wholesome, that with the
Holy Ghost we may say, The mouth of the just is a vein of life.

His good disposition was transparent through the sweetness of his carriage.
Every man knew he was a man, but they who hold intelligence with Heaven, would
have taken him for an Angel.

He carried himself with a gravity that was graceful, and had nothing of the
haughty; neither did his mildness ever lessen his respect, or his rigor his
love. He had the majesty, not the pride of his equals. He was like Nilus, which
only of all Rivers is not subject to wind. He had the air of a Soldier, both
in his demeanor and countenance: but his sweet disposition and mildness
assured, he had in his breast erected a Temple to Peace. He resembled the
propitiatory Cherubins, was Gold without, and of Olive wood within; as the Wand
which Brutus presented in the Temple of Delphos to Apollo, a Rind of the
Cornel tree, a Soul of pure Gold. In fine, our Placidus was so mild, and so
just, that the Public would have sent none but him to receive the Mother of
the Gods, if she again sailing on the Seas, had arrived on the Roman Coast.

At length he resolved to marry, persuaded not only by the pleasures enjoyed
in Peace, and prefermonts by War, but the ordidinary inclination of man, to
have a Consort for his own content, and the good of the Universe.

And it succeeded well, he espousing Trajana, a Gentlewoman of rare chastity;
and in her affection and deportment so conformable to her Husband, that her
Habitation was a School of Music, in which, from several voices, an excellent
harmony resulted. They loved one another, they mutually submitted, and had a
reciprocal compassion, and esteem for each other. The husband beheld with no
eyes but his wives, and the wife looked in no other glass but her husband. She
conformed her self so naturally to his will and disposition, that both in her
mind and actions, as it were in a glass, every man saw the solid image of her
husband. A prudent woman (says Plutarch) will frame her self by Geometrical
discipline to her husbands affections and nature, as the lines and superficies
move not alone, but always with the body, so a virtuous woman should move, or
be at quiet, will, or not will with her husband, making one single Will of two
Understandings.

Of this happy Graff grew two Sprouts, which degenerated in nothing from the
ancient Stock. Their two little Sons, although young, fairly promised to
imitate the virtues of Placidus and Trajana, living the followers, and dying
the companions of their Parents.

In the mean time, Placidus, ordained for great things, was infinitely weary of
the idleness of Peace; and because no where better, and more to his genius, he
could employ himself, than in War, he spent in hunting the greatest part of his
time.

Hunting resembles a War; but resembles it so naturally, that it is no absurdity
to say, War is a Hunting, and Hunting a War. Does't not happen frequently in a
Battle, that the Enemy flies? in Hunting, that a Beast makes resistance?
Because they that run away in a time of War are not Beasts, shall not therefore
War be a Hunting? Because all that in Hunting make resistance, are not Men,
shall not therefore Hunting be a War? But be it what it will, our gallant
Cavalier still employed, and diverted himself in hunting, where his labor, his
stratagems, and the combats he had, (though they never produced glorious
Victories) still exercised his body, many times his judgment, and sometimes
his courage; and though sometimes they were dangerous to him, and sometimes
painful, yet always they served to entertain and delight him.

His Huntsman once telling him, he had found at feed a little way off, a great
Herd of Stags, he joyfully, (and he could not but be joyful, if our soul still
retaining some sparks of the Divinity, from which it proceeds, presages good
luck) ranged the Hunters into order, distributed the Dogs, had fresh Horses at
hand, and sending to watch the leaps, so contrived his design, that the hunting
might prove as successful, as he hoped 'twould be delightful, in respect of
the game.

O loving God, by how many, and what ways, contriv'st thou the salvation of
the senseless sinner? The Wood has no retreat in all its dreadful horrors,
and secret lurking holes, where the soul may so lie hid, as God does not seek
it, to beseech it to receive of him Graces, Mercies, Heaven, and Divinity.

In the morning, by break of the day, which was to show the Sun of Mercies to a
Hunter, Placidus well furnished with Men and Horses, rode toward the fore
mentioned Forest; where no sooner they arrived, but discovered the Herd they
sought. Every one there fingling out his game, began to pursue the flying Deer,
to see who could bear away the Prize; which while they endeavored, a Heart so
great, and breathed, fell to Placidus his share, that it led him amain into so
uncouth and remote a place, that (his Horse now beginning to fail him) he was
hopeless of the Prey he had promised so fairly to himself. Placidus losing the
Deer, rode sadly away; but when he was under a cliff, and casually lifted up
his head, he spied again the Stag, who (leaping over the top of the rock, with
his head spreading out with knotty beams, and at bay, being turned toward him,
as if he staid there to devour him) stood proudly expecting him.

The Stag (as Saint Jerome and Saint Basil write) draws the Serpents by panting
out of caves, and destroys them. 'Twas the work of a Deity to send a Stag to
purify his breast, which had been a cave to harbor the Serpent of Idolatry.

Placidus (greatly terrified at the stratagems of the fact, and not a little
amazed) stood musing what to do; but it seeming absurd to give the weary Beast
any time to take breath, leaped hastily to the ground, making sure of his game,
if he could gain the top of the cliff.

He had scarce begun to go on, but he heard a voice thunder in his ear, which
though weak and sad, carried with it, I know not what of horror, which
disordered all the blood in his breast, where his troubled spirits strayed out
of the way, to meet in the heart.

Casting about his eyes to find from whence the voice came, he discovered (O
sight never to be desired enough) betwixt the horns of the Heart, a Christ
crucified, who bathed with tears, and full of brightness, beheld him with such
tenderness, that perhaps he might have died of delight, if the confusion of
hearing himself guilty had not qualified it. Placidus, ah dear Placidus, why
persecutest thou me? What have I done unto thee? So Christ, who descended from
Heaven into the Woods, to make a Sinner a Seraphin, renewed his instance,
weeping more than ever, and full of love and zeal for his salvation.

O Lord, ay me, O Lord, no more lest I dye; no more, O sweetness, O sorrow,
whatsoever it be, I feel the Heart that strikes me to the heart. Behold me
prostrate at thy feet, wholly penitent, and all thine. Dispose of me as thou
please. But who, who art thou Lord, that so gently reprehend'st me? So
Placidus, who dazzled with a heavenly ray of Christ's brightness, had been
comforted in a moment, illuminated, and enflamed, languishing and lying on the
ground, fell into an amorous ecstasy.

Who am I, dear Placidus? who am I? Does not the sweetness thou tastest witness
it? Does not the excess of my charity teach thee? Does not the remorse of thy
conscience speak me to thee? Ah, who am I? I am Jesus Christ, who created thee,
redeemed thee, and will save thee, if thou obey me. I am that God, who
descending from the Throne of my Glory, dear Placidus, for thy sake have vested
my Deity with flesh, it seeming too little for my love to contribute no more to
thy salvation than that pure act of my will, which alone was sufficient to save
thee. I desire thou should see, that for thy sake I used all occasions to
suffer my self willingly to be trampled on, and torn in pieces.

Ask but these veins, these arteries, these bowels, and they will tell thee,
whether I have in them all one single drop of moisture to keep me alive; what I
could not spill, I have vented by sweat; what I could not sweat, I have caused
to be drawn out by lances from my heart. And thou Placidus, what do thou for
me? what do thou for thy self?

So answered the Father of Mercies, when Placidus began to cry out, No more, my
God, no more Graces, this plenty is too great, a breast of flesh cannot hold a
whole Paradise. Ah me, will thou bury Beatitude in a vase of Perdition, my dear
and sweet God, now indeed that I know thee? But how can thou endure, and much
more love, so wicked a Creature? Why do not unnail those hands, and pierce
this breast, which is not ashamed to harbor so ungrateful, wicked, and
rebellious a soul?

Then weeping abundantly, like a devout Penitent, he consumed himself in the
fire of Charity, God Almighty giving him an essay of the unspeakable and
incomprehensible sweetness of eternal felicity.

Rise Placidus, go hence to the City, and there with thy Wife and children,
have recourse to my Priest, and be baptized: then coming back hither, thou
shall here enjoy my presence; where unveiling to thee the deep mysteries of my
faith, and telling thee some particulars of thy future condition, I will again
dismiss thee with comfort and fortitude.

So speaking, vanished our most merciful Father, who, rather upon a Cross,
than the shoulders of Seraphins, would appear unto him, to let the World know,
that when the salvation of a Sinner is in question, if the Jews will not
crucify him, he will again crucify himself.

Here the new Christian much amazed, yet full of confidence and love, was about
to complain of God, that he had so soon taken from his sight so sweet an
object. But he was reprehended by that light, which had more illuminated his
mind, than beatified his eyes. Ah no (said he, having recollected himself) I
will not take it ill, no my God. If I had still enjoyed thy sweet presence, I
should have lost that happy time which I owe to the obedience of thy
Commandments. My God; thy most holy will be done, I go hence, my dear God. Be
pleased to give me strength and constancy to serve thee, in order to the will
and zeal thou have given me to desire it.

Speaking thus, and burning with zeal for the service of God, he was even ready
to creep on his hands and feet to Rome, in the posture he then found himself.
Every thing tends to its center in the most direct line. Placidus had already
left all his understanding in the track of his will, and would outrun himself,
to show his prompt obedience to his God.

This zeal made him think of his Horse, whose natural swiftness might carry him
with more speed to his Baptism. Then leaping into the saddle, and spurring him
on, he posted toward Rome. His earnest desire of getting thither, made him
impatient of delay. The memory of the pleasures he had newly enjoyed,
transported him, and his wishes, to get out of the dangerous state of Paganism,
were a torment to him. O how many times, recollecting himself, did he say,
Let Us moderate this pleasure, my soul, let us look to our selves, lest the Horse
by going out of the way with his errors, prolong ours. O let us go hence, let us
make have away, God will direct us. O dear, O sweet, and loving God, and when
deserved I ever these favors? and how at any time was I worthy of them, who
always, and in all things, and in every place, have been void of all justice,
and full of all iniquity? Ah dear Wife, what will thou say, when I shall inform
thee of the favors God does us? what will thou say? will thy bosom contain
them? can thou resist this sweetness, and not receive comfort, and be
fortified by the rays, which out of compassion, most loving and most merciful
God, and God too late known, I have beheld and tasted.

With these, or the like meditations, the Christian Actaeon (having seen in the
Woods the D^ana of Christ's Humanity, Sister to the Sun of Divinity) rode along,
sometimes feeling his heart torn by the barking and biting remembrance of his
former offenses; and at other times, finding himself a new man, flew with his
soul to the feet of Christ, as the Heart to the fountains of waters, with as
much thirst as confidence.

Being come at last to the City, lighting off his Horse, and going up to his
Wife (who flying, came to meet him with her extended arms) he began. What will thou say, my dear Wife, when thou shall understand the news I bring? When
Trajana, weeping through abundance of affection, replied; I have great things
to tell thee, O Husband come too late, and too long expected.

Having received one another with mutual embraces, and the kindness used by
persons, who loved each other according to their merit, and reciprocal
obligation, Placidus (having something in his eyes which looked like amazement,
and resembled a trance) rid himself of his servants officiousness, who employed
about the service of his person, deprived him of his liberty; and departing
with his dear Trajana, to impart unto her the wonders he had seen, gave his
Wife opportunity to prevent him in this manner.

And where have thou been so great a while, my dear Placidus? What toylsome
occasion returns thee to me so disordered and troubled? What sad thoughts have
sunk thy eyes? At the time I expected to enjoy with thee those eternal
felicities, which even the last night were promised me by a Crucified Man, who
was clothed with the Sun. Why do thou meet me so sad, and so pensive?

Placidus, at the name of Crucified, (a voice more pleasing, because little
expected) was all on fire; and lifting up his hands to Heaven, with floods of
tears falling from his eyes, brake out in this manner.

Ah good God! what! every where graces? every where graces? Go on cheerfully,
dear Wife, for we have a bountiful God, who is all hands, a God whose torn
bosom is replenished with graces, a God all honey to comfort us, and all fire
to warm us. Thou have seen our God, dear Wife, thou have seen our salvation. I
was not in trouble, but an ecstasy of pleasure. The heat that breaks out at mine
eyes, my breast was not able to contain. Glory be to God, my dear Wife, that
God will be with us; praised be God, my dear Wife, that the God of all truth
seeks us for himself. Then as well as his tears would permit him, Placidus
informed his Wife of the wonders he had seen in the Wood; in the relation of
which, how often these souls were transported, with how many ecstasies, and how
often with a melting affection they now comforted, now commiserated one
another, good Lord declare you, who occasioned it; I, for my part, can easier
desire than describe these delights. I know Trajana (called by the Holy Ghost,
whom we never more worthily answer, than when we quickly answer) hastened her
Placidus, Up quickly, let us away, let us readily consent to so many graces; let
the jealousy of losing them be our rule how to love them.

O expressions, that deserve to be sung on the Harp of a Seraphin, in the
hearing of a Deity.

All the Curtains of night being drawn, as if it meant likewise to contribute
to the salvation of this fortunate Couple, securing them under its Mantle, from
the injuries, or at least the impediments might rise against their good, but
then sharply condemned resolution, taking with them their two little Sons, and
two Servants, whom they long had found faithful and affectionate, they went to
the sacred Font, to be baptized.

A good religious man, called John, was chief in Rome over the Sacramental
Treasury of the growing Church. He (hearing and admiring the desire, but much
more the vocation of the new Believers, and giving God the praises, which a
Pastor should do, who saw his Flock every day increase) sought, I Will not say to
confirm them, for he knew by their zeal, the Holy Ghost assisted them, but to
show them with what love and pleasure he resented the favors God their
Benefactor had so graciously conferred upon them. The humility with which they
approached to the sacred Font, together with the tears they let fall, in
witness of the comfort they received, and the love they expressed in their
gratitude to God, were such as might become two Souls, that had spoken face to
face with a living and loving Deity.

To him that understands these Love-extasies, the Writer is not useful; and to
him that is not capable of them, he is too superfluous. Yet I Will not omit to
remember, that God showered abundantly his graces on them, and the treasures
overflowing their souls, were sufficient to enrich, and beatifie the best of
men.

The good Priest melting in devotion, was touched with a generous and spiritual
emulation; perhaps desiring more to be their Companion, than rejoicing in the
title of Father. They thanked him for his charity, and he recommended himself
to their devotion. They besought him, (knowing the ill life they had lead) to
pray to God for them, that he would be pleased to make them new Creatures; and
he entreated them to sue for his pardon, since having been so ancient a Servant
in Gods House, he could learn of Children (yet Babes in the state of grace)
devotion and wisdom. He lamented his own coldness, and they much rejoiced they
were come into Gods House, where every thing was fervor. In fine, they here
contested about charity, humility, and reverence. His was the Victory that
lost, and God at the same time was the Cause of it, the Spectator, Judge, and
Recompense.

Eustachius and Theopista, (who had left in the sacred Font of Baptism the
names, as well as the belief of Placidus and Trajana) at last took leave of the
Priest. They parting thence, and returning homeward full of unspeakable
consolation, went kissing their Chiildren; as if they had but newly brought
them into the World. O bowels of our bowels (said they) how much are we
indebted to God, who even at this time has bestowed you on us? Ah! wretches
that we are, how long have we kept you, hanging by the small thread of so
brittle a life, over the infernal precipice of a gulf of mortal eternity! Ah!
blind that we are, who loved you so little! How happy are ye, who being yet
innocent, and regenerated by your God, may no sooner use your reason, but begin
to do good! Would we had been-so fortunate, who obdurate so often, and so long,
have not only lived in sin, but frequently to sin; Courage, dear Wife, said
the Husband; Courage dear Husband, said the Wife, since God in his infinite
mercy has pardoned us; let us think now at last, how to make our selves worthy
of the pardon we have had, and operate in that manner, our God repent not he
has pardoned us. So speaking to themselves, by the virtue of the charity of
God, which possessing a breast, turns it all into heart, they resolved not to
yield even to the Seraphins themselves, in loving so bountiful a God. But what
said I of Seraphins? Not to yield to God himself, in loving God.

He will love (said they) more than we; for being all knowledge, and all
goodness, he can have correspondence with himself, and condignly love himself:
but he shall not surpass us in love, in what we are able, because we will love
him with our will; we'll only desire him, only covet him, and only seek him.
We'll do so dear Wife, we'll do so dear Husband; and let us declare our
resolution to God, that he may be pleased to further our desire.

With these, or the like passions, they came home, where Eustachius (repairing
the forces of his body with meat, and recovering himself of the weariness
caused by his pains in the VVood, and the restless agitation of his mind,
after he had ordered a new hunting the day following) fell asleep: how he
rested, you may guess, if you know how one rests who lies down full of serious
thoughts. His sleeping was a watching, he contemplated, slept not, since the
meat in his stomach could not send up fumes to cloud and darken his mind, in
which the eternal Sun of the Cherubins did shine.

O how happy are they that are capable of this happiness? A good man is a
Tabernacle of the grace, and a Theater of the glory of God. Every thing he
does, has contentment joined to it. He neither eats, drinks, nor sleeps, but
with this consolation, that God seasons everything to him. What wonder is it
then, that loathing these things of the world, he sometimes leads a life, which
fools call Madness? These, these are the souls God loves to converse with: with
these, as with some rare work of his hands, he is so well pleased, that he has
at other times declared by word of mouth, to love them as his delight, as his
Children, and things made according to the rule and contentment of his heart.
And is not man mad, if (while he lives here upon Earth, and may converse with
God) he neglect it? O fools if we know it not, and desperate men if we know it!

Eustachius rose early in the morning; Mad man! what said I? at midnight; and
before his heavy eyes had satisfied the necessity of nature, the enamored
Eustachius left sleeping, and suddenly leaping out of his bed, God grant, said
he, with a heart full of sorrow, that I have not slept too long. He goes
sollicitous to the window, to spy out the morning, but finds, that the night
has not run yet half its course. Being satisfied that he had not slept too
long, he was still impatient, as unable to sustain an expectation, which was
very painful, by the violence of so earnest and amorous a desire. He supposed
Aurora had wronged him, in suspending so long the coming of that Sun which was
to conduct him to the feet of the Sun of Justice. He thought to have returned
to his bed, to have slept out the remainder of the night, but his zeal
persuaded him it was sacrledge to referr to the arbitrament of sleep, a Vision
that deserved to be longed for with impatience by the Angels themselves. He
would have been glad that sleep had overcome him, to rest without offense, and
pass away the time, which he knew not how to know without passion. He would
have been waking, though it had been with pain, if he could have only thought
on what he should do when his God should appear: but the more he thought on it,
the more he perceived his desire and longing to be there, was augmented in his
heart.

In these sweet afflictions, Eustachius enjoyed the time he desired to spend;
and while he expected this longed for Vision, he prepared himself so, as not to
be made expect any longer, the other he desired and sighed for in a higher
degree.

At break of day, having distributed in fit places his Dogs and Huntsmen,
(armed with the breastplate of faith) he rode sollicitous toward the VVood;
there to arrive, and separate himself from the company, as a Fugitive, was the
thing he intended. The center of his heart, and career, was the Paradise of the
Forest, where he thought to find his Christ. The horror accompanying
solitude, increased amazement and terror in his heart, while he stayed for
that Divinity, whose coming every moment he attended. Each whistling of the
air, and noise of the leaves, he reverently supposed were the Angels, singing
praises to that Deity, whose sacred presence represented the VVood, as a
Sanctuary to him.

Being come to the cliff, where at first he saw his Christ; and lighting off
his Horse, with a breast full of reverence, he prostrated himself to adore that
Divinity, whose Vision he attended, with no less fear than confidence. A Light,
like that of Paradise, brake out of the bosom of a little cloud, and
Eustachius was again made partaker of the presence of Christ, who spoke in this
manner.

Eustachius, thou have begun well, persevere; for if thou hold on to the
end, thou will advance my service, and save thy own soul. The favors I have
done thee, will be envied by Satan, whose temptations, if thou shall resist
valiantly, thou shall overcome gloriously. I my self, for thy good, will permit
him to assault thee; resist, and be victorious. I will be sure to help thee, do
not waver in thy faith. Thy honors, thy children, thy wife, and thy riches, I
have given thee; and it is necessary thou make it appear of whom thou do
acknowledge them, and with what affection; Thy faith and thy constancy must
assure me of thy love. I have resolved to try, how much of thy heart thou art
willing to give me in thy love, who have, to save thee, spilt my blood and life.

What may we, O Christians, believe he replied, whose perfections we may
measure by the love of God to him. I speak not of the love by which God
complied with his perfections, I mean the love by which he made him perfect. I
imagine he answered thus: And why should thou give me so abundant a
knowledge of thy goodness, most amiable God, but to love thee, and in order to
the tribulation I must suffer? And what sort of tribulation (able to balance
the infinite love I ow thee, and thou do deserve) can a body of dirt, more
brittle than glass, be able to support? If thou will bestow a love upon me,
proportionable to my sufferings, employ, I beseech thee, all thy power, in
inventing and devising an affliction, as great as the love I bear thee, as the
love I beg of thee. But this is not enough, O love of my love, this is not
enough, it is necessary thou give me a nature, which encountering all these
evils, will not cry before it is hurt. Thou call'st me to affliction, and I run
to affliction. And what can I ever endure, that may expiate such a multitude of
sins, much less return so many favors? And what tribulation can at any time be
displeasing to me, if so sweet and so beloved a God, a God of consolation and
comfort, will assist me? If I have with me, or rather within me, the vigor,
health, and life of all things, what evil will be able to hurt me? what grief
make me grieve? If I must do thee service with affliction, I would be afflicted
when I am not in thy service; for I cannot e're imagine, how that he that
serves thee, can suffer affliction. And how will thou value the afflictions,
which e're they torment, thou asswagest? Grant, O my God, grant I conjure thee,
by the merits of that infinite love with which thou love thy self, grant I
may love thee as well as I desire, and grant I may desire it as much as thou
deserve it, and then come Hell, and let Men arm themselves together with the
Angels, and join with thee in putting me to torment, I shall not at all value
them. I love a God, too sweet, too dear, and too loving. When he should cast
Thunderbolts at me, he comes with his nailed hands to comfort me. When he will
have me suffer, he comes to tell me of it, to animate and encourage me. And for
such a God can I suffer? I may, but I do more desire, than believe it. I
believe it, because he tells me so; but I doubt he will not tell it me, to make
me please him by consenting to it; and I would by suffering do something that
might please so bountiful a God.

With these, or affections of this kind, he overflowed, who in the eyes of
Christ learnt the most profound Divinity that is practiced in Loves School.

The more scorching and enflamed the Earth returns the Sunbeams to the Sun, the
more vigorously the Sun both waters and makes fruitful the Earth. God is as
the Sun to our soul, the more fervently we return him our love, the more
vigorous he is in the heat of his love to Mankind. They seem to scorch, yet
make the soul fruitful; which the more it is enflamed, the more it prevails
with God, for the oil of his heavenly grace.

So affectionately answered Eustachius; but Christ more affectionately replied:
These replies I should prosecute, but how to comprehend and express them,
though I wanted not the force of understanding, I should want without doubt the
perfection of virtue.

Gods conceptions only charity understands, and not reason. To describe them,
serves only to desire them, and not to make us fit to comprehend them. God only
makes us capable of them; and he that understands them, understands the^ by
grace and not by speculation.

What Christ did communicate to Eustachius, sure was most true, and I wish we
were worthy to partake of the tenderness of the love he expressed to him. He
showed him how well he was pleased with the zeal of his good will, and
instructed him in the most hidden msteries of his faith. He encouraged and
fortified him against the fierce temptations of the Devil, and after very many
revelations, (which would have been favors in Paradise it self) he promised to
hasten his Martyrdom and Crown.

When the Vision was ended, (in the period of which, the faster Christ
vanished out of sight, the more he adored him in his heart) Eustachius, full of
inward consolation, (having kissed the stones, saluted the trees, and
reverenced the place, which had been the Altar, the VVitness, and Temple of his
happiness) rode again toward the City.

Being come to his Wife, who expected him with the anxious solicitude, which
is not without hope, while he imparted to her the contents of the past
revelation, the Holy Ghost communicated to her its consolations and sweetness;
as if he should say, It Is justice thou should share in the delights of the
Vision, as thou art to share in the torments and afflictions mentioned in it.

The sharp temptations threatened, raised no fear in this Woman, who only was
effeminate in the duties of a Mother.

Ah, God fights not to conquer; and what glory can a Deity have in the ruin of
a Worm? The stronger his assaults be, the willinger he loses, and with greater
glory. Gods trials are accompanied with his Graces, and his Crucible makes the
Gold, tryes it not. Let Us comfort our selves, dear Husband, let us comfort our
selves; he will lose if we lose; and what can we lose, who have quitted the
propriety of our selves? And what will God try in us, if we be strong? That
cannot by nature be strong, which is naturally weak. If he will have us strong,
we shall not be weak; we shall be strong enough, if we be his, yes, yes, his,
let us wholly be his; and we shall be so always, and better Volunteers, because
we desire it, than because we are so naturally; and neither the force of
opposition, nor the rage of temptation, or the terror or pain of death, shall
ever have the power to make us not his. And now being his in this manner, shall
we not be defended by so gracious a God, who when we were his enemies, and
rebels, protected us?

So said Theopista, in whom the grace of God spoke more than her tongue; for
'twas that which informed her how such things were to be known and deserved.

But having prescribed new laws to their affections, and regulated their
senses, they studied that virtue which accustomes men to goodness.

Eustachius thought himself obliged to reform, in the first place, his House,
as he had done his Soul, and in a short time reduced it to that state of
perfection, that knowing what was needless, he quickly began to enjoy the
tranquillity, which men by living out of necessity, aim at. Humility chased out
of his House the pride of such Furniture, as makes the Master of it the most
inconsiderable thing there. His Table did nourish, not nauseate; for he fed not
to stir up an appetite, but to satiate hunger. His Clothes did cover, not adorn
him; for the habit is too gaudy, which deserves more respect than the man. His
Walls were not beautified with Mercury's Thefts, the Adulteries of Jupiter, and
the Infamies of Venus. And how can the Soul be held good, whose Body's not
thought happy, if even the Walls themselves, which secure its repose, be not
wicked? If even the bowls he drinks in, afford not more lasciviousness to gaze
on, than wine to please his palate? He was waited on, not idolized, by his
Slaves; and his Cup Bearer, by his serving him on the knee, feigned not to
believe he was a Jupiter. Whosoever named him, did not swear with a preface of
radiant titles, he supposed him transformed into a Star. He received not into
his House that kind of mad men, called Dancers, (People, all whose learning's
in their feet, all whose measure's in their errors) for there was no Feast,
but that of a good Conscience; neither Orpheus, Amphion, or Circe, had any
thing to do there; their harmony was the sighs, with which, from the
remembrance of their former transgressions, they passed to the hopes of a
future felicity. There was no discord, they two agreeing to sing perpetually
the mercies of so gracious, and so bountiful a God. No revellings were heard
there, nor tumults caused by Plays. Nor used they there Dice, which while with
golden promises they seem to flatter men, do cheat them of their lively hood,
and dishonor their death.

In his House they looked after the manuring of the Soul, not the Garden, where
Charity flourished, Piety, and Devotion, and not the Anemone of Thessaly, the
Musk-flower of Greece, and Granadiglia of Mexico. Good God, how is it possible
the intemperance of man should be so great, as (to please his sense of
smelling) to bring fading flowers from the famousest and remotest Eastern
Provinces?

And who would e're believe it, that the luxury of a prince (why speak I of a
Prince, of a Citizen, and often too necessitous) had caused a frail Flower to
be brought at his infinite charge over the Ocean, through Deserts, and over
Mountains, into a new World, and only for perfuming the Air for an unfortunate
man, who in a whole Hemisphear can find no smell to please him? He that will
venture all his fortune in a Flower-pot of earth, deserves to be ruined by each
blast of wind.

Now the example of Eustachius and his Wife, had corrected in that manner, and
reformed all the rest of the Family, that even out of reverence they forbore to
do ill.

His Slaves were rather Scholars than Servants, who loved their Master out of
wonder, not only out of gratitude, and were used like Children, not Enemies.
Authority without contempt, Riches without avarice, Honor without ambition,
and Splendor without luxury, remained within his Walls. In fine, his House was
become a Pantheon, where Modesty, Temperance, Charity, and each other Heavenly
Virtue, were held in great reverence. If a Christian had desired to behold the
two Tables of stone, where God with his own finger had written and engraven the
Precepts of his Law, he could no where find them better, than in the hearts of
Eustachius and Theopista. Each of them was marked, as the Plate of Gold on the
Miter of Aaron, with Holiness to the Lord. They were in that degree of
perfection, that I cannot describe it; the Touchstone will tell it: but God
must touch them, to tell us their worth. And what will that be?

The Loving Husband, and Prudent Wife, etc.
The second Book.
WE have seen already how this valiant Champion was reformed by the Sovereign
Commander of the Christian Militia: I must now relate the actions he
courageously performed with his Pike in his hand, on the dangerousest Frontiers
of the Enemy.

He lost in the first charge, all the lives of his slaves, occasioned by a
violent and contagious disease, for which there was no remedy. All attempts for
their health were in vain; and while some endeavored to prevent their
destruction, and others searched after the cause of the malady, they were by
its effects destroyed and consumed themselves: the spectacle of which was so
horrid and miserable, that the death of the Physician was often lamented by the
languishing Patient.

Solitude inherited his House, which his Friends, afraid of death, retreated
from, to avoid the infection, whose Violence made Physic of no use, while it
gave them no time to consult what to do.

What sorrow this loss might occasion to Eustachius, and how vast a sufferer he
was, he can best tell, that knows how great a part of the greatness and riches
of the Romans, the Slaves were.

They sowed, plowed, and reaped. The Yeoman of the Celler, the Barber, Tailor,
Groom of the Stable, and often too the Sumpter-man, were all Slaves. They
waited in the Chamber and Hall, and were Sewers and Cup-bearers. A Citizen had
of them on the rental of his revenue, to the number of a thousand; and Seneca
complained, that that Age had built Houses like Cities for greatness, and had
Families equal to Nations in number.

Flesh and Blood so galled in its interest, made Eustachius sensible, that he
could not without infinite grief bear so notable a loss.

Of what use will the Ground be without a Tiller? Cattle without a Cow-herd?
Houses without a Housekeeper? and Lords without Servants? In one only day,
with a single and a momentary disaster, as it were, lies so languishing, and
discomfited, all the fortune of his House? And whither shall he run to repair
it? Perhaps to Christ, who no sooner was known and adored, but blasted and
consumed all his Goods. Could he have fared worse, if he had refused to adore
him? Is this the encouraging of his Servants? This a way to comfort and confirm
them? Ah poor Eustachius, what will thou do? What hopes have thou left in the
progress of thy faith, the first entrance into which has lost thee all thou
had? To abandon a Jupiter, who made thee glister every where like the Sun, to
follow a Christ, who can only give thee nakedness? Thou never would credit
this truth, till thou had felt the smart of thy error. Thou too easily have
believed this God, and what God is this that will never suffer thee to be
happy, but when thou art his Enemy; nor makes thee unfortunate, but when thou
art his Friend? Ah Wretch! return to thy self, return.

So Satan suggested to Eustachius, in whom the piercing sense of his sudden
calamity could not choose but raise a storm of affliction. Fools are insensible
of disasters, but wise men bear them valiantly. Nature will have us to resent
them, but Reason to manage them. Virtue may restrain our resentment of
unhappiness, but cannot so subdue it, but it naturally will rebel. Valor would
decay, if it were not kept in action. We are born to fight thus, and
remunerated for so doing. God after the Creation would have placed us at first
among the Angels, if he had not been willing we should fight for the Victory
our activity aspires to. We might have enjoyed without opposition the glory of
delight, but not of repose and reward.

Eustachius (tossed up and down, not dejected) acknowledging every thing from
Gods hand, did comfort himself. It Is a favor (he said patiently) that the
scourge we deserve for so many transgressions, vents its fury on the shoulders
of our fortune. Let Us think on what remains, since that which is past is
irrevocable. Let Us be thankful to God for what he has left us, and thank him
for what he has taken away. Was he not merciful to us, in suffering us to
enjoy so much time? Who knows, if his depriving us of our Goods, has not been
a greater favor than his giving them to us? How many have lost their lives, by
being Masters of so many desperate fellows? The name of God be praised, we have
still so much left us, that living with much less, we shall live with much more
than is necessary. Can we part with less than the lives of a few Slaves, to
have an occasion of conforming our selves to Gods will?

While he was thus reasoning with himself, behold a panting Messenger arrived,
whose wan and sad face ushered in his dismal news.

It grieves me, my Lord, said he, to relate what will doubtless afflict you.
But the loss is as great, as the tidings inevitatable. All your Flocks of
Sheep, your Oxen, and Horses, are destroyed by a sudden contagion, and have
left us as poor, as confounded and amazed.

When God permits the Devil to command, his Scepter is of fire. He so fears his
authority of destroying should be clipped, that he undermines, esteeming the time
lost he employes in demolishing and battering.

To be poor on the sudden, is a great thing with patience to support,
especially for him who is not obliged to Fortune, but ows all he has to his
own virtuous ^^bours.

Nothing in this World we love ^ore than the fruits of our own labors. We love
them, because they are commodious; we love them, because we got them hardly;
and we love them, because they are our Children: but yet for all this, their
loss would be supportable, if we loved them not as testimonies and assurances
of our virtue.

For this last blow, which ruined entirely all the substance, not only the
greatness of Eustachius his House, what may we imagine he said, whose only
hope was, the sale of his Cattle, or their profits at least, would have
repaired the loss he had suffered by the death of his Slaves.

He said, Praised, blessed, and thanked be God, who has eased me of the weight
of so painful a care. Whom should I have trusted with the government of this
Flock, which only was left me, after my Servants death, to disquiet and tro^
me? Dear Wife, our God takes from us all impediments, that we being freer, and
disengaged from all affairs, may attend his service, and be thankful to him.
Be he always glorified, and I beseech all the Angels, together with all
Creatures, to thank him for me, since I cannot perform it of my self. God alone
be my patrimony, my treasure, and substance; by virtue of him, my losses will
not hurt me, my gains not distract me, not my miseries afflict me. If my God be
but with me, what thing can I want?

But what should these poor persons do, I should say Lords, if the Pestilence
had not killed too this title? By selling the best furniture of their House,
and their Lands, which for want of looking too, were wholly out of order, they
both patiently supported, and consumed too their poor Family. Their Friends
quickly left them, since it is a usual fault in the world, to fly away from
thence, whence Prosperity is departed.

Many blame Fortune for this, and say, she is so cruel, she would think she had
left him too much; whose poverty she has decreed, if she had not too, deprived
him of Friends. But wise men do know, this fault is our own, and not the Stars.
Man is afraid to touch him whose condition is infected, and cannot give us any
thing but contagion; or pretend, but to our Goods.

The not being a good Friend to ones Friend, makes us not count a Friend among
our proper Goods; else 'twould be impossible we should think it a misfortune to
part with any thing of our own, for his sake, whom we valued as one of the
pretiousest Jewels we have. His Followers deserted him, because he wanted means
to maintain them; and he that cannot live of himself, stands in need of
another. He was not cried up, because he was not rich. Acclamations and
splendor go together; and he that is wealthy, may be prudent, wise, and
valiant. Every man did pity him, but no man assisted him. All knew he was
innocently unfortunate, but woe to him whose Innocence must only relieve him.

He that could not help him, desired it affectionately; and he that could do
it, avoided meeting with him, for fear of being moved to pity. Men fly from the
miserable, as from the infected with the Plague. And though we all know, what
we do is the thing we would not have done to our selves, yet interest so swayes
us, we had rather deserve cruelty by our avarice, than purchase mercy by
compassion.

Having spent what they had sold, these Noble Persons began to be sensible of
the outrages of shame, which always accompanies and torments us in adversity.
He that is unfortunate, thinks every one derides him, objecting his necessities
as a punishment for his offenses, or accusing him of folly in the management of
his fortune.

Their Noble Birth likewise reproached them with their present low condition.
They grieved to be a disgrace unto those who had left them so well; and though
their new Religion had extinguished all ambition in them, yet they thought it
unhandsome to do any thing misbeseeming Nobility, (a gift of Heaven) that
swerves not from its principles, of which, the obligation to uphold it with
honor and state, is not the least. In fine, their last refuge was a firm
resolution to retreat far from Rome, where to be seen living in that manner,
was the greatest affliction their poverty made them suffer. They thought, that
going where unknown they could have what was necessary, would be a
relinquishing the qualities at Rome, which made even things of superfluity but
necessary.

If to live in the luster of a Prince, were as easy a thing as to live like an
ordinary man, Fortune would not have many Altars. Solitude and Poverty they
supposed would make them most happy.

O God, with what tranquillity shall we enjoy our selves in a sacred peace,
exempt from the noise and tumults of Followers, who, by reason of their many
necessities, are continually troublesome and importunate? O God, with what
freedom may we (being at liberty) dive into the contemplation and service of
that beloy'd Deity, who seasons so sweetly to us our calamities? And when in
the greatness of the world, and honors of the times, were we sensible of the
contentment of heart we have now, among so many miseries, which should grieve
and afflict us? Now I plainly see (said Eustachius) what terrestrial riches
are; they are burdens and impediments, which load, vex, and weary us. And when
shall we be in a place, where the opinion of the world will not force us to do
homage to unconstant Fortune?

Will the Earth ever be so barren, as not to afford us even prodigally,
nourishment? Shall we ever find any so inhumane to envy our condition, and
ensnare us? Can we probably want attendance, if sick, in a place where we shall
be four in company, of the same blood, religion, and mind? Can our Children
want Masters, while we, who have spoken with God, shall have nothing to do, but
to teach them what advantage it is to speak with God.

And though we should have nothing to help us (replied Theopista) can we ever
do amiss in that place, whither we go to perform the will of God? There, where
we may satisfy the debt our many sins have contracted? There, where by our
suffering, we may return our thanks unto God, for his infinite favors?

When they had agreed on this, and packed up some few necessaries, in the night
poorly clothed, with bundles on their backs, and leading each a Child by the
hand, they abandoned the City, making toward a certain Sea-Town. Who is able
to relate the resentments of this departure, in so poor an equipage, and never
more to see that native soil, and that beloved Country, where so long and so
happily they had lived, and with so much respect and renown? Peradventure each
concealed his grief, not to aggravate his Companions affliction, or blushed to
discover his own.

It Is true, they left voluntarily their Country, they left it too most
willingly, I confess: But who has not a love for himself? And who loves
himself, that loves not his Country? O God, declare it you, who permitted them
to feel the piercing sorrows of disasters, to make them relish better those
delights, which made them suffer patiently for your sake.

Theopista, peradventure to cheer up her Husband, by showing him her alacrity,
went joyfully before him, and apace. Eustachius edified, or rather astonished
at the zeal of his Wife, perpended how happy God had made him in his Spouse,
who alone was equivalent to all other sublunary fortunes.

And what should I do, unfortunate Man that I am, so he said, without her, who
in travel is my comfort, and in prosperity my guide; who, when I am weary,
refreshes me, and guards me when I sleep? Pardon me, O Lord, I acknowledge my
crime of so great an ingratitude. Am I likewise so unthankful, to go away sad
as though I were unfortunate, when I go with so religious a Wife, and two such
dutiful Children? O dull heart! O heart of earth! When will thou leave these
earthly thoughts? And what have we lost? Our Herds? Served they otherwise than
to fill the Exchequer, which was never yet opened, but in favor of Pride,
Luxury, and Vanity? Our Slaves? And art not thou ashamed, I will not say to
grieve thou have lost them, but not to be sorry thou have had the rule over
them? Ah cruel man! Ah Tyrant! For a man to dispose of another man's life? And
why? By what Law? O barbarous Scythian, for thy convenience, must a hundred men
as good as thy self, and oftentimes better, to foment thy vices, be obliged to
thee, depend upon thee, and be chained to thy service? He has not deprived
thee of thy Herds, he has not deprived thee of thy Slaves, he only has
deprived thee of the means and occasions of ill, ungrateful man, and art not
thou sensible of it? art not glad of it? and art not thou thankful?

These Noble Pilgrims had scarce left their Country, but their House was most
treacherously broken open, and robbed by certain Rogues; who, though they bear
the title of Men, yet live of nothing else but the spoil. Thieves (still the
Enemies and Betrayers of Humanity, of which they are rather Moths, than part)
entered his House, and sacked it of the Furniture that remained, and was rather
a reproach than a monument of their decayed happiness.

In the mean time the day came, which the Romans used gratefully to
commemorate for the Conquest of the Parthians.

When the People were assembled, the Army in armor, the Theater crowned, and
the Prince on his Throne, nothing was wanting but the valiant Commander, the
Soul of the Camp, the Heart of the Prince, and right hand and Idol of the
Commonwealth, and Empire; brave Placidus was absent, who completed, not only
was the cause of the felicity they so gloriously remembered. While the People
thought the General staid redressing some defect, the delay only served to
prolong the applauses of public consolation. But as soon as the Prince and
People understood, the just, magnanimous, and valiant Pilgrim was departed, (to
fly from the shame his poverty might occasion) it is hard to relate with what a
congealed force all cheeks lost their red, all eyes were cast down, and all
tongues turned to silence. Many cursed Fortune, and murmured against
Providence. It seemed unsupportable, not only unjust, so valorous a man, and
so good, should not only be subject to the outrages of Chance, but suppressed
by them. Never any Triumph began with more joy, and ended with more sorrow. But
why name I a Triumph? Here they represented and bewailed an unhappy Catastrophe
of Fortune; and the day that was designed for the joy of the Romans, for the
Victory obtained over the Parthians, served only to cheer up the Parthians for
the notable loss the Romans had sustained, in the ruin of so valiant a
Commander and Warrier.

Trajan (as men use to do) esteeming things more, as they have greater need of
them, lamented the loss of so powerful a Minister. Perhaps he was too, moved
at the disaster it self; for though great Persons measure every thing with the
compass of their interest, yet Virtue does not suffer them to deny him
compassion, who has gained it by desert, and demands it as unhappy. A diligent
search after them was commanded, but the new Christians had too secretly
conveyed away themselves, and were far enough off, and secure.

They designed Egypt as the end of so tedious a peregrination; and being close
pursued by their unhappiness, they thought they were obliged to seek reparation
in that Kingdom, where their Christ did trust himself, when he fled away
young, and was persecuted by Herod, the worst of the Tetrarchs of Judea.

After many days travel, together with their frequent, and daily wants, and
the in juries they received from certain Robbers, they got to the Seacoast at
last, deprived of every thing, but the hope they had in God.

They embarked themselves, to avoid the incommodities of so tedious a Journey,
which afoot to undertake with two such young Children, was too difficult a task.

The wind blew favorably, and the shore they soon lost. The Vessel sailed so
fast, that perpetually it was before the wind. All Prosperity seemed to be at
the Helm. But they went not much further, e're they saw, He puts fondly to Sea,
who flies from Misfortune. The Sky was serene, yet it blew hard enough to
precipitate them into an Ocean of dangers. The winds (which disagreeing in
appearance, conspired to destroy the poor Bark) concealed in a moment the Sun,
turned the waves topsy-turvy, and raised a storm in the Air. They might look
into the Sea, and not cast down their eyes; for being often buried between two
deep shores of raging billows, they were lower than the waters, and afraid of
sailing down to the bottom. 'Twas dreadful to hear the sad noise of the
shrowds, which beaten by the wind, seemed hissing to bewail the unconstancy of
the waves, and treachery of the Sky. Some of the Passengers, by encouraging
others, did labor to deceive their own fears; and others, by hiding their
faces, said, they feared more the visage of death, than his sith. The Mariners
endeavored to strike the main-yard, which now would be only commanded by the
wind.

The Pilot lamented the authority he had lost over the helm, which obeyed
nothing now, but the tyrannous Sea. To see light, they were forced to pray it
might lighten, and to fear no thunderbolts; 'twas enough but to think on the
devouring waves. In fine, the hope of landing any where; but in the haven of
death, was as bold an undertaking, as to venture to Sea without a Boat.

Albeit a sweaty fear congealed on the brows of the miserable Passengers, yet
every one very earnestly, in order to their several Religions, made vows for
his own safety. Theopista (who had never seen such horrible spectacles on the
Land) being affrighted, and half dead, lay languishing in her dear Husbands
arms. He, who more than once had met Death in the face, apprehending no
otherwise the danger, than not to be insensible of it, spoke to her in this
manner.

Where is your Courage, which boasted of seeking, not only of enduring the
painfullest death we can suffer for God? No leaf falls to the ground without
his distinct and particular permission, who has a care of it; and shall we
fools, fear the death he permits, or wickedly go about to avoid what he
appoints? And though these waves were designed for our Sepulcher, what death
can be less grievous than that overwhelms thee? what happier than that does not
part thee from thy Husband and Children? and what more fortunate; than that
finds thee devot^d to the will of thy Creator, and advancing in his service?
Believ'st not, that this Vessel, though split, and weather-beaten, can as well
serve to carry thee to the shore of Beatitude, as to the land of Egypt? Ah dear
Wife! what fears are these? He cannot fear so much, that loves not excessively
himself; and he cannot love excessively himself, that loves his God enough. Go
to, go to, Theopista; if God may be calmed, prayers, not fears will appease
him. And if God will be served, shall not we be ashamed to serve him so
faintly, and poorly?

When the Devil saw no battery could affright, much less overcome Eustachius,
sounding a retreat to the tempests, he cleared the Sky to the eyes of this
Passenger, who still in his heart had the calm of each storm, and all Heaven's
serenity.

When the Tempest was over, they sang, and commemorated the daily mercies of
their gracious Preserver. Only Theopista completed not her joy, being ashamed
and sad she had showed so little confidence in so kind and so merciful a God.
Eustachius comforted her, telling her, that her fears had proceeded from the
weakness of her sex, and not a want of courage, and that she would not want
opportunities of expressing her zeal, which was (for Gods sake) not only to
contest with future disasters, but the memory of their happinesses past. In the
mean time, they took pleasure in thinking, in what tender charity, what
innocent and calm poverty, and what uncouth and free solitude they should lead
the residue of their lives, and spend all their affections, and exhaust all
their spirits in the service of their sweet and loving God.

This their daily meditation made them often in an ecstasy of delight. The
Heaven seemed to them to go faster than the Ship, so great was their longing to
be on the shore. All the Passengers and Mariners beheld with admiration, the
majestic poverty, discreet affection, and humble nobility of this Couple, who,
even in their adversity, were honored, and envied. Some wondered, how persons
so qualified, were so poor; but no body could leave wondering, how persons so
poor, could be so well qualified. Every one was attentive to the words of
Eustachius, whose expressions had a certain air of greatness, which made him
respected. Every one beheld with compassion, and delight, the face of
Theopista, whose poverty had not changed her noble mean, nor altered her
complexion, the harmony of which diffused a certain sweetness, forcing their
eyes (though barbarous) to adore her. None could, without astonishment, behold,
with what readiness and humility, a General, and Conqueror of Armies, ran
uncalled to all the duties and affairs of the Sails, the Oars, and Helm. He
must have wept heartily, that had seen with what charity, humility, and
curtesy, this most noble of Ladies, aiding all without distinction; now helped
to make clean what belonged to the Mariners and Vessel, now assisted in serving
them, in dressing their meat, and offices of this kind, the air of whose
countenance had made the Voyage fortunate. Every man, and especially the Master
of the Vessel, said he could not choose but envy her Husband for his happiness
in her. And who would not think it an incomparable happiness, to have so
discreet, so provident, and so loving a Wife?

They sailed some days so prosperously, that they quickly made land. At that
happy sight, Eustachius and Theopista (transported with gladness and gratitude)
kneeling, with their hands reared to Heaven, gave thanks unto God, who at last
had brought them safe to the shore; where they trusted they should find a
contented life, and quiet death.

The Seamen were scarce come into the road, when the Passengers grown
impatient (as if they had already touched the shore) began to seek their goods,
take leave of the Sailers, and satisfy the Master for their passage, with
money, or merchandise of like value. Some bid the Pilot farewell, and others
thanked their Friends for their company, while the Mariners went about, begging
something to drink; only of Eustachius and Theopista (whom they knew were
unhappy) they asked nothing, but saluted, and saluted them again. They joyfully
taking up their poor bundle, and holding each a Child by the hand, expected
with gladness when the Bark (which was near the Land) would strike sail, and
cast anchor; which no sooner was done, but the Passengers quickly clearing the
Vessel, went ashore, Eustachius excepted, whose departure certain Mariners of
set purpose deferred.

With eyes seeming big with indignation, and were only swollen with love,
Whither go thou, came out roaring the Master of the Ship, whither go
thou, foul Thief? who shall pay me? How troubled poor Eustachius remained at
those words, 'twould be too sad a thing to conceive; who quickly foresaw, that
to his great prejudice, his departure with the rest was suspended. His threats,
superfluous to one disarmed, and miserable, presaged this furious man's guilt;
the solitude they sought after, bearing witness of their enterprise, that it
needed no testimony.

Poor Eustachius replied, I go where I hope my necessities will be mercifully
supplied, Heaven will content thee, which is so just, it never suffered Charity
to go unrewarded, or wickedness unpunished.

Neither Charity, nor Heaven, ever rigged yet my Ships, said the Master, or
paid my Men their wages. Who Is there? seize on his Wife.

Then Eustachius and Theopista fell down on their knees, and endeavoring with
their tears, to pay him at least with compassion, since they could not for the
present pay him otherwise, sought humbly to appease him.

What can this poor man pay, who has nothing of his own, but the trouble of
maintaining with his hands, himself, his Wife, and Children? If this poor
Bundle will content you, he said, I give it you most willingly: But what will
you do with these few rags, which (to preserve us from the injury of the
weather) are left us of our fortune, not to ease, but deride us.

Dispatch, replied the barbarous Lover. Then going to Theopista, who being now
Captive, was led as a Prisoner into the Cabin; Weep not, he said softly to
her, weep not my dear, I claim thee alone as my reward, but not for the service
of my Bark, but my heart. Eustachius (whose Valor, which used to be
victorious, was not yet extinguished) resolving to dye, or recover his Wife,
leaped with such fury to the ground, that he showed what an influence grief
often has on gallantry. But what could he do? Those Sea-Tigers threatened with
their Swords, their Bows, and Scymitars, to kill before his face in an instant
his Children; if he spoke a word more, or stirred a foot further.

At this so sad encounter, Eustachius his heart left his bosom, and his
courage his heart. But what will be the issue? Ah I cannot penetrate it, and
much less describe it. This vast disaster deprived him likewise of the little
consolation which weeping affords. All grief is contumacious, but this has so
much power, it turns Tyrant. His breast clasped his heart in his breast, being
afraid to see it murdered by sorrow. His legs could not bear him from the
ground, for the power that gave them motion (called to help where there was
greater need) could not do its office in a place so remote from the heart; so
as the vital parts disagreeing, menaced ruin to the fabric of his body. The
blood (leaving pale all the members) retired altogether in defense of that part
the life does flow from. His soul was all reduced into his eyes, for only by
that passage it could find a way to the languishing heart. He began, and made
an end many times, before he had begun to lament. Grief that may be vented, is
too weak; neither naturally can we lose without torment, what we love to
possess. He stood long on the shore, amazed, immovable, and senseless. Each
little distance would have made him thought one of the stones which Ships are
fastened to. He spoke not at all, but when he now turned his eyes from the Bark
to his Children, or from his Children to the Bark.

Woe's me, he seemed to say, with his eyes rather querulous, than weeping*
woe's me, that Vessel is fraught with nothing, but only our di^a^ters. O poor
young Children, and innocently unfortunate, behold there your life and mine
sails away. Ah, I said amiss; God would have her go; Ah, she is forced away.
Weep little ones, weep ye, she is forced away; she began to suffer violence,
even between our arms. What shall we Wretches do? Is that the Bark which
carries her? O too cruel eyes, why show ye it me? Hitherto I have wept for what
I have lost, but now I must begin to bewail what is left me. What show ye me, O
cruel eyes? Dear Wife, whither go thou? who robs me of thee, the ease only
of my tribulations, and the only tribulation I resent? Whither go thou,
poor Theopista? whither go thou Theopista, who to no other end surviv'dst
the tempest, but to find a more dangerous haven than shipwreck it self? For
what art thou reserved? I never thought the time would have come, that I should
have desired (and with pity) to have had thee slain by thunder, and
shipwrack'd. We have lost our Goods, our Slaves, our Herds, and our Country,
yet none of these losses is so great, as that of not losing our selves among
the rocks. And O thou Sea, that only would be calmed with my misery, why
did not drown that Bark, where the Husband in the bosom of his Wife, and the
Wife with her arms about the neck of her Husband, (though they had lost their
lives) would not now have lost the company of each other. Ah, my cruel fate (to
make me more unhappy than any ever was) would have me suffer shipwreck no where
else, but on the shore.

So he seemed to speak, with his eyes full of grief, looking sometimes toward
the Vessel, which now was out of sight, and sometimes turning himself toward
his Children, exposed to want by misfortune, and not any fault of their Mother.
But he spoke not so courageously before, resembling Moses at the foot of Sinai,
the place of tribulation; who the more it did thunder on the mountain, remained
the more undaunted, and got the more ground.

Let Us go hence children, he said, let us go hence my sons, God is not pleased
we shall have any longer the company of dear Theopista; his sacred will be
done; he takes her away, that gave her to us; and I cannot e're believe, that
he, who bestowed her so just, will let her be corrupted and depraved. Let Us
wholly and willingly submit to his good pleasure, and then he will be sure to
defend, preserve, and comfort her. Ah heart! too pitiful a heart! why take
thou it ill? Desir'st thou what God will not have? I am glad of it, that thou
may not grieve, because the more sensible thou shall be of this loss, the
more meritorious will be thy content, and this thy oblation more accepted.
Would not lose willingly thy self for the love of thy God? and why not thy
Wife? How know thou, God takes her not from thee, to preserve her from the
dangers peradventure thou might lead her into? Ah dear Theopista, where art
thou? whither go thou? who robs me of thee, O only Port of all my
disasters? who deprives me of thee, O only consolation of all my afflictions?
whither leadst me, wicked sorrow? Yes, yes, it is but justice she is taken from
me. And how was I worthy of so good a Wife, so religious a Woman, that have
been wicked, sensual, and ungrateful; and having so bountiful a God, have
taken up my rest, and confined (which is worse) my affections, in the bosom of
a Woman, for my haven and comfort? Yes, yes, my beloved Theopista, go as far as
thou art dear unto me, and I love thee. May I seek no more delight any where,
but in thee alone, O dear and loving God, O God, the hope of my hope; O God,
the only delight of my future delights. Farewell Theopista, poor Theopista,
God will preserve thee, whose holy will always be done. Let Us go hence, little
Sons, let us go hence; she is gone, be content; God will be our Theopista, and
comfort, accompany, and protect us.

So when he had fitted his least Son on the truss at his back, carrying the
other in his bosom, and supporting himself, with the hand he had free, on a
poor and mean staff, he followed the way that seemed the most beaten.

O how many times, called back by affection, turned he toward the Bark* which
he could only see in his mind. Farewell Beloved, farewell Theopista, this is
the last farewell; I no longer call thee mine, for God is not pleased to have
thee so longer. Thanks be to God for all things. Let Us go hence little Sons,
poor little Sons; God is not pleased Theopista should be longer with us; God
will be our Theopista, and be his will done. As soon as we shall find an
Habitation, that is capable of our miseries, I Will act the part of Theopista,
I Will provide for you, get ready your meat, and bless it; I Will teach you Gods
name, and how to thank and praise him; ye shall not want comfort, let us only
go hence. Farewell Theopista, God will be with thee. It Is time Eustachius, to
begin to discover the best way, in which God direct us, to find out the place
he would have us go to. This way is the directest, let us go here. Ah poor
Theopista, God knows how thy heart beats, which is so remote from thy dearest
Eustachius. God knows what thou endurest, and knows what thou fear. Be
confident, be confident God will not forsake thee.

Relying in this manner on God, and offering up often, and suppressing his
sorrow, he advanced so far, that coming in the night to certain poor houses, he
was treated there charitably till the morning. What rest he took that night,
let him conceive that knows. The Children cried continually, calling on their
Mother, but in vain, unless they called on her to wound the heart of their poor
and disconsolate Father. Imagine what affliction Eustachius was in, who with
his own disasters, was forced to ease others. O God, what condition!

When the day appeared, he resuming his sad burden, and thanking his Host for
his charity, informed himself of the way, and departed. To lose no time, and
free his mind from thoughts, and the thoughts of the difficulty of the way, he
sometimes recommended Theopista to the protection of Heaven, and sometimes gave
God thanks for the benefits he had received. He sometimes renewed the oblation
and sacrifice of his will, and sometimes begged strength against so many
tribulations. He gave God thanks, that he thought him not composed of Plaster,
and prayed he might be worthy of victory. Sometimes his little Sons asked him
questions, and sometimes begged something; and he now with words, now with
bread, gave ease to their sufferings. His Childrens vivacity and spirit, was no
small consolation to him, who called them the staff of his old age, the
Companions of his exile, and Asswagers of his cares; and for their education,
he designed them the service of God, to make them share more of his virtue,
than fortune. He reposed many times, and then perhars slept, his weariness, his
sorrow, and former watching, inviting him to it.

At last, after many hours travel, they came to a Torrent, which was stony, and
made a huge noise; the space between whose banks was so great, the eye could
not measure its distance. Having laid down his burden, (not finding any one in
that solitude to direct him) he resolved to sound the Foard; and laying his
Sons to rest, who lying on the grass, began to play together, he guided by his
staff, descended into the stream, and found the water arrived not to his knee,
all the danger consisting in the breadth, and not the depth. Being returned to
his Sons, he resolved to waft them over; but to secure himself, he thought it
the best to separate the weight, and carry them over at twice. Having carried
over one, he came back for the other; but getting up the bank, he had scarce
discerned the shore, when viewing the land with his eyes, he discovered, ah
sight! poor Eustachius discovered a Lion, who stealing away his little Son,
fled apace with the Prey in his mouth, but more peradventure out of greediness
than fear, and just then vanished out of his sight. Ah what saw he? Ah what
will he do? Let Us pass by, O Pen, his affections, too bitter to be remembered,
and too hard to be imitated. There Is need of a veil, lest the colors should
express an affliction so great.

Eustachius ran faster than the torrent he passed. Woe's me, said he, let us
make have, lest the other be likewise in danger. If God will let us have but
one Son, one Son is enough; thanks be to God for what he has left us, and
thanks be to him, that his will is performed in the loss of the other. O how
many men, for one only son, would call themselves happy? If sons prove a
comfort, one only is enough; but if otherwise, one only is too much. Ah most
unfortunate child, to be buried in the belly of a beast? Ah I am unhappy to
beget thee for Lions. I thought I should only have had cause of complaining
against Fortune for making me miserable, but I find I must complain as much of
Nature, for making me a Father.

Speaking in this manner, he came to the other bank; and running, and out of
breath, when he got to the top, he began to say thus to the top, he began to
say thus to his son; We have lost thy little brother, a Lion has devoured him;
when he found, that the Wolves, which likewise had deprived him of the other,
came howling, to partake of the delicate Prey.

At this sad spectacle, what kind of man may we phansy the childless,
afflicted, and deserted Eustachius? I should have called him Father; but cannot
be so cruel to remember, he has no more sons.

Hear ye ages, and wonder! Hear ye the Miracles of that powerful God, who has
been always wonderful in his servants. Eustachius, at that lamentable fight,
humbling and prostrating himself on the ground, began, weeping much, to cry
out; O free, O happy state, deserving to be only acknowledged from the hand of
a merciful God; we have nothing else to lose, all our Goods are now secure,
and our little Sons (ah little Sons!) got safely to the shore. What matter
is it, if by shipwreck, or sailing, they get to the land, provided they get
thither with safety. Gods favors should be gratefully commemorated, and not
exposed to censure. Lets sing, my Soul, let us sing the mercies of so gracious a
God. O free, O happy state! We are in so fortunate, and secure a condition,
that we have nothing else to fear or hope for. Fortune can threaten us no
longer, she can no longer trouble us, God be blessed and thanked. O dear, most
loving and merciful God, and when could I ever have imagined, being fettered
with so many snares of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, I should be so
happy, to be free and disengaged from them all, and only depend on my will? On
my will, which is now, and ever shall be thee, O my dearly beloved, the love of
my soul, my God? Thou shall be my Mother, my Wise, my Father, and Children; in
thee are to be calmed my affections, my miseries, and thoughts; thou art to be
the object of my understanding, the prey of my will, and the glory of my
memory. And since thou have brought me to this happiness, shall I have so
rebellious, so stubborn, and so senseless a heart, to bewail it when it comes?
Ah my God, my heart is of flesh, be pleased to forgive it; and of stone, be
pleased to split it; draw from it the water, may set forth thy glory. From
thee, in thee, and for thee, I protest for the future, all my thoughts, my
affections, and words, shall begin, advance, and terminate. I protest,
whatsoever has not thee for its object and center, my Creator, Redeemer, and
my God, (the name I always find the most sweet) I will not approve of. I will
no longer will any thing, but what thou would have me to will; nor love any
thing, but what thou would have me to love. What is not of God, or for God,
Eustachius shall not love, or desire.

So raising courageously himself, (Ah, good men have afflictions without, but
consolation within) as if he had endured nothing yet, he went on, beseeching
God to begin now at last to exercise and try him.

And when, said he, shall we ever have a better occasion? when ever find a
time so opportune, to suffer for Gods sake? Afflictions are no longer
impediments, to divert us from the service of God, to which we are wholly
devoted. Where are the tribulations and miseries that were threatened? What
hitherto we have suffered, was ill only out of opinion, and what have we
suffered of our own? Goods, Honors, Dignities, Wife, and Children, were no
otherwise ours, than as troubles. And must it be called and esteemed a
tribulation, to be rid of troubles, subjection, and impediments? Ah my God, and
what do I suffer, for thy sufferings for me? And what satisfaction do I make
thee, for the many offenses I so long have committed? When thou wast pleased to
suffer for me, did not willingly lose thy Goods, thy Mother, and thy
Country? Wast not willingly torn in pieces, and crucified, and which is more
than all, most innocently? And shall I wicked man, in my tribulations and
sorrows for my sins, have nothing to relate, but that I was present at the
sufferings of others? If thou say I am so weak, I shall be discontented, and
likewise unfortunate, if thou, who can not err, have so low an opinion of
the love I bear thee. For my own part I confess, that methinks I have more
courage, and dare perform more. Give me, ah g^ve me an affliction deserving the
testimony of my love, and let what is past be my penance. Let what I must yet
suffer, be consecrated wholly to the love, I consume my self in, for thy sake;
for I cannot endure to be a vulgar Servant to God. The favors thou have done
me, oppose it, and my soul cannot suffer it, which blushes to be only known a
Christian, by not worshipping of Idols. Hitherto my Wife has been a Sufferer,
my Children, and Slaves, and it is now high time I suffer something for thy
sake, for thee, O my dear, most loving, and merciful God.

With these, and the like entertainments, Eustachius went so far, that at last
he arrived at a Village called Badiso, whose retiredness and poverty so pleased
him, he resolved to fix there, if he could. The few persons living in that
place, made it partly seem no desert, though otherwise it was unfrequented,
where they sowed what was necessary, to keep them alive; and not sell, unless
they sold, not because they possessed, but because they lived there. The place
was remote enough from Rome, to conceal him from fame; and as far from noise,
as necessary to separate the mind from the pleasures of the world. There
poverty was no shame, for riches were not known; nor used they treacheries
there, for interest commanded not. The men there dissembled not, for there they
did not covet; and the women did not set themselves to sale, for they loved not
for lust, but to preserve nature. The air was calm, the soil very fertile, and
the Inhabitants sincere. Eustachius thought this place was agreeable to the
life he had designed; and therefore recommending himself unto God, for the
illumination of his will, he sought how to live. But he soon was entertained,
as a Partner in those rural affairs, by a good and poor man, of some little
power there; but whether a Labourer, or Master, I know not, for I know not if
the tyranny of dominion was in force at that time, in a place so retired.

Eustachius, giving thanks unto God for this ultimate favor, so willingly and
industriously fell to tilling of the ground, that the Owner of the Village,
being eased of his labor, and glad of his new servant, ascribed and imputed to
Heavens gentle influence, the arrival of this Pilgrim, to whose care now he
committed all his business, and his poor estate.

The Earth returned so happily Eustachius his labors, that the Master was
astonished, who thought it impossible so small a spot of ground should abound
in that manner. All that beheld it, thought it painted, and not tilled, it
pleasing as well the eye, as 'twas useful for man's life. Each Turf brought
forth Flowers, eve-Flower Fruit, and all Fruit grew ripe. The Seeds seemed
ranged into order, not scattered; and the Trees being lopped, showed the
Husbandman's industry, by their growing the better. The Meadows were pleasant,
the fallow ground manured, and every thing answered art, the eye, and
expectation, with increase, delight; and Plenty. Ah, O God, the sighs of the
Tiller were the Southwest-winds, and his tears the dew, which made the soil as
fertile, as the Paradise of his soul.

Fifteen years together lived Eustachius, in this hard, but happy poverty; in
which time he trafficking for eternity, and leading a life that was rather a
meditation than life, discovered to the world, how men may live on Earth, and
yet dwell in Heaven. Every thing informed him of his Maker, and in every thing
he found something to encite him to a Virtue. If a little thin Cloud passed by,
he reverenced it as a shadow of Gods presence, and contemplated in the Heavens
on his Palace, and in the Sun on his Tabernacle. In each breath of air, he
adored the Spirit of God, passing and triumphing on the wings of the wind. He
either plowed, mowed, or sowed, never wanting occasion of recollecting himself.
He grieved, that Man from the Earth, an insensible thing, could promise himself
a gratitude for each, though little, labor of his tilling; when he, who had a
soul, and was rational, and more obliged to God than any other Creature, was
cold, slow, and backward in returning him thanks, who covered him with the
Heavens, warmed him with the Sun, sustained him on a Pavement of Flowers, and
nourished him with plenty of all things drawn out of the ground. Every Flower
put him in mind of a virtue. The whiteness of the Lilly made him blush to
think, a Soul redeemed by Christ, should let a stinking Flower surpass it in
purity. In every Rose he found a thorn, piercing his heart, and upbraiding the
little charity he expressed for the love of his God, who crowned and rent with
thorns, was torn to save him. The herb Turnsole is never weary in following the
tracks of the Sun, Eustachius said, mortifying himself; and will thou, O my
heart, let a Flower instruct thee, in loving, ^erving, and contemplating on thy
God? The Hyacinth, in the opening of his leaves, sends forth sweet and sad
notes; and he that bewails not his sins in his heart, bewails them in the
leaves. But what does Eustachius perform, who has been so long, and
continually a Sinner? Every green Herb taught him hope, and every fruitful
Tree imitation. These Meditations ended in ecstasies of his mind, which severed
from the body, did run to the feet of his Creator, to thank him for the fruit
he had gathered, as a benefit received; and the immature fruit, as a benefit
expected. Such was the life of Eustachius, in that solitude inhabited by
Angels, who continually descending and ascending, as it were on Jacob's Ladder,
beheld and admired the love, which toward his Creator he expressed, whom I
cannot call earthly, since he always lived in Heaven.

The Loving Husband, and Prudent Wife, etc.
The third Book.
WHosoever is thankful to God in prosperity, pays his debts; but he that gives
him thanks in adversity, turns Creditor. Tribulation, says Saint Jerome, is a
fruit of the Almond-tree, the rind of which is bitter, but the kernel very
sweet. And the Naturalists observe, when the Almond-tree is full of blossoms,
it is a sign of a plentiful harvest. Our Eustachius makes it good, whose
sufferings all know, which have been so great, their billows have petrified his
heart, and rendered it stony, obdurate, and dead; to passions and affections.
Under the bitter Plant of affliction, as Jacob under the Turpentine-tree,
Eustachius has buried the Idols of his affections, his interest, and desires.
His heart is no longer of flesh, but of Christ; and had it been opened, the
name of Jesus would have been found there, as in that of Ignatius the Martyr.
But God would not permit him to continue in this state. Tribulations may serve
to increase his temptations, but cannot increase the faith of his invincible
heart, which can have no addition of courage. The eagerness and valor he has
showed on all occasions, give him worthily the praises and title of a Noble
Commander, who had been still victorious. Here misery made a stand, and Heaven
cleared up to this fortunate Passenger.

As Eustachius was discoursing one day with certain Husbandmen, in order to
their rural affairs, two Strangers saluting them kindly, approached to them,
whose civility the Country People returning, offered themselves readily to
serve them in what they were able. The Strangers thanking them, seemed most
desirous to have information of a Roman, called Placidus, who together with his
Wife, and two Sons, had been missing fifteen years, and they were in quest of.

Eustachius, who before had been their General, and their intimate Friend, knew
them, but was not known again. And who would e're have thought so pale, so
hairy, and so humble a countenance, colored only with misfortune, could have
been the face of Placidus, who formerly full of majesty, and glittering like
the Sun, represented in the Colors of his Banners, the Purple of his Triumphs.

At this their encounter, and demands, Eustachius could not choose but be
sensible of the natural commotions our frailty occasions; so as it is no wonder
if the memory of himself, his Wife, and his Sons, caused him to relent.

The temptation was strong, because too unexpected, and had a too delicate
opportunity, and too little suspected. His Friends were the cause, whose
affections, incommodity, and charity, (unless by not concealing them) he could
not return. Quickly, but quietly, lest he should have been observed, he sadly
turned his back, and leaving the company, went weeping toward his home. His
tears trickl'd down in too great an abundance, and he perceived he wept, with a
kind of afflicted sensuality (even tears, said Metrodorus, have their lust)
which he soon was sorry for.

Woe is me, what do I? Men weep not in this manner for the easing of nature,
whose sorrows to appease, many tears are not requisite. Men weep in this
manner, for some unruly passion, tyrannically subduing their reason. Lets look
to our selves, O Eustachius, least the Devil circumvent us, for this violence
is too great.

So he spoke to himself, when invaded by the memory of his former prosperity,
his love to his wife, and his grief for the death of his sons, but conquered by
his fear, to be seen by his God, too devoted to the world; he besought his
sacred Majesty, not to suffer any earthly affection to prevayle in his heart,
which dedicated and bequeathed to him, was no otherwise of Eustachius, than as
Eustachius could not serve without a heart, and love his gracious God.

So with unknown resentments, resembling a trance, which might be thought a
punishment for his sorrow, but probably was the sweetness, and fruit of his
devotion, he fell to the earth, beseeching God to moderate so immoderate a
passion. He would have begged of God, as he was pleased to comfort him with the
unexpected presence of two such dear friends, so he would too be pleased (even
once before he died) to show him his beloved Theopista, since he could not hope
possibly, to see his little sons (ah little sons) so unfortunately lost, and
bewayl'd.

He would have pursued his desire with devout supplications, and prayers, if he
could have been assured it was no temptation, he being so confirmed, and only
intense in the will of his Creator, that it seemed to him a sin to desire it.
He so passionately was enamored of God, that he thought, if he loved any thing
besides him, 'twould decrease his love to God.

These his irresolutions and doubts expressed his devotion and affection to God.
It Is one of the happinesses of a soul in the state of grace, to see that all his
thoughts, affections, and operations are prayers, incenses, and meritotorious.

To these supplications of Eustachius, a voice answered plainly from Heaven,
which spoke in this manner. Be of good cheer, dear Eustachius, I do not forget
thee; O God, what expressions! O heart too hard, and too deaf! Do thou hear
what God does to his servants, and yet take pleasure in rebelling against
him? Ah, what unhappiness?

Eustachius encouraged with this voice, whose affectionate expressions may be
easier imagined, than described, when he had adored, praised, and thanked
Almighty God, whose favors we return, when we gratefully acknowledge them,
rising from the ground, proceeded on his way. Every pace was a sigh, and every
sigh an arrow, which he shot toward Heaven; Arrows not rebelling, but
ejaculatory, shot-towards a sweet enemy from an amorous heart, and not to
offend, but provoke.

The showrs, which fall with thunder, by Plutarch called fulgoral, are the best
to water, and make the earth fruitful, from whence they are exhaled.

He no sooner was returned to his work, but his foresaid Companions came
suddenly upon him, who being still in motion, here only* excepted, ended
fortunately their pilgrimage in this field, where their own consolation, and
Count^yes felicity they found green and fl^ur^shing in the person of
Eustachius. They relating the marks, and Characters of Placid^s and Theopista,
enquired of him, if he could peradventure, g^ve tidings of them, whom they
asked so kindly after: he could not but be moved at their cordial affection,
and pity their sufferings, in s^eking after him.

Gentlemen, he replied, why seek ye him so earnestly, and with such
inconveniency to your selves?

Great things, said the strangers, of which our great love is the least, induce
us to seek him. He no more conquered by the love of his friends than the
curiosity of sense, concealed still himself; but because he was charitable, and
desired to oblige them to his power, he said he could not satisfy their
demand, replied in this manner.

It Is now very late, and because in this poor Country you will not find easily
lodging, I Will willingly accomodate you this night, if you please to accept it.
They received his most courteous invitation, God so directing them, who
disposes of our hearts, and subordinates the means to the end. When they came
into the house, and his master was withdrawn, he besought him, in relation to
his many years service, to lodge the noble strangers for a night. What can we
deny to so useful, and so faithful a servant? All ceremonies in expressions
of kindness, being ended, they sat down to supper, where Eustachius was the
Cook, Sewer, Carver, and Cupbearer, and made them all the Sauces, we can taste,
where charity makes the feast.

In the mean time, while the strangers discoursed of Eustachius his kindness,
and entertainment, they thought they saw something extraordinary in his
countenance, and behavior, which they were acquainted with. The more they
heard him speak, and partak'd of his Charity, the more clearly they thought his
face confirmed them he was Placidus, the end of their travail, and object of
their thoughts, whose health they drank, and only spoke of.

God knows, where we may find him, they said, how he lives, and who shall be
so happy to discover him. His sons are now men, and his wife, if she be living*
must be old. God knows, if we shall know them, if we meet them, and if they'^
know us.

These sad, and affectionate remembrances made Eustachius now and then shed a
tear, and though he did all in his Power to suppress them, the violence he
used gave his friends an opportutunity to perceive him much concerned, by his
laboring so violently to conceal them.

The strangers wonder, and suspicion persuaded them to doubt (if we doubt what
we desire) he was Placidus, so as among themselves they began in this manner.

Dear Antiochus, I take him for Placidus, when the other, called Acatius,
replied, I doubt it very much. His age and stature agree well with Placidus,
his voice is the same, and his shape not unlike: But where are his wife, and
his sons? why should he conceal himself from us? from us, who have been always
his servants, and lovers of his family, and name? But if he be not Placidus,
what mean his compassionate looks, and interrupted sobs, the greatest signs
of love? Ah it is he, the first replied quickly, but softly said the second,
grant he be the same (but we are not so happy) he cannot be hid from us;
Placidus in the nape of his neck, has the skar of a wound, which, if it be he,
will assure us of the truth. Indeed said Antiochus, you say very well, and
therefore let us look there immediately. Ah, if we shall not discover it, the
pleasure, we receive by this hope, will too soon have an end. So between hope
and fear, they went to Eustachius, and looking on that part of his neck, which
ends in his right shoulder, they found and read the character of the changes of
fortune, represented in his life. I know not if they wept, nor can express
their sorrow, for tears had no room in two hearts so full of joy, so as it was
necessary to defer it: Their tears fell in showers, not in drops, two eyes
being too few for so sweet an affliction.

Ah longed for Placidus, and why did conceal thy self from us? from us, whom
so often thou have called the faithful friends of all thy fortune? By what
fault of ours have thou been induced to live in a condition, in which to hide
thy self, its useful to thee, or may procure thy shame to be known unto us?

Can there be so ill a state (when it is for thy advantage to own it) can make us
affrayd? Has fortune Peradventure, among its Many evils, a disease that kills
gratitude and love? Ah Placidus, and what have we done to merit this rigor? If
thou art desirous to conceal thy self from fame, to be known unto us, it
reveals thee not to any. We have found thee, if thou will, and if thou will
not, our discovery of thee shall but serve to this end, that even in this
place, we have sought thee. Thou can not refuse to be known unto us, unless
thou will deny us the reward our pains justly claim for seeking thee so long.
This, thy virtue will not suffer us to fear, and our hearts cannot credit,
which have always loved thee so, that we cannot leave seeking thee, not when
thou desir'st not, to be found, not when thou thy self think thy self in
such a state, deserves to be even avoided by thy self.

These tears were let fall by his courteous companions; to whom Eustachius was
willing to be known, when he saw he was discovered.

Friends, he replied, the very same affection that causes your sorrow for my
solitude, is the thing that occasions, and deserves it. The more dearly ye love
me, the more justly ye deserve I should conceal from you the irksome.
information of my state. When I could no longer serve you in any thing, but by
hindering my calamities, to disturb your repose, I retired in this habit, much
less grievous than my fortune. I thought I was unhappy enough, without taking
one me the sorrow of others. For this only reason I declined your presence,
and now beg your Pardon, for being disobedient. I was in so low an ebb of
fortune, that having nothing left me to lose, but my friends, I thought my love
to them obliged me to leave them, to prevent their being taken from me.

K^sses interrupted these excuses, by drowning and stifling them in tears and
embraces. They were forced to be silent, because they were forced to weep, and
could not find words to express so great a love. But their joys quickly ended,
for no sooner Antiochus, had obtained a truce of his passion, but turning to
Eustachius, he asked him for Trajana, and his two young, and beautiful sons,
who, inferior in nothing but number, to the Graces, were admired by the people
of Rome, who wished the Latin Empire might perpetually abound with persons of
like valor.

Eustachius recounted all the accidents, which befell Theopista, and his sons,
at whose most unfortunate, and dreadful remembrance, if his two dear
companions did not kill themselves with weeping, 'twas by reason of their
horror and amazement at the tragical relation.

Many of the inhabitants of the village, where the fame was soon spread of
Eustachius his quality, brake off their discourses and complements, by their
concourse to them, who with gladness, and confusion mixed together, came to
see, and do him homage, and there was none amongst them so rude that relented
not, considering in what manner, and how roughly, the bravest soldier living
had been depressed by fortune.

All of them amazed at such strange revolutions, began to bewail his
departure, as foreseen, and especially they who just came to see him, as the
two dear Companions related, how Trajan (resolving to chastize a certain
nation, for pillaging temerariously, and depopulating the Confines of the
Empire) expected only Placidus, whose valor alone was supposed to parallel the
greatness of so dangerous an enterprise. Acatius and Antiochus affirmed, that
Trajan had often been sorry for the distance and misfortune of Placidus, and
particularly in this occasion, so as proposing many rewards, and preferments to
the bringer of him back, he had sent into all Country, to enquire strictly
after him,

The good, and honest Peasants were afflicted, when they knew he must depart,
who caused Badiso to be envied by the Capitol. They thought when Eustachius
departed, serenity would depart from their clime, and fertility from the soil.
Ah, said they, when he is gone from us, who still was so ready to help every
one, so kind, and so useful, whither shall we go for Counsel, assistance, and
a pattern?

The better part of night was consumed in so many, and such different
narrations, and conflicts of love, so as they were forced to repose.

Eustachius alone indefatigably spent the residue of the night in commending
himself to his God, and beseeching him, to guide and protect him to the place,
where he might spend his life, and Sacrifice his death in his service. He
rememberd, he had heard from Gods own mouth, he should be restored to his
former condition, so as knowing 'twas Gods Will (to comport himself always, in
every thing to the will of his Creator) he resolved to go thence with his
friends, to see in what God would employ and command him: when the dawning of
the day began to appear in that Heaven, which surpassed each thing in
clearness, but the heart of our gallant Cavalier, they all rose.

The art the world uses in laughing, and weeping, in order to interest, and not
to affection, is the cause, that to describe with how many tears, the departure
of Eustachius was accompanied, will not show with what sorrow, he was seen to
depart, of all the Countrey-people, who flocking to him, embraced, attended
him, and wept, and he that first returned, ended first the necessity of leaving
him.

By his friends, who were copiously provided of all things, he was clad in the
journey, according to his quality, where the trouble they had, was not long,
for they guided by the soft, and gentle gale of Gods grace, arrived in thirty
days at the haven so desired.

The fame of his coming outstript him, so as at his arrival in Rome, he found
the City full of acclamations for him, where the joy, and honors he was
received with, unless we'll do them wrong, are incapable of relation. He
entered the City in triumph, if ever any triumph was accompanied with applauses
of that kind, where every street was a Capitol, and every voice a
Panegerique. Nor was it at all necessary to exhort him against pride, for he
went as composed, and modest, as became a child of Heaven. This was a triumph
over fortune, which conquered, and suppressed by his virtue, beheld him pass to
glory on a Chariot of hearts, and wills. When they came to the Palace, embraces
tired the day, where the the Emperor met him, embraced, and honored him, and
informed of his adversities, could not think of them, but with sorrow. Each ear
distilled into Pity, that listened to his disasters, whose fortune would have
had the name of tragedy, if it had not had a gallant Cavalier for the subject.

When the Emperor, and the Orders of the City had received him with so many,
and so glorious expressions of kindness, the interest, and reasons of the war,
were imparted to Eustachius by Trajan, in whose Cabinet he learnt, that the
happiness of Princes resides altogether in the chamber of Presence, beyond
which, the secretest rooms have only the greatness of troubles, and cares. He
found that Trajan, dismayed with the greatness of the conspiracy, the distance
of the place, difficulty of provisions, and insufficiency, and infidelity of
his ministers of State, prepared for a war, which reason represented as
dangerous, as necessary, and inevitable, for the honor of his Crown.

Eustachius particularly informed of Trajans designs, so c^mmented on them,
that the Emperor perceived, Victory is the daughter of Counsel, and where
prudence speaks, fortune, it is probable, will cease to be inconstant, and find
fixed stations.

Trajan, without making more ado, relying altogether on the Virtue and Courage
of Eustachius made him publicly the General, and recommending to him the
glory of the Latin Empire, remanded him so fraught with his favors, that had
it not been justice to advance by all possible means the honor of his Master,
gratitude would have put him in mind of returning the benefits of so gracious
and generous a Prince.

When Eustachius had mustered the Army, settled each Command, and provided all
sorts of ammunition, he marched toward the enemy, but the name of the enemy,
and how the war was managed, antiquity has not left it so clearly to us, as
(without doing wrong to the truth of the story) to descend (...) particulars.
This may be enough, that Eustachius conquering the difficulties of a tedious
and dangerous way, and often contesting with the incommodities of hunger, the
outrages of ill weather, and ambushes of the adversary, discovered, cop'd,
fought with him, and o'rcame him.

When he had subdued the rebel, he secured the Empire to the Emperor, and
remustering his soldiers, renowned by the victory, and enricht with the booty,
resolved to retreat. But 'twould not be amiss, to relate the affectionate
charity, with which he commiserating the unfortunate, moderated the anger of
the Conquerours, restrained the rapacity of the Covetous, and repressed the
fierceness of the lustful, telling them with arguments, but more efficaciously
by his own example, that victories are dishonored by acts of injustice, and we
make an ill return of Heavens favors, when we do commit cruelties. It would
peradventure be convenient, and perhaps not unprofitable, to tell the love, and
tears, he devoutly expressed, for the multitude of graces from God, but who can
describe the conceptions of an Angel? Graces he received, and was thankful for
them; and was thankful, because he received them; and received them, because
he was thankful. He returned them so affectionatly, that oftentimes the graces
losing the name of graces, became the reward of his gratitude; his zeal making
him so deserving, that the favors he received, made him capable of deserving
them afresh. O most happy state of a Soul in love with God!

The Army marched, and marched in order, every pace being regular, in respect
of their motion, and convenience of the stations. The Vanguard, Battalia, and
Reer-guard, with the Baggage, and Provisions, in their place. Light-Horsmen
scowr'd the way, though the Country was open, and no danger of ambushes, and
the Precursors went for Forage, as the way was commodious. In every thing they
provided against the perils of a War, and enjoyed in every thing the delights
of a Peace. They marched in order, not out of suspicion, but discipline, for
their Arms served only for the character, and not the defense of the Soldier.
At the end of some days, Eustachius arriving in a pleasant and fruitful part
of Egypt, resolved the Army should repose for some time, which, by reason of
its hard and toylsome march, was in no good condition. During the sweetness of
this rest, the Soldiers allured by the pleasantness of the Country, went
recreating themselves in that Paradise of Egypt, whose bosom still enameled
with a Spring of standing Treasures, invited them with pleasure and
tranquillity to lie every where on the ground.

It happened on a time, that two of them declining the heats at noon day, were
resting themselves in a shade of Palm Trees, where a Garden lay concealed,
which for the delights of the Inhabitants, was seated in the most remote part
of the House.

They lay solitary on the grass, and talking among themselves; and because the
convenience of the place, and the time unfit for business, gave them the
opportunity, they passing from one to another discourse, informed each other by
turns of the state and condition of their fortunes.

A poor Woman, that was spinning behind the hedge of the neighboring Garden,
and refreshing her self in the shade, heard all their discourse, and things;
which not only caused amazement in her heart, but drew tears from her eyes.
She tossed up and down disordered, and much troubled; resolves to change the
climate, to make use of the tidings she received by chance. But how will she be
able to do it, since she is so unhappy, that to call her a Woman of small
fortune, would detract from her calamity?

While these mental tumults lasted, her mind gave her, happily the General, if
she made it her suit, would easily condescend to her modest desires.

She, who had her heart and her ears replenished with the celebrated piety of
Eustachius, embraced the suggestion; and arriving at the place, where she heard
he was quartered, continues her request for access, and easily obtained it of
him; who never ashamed to have his actions seen, retires to live more quietly,
and not to sin more secretly. She found him sitting in the midst of his
Champions, the glory of that age, where I might say, he recreated himself, if
treating of a Hero, it came not near impiety, not to say, he was at Council.
She first prostrating her eyes, and then kneeling, rather owning the title of a
noble and modest Maid, than a mature and beggarly Egyptian, spoke to him in
this manner.

You see, my Lord, a poor unhappy Creature, who has lost all that Heaven and
Nature could give her. Time and Fortune have robbed me of my Youth, my Parents,
Country, Means, Husband, and Sons. But Heaven be praised, whose decrees
should be always held in reverence, nothing else is left me; but the dreggy
part of my age, which being vile, infirm, frail, impotent, and painful, begins
now so to trouble me, I am obliged to think of my Grave, to prevent my being
miserable, even after death. Rome was my Country, whither natural affection
calls me, the only favor I have left me to beg for so wretched a Carcass. I
beseech you, Noble Sir, deny not my request, that I may at your charitable
charge once again see that soil, which though it gave me so unfortunate a
birth, deserves my love so well, I never shall remember it, but with tears, and
with sighs.

These few, and sweet words, which she uttered with humility, and a modesty
expressing majesty, the standers by moved with compassion, commended extremely.

Eustachius, who never was more happy and contented, than when he had occasion
to exercise his piety, approaching to her, who continued yet kneeling, replied;
Poor Woman, thou shall receive comfort. Thy discretion bears thee witness, thy
birth is as thou say. Rest satisfied, I will take such order, thou shall be
provided of all things in the journey, and go along with us to the place thou
desire.

On the sudden the good Woman, when she heard him say so, as if she had been
struck to the heart, lifting up her eyes, and fixing them on the countenance of
the General, being dismayed, amazed, and pale, with a certain distemper, which
some did interpret confusion, and others astonishment, stood still without
motion. Every one admiring the strangeness of the thing, fell a guessing at the
cause produced so sudden a passion. But the pale and wan color in her cheeks,
became quickly a fine red; and as soon as her mind had obtained some peace to
so many perturbations, she endeavored with her tears to vent her great passion.

Eustachius more amazed than the rest, and urging her to tell the sudden cause
of so sensible a sorrow, offered to assist her more abundantly, if she needed,
or desired it.

The issue was thus; when the Woman had calmed her passion, and was confident
of the Generals magnanimity, she besought him at last, that dismissing the
Company, he would suffer her, for a short space of time, to speak to him alone,
about business concerning her. Eustachius condescended, and all the standers by
went away, leaving her shut in, and alone with the General; who longing,
irresolute, and wavering, by reason of many doubts, guessed, penetrating with
his judgment, what the Beggar would say, who was not, without a great mystery,
so grievously, and suddenly afflicted.

They discoursed long together, so as they who were without, were a great while
only curious; but when the length of time began to exceed what they thought in
probability was enough to dispatch such mean affairs, amazement succeeded.

And what things deserving so tedious a Session, do the tears of a despicable
Woman design? What counsels does so valiant and so honored a Champion impart,
or receive from a Female of no worth? While they murmured in this manner, a
Sergeant, whom the General called, at last entered in, who quickly returning
with a pale and troubled countenance, obsequiously and hastily shut the door of
the Chamber. How amazed they were at that, I cannot relate, their wonder even
making them dye of fear. Ah, what is the matter? All came about the nimble
Messenger, asking him earnestly the cause of his paleness and solicitude.

Sirs, he replied, great things are sure amiss, but what, I could not
penetrate: but I found the General weeping, who so often with dry eyes has
seen the doubtful dangers of Victory, and contemned and overcome the horrors
of death. I am seeking certain Soldiers he commanded should be brought to him
presently, and hinder not his service.

The Soldiers he sought after, were the very same Men whose discourse the same
day the poor Woman had heard and observed behind the hedge of the Garden.

'Twas not long e're he came back, accompanied by the two Soldiers; who
hearing with what trouble and impatience the General expected them, were
dejected, and half dead. The paleness in their faces was interpreted by the
Waiters, as the mark of an ill conscience; and every one looked strangely upon
them, as well because they thought they were guilty of the Generals sadness,
whom they loved, as because, if they were destined to ill fortune, 'twas
necessary to begin to declare, they had no amity with them. Friendship dies,
when Calamity is born. Even this increased the horror of the Wretches, who the
more they were used to be respected, as being Lanciers, and sitting at the
General's Table, bewailed with greater terror, the contempt and disesteem
showed to them in this occasion. Eustachius informed of their arrival, gave
order to the Sergeant, to usher them in, who commanded immediately to go out,
returned to his Companions to raise new doubts among them; who perplexed,
panted after the knowledge of such strange and impenetrable nows. Eustachius
not long after, cried aloud, so as every one, attentive to hear what succeeded,
heard resound from the Chamber, though shut, a lamentable confusion of weeping,
and sobs.

They irresolute awhile, concluded at last, they were bound to go in, to see if
they were able to do their Lord service. But the Chamber being opened, they
amazed, and more disordered than before, found, (ah wonder!) found, that their
valiant Commander, prostrate between two Soldiers, and a despicable Woman, lay
pitifully weeping, like a drooping little Boy, that had been correctedd for his
faults.

Eustachius no sooner beheld them, but rising from the ground, and instantly
looking cheerful, cried aloud unto them, Come in Brethren, come in; I invite
you to behold the unspeakable wonders of Gods providence and mercies. The joy
his words occasioned, which were far more pleasing than they could imagine,
surpassed each affection in the breasts of the Auditors, curiosity excepted.
When they were entered in, he re-spake in this manner.

Behold here, O Friends, my Wife, and my Sons, the chances of whose losses will
eternally be famous in the Diaries of my Misfortunes.

He recounted here particularly to them, how his Wife had long since been
violently taken from him by an amorous Robber; and how by the favor of Heaven,
she preserved undefiled, surviving the barbarous Fellow, and extremely
necessitous, came begging to the service of a Garden, behind whose hedge she
had the occasion of re-knowing her Sons, who contracting a friendship, and
relating the unfortunate accidents of each others fate, were known to be
Brothers.

All ran on the sudden by turns, to embrace and do homage unto their new Lords;
by whom they were informed of the manner, how the one by Shepherds recovered
out of the mouth of a Wolf, and the other by Peasants out of the paws of a
Lion, had, spending their time in a mean education, been at last by a Drum
recalled to their natural inclination.

Acclamations soon began, the usual Companions of felicity; each one affirming,
he admired how 'twas possible they took not before for Placidus his Sons, those
valiant young Gentlemen, who were so like their Father in the features of the
face, the strength of arm, and magnanimity of heart. Kind receptions, praises,
and congratulations, would have never had an end, if the General, who most
passionately desired to thank again his gracious Creator, had not, taking an
occasion from the time, (the night now coming on very fast) after his thanks to
every one for their kindness, most courteously and dexterously dismissed them.

After their departure, Eustachius left only with his Wife and his Sons, began
to say to them, Ah Wife, ah Sons, as dear to my heart, as all the hope it has,
and all its felicity; and what sense have we of the multitude of favors so
merciful a God bestows upon us? Ah dear Theopista, whom so long I have sighed
for, behold me again in thy arms; I embrace thee by the favor of that most
loving Father, who most graciously and mercifully deprived me of thee, to make
me relish pleasure, by restoring thee to me. And O ye Sons, so principal a part
of my bowels, have ye in such disatrous and difficult ways of hostile
vicissitudes kept the innocence was due from you by gratitude, not only by
nature, for the many obligations, which more than all men living besides, ye
have to so bountiful a God? Embrace ye me, O Sons, O Sons much defir'd, and
twice born. O how many times have tears drowned my sleep, when I thought I
heard you howling and roaring in the Woods? But glory be to God, we behold one
another once again, and shall meet for the future more happily, for the plenty
of so many favors cannot choose but so mollify, and so powerfully in the end
raise our hearts to correspond with God Almighty, but that this correspondence,
enflaming, and replenishing us with him, must shower on our souls a Paradsie of
graces, of glory, and happiness.

Here he made an end, for affection brake the thread of his discourse;
Theopista wept, and his Sons likewise wept. The brother the brother, the
husband the wife, the mother the sons, and the sons now their father, now their
mother did hug, and embrace, mixing congratulations with kisses, and
embittering their kisses with tears. Every thing concluded in expressions of
kindness, and the mutest were most eloquent. All these love-extasies they ended
at the foot of a Crucifix, where what discourses of gratitude, what sense of
devotion, what affections of affection, and what protestations, and
resignations they made, I cannot describe. The Angels have done it, who,
spectators of so delicate and wonderful a scene, have registered their Acts in
the Annals of eterninity, to present them to God, as a pleasing sight to him
who is in his own sphere, when he shines among the flames of an enamored heart.

They supt, but gazed more than they did eat, the communication of their
miseryes past refreshing them more, than the delicatest meat, though it had
been dressed by the skilfullest hand, and with the rarest sauces in the world.

In the morning they went to the Army, which rendevous'd together, expected
them, waving with gladness, acclamations, and such joyful applause, that it
plainly appeared the happiness alone of the General, was the soul of that vast
body, considering his dignity, but the heart, if we consider their affections.

This day they were jocund and joviall, and consumed the next in preparations
to be gone, the word being given through the Camp of their future dislodging.
Eustachius, when the legions, the baggage, and prisoners were marched away, went
directly to Rome, in the midway to which he received advice, that Trajan, the
just, the valiant, and courageous, was dead, which disturbed in some sort the
contentment of his heart. Something should be said in the praise of his virtue,
if the name of Trajan had not been the greatest praise the memorialls of that
age could commemorate. The General published the news to the Legions, who wept
not for his death, for at the same time, they heard of the succession of
Adrian, not was it lawful, or at least secure to weep, when tears might
maliciously be interpreted, and said to be shed, rather for the coronation of
the one, than the death of the other. In those tyrannous times, they looked not,
nor spoke without counsel, and before they went abroad, received information
of the interests of the Prince, to know what kind of Countenance they should
wear through the City.

Eustachius arriving in Rome, was received in that manner by the Emperor, that
he found no want of Trajan. I relate not the ceremonies at his meeting, his
praises, the concourses of people, the Images, Crowns, and triumphall arches,
because in each place, where virtue appears, she draggs triumphs after her, and
he is much more fortunate than valiant, whose virtue can receive augmentation of
glory by a triumph.

Adrian embraced, commended, and rewarded him, augmenting his titles, his
riches, and authority. Adrian's whole discourse still concluded with the
prudence, the valor, and fortune of Placidus. Placidus was the Emperors right
hand, the apple of the eye of the Empire, and a pattern for the Lords. All
looked on him, not only as a valiant Commander, but a favorite, He that of
Placidus could dispose whose Genius was supposed predominant over Adrians,
thought he could command the Prince: Adrian made him often tell the story of
his life, and kissed, and hugged him often in his bosom, and sometimes was so
jealous, and sometimes so delighted with him, that he challenging a share in
the fortunate success of so raging a tempest, said, in the health of Placidus,
he owed his first triumph to the Gods.

Placidus dispatched all affairs, and calmed and resolved all the Emperors
cares, and doubts. But what wonder is it, that virtue should be loved, and
respected. Placidus never went into the Royal Cabinet, but learning, and truth
enterd with him, necessary conditions for the Moses, who is to be there to
discourse with his God. His Power never swelled him at all, and though in so
short a space of time, he attained to such greatness, that his looks and
command were held in the same veneration, yet he more humble, and more affable
to all than before, then only showed his greatness, when he had an opportunity
to show his magnanimity. He had a heart of ashes, and still thought upon his
own vileness. As the Be that the wind should not carry him away, he still
carried in his hands the base stone of his condition. He had not, like
Philotas, need of shoes soal'd with lead, to the end the wind of vanity,
should not raise him from the earth. Death, and the Cross, were the Anchor and
Mast, which secured this Ship. He knew well the feathers of birds, that were
offered up in holocausts, were thrown on the dunghill, and that the more the
Siren of greatness allures, the more needful it is for Ulysses, to be tied to
the mast, for his own preservation.

The greater his power was, the more still the followers, or to speak better,
the fishers of Fortune extended their netts, and toiled for his favor. Every
one believed, he had stopped the rolling wheel of his fortune, when he thought,
he was sure of his power. Every one directed his motions to the splendor of
this light, which was reverenced by all, as the North Star of this Heaven. O
with what ease do our eyes deceive themselves!

Whither it be the nature of affection, whose heat's the less durable, by being
the more vehement, or whither it be the nature of nature, which having to every
thing prescribed a mutation, reduces that faster to the center, which she has
with greater violence exalted to the summit, Placidus had a fall.

Confide he in the favor of man, who is a greater favourit, more deserving,
and more necessary to his master, than Placidus was to Adrian. He fell, but he
fell into Paradise. This is a fortunate precipice, for he fell into the lap of
eternal and incomprehensible felicity, but yet it is a precipice, for a terrible
and dreadful example of human mutability,

That a man for his virtue respected, and for his condition most powerful,
well spoken of by all, desired by all Nations, and victorious in all battles,
whom his Country gloried in, the age he lived in honored, and in whom the
Prince said he was happy, should set in an instant, be examined by a hangman,
unjustly condemned and sentenced by that mouth, which more than any other
carest, kissed, and made him renowned, is a thing so full of horror, that I hold
the man mad, who after so notorious an example, will trust in his own prudence,
and think it sufficient to support him in the favor of man, be he never so
friendly, or obliged.

The ancient Roman Emperors, after any remarkable victory gave publicly
thanks to their Gods, which they used to do with that pomp of apparel, and
train of applauses, that many times the altars had occasion to envy their
bravery, who offered Incense on them, and still he was adored more devoutly
that discharged the vow, than he that had given the success.

The pomp predesign'd for the glory of this sacrifice, receiving the Period
expected so long, Adrian with bravery more becoming a magnificent oftentation,
than a devout and great gratitude, repaired to the Temple to give the Gods
thanks, for the Empire so great, and victory so glorious they propitiously had
given him. He went into the Temple, attended and applauded by all his greatest
Princes, beginning his function with the accustomed piety of the fortunate, who
usually place all their devotion in the charge they are at in the sacrifice.
When the end drew nigh, he looking about him, remembered that Placidus was not
there, and sighing, quickly feared, lest some sudden distemper might surprise
him in that manner, as to hinder him from waiting upon him.

He said to himself, he cannot be ungrateful, to whose only glory the victory
we consecrate is due; nor can he be thought irreligious, for he is well known
and respected, as descended from as holy a man as Heaven has on earth, and he
will not degenerate. The sacrifice no sooner was ended, but the Emperor with
extraordinary kindness, was extremely desirous to know what had happened to his
Placidus, who as soon as he came into the Temple (not without a universal
astonishment) he heard, departed thence in great have with his sons.

Adrian more doubtful than before, and more irresolute, gave order, that
Placidus should again be sought after, and if he were well, should repair unto
him, who stayed to speak with him, with unspeakable anxiety. The Emperor scarce
arrived at the Palace, when Placidus appeared with his sons, and Adrian soon
looking serenely complained of him, as if it had troubled him much, to be so
long uncertain of his health whom he loved, and favored in that manner.

And what could I think (he quickly said to him) but that you were ill, since
you were not present at the sacrifice, we offered to the Gods, out of gratitude
for a victory, which more for the benefit of your glory, than the growth of the
Roman Empire, they so prodigally have favored, and assisted. Surely something
of great consequence (to the standers by great scandal) made thee go from the
Temple, where the Gods would have has thee to be gratefully religious, and
exemplar.

Sir, replied Placidus, you accuse me of a fault I never committed. If because
I was not present, where cold, mute, and impotent stones are adored, you think
me ungrateful to Christ, who only is the giver of victoryes, you guess very
ill.

Adrian at these words, whither amazed, or ambiguous, I know not, looking on
the ground, and with the forefinger of his right hand, scratching lightly his
hair, stood still a little while, like one that thinks on things, and resolves
not what to do, then dying his countenance with his doubts, he blushed, and grew
pale, began, and was silent. In the end, he composing himself as well as he
could, sent out of his mouth, which expressed indignation, these words, or the
like.

Let Us be cautious, O Placidus, of speaking against Heaven, for the matter is
too nice. Jesting is not good, where simplicity or malignity ill applied, may
occasion bad examples to the public. Though the knowledge men have of thy
goodness, secures thee from the fear of being reputed irreligious, thou
should not bring me into the danger of blame, for too much forbearance, by
permitting such things to be spoken in my presence, which cannot be peaceably
heard, without the blasphemy of the ear.

Sir, replied Eustachius, grown red with the holy Ghost, whosoever professes
his Religion, does jest. For the Victories I have had, I have thanked the
gracious God that bestows them. If I waited not on you where Jupiter and Mars
are adored, 'twas only that I could not endure to see, not only vainly, but
wickedly, the incenses consumed, which belong to the Lord of Hell, where Mars
and Jupiter themselves are eternally tormented.

O God, what do I hear? Is Placidus so terrible a Blasphemer? Placidus so
pertinacious a Christian? A Christian, and Blasphemer, even to my face? Fear we
so little the Thunderbolts of Heaven? Is Adrian's Sword and Justice so
slenderly regarded? Soldiers, keep him in hold, his greatness will serve to
get Fortune renown. Some violent distraction of mind has perhaps overcome
him, and therefore give him time and opportunity to recollect himself. A
sacrifice will rectify his error, and when no hope is left, I Will find out a
way to repair the veneration of the Gods, and save the Law from violence. No
greatness of Fortune, prerogative of Valor, or protection of Favor, is
security to any that refuses to worship our Gods, during Adrian's reign. Shut
him up again, and keep him safe.

Placidus would have answered; but the violence of Adrian's passion, which
carried him away, made him lose that opportunity. In the mean time, the
Soldiers surrounded him, while he full of spirit, began to preach, and
publicly profess his belief, detesting the Idols, and preaching the truth of
Christ's Law to all the Guard of Caesar. Yet none was so bold to approach to
offend him; so powerfully the rays of his Virtue, which commanded a respect in
each person, were darted by him.

Why delay ye, Fellow Soldiers, he mildly spoke to them, why do ye delay? Is
this the Discipline you learnt in my School? Obey ye so slowly your General?
What respect retards you? Is It perhaps to do me honor? Honor me by imitating
the readiness with which I have always obeyed my Superiors. A Master's
commands should be executed, not examined. Approach free'y to me, I defend not
my self, I long have aspired to these Manicles. Behold here are my hands, bind
them if you please, I refuse not to be tied: He was bound harder, and more
ignominiously, for whose sake ignominies shall be glorious to me, and wounds
serve for trophyes. In one thing alone ye may gratify the affection I have
always had for you, if ye speedily send to Adrian, and tell him I am
Eustachius, not Placidus, a Professor of Christianity, no Idolater; and that if
from me, my Wife, or my Sons, he hope for any other confession, he hopes for it
in vain. He shall see by our undauntedness, what manner of Gods he serves, who
loves his God as heartily as we do love ours: and if he will determine any thing
on our lives, who so firmly persist in our faith, let him speedily do it, to
decline the loss of time in his Counsels, and retard not the reward of our
Victories.

These words being spoken with a stable and fearless countenance, begat an
amazement in the Auditors, which turned in the end into pity. Every one was
sorry for him; and there was not any person so vile, that would not very
willingly have opened a vein, to avoid seeing him brought to so ill an end, who
was as good as happy, and so happy, that he could desire nothing of Fortune,
because she had nothing left to give him.

When the rumor was spread through the City, that Placidus was carried to
Prison, the People abshed, came running with such tacit confusion, that the
streets; though full of Persons, would have been supposed a Desert, if they had
given credit to their ears, the tumult here making no noise, and quietness not
reposing. The silence was such as is usually occasioned by abundance of fear,
or a sorrow incapable of revenge. The cause of this strangeness was both
terrible and ambiguous to them, who could not think him impious that was so
well known, now excuse a wicked deed of a Prince so much feared.

Adrian informed with what constancy Eustachius contemned both Death, and the
Gods, was mad with indignation, and perhaps too with grief, for without extreme
violence we pass not to hatred from love; so deeply and tacitly this potent
affection of affection takes root in our hearts. Supposing himself to be
vilify'd and despised, as he was contriving a revenge, a new information
furpriz'd him, that Theopista, with her sons, was as ready to accompany her
Husband into Prison, as she did in his Belief. He heard that all four,
unanimously and publicly detesting the Idols, (not without the Peoples wonder
and attention) stood preaching and extolling the merit of their Religion. He,
(overcome by a violent passion) which transported him against them, would
precipitously have commanded their present execution, if some persons of
authority, commiserating the sadness of their case, and endeavoring the
appeasing of his fury, had not made him believe, 'twould be more advantageous
to the Empire, and Religion, to conquer Eustachius, than kill him. They
represented to Adrian, Eustachius was a Person beloved of the People, and
Armies, and 'twas necessary, not only commendable, to give him some time, that
his contumacy might justify the punishment, or repentance make glorious his
imprisonment. This, as the best resolution, was concluded; and therefore the
Prisoner was informed, he should prepare himself to make the Gods a sacrifice,
or be sacrificed himself. This combat continued three days, during which
time, all the Christians of the City were not wanting to visit him, to comfort
and encourage him. His friends used all means for his safety, and the Emperor
invaded him by his intimate acquaintance. The last temptation was suggested by
a Friend, who, though sent by Caesar, feigned he came of himself out of
kindness, and an earnest desire to preserve him; insomuch as what Arts the
School sels, Dissembling can counterfeit, or Interest devise, he put in
execution; and making a mixture of affection, of arguments, offers, and
threats, and tempering and infusing each thing in commendations, the last and
most powerful enchantment to Persons of Valor, labored mightily to corrupt
him.

Dearest Eustachius, what is become of thy renowned Virtue, the scourge of our
Enemies, the prop of our Empire, and glory of our Age? Who has persuaded thee
to make thy self an Enemy to the Gods, by opposing the Religion of thy
Ancestors, the Law of thy Prince, and injuring the simplicity of the People,
who by thy example will protect the injuries done to the Gods, which have made
thee victorious against all the powers, and triumphant under that space of
Heaven they govern and illuminate? Eustachius, thou dissentest from thy self,
not only from thy Prince, and out faith. Why leave thou the Religion thou so
frequently have defended with thy dangers, so often augmented with victories,
and so many times authorized with thy noble and sumptuous sacrifices, even to
the exhausting of thy Treasure? Is this the gratitude thou professest to the
Gods, who so often have made thee victorious, and sharing, as it were, their
Divinity with thee, have allowed men as well to swear by thy happiness, as by
their own omnipotency.

Some Devil, and Enemy to the People of Rome, has perverted thee. The justice
of those Gods, who never abandoned thy protection, till they saw thee their
Enemy, make thee see the injustice of thy cause. Consider, dear Friend, what
condition thou art in; from the high way of triumphs, and greatness, thou art
fallen into Prison, and the danger of thy head; Ah unhappy man, who will assist
thee? Will that God peradventure, whose own hands are nailed? Will thou
therefore dishonor the glory of thy name, ruin thy state, and the greatness
of thy Family, and bury the hopes of thy Country, which promised it self, in
thy valor and prudence, a long and sure prop to its happiness? Will thou
despise the fortune which offers it self unto thee by the favor of the Prince,
who, because he might not see thee destroyed, exhibites to make thee so great,
that thou in all the world shall have none above thee, he only excepted, who
is second to none that is not a God. All thy friends and alliance, with tears
and prostrate hearts, beseech thee not to do it. Will thou see so many tears
shed in vain, and so many friends deceived, for a God condemned, and punished?
They have bought thy protection with the sweat of their labors, and have
spent, and still passionately desire to spend their blood for the glory of thy
Family and Name; and will thou give consent to abandon them? Ah, they may have
reason to fear it, if thou take delight in holding them so long in suspense,
and go about even to abandon the Gods themselves. But who, but who are they,
which removed not far from thee, groan under the weight of so many Chains, in
so dark and so dreadful a Prison? Ah wretch that I am, whom do I behold? Are
they, or are they not the same? Are those thy so valorous Sons, and that thy
Wife so chaste, whom thou so much lovedst? Ah Placidus, and can find in thy
heart to see them torn in pieces? And why grow'st thou so cruelly perverse on
the sudden to thy Friends, thy Wife, thy Sons, thy self, and the Gods of thy
Progenitors, of thy Prince, thy Country, and Triumphs?

Eustachius inspired by God, turning himself toward his Sons with a smile,
lest his valor might be stained if he fell to words, when he had the command
of his Sword, spoke to them in this manner.

We must now, my Beloved, resolve to do something; and what will ye do? To
enjoy a short eternity, will ye disgust the Friends which counsel us so well?
For a God, though a Creator and Redeemer, will ye offend a Prince, that has
done you the honor to let you spill so often your blood, to uphold him in his
Throne? For a God displeased with our loving Deities, though Heaven be his
Temple, and by nature he be goodness it self, and virtually omnipotent, shall
we leave off offering up Incense to these beautiful Statues, where men admire
the excellency of Art, and harken to infernal Consultations? If ye'll resolve
on this, besides the leave ye'll have of the most gracious Prince, to spill
again your blood for his sake; he will too permit you, (since the loss of your
souls is inevitable, if ye dye in rebellion against the true God) to live at
least, and quickly lead a fortunate life, if it be a happy life, to have many
occasions of contesting with the dangers and miseries of war, emulation, envy,
sickness, and servitude.

So spoke he to them; then turning himself to his idolatrous Counselor, he
added; I both excuse and pity thee: Thou do not comprehend what our souls
aspire to; we thirst after favors and lives which are not terrestrial. Report,
we do not adore Gods, Deflowrers of Virgins, Incestuous to their Sisters, and
Deceivers of Men; Gods that are Parricides, Adulterers, Rapacious, Impostors,
and Blood-suckers, born to the shame, not protection of the world, and deify'd
only by them, who under the shadow of a Deity, that loves, and does not punish
impieties, seek to shelter their consciences. And is it possible a Man of
Valor, though no Christian, should not be ashamed to see himself prostrate at
the foot of a God, more wicked than wickedness it self? And is it possible he
should not know these Incenses are consumed in vain; and so many, and such
chargeable Victims, are to no other end, but to waste our Wealth and Goods?
These are Gods which rob us, though dead, and though adored. O blindness! That
God is not ours, which seeks our perdition; and that God is no God, that knows
not how to hinder his own. Let us bestow our incenses where we have our hopes.
We hope not in impieties, in wickednesses, and eternal blasphemers of Gods
name, by whom they condemned, will always feel the punishment of their pride
and rebellion.

I can answer you no otherwise, but that you know us not, if you threaten us.
And what would thou have us to fear? Shame? And think thou that he will dye
of shame, who, a Conqueror of the Devil, and the World, dies serving, and to
serve his Creator? What would thou have us fear? Death? A Christian hopes
for death, and fears it not. Gods knife, not Adrians, affrights us. A Christian
has his Country, his faith, hope, treasures, and glory in Heaven. He is not a
Countreyman of this life. Whosoever kills him, does not drive him from the
Earth, but helps him to get sooner to Heaven, whither he (here a Pilgrim)
aspires. O unhappy man, that to live a few days, would lose such a fortunate
occasion of eternally beatifying himself. But why named I a few days? If thou
can assure me of a moment of time for sacrificing to thy Gods, I am ready to
tell thee, I will readily do it: but if that cannot be, (so fading and
uncertain is this our frail life) why would thou make me lose an eternal
felicity for a very short moment of time? for a moment uncertain? for a moment,
which, if certain, would have howsoever more torment than life? Friend, we will
dye, even to fly this so troublesome life, much more to serve our God, that is
so full of power. And this life is too vile, too uncertain, and too dependant;
and we passionately desire once to dye, to behold our most merciful God, to
whose only presence our souls do aspire and sigh. Ah, O my Sons, shall we
never attain to this happiness? Shall we never get to taste it? O most happy we,
if our God will be pleased to confer it on us. And what shall we do in that
blessed light, which never is eclipsed? In that inexhaustible and
incomprehensible Sea of delights, and consolations? Will these petty disasters
we suffer for his sake, prove bitter or sweet, profitable or sad? Ah woe's me,
a frail and poor Creature, who love not even so well my God, but that the flesh
makes me think of interest, of pleasure, and reward. Be not scandalized my
sons, let us fight, let us suffer, and dye for the only love of God. God alone
be our object, our reward, and our interest. Though he did not intend to reward
us, he deserves to be beloved; and how much for us has he done? Ah scourges,
ah thorns, ah lances, ah nails, and ah cross, ye know very well.

They spoke here all together, as expressing the consent of four valiant
persons, who animating one another, as they fortified themselves, so made the
Spectators relent. The Orator, confounded, and unable to compass his end,
returned to Adrian, relating to him, he had met with a Prison full of
Constancy; where he that expected to dye, was more fearful of the flowness,
than the sharpness of his Sword.

Adrian implacably incensed with this last relation, calling Placidus
ungrateful, sacrilegious, and seditious, and invoking particularly each God,
extolled and exaggerated the merit of his own piety. That he had rather part
with a Minister of state, though useful and glorious to the Empire, than that
Heaven should be sacrificed to by his hand. When he with exclamations,
complaints, threats, and injuries, had sufficiently enflamed and tormented
himself, (the authority of the Devil his Counselor prevailing at last) he
resolved to blot Placidus out of the book of life; and asked by his will, what
death they should dye; the Lions, he replied, should devour them, who had for
that purpose fasted three days together.

The innocent Christians were led to the Theater, whither they went with a
faith deserving a Theater. The People (who with tears resented their condition)
accompanied and pitied them with a sorrow and compassion that cannot be
expressed. Every one was sorry for the Sons unhappy youth, and every one for
the Parents affliction. Some thought the death of the young men was most worthy
of pity, because they were cut off in the flower of their age, while others had
a greater compassion for the Parents, supposing their death to be the more
precious, for by losing themselves, and their Sons, they lost and lamented more
lives. When the Theater was opened, and the persons condemned appeared, who
more cheered up themselves in their dangers, no eye was free from tears,
especially when they saw, and heard Eustachius speak, who kneeling in the midst
of his beloved family, cried aloud with his hands reared to Heaven.

Though all hell should be let loose, much less a few Lions, he can have no
fear that loves thee, O Lord. Thou art too sweet, and too dear, O sweet and
dear Love of our love. Behold us at thy feer, most ready and prepared for a
sacrifice, which is not so pure, and immaculate, as thou do deserve, is what
four poor, and miserable sinners can give thee. With thy loving mercyes, make
it what thou would have it to be for thy glory. What say ye dear Sons? are
ye glad of this occasion, to show your prompt obedience, to our most gracious
Father and God. Take ye pleasure that he see, he has not given so much to you,
but that ye are ready to present, and sacrifice more to him, if it lay in your
power? Offer up to him, and give him that life, he so often has bestowed upon
you, preserved and made noble. Which way will these Lions come out? Will they
make peradventure to this place? Come valorous Sons, let us bend thither. Ye
are well acquainted with Lions, ye have conquered them formerly, when ye were
not old enough to distinguish them: Will ye now be afraid of them, when ye
fight for Gods sake?

Ah dear husband (his wife interrupting him began) wrong not the valor of our
Sons. Ye, O my Sons shall stand here together, and I here before: She will lead
you out of this life, who brought you into it. Give praises to God for the
victory, and bless and invoke him. O holy, thrice holy, and a thousand times
holy, behold us at the sacrifice, we so often have desired. Accept O amorous,
accept most loving flame of our breasts, this litte and last, but cordial
oblation of our wish.

When the grates were opened, the Lions (very hungry and at liberty) issued
forth, whose horrible roaring made all the spectators afraid, for they came
with that violence and fury, that the holy Martyrs obsequies were lamented by
all, e're their death. None could endure to behold this destruction, so as with
a generous aversion, all looked another way, not now not to pity, but to shun
the the first encounter of so sad, and so skreaking a compassion. Now every
one, disliking so merciless a spectacle, departed, abhorring and detesting so
barbarous a cruelty, when behold a sudden hissing arising, each eye was
recalled to the Theater, and overcome with the wonder of an accident, which
disordered, and terrified each breast, and each conscience.

When the Lions were unchain'd, and came furiously to the grate, which was set
wide open, they no sooner approached to the prey, but fearful, harmless, and
hungry, retreated, and carrying low their heads, (showing they were conquered
by the virtue of men, who though living on earth, were of Heaven) persuaded the
people to magnify Gods power, who not only when he pleases, makes Lions, but
the pillars themselves, that bear up the Heavens, tremble, totter, and shake.

In the most noble fabrique of the Temple of Solomon, I remember not, that in
any of the Chapiters, or bases of braffe were figured certain knobs, composed
of Cherubins, of Lions, and Palme-trees. Behold here a mystery verified.
Eustachius, Theopistas and their Sons, representing four Cherubins, with the
branches of Palmetrees adorning their hands, came conquerours out of the midst
of those Lions, whom still with great ease, the servants of God have usually
overcome, as if they were Lambs, and not Lions. Adrian, to whom the relation of
the miracle was brought with all speed, poisoned with the fury of his vilifi'd
Devil, lifting his hands toward Heaven, and feigning he was comforted, that
he might not confess he was overcome. O Eternal Providence, brake forth, even
the beasts themselves abhor those ill-bred People, which rebelled against the
Gods. The Lion never showed his magnanimity more seasonably, than by scorning
such wicked, and infamous nourishment. But let them not brag, their sacriledges
were unpunished, for my sword is keen enough, to root out of the world so
pestiferous a graffe. I must not let the Peoples simplicity be deluded by their
incantations, who that they might detract from the glory of our Gods, have made
hell protect their impiety. Remove them from the Theater.

The next morning the Tyrant arose by break of day, whose fury would not suffer
him to rest. He was very much afflicted, to see his vast Empire inferior in
valor, to the courage of four persons, armed with nothing else, but the only
name of JESUS.

The ancient Emperors, to martyrize the Christians, kept a huge brazen Bull,
the invention I believe of some Devil, who brought a hell on earth, which when
'twas red hot by a vehement fire, affrighted and terrified whosoeve beheld it.

This machine exposed in public, which scared even him, that went near to it,
the barbarous Tyrant gave command, the four Champions should be put, and
enclosed in it is bulk. O number proportioned to the form of a basis, whose
quadrangular firmeness was most fit, to support the growing Church.

This liker a Devil, than a Bull, was no sooner made hot, but dreadfully at
his eyes, his mouth, and his nostrills, breathing smoke, and flames, was
sufficient to terrify, even heaven it self, much more the poor breast of a man,
whom the mere apprehension of d^^th was enough to deter and deject. Those
breathings, which in every other creature were the arguments of life, were in
this infernal monster the symptoms of death. While the Machine waxed hot, the
matter enflaming it self (which naturally being cold, by how much the more
vigorously it resisted the heat, by so much the more violently received and
distributed the heat with more pain) I imagine to my self, the prisoner first
assaulted by the air, which with its heat invading his head; did threaten to
choke him. That part of the brass then growing more vehemently hot, which
nearest the fire, endured the first assaults, the poor tormented creature,
beginning first to feel his flesh singe, then fry, and consume, could not
choose (grown offensive to himself) but grieve he was forced to bewail with
unspeakable sorrow, the cruelty of that punishment, which making him survive
his own flesh, caused him ^o see those limbs, which so cruelly (O death even
painful to our fancy) he had both felt die, and was forced to lament too when
dead.

No sooner the cruel Emperors Command was performed, but the fire being
lighted, in less than an hour, the Bull (which no longer was of brass, but all
fire) threw up horrible sparkles from out of the midst of the ambient flames,
with so doleful a spectacle, that the standers by themselves, felt their
bosoms and eyes melt with pity, at the sight of that object, which certainly
without grief, was not to be seen.

Our four courageous Champions were sacrificed to truth, on this altar of
torments, whose affectionate death I resolved to conceal, since I feel my heart
broken to pieces, I would I could say with devotion, but I am so great a
sinner, I dare not have such thoughts of my self.

I confess I abandon thee, O Reader, in the best of the story, since I should
have represented the devotion, with which these holy Martyrs have yielded up
the Ghosts, beseeching God to free them at last from these earthly afflictions,
and make beneficial to the piety of posterity, the memory of these sufferings,
of which the first reward, was to hear a voice speaking from Heaven to them, it
shall be, as ye desire, O happy souls.

I confess I should relate, how gloriously Gods omnipotence appeared, by
freeing them from so terrible a burning, where they were rather lulled asleep
than consumed, without the least harm of a hair, much less of their garments or
flesh.

I confess, it would redound very much to our profit, to meditate on the pity
(to our own confusion) which an unbelieving people afforded by their tears, of
which the most wicked commiserated their punishment, and the best their faith
did imitate. I confess all this, but what shall I do? my pen can write no more,
grown feeble with compassion, as well as with weariness.

I have spent all my affections, it remains now, O Reader, thou begin to use
thine. And when e're again (before it be too late) will thou have such a fair
opportunity to meditate, to weep, and to lead a better life.

FINIS.

