A SERMON AT THE FUNERAL OF Sir JOHN NORTON, Bar. Lately deceased.

Preached in the Parish Church of East-Tysted in HANTSHIRE:

By Thomas Mannyngham, Rector of that Parish, and Preacher at the Rolls.

LONDON, Printed for William Crook at the Green Dragon without Temple Bar.
1687.

Imprimatur.

Hen. Maurice R. P. D. Wilhelmo, Archiepisc. Cant. a Sacris.

Feb. 7. 1687.

To the much Honored Lady, THE Lady DOROTHY NORTON, Relict of Sir JOHN NORTON
Lately deceased.
Honored Madam,
IT was my Proposal, that if there were any thing acceptable in this Sermon,
Your Ladyship might have it first transcribed for your own use, and in that
manner communicate it to what Friends You pleased. But since Your Ladyship is
of another Judgment, as that the Character of one, who was every way so worthy,
and so universally known and beloved, deserves to be made more public, I
humbly submit. Only I have one thing to request, that if at any time I should
be accused of Flattery in the management of this Subject (and if I should, it
can be by such Persons only, as envy all Commendations that are given to
others, or were very ignorant of the Worth of Sir John Norton) Your Ladyship
would be ready to vindicate me from that Aspersion; and to witness, that as my
Pastoral Behavior toward my Honored Patron, both in the time of his Health,
and of his Illness, had never that Guilt upon it; so now likewise, though it be
less dangerous, I have not bestowed upon Him any undeserved Praise: But though
some parts of His Character may seem warmly, and very affectionately
represented, yet there are none of them above the Truth.

Madam, I shall not here attempt any Consolatory Discourse; neither shall I
undertake, either to describe, or to renew Your Grief; but I shall rather choose
to draw a Vail over it at present, or leave You to declare it Yourself; not by
fruitless Lamentations, and dark Retirements, as if You were discontented at
Providence and the World, but (what is a clearer Argument of Your Wisdom, and
Your Love,) by doing all things in Honor of the deceased, the whole remainder
of Your days. And as You have hitherto been, not only a Companion with Him in
all his commendable Actions, but an Encourager too; so I doubt not, but Your
Ladyship will continue the same Acts of Charity, keep up the same decent
Hospitality, improve the same Friendships, respect the Clergy which He so truly
loved, maintain the same Constancy in attending on the public Worship of God,
and persevere in the same Faith: Then the Almighty will bless Your Ladyship
with the Prosperity of this Life, and afterward admit You to the same Place of
Joy and Rest, whither Your Dearest Husband is gone before. Which that he may
do, is the hearty Prayer of,

Madam, Your most Faithful, and most Obedient Servant, Tho. Mannyngham.

PSALM XV. v. 1, 2. Lord, who shall abide in thy Tabernacle? who shall dwell in
thy holy Hill?

He that walks uprightly, and works Righteousness, and speaks the truth
in his Heart.


THIS Psalm may be called a Description of a Citizen of Sion, of one that God
will admit unto all the Privileges of his Sanctuary here, and reward with
eternal Happiness hereafter. For whosoever so orders his Conversation in this
World, as to live and die a true Member of the Church of God, shall never fall,
shall never be moved, but shall stand in the Congregation of the righteous for
ever: Or, though in some sense, he fall by Death, yet shall he rise again by a
glorious Resurrection; though he be moved, yet it is but from one Church to
another, from the Church Militant to the Church Triumphant.

In the Words we have a most important Question proposed by the Prophet David
to God himself; Lord, who shall abide in thy Tabernacle? who shall dwell in thy
holy Hill? and God presently returns an Answer, as it were, by a voice out of
the Clouds; He that walks uprightly, and works Righteousness, and speaks
the truth in his Heart: These being the chief distinguishing Marks of a true
Israelite; for whatever Particulars are contained in the following part of this
Psalm, may be reduced to these general Heads, of Integrity, Justice, and Truth.

Here therefore we see what are the principal and substantial things that God
requires to fit us for his Communion, and so make us capable of the peculiar
Blessings of his Covenant and Promise, viz. such Moral Duties, as evidence the
Truth and Simplicity of our Hearts, and declare the Uprightness of our
Conversation with Men; for by these he measures the sincerity of all those who
come to worship him.

Nothing was more liable to the abuses of Hypocrisy, than the Ceremonial or
Tabernacle Service of the Jews, (which is proportionably true of all other
outward Worship whatever) and therefore God tries the Truth of their most
solemn Acts of Worship, by their Conformity to the plainest Duties of Human
Society: For what does the Lord require of thee, says the Prophet Micha, Mich.
6.8.
but to do justly, and to love Mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? And St.
Paul in his Epistle to the Romans, tells them, Chap. 14.17, 18.
that the Kingdom of God consists in Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the Holy
Ghost. For he that in these things serves Christ, is acceptable to God, and
approved of men.

It Is not my Business at present to enlarge upon any Point of Divinity, but
only to declare what are the Qualifications which the Prophet David here gives
of his true Citizen of Sion, and then to consider how near a Resemblance, the
Life of the Honorable Person, whose Funeral Rites we are now performing, had
to the Description laid down in this Psalm: So that when we shall find Him to
have maintained a great Integrity, Righteousness, and Truth, through the whole
Course of his days, and also to have been a constant and devout Worshipper of
God in his holy Tabernacle, we may have good Christian Hope, and Comfort, and
Confidence to conclude, that he is now praising and glorifying the Almighty in
a more excellent manner in the New Jerusalem.

I. Therefore I shall endeavor to make it evident, that in the main Actions of
his Life, He duly practiced the great Moral and Political Duties laid down in
this Psalm, both as a private Person, and as a public Magistrate. II. That, as
in Conformity to the Rules of this Psalm, He was rightly qualified to abide in
the holy Tabernacle, so accordingly he lived and died a devout Worshipper of
God. And therefore, III. We have reason to conclude, that his Soul is now at
rest upon the spiritual Sion, the holy Mount of God.
I. I shall endeavor to make it evident, That in the main Actions of his Life,
He duly practiced the great Moral and Political Duties laid down in this Psalm,
both as a private Person, and as a public Magistrate.

But before I proceed to his Character, it may be worth our Observation to
consider what a proper Place and Esteem the Prophet David has given these
Virtues of Honesty, Justice, and Truth, by making them the chief Ingredients
whenever he describes a truly pious Man: So that let the Disturbers of Peace
and Truth, contend never so earnestly about Opinions, Speculations, and outward
ways of Worship, Men are no further religious, than they are honest and just:
Our practicing the Duties of the second Table, being the best Evidence that we
can give of our right Observation of the Duties of the first; as may be
undeniably manifested through the whole Current of the Old and New Testament;
particularly, through all the account of the Lives of the Patriarchs, through
the ancient Book of Job, the Psalms of David, the Proverbs of Solomon, the
Sermons of the Prophets, the Expositions, Parables, and Discourses of our
Savior, and the Rules and Precepts of the Apostles: And they who forsake these
plain, and numerous, and divine Testimonies of what was always esteemed pure
and sincere Religion, and undertake to dress it up in new Notions of their own,
as they best suit with their private Passions, Fancies, and worldly Interests,
may make Mankind either ignorant Worshippers of they know not what, or
phantastically zealous they know not why; but will never persuade People to be
truly humble, charitable, and substantially Good; or imprint upon their Minds
an awful and just Reverence of the Eternal and Incomprehensible Godhead. Now
the Honorable Person, whose bodily Remains are here before us, was one who
showed the Truth of his Religion, by the Honesty and Justice of his Life; and
declared his Faith in God, by his Fidelity to Man. He never took up a Reproach
against his Neighbor, or a Reward against the Innocent, or admitted of any
unlawful Gain; but was true to all his Covenants and Contracts, faithfully kept
his Oath of Allegiance, and would still have done so, though it had been to his
temporal Hindrance.

All you who are now present, can fully testify his exceeding Worth in all the
Variety of his Capacities and Employments, both private and public.

You who are of the Nobility, Gentry, and his worthy Relations, can witness the
high Generosity of his Soul, the Greatness and Constancy of his Friendships,
the Love, the Honor, and the Sincerity of all his Correspondencies.

You can witness, (for many of You were Partners with Him in all his eminent
Stations, and deserve your Commendations too) You can witness how assiduous and
punctual He was in all the Important Trusts that were committed to Him, whether
in the August Assembly of the Parliament, his honorable Commands in the
Militia, or his Justitiary Affairs upon the Bench. How highly Loyal He was ever
to His King, and yet a studious Preserver of the ancient Privileges of his
Country; but yet no such turbulent Lover of his Country, as any ways to
undermine the just Prerogatives of the Crown. How firm and resolute He always
was for upholding the established Church of England, and yet not Factious
against the right Succession. How vast an Empire he had obtained in the
Affections of the People by his Affability, his Hospitality, and his repeated
Acts of Kindness; and yet how innocently, how justly, and how loyally He
managed so dangerous a Power. That largely extended Popularity in which he
always lived, and which would have made perhaps another man vainly giddy, or
seditious, made him more thoughtful, and more steady to the Crown. For he could
not but consider what peculiar Obligations He had to be faithful to the
Government, since so great a Multitude of all sorts had committed themselves to
his charge, and owned Him for their Oracle in Civil Wisdom. Therefore He guided
them in all humble Submission to their Sovereign, and inspired them with that
Allegiance, which He constantly practiced himself; which he practiced with the
same Sincerity, with the same Conscience of his Oath to God, as well as to Man,
under all Accidents and Circumstances, through all Variations and Changes; for
no Sufferings could terrify Him, no Prosperity could soften him out of his
Duty; no public Discontents could sour Him, no private Friendships could
bias Him: But lo! He has now concluded the Male-Line of his Loyal Ancestors
with untainted Honor; and may all his collateral Posterity both imitate and
inherit the Glory of this his Character! And may all You, who were his Noble
Friends and Acquaintance, maintain the same illustrious, as well as truly
Christian Virtue, to the end of your days; whatever difficulties arise,
whatever temporal Losses You undergo; for otherwise You will blast the
Reputation of the Church of England, You will forfeit the Protection of the
Divine Providence, and lose the fairest Opportunity that this Nation ever had
of glorifying God, by a meek perseverance in Obedience and Truth. And as You
are Christians, you must acknowledge, that the Gospel is not upheld by
Wilfulness, but by Humility, and by Patience.

They who are of the Clergy, can testify what Regard he always paid to that
Order, how gladly he received their Visits, many times returned them, and never
seemed more satisfied than when his Table was filled with their Society. He was
not afraid of their Learning, their Prudence, and their Observations, but could
thoroughly relish their wisest Discourses, and match their accutest Sayings.

A Reverend and a Virtuous Divine was no tedious Burden to him, no Censure on
his Manners, no Comedy to his Servants, and no Jest among his Family: No, I am
sure, whoever of them brought any Esteem along with them to his House, never
went away with it any ways diminished, but rather increased with the Additions
of a due Respect.

He well knew the sad Degeneracy of this Age, with what Contempt and Scorn the
Men of that Function are many times treated by those, who envy their
Subsistence, and hate their Virtues; who having renounced their Allegiance to
God, are continually offering Violence to his Ambassadors, and being conscious
to themselves, that they have justly deserved an Excommunication for the
notorious lewdness of their Lives, cannot but expect an Anathema from every
Churchman that they meet, and therefore treat them as their greatest Enemies.

These horrible Impieties he knew were too much in fashion among the Great, in
whom Civility and common Manners are usually accounted the lowest of their
Qualifications, and therefore he endeavored to set them a better Example, for
he had never any thing to do with the Throne of Wickedness, or with the Chair
of the Scorners: He never put those Faces to Confusion, that were made tender
by Modesty and Retirement; he never cast a Cloud of Infamy and Reproach upon
the Beauty of Holiness; but he always rejoiced to express his Reverence of God,
and his Affection to Religion, by his proportionable Respects to the Clergy; he
loved to be a Partaker of the Tranquillity, the Wisdom, the innocent and meek
Conversation, the Joy and Gladness of the Righteous, and to be held a Companion
of all those, who with an unparalleled, John 15.14, 15.
but yet unenvied Title, are called the Friends of Christ.

Thus he fully answered that part of the Character of a Citizen of Sion, laid
down in this Psalm, where it is said of him, That in his Eyes a vile Person is
contemned, v. 4.
but he honors them that fear the Lord. Indeed his Civility embraced all
men, though his Judgment knew well how to distinguish: To contemn any one, was
not in his Nature, though it sometimes happened to be his Duty, especially as a
Magistrate. But the vile Persons that he contemned, were not the poor and
destitute, those he relieved: They were not those of a mean or common
Parentage, for such he many times enobled with his Invitations and courteous
Notice; neither were they those, whose Vices were private, or known only by
common rumor, or long since committed; for as to such things he was not hasty
to judge any, but left them to God, and their own Consciences, despising none
as Publicans, because he could not tell what Saints Repentance might one day
make them. But the vile Persons that he contemned, were more especially the
busy Disturbers of Church and State, either by open Rebellion, secret
Conspiracy, or libellous Pamphlets: And likewise among the vile Persons, he
could not but reckon all such (though otherwise never so high in Quality) who
scoffed at Religion, and despised the Clergy; because so profligate a Demeanor
toward sacred things and persons, was an Argument to him of the worst of
Tempers that was incident to human Nature, as denoting both the highest pitch
of Profaneness, and the lowest Dregs of Sensuality.

But our good Citizen of Sion made much of them that feared the Lord, defended
them from the Insolence of those that would oppress them, rendered them Aweful
to their Flocks and Charges, teaching them new measures of Reverence by his own
Demeanor, making them ready and cheerful to render their whole Dues, when they
saw him, who was so strict an Observer of Judgment, Mercy and Truth, to be so
exact and punctual in the payment of all his Tithes.

He had no Fortunes to make, no prodigally wasted Patrimony to repair by Fraud
and Sacrilege, but what was wanting to the ancient Demesns of his worthy
Family, was nobly lost by their faithful adherence to the Church and Crown, and
therefore never to be rebuilt upon their Ruins: Yet notwithstanding all the
loss it underwent in the civil Wars, it still remained an ample, and a thriving
Estate under the Discretion and Liberality of its Owner; it had no Canker in
it, no unjust Titles to moulder it away, no Curse of the Needy upon it, but was
always blessed with the good Providence of God, the Prayers of the Clergy, and
of the Poor. And thus shall every Man be blessed that makes much of them that
fear the Lord. They that love God's Ministers, shall be beloved of God; they
shall dwell in plenty all their days, descend with Honor unto their Graves,
and their Memories shall be dear and sacred, as long as Learning, and Wisdom,
and Piety shall remain.

They who are of the Commonalty can sufficiently witness the Condescentions of
his Kindness, the easy Familiarity of his Converse, the readiness of his
Favors, and the uprightness of his Magistracy; how he used his Authority
chiefly to reconcile the minds of those that were offended with each other, to
cool their Passions, to lessen their Differences, to recommend the Benefits of
Peace and Amity, to declare the ill Consequences of Enmity and Revenge, and by
threatening the Rigor of the Laws, to keep them from the punishments of them.

How often have fierce and contending Adversaries forgot their Malice in his
presence, and been ashamed to prosecute their Neighbors before him, who always
was so kind to his? He was every way so completely fitted for his Justitiary
Jmployment, by his Wisdom, his Equity, and his Reputation, that there were few
but were ready to stand to whatever he proposed: They were fully possessed with
an admiration of his person, and his worth; they knew how inflexible he was in
Honesty and Truth, and repaired to him, rather as an Arbitrator, than as a
Magistrate; and accordingly he managed their Controversies, as a true Lover of
his Country, and an equal Guardian of Peace and Concord; he often served the
true ends of Government more by advising as a Friend, than by giving out Orders
as a Justice, and composed more Differences by the good humor of a Gentleman,
than by the severity of a Magistrate.

You can witness how he spent his time and his Estate continually in the
Country, and scarce ever went to London, but to attend in the Parliaments, and
there to promote your Interest; how he preferred his Habitation here, before
all the Splendour and Diversions of the City; and how he valued the plain and
downright Affection of honest and industrious Farmers, before the finest
Professions of Flattery and Courtship; you cannot but remember with what
cheerfulness of Looks, and heartiness of Language, he received you to his
Table, which you always found loaded with such substantial Provisions, as
having served the Parlour, afterward feasted the Hall, and plentifully
relieved the Poor at his Gates.

When his House was filled (as it often was) with promiscuous Guests, how
obligingly would he accommodate himself to Persons of all degrees and ranks;
salute the Gentry with complete Address; give such respect unto the Clergy, as
should invite others to pay the same; talk friendly and facetiously with the
middle sort of People, kindly and affably with the Lowest: Nay, he would
oftentimes give Life and Countenance to the meanest Guests, by particular
Applications, and the repeated Testimonies of their Welcome.

Those who were his Tenants, can witness how far he was from being a hard
Landlord, or requiring more than his Ground would yield; how favorably he
considered all Casualties, how desirous he was of their honest Profit, what
Pleasure he took in seeing them prosper and thrive! so that we may be assured,
Job 31.38.
that his Land will never cry against him, nor the Furrows thereof complain.

His Servants know what a gracious Master they have lost, in whose Service they
found no harshness of Commands, and no Indulgence unto Vice: To retain unto
him, was not Licentiousness, but Discipline and good Manners; neither was it
Slavery, but Preferment; and accordingly they performed their Duty more from
Love, than from Fear.

Some he educated and provided for, with the tenderness of a Father, some he
apprentis'd out to profitable and honest Callings; he rewarded all that any
ways deserved, and there were few but did deserve; for he took care to instill
both Civility and Religion into them, and to let them know, that he was most
offended, when they neglected their Duty to God: He never affected much
Appearance or Splendour in his Retinue; but the only Pomp in which he seemed to
be most delighted, was in walking constantly to the House of God, before a
numerous and well-ordered Family.

And now, Beloved, you may think perhaps that I have finished his Character by
these several Appeals, which I have made to those who fully understood his
multiplied Worth; but yet there are greater things behind for my self to
witness, which will show him to have been a devout Worshipper of God; and that
these sundry Instances of his Integrity, Righteousness, and Truth, which I have
already given, were but either so many preparatory Qualifications to, or
demonstrative Evidences of, the Reality of his Devotions: For without some
Degree of these, Men are not fit for the solemn Worship of God; and without an
Improvement in these, their Worship is but Mockery and Profaneness: To be
Honest, Just, and Faithful, or, what is all one, to be without Guile, is
perhaps the safest Description of a good Christian, that the New Testament
affords us; our Savior gave it of Nathaniel, when he called him an Israelite
indeed, John 1.47. Nay, it is given of our blessed Savior himself, 1 Pet.
2.22. Who did no Sin, neither was Guile found in his Mouth. And Rev. 14.5. it
is there affirmed of those who are represented as the highest Order of Saints
in the Resurrection, that in their Mouth was found no Guile. Without this sure
and standing Evidence of the Simplicity of the Heart, we may be at strange
Uncertainties about our judging and defining what is true Religion and Virtue;
for Experience has assured us, that Men may have such odd Apprehensions of the
Divinity they worship, as may root out all their Remains of Moral Honesty; and
things may arrive to that desperate Pass, that some Men's Piety shall be nothing
but an Ecstasy about God, and the Ranckness of Self-love under the sacred name
of Zeal.

Having, therefore, attested the Integrity, Righteousness, and Truth of this
Great Exemplar before us, and finding him so well qualified, according to the
Method of the Psalmist, to be a Worshipper of God, I shall in the

Second place consider how he behaved himself in that spiritual Privilege and
Station.

He was admirably composed by the sincerity of his Temper, and the seriousness
of his Affections, for the solemn Worship of God; he seemed to me to have an
extraordinary sense of the Majesty of God upon his Mind, a deep and unaffected
Humility in all his Thoughts, and religious Actions; and such a grateful
Experience of the Mercies of God, as was always ready to overflow into Praises
and Thanksgivings. And this Reverential Habit of his Soul, being a due mixture
of Fear, and Love, and holy Admiration, was owing, next to the Grace of God, to
that strict, and truly Christian Education, which he received from the Care of
his wise and virtuous Parents; for it was then, that he imbibed those early and
lasting Impressions of the Awefulness of Religion, which he kept inviolate in
the University, and in the Country, which he carried with him from his Youth
to his Grave, through all the Hypocrisy of the Usurpation, and through all the
Profaneness since. Nothing was more odious to him, than sporting with sacred
Things; not, that he wanted a Talent to have furnished out the Wit, but he had
a devout Nature that abhorred the Crime. No Man was more facetious than he,
when it was seasonable and innocent, but then God and and the holy Scriptures
were never any of his Subjects: He was never known to use any manner of Jesting
to the Prejudice or Reproach of his Neighbor, and we may be sure he was much
more tender of the Honor of his God.

He was so far from entertaining any peevish Exceptions against the excellent
Liturgy of our Church, that he could never sufficiently admire the Purity, the
Spirit, the Holiness, the Divine Plainness, and the comprehensive Wisdom of our
public Prayers: He frequented them, and loved them, because he truly relished
them; he truly relished them, because he came prepared unto them, by the
private Devotions of his Closet, which he likewise sustained and cherished by
his duly reading, and meditating on the appointed Psalms and Chapters for every
Morning and Evening throughout the Year.

His grave and examplary Behavior in this place, always showed what an entire
Affection he bare to the whole Service of the Church; for by his humble
Gestures, his devout and audible Responses, and his exact Conformity to all the
outward Decency prescribed, he was, in a manner, a living Rubric to the whole
Congregation; and by his continual and hearty Amens to every Prayer, he
animated the Devotions of all that were present

He was not one who expected Curiosities from the Pulpit, or that the common
Christians, or those of an ordinary Understandding should be neglected, to
supply Dainties for his Ear: For though he was a Judge of the Purity of
Eloquence, the choiceness of Expression, the clearness of Method, the strength
of an Argument, the depth of sound Divinity, and the height of an affectionate
Piety; yet he was a Favourer of the plainest, and most inartificial
Instructions: Nay, he did not disdain (as many Great Persons do) to be a
constant Auditor of the repeated Rudiments of Christianity, and the most
familiar Catechizing of the Children; for he well knew, that those Fundamental
Articles were the important Truths on which our Salvation does depend; and that
however a sufficient Knowledge of them, may be soon acquired, even by the
meanest, humble, and willing Disciple of Christ, yet they contained such
boundless Treasures of Divine Sense and Meaning, as might exercise the vastest
parts, and continually enrich the most improved Mind.

He was a strict Observer of the Lent for three days in a Week: He constantly
received the Holy Sacrament at the three great Festivals of the Year, and
sometimes oftener; and before every receiving, he usually enjoined himself three
or four days of strict Preparation, and sometimes more.

The last Sacrament I gave him, which was on Christmas Day in his Chamber, it
was some scruple upon him, that he had not prepared himself more solemnly,
according to his wonted Method: But when I told him, that I did not doubt, but
his extreme Pains, and his commendable Patience under them, had supplied the
Design of his former Self-denials, and had wrought him into an humble and
heavenly Temper; He resigned himself to my Intimations, and received his
Viaticum, his spiritual Strength, upon His weak and trembling Knees. During all
His Illness, till he kept his Bed, he would not hearken to those that proposed
to him any other Posture in his Prayers; and in the latter part of his
Weakness, he was prayed for in many of the neighboring Churches, in the
Cathedral of Winchester, and in the Chapel of his Diocesan.

Thus he was a true Son of the Church of England, followed all Her Rites and
Usages, paid a strict Obedience to all Her Directions; mourned when she
suffered, rejoiced when she flourished, prayed fervently, and acted vigorously
for Her Prosperity, cherished, respected, reverenced all Orders of Men within
Her; was intimate with a long Succession of Her most eminent Prelates and
Pastors; was greatly honored, and entirely loved by most of the Reverend
Fathers that now adorn her, and protect her, by their Learning, their Prudence,
their Fortitude, and their Piety. He was so well grounded a Member of the
Church of England, that I am fully persuaded, no Art or Cunning, no
Allurements, no Terrors, no Losses, could ever have moved him from the two main
Pillars of his constant Profession and Practice, viz. his Duty to the Church,
and his Loyalty to the King; but upon all Occasions, as formerly, so still, he
would have bravely served his Prince to the utmost Extent of what is lawful;
and had there been more than this required, he would have humbly and mildly
suffered for the Testimony of a good Conscience.

After a continued Enjoyment of his Health for threescore and four years, God
was pleased to exercise him with a severe Sickness, above two years since; from
which in some time he recovered, though perhaps never to the Strength and
Consistency of his former State, yet to a greater Watchfulness over all his
Actions, and I am persuaded, to a much further Advancement in his spiritual and
everlasting Affairs.

About four Months since, he was surprised with an unusual Swelling in the
Neck, which at first was not apprehended to be of much Consequence; but the
extraordinary Concern of his most Affectionate Lady, would not permit her to
entertain the like Thoughts; she was restless between Love and Care, and her
Breast was filled with melancholy and aloding Fears; the longer it continued,
the more confirmed she was, that there was still some lurking Malignity in it,
not yet discovered; and the Event showed, that she was not mistaken; for after
most acute and lingering Pains, through the pungency of the Humor enclosed, and
the Causticks that were applied, (all which he underwent with wonderful
Patience and Resignation, never murmuring or repining, but often lifting up his
Hands and Eyes in silent Prayer) it came at last to a cancerous Ulcer, through
which the whole substance of his Body was drein'd, notwithstanding all the
Assistance of able Physicians, all the Skill and Accuracy of Expert Surgeons.
But though he gradually decayed, and was by many given over, yet still no
possible means were left unattempted (through the unwearied Industry and
Solicitude, the wise, the tender, and the honorable Care of his afflicted and
sorrowful Lady) either for his present Ease and Support, or for his future
Recovery; nothing was left unattempted, till the Evening before he died; and
then, having a clear Prospect of his approaching End, he told those about him,
that he would take nothing more, took his last Farewell of his Dear Wife, prayed
God to bless her, and composed himself for another Life; and the next day,
being Sunday, between four and five in the Afternoon, without any Convulsions,
or any Pangs of Death, he calmly resigned his Breath, and fell asleep in the
Lord. And this he did in the midst of the Commendatory Prayers and Ejaculations
of those who were about him, joining with his own Minister then present, who,
notwithstanding his unsought-for Avocation, had the Opportunity of attending
his noble and beloved Patron, the last six Weeks of his Illness; passionately
interceding for the acceptance of his Faith and Repentance, through the alone
Merits of Christ our Savior; and at the Point of his Departure, humbly
presenting his Spirit unto God.

III. And now lastly, what remains, but to comfort one another, that through
the Mercies and Forgivenesses of our most Gracious God (who delights to
magnify himself in the Salvation of Mankind) our Noble Friend, and Dearest
Brother, is now in the Possession of that State of Happiness, which the Souls
of humble Penitents receive after this Life; that He is now joining in the
Hallilujahs of that Church, which is seated above all the Storms and Confusions
of this World; where Truth and Holiness have no Disguises, and where Religion
raises no Contentions, but those of Praise and Love. There let us leave his
Soul at rest, and commit his Body to the Earth, till the Resurrection of the
Just; and in the mean time, whilst we have Health and Opportunity, let Us also
endeavor to be eminent in Integrity, Righteousness, and Fidelity, in speaking
of the Truth, and in doing good; let us maintain the same Loyalty that he
practiced, pay our constant Attendance on the same public Worship that he
frequented, and die in the same Faith, in which he died: Then we also shall one
day rest with him upon the same Spiritual Sion, the holy Mount of God.

Which God of his infinite Mercy grant, through the alone Merits of Christ
Jesus. Amen.

FINIS.
THere are Five Sermons and Two Discourses by the same Author, printed for
William Crook.


