A MAP OF THE Whole World: OR THE ORB Terrestrial, in Four Parts, (VIZ.) ASIA,
EVROPE, AFRICA, AMERICA. Containing all the known and most Remarkable Capes,
Ports, Bays and Isles, Rocks, Rivers, Towns and Cities; together with their
Situation, Commodities, History, Customs, Government; And a new and exact
Geography, especially their Longitudes and Latitudes, in Alphabetical Order,
and fitted to all Capacities. A Work, as well Useful as Delightful, for all
Scholars, Merchants, Mariners, and all such as desire to know Foreign Parts.

Dii laboribus omnia vendunt. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Jenner, and are to be
sold at his Shop, at the Entrance of the Exchange next Broadstreet, 1668.

TO THE READER.
Our Fathers remember one man that drew the whole body of the Heavens in a
short Plate, which he presented to the Emperor of Germany; And another that
Comprehended the Ten Commandments, the Creed, and the Lords Prayer in one
single Penny, which he bestowed upon Queen Elizabeth. We their Posterity, have
here, all that the Industrious Collection of Strabo, Pliny, and the Judicious
Observations of Pomponius Mela, the choice Rarities of the Nubian Geography,
the deep and long Reaches of the Admired ((...)) Three men esteemed Miracles of
Nature among the Ancients, Plato (...). Aristotiles (...). and Ptol. (...).
Ptolomy: the great Industry of Gerard Mercator; the often translated
Cosmography of Sebastian Munster; the worn-out German M. S. of Goldman; the
stately pieces of Bleau, and Johnston; the comprehensive Description of Lucas
de Linda: the (...) of Ralph Volaterran; the Great World of Great Ortelius and
Maginus; besides the Corographies of each Country, Pausanias of Greece.
as Guicciardane of the Low Countries, Leanders of Italy, Cambden of England;
The travels of the Experienced, as Sandys, Blunt, L' Blance, the Holstein
Ambassadors; all these sum'd up in 24 sheets, above an 100l worth of Learning
for 18d, and many ages knowledge of the whole world for a few hours study: It Is
strange though true, to consider that the Gentleman's curiosity can pitch upon
no Place, Custom, History of any part, or all the World, but here he has
satisfaction; the Traveller desires to know no Country, either for his
Instruction in new Observation, or Recollection of his old ones, but here it is
fully described: The Seaman sees here in one day, all Creeks, Sands, Ports,
Channels, with the Longitude and Latitude of each place: The Merchant, all
Commodities Imported and Exported into each Country, with the Marts for them;
the time and place of trade for each of them; the Novilant has the situation
of each place of action he hears of; the Scholar all the Governments, Laws,
Alterations, Inclinations, Inhabitants, Cities, Laws and Customs of each
Country. Cato used to ask upon the proposal of any business to be done, cui
bono, to what end is this? And if thou ask, cui fini, to what purpose is the
writing of this Book? We answer, 1. It is to prepare the younger sort with an
exact introduction to larger Geographies. 2. It Is to accommodate the more
knowing with an exact account in the brief of their larger reading to help
their memory. 3. It Is to render History more pleasant; for as the story makes
the place more remarkable, so the particular knowledge of the place makes the
story more pleasant. Ammian Marcellinus has deserved well of the Commonwealth
of learning, by premising the Geography and Description of each part of the
World, before he attempted the History of the whole. 4. It Is to render the
Scripture in many places mentioned in it (out of Chytraeus, his Itinerarium S.
Script. and Adricomius his Terra Sancta) more intelligible. 5. It Is to furnish
Physicians with the necessary knowledge of the temper of men's bodies in every
Clime; the nature and growth of simples, and medicinal drugs in each Country;
to acquaint Lawyers with the Laws of Nations, and Divines with the Religions of
the World: To hint to Statesmen the Genius of all people; together with the
Limits and Bounds the Weakness and Strength, Advantages and Disadvantages of
all States and Kingdoms. And Lastly, to entertain any Gentleman without any
charge or pain, with the particular draughts of Kingdoms, Provinces, Cities,
Towns, Castles, Continents, Islands Peninsulaes, Istmus's, Promontories, Climes,
Horizons, Meridians, Zones (all done beyond Clavius, Sacro Bosco, by Mr Hues
his Book of the use of the Globes) Streights or Fretes, Creekes or Bays,
Lakes, Rivers, with their Rise, Course, Channels, Harbors, Influxes, (done
exactly by Aurigarius in his Speculum Nauticum, Sr Tho. Reeves his Historia
Navalis, Pet. de Medina, and Nonnius his Regulae Artis Navigandi.) Cities and
Towns (which may serve instead of Bruinus his Theatrum Urbium, or Stephanus
(...)) Revenues, Strength, Discipline out of Boterus, etc. and that too in as
complete a way, as if he had traveled over either all the Books, or all the
Countries of the World; whereof this little Book contains as handsome
particulars, administering to Discourse upon all occasions, as any ingenious
person that keeps Company can wish.

As little as this Book is, it is not so Brief as to be Obscure, only there
being no place for an idle word or letter in so exact a Piece, we have
expressed such known words, as East, West, North and South, Latitude and
Longitude, etc. with the first letters of them, and divided each Country into
its Province, assigning to each Province its Towns, etc. (without any
circumlocution, -- Ornari res ipsa negat, contenta doceri) with the Bounds,
Situation, Length, Breadth, and Estate of each place of Note in the World,
whereby a man easily learneth how each place stands its self, and with
relations to all others; what its Original is, if now in being, and what its
former condition was, if now desolate: And all this with that exactness ((...),
Arist.) the subject matter is capable of.

A MAP OF THE Whole World: Or, the Orb Terrestrial, in Four Parts, (viz.) Asia,
Europe, Africa, and America.
ASIA.
ASIA, Called so from Asi, a middle, because in the middle between Europe and
Africa, Boch.
In Scripture, called Semia, from Sem, bounded on the West with the
Mediterranian, Aegean, the Helespont, Propontis, Thracian, Bospherus, and the
Euxine Sea toward Europe; On the South with the Carpathian Sea, and the
Southern Ocean toward Africa; On the East with the Indian Sea, and
Maredel-zur toward America; On the North with the main Scythick Ocean; all
Sea-bound, except a narrow Istmus, in the South-west toward Africa. Its
Situation.
Situated E. and W. from 52 to the 169 degree of Longitude, N. S. to the 82
degree of Latitude to the Equator, longest day, except in Northern parts, 12
hours, length 5200, breadth 4560 miles, famous for being the Scene of the
Creation, Redemption, and first Monarchs of the World.

Here Is Mount Taurus from Lycia to the Indian shore, 6240 long, and 357 broad,
memorable for three difficult passages, first, Pylae Ciliciae; secondly,
Caucatiae; thirdly, Portae Caspiae. 2. Imaus crossing Taurus 36 Monarchies,
those Mountains of power; 1 the Turkish, 2 the Persian, 3 the Cham of Tartary,
4 the Chinois, 5 the King of Barma, 6 the Great Mogor: and 4 Religions,
Christianity improved much lately by Trade, Judaisme, Paganism, and
Mahumetanisme.

I. Asia minor, a Peninsula, between 51 and 72 degrees of longitude, 36 and 45
of Latitude, 630 miles long from the Helespont, to Euphrates, and 260 broad
from Sinus Issicus to Trapezond; healthful and fruitful between the middle
parallel of the 4h clime, and the middle parallel of the 6th, as good for
Horses, according to the Turkish Proverb, as Europe is for horsemen. Here Is 1.
Pontus, where are 1 the mid-land towns, Claudiopolis, Flaviopolis, Juliopolis,
called so from the Roman Emperors that built them. 2. the Sea-towns, as 1
Heraclea Ponti, the seat and residence of an Emperor formerly, and now a place
of good Trade. 2 Diospolis on the Euxine Sea. 3 Amastris. 4 Sinope on a
Promontory shooting into the Main. 5 Castamona. 6 Favagoria. 7 Amasia, where
the Grandsigniour's Eldest Son is kept always as soon as circumcised till his
Fathers death. 8 Diopolis, where Mithredates escaped Lucullus, by strewing
treasure in his way. 9 Polemonium. 10 Hermanassa. 11 Or Neocaesaria.
Nixana. 12 Sebastia; hereabouts were the warlike Amazons, that had no Whence
called Amazons, from (...).
Males among them; going to their Neighbor Nations once in three years for
copulation, and if they brought forth Males, they sent them to their Fathers,
if Females they kept them. 13 Cerasus, whence Cherries were brought to Rome A.
V. C. 680. 14 Ischopolis. 15. Trapezond on the Euxine Sea, a famous Empory for
Salt-fish, an adjoining Mountain affording a black stone, that when beaten
serves for salt; and for being the station of the Turkish Galleys, that are to
clear the black Sea.

II. Fruitful Bythinia, Eastward of Pontus, Westward and Northward the Euxine
Sea, and Phrygiaminor, whererein 1 Scutori well Garrisoned, and Orcharded with
Maiden tower over against the Haven of Constantinople. 2 Nicomedia much
frequented for its fresh springs, and pleasant plains. 3 Prusa or Brussa, the
Turk's Imperial Seat before Adrianople, and now their Sepulture large and
wealthy. 4 Poor Caleedon, where Constantine intended to build his Seat, but
that Eagles carried the workmens lines to Bizantium, and where was the 4th
General Council, consisting of 530 Bishops against Nestorius. 5 Nice, now
Neichia, or Isnichs, famous for two Councils held therein; one famous A. 314 by
Constantine, the other by Where Images were decreed to be worshipped, because it
was written, Let us make man after our own Image. (...).
Errene.

III. Galatia, or Chaunger, E. Cappadocia. N. Paphlagonia, S. Lycaonia famous
for fruits and stones, especially the Amethyst, that keeps men from being drunk
as long as they wear it; where people used to cast letters with the deceased
into the fire, to be read in another world. Here 1 Ancyra famous for an old
Synod, A. 299 and good Chamlets on the banks of Surgarius. 2 Olenus. 3
Agrinana. 4 Tavium. 5 Androsin. 6 Phaborena. 7 Thorma. 8 Talach Bachora.

IV. Paphlagonia now called Rom, E. River Haly, and Cappadocia. N. Pontus,
where there are such poor places, as Gangra where Concilium Ganyrense 339. 2
Conrula. 3 Pempeiopolis. 4 Germanopolis. 5 Nouna. 6 Andrapa.

V. Phrygia the less E. Mysia. W. Hellespont. N. S. Propontis and the Aegean
Sea: Here is, 1 the Ruins of Troy: 2 With its Port Sigaeum, and 3 the Sea town
Lyrnessus, and Assus, Acts 20.13. where dead bodies are consumed in 40 days,
and 4 strong Scamandria.

VI. Mysia E. W. Phrygia the greater and less N. S. Bythinia Hellespont, Lydia
and the Aegean, where besides the Mountain Olympus, and the Rivers Caicus, and
2 Granicus: 1 Pergamus on a goodly plain by the banks of Caicus, famous for, 1
a great Library, containing 20000 Volumes, whence Parchment called Pergamenum.
2 Tapestry. 3 Galens birthplace, who attained to 140 years of age, 1 By never
eating or drinking his fill. 2 Nor any thing raw. 3 And by perfumes he carried
about him. 4 And one of the 7 Churches in the Revelations. 2 Alydda. 3
Trojanopolis. 4 Praepemissus. 5 Protoselene. 6 Addramittium, Acts 27. 7 Dainta.
8 Scepsis vetus on the Aegean Sea. 9 Parium, and its Marble. 10 Priapus, the
filthy Gods Lampsachus. 11 Cyzicus Famous for a Temple, whose Pillars were 4
Cubits thick, and 50 Cubits high.
strong and beautiful in the Propontis:

Arce, Maenibus, portu, turribusque marmoreis illustris. The stones of whose
ruins, by an Earthquake are carried daily to Constantinople. 12 Abydos on the
Northwest of the Hellespont, over against Sestos, fortified with two Castles
which defend Constantinople on that side from all force by Sea.

VII. Phrygia the greater, or Aidin-Ills, W. Mysia N. S. Pontus and Lydia E.
Galatia; the Inhabitants famous for afterwit, whence sero sapiunt Phryges: and
their Aristotle says, there are 3 sorts. 1 (...) Grave of Spondees. 2 (...)
active of dactyles. 3 (...). The husbandmans plow and oxen, tied in a knot.
Enthusiastic and fantastic music, which (according to Tullies Mutata Musica
mutantur mons) had a great influence upon their manners. And the Country
fruitful by the Rivers. 1 Sangarius. 2 Marsias. The town 1 Mydeum from Mydas,
who because he desired all should be turned to gold he touched, starved because
his meat was so, 2 Colloss. vid. Epist. ad Col. 3 Pesinus. 4 Gordion, where the
knot which Alexander cut with his sword was.

VIII. Armenia surrounded with Taurus, Mons Scordiscus, and Euphrates, and the
black River Melas; with Arabyssus, where Chrysostom was banished by Eudoxia.
Melitone, now Suur, famous for Wines and Oils. 3 Strong Gornuc^, Nicopolis, and
Oromundus.

IX. Cappadocia, now called Amasia, E. S. both Armeniaes and Lycaonia, N. W.
Galatia and the Sea; rich in wines fruits, mines of Silver, Iron, Brass,
Alum, besides Alabaster, Crystal, Jasper, and the Onyx stone, and horses; the
people wicked, whence tria (...).
Cappa cacista, and venomous poisoning their very Serpents.

The Towns, 1 Nyssa, whence Gr. Nyssenus. 2 Nazianzum, whence G. Naz. 3 Mazaca,
St. Basils See. 4 Tyana. 5. Archelais. 6 Comana. 7 Diocaesarea. 8
Faustinopolis. 9 Andraca. 10 Salambria. 11 Erxirum the Rendezvous of the Turks
in their expeditions against the Persians. 12 Pterium on the River Iris,
yielding yearly to the Turk and his Beglerbey of Anatolia 60000 Ducats.

X. Asia, properly so called, now Sarchan or Proconsula; Asia E. N. Lydia and
Mysia S. W. Caria and the Aegean; where 1 Pitane on a River of that name, where
they made bricks to swim. 2 Acarnea, where the Tyrant Hermias was baited in
Oxes hide. 3 Elea, on the mouth of Caicus, Port to Pergamus. 4 Cene, or Canna.
5 Cuma, where Sybilla Cumaea. 6 Phocaea, called so from the Sea-calves, there
called Phocae. 7 Myas The place given by Artonerxes to Themistocles, when he
fled from Athens; at which the Emperor was so overjoyed, that he would cry in
his sleep.
destroyed by Flies. 8 Erythra, whence Sybilla Erithaea. 9 Lebedos. 10
Clazomone of much esteem for good wines. 11 Prieno. 12 Ipsus. 13 Teos Anacreons
birthplace. 14 Smyrna, a fair City on a Bay of the name, hanging over the Sea
hill-wayes. One of the 7 Churches in the Revelations, and much traded to for
Chamlets, Grograins, and such Stuffs, made at Ancyra, besides wines; here the
English have a Consul. 15 Colophon, which put an end to any war that they were
engaged in, whence the phrase Colophonem addere:

Septem Vrbes certant de stirpe insignis homeri,
Smyrna, Rhodos, Colophon, Salamis, Chios, Argos Athenae.
16 Ephesus, metropolis of Asia, one of the seven Churches, and memorable for
Diana's Temple, 425 foot long, 220 broad, supported with 127 Marble Pillars 70
foot high. 200 years in building; 7 times fired, the last time by Herostratus,
the night Alexander was born, Diana the Goddess of Mid-wifery being at his
labor.

XI. Curia, N. E. Lycia, Lydia, and Ionia S. W. the Aegean and Carpathian Sea,
where Auguty was first invented, and Astronomy By the same token that Endymion
the Astronomer here is feigned the Moons sweet heart, she kissed in his sleep.
: Here besides the River Salmacis, that weakens those that drink it, is the
City Miletus, Acts 20.10. Thales birthplace, Iren. l. 3. c. 14. 2 Mindus, that
was in danger of running out of the Gates. 3 Heraclea ad latmum. 4 Borgillia. 5
Milasa. 6 Primassus, which Philip of Macedon took with a counterfeit mine. 7
Cnidus, famous for a Marble Image of Venus. 8 Cressa. 9 Halicarnassus where
Mausolus his tomb, one of the seven wonders of the World, built by his Wife,
was Mart. Epig. 1.1.

XII. Lydia S. E. Phrygia M. and Coria N. W. Asia proprie dicta, and the
greater Mysia; the first Inventors of Coining, Pedling, Huckstering and Gaming
were these people, who found out gaming to divert their hunger. The Hills, 1
Siphylus. 2 Tinolus covered with Vines and Saffron, on the Rivers, 1 Hermus. 2
Caystrus. 3 Pactolus and its golden sands. 4 Crooked Maeander, and enriched
with Gold, Silver and Gems; the Cities, 1 Sardis, the taking of which by the
Graecians so startled Xerxes, that he caused it to be said every day at his
Table, (as it was every year in the Parliament of Paris about Calice) the
Graecians have taken Sardis. 2 Philadelphia. 3 Thyatira. 4 Laodiceia. 5 Of the
Asian Churches. 6 The 2 Maynesia's. 7 Alabanda, and 7 To the Inhabitants,
whereof Ignatius writ his Epistle ad Trallenses.
Trall is on the Banks of Caistrus.

XIII. Lycia, environed on three sides, with the Mountain Taurus (and shut in
on the 4th with the Mediterranian) famous for that branch of Taurus, here
called Chymaera; and 1 the City Mira, Acts 27.5. 2 Telmesus, and its
Southsayers. 3 Pratius and its fair haven. 4 Phaselis with its Pirates, and
Brigantines. 5 Cragus, under a Mountain of the name. 6 Aenonda. 7 Corydilla. 8
Rhodia. 9 Solyma; all these now a Part of the Kingdom of Caramania.

XIV. Lycaonia S. E. Armenia minor, and Pisidia N. W. Cappadocia, and Phrygia
major; where is, 1 Iconium, now Coynri, situated advantagiously in the
Mountains for defense and safety. 2 Lystra, Acts 14.19, 20. 3 Derbe. 4 Laranda.
5 Adopistus. 6 Paralais. 7 Camara, and 8 Caratha.

XV. Pasidia N. Lycaonia, E. Armenia the less, W. Lycia, S. Pamphilia and
Cilicia; where is 1 old Antioch, Acts 4. 2 Impenetrable Seleucia, and
Termessus. 3 Fruitful and pleasant Sagalassa, Selge, Cremna, and Lysinia.

XVI. Isauria E. S. Cilicia on both sides Taurus, plentiful in Vines and other
rich products, about the River Calecadnus, where besides the ruined Isauria, is
the rich and well-traded Seleucia, and Claudipolis.

XVII. Cilicia S. Mediterranian and Syria, rich in Soil, and conveniently
situated on the Seacoast for Trade; but meanly Here are the Squilachi, a mixed
creature between a Dog and a Cat, that steal peoples clothes.
inhabited, and therefore yielding only Goats, Sheep, Butter and Cheese, with
good Horses, where 600 are yearly called for the Grand-Seigniours Service,
where (besides the Rivers thundering Pyramid now Malmistra. 2 Orymasdus. 3
Calycadnus. 4 Cold Cidnus, that cures the Gout; and the impassable Streights,
called Pylae Ciliciae) are the Cities, 1 Solae, where Pompey settled the Pirates
in an honest way of livelihood. 2 Tarsus, now Tersia and Hamsa, St. Paul's
birthplace on the banks of Cydnus to this day strong and wealth. 3 Epiphania.
4 Mopsuestia. 5 Anchiala on the Sea side near the Promontory Zephyrium. 6
unwalled, but well By the Castle adjoining.
defended Adena, well known to the Travelers over Who take in here 3 days
provision. Especially to those that have not been used to it.
Taurus, for its plentiful provision of Wine and Corn. 7 Famous Issus, now
Aiazzo on the Bay called Golfo di Aaiazzo. 8 Unwholesom, Fenny, but
commodiously seated, and traded Alexandria, now a few houses of straw and mud;
the nearest Haven to the Bay of Aleppo, and called Scanderoon. 9 Nicopolis. 10
Amavarza. 11 Fair and large Heraclea. 12 Scandelow.

XVIII. The Isles of Asia minor, from the mouth of the Hellespont to Rhodes;
among which, 1 Penedos Tenedia securis hatched, carried at the Judges back, to
mind them of justice.
over against Sigeum, now Cape Janizarie, 10 miles round producing good Wine
and Crab-fish, with a Town of the name;

Nunc tantum sinus and statio malesida Carinis. 2 Lesbos 168 miles round S. W.
Barren. N. E. Level and fruitful, with excellent Corn, and delicious Wine,
where is Lesbos. 2 Methymna. 3 Mytelene, Seated on a Peninsula, a commodious
Haven on the North-side for Galleys, S. for other ships, well fortified by Art
and Nature, with a strong Castle, and a well stored Arsenal. 4 Vasilica. 5
Theodori. 6 Castle-Gera. 3 Chios, over against the shore of Jonia 126 miles
compass, the only place for Mastick, a gum cut out of the bark of the Lentisne
tree in July and August, and gathered in September, yielding 18000 Sultanies
yearly; besides, good for Corn, Oil, Marble, some Silks, and Cotton wool,
short of those in Smyrna; Honey, and most delicious wines, with an infinite
store of red tame Partridges; the inhabitants merry Greeks, and grave Genoese:
the most eminent places here, 1 Pigrine. 2 St. Elias. 3 Chios now Sio, full of
Oranges, Lemons, Pomegranates, Citrons, on a good Haven, secured by a Garrison,
So watchful, that there goes a word round the Castle every minute.
and watch-towers on the shore, and directed to by a Lantern. 4 Samos S. E.
Chios, 85 miles about, abounding with Oil, and Olives, with a medicinal earth,
called terra samia; store of timber, on a fair and capacious Haven, much
infested with Pirates. 5 Iscaria, now Niceria. W. Samos 37 miles round,
neighboured by two dangerous rocks, abounding with Pasture and Corn: no Haven,
but good Roads:

Icarus Icariis nomina fecit aquis. 6 Palmos. The inhabitants point the Cave
where the Revelation was writ, showing St. John's hand, the nails whereof grow
again as fast as cut.
now Palmosa, fruitful in Wheat and Pulse, with a fair Haven. 7 Claros and
Lexo, where abundance of Aloes and good harbors. 8 Coos, Cos, or Cous, a level
in that part of the Aegean, called the Myrtcan-Sea, now Lange, famous for
Tiffanies, Vinum Cos, Cypres-trees, Turpentine, and its sweet springs, 70 mile
circuit; famous for Aesculapius his Temple, and Hippocrates his Birth.
Carpathres S. Caria in the Mediterranian 60 miles compass, happy in its Marble
and Ports, especially near Scarpanto. 9 Rhodes over against Lycia 140 miles
round, of a most temperate air, and most fruitful and pleasant soil, the Sun
every day shining upon it; where is Lindum now Lindo a petty town; Rhodes on
the East of the Isle, on the side of a hill near the Sea, with a safe and
commodious Haven treble walled, This, and Famagusta in Cyprus, being the
strongest places belonging to the Turk.
fortified with 13 Turrets, and 5 strong Bull-works, besides sconces and
outworks; Here was the Colosse 7 Cubits high, each finger as big as a man, 12
years in building, and one of the 7 Wonders, whence it was called Colossa.

XIX. Cyprus 550 miles round on the Cilician and Syrian Seas, from each main
Land above 60 miles, having 10 Promontories, and having had 10 names, as famous
for Cypresses as Rhodes is for Roses, under the 4th Climate, hot, abounding
with Wine, Oil, Corn, Sugar, Cotton, Honey, Wool, Turpentine, Allom,
Verdegreese, all sorts of Metals, store of Salt, Grograins; besides Lycus and
Lapithes small Torrents, and some springs running from Olympus, Called now the
Mountain of the Holy Cross.
which is here 54 Italian miles round, loaded with Trees and Fruits of all
sorts, where is ruined Paphos, now called new Paphos and Baffo, on the Sea
side. 2 Arfino. 3 Trepano, a well seated, and traded port. 4 Connelia rich in
Sugar, and Cotton-Wool. 5 Cithera. 6 Amathus. 7 Episcopio a considerable place
near the Promontory Curias. 8 Salines and its rich Salt Pits. 9 Strong Nicosia,
in the midst of the Isle, both pleasantly and fruitfully situated, and exactly
round. 10 Wholesome Cerines near the Sea; 1 Famagusta raised out of the Ruins
of Salamis in the E. end of the Island in a plain and low ground, between two
Promontories, Cape St. Andrew, and Capo de Griego 4 square, 2 miles about, with
a haven (opposite to Tripolis in Syria) opening toward the South-East,
defended from the injury of the Sea by two great Rocks, betwixt which the Sea
comes in at a narrow passage, not above 40 paces broad, but after opening
wider and wider, to a convenience of safety and capacity assured both by the
difficult Entrance, and a Chain crossed over it. 12 Arsinoe, now called
Lescare. 13 Tamassus, eminent for brass mines, and a great quantity of
Verdegreese, and Vitriol found near it. 14 Idalium, the yearly custom upon
Salt is here 500000 Crowns.

XX. Syria, W. Mediterranean, S. Palestine and Arabia E. Euphrates, N. Cilicia,
and the lesser Armenia; 525 miles long from Taurus to Arabia. 470 miles broad
from the Mediterranean to Euphrates, the language Arabic, the religion
Christian, Mahumetan, Pagan, or a mixture of all professed by the Drusians: the
prime Rivers, 1 Chorsaeus or Chison. 2 Orontes now Saldino. 3 Eleutherus now
called Casmar. 4 Singos. 5 Euphrates: the Mountains, 1 Carmel. 2 Piena. 3
Casius, four miles high. 4 Libanus, famous for Cedars, Frankincense and Honey
falling on the boughs of the trees; 150 miles long from Sidon in Phaenicia, to
Smyrna in Caelosyria, inhabited by Maronite Christians, that pay the
Grand-Seignior 17 Sultanies a man when above 12 years of age.

1. In Phaenicia, a maritine part of Syria of great traffic, formerly was 1
the famous port Ptolemais razed to the ground, 1291. 2 And the ancient Mart of
Tire. 3 Sarepta or Sarphath on the Seacoast, between Tire and Sidon, and its
good wines. 4 Sidon, in a rich valley between Libanus Northward, and
Antilibanus Southward; the inhabitants whereof, the first makers of Crystal
Glass, Zech. 9.2. the matter thereof flowing thither from the adjoining Rivers,
with an haven for Galleys, and a Block-house. 5 Bunitus. 6 Biblis. 7 Orthosia
lately Tortosa. 8 Tripolis, eminent for Amaza Franki, Kell-franhe, and other
fruits, and two miles from the Sea, and half a mile from the haven on the
west side of it; rich in Gardens, Springs, and Silkworms, whose Silks they
sell raw to the Italians, and much increased by the trade of Scanderoon, and
well fortified.

2. In Syria, properly so called, S. Phaenicia; rich in 1 Fruits, especially
Figs, hanging about the high ways. 2 Sheep with great tails, weighing 25 pound
and upwards; and 3 great store of Cotton-wool: is 1 Rugia. 2 Hierapolis. 3
Barbarssus. 4 Chalcis. 5 Telnedissa. 6 Laodicea and its good wines. 7 Apamea. 8
Emesa or Hamse in a spacious and fruitful plain, and well watered. 9 Epiphania.
10 Laris. 11 Gebal, Ps. 83, now Gabella. 12 Aradus. 13 Daphne. 14 Antioch
seated on both sides the River Orontis, twelve miles from the Mediterranean,
the River Parsar passing on the South Side of it, now ruined. 15 Alburia.

3. In Comagena E. Euphrates and Mesopotamia, W. Amamus and Cilicia. N. Taurus
and Armenia the less, a place famous for Divination, was Samosata. 2 Germanica.
3 Singa. 4 Pinora. 5 Aleppo, the Aleph or first of Syria, on the bank of
Singas, kept up, because commodiously situated for the trade of the whole
world between three ports of Tripolis, Berytus, and Alexandretta in Turkey,
besides the Persian Territories, where the English Merchants have three houses
for stowage, and a coul; the building low, and arched before their doors, and
the site pleasant among Gardens, and secure rather than strong. 6 Aman between
Tripoli and Aleppo, pleasantly seated on two Hills, and environed with Orchards
of Palm trees, and very good fruits. 7 Byrrah and those places, Esr. 37.13. 2
Kings 18.34.

4. In Palmyrene, N. Comagena wholesome for hot Springs, but not well Rivered,
is 1 Palmyra, see 1 Chronicles. 8.4. 2 Sura. 3 Alamath.

5. In Caelosyria the Syria so much spoken of in the Books of Kings and
Chronicles, is, 1 Heliopolis, now Balbec. 2 Chalcis, west of Damascus in the
shades of Libanus. 3 Abila. 4 Adida. 5 Capitolias, now Suente. 6 Damascus
situate in a large plain, environed with hills, and watered with the River
Chrysorrous, watering the Orchards and Gardens, whence we have excellent wines;
the luscious Damascenes, the sweet Damask Roses, and the curious Damask works.

7. Eden, at the foot of Libanus.

XXI. From Caelosyria, over Hermon we go to Palestine, W. Mediterranean, N.
Antilibanus, S. Arabia Petrea; under the third and fourth clime, 200 miles
long, and 80 broad, where are first Rivers, 1 Chison. 2 Kidron. 3 Zared and
Naphthea. 4 Arnon. 5 Jaboc. 6 Hermon. 7 Jordan, surrounded with Poplars,
Tamarishes and Reeds of all sorts, and passing through the Lake of Tiberias
without mixture with it into the Mediterranean, and the dead Sea. Secondly,
Hills, Sion. 2 Moriah. 3 Calvari. 4 Tabor. 5 Olivet. 6 Gerizim. 7 Savon, now
Capo Bianco with its Rosemary, Sweet Mayjorum, Hyssop, Bays, and other
odoriferous plants, besides Leopards, etc. 8 Gilboa. 9 Basan. 10 And Abarim.

1. In Peraea, a Part of Palestine between Jordan and Arnon, from Pella N. to
Petra S. was 1 Recome, 2 Kings 14.7. 2 Midian. 3 Rabbat. 4 Diblathan. 5 Gallim.
6 Muthana. 7 Nathaliel. 8 Bamath. 9 Mizpah. 10 Hor. 11 Kir-harasath. 12 Rabbah.
13 Dathema. 14 Minneth, 15 Abel vinearum. 16 Mitspa. 17 Magod. 18 Bosor. 19
Abel shittim. 20 Bethbara. 21 Machaerus. 22 Leshaa 23 Midibuh. 24 Bosor. 25
Livias. 26 Libias. 27 Hedemath. 28 Bamath Baal. 29 Heshbon. 30. Adam. 31.
Aroer. 32 Dihon. 33 Bethnimrah. 34. Nolioroh. 35 Bethharan. 36 Beth-ezob. 37.
Succoth. 38 Jazor. 39 Mahanaim. 40 Rogelim. 41 Ramoth Gilead. 42 Penuel.

2. In Ituraea another Province, ragged, rude, and given to witchcraft; 1
Hippus. 2 Bathira. 3 Pella, 4 Edrey. 5 Carnaim. 6 Ephron. 7 Jabesh Gilead. 8
Ashteroth. 9 Gaulon. 10 Gamala. 11 Gadara. 12 Gergesa. 13 Juleus. 14 Abel. 15
Gessur. 16 Mahacath. 17 Chauran. 18 Chalsar Havan. 19 Us. 20 Sueta.

3. In Galilee, rich with all manner of fruit, was 1 Hazor, now Antronia. 2
Capernaum, a poor fisher-town. 3 Hamath. 4 Kadesh. 5 Riblah. 6 Saphet, the
only place where the Jews have the face of a Commonwealth. 7 Bethsomes,
Carthan, Masoloth and Cinereth. 8 Ascheche, Gabula, Giscala, Cana, Messal
pleasantly seated, and of great importance. 9 Jokneham, Zabulon, Cana-major,
Barsabe, Dothan, Bethsaida, Nazareth, Jotopata, Tiberis, Bethulia, Japha,
Sephoris. 10 Ta^ihaea, Chishion, Remelh, Enhaddae, Naim, Aphraim, Daborath the
Castle of Pilgrims, now Tortora.

4. In Samaria, rich in Pastures, Cattle, and fruits, is Bethsan, on the banks
of Jordan, out of whose ruins many pillars, and other pieces of marble are
drawn out. 2 Thirza. 3 Acrabula. 4 Thebes. 5 Ephra. 6 Bezeke. 7 Jezreel. 8
Megiddo. 9 Dora. 10 Caesarea. 11 Antipatris. 12 Saron, and Lidda, or Diospolis,
Ramatha, Ajalon, Shempath, Cares, Silo, Bethoron, Michmas, now Byra, Sichem
since Nicopolis, Samaria, famous for the marble pillars found there, now
nothing but a few Cottages, filled with greek monks.

5. In Judea, on the Sea coasts from the South of Phaenicia, to the North of
Idumaea, is 1 Gath and its New Castle. 2 Wealthy and strong Accaron. 3 The fair
village of Ashdod. 4 The goodly Sea-town, Ascalon, repaired by Rich. I. King of
England. 5 Wealthy Gaza, surrounded with its rich and pleasant valleys, and its
Port Majoma. 6 Joppa, Joffa with two Turrets with Harquebusses to defend the
haven, which lies too open to the North-winds, whither Merchants trade for
Cotton-wool, keeping their Factory at Rama on a sandy plain, in the rising of
an hill. 7 Modin, where the Macchabees Sepulcher of seven Pillars, so that they
are the Seamans marks. 7 Tzara. 9 Healthful Gerar in the south of Canaan. 10
Ziglag. 11 Coreath Sepher since ^aema an old University. 12 The well fortified
frontire-town Beersheba; besides those Cities of the Tribe of Judah: 1 Arad. 2
Hebron. 3 Tecoa. 4 Cerioth. 5 Jether or Jethica. 6 Maresa. 9 Emaus, and its hot
baths. 8 Hason, Odalla, Keila, Eleutheropolis, Azeha, Bethsur, Zoar, Mussuda,
the strongest place in Judaea, Libna, Ziph, Bethlem, places renowned for
Balsom, and those of the Tribe of Benjamin; as 1 Michmas. 2 Mispah. 3 Geba. 4
Gibeah. Ai. 6 Gibeon. 7 Jericho. Anathoth. Gilgal. 10 Bethel; Ramath. 11
Jerusalem, to whose ruins many repair out of devotion, more out of curiosity,
paying the Turk nine Crowns a man, amounting yearly to 80000 Ducats, only low
roofed houses built here and there for two miles compass, looking handsomely at
distance; inhabited by mean Artezans of all Nations and Religions.

6. In Idumea, E. S. Arabia Petraea, W. Mediterranean that dry and sandy place,
bearing nothing but Palm Trees, besides the two Hills, Mount Seir and Cassius
are remarkable, 1 Dinahahath, Genesis 36.32, 35, 37. 2 Anthedon, a port town on S.
River Boser against Gaza. 3 Well fortified Rhino curura. 4 Ostracine, now
Stragione on the Seaside beneath Anthedon, and some few Villages inhabited by
Arabians, and Castles kept by the Turks in the way to Egypt; as 5 Hamones,
Harista, and Cario, Custom houses near Gaza, so ill watered, that the chief
men there have all their water from Tena, twelve miles off, on the Coast of
Egypt; all these places under the Turk, though inhabited by the hated Jews in
many places, who every Easter are in danger of that death they inflicted on our
Savior, by reason of their Usury and Brocage, together with their being the
Turks Publicans, and Tax-gatherers, their Nation stinks, as much as they said
their bodies do.

XXII. From Arab, black, or Harab, a thief or wanderer, they living in Tents,
and carried by Dromodaries.
Arabia E. Chaldea, and Gulf of Persia, W. Palestine and the Red Sea, N.
Euphrates, S. Main Southern Ocean; the Language Arabic, which is the Language
of most Mahumetan Countries, the Alcoran being Writ, and most of their offices
performed in it.

1. Has in that Part called Arabia deserta, now Benoni, E. Babylonia, N.
Mesopotamia, W. Palestina, S. Arabia foelix, Jobs Country, only one remarkable
place (being nothing but Rocks and Deserts) and that is Semischusach formerly
called Saba, and some other Villages peopled by the civil Moors.

2. In the Rocky (Petrea) not traveled but in Carvans only by Merchants with
their Camels, who bring their food with them, the wandering and Idle Inhabitants
having nothing but Milk, Herbs, and Venison; Besides, 1 Mount Sinai, where
there is a mesque of Turkish Pilgrims. 2 Horeb, now Orel, where is a Monastry
of Greek Monks. 3 Hor. where is 1 Petra now Crat, near Mount Hor. the treasury
of Egypt, and the Key to Palestine. 2 Bosra, now Bassereth of good esteem. 3
Elama, on a Bay of the Red Sea, called Sinus Elanicus. 4 Berenice, or
Ezion-Geber, the harbor for the ships going to Ophir. 5 Sur and Havilah on the
Gulfs of Persia and Arabia, etc.

3. In that portion of it called Arabia the happy, now Ailman, E. of Persia, W.
Arabian Gulf, S. Ocean-abounding with Myrrh, Balsom, Frankincense, Gold and
Precious Stones, with Corn, Cattels, Wines, quiet Roads and Harbors, besides
medicinal waters, eminent for the Phaenix, and the Ostrich that digesteth Iron,
are now upon the ruins of the old places mentioned by Ptolomy.

1. Egra near Sinus Elaniticus on the Red Sea, or Algiar port-town to Medina,
three days Journey from it. 2 Where Mahomet was born.
Jatrib being between. 3 Medina Talnabi, ill and poorly seated, but rich by the
confluence of Pilgrims that flock thither to Mahomets Tomb (and Temple where
burn 3000 Lamps continually) enclosed in an Iron Grate, and covered with
Velvet, sent thither yearly by the Grand Seignior, the old Pall being cut into
Relics. 4 Cusa, the Counsel-place. 5 Mecca near Medina the great Mart of the
Commodities of Arabia, Persia and India, carried thence into all parts of the
Turkish Empire, no Christian being permitted to come within five miles of it,
it being unwalled, no water but rain: 6000 Families yearly visited with three
Carvans of Pilgrims from India, Damascus, and Grand-Cair. 6 Zeden haven town to
Mecca forty miles off, well built, and of great resort, but weak in a sand on
the Red Sea. 7 Zebel, the Metropolis of the Country, near the Red Sea,
well-traded for Sugars, Spice and Fruits. 8 Eltor, the only port Christians
may Inhabit. 9 The well-traded, well fortified, and capacious haven of Aden on
the entrance of the Red Sea, near the Streights, called Babel-Mandel. 10 Oran,
the Key of the Southern Ocean. 11 Zean, fifteen miles square. 12 Hor, a
Garrison. 13 Muskahal on the Persian Gulf near Cape Rezel Gate, opposite to
Surat in the East Indies, well fortified by the Portugeez.

4. In the Islands, 1 of the Not because of the red sand or water.
Red Sea, or the Sea of Edom, which are twelve not worth naming, they are so
small and desolate, except Dolaqua, one hundred and twenty miles long, and
twelve broad, with a City of the name, where they gather Pearls. 2 Hot Camaran.
3 Red Xomou. 2 Of the Southern Ocean from the East of Aethiopia to the Indies.
1 Tylus with Vines, Olives, and good materials for Shipping. 2 Bairen and
Gonfiar, where we have the best Pearls in the World in beds of Oysters.

XXIII. Chaldea, E. Persia, W. Arabia the desert, N. Mesopotamia, the Seat (its
thought) of Paradise, so fruitful, that it yields three hundred fold
increase; three harvests: the first place of Astronomy, Astrology, Divination
and Idolatry, had first Babel that was confounded: Secondly Babylon, formerly
one of the worlds wonder, as many furlongs round, as there are days in the
year, (viz.) 365, 50 Cubits high, and so broad, that Carts might meet upon
them; finished in one year by an 100000 workmen on both sides Euphrates, famous
for pensile Gardens; and for that the Enemy had entered one end of it, three
days before the other heard of them; in whose stead now stands Called so,
because of its Gardens.
Bagdad, a place of great wealth and traffic, about seven miles round,
maintained now by the trade of Aleppo by Water, and by Land, in Carvans by
Camels, for whose passages public spirited men have built houses of Receipts on
the Roads, called Caravane Rows, or Canes; here they correspond by Pigeons,
which they teach by carrying them with them in a Cage to coast any Country. 2
Ctesephon. 3 Sipparum, and its great Trench 4 Apamia. 5 Balsora, the port to
Babylon at the fall of Euphrates to Sinus Persicus where the riches of Arabia,
Persia, and some parts of India, are landed and carried to Babylon, and so by
water to Aleppo

XXIII. Assyria, E. Media, W. Mesopotamia. N. Turcomama, where Christianity was
planted by St. Jude, and corrupted by the Nestorians; has 1 Calach. 2 The
fruitful, well-seated, and well-shaded Sittace. 3 Arbela, near which they say
Noah built the Ark. 4 Apollonia. 5 Geguamela. 6 Rhezen, which was once
delivered up, because the Inhabitants were frighted with an Ecclips of the Son.
7 Mosul, the chief City of Assyria, raised upon the Ruins of Nineveh, whereof
there are hardly any footsteps, and the seat of the Patriarch of the
Nestorians, who call the Pope, the Reprobate Bishop. 8 Strong Arzeri and
Scheheruzal.

XXIV. In Scripture, called Padan-Aram, Syria Culta.
Mesopotamia, E. Tygris, W. Euphrates, N. Taurus, S. Chaldea, now Dearbech,
where Christianity was preached by St. Thaddeus has these remarkable places: 1
Strong Cologenbar. 2 Fair Edessa on the River Scyrtas near Euphrates. 3
Nisibis. 4 Vr. 5 Haran. 6 Amida. (a strong frontier town against the Persians)
now Caramit, or Kara Amida, i. e. black Amida. 7 Phalga and Seruts at the
meeting of Caphoras with Euphrates. 8 Singara, on a River of the name well
fortified. 9 Bezabde on the banks of Tygris; Virta and Merdix impregnable.

XXV. Between Mesopotamia and Turcomania on Mount Taurus; is, 1 Moras, with its
hot baths, and abundance of sulphur. 2 Larus Joon, between Omoal the last town
of Hircania and Damoan, the first of Media.

XXVI. Turcomania, N. Tartary, S. Mesopotamia and Assyria, W. Euxine Sea
Cappadocia, and Armenia minor, E. Media and Caspean Sea has

1 In that Port called Where the people are commonly strong and industrious.
Armenia major, equally composed of hills and dales, rich in Cattle and Fruits;
famous for rich Tapestries, Grograines and watered Chamlets, which by a
privilege under Mahomets own hand above other Christians, they sell all over
Turkey, using the Armenian Tongue, Christened by St. Bartholomew, are, first
the Rivers, 1 Aruxes, runs from Armenia to the Caspian Sea; and 2 Cyrus. 3
Cambyses. 4 Euphrates, now Frat, Insomuch, that they who go by water from
Byrrah in Mesopotamia to Bagdat, come back by land, selling their Boats, bought
at 50, for 8 Crowns at Apamia in Chaldaea.
a violent stream cut into Channels, least it should drown the Country. 5 A
swift River, affording an easy passage in a few rafts, born up with
Goat Skins, blown up with wind to Bagdat, running long under ground, in whose
and Euphrates circlings lay Eden.

2. The Mountains Abos. 2 Periardes. 3 Vdalespes. 4 Antitaurus. 5 Montes
Moschici. 6 Niphates. 7 The Gordian Mountains, or Ararat.

3. The Towns; 1 Artareta now Corin where the Battle was fought, 1514. which
the Turks call the day of Doom; the place called the Calderan fields. 2
Sebastia now Suassia, seated on Euphrates. 3 Tigrane certa on the River
Nicesorius. 4 Arcamasola. 5 Cholna. 6 Baraza. 7 Arsarata. 8 Theodosiopolis. 9
Colonia. 10 Strong Clamassum on the Euphrates. 10 Charz made impregnable in
three weeks, 1579. 11 Well garrisoned and Ammunition'd Vau, a Frontier against
the Persians. 12 Well fortified Arminig held by the Persians.

2. In Colchis famous for Vines and Gold ( E. Iberia, W. Euxine Sea, N.
Tartary, S. Armenia the greater) formerly, now the That fell their children for
meat, and invite their neighbors to enjoy their wives.
rude people Barter one Commodity for another, with a language of their own;
besides the River Phasis navigable eighteen miles into the Country, whence came
our Pheasants; was 1 the famous Mart Dioscurias, where the Romans kept 130
Interpreters to correspond with people of 300 Languages that traded there. 2
Phasis, on the same River, now Phassum, the residence of the Turkish
Beglebergh. 3 Neapolis and Alvati.

3. In Iberia, E. Albania, W. Colchis, N. Mountains Caucasus, called so from
the River Iberus running through it, now Georgia, woody and fruitful; the
people warlike, christened by Constantine the Great, and now divided between
Mahumetanism and Jesuitisme, since 1614. is 1 Cremen. 2 Cachete. 3 Triala. 4
Altuncala, or the strong Golden Castle. And the impregnable Archichelech. 6 The
large and well fortified The Key of Media and Sirvan.
Testis Lori, and Tomanis (rich in Corn, Cattle, and Fruits, with Forts
commanding all passages.) 7 Glisca and Biscapar.

4. In Albania, W. Iberia, E. Caspian Sea, naturally fruitful, affording three
reapings for once sowing, where people formerly could not tell an hundred, and
understood not weights and measures, or money, reverencing old age, but not
speaking of the dead: Gray from their Childhood, and seeing as well by night
as by day, is nothing remarkable; but the Rivers Albanus and Cyrus, and the
City Derbent near the Caspian Sea, now Demircan or It is called by Egesippus
Porta Ferrea.
Iron Gate with Sabran, and Sancta Maria, all, or most of these places under
the Turks.

XXVII. Media, (E. Parthia and Hircania, W. Arm. major, and Assyria, N. Caspian
Sea, Georgia. S. Persia, now Skeir-vun, i. e. Milky-plain, where it was a
punishment for the Vulgar men to have less then seven Wives, and Women less
then five Husbands; their bread of dried Almonds, their meat wild flesh; on the
North side plenty of Wines, Fruits, Cattle, especially horses on the South
side; they poison their Arrows with Oleum Mediacum, so that nothing can allay
the heat of the wound but a little dust, converted by St. Thomas.) has in it
besides the River Canac, between it and Armenia major, and the Lake Argis,
whose fish dried by the wind and sun raise these People a great advantage.

1. In the inhospitable Atropatria between Taurus and the Caspian Sea, whither
its thought the Jews Captived by Salmanasser, are placed 1 Bochu by the Hence
called Mare de Bochu.
Caspian Sea. 2 Strong Eres possessed by the Turks, as an inlet to this
Country. 2 By the Persians called Cyrectzbata, it may be Cyropolis.
Shamaki between Eres and Derbent, notorious for a Pillar of Flint-stones,
interwoven with the heads of Persian Noblemen set there barbarously in terrorem.

2. In Media, especially so called, eminent for generous Called Nissei.
horses, fat Cattle, good Corn and Wine, and and excellent Water; was 1 Ruined
Ecbatana as stately as Babylon, formerly out of whose rubbish, 2 Tauris was
built now Baronta under the shadow of Mount O^ontes, a hundred and fifty miles
from the Caspian Sea, opening S. toward a large and spacious Campaign, six
miles round built of brick with flat Roofs and Battlements, as in all the East;
well traded, and inhabited at least by 200000 persons, with a strong Citadel. 3
Caspin on the Ruins of Arsacia, very conveniently and pleasantly Situated on
a Riveret that serves for necessity and pleasure, but not for trade. 4 Rages.
5. Nasuana. 6 Ardoville. 7 Sultanives ruins and Mosches, environed always
with snowy Mountains. 8 The fair Market Tywan. 9 Turcoman. 10 Daman, i. e. a
second Plantation at the foot of Taurus, where the Inhabitants think Noah's Ark
rested.

XXVIII. Persia, E. India, N. Tartary, S. Sea, W. Media, under the 3d, 4th,
5th, and 6th Clime S. days thirteen hours. N. fifteen hours, healthful and
shady; the people half skillful in Physic, Poems, Astronomy, There was an
edict of Cyrus, that they should not go on foot.
Horseman-ship, Archery, Whence the Magi that came to our Savior are thought
Persians.
Magic, and among other manufactures in making Silks and Cloth of Gold; all
the Christianity there was planted by St. Thomas. Has

1. In Susiana, W. Babylonia, N. Assyria, S. Tygris, called Havilah, famous for
Gold A tree whose gum turns pearl.
Bdellium and Onyx stone, 1 Aracca and its bituminous water easily fired, and
not easily quenched. 2 The Ruins of Susa. 3. Elimais rich by Pilgrimages with
Sela on the Bank of Eulaeus, that emptieth its self into Sinus Persicus, of so
pure a stream, that the great Persian Kings would drink of no other water. 4
Jaaroone inhabited by Jews Suum and Casa.

2. In Persis, W. Susiana, N. Media, E. Carmania, now Fars, where some Dates,
Palms and Emeraulds are found; and in one part of it abundance of Roses,
Rose Water, Cordovans, Corn, Fruit and Cattle; are 1 Ausinza on the Bay,
between the mouths of the Rivers Bagradas, and Brisoana, as 2 is Jona Capolis.
3 Axenia now Lansilla. 4 Shyras raised on the ample ruins of Persepolis (burnt
by Alexander in a drunken fit, at the instigation of Lais) near the banks of
Araxes, now Bindimir the Metropolis, nine miles round in a plain, hemmed with
Mountains, famous for Gardens, and Mosches with their golden lights, and a
thousand Lamps; affording Good Wine, pretty Women, pleasant fruits, and a
gallant people. 5 Well-wooded and watered Moyown, N. E. Shyras. 6 The high
Mountain and Castle of Banneraw. 7 Berry, a School for the Arabic tongue, etc.

3. In Now Chyrman.
Carmania, W. Persis, and the Gulf of Persia, N. Parthia, S. Indian Sea,
affording neither good Port, nor good coming to it all the two hundred leagues
on the Seacoast, to carry off its poor Commodities, such as Dates, Myrrh,
Arsenie, Brass, Iron, Alabaster, Fish and little Silver; are 1 Cyrza and
Gochorta, two Port Towns. 2 Alexandria. 3 O^tespana. 4 Armuza, on the shore of
the Persian Gulf. 5 Populous Gunbroone. 6 Jasques in Cape de Jasques. 7
Charmania (Chyrman) notable for cloth of Gold, and Scymitars. 3 Inland Lar,
and its goodly Market place Mosch, and Citadel of Mosaique work, through this
Country Alexander marched after the Conquest of India in a fortnights continued
fit of drinking and revelling.

4 In Ormus, an Isle in the entrance of the Persian Now called Mare Elheriffe
and the Streights, leading to it the Streights of Balsora.
Gulf (which after a narrow straight opens to the City Balsora, and is two
thousand five hundred Italian miles compass) twenty miles round, affording only
Salt, and notwithstanding its so hot, that the people are forced to live in
Caves; and so unhappy that they send to other Countries for water; is so well
Situated, that the Wealth of Persia and East India is brought to its great
Mart Armuzium (two miles round) in the end of the Isle, and thence conveyed by
water to Euphrates, and thence by Boats, or Camels to Aleppo, Alexandretta and
Tripolis, till it was destroyed by the help of the English, 1622. who have
therefore customs of all strangers that traffic at Gambroon, whither the
trade of this place was removed.

5. In Called Gest and Circan.
Gedrosia, W. Carmania, S. Indian Sea, E. Gambaia or Guzurat in India, a barren
place, affording only Nard, and Myrrh, but a poor Village is the chief City.

6. In poor Drungiana, S. Gedrosia; is 1 Prophthasia now Sistan. 2 Sige or
Sigestan, 3 Mulebet, 4 Pharazada. 5 Arvada.

7. In Despicable Cabal.
Arachosia is no place memorable; but 1 Alexandria now Cabal at the foot of
Taurus. 2 Sin.

8. Candabor.
In Para Pomismus, N. Bactria E. India, W. Ana, dark with hills; is 1 Candabor,
the Metropolis of great trade, by reason of the Situation of it on the borders
of India.

9. In Aria, W. Parthia, E. Para pomismus, where is in some places a strong
wine that will keep color, and taste eighty years, something like Myrrh and
Saphyr: there are now only, 1 Heri or Eri on the banks of Arias, called the
City of Roses, very strong. 2 Sasuar.

10, In Parthia, E. Aria, W. Media, N. Hyrcania, S. Carmania, now Arach,
nothing but sand, unless it be under the woods, where are things for necessity,
none for riot; the people slavish, nimble horsemen, and Archers: the Country
not passable for the Sands, were it not for Caus-wayes and Castles at each
three miles end; are 1 Hispan Spanhawn.
raised out of the ruins of Hecatompyle, called by the Inhabitants, Half the
World; nine miles round in a plain with Gardens, Baths, and Mosches, and a
cloystered quadrangular market place, well stored with Merchandises, and Drugs;
in the quadrangle whereof they use horse-races, and other warlike exercises.
Jelphea on the other side the River, inhabited by Armenian Christians for a
great Poll. 3 Croom, a large, pleasant, and healthy place on a Riveter. 4
Casham, rich and well built, and filled with Artizans in Silks, Sattins, Cloth
of Gold, and Carpets; adorned with a beautiful Caravans Raw to entertain
strangers. 4 Tangaunt where the King of Persia has an incomparable House, for
Gardens, Groves, Echoes, and Labyrinths, etc.

11. In Hircania, S. Divided from Parthia by Coronus, the way through which the
Persians say Mortis Haly, the second Mahomet, cut out at one blow with a
Cymitar.
Parthia, N. Caspian Sea, E. Mergeana; the people of which place starve their
Parents at seventy years of age; fruitful in pasture, wheat, wines, figs, and
other fruits; full of Forests, and those Forests full of Panthers, Leopards,
Lions, Tigers, etc. Is 1 Hyrcania Hyrcan. 2 Ashoraffe two miles from the Sea in
a spacious plain, containing two thousand houses, adorned with two great
Palaces, the Furniture of one of which was valued by a Merchant at twenty
millions. Farabont, on a navigable branch of the Caspian Sea, well-traded,
especially by Muscovy Merchants, or Silks, whose ships come from the Volge,
which discharges it self into the Caspian Sea by seventy mouths in March and
return in July; it being from thence to Astracan but ten days sail; famous for
its Gardens, a Palace, and a Marketplace. 4 Chiachoporo on a River, the water
whereof is for eleven months sweet, and for the twelfth salt. 5 The
well-watered and wooded Barfrushder and Omoal resorted to by People of seven
Tongues. 6 Stava, a Town of great Traffic for raw silk. 7 Mesander, whence
the Province Mesandrum.

12. In Sandy Morgiana, W. Hyrcania, E. Bactria, N. Tartary; besides huge Vines
as big as a man's middle, with clusters of Grapes two cubits long, of Noah's
planting, as it is thought here; and the City Alexandria, now called Indian;
the chief place in the Country near which is Jasonium on the confluence of
Margus.

13. In Bactria the greatest part whereof S and W. is nothing but sand, which
is traveled only in the night but toward the River Oxus, plentiful in wheat,
and all grain except Olives, rich Metals, and some Precious Stones, as
Emeralds, Chrysolites and Jacinthes: is 1 Bactria at the foot of the hill
Sogdii now Bochor, the Metropolis well fortified and stored. 2 Istigias, the
pleasantest City in the East. 3 Eucratidia, Alicodra, Charra Charta, all these
under the Persian Sophi, except here and there some places taken by the Turks,
and others under the Muscovite and Portugez; the first whereof manageth the
Trade of the Caspian Sea, and the latter, that of the Southern Ocean.

XXIX Tartary, E. China, and the Streights of Anian, W. Russia and Podolia, N.
Scithicke or Frozen Sea, S. China, and the great wall that parts them,
containing five thousand four hundred miles from E. to W. and three thousand
six hundred from N. to S. from the sixth climate, till they cease measuring by
climates; the days being in some places six months, and the nights as long,
reaching from fifty degrees of Longitude, to one hundred ninety five, and from
forty of Latitude to eighty, i. e. within ten degrees of the Pole it self: The
people swarthy, squat, swift, vigilant, hardy, whining when they talk, and
howling when they sing; men-eaters, drinking Mares milk, riding Oxen. That
Christianity that is there planted by St. Andrew, and St. Philip, and overrun
with Nestorianism; thought by Genebrard to be the Off spring of the ten Tribes:
Has,

1. In Tartaria Chersones joined by an Istmus to the main land, which the
Tartars went to dig through; whence Precopensis from Precaph, signifying a
trench.
Precopensis or minor, abounding in Camels, Horses, Oxen, Sheep and Goats,
Venison in in their Forests, and Fish and Fowl in the Fens of Maeotis, with a
temperate air, about ninety nine Italian miles long, and sixty three broad: on
the Rivers Boristenes and Tanais, arising in Russia in Mosco, in the chief
City, Now called mare delle Zabab. Ital. Mar. della Tana and Mer Bienco.
of which there are 50000 Tartar horses sold yearly; besides that these people
with roots, cheese and garlic, eat horses flesh, each Bowman carrying two
horses with him to the wars, one for service, and the other for meat.) 1 Caffa
near the Streights [Sterto de Caffa] a flourishing Empory, with a capacious
haven, commanding the trade of the Euxine. 2 Preceph. 3 Wel-traded and
harbored Corsunum, now Sari Germanum, from the yellow earth thereabouts like
Saffron. 4 Wel-fortified. Crim (whence Crim Tartars commanding the Euxine, and
Lake of Maeotis. 5 Panticapaeum, on the Vospero or Bosphorus. 6 Tanas on
Tanais, frequented by the Merchants of all Nations on the Euxine under the
Turks. 7 Ruinous, but high Ingirmenum. 8 Oizakow, the residence of the Cham,
whose Court in Summer time makes a moveable City of Wheele-houses, called
Agara, or the town of Carts near Podolia in Poland, and part of Muscovy, under
the protection of the Grand-Seignior, who recommanded one of the Chams to be
King of Poland, in a letter to this effect, that their Pope should be his Pope,
and their Luther his Luther, and that he would not put them to the charge of
housekeeping, for he could eat horseflesh.

2. In Tartaria deserta, W. Precopensis and Russia, From which divided by the
River Spane, which falls inio Caspian Sea, about the middle of it.
E. Zagathai, N. Frozen Sea, S. Euxine, and Caspian; so fruitful, if the
Tartars (that laugh at us for living on the top of reeds; so they call our
bread) say true, that for once sowing Mill and Punicum they have without any
tillage three Returns of both; Few Cities, (they roving with their herds, as
the grass holds capable of Merchandise, having a fair sea coast, several Bays,
Havens, and navigable Rivers, only Mountains, on the top of which the Sun
shines when its night in the Valley) saving 1 Locoppa. 2 Conice, Phanogoria,
St. Georges on the Bosphorus and Rha, near which on both sides there is a
medicinal root called Rha Pontiche, to distinguish it from Rha-Barbarum or
Rhubarb. This tract inaccessible. 3 Bolgar on the River Volga, near which is
the greatest herd of Tartars, called Horda Magna. 4 These people are sanctified
by their Priests by sprinkling them with Milk, Earth, and Cowdung.
Scharaishe on the other side of the Volga, where is no money but brass, no
corn but roots troublesome to Muscovy, who pacifieth them with presents, yet
keeping continual Garrisons at Casan, Astrachan, and Wiatra, least they should
disturb the Russia trade in the Caspian Down the Volga, as they go up and down
in herds following the Pole Star, but keeping close for fear of the Muscovite;
much delighted in Negromancy and Conjurations under the Cham of Chathai; their
delicacies are mice, serpents, and other worms, and their mansions Caves.

3. In Zagathai, E. Cathai on the other side of Imaus, N. Frozen Sea, S.
Caspian and the River Oxus, between it and Persia; is 1 Drepsa on the Oxus: as
is 2 Oxiana. 3 Maruca. 4 Alexandria. 5 Tribarra, not considerable among such a
Whose leaders are their Priests, which they call Papa.
wandering people. 6 Zabaspia, an eminent town, by reason the Inhabitants
thereabouts are civil and industrious, good mechanics, well skilled in
manufactories, and very seldom without a great confluence of From India and
Cathai.
Merchants, trading on the River Daix, and the mouth of the Oxus. 7 The
magnificent Mara-Canda. 8 Well-traded and populous Bichend; and 9 in the wild
Turcestan Calba, Ocerra and Crustina on the Lake Kitay, much frequented by
Russian and Tartarian Merchants sailing thither by the River Ob, for Bevers,
Sables, Seil-skins, etc. and not far hence are the Savage Scythians.

4. In Cathay, W. Zagathi with Imaus, between E. Sea and China, S. India, N.
Tartaria Antiqua, extending from the North Sythia extra Imaum to the South
India Extra Gangen nine hundred and sixty miles, and from E. to W. one thousand
five hundred, abounding Eastward with Wheat, Rice, Wool, Hemp, Silk, Musk, and
Rhubarb on the banks of Volga; besides Camels hair, Chamlets, and such a
numberless number of horses, as that they sent eighty thousand at one time for
a present to the King of China; and the great Cham feeds yearly ten thousand
white Mares for their Milk; the Air very hot in summer, and very good in
winter, subject to wonderful thundering, earthquakes and winds: their Cham not
to be seen without purgations or washing; are 1 Cambala, or Cham's pleasant
seat of freestone in the heart of the Country on the River Palysanga,
navigable from the Eastern Ocean thither, whither it conveys a great store of
Merchandises and Merchants, and among other Merchandises, ten thousand
Cart-loads of Silk from China. Twenty eight miles round, containing among other
Inhabitants, Fifty thousand Astrologers. 2 Xandu, the Emperors Palace,
containing eight quadrangles one within another, the least two miles in
compass, between whose several walls are Walks, Gardens, Orchards, Fish Ponds,
Parks, Forests, Chases, etc. 3 Fair Caraio and Gouza, where the women are said
to guild their teeth. 4 Careanfean, where is the herb called Chiny-Cathaii, an
ounce whereof being valued worth a sack of Rhubarb; not far from hence in
Serica you may barter their Silks for trifles, for like Quakers they make but
one word.

Especially, at 1 Sera. 2 Ottocora. 3 Issedon. 4 Orosana; and 5 Donata: Here
and in Scythia extra Emaum, they made carousing cups of their Fathers skulls;
where 1 Hiachan is a great Mart. 2 Cialis, a great Court. 3 Succuir, famous for
Merchandise. 4 Campion, where if the woman offer her self to the Priest, he
thinks it a sin to refuse lying with her, besides other barbarous, desolate,
idolatrous, and enchanting provinces and Cities, only in East Tartary, there
are Castors, Martrois, and Zibellons, and other precious skins, besides Horse
hair, and the root Ginsen, with which they traffic at Leatony, a Province N.
E. of China: of Tartaria Antiqua, you may be sure nothing remarkable, since
they are so barbarous, that they will marry no Virgins, but such as have been
prostituted by their Mothers to the Merchant-strangers, who bestow on them
Jewels, and she is the most acceptable to her husband, who brings him the
greatest reward of her shame.

XXX. China, E. Oriental Ocean, W. India and Cathay, N. Altas, Out of the
profits whereof they are very charitable to their lame and maimed, rejecting
the blind, as able to work by grinding of Corn.
and East Tartary, from which divided by a chain of hills, and a great wall
extended four hundred leagues in length. S. Cauchin-China, a Province of India
three thousand leagues about, one thousand eight hundred leagues long, reaching
from 130th to 160th degree of Longitude, and from the Tropic of Cancer, to the
53d degree of Latitude; lying under all the climes from the 3d to the 9th; hot,
but healthful: so fruitful, that it yields three harvests a year, of Wheat,
Barley, Rice, Wool, Cotton, Olives, Wines, Flax, Silk, besides their Pearls and
Bezoar, all kind of Metal, Fruits, Cattle, Sugar, Honey, Rhubarb, Camphire,
Ginger, and all kinds of Spices, medicinal wood, called China Wood, Musk,
Salt, Poultrey, especially And Hogs, whereof six thousand a day eaten in the
same place
Ducks, whereof in one town, thirteen thousand eaten one day with another. The
people well-set, middle-sized, gluttonous, but cleanly, not touching their meat
with their hands, but eating with two Ebony sticks, whence silver Forks used
first in Italy, and then in England. Skilful in Manufactories, the Son being
bound to follow his Fathers Trade, witness, PRINTING, and GUNNING, its thought
first invented there. Porcellan dishes, curious carvings, and their fine
painted works in Tables, Leathers and Stuffs, whereof they are so proud, that
they say they have two eyes, the Europeans one, and the rest of the world
stark-blind: the Women very modest, reserved, and much watched by their
Husbands, having invented them a pinching fashion of shoes, that they might
have no delight to walk abroad. The Inhabitants reckoned one hundred and
seventy million by Sea and Land; the Sea for three hundred leagues from Nanquin
to Paquin, being but one street of Ships, wherein they buy, sell, are born, and
dye. The People multiplying, because they make no War but Defensive, and are
forbid to go out of their Country. Their Religion Gentilisme, with some
remainders of Christianity, planted there by St. Thomas. Here are five hundred
ninety one Cities Uniform, most on one of their seven On which are twelve
thousand bridges, under which ships sail.
Navigable Rivers, whereof the most Eminent are;

1 Qunsoy or Suntren, on the West of China near Cathai, formerly an hundred
miles round, with a Lake in it thirty miles about, containing six hundred
thousand Families of Artificers. 2 Vnguen and its Sugars. 3 Nanquin on the
great River Kuni, thirty miles round, with twelve thousand Ships before it,
nine leagues from the Sea; two hundred thousand houses. 4 The Royal City
Paquin, walled so thick with brick, that twelve horsemen may go abreast upon
the wall of it. 5 Canton or Quamchen, (where is one Herb that is all the
Physic of China.) On a Navigable River where the Portugez drive a wealthy
trade in the day time, being shut out at night; whereupon they have settled
their Mart at Macao, the Port-town to this. 6 Xaokin on the like River. 7
Zuchean, the center of Merchandise. 8 Hamseau or Hanychen on the Northside of
the River Cinithany, within two days Journey of the Sea, affording trade to all
the Northern parts of China. 9 Stately Fochea. 10 Coluns, and its best
Porcellane. 11 Or Thiencin.
Scianchai seated in a Country that looks like one Orchard within twenty four
hours sail of Japan, a great Mart and Harbor, where two hundred thousand
persons work in Cotton. 12 Chinchiamsu, on a River that never freezeth. 13
Suarchea, the only Southern Port of China. 14 Caiton or Caisuuy on the River
Kiamy a good harbor destroyed 1642. 15 The convenient Haven Kaianchen on the
Southside of the River Croc^us. 16. Chatking. 17 Taitung. 18 Nancheny, besides
the two Isles Corea, and Cheunan.

XXXI. India, E. China, W. Persia, N. Tartary, with Taurus between, S. Sea;
extended from the one hundred and sixth, to the one hundred sixty ninth degree
of Longitude; and from the Equator to the forty fourth degree of Northern
Latitude: affording a double increase, and blessed with Mines of Gold, Silver,
and Precious Stones, with Metals of all kind, except Copper, and Lead; and
Cattle, except Horses, and Fruit, except Wheat and Vines; all Spices, Civets,
and medicinal Drugs; besides that, it is famous for all sorts of Camels,
Parrats, Apes, Dragons, Serpents, Rhinocerats, and Elephants: The Inhabitants,
1 Indians. 2 Moors. 3 Jews. 4 Tartars. 5 And Merchants-Portugez, Spaniards,
English or Dutch: Civil, plain-dealing, proud only in Perfumes, and Jewels,
(living on Barley, Rice, Milk, Honey, etc.) The women in Lawn, so fond, that
they dye with their husbands, that bought them for a Yoke of Oxen; though they
have a barbarous custom, that the Brach-mans or Priests should lie with them
the first night they are married; and that of killing their Friends before they
are aged. Ten Mountains of Note for precious Stones. Two Rivers, 1 Indus now
Naugrocat, falling after a course of nine hundred miles into the Sea in seven
months. 2 Ganges eight miles broad in the narrowest place. On this side which
is called India intra Gangem. E. Gulf Bengala, W. Persia, and Arabian Sea, N.
Taurus, S. Cape Commari; having eighteen or nineteen Rivers, discovered after
three attempts by the Portugez, while the Spaniards were busy in making a
discovery of the new World, 1502. Fifteen Provinces, and forty seven Kingdoms
under the great Mogul.

1 Dulsinga, S. Cambaia, N. Tartary, E. Indus, W. Persia, The snowy Mountains
much conducing to the temperature of it.
temperate where 1 Healthy Chusmair in a most delicate and rich valley. 2 the
Fort Roree. 3 Sestan. 4 Multun, three leagues from the Indus, the ordinary
through-fare of the Caravans in the way from Labor to Spahan, forced to stay
there four days to enrich the town: good for nothing but Bows and Arrows. 5
The Fort Duchee in the Streights of the mountains to secure the Caravans.

2. Over against Dulsinda Pengab, where 1 is Lahor, on the Eastern banks of the
Indus, the chief Staple for Spices, carried by land to Persia, and by water to
Europe. 2 Sultan Puarre. 3 Athec, in the way you come from Lahore to China.

3. Mountanous Mandao, N. Pengab, where 1 Mandao on the River Mandavo of good
note, eighteen miles round. 2 Moltan, where the women go booted and spurred.

4. Thievish Delly, and its swift Dromedaries, W. Mandao; has 1 Delly, a great
City of pleasure. 2 Doceti. 3 Tremel, on the W. River Mandova.

5. Well-watered, and rich Agra, N. Delly, and Mandao; where 1 Agra, strong and
populous on the North bank of the River Jemena. 2 Decayed Fate-pore, or
Feti-barri. 3 Impregnable Hendee. 4 Biani, where the best Growing on a small
shrub like a Goose berry bush, bearing seed like cabbage seed, which being
cut-down and dried for half a year in heaps and rotten, is trod with Oxen in
the stalk, and being grownd small and fine at the Mills, is last of all boiled
in Furnaces, refined and sorted, and so sold to the Merchants.
Indico; for the making whereof here are twelve Mills.

6. Sanga, N. Agra, 1 Azmor, one hundred eighty miles from Agra, at each three
miles end, of which there is an Inn built for Pilgrims. 2 Citor, in the middle
way between Surat and Agra.

7. Cambaia, E. W. Welly and Manda^, S. Sea, where 1 Insinda the first Province
thereof is 1 Lawribander in the outlet of Indus, three days journey from Geta
Negar Tutta (on the banks of the Indus, a town of great trade, frequented by
Portugez, who return Pepper for such Indian Commodities as come hither from
Lahore) to which it is the Port-town; much frequented, because free from
worms, which about Surat disable the ships. 2 Sarrama the middle Town. 4
Nuraquimire, beyond a Where those that rob a man will conduct him through the
deserts, that others shall not touch him.
desert. 5 Radempoore near it. 6 Calwalla, given the women to bring up their
Daughters to Dance.

2. In Robbing Guzarate, N. Sinda. S. Sea, E. Indus, W. Persia. 1 Diu, looking
toward Persia, in the mouth of the Indus, possessed by the Spice-Traders of
Portugal; the first news of the taking of which was brought to to Lisbon by Jo.
Botelius from India, in a Vessel of eighteen foot long, and six foot broad. 2
Boldra. 3 Medabat, on the Rivers side as big as Paris, much frequented by all
Merchants. 4 Ardovat not far from it. 5 Saringa. 6 Poriana. 7 Sherfo, the
Sepulcher of their Kings.

3. In Cambaja, N. Mandao, S. Decan, Surat, W. Sea, abounding in Rice, Wheat,
Sugar, Spices, and choice fruits of all sorts, great store of Silk and Cotton,
Diamonds, Chalcedonies, Onyx-stone, and Cornelines, or as we call them
Cornelians; and the rare Beast Abades, twice as big as a Bull, with an
impenetrable skin, and a little horn on their Snouts. Where the people never
marry out of their own Trades or Tribes, especially the Banians who are kind of
Pythagoreans. 1 Cambaja, three miles round, and from the Indus. 2 Barrocho, S.
of it where good Called so from the City Calicut, where it was first made.
Calicoes. 3 Welfortified and orcharded Surat, with its Pomgranates, Melons,
Figs and Lemmons, the residence of an English Factory, that has a great trade
in the Bay of Swalley, ten miles off. 4 Neriand and its Indico. 5 Daman, a
pleasant town of the Portugez, upon the Seaside over against Diu. 6 High and
impregnable Campanel and Dacaiotote. 7 Netherby and Bandore, great Markets for
Brazen ware, Beasts, and Armor. 8 Decan, N. Cambria, W. Sea, on the Seacoast
for two hundred and fifty miles. 1 Decan, and the rich and well-guarded All the
people there go in Silks and Tiffany, being coalblack.
Diamond-hill near it. 2. Bider, a Royal City Northward. 3 As Visapore was. 4
Danagur. 5 Sintacora, on the mouth of the River Aliga. 6 The great Empory Goa,
fifteen mile round in the Island Ticuarinum over against the outlet of
Mandavo, one of the Keys to the Indies, possessed by the Portugals. 7 The
Sea-town Chaul theirs too. 8 The beautiful and well-traded town Brampore, on a
great River like London, not far from the strong sort Syra.

9 Canara, N. Decan, S. Malabar, W. Sea has 1 Melinde. 2 Onor. 3 Patticalia. 4
Mangalor all Ports of good trade for Sugars, Figgs, Corn held by the Portugez.
5 Lispor and its quarries of Adamant. 6 Solset, and its Peninsula.

10. Malabar, N. Canara the River Gangeraco between E. Narsinga, and the
mountain Gates between, S. W. Sea, plentiful for Ginger, Cinnamon, Cassia,
Pepper, and the Dates that yields Wine, Oil, Sugar, fine Cloth, and Cordage;
and another bearing Cotton, Cypress, and cobweb Lawn, the leaves Satin and
Taffata, besides Apes, Monkeyes, Parrats, and Paraquitoes. 1 Connor, in the
Province of Connor, with a fair and capacious haven, much frequented by
Merchants, especially Portugez, who have a Citadel here. 2 Cora, 3 Peripatum.
Marabia. 5 Main. 2 Where they are so barbarous, as to change wives with one
another in mirth.
Calicute, in the Province of Calicute on the Sea three miles, a place of great
trade, where the Eastern and European Merchants meet. 3 Chale, a Fort. 4
Chatua. 5 Purtangale. 6 Tanor. 3 Cranganor, commodious for trade, at the mouth
of a River in the Province of Cran Ganor on the S. of Calicate, full of St.
Thomas's Seventy thousand of them there.
Christians. 8 Cochin, a well-traded, and well-havened town in the outlet of
Mangat, in a Province of that name, S. Cranganor forty leagues on the shore. 9
Caicholam, a much frequented Port-town in Caicolam. 10 Caulan near Caicolam,
with its commodious haven much resorted to by foreign Merchants for Pepper and
other Spices. 11 Quilacor in Trevandor, whither the Kings of that place after
twelve years Reign go, and on a Scaffold cut their Noses, Ears and Lips, and
at last their throats.

11. Narsinga, S. Trevancor, E. Gulf Bengala: here is 1 Cael near Trevancor,
where they fish for Pearl. 2 Golconda. 3 Chamdagrin, a seat-Royal. 4 Perepoi,
where at an yearly feast they offered two hundred thousand Crowns. 5 Madura. 6
Chadamburam. 7 Maliaper, or St. Thomas re-peopled, with a Colony of Portuguez.
8 Choromandel, a place of Trade, giving name to all the Seacoast about it on
the west side of the Gulf of Bengala. with Casta, Negapatan, Tarnassari,
desolate Bisnagar, and Royal Narsinga, where the women desire to be buried
alive with their Husband:

Et certamen habent lethi, quae viva sequatur
Conjugium; pudor est non licuisso mori:
Ardent victrices, and praebent pectora flammae
Imponuntque suis ora perusta viris.
12. Oristan, S. Narsinga, Botanter, E. Gulf of Bengala, a fair Seacoast of
three hundred and fifty miles in length, i. e. from Cape Guadarino between it
and Narsinga to Cape Leogorae between it and Bengala. 1 Orissa, on the Sea
side, well traded for Rice, Cloth of Cotton, the Stuff Yerva like Silk;
together with long Pepper, Ginger, Mirabolins, etc. 2 Royal Cateoba. 3 The
weltraffiqued Port Angeli, at the bottom of the Gulf of Bengala. 4 Poor Bacola.

13. Botanter, S. Onstan, W. the sacred River Whose waters they fetch far and
near for Sacrifices.
Guenga, E. Ganges, where the people have ears of a span length, never washing
for fear of defiling the water; where is Bottia, Clamur-Kukares (a Staple for
the sale of their Cloth to the Chinois, and Tartarian Merchants) Here their
money and their meat is Almonds.
Couche, where they kill not their Cattle, but keep Hospitals for them when
they are old.

14. Patanau, N. Botanter; 1 Large, but thatched Patane. 2 Holy and Pilgrim
Bannaras on the holy Ganges. 3 Siripur. Where the Jesuits were told by the
heathen, that they might as lawfully worship their Pagods, as they their Images.
4 Ciandecan, on the bottom of the Gulf of Bengala. 5 Satagan.

15. Bengala, N. Patanaw, E. Pegu, S. W. Gulf of Bengala on the Gulf and River
three hundred and sixty miles long has 1 Bengala on the Ganges, rich in trade
for Silk and Cotton, long Pepper, Ginger, Sugar, Wheat and Rice; the people
subtle and skilled in Philosophy, Physic and Astronomy: richer in Pilgrimages
to the Holy Water of Ganges, with Gatigan, a well-traded port in the bottom of
the Gulf of Bengala. 3 Taxada, decayed in trade by an alteration in the
Channel. 4 Porrow Grande, and Porror Pequeno, two Lawless Asylums, with the
Islands Basse, Cainam, Islas de Pracel, where was reported such store of
Adamants, as drew ships thither, if they were not pinned with wooden pins.

2. In India Extra Gangen, or the continent beyond Ganges By the over flowings
whereof it is made as rich as Egypt is by that of Nile.
is 1 Brama, W. Ganges, N. Cathay in Tartary, E. Cauchin-china, S. Pega, now
Barma, rich in mines of Gold and Silver; Rubies and Musk much traded to by
Portugez: and there 1 Calam. 2 Bacan. 3. Meranda. 4 Melinta. 5 Prom. 6 Ava. 7
Tangu, and 8 Brama, where is the tree called Moses, which they take to be the
Tree of Life.

2 Cauchinchina, W. Brama, E. China, N. Tartary, S. Camboia, rich in Aloes,
Silks, Taffata, and other Stuffs, Gold, Silver, Porcellane earth, wrought into
China-ware (well counterfeited among us by drawing a white crust on our Potters
Earth) Powder, Guns, where is the City Cauchin-china, on a River of China,
running into a capacious Bay, with the Island Almo, where they fish for pearls,
commanded by Portugez

3 Camboia, N. Cauchin-china abounding in Elephants, and Rhinocerots or Abades,
Aloes, Gold, and the sweet-wood Calumba, where is the well-traded City of
Comboia, on the River Mecon, as the Staple for the Commodities of this Country.
2 Cudurmuch on the same River. 3 Coul on the seaside.

4 Jangoma W. Pegu, E. Camboia, N. Brama, S. Siam, a barbarous place not
observable.

5 Siam, N. Jangoma and Pegu, E. S. W. Sea, a Peninsula, called formerly the
Golden And reckoned one of the five Chersonesses, the other four being the
Peloponesian in Greece; the Thracian in Propontis, the Taurican in the Euxine,
the Cimbrian in Denmark.
Chersonesse, rich in Gold, Silver, Tin, etc. Pepper, Elephants and Horses. 1
Malaca, a noted Empory for the space of two hundred and seventy miles,
especially at the City Malaca on the River Gaza, unwholesom indeed, but of
great trade for Spices, Ointments, Gold, Silver, Pearls, and precious stones,
especially since the Portugals removed the trade from Sincapura, a Mart near
the Promontory Magnum hither. 3 Palo Zambilan, whence to Sincapura, about the
Southern Cape, called Cape Liampo, two hundred and seventy miles. 2 Johor and
Patane, the Queens whereof have been so kind to the English and the Dutch, as
to permit them Factories there, 1612.

3. Siam, particularly so called, where is, 1 Socatus. 2 Quedoa, and the best
Pepper. 3 Tavai, Lugor on the Seaside. The People here believe that the world
will be burnt, and under the ashes of it, two eggs, out of which shall come a
man and a woman to re-people it.
4 Siam, commodiously seated, and much frequented for trade, and Merchandise on
the River Menam.

4. Muantay, between Jangoma and Siam, memorable for the third Empory of the
Indies Odia or Vdie on the Banks of the River Caipumo, where two hundred
thousand Skiffs and Shallops, attend to waft people from place to place.

6. Pegu, E. Jangoma and Siam, N. Barma, W. S. Gulf of Bengala, where besides 1
Verma. 2 Machin, where neither Port nor Haven; is, 3 Orachan, in which Province
is; 1 Dianger ruined. 2 Sundiva, in an Island well fortified. 3 Arrachan, on a
capacious River thirty leagues distance from the Sea. 4 Martavan, with its
chief City Martavan, rich in Rice, Iron, Lead, Steel, Brass, Silver, Gold,
Sugar Canes, and other woods odoriferous, and medicinal, situated on a
capacious Haven all the year open; and what is rare, here free from Sands, even
in the winter time. 5 Pegu, lying like a Crescent on the Gulf of Bengala,
eminent for Rubies, Civet-cats, Lacca (Gum made by Ants there, as Wax is made
by Bees here) Elephants, and the best Parrats; the people whereof say, they
were begotten between a Dog and a China Woman cast on the shore. Here are 1
Woody Cosmi. 2 Jocabel. 3 Dian. 4 A City four square, and each square four
miles.
Coilan. 5 Lanagon. 6 Silvan pede. 7 Meccao, (where such goods are unloaded as
are carried by land to Pegu) with its strong Castle. 8 Siriang, a strong place
in the mouth of Pegu, on whose Banks most of the foresaid places lie; as does
the most beautiful, rich, and well-traded Pegu, in the Old part whereof the
Merchants live, as the King does in the New; most of these places under Kings
of their own, that daily make war upon one another, but the greatest amongst
them is, the rich, and absolute Prince, the Mogul.

XXXII. The Oriental Isles:

1. In the heap of Isles, containing fifty three Kingdoms, two hundred leagues;
S. on the Sea called Japan, where the people are cunning, ambitious,
implacable, hating idle recreations; eating in Physic sharp salt, and raw
things; using in salutations to put off their shoe: is 1 Meaco, the common
staple of Japan. 2 Ossacy, of great trade. 3 Feno-Jama their University and
Banoum. 4 Bongo. 5 Cora, where at least one tooth of their Kings must be
interred. 6 Amanga Sequi. 7 Surungo, as big as London. 8 Edoo and Firando,
where 1613 there was a Factory settled for the English Merchants. 9 The noted
Haven Ochino-famanus.

2. The Called so in honor of Philip the 2d of Spain, because in his time
discovered by Leguspi a Spanish Captain, 1564
Philippines, and the neighboring Islands S. of Japan, rich in Rice, Pulse,
Honey, Wax, Sugarcanes, the best Figs in the world, Cotton-wool, Mines of
Gold, and other Metals; plenty of Fish, Birds and Beasts: where forty
containing a million of people, are under the King of Spains Government, and
under his Viceroy in New-Spains Jurisdiction: As 1 Lusson with Manilla, a
commodious Haven town. 2 Tandair, very fruitful. 3 Mindano, three hundred and
eighty leagues round, where 1 Cailon, Pavados, Sabal, and Dapiro, and westward
the Lequins; and Hermosa, lately called New-Holland, because taken, planted,
and strongly fortified by some Adventures of that Country; Ciumbabon, where is
the That shrinks at a touch.
Plant-animal.

3. The burning seven That is, 1 Mira. 2 Rosingen. 3 Romans 4 Nerro. 5 Aii. 6
Ganuape and Bandan.
Isles of Bandan, where are the best Nutmegs growing like Peaches or
Malacatoons, where are Dutch Factories, and some English Merchants, the place
being yielded to the Protection of King James, November 24, 1620, both the
Dutch and we taking advantage of their divisions, though they are more inclined
to us than the Dutch.

4. The innumerable Moluccoes hot on both sides the Equator, affording
Cinnamon, Ginger, Nutmegs, Mastick, Aloees, Pepper, and especially Cloves
growing on trees like Bay-trees, which after the white and the green blossoms
when they smell extraordinarily fragrantly, yield red and hard ones; which are
Cloves so hot, that in two days they will As they say, will the unspun Silks of
China.
dry up a pail of water standing in the room where they are sorted; the most
remarkable of them are Tidor, Terenate, Macir, Rachtan, Machian, Botone,
Poleroone and Poleway; in the former whereof the Dutch have three Forts and
Factories to the Spaniards one; the two last are the Englishes, surrendered
December 23, 1616. by right, the first the best in the world for Cloves, and
the latter for Nutmegs, which the Dutch seized, cutting down the Clove-trees,
and the Nutmeg-trees, when they were to restore them to the English.

5. The Many Selebes, as 1 Selebes properly so called, where Cian or Sion. 2
Nebon, N. and Terelli, S. 3 Gilolo, or Del-moro, well stored with wild hens,
and a kind of Shellfish that much resembles Mutton; and the Tree Saga, which
affords them bread and drink. In the chief town whereof Batchame or
Batachina, there is a Dutch Fort to defend their Factory.

6. Amboyna, S. of the Equator, fertile in Rice, Citrons, Lemmons, Orenges,
Coquo-nuts, Sugarcanes, and Cloves, etc. Which hot fruits suck the moisture of
the Earth, so that nothing else will grow there. Notorious for the unheard of
cruelties exercised upon the English by the Dutch 1618 in that place.

7. Macassar, W. Amboyna, S. W. Celebes, six hundred miles from E. to W.
plentiful of Rice, Flesh, Fish, Salt, Cotton-wool, Gold, Pearls, Sander a
Medicinal wood growing like a Nutmeg-tree, the fruit like Cherries, overgrown
with wood; there 1 is Senderem, near a large Lake, very commodious for
Traffic. 2 Macassar, an English Factory; there are other places hereabouts, as
Sanguin, Terrao, Solor, etc. but not worth a Description.

8. Borneo, two thousand two hundred miles round, under the Equator, affording
besides necessaries Camphire, Agariche, Adamants; and a people very white and
honest, that sit not on business till the Moon is up, which they take to be
the Suns wife, and the Stars their Children: Has for towns, 1 Borneo, near a
goodly Bay, N. W. 2 The Commodious Cities, and fair Havens of Tajopura,
Tamoaratas, Maalano, Lavi, Paro, and Sagdana an English Factory.

9. South of Borneo and the Equator, is Jabo-Diu; (...), Island of Barley.
1 Java major, three thousand miles round; rich in all Corn, especially Rice,
all flesh salted, all sorts of Fowl, plenty of Gold, Precious Stones, Brass of
the best kind; Silks, Pepper, Ginger, Cinnamon, and other Spices; the people
careless of their words, answering when taxed with it, that the tongue was not
made of Bone. The chief Towns, 1 Panacuran, near a burning hill. 2 Jortam. 3
Ballambua. 4 Passarva. 5 Taban. 6 Taggal. 7 Surrabaia. 8 Catabaon. Unwholesome
Bantam of great trade the English, Portugez and Dutch having Factories here;
the principal Factory of the English in the Indies. 10 The good Port Agracan.
11 Sura. 12 Situa, about which there is abundance of Pepper.

2 Java minor, not so well yet discovered.

10. Summatra, seven hundred miles long, and two hundred broad on the North of
Java major, under the Equator; the Soil hot and unwholesome, yielding Ginger,
Pepper, Camphire, Agariche, and Cassia; besides Honey, Wax, Silks, Cottons,
rich Mines, not only of Tin, Iron, and Sulphur, and other Minerals, but of
Gold, it being conceived to be Solomon's Ophir. The Inhabitants good Merchants,
and Artificers, always leading a spare Horse with them to their Mosches,
looking for Mahomet to come and ride on him: Here is, 1 Passaman, a town of
great trade; but unhealthy as the English know, who have a Factory there. 2
Tecoo, and its convenient Haven. 3 Priamon, all three towns lying in that
Country where Pepper grows. 4 Achen, and the Kings Court. 5 Menantabo. 6
Cambar.

11. Zeiland, Northwest of Summatra, and its woods of Cinnamon, Lemmons,
Orenges, etc. wild and tame Fowls and Beasts, especially Elephants, thought by
them Paradise, there being an Hill there called, Pico de A^am; the people good
Artificers and Jugglers; Here is, 1 Candie. 2 Ventane. 3 Colmuchi, on a
capacious Bay, a place of great trade, especially for Cinnamon, Gems,
Elephants-teeth, etc. well fortified by Portugez, who call it Columbo. 4 Laula.
5 Galle. 6 Tinamaca. 7 Triqui Lemale. 8 Jana Sipatan. 9 Vilassem. 10 Batecolom,
near which Isle, are the Maldivae, and there Maldiva, a well known Empory.

All these places speak the Indian tongue in diverse Dialects; most of the
Inhabitants Pagans and Mahumetans, except here and there some Plantations of
Christian Converts, by the Spaniards and Portugez.

The End of ASIA.
Directions to find out any part or place in this Book, desired or sought for:
FIrst, You must know, that on both sides the Map, are degrees of Latitude, at
every ten of which there is a Circular Line drawn through the Map: Secondly, at
the top and bottom there are Degrees of Longitude; at every 10 of which, Lines
are drawn through the Map.

Now, if you would find any City or other place of Note, look for it in the
Table, and there you shall see what Latitude and what Longitude it has, which
finding at one of the sides, and top of the Map, bringing them till they cut
one the other, there you shall find the place.

Example, I would find this City of London; I look for it in the Table, and
there I find it has 51 degrees of Latitude, and 24 degrees of Longitude; which
51 degrees of Latitude, I find at the side of the Map, and the 24 degree of
Longitude toward the top of the Map; then I bring them till they cut one
another, and there I find the City: So of the rest, note that the degree of
Latitude and Longitude must be brought in a circular line, like unto them that
are made at every 10th degree: Withal, observe that Asia, Africa and America
are divided by the Equinoctial Line, and if above it you fail to speed, repair
to that part beneath the Line, and expect a satisfaction answerable to your
expectation, and suitable to your inquisition.

The Names of all the known and most remarkable Capes, Ports, Beys, and Isles,
Rocks, Rivers, Towns and Cities in Asia, with their Latitude and Longitude.
La. Lo. ABescum 41 49 Abiach 39 67 Abian 13 83 Achaba 12 117 Achan 13 157
Achom 06 130 Achom 06 129 Achsiges 42 118 Acor 29 90 Acsamparo 39 81 Aczu 49
129 Adac 41 83 Adaia 14 84 Aden 13 82 Aden 13 83 Admiralitegt Eyland 74 80 J.
do Admirante 15 84 Adu 04 110 Advidt 18 79 Agacio 04 153 Agadwa 14 112 Aiaz 15
84 Aiazo 47 75 Alar 41 81 Alarch 40 70 Alba Zichia 48 73 Alepia 39 70 Aleppo 38
72 Alexandreta 38 72 Alibinili 20 92 Alima 31 109 Amansirifdin 20 83 Amasia 41
68 Amboina 03 160 Ambuar 04 132 Ameida 38 82 Amhiou 37 144 Amny 32 132 Anamir
39 70 Anandole 40 70 Anar 39 91 Anari Mountains 57 121 Anathon 42 112 Ancheo 31
157 Ancosi 48 140 Andegen 49 128 Andemaon 14 129 Andemaon 12 129 Chitre
Andemaon 11 120 Andinir 39 101 Andragir 01 136 Angel 23 127 Angreadisi 48 113
Angua 39 89 Anguri 41 65 Anjo 17 137 Anna 29 84 Anna 31 81 Annibi 59 339 Annibi
Lake 61 135 Antax 21 79 Antiochia 38 71 Aparis 39 63 Apola 22 95 J. d. Aquada
01 167 Aquarma 18 153 Aquita 38 177 Ar 13 84 Arabia 31 74 Arabia and deserta 29
73 Arabia the Happy 20 85 Aracam 21 132 Aracam 24 127 Araptar 38 78 Araseng 39
91 Arassan 39 114 Arast 41 89 Arcanis 39 78 Archangel 62 67 Ardavat 26 116
Arden 32 74 Aremogar 13 118 Argel 15 86 Argia 31 91 Argistan 38 94 Ariader 41
111 Arigal 04 129 Armadavat 23 113 B. Aror 02 147 Asar 20 89 Asareft 41 120
Ascamparo 39 81 Ascor 40 73 Asia 39 71 Asian 30 110 Assen 48 121 Assyria 39 83
Asum 39 82 Asta. 19 91 Astracan 49 82 Ava flu. 28 132 Avarel 12 145 Avias 41 65
Azach 48 81 Ayaman 27 81

B
Babacamber Lake 41 107 Babamum 02 147 Babelmandel 12 81 Babylon 32 83
Babujones 20 154 Bacanois 13 113 Bacasa 05 145 Bachian 01 158 Bacianchi 49 69
Backanta 43 82 Bacola 23 123 Bacora 31 84 Badaglam 39 117 Badits J. 07 148
Bagiodet 32 84 Baha 23 93 C. Bajador 19 153 Baida 68 110 Baino 04 146 C. Baiso
69 68 Balagna 58 75 Bama 01 140 Bancai 01 135 Bar 28 88 Baraichir 31 99 Baras
02 131 Bardacho 41 162 Bargu 67 145 Baroalor 13 113 Baroche 21 113 Baros 02 137
Barvas 05 134 Basiar 38 120 Basora Streights 23 98 Bassiri 28 98 Batavia 05 139
Batha 01 132 Batecale 13 112 Batoch 31 70 Batochma 01 161 Bay la Baya 13 158
Bedgis 32 112 Bedroch 02 156 Bedu 38 81 Begeerten hoeck 75 103 Beil 29 72
Beisal 31 93 Betis 37 74 Ben 29 99 Bendels 31 93 Bengala 23 131 Bengala 22 132
Berdan 31 82 Berdio 10 134 Bereford 74 95 Beresps 41 81 Berghen 72 78 Beron 26
91 Bestan 39 93 Bexinia 51 80 Biancaon 04 148 Bicanapo 22 129 C. Bicay 07 153
Bicheand 42 109 Bicipuri 19 139 Bigul 41 110 Bilato 01 157 Bilther 29 108
Bingira 23 113 Bingul 41 83 Binhachu 29 140 Biron 32 82 Birusen 32 119 Bisnagor
17 115 Bolli 41 65 Boom J. 04 141 Boratay 40 129 Borneo 04 145 Borneo 03 145
Botton 03 155 Cost Brava 19 153 Braimu 28 94 Brema 52 168 Bremia 21 135
Bronsensko 74 59 Browers Sand 04 139 Brun 88 92 Bubutor 23 72 Buchephala 32 123
Buchio 28 149 Buecho 28 155 Bulgar 53 82 Bungo 32 164 Bungo 31 168 Bunilipatam
18 119 Buorno 07 158 Burgian 39 108 Burro 03 158 Bursia 41 60 Busachi 43 80

C
Caba 48 121 Cabail 31 112 Cabarao 11 158 Cabinees 05 156 Cabis 29 99 Cabona 04
155 J. dos Cabores 12 130 Cabu 11 155 Caburo 01 148 Caciasley Lake 41 114
Cadapam 03 147 Cadilipatam 22 124 Cadissa 31 81 Cagia 48 71 Cagria 41 68
Caitachs 41 84 Calatia 29 104 Calamianes 10 149 Calandua 03 147 Calantagu 06
136 Calami 67 129 Calauro 06 153 Calba 49 119 Caldar 31 80 Caldea 30 81
Calecuth 12 113 Caleture 14 117 Calocota 21 123 Came 33 99 Camafo 02 160 Camaran
17 81 Cambaia 22 112 Cambalu 57 163 Cambava 07 150 Camdaluys 06 109 Cameni 62
92 Campai 01 135 Campamarin 22 122 Campanael 22 114 Campion 59 147 Camul 58 143
Camultan 31 104 Cana 18 83 Canaa 38 171 Cananor 12 113 Canasie 29 104 Cancirao
07 146 Candachnu 21 145 Candati 38 129 Candesbachens 32 117 Candu 05 111
Canduan 38 132 Canfa 29 118 Canfat 29 119 Canai 08 118 Cannahusi 49 92
Canssiend 39 111 Cant 49 103 Cantam 23 147 Catandanis 14 158 Cantao 23 147
Cantogna 22 99 Ab Canucho Primeiro 11 158 Caor 31 131 Capelle 08 109 Caph 37
104 Caracoll 11 131 Carangaro 05 158 Carasan 41 132 Carassa 43 103 Caraz 28 71
Caraza 42 133 Carchi 18 142 Careb 33 89 J. de Carenouba 10 129 Cargai 38 109
Carguth 53 140 Carigare 21 124 Carli 62 140 Carput 39 73 Carscha 21 80 Cartibut
39 79 Carvi 22 93 Casdar 27 111 Casmi 39 91 Cassan 39 94 Casser 42 131 Castelle
42 64 Castri 38 90 Casusa 32 175 Catacora 63 148 L. Catandanis 14 158 S.
Catharina 31 71 Cathaya 59 150 Catsnos 64 65 C. Caudinos 68 65 Cax 41 119 Cay
32 173 Cazan 57 80 Cazan 57 83 Cecir 09 135 Cedu 07 112 Ceiram 05 164 Celebes
01 155 Celebi 33 78 Cenaon 04 163 Centos 49 99 Ceram 03 161 Chabacu 41 77
Chabaque 24 121 Chabul 31 113 Cham 54 82 Chamba 12 144 Chanchim 22 145 Chaquoan
10 143 Charabon 05 142 Chaul 19 112 Cheatehu 41 148 Cheche 40 101 Chechio 43
143 Cheng 41 113 Chequiam 31 154 Chesmias 38 124 Chesolitis 49 109 Cheta 38 138
Chialis 53 132 Chiamay Lake 31 132 Chiambuchi 31 151 Chiamchi 29 153 Chianca 58
171 Chiarga 43 109 C. Chichio 47 160 Chiechia 42 83 Chien 24 153 Chieto 41 73
C. Chigmano 31 157 C. Chilac 08 116 Chilmar 31 91 Chilou 31 151 China 20 140
Chincheo 24 152 Chinchio 39 144 Chind 49 112 Chintane 41 62 Chinis 49 89
Chintecran 28 104 Chiom 03 154 Chipichi 47 78 Chiri 41 77 Chirma 29 98 Chirvan
32 108 Chirva 41 78 Chiseri 42 78 Chochloma 58 77 Choi 18 140 Choria 22 131
Chuch 39 78 Chulifu 49 142 Ciangario 57 168 Ciaohu 38 151 Ciarcian 42 122 Ciarn
48 122 Ciarti 51 138 Ciartiam 51 138 Cibinan 29 104 Cieugient 48 113 Cilno 42
63 Cincopa 49 68 Ciorza 63 144 C. Cipaom 31 139 Ciram 31 108 Circan 31 108
Cirote 28 129 Citar 23 116 Clamiata 31 89 Cochinching 19 139 Cochiuway 40 140
Cocman 41 82 J. Cocos 03 128 J. dos Cocos 17 129 Coilon 42 177 Coiscan 27 94
Coix 19 87 Colchistan 38 110 Colgoy 69 72 Colmak 67 129 Colonita 08 116 Duas
Collunas 25 179 Com 41 68 Como 27 101 C. Comori 08 113 Condagari 04 157 Condora
62 80 Condu 37 121 Contihu 38 141 Coorica 51 132 Copa 38 95 Cor 38 102 Cor 17
81 Coral 41 139 Coraran 61 147 Cordel 32 121 Canal D. Cordu 07 109 Core 20 85
Corr 33 161 Corsum 42 102 Cortiza 54 66 Corus 42 103 Cosbas 41 77 Cosmay 48 89
Cossin 67 97 Cossin flu. 63 105 Cossinig flu. 62 106 Costa de prael 17 141
Costaque 28 88 Cotan 14 145 Cotarinsto 03 143 Cotelmes 58 81 Cotelnitz 58 85
Couchine 18 143 Couchin 21 140 Covea 22 147 Coulan 09 113 Coulete 11 113 Coylon
03 166 Cranganor 11 114 Cremuch 43 78 J. D. Cubelin 09 107 Cubens 48 82
Cuchencan 49 151 Cuchia 52 132 Cumbor 28 158 Cui 11 135 Cuova 22 98 Curdi 41 77
Curm 31 121

D.
Dabul 18 112 Daga 40 93 Daga 40 94 Dala 19 132 Damaom 21 113 Damascus 32 72
Damixno 20 112 Damma 06 144 Dampini 04 136 Danra 41 118 Dapito 08 154 Daragati
68 38 Daragsi 28 105 C. Darama 04 112 Daramoi 05 141 Ter. Daru 03 132 J. Daru
04 133 J. Daru 05 167 Davisi 49 98 J. da Day 02 160 Dazia 41 69 Deblee 17 112
Deiser 38 93 Delfare 18 98 Delli 21 117 Denace 29 91 Derbe 43 82 Dern 31 94
Desert 58 130 Desert of Belgian 06 155 Devo 38 174 Defina 61 71 Diamuch 42 110
Diarbes 33 82 Diepe Bay 73 79 Dio 21 110 Diul 21 106 Doan 28 93 J. Dodombre 08
128 Dodon 19 132 Dondengam 02 143 Donko 52 66 Doriswal 59 130 Dosal 33 87
Dostian 23 124 Dulcida 28 102 Durate 01 153 Dwina 61 60 Dwina flu. 62 70

E
Eara 30 70 Easso 47 77 Efeso 39 57 Eigen 38 167 Eilag 49 112 Einga 31 166 Eit
32 81 Elagiar 31 72 Elcatie 24 84 Elforga 24 77 Elget 18 82 El pracel 17 14
Eltaif 24 78 Eltor 29 70 Endras 38 117 Engan 28 109 C. del Engano 19 155 J.
Engano 04 134 Enseada 18 142 Enseada d. Nanquin 39 160 Eoqui 38 185 Erbel 38 88
Eremige 09 113 Erex 41 83 Erin 51 126 Erste Hoeck 72 75 Eschinaru 41 103 P.
Escondito 18 155 Espunce 42 111 Etaican 41 119 Euphrates flu. 33 78 Euphrates
flu. 32 80 Exapoli 51 75 Excehia 42 80 Wms Eyl 02 132 Eylant 70 80 Ezina 60 140

F
Farave 107 41 S. Farn 32 89 Farsi 24 74 Fartach 18 88 Feluavia 33 83 Ferber 39
114 Fexi Jonoxima 31 174 Firushat 31 91 Fischio 38 61 Fitachi 33 176 Flores 07
152 Foia 39 57 Forcades 07 152 Formosa 26 158 Fortona 44 98 J.D.S. Francesco
Abrolho 05 87 Francesco Gomez 13 158 Frutach 49 92 J. D. Fuogo 28 163

G
Gaga 22 111 Gaibar 24 78 Gaiga 41 73 P. D. Gallo 07 116 J. de Gamo 03 112
Ganges flu. 29 126 Ganges flu. 32 129 Garpia 09 109 Gebrokenhoek 07 133 Genco
42 77 Gerger 41 73 Germop 40 103 Gest 29 109 Geuben 28 73 Gian 40 102 Giang 40
102 Giend 48 109 Gillibar 02 134 Gillolo 01 169 Gillolo 01 159 Gelula 32 88
Giocbach 18 83 Gion 29 91 Goa 17 112 Goadel 27 102 P. de Godonso 18 118 Gonga
29 92 Gonta 58 147 Gor 40 133 Gori 39 131 Gorar 32 79 Goro 47 77 Gout Bay 76 98
Gouro 31 128 J. des Graes 01 164 J. des Graos 01 165 Grigos 38 60 Grufting 58
116 Grustina 58 110 Gubelaman 18 90 Gubu 18 89 Guefu 48 148 Guegasu 52 163
Guiochio 27 145 Guiro 38 74 Guiulap 38 74 Gulferis 32 91 Guzarata 22 111

H
Halibir 20 79 Heemsthoeck 75 103 Here Is 32 92 Ser. Heri 38 103 Herin 32 84
Hermana 28 174 Hermate 01 134 Hiamangari 29 164 Hiamchez 31 144 Hianchoan 32
142 Hiechiga 37 174 Hietch 37 172 Hilam 23 140 Himpim 49 149 Hizium 38 168 Hizu
32 173 Hocheu 49 139 Hoci 48 134 Hoe 48 138 Hoatenhu 41 142 Holanu 41 143
Holiemanhu 31 143 Homine 42 70 Honao 39 148 Hontu 42 134 C. Hoquan 56 147
Hoquay 48 138 Hor 22 98 Hoyam 36 147 Hucheanu 28 157 Huchio 43 142 Hunaon 40
150 Hunchiu 31 150 Huquid 27 151 Huquosan 31 143

J
Jaffa 32 70 Jaffanapatam 10 118 Jambog 27 73 Jambut 24 74 Jancoma 19 134
Janpeur 27 152 Jaqueio grande 27 162 Jaquete 22 107 Jarat 07 163 Jaroslaw 58 66
Jasques 28 95 Idumaea 31 71 Jebel 33 79 Jemeri 27 127 Jeria 48 137 Jerome 53 101
Jerusalem 31 71 Jessed 32 92 Iliam 12 138 Ilhas dos Ladrones 31 176 Imaner 40
94 Imaner 40 98 Imene 24 89 India within Ganges 29 122 India beyond Ganges 27
131 Indian 39 104 Indu 29 113 Indus flu. 27 114 Initusu 41 139 Inquehu 23 147
J.D.S. Johannes 07 154 Jor 02 137 Jorgewitz 58 71 Jorman 57 85 Joughoria 57 108
Ira 12 117 Irmainech 48 91 Os fere Irmanas 08 96 Os tres Irmanos 04 94 Irnim 18
82 Isitac 08 153 Corea Isthmus 41 161 Istiaias 41 112 Jubra 64 78 Jubri 63 78
Jubu 28 151 Junno 37 142

K
Kalmucki 49 91 Karkithay 51 125 Kathay Lake 54 129 Kendori 61 89 Kithaskos 58
117 Koloa 63 67 Koy 05 165

L
Labo 03 129 Labor 23 118 Labor 43 122 Lacaoct 32 148 Laghi 16 84 Laiazzo 38 71
Laikheu 41 159 Lamhionuhu 28 147 Lampaca 22 151 Lanchiou 39 139 Landen 01 143
Langeness 71 71 Langoma 13 140 Langor 12 139 Langor 39 99 Lanuu 37 139 Lapara
05 144 J. D. Laqui 26 160 Larkhen 48 119 Lasculipatam 18 119 Lassa 31 87 Lavona
42 71 Laxa 58 165 Lazama 22 81 Lecehi 52 75 Lem 39 89 Lemsa 62 67 Lepin 59 92
Lequeo minor 22 155 Lequeo pequeno 23 157 Lere 43 101 Lesti 53 67 Levir 08 158
Leuri 33 171 Liamhat 31 147 Liamhat 29 147 Liampo 29 157 Liampon 05 137 Liamu
32 141 C. Lianthon 48 162 Ligor 08 135 Lima 27 88 L. Linga 02 140 Lingnou 31
149 Lohares 28 114 Lominato 09 150 Lonati 47 77 Lop 43 122 Lop 51 139 Lop
Desert 52 140 Lori 41 81 Loron 29 87 Loures Bay 71 76 Luavenu 22 143 Luca para
05 158 Lucomoria 60 101 Luconia 17 153 Lugor 08 133 Luhu 41 150 Luicheu 19 145
Luienheu 39 158 Luohiuu 38 152 Lurch 16 142 Luzom 18 153

M
Macao 19 132 Macas 22 148 Macasa 05 153 Machacharees 01 153 Machan 19 133
Machia 01 158 Macran 28 110 Macran 27 106 Madrafaher 21 110 Madura 06 147 Maffa
22 92 Magiarahat 21 90 Maglasen 41 98 Magnesia 39 60 Majacca 07 134 Mal 29 115
Malacca 03 135 B. d. Malaga 09 158 Malagindo 39 79 Malana 03 143 Malatia 39 73
Maliapor 13 117 Maliaque 03 153 Maldiva 03 110 Maldiva 01 111 Malerone 08 117
Malgomzua 71 100 Malmi 38 113 Mamoya 01 153 Manahon 29 87 Mancop 02 144 Mandao
27 117 Mandato 16 157 P. d. Mandato 18 152 Mandos 02 152 Mangalor 13 113 Streto
di Manhilla 14 158 Manicabo 02 134 Manicapatan 21 123 Manitta 17 152 Manoda 02
156 Manpado 22 150 Marane 32 94 Marareo 18 133 J.S. Maria 08 135 Marib 18 87
Marmareo 56 89 Marthaban 17 134 Maru 42 103 Marudo 08 148 Masaris 48 98 Masbet
51 82 Mascalat 23 87 Masdaron 41 92 Ilhas. d. Masearenhas 02 90 Masuson 39 99
Matacola 07 119 G.d. Matahambre 17 156 Mataran 06 142 J. dos Matelotes 12 169
Matergua 19 92 J. Maurits 09 152 B. May 13 142 Meac 37 169 Meaco 38 169 Meaos
02 157 Mecca 13 81 Mecca 23 77 Mechender 41 133 Media 39 89 Medina 24 75 Medino
39 98 Meelhaven 71 77 Melaxo 39 59 Meligberit 23 122 Meliolzura 33 74 Menan
flu. 29 131 Menigiam 28 95 Merdi 38 81 Meret 41 89 Merglan 43 112 Mesagart 41
94 Mesamar 41 93 Meze 65 71 Miam 31 147 J. d. S. Michael 08 149 Micheuu 39 141
Militan 39 117 Mimeud 33 118 Mindanao 07 156 Mindanao 08 155 Mindora 12 152
Streto. d. Mindora 14 152 Mintam 01 152 J. d. Mirabiles 17 151 Mirgun 13 134
Moga 19 131 Mogalachsu 47 119 Mola 05 164 Moltan 23 115 Molumi 32 155 Monfia 08
73 Mongul 60 150 Monpracem 07 134 P. Montano 01 131 Mora 44 100 Morair 21 89
Mordwa 53 76 More 69 71 Morioherinoso 79 156 Moro 14 134 Moscow 53 66 Mua 02
135 Muchi 21 77 Mugia 39 89 Mugora 19 79 Mugu 43 119 Mulchoder 41 93 Mulon 58
150 Multan 29 112 Mus 39 82 Musadali 31 84 Mussu 39 85 Muxentus 48 128 Muy 23
77

N
Naban 29 92 Nabaro 51 77 Nagata 38 164 Nagajanorda 49 90 Nageara 31 73 Naiam
62 136 Naiman 62 140 Nalobriga 28 171 Nanquu 32 153 Narch 30 122 Narsinga 13
115 Narsinga 14 115 Narsingapatam 19 120 Nasasira 03 149 J. Nassau 03 133 C.
Nassaw 90 74 Nastma 32 176 J. Do. Natal 08 78 Natel 40 90 Natuua 04 132 Navigni
37 151 Nayn 19 91 Nedachiu 32 150 Negapatam 11 116 Negoar 11 154 Niachu 32 139
P. Nias 07 131 Nibongs 02 143 S. Nichola 62 64 L. D. Nicuba 08 129 Bara de
Nigrais 18 131 Nimerdon 41 98 Nisabul 33 108 Nissa 31 94 Nisu 53 70 J. Noba 01
161 Nocum 32 154 Noquiuu 29 148 Nosuiseme 64 66 Nova Zembla 72 90 Novgorod 58
72 Novi 38 172 Novo 32 83 Nubisat 39 93 Nuca 39 64 Nuga 33 98

O
Obaia flu. 68 92 Obea Castle 68 96 Obia flu. 60 99 Obii flu. 58 122 Odia 14
136 Oelebe 07 117 Oirest 30 100 Ombo 08 156 Onde Seperdeo and a S. pedro 01 101
Onon 14 113 Opagodo 12 117 Orasan 38 110 Orsaoan 36 94 Organci 48 101 Orixa 21
119 Orlo 59 85 Ormus 23 94 Ormus 28 93 Osunu 31 165 Ouro 02 127 Ouro 02 125
Ouro 01 121

P
Pagansi 18 153 Pagasa 47 98 Pahang 03 137 Paiachio 30 141 Paiat 39 63 P. de
Paiores 18 156 Palalonga 18 118 Paledeate 13 117 Palhor 20 121 Palialiu 39 138
Palimban 02 138 J. das palmeiras 06 161 Palolimen 41 60 Palu 22 117 Panama 12
153 Panber 42 72 Panens 31 98 Panhum 32 140 Panevasion 17 152 Paniamhu 43 144
C. Panimnitue 47 151 C. Paqui 49 152 Para 33 104 Pargicas 03 156 Paris 41 58
Parmangato 22 108 Pasan 04 131 Pasch 41 98 Pascharu 58 90 Pasgema 01 132 Pasir
27 105 Passay 05 132 Patalgo 08 117 Patane 07 135 Patepane 22 109 Paternoster
07 153 C. Patim 49 153 Patines 04 164 Paxadro 20 115 Pazanfui 57 160 Pedir 04
129 Pegu 20 133 Pegu 21 134 Pehiholm 43 141 Peim 51 136 Pemb 48 134 Pemba 05 74
Penacota 18 119 Pepraes 17 131 Pera 05 134 Pergamo 41 58 Perm 57 95 Persia 38
93 The Persian Gulf 29 99 Perton 38 102 Pesarit 42 121 Pesondo 47 73 Petzora 64
84 Petzora flu. 63 86 Petzorke 71 71 Pigneli 51 136 R. d. Pintatos 19 156
Pipilipata 22 124 Pirichemar 41 91 Pitan 39 127 Pitsana 68 78 Pitzora 69 84
Platagena 41 67 Plessa 58 67 Pochio 39 153 Poco 02 147 Poiassa 62 90 Poin 48
121 Polarim 21 123 S. Polo 17 143 Polopoli 38 68 P. Pomam 10 138 Pommaluco 02
112 Ponciam 06 134 Ponda 07 134 Ponodam 17 156 Pontare 08 155 J. Porcos 03 128
Porion 38 101 Potera 38 62 Potigarara 04 137 Costa d. Pracel 03 133 Primeiro
Surgidero 12 158 Projaman 01 133 Puacotia 19 121 Pucavaon 03 143 Puelhas 158 12
Pulo 18 143 Pulo 16 144 Pulo 11 145 Punpa 48 134 Puraqua 07 109 Purgicas 03 156
Purtegal 02 153 Puto Condor 09 141 Puto Hube 09 142

Q
Qualisut 27 153 Quancii 23 144 Quancii 21 144 Quancii 28 143 Quentin 43 154
Quetho 08 108 Queviuhu 27 139 Quianchiu 28 152 Quianhu 29 150 Quianhu 29 151
Quiatechiu 32 139 Quibenhu 19 140 C. Quichio 27 141 Quicheu 29 140 Quicocum 32
171 Quilanchim 32 149 Quinchio 51 149 Quincii 49 160 Quanzay 43 154 Quiqui 01
153 Quitu 38 138 Quoda 07 134 Quor 26 153 Quunliahu 31 177

R
Ra 39 74 Racaim 20 111 C. Rachade 03 135 Rachagi 31 103 Rada 18 85 Rahabi 32
79 G. Rama 22 131 Raofa 42 130 Rarass 28 117 J. Rasa 09 128 C. Ras Algate 23 98
Rastum 38 82 Reama 17 85 Red 18 88 Reis 17 133 Remaier 39 123 Renevi 48 114
Resan 53 17 C.d. Resurrection 07 159 Revick 03 133 Dog Reys Magos 27 161
Rezania 52 70 Risa 48 91 Riso 42 73 Rocha 38 75 Roda 40 83 Roda 40 86 Roere 02
131 Rolinogori 62 66 Roast 41 90 Rostowa 58 65

S
Sabar 48 111 Sabochbar 57 97 Sabunra 11 158 Sacay 32 170 Sachamia 50 118 Sachi
43 118 Sachi 28 149 Sachion 53 141 Sachium 41 154 Sagar 21 81 Sagatin 58 94
Saich 48 140 Sakaden 01 144 R. d. Sal 23 152 Salacut 41 89 Salacay 06 153
Samach 47 109 Samachi 41 114 Samarcha 49 132 Samaria 32 71 Sambilon 08 132
Samoieda 68 93 C. Sanci 49 142 Sancit 42 142 Sandelbos 08 152 Sando 38 175
Sanga 24 117 C. Santo 42 152 Sarachiuch 47 102 Saraitak 41 88 Costin Sarg 71 75
Sarubu 18 87 Satagan 23 128 Satalia 38 63 Satan 24 74 Sava 19 84 Scans Hoeck 71
75 Schio 41 58 Schiraz 31 92 Th. R. Sea 20 73 Seban 48 110 Sebolas 17 133
Sebrui 39 98 Sebsoar 39 99 Sede 32 99 Segena 32 174 Semam 32 153 Serberco 38
112 Serchis 30 120 Sereng 30 105 Serent 41 81 Sermangon 91 119 Sernam 12 135
Serot 05 161 Serra 52 159 Sert 38 85 Servan 41 89 Serus 33 103 Shakasi 51 90
Shaysure 48 100 J. Shilpats 06 163 Siachem 31 121 Siagna 01 135 Sian 14 138
Siarant 31 117 Sibescher 31 89 Sibier 61 100 Sibsar 38 108 Sicabo 26 73 Sichio
39 151 Sidon 32 71 Siduscon 24 110 Siduu 39 143 Do. Sierta 26 176 Sieto 03 130
Sigersul 33 90 Sigstan 31 101 Siler 21 91 Siminan 48 108 Simmuan 42 128 M.
Sinai 29 71 Sind 28 111 Sindu 27 108 Sirput 33 91 Sisime 38 173 Situala 22 130
Sleg 49 112 Slohoda 59 81 Smirna 39 59 Soar 23 95 Sobar 38 69 Soesen 03 130
Solamas 39 88 Soldinia 39 90 Solonger 04 135 S. Sophia 48 72 Soptha 33 81 Sotor
05 154 Soutan 21 147 Speriamo 02 137 C. Spiritu santo 03 158 Spresp 38 83
Stingui 59 142 Straight of Sunda 06 137 Stranu 42 86 Strelna 60 76 Streltze 61
76 Strupilicas 62 90 C. Suchi 48 144 Suckdane 01 143 Sucko 59 67 Sucuan 31 157
Sues 30 68 Suiatsteo 57 82 Sumatra 02 133 Sumerlange 08 133 Suminat 31 113 C.
Sunteh 47 149 Suocuir 58 148 Sura 38 156 Surate 21 113 Surato 09 155 Susdal 58
67 Suva 02 152 Suvas 41 70 Swarte Hoeck 74 81 Sway 21 148 Swithin 31 157 Syday
19 153 Sir 21 93 Syria 33 71

T
Taba 26 91 Tabacia 22 111 Tacastan 40 120 Tach 28 98 Tacho 26 154 Tachmin flu.
64 115 Tacthen 19 147 Tadmar 31 72 Tagalla 18 133 Tagema 05 154 Taichan 39 92
Taingim 62 143 Taman 02 134 Tamanatos 02 143 Tamara 04 144 Tamasa 12 135 C.
Tamasi 42 127 Tamenacerim 02 143 Tana 38 169 Tanacerim 11 135 Tanaxima 29 164
J. Tanay 13 131 Tandura 12 158 Tanedare 07 117 Tangara 41 1^9 Tangchit 49 117
Tangonere 09 119 Tanguth 57 140 Tapuiri 52 107 Tares 48 109 Targana 49 117
Taron 39 91 Tarsus 32 92 Tarrar 61 156 Tarvana 12 138 Taskent 51 130 Taskent 49
130 Tasmoha 48 151 Tauris 41 80 J Tazata 69 131 Teachio 33 151 Tebes nising 31
1^5 Techio 31 149 Teid 23 90 Tema 33 92 Temechio 42 148 C. Tenchio 41 162
Tendiet 48 119 Tenduc 58 165 Tepetuet 43 140 Teras 48 110 Teria 48 138 Termen
42 118 Termena 39 117 Terra alta 08 157 Tesca 21 118 Tesech 29 95 Test 33 92
Theama 22 78 Thum 38 101 Tiachio 48 141 P. Tiago 08 134 Tianchenoy 48 150
Tianchenoy 48 150 Tibique 27 98 Ticko 01 133 Tidor 01 158 Timar 33 91 Timor 07
160 Tinior L. 01 155 Timibacam 28 158 J Tinhosa 18 145 Tiria 39 62 Tislin 42 80
Tolema 31 133 C. Toncheo 51 152 Tonsa 32 168 Tortosa 37 71 Totma 59 71 Totolli
01 155 Tozichu 31 141 Traja 41 56 Trebisond 42 72 Trenalala 11 117 Treno 17 133
Tricomalo 09 119 Troitz Koy 57 67 C. Troost 74 93 Tuba 04 152 Tuban 05 145
Tucajao 06 134 Tulcatam 39 107 Tulla 52 67 Tumen 58 97 Tumisa 23 88 Tursis 39
103 Tuszara 69 76

V
Vacia 39 84 Vacsisatlan 47 118 Vahulitz 60 85 Valanboam 06 148 Vanas 38 107
Var 21 121 Varcend 40 109 Vari 39 88 Vasa 31 84 Vehe 32 112 Velvaling 41 121
Vergut 48 114 Verm 27 129 Verwinter Hoock 74 104 Vesgirt 42 119 Veubia 39 138
Viatka 59 85 Vich 53 76 Viga 37 168 Villan 38 178 Ulache Hoek 05 136 Undis 39
93 Volga flu. 57 80 Voloari 32 172 Vonchia 19 144 Vora 13 140 Voziam 41 132
Usgetia 59 70 Uslinger hooft 75 103 Usting 61 75 S. Ustinga 62 70

W
Waggats 69 90 Wassilgorod 57 77 Weliki perni 69 95 Weliki poiassa 64 95
Wologda 69 66

X
Xamii 48 142 Xana 32 171 Xanton 42 154

Z
Zacabin 61 156 Zacaria 49 70 Zagathay 47 108 Zahaspa 42 100 Zanzibar 05 73
Zeche Sirach 42 81 Zehel 17 88 Zianbenhu 28 157 Zibit 18 81 Zibith 17 81 Ziden
22 77 Zingir 49 72 Zir 31 107 Zitari 17 117 Zizira 38 84 J Zocotora here is the
best Aloes 13 90 Zuich 38 89 Zuza 39 101

THE Description OF EVROPE.
THe least Part of the World being but two thousand eight hundred miles in
length, and one thousand two hundred in breadth; wherein are spoken fourteen
Mother Tongues: 1 In Ireland, and the west of Scotland.
Irish. 2 Welsh in Wales, Corn-wall and Britain. 3 Basquish, about the
Pyrenean Hills. 4 Arabic, in the Hills of Granada, 5 Dutch in Belgium,
Germany, Sweden, Denmark and Norway. 6 English in England. 7 Caucbian in
East-Freizland. 8 Sclavonish in Sclavonia, Poland, Hungary, and almost all the
Turks Dominions. 9 Illyrian on the East Side of Istria, and the Isle of Veggia.
10 Greek in Greece. 11 Hungarian and Epirotique in the Hills of that Country.
12 Jazygian on the North-side of Hungary. 13 Tartarian in Taurica, Chersonesus.
14 Finniche in Finland and Lap-land.

I. Spain. Compared to an Ox-hide spread on the ground. N. Bay of Biscay. W.
Atlantique. S. Streights of Gibraltar. E. Mediterranean. N. E. Pyrenees,
between it and France, eight hundred miles long, and five hundred and six
broad; two thousand four hundred and eighty in compass; reckoning eight
Millions of Inhabitants spent. 1 By Wars. 2 Expulsions of Eleven hundred
thousand by Philip the third, and one hundred twenty four thousand by Ferdinand
the Catholic.
Moors.

3 Infinite Plantations and Garrisons. 4 The barrenness of the Country and of
their people: (the Country in the midst or the 4th and 6th climates) Generous
people, witness the Cobblers advise to his Son to retain the Majesty of his
Family; and the poor woman's unwillingness to let her Son be an Apprentice,
because None knew their Fates, and he m ght be King of Spain; and the Cavalcero
that said, He would not mend his Spanish pace, for all the whipping in Paris.
Zealous and watchful over women; of great patience; the Spaniard seems wiser
then he is; and the French is wiser then he seems; their Language and Law the
issue of the Latin: their vendible commodities are Wines, Oils Metals,
Sugars, Silk Rice, Liquoras, Fine Wool, Cork, Rosin, Lemons, Raisins, Oranges;
its defect of Corn supplied from Italy, Sicily, and France: meat little, sauce
and sallet (as Sr. R. William answered a Spanish Don) much; Religion planted by
St. James, and so promoted the Roman way by the Which is so severe there, that
one hearing one of the Inquisition had a mind to a dish of Pears (being like to
die before he knew what he would have with him) he pulled up the tree by the
root, and carried it to him with the fruit upon it, saying, He would keep
nothing in his house that an Inquisitor should have a mind to hereafter.
Inquisition here, that when the people were mourning about a late Pope, when
he was sick, he said, My life can nothing benefit the Church, but pray for the
Prosperity of the King of Spain, as its Chief supporter. Its Rivers are 1 Ana,
rising in Seira Molina near Luenca running fifteen miles under ground (called
in Spain the Bridge whereon fifteen thousand Cattle may feed) and falling to
the W. Sea S. of Portugal.

2 Tagus running from the same spring by Toledo and Lisbon to the same Sea. 3
Guadalquior, by Corduba and Sevil to the Haven of St. Lucar. 4 Iberius from
Biscay by Saragossa and Tortosa to the Mediterranean navigable two hundred
miles. 4. Duerus through Portugal to the Atlantique.

I. Navarre, E. Bearne and France, W. Iberius, N. Biscay, S. Arragon. 1 St.
Palas. 2 Navarreux, of great importance and strength. 3 Pied de Port. 4
Roncevoux, these places in Low Navarre, incorporated with France, 1620. 5
Victoria. 6 Viane well fortified on the Ebro, as Frontire to Castile. 7 Sobra
be in the most inaccessible part of the Pyrences. 8 The well-fortified
Sanguessa. 9 Pampelun in the Champaign on the Banks of Arga. 10 Moya, a strong
frontier against France. 11 Montrell. 12 Olite. 13 Tafalla. 14 Tudele, the
Garrison and University on the Banks of the Ebrous. 15 Calattora is on its
Western Banks, with Logroguo and Estella.

II. Biscay, W. Leon, N. Sea, S. Navarre, and old Castile, E. Pyrenees and
Guienne in France, well-stored with Sider, Timber, and especially Iron and
Steel, to make amends for its want of Corn and Wine; the Inhabitants rude and
ignorant, especially in Religion; 1 St. Don Bastia.
Sebastian, a well-traded Port in the mouth of Gurvineo, with a fair and
capacious haven, defended with two Castles. 2 Tolosa or Toloset at the
confluence of the Oria and Duarzo. 3 Placenza on the Denia, inhabited only by
Black-Smiths. 4 Guataria, with a safe and convenient haven. 5 The well
fortified and garrisoned Fontarabia. 6 Renteria and its good Salmons. 8
Montrico, at the mouth of the Denia; all these in the Eastern Biscay near the
Pyrenees called Guipiscoa. 8 Berneo. 9 Guernica. 10 Well seated for provision
of flesh and meat.

Built by de Horo, 1300.


Bilboa on a fair Creek within two leagues of the Sea, enriched by Bilboa
Blades, Armor and Wool, private Merchants building here yearly four or five
ships for their own trade. 11 Larrabecna. 12 Laredo, with its capable Port. 13
Portugaletre, on an arm of the Sea.

III. Leon and Oviedo, N. E. Biscay, S. Castile, W. Gallicia. 1 Sublanco. 2
Leon at the Mountains bottom. 3 The frequented Port St. Andera on the Bay of
Bisay. 4 Santillania. 5 Llanes. 6 Cividad Real. 7 Villa viciosa a known Port. 8
Aviles, near Cabo de Pinis. 9 Oucedo. 10 Palenza on the Carrion. 11 Astorga,
frontiring on Gallicia. 12 Benevent. 13 The well-fortified Tero.

IV. Gallicia, E. Asturia and the River Meaw. 2. S. Portugal and the Minio, N.
Sea of Biscay, W. Atlantique, barren in all things, but the best Iron, improved
by their bad water; 1 Compostella, or St. Jago, much resorted to for Learning,
and Pilgrimage. 2 Baiona on the mouth of the Minio. 3 Groin, Two parts of it,
the high town and the low.
well fortified on the Sea of Biscay, between Cabo Ortegal, E. and Cabo Finis
terre W. of it.

V. Corduba, W. Portugal, and the Sea, E. Murcia and the Mediterranean, N. the
Mountains Serra Morina and Castile. S. Ocean, Streights or Gibraltar, fruitful
in Wine, Oil, a Sivil Orange, and Corn ripe in April. 1 Corduba, on the left
shore of Guadalquiver over a fair plain, where is a wood of Olive Trees thirty
miles long; whence our Cordovan Called so, because shipped there.
leather. 2 Jaen. 3 The skin of some Sardinian beast.
Ossuna. 4 Eccia on the River Chevil. 5 Morchena, on a hill where the best race
of Gennets. 6 Xeres de la Frontera and its Xeres Sack. 7 Medina Sidonia, the
Duke whereof is worth One hundred thousand Crowns, per an. etc. 8 Algezire on
the Sea side. 9 Conil, on the Sea beyond the Isle of Gades. Giving name to a
Spanish Duke.
10 Gibraltor in the mouth of those Streights the utmost South point of Europe,
Hercules Pillars. 11 St. Lucar, at the mouth of Guadalquivir Port to Sevil. 12
Tariffa, at the end of a Promontory looking into Africa. 13 Sevil, six miles
round the fairest place in Spain, a River running through it; where are 1 A
good University and Library. 2 Stately Palaces and Monastries. 3 Innumerable
Gennets, and a great Mart both for the Exporting of Oils, Oranges and Wines;
And Importing of the Pearls of Cabagna, the Emeraulds of St. Martha, the
Cochinels of Mexico, the Corrals of Hispaniola, where the common proverb is,
that if There does not enter Sevil every day in the year four thousand Pipes of
Wine, the Farmer of the Custom-House is sure to break. All these places in the
Province of Andalusia. 17 The two Ports and fair Havens Portreal and
Sancta-Maria to Gades in a Bay on the West of an Isle of that name, seven
hundred paces from the To which it is joined by the bridge Puento de Suato.
Famous for Springs and Mosaical works, and a Court of Parliament.
main Land; the road for the Spanish Plate-Fleet near the Streights, where
Hercules writ Nil Vltra, but Charles the 5th Plus Vltra. 18 Acamora on the
Tagus, famous for the Knights of the Name. 19 Guadalcanal with its Silver and
Gold Mines. 20 Merida, on the Tagus, and the old Roman Bridge. 21 Medelino. 22
Badaios near Portugal. 23 Guadalupe, as much resorted to as Loretto. 24
Placenza amongst the hills of Castile, and these in Estramadura.

VI. Granada, E. S. Mediterranean, N. Castile, a well-towned and stored
Country. 1 This and Alacan were famous for the Knights of it.
Granada with the Darion running through it seven miles round well fortified
and traded. 2 Rocky Alhama, and its medicinal waters. 3 Guadix. 4 Voles Malaga
under high-hills, as Ronda and Munda is, where Caesar said, He fought for his
Life, as he did in other places for Honor, keeping the Soldiers together,
with this word, Remember that at Munda the Soldiers forsook their General. 5
The well-fortified Frontire near Castile Antiquera. 6 Maxasra on the
Mediterranean shore and Vera. 7 The strongly and pleasantly Situated Loxa on
the Darion. 8 Malaga, at the mouth of Guadalquiver, well fortified and traded
for Raisins, Almonds, and Malaga-Sack. 9 The noted Haven Almeria on the
Mediterranean. 10 Carthagina, Coin and Basa, strong inland Towns.

VII. Murcia, E. W. N. Granada and Valentia, S. the Mediterranean. 1 Murcia and
its Pomgranates. 2 Carthagena in a Peninsula within the Jaws of the
Mediterranean, with a deep Marsh on the W. side of it, with a capacious and
safe Bay; whence Admiral Dorea said, there were but three safe Harbors,
August, July and Carthagena. 3 The inland port Lorca. 4 Alma ca, Sarazal,
strong places toward Valentia. 5 Cervillan. 8 Alhuma.

VIII. Toledo 1 * Calatrala on the Ana. 2 Toledo, strongly and pleasantly
seated on Tagus (enriched by a great resort of Noblemen, Shollars, Merchants
and Soldiers thither) upon the side of a hill: the Bishopric the best next to
that of Rome, worth thirty thousand Crowns. 3 Talvera de la Reyna on the Tagus.
4 The Town and Duchy of Medina Caeli.

IX. Castile, W. Portugal, N. Biscay, S. Carduba and Granada, E. Navarre,
Arragon and Valentia; 1 Soria. 2 Avila. 3 Vallis Oletum from the O^ lives about
it, where there is a college built by Philip the second for English Papists.
Validodid on the River Pisuerga, an University and a Mart. 4 Segovia, under
the Mountain Idubeda of great trade for Cloth. 5 Burgos on the head of the
River Relanzons in a controversy, between which place and Toledo, one said he
would speak for Toledo, and then Without which there is a Nunnery of 150 noble
Ladies called De las Huelgas
Burgos should speak for its self. 6 Cividad Rodrigo on the Gada. 7 Strong
Zamora on the Duero, where are the best Bag-pipes. 8 Lerma. 9 Tordefillas. 10
Salamanca. on the River Tormes in Old Castile. 11 Signenca. 12 The Royal City
Where is the famous building of the Escurial, where the Duke de Medina Coeli,
claiming a right in the Crown is answered, Non est ligar, there is no place.
Madrid upon the Guadarama, where the upper Rooms belong to the King, walled
with flint, which they call a Wall of Fire. 3 Alcala de Henans, or Complutum,
famous for its University, and the Translation of the Bible. 4 Alcazar, in the
Mountain Orospeda as is Molina, well fortified by Art and Nature, and Cuenca on
the Spring of the River Xucar and Tagus, all in New-Castile.

X. Portugal, N. Full of red lead, called Minium, navigable 100 miles, as is
the River Lavada
Minio and Avia between it and Gallicia, S. Algarve, W. the Atlantique, E.
Castile and Estramadura a Line from Ribadania on Aria to Badaios on the Anas or
Guadiana, four hundred miles long on the Seacoast, an hundred miles broad,
eight hundred seventy nine miles round, containing one thousand four hundred
sixty parishes. The defect of Supplied from France.
Corn in that healthy Country, supplied by the abundance of Silver, Marble,
Salt-fish, Fruits, Allom, Oil, Wine, and especially the making of Silk and
Salt. The people plain, devout, and good Seamen; the Rivers narrow and banked
with steep rocks, and so not very passable: Here is, 1 Lisbon, a famous Haven
and Mart on the Tagus, defended by the The Fort of St. Julians, and Rock Belem.
Castle Cascais, and situate on five small hills very Reckoned the fourth Mart
of Europe, the other three, being Mosco, Paris and Constantinople.
populous seven miles round; thirty Parishes; twenty thousand houses. 2
Santaren, on the Tagus. 3 Sintra on the Atlantique near Montes Lunae, the cool
retirement of the Portugez King in Summer. 4 Conimbre, the University among
Vineyards and Olive-yards on both sides the River Mondego. 5 Braga on the N. of
Duero. 6 The Haven Porto in the mouth of it. 7 Bragance. 8 And Ebora in a
spacious plain on the S. of Tagus. 9 Olivenca. 10 Portelegre. 11 Beia, all
these in Portugal, properly so called. 12 Niebla. 13 Silvis. 14 Tavila. 15
Faro, noted Ports in the Atlantique. 16 And the Haven Lagus in poor and desert
Algarvan. 17 The Healthful, only the people are subject to a disease, called
the Blood.
Azores, the chiefest commodity of which Islands are; the Peaches, Apples,
Lemons, Oranges, Botato Roots, Woad especially Island Woad, Canary Birds in 1
Tercera, sold in the safe Port of 1 Angra, begirt with Rocks; Pray, Villa
Nova, Sebastians, and St. Barbara, Earthen vessels in the impregnable St.
Mary's in the Isle of 2 St. Mary's. 3 St. Where they seat the meridian.
Michaels, and its Port Punta del Gada. 4 Fayal, much frequented by the English
for Woad. 5 Gratiosa Cedars in St. Georges, and Teixo, a brave tree allowed
only the Kings Officers.
Pico, where is 1 St. Sebastians; and 2 Cattota de Nesquin. Florez and Corvo,
where is the famous Sancta Crux, all under the Duke Who kept before three parts
of the Portugez under him.
of Braganza, since 1640, King of Portugal.

XI. Valentia, E. Mediterranean, W. Castile and Arragon, N. Catalogn, S.
Murcia, furnished with Rice, Sugar, Corn, Pomgranate, besides Mines of Sugar at
Buriol, of Gold at Lodar, of Iron at Finistrat, of Alabaster at Piacent; of
Allom, Lime, Plaster, the best Silks, Cotton, Crimson, Scarlet, and other
precious Colors, and rich perfumes; where 1 Alicant with its Bay on on the
Mediterranean, where is Alicant or Mulbury Wine. 2 Orivela, on the Segura. 3
Segorve. 4 Xelva. 5 Valentia, a fair-traded Port on the mouth of the
Guadalundea, three miles from the Mediterranean, an University. 6 The little
Village Laurigi. 7 Cullera, on the mouth of the Xucar. 8 Morvedre. 6 Gandia;
and 10 Denia, with its goodly prospect over the Mediterranean.

XII. Catalonia, N. E. Pyrenees, E. Mediterranean, S. Valentia, N. and N.
Aragon, a woody and barren place, the people perverse, maintainers of their
Liberties. 1 Cabo de leaux, not far from Moncada, Vrgel, and Momblane. 2
Tortosa, a strong French-Garrison on the Ebro. 3 The well-traded town Girone. 4
Large, pleasant and strong Barclerone, with its commodious Haven near the River
Lobregat on the Mediterranean. 5 Tarragone, E. of the River Francolino on the
Mediterranean, as is the safe Impurias, and the Ports Blanos, Palamos, and
Rosas.

XIII. Majorca, where 1 Helna on the River Techo. 2 The commodious Harbor
Collibre. 3 The well-traded and fortified Perpignan on the River Thebis; as is,
4 Salsus, a strong Frontier against Languedoc. 5 And the Old Castle Rousillon,
all these in Rousillon, S. Mediterranean, W. Catalogu, E. Languedoc. 6 Palma,
now Majorca in the Island Majorca, seated in the Mediterranean, just over
against Valentia, one of the Baleares. 7 Maon and Farnessus, two convenient
Havens, and the two Cities, Minorca and Jamno in Minorca, another of the
Baleares. 8 Where Conies destroy their harvest.
Yvica, in an Isle of the name where they make much Salt, between the main Land
and the Baleares. 9 The Corn Island Frumentera, infested by Serpents; with 1
Vedra. 2 Conirello. 3 Dragonago. 4 Moncoliber and Scombraria just opposite to
Carthagena. The Baleares, where they are so given to slinging, that the
Children have no meat, but what they can hit with a sling.

XIV. Arragon, W. Castile, N. Navarre, S. Catalogn, E. Pyrenees, on both sides
the Ebro; ill inhabited, unless it be in the Valleys about Calataiub: here 1
Jacca. 2 Calataiub on the Xalon. 3 Babbastro on the Senga. 4 Venasque among the
Pyrenees. 5 Lerida, on the Segre 6 Moson, where the King of Spain is
entertained every third year, and presented with three millions of Crowns from
Catalogne; One hundred thousand from Valentia, and two hundred thousand from
Arragon, which otherwise are free. 7 Huesca, the University. S. of Jaca. 8
Saragossa, on the Ebro, where the Heathen seeing the Lazars said, he would not
be a Christian, if Christ kept his Servants no better; all under the Dominion
of the King; to whom Pope John the 8th, and Alexander the 6th, gave the title
of Catholic, because he subdued the Moors, and converted the Indians, and
extended his dominion as Catholic as his Religion (they bragging that the Sun
rises and sets in his Dominions) in all Parts of the World. Here are five
Arch-Bishopricks, fifty two Bishoprics, and eighteen Universities.

II. FRANCE; Over the Pyrenees, like a Lozenge, N. English Sea, W. Aquitain
Sea, and Pyrenees between it and Spain; in the Northern temperate Zone, between
the middle parallel of the 5th Clime, the longest day fifteen hours; and the
middle Parallel of the 8th Clime, the longest day sixteen hours and an half:
the people whereof are said to be Wise after a thing is done, the Dutch in the
time of Action, and the Italian before it, much given to Law, it being said,
that there are more Law Suits in France in seven Years, then there have been in
England since the Conquest. Jovial in their discourses of Religion, witness the
man that would not eat the body of Christ, because (though it was on his
deathbed) it was upon Friday; and another in the same condition, when a
Clownish Priest offered him the Sacrament, that said Christ came to him, as he
entered into Jerusalem upon an Ass. Their Women free and debonair, the Language
Voluble and Elegant, said to be Amorous; as the Italians is Courtly, and the
Spaniards manly. Made sweet by the omission of several Consonants, whereupon it
was said, the French pronounce not as they write, sing not as they prick, and
speak not as they think. The Land affords plenty of Corn, Wine and In exchange
for which there is yearly brought into France one Million, two hundred thousand
pound, besides, that the Natives use no Salt, but what they buy of the King.
Salt, besides Beeves, Hogs, Nuts, Woad, Skins, Linen. The Peasants are slaves
to the Lords and King, and the Government Arbitrary; the Religion is the
Catholic, mingled with the Protestant: the Laws temporary and at pleasure,
only of late, reduced to a Code; the Salique Law, is, that no woman inherit the
Crown, called so (say some) from the first words of it, si aliqua: the
Spaniards French Gentlemen said, that Spania and Mania, poverty and madness, in
allusion to the King of Spain and the Duke of Mayn, were the enemies of France.
and the English, are the great Enemies of France; and when an English man was
asked at our last leaving of France, When he should come again; He answered,
When your sins are greater than ours.

It is said, that the best place, 1 to be born is in France, because the
Government is always in a man. 2 To live in is Italy, because the people are
Civil and Ingenious. 3 To dye in is Spain where the Religion is Catholic;
there are thirty four Havens here, large, safe, defensive, and frequented. 1 In
France, properly so called, Isled with Rivers, E. Champagn, N. Normandy, W. S.
La Beausse. 1 A Bishops See.
Selis. 2. Campeign, on the Oyse, the Kings retiring place for Hunting. 3
Beavois, a large well-traded town. 4 Clermont. 5 St. Loup near Picardy. 6
Luzarch. 7 Brenon villo in valois, the name of a Line of Kings in France. 8
Chaenton, three miles from Paris, with a They being not permitted the free
exercise of their Religion in any walled town.
Church of Protestants. 9 Corbeil. 10 Morel and Melun near the confluence of
the Sein and Essons, with Fountain Bleau, the Hampton Court of France in
Heurepoix. 11 Fair Estampes, in an equal distance between Paris and Orleans. 12
Montleberry, between Paris and Estempes, as is Castres and its Parliament. 13
Nemeurs in Gastinois. 14 St. Where there are 52 Colleges, like the Halls at
Oxford; the Scholars rude, and the place dangerous.
Germain, the Windsor of France. 15 Poissie, on the confluence of the Siene and
Marne. 16 Chantilly. 17 St. Denis, the Sepulture of the French Kings, three
miles off Paris. 18 St. Cloud. 19 Paris on the Sein, not navigable in less
than seventy five miles off of it (with the Lowre their White Hall, and the
Garden of the Tuillieries) in four parts, the Town, the City, the That endured
one thousand one hundred shot, 1614, and not taken.
University and Suburbs, besides the Royal Retirements of, 1 Madrit. 2 Rual;
and 3 Boys de Vincennes all in the Isle of France.

II. In Champaign, N. Picardy. E. Lorrein, pleasant and fruitful. 1 Cholon on
the Marne a See; as is 2 Joinvill, St Vrben, and * Pieere-fort. 3 Vassey on the
Blois. 4 Vitrey, on the confluence of the Sals and Marne. 5 Chaumont on the
Marn, strengthened with a craggy Rock and a Castle. 6 The Royal Fort St. Desire.
7 Rhemes the Who is one of the twelve Peers of France.
Archbishops Sea on the Vaste, where the French Kings are Crowned with the Oil
kept in that Church, and where there is an English Catholic College. 8 Ligni
on the Sault; all these in the Province of Rhemes. 9 Sens an Archbishopric.
10 Langres on the head of Siene, the seat of one of the twelve Peers of France.
11 The strong and well-traded Trois, the Daughter of Paris, on the Siene. 12
Provence, with its Province-Roses, and other flowrs. 13 Meaux, a Bishops Sea on
the Marn. 14 Mounceaux. 15 Monterrie, a strong place on the confluence of the
Sein and the Yonne. 16 Castle Thierri on the Marne. 17 Auxerre. 18 Fontenay,
these in the Province of Sens. 19 The well-fortified Bar le Duc on the Siene in
the Dukedom of Bar, formerly belonging unto Lorrein.

III. Picardy, E. Lorrein and Luxenburg, W. Normandy, and the English Sea, N.
Artois and Hainault, the Granary of Paris. 1 Callice, at the entrance of the
English Channel near Artois the And Queen Mary said when dead, that the loss of
it should be found on her heart.
Key of France, of such consequence, that M. de Cords, before Q M. lost it,
said He would be contented to lie seven years in Hell to recover it. With its
out work strong Hamme. 2 Fiennes. 4 Ardes, where the interview was between King
Henry the 8th, and King Francis. 5 The fort Blackness, between Callis and
Boulogn. 6 Boul gn on the shore, with its out-work Boullenbergh and its
opposite Chastillon. 7 Abbeville, on the Some well-fortified and Garrisoned. 8
Monstrevil, a strong out-work to Paris, between Abbeville and Boulogn. C ecie
and its battle, and the small Haven Treport. 10 Peronne on he Some with the
strong Frontiers Roy and Mont-didier. 11 Corbie, a strong Frontier on the
Neatherlands, as Chaune. 12 Piquigni on the Some, between Amiens and Abbeville,
famous for the interview of Edw rd the 4th, and Lewis the 12th. 13 Amiens on
the S^ame, wi^h its Cathedral and Vidamate. 14 Soissons on the Aisne, giving
title to a Duke of the Royal Stock of Bourbon. 15 Laon, whose Bishop is one of
the twelve Peers. 16 Chappelle, one of the best outworks of Paris against La
fere, Han; and which is of most importance, St. Quintin. 17 Rothel, a frontier
upon Hainal as is St. Monhaud, Sygni and 4 Cheau Portian. 18 Guise and its
Castle and Dukes, Ripemont; the strong outwork Chastlet toward Lunemburgh, 4
Mazuers and its Citadel on the Meuse.

IV. Normandy, E. Some and Picardy, W. Britain, N. our Channel, S. France,
where (not to mention the poor Roy de Jvedot) after I have noted that they have
much Law, the people are so hot, and no wine, the Climate is so cold: Observe 1
the City Constance, and its Land-mark-spire. 2 Auranches, on a Rock over the
English Channel. 3. Strong Where William the Conqueror was buried.
Caen on the Orne. 4 Buetux. 5 The large, sweet, and well-traded Roues on the
Sein, where Lewis the 12th would not, as he was instigated, deface the Grave of
Jo. D. of Bedford, saying, God forbid that I should wrong him when dead, whom
all France could not withstand when living. Where the Skinners Daughter,
William the Conquerours Mother was born.
6 Falais on the Ante. 7 Verneville. 8 Alanson. 9 Rich Eurux. 10 Pontoise on
the Oyse. 11 St Valerois, on a safe little Bay between Diepe and New Haven. 12
Deip on a large Bay of great trade to the New Foundland. 13 The Port-town to
Paris and Rowen, on the mouth of Sein, called Haure de Grave; besides the
inconsiderable Forts, Harflew, Honflew, Churburgh, and towns, Longueville,
Aumal, Harcourt, Ewe, etc. Mortaegn, Nogent le Rotrou.

V. Britain, E. Normandy, S. Anjou and Poictou, N. W. English Sea, plentiful,
as pleasant, except in Wine and Navigable Rivers. 1 St. Maloe, a great Mart
with Spain on a Rock in the Sea. 2 Brieu, a frequented Port in the English
Channel. 3 The little secure Haven, Blavet, Morlais, Triguer, and St. Pol de
Leon and Croissie in the mouth of the Loir; and the most goodly Harbor of
France, and Key of Britain, on a large Bay in the Western Ocean, with the well
frequented Road Conquet, Kemper, Corentine near the Fore-land against the
Promontory La Four. 4 Inland towns, rich and pleasant Dinan on the Rance
Lam-bulle, Nantes on the Loir; the Parliament City Renes; Moorish Dole; noble
Rhoan. D. of Vendosmes seat Ansenis: the strong pieces Chastieau-Briant and
Clissen on the Loir.

VI. Aujou, E. la Beus, W. Britain and Poictou, N. Normandy, S. Berry and
Poytou. 1 Bawgie. 2 The Pleasant, Reformed University Saumaur on the Loir. 3
Angiers, University on the Sartre, very healthful. 4 Beaufort. 5 Locks, on a
Rock by the River Indre. 6 La Fresh and its College of Jesuits. 7 The
pleasant Amboise on the Loire in the S. E. of Anjou, called the Garden of
France. 8 Pleasant Richlieu. 9 A fair and well-traded town in a sweet Country
on the Loir Where is the Gate St. Hugo, whence Hugonots issuing out in great
Multitudes had their names.
Tours. 10 Mayen Northward on the main. 11 Laval, near the head of the Main. 12
Man's on the confluence of the Huine and Sartre.

VII. La Beausse, N. Normandy, S. Berry, W. Anjou, etc. the Nurse of Paris. 1.
Chartres, seated on a sweetly contrived uneven place near the Eure, fair and
goodly 2 Annea. 3 Druex on the Eurux. 4 Remorantin on the Souldre, Mallenzay,
La Fert in lower Beaus toward Berry; Clery, Turi, and Angervile, between Paris
and Orleans. Jargau, a strong out-work of Orleans, pleasantly seated on the
Loire in a sweet air, where Wine grows so strong and intoxicating, that it is
banished the French Kings Cellar by an Edict, an University for the reading of
the Civil Laws: besides Blots on the Loir, that good air where the Kings
Children are Nursed. 2 Castean-Dun, on the top of an hill on the confluence of
the Loir and Aigre. 3 Lavardin. 4 Vendosm.

VIII. Bourbon has 1 Molins on the Allier the center of France, eminent for
Salmons and the With abundance of Oranges and Lemmons.
Gardens on the Castle of it. 2. The two Bourbons on the Loir with their
Medicinal waters; St. Porcini, St. Amand, etc. In Burbonois toward Berry and
Auverne. 3 Montbrison the Loire and Feur; St. Germans; here is abundance of
Coal, in Forest N. Lanqued, S. Bourbonois, E. Beaujolois; where 4 Beau Jeu on
the brow of a rising Mountain, with a goodly Castle. 5 Belle ville. 6 Vi^e
Franch. 7 Neirond. 8 St. Flour in Avergn, impregnable. 9 Arilla on the
Jourdain, with its strong Cast. 10 Beauregard on the Garden, Billon, Maral. 11
Clermont, where was a Council 1067. pleasantly situated. 12 Lion. 13.
Montpesier. 14 Montferrat. 15 Yss^ire 16 Turenne. 17 Aigueperse.. 17 Briondo.

IX. Nive^nois, N. la Beaus, S. Burbonois, E. Champaign, W. Berry, where
Quarries of Stone and Mines of Silver and Iron, with good Pastures make amends
for their want of Corn and Wine; has 1 Nevers on the Loir; and 2 Potigni, with
its old Abbey.

X. P ictou, N. Britain and Anjou, S. Xantoign, E. Berrey and Limosin, W.
Aquitain Seas has 1 Where St. Hilary was Bishop.
Poictiers on the Clin, an Academy for the Civil Law. 2 Soari on the Charent. 3
Talmont on the Sea. 4 The indifferent Port Beaumoir. 5 Lusignan on the Jon. 6
Lusson, on a navigable Arm of the Sea. 7 Thovars. 10 Duke Hamiltons Title and
Earldom.
Chastle herald.

XI. Berry, good for Pasturage and Sheep, whence an excess in number is
retorted there thus Fie Sir, there are not so many sheep in Berry wherein of
thirty six walled places, these are the most remarkable; 1 Wiarron, pleasantly
seated in the confluence of four little Arnon, Theo, Cher, Yeure.
Rivers, among Woods and Wines. 2 Bourges, a large rich Town on a Marsh,
commonly over-flowed by the Rivelets, P. de Commines his Barony, who made as,
C. de medicis used to say, as many Heretics in Policy, as Luther did in
Religion by his plain and impartial writing.
Auron, Malon, Aurelle. 3 Conoressant on the Souldre with its magnificent
Castle. 4 Chasteau Reux on the Indre. 5 Issanden on the Theoi. 6 Argenton on
the Creuse. 7 Sancerre of consequence and strength near the Loir. 8 The Town
and Seigniory of Aubigney, giving Title to the second branch of the House of
Lennox.

XII. Aquitain, through which the Charente runs to the Isle of Oleron. 1 The
Seneschalsie Saints on the Charente. 2 St. John de Angelie, now demolished,
and called 1621 Lewis burgh on the Boutonne. 3 Bourgh sur la mer on the
Dordonne. 4 Retraict on the conflunence of the Garond and the Dordonne. 5 The
strong Garrison Blay on the mouth of a River, securing the passage to
Bourdeaux. 6 The known Port of Xantoign, Rochel, within a capacious Bay, with
two Forts on each side of it, and a Chain drawn up between every night, with
the new fortifications of Montalban and Nismes. 7 The considerable Fenny
Sea-Town Marans, with strong Soubize and Chastillon; these in Xantoign, E.
Limosin and Perigort, W. Aquitain Sea. 8 Fronsache between the Garond, and the
Dordonne, as is Libourne, Soulat, Monseguer, Esparrez, Reule, Chasteau-Moron,
Sainctere. 9 The frontiers Baion on the Sea, St. Jean de Luz, where the last
Peace was made between the French and the Spaniard at the Foot of the Pyrenees,
and D' Acq^. 10 Moorish Bourdeaux on the S. Bank of the Garond, a noted Empory
for Gascoign Wines, frequented by the The English not permitted to come up the
River, till they have unladed their Ordinance at Blay.
English and Dutch; these in Guienne, S. of Gascoin; where 11 Mountainous, 1
Oleron, Orthres, Lescar. 2 Well-Garrisoned Saincterre. 3 The Parliament City
Pau. 4 The frontier Grenade near the Pyrenees toward Spain. 12 Strong
Savardun, and Monthault. 13 Masews and Mirepoix on the Garond. 14 Panieres,
Mirand and Foix on the Languier in Foix, W. of Languedoc. 15 Hilly Tulles,
Vzarche, Breive le Gaillard, Meissuch, Belmont on the Vezere in la March, or
lower Lemosin toward Auverne. 16 Industrous Limoges, called the Prison of
Beggars, where every body must work, on the Vienne. 17 Chaluz and Soubsterrein
on the As is Dorat, Boisson, Birat, and Confaulat.
Confines of Berry. 18 Mascar, and the Well that ebbeth with the River of
Bourdeaux, la Roche, M^ramont, strong Nontron, Sarlat Parigeux and its Wines in
a pleasant Valley; Bergerac on the great River D^xdon. Angelosme encompassed
with the Charente, and some hills near which is Roch Falcon. Chabannes,
Merrivill and Villebois. In Perigort, W. Xantoign, and S. Gascoin. 19 The Chief
City of the Cadurei, whence the worshipful English family of the Chaworths.
Cahors, a well traded town on the Loch, strongly seated and fortified
Montalban Souloc and Nigrepell is on the Dordon (where 1621 women's Secrets were
filled up by barbarous Soldiers with Gunpowder, and so tore to pieces)
Chasteau, Sarasin, Nazaret and Burette on the Garond in Quercu, toward
Languedoc and Auvergn. 20 Buigners and its Baths, Lourd, Tarbe on the Adour in
Bagorre, N. of Bearne. 21 Moret, Lisle en don, and Lombes on the Garonne,
Silliers, Monregeau, St. Fregau, St. Bernard, Conserans near the Pyrenees in
Comminges. 22 Aux on the Gez. 23 The modern fortification of Lecteure against
Spain, Chastelineau, Nestes, Malbourquer, Auvillar in Armaignac. 24 Mont de
Mursan and Tartus on the Lador; Chastel Jalone and Nerac, able to disturb Trade
between Bourdeaux and Gascoign. 25 The Seneschalhe Again, well-traded on the
Garonne, Foy, Condon, Villeneufne, Claerace and Marmand; most of these parts
reformed.

XIII. Provence, the Province, W. Languedoc, S. Mediterranean, N. Daulphine, E.
Alps, 1 Marish Famous for a Council there in Constantines time.
Arles on the Rhosne. 2 The noted Port, Marseilles, Toulon on the Mediterranean
with fair Havens. And 3 Aix on the Rhosne. Where is brought much Salt, Oil and
Almonds from the Isle of Eres.
4 The Seacoast Town Antibi toward Italy near the Varo. 5 Feriols on the
Mediterranean, and the Inland la Grace, Merindol and Chabriers in the
Mountains toward Daulphin, not memorable, but for the Protestant Massacre
there, with Aurange, and one or two towns more in the Principality of Aurange
and Avignion, with as many places belonging to the Pope in Avignion, S. of
Aurange.

XIV. Languedoc, W. Gascoine, E. Province and Daulphin, S. Mediterranean and
Pyrenees, eminent in the lower part of it for Olives, Figgs, Raisins, Oranges;
1 The large Parliamentary City Toulouse (where Aurum Tholosanum) on the
Garonne. 2 Strong and Rocky Montpelier, with its Physic, University and
Garden. 3 Nismes, Aleth and Carcasson. 4 Commodious Alby on the Alby, Beziers
on the Orb, Agde on the Egbaud and Narbon, the Aude well fortified, as a
Frontier to Catalogn, and Rousillon, with Viviers on the Rosne and Rhodes.

XV. Daulphine, N. la Bresse and Peidmont, W. Lionois and Languedoc, E, Alps
and Savoy in the higher Part of which the people travel from All-halland-tide
till Easter, leaving at home none but old people, women and children. 1 The
Civil Law, University and Mart Valence, seated as the Presidial town and
Metropolis Vienna, and Parliament City Grenoble, well built on the Rh^sne,
along which River lie La Roche, Rosillon, Ternay, Montmelinor, Romons, St.
Andre, Beaurepaire, St. Morceline, Cremien; in the lower Daulphinate: The
Presidial Siege, and Metropolis of Ambrun by the durance, as is Bria^son
Memorable for a reformed Synod held there 1603, where the Pope was defined to
be Antichrist.
Gappe, Tricassin; Dye whence Vin A good stomach wine.
Die, Essiles, Mombrun and Charges.

XVI. Lions: 1 Escaalas, Chaumont, Lebrelle, Franche-ville, Dandilli on the
Rhosne. 2 Mascou on the Sosnes, as Lions is on the confluence of the Rhosne and
Sosne, a good University, and a great Mart, where Peter Waldo seeing a man
suddenly dying in the streets, was awakened to become Religious, and so begun
the Waldeses: On the East of Lions, is the frontier Bourgh against Savoy,
Montreal, Castillon, Bellay, Bugey and Verome in la Bresse.

XVII. The Dukedom and Earldom of Burgundy, that has more Rivers than all
France, as France has more than all Europe; 1 Chalosnes, and the fair
well-fortified Parliamentary Dijon on the Sosne. 2 Aurun and Beaulne on the
Bursoize, where is the best wine of France. 3 Poor Alize, Tournus, Verdun,
Naiz, St. Leiger and its Baths and strong Semur, Noyers, Auxerre toward
Champagn, with Charolles in Charlois near La-Bresse, these in the Dukedom. 4
Laxaol and its Baths, strong Nazareth on the borders of Switzerland: Arboise
and the best Wines: the Salt place Salim; the well fortified Metropolis
Bisanson between two Mountains on the D ux, as is Dole, where it is said, that
the People for fear they should be Protestants, are forbid to talk of God: and
Poligni in the Country.

XVIII. In the Isles, 1 Oleron, where Richard the third of England gave those
Laws as Lord of the Sea, now obtaining in the World under title of the Laws of
Oleron. 2 Ree, the out-work to Rochel; 1 St. Hilary, St. Martins, St. John's de
mons, La Butte de moni, in a Marsh full of Salt Pits; in the Aquitain Sea,
strong Belle Isle; Salt Marmostier, and Isle de D^ea in the west Sea. 4 L'
Anguillade, Maguelone, Pomegues and Eres, poor things in the Mediterranean.
Which it sends to St. Maloes, and so to Spain.
Impregnable Jersey, with its Corn, Sider and Fish, and Michaelmas Ague, called
Les Settembres; Rich Guernsy with its Stockings, Wast-coats, Merchandise
strengthened by St. Peter's Port; poor Alderney, and its semicircle haven La
Craggio and Sarke, all four under the Which the people will not change, though
they perish, and therefore they kept out the French so long.
gracious Government of the Kings of England these three hundred years. The
Strength of France is Sixty Thousand Horse, and Eighty Thousand foot: The
Revenue Eleven Millions Sterling; whence Maximilian desired. That one of his
Sons might be a God, and the other King of France. Here are fifteen
Universities, one hundred and seven Bishoprics, and seventeen Arch-Bishopricks.

III. ITALY, N. W. Alps toward Germany and France, Adriatique, toward
Dalmatia, S. Tuscan Seas toward Africa, E. the Adriatique and Jonian from
Greece. From Aost near the Alps to Otronto in the E. of Naples, one thousand
one hundred thirty four miles, The breadth of it from the River Varo in
Provence to the River Arsia in Friuli.
four thousand round, under the 5th and 6th Climate of the temperate Zone. The
Best spoken in Florence.
Language Italian, i. e. corrupt Latin; and their Religion the Catholic:
Their Mountains, 1 the Appennin, a ridge of Hills, reaching from the
Territories of Genoa, to the furthest part of Italy. The whole story of the
Original Governments of it may be seen in Livy, Florus, Suetonius, Salust,
Tacitus, Halicarnasseus, Dio Caessius, Lipsius, Boterus. The Land, besides Corn
and Wine, supplying other Countries with Glasses, Allom, Rice, Taffaties,
Sattins, Silks, Grograins, Rash, Fustians, Velvets, Goldwire, Armor, etc. That
make the Italian Merchants the The rich men in Italy are the richest, and the
poor the poorest.
wealthiest of Christendom; the people being Civil, Thrifty, Reserved,
Thoughtfull, Submissive, Modest, tender of their own and others Reputation,
Jealous; the Women modest, yet slurred with this Proverb, That they are Magpies
at the door, Saints at Church, Goats in the Garden, Devils in the house, Angels
in the streets, and Sirens in the Windows; If God make them Tall and Fat (for a
Goodly Woman is of much esteem there) they will make themselves fair.

I. In Naples, environed with the Tuscan, Jonian, and Adriatique, only a line
between it and St. Peter's Patrimony with its Whereof not one transported
without the Vice-Royes leave.
Horses, Allom, Wines, Metals, Saffron, Silks, Oil, Baths, and
Physick-Gardens, and good Soldiers. 1 Important Cajeta, on a capacious bay. 2
Fair Whence the Prench disease came first called Morbus Neapolitanus.
Naples, seven miles round on the Sea, defended with four Castles, and a
mountain impregnably, with the Hospital Annunciada, spending sixty thousand
Crowns a Year. 3 Delicious Capua. 4 Poor Cuma and Nola. 5 The Creek Puteoli,
over against. 6 Baiae, and its semi-circular Bay, with its Baths and Buildings.
7 Sessa. 8 Strong Aversa Casetre, etc. and twenty three more, with one hundred
and seventy Castles, with the flaming Hill Vesuvius. 8 Fair A Rival to Naples.
Rivells. 9 Pleasant Nuceria, nine miles from the Sea. 10 Malfi on the Sea,
where was invented the Mariners Compass, Anno 1300 by Flavio. 11 Marso. 12 The
Physic place Salerne, within a mile of the Sea; all these in Terra de Lavono,
the great Forest of Vines. 13 Benevent, Arpino, Aquila. 14 The well-traded
Mart Lanciano, four miles from the Adriatique, with its port Ortona. 15 Citta
die Chietti, seven miles from the Sea. 16 Aquino and Sulmo, famous for Aquinas
and Ovid, on the River Piscara in Abruzzo. 17 The Lakes Lesnia and Arduatius
memorable for Eeles, and for that draining cannot diminish them, nor Floods
increase them. 18 Rich and ancient Luceria, Troia, Ascoli, Maufredon with its
capacious and impregnable harbor, populous St. Severine, the rich soyled Barri
near the Sea; the important haven town Barlet, reckoned with Crema in Lumbardy,
Prato in Tuscany, and Fabriano in Ancenitana, the fourth strong hold of Italy;
the narrow port Monopolis, Bitonto, Polignano, Bisigh, Molfet; strong The
Vennsium, that was Horace's birth place.
Venosa in the two Apulias Daunia, and Peucetia (...) from the pitch there. 19
Rich Lecci, weak Sea-town Castro; impregnable Gallipolis; the choked haven of
Brundusium, and the capacious port Otronto in the Country Otronto Environed
with the Adriatique and Jonian, furnishing the Merchants of Genoa with Corn,
Oils, Melons, Citrons and Saffron if the birds Gains keep off the
Grasshoppers. 19 Well-fortified Visignan, rich Macera; Belcastro, eight miles
from the Sea; Rosanum 3 miles Altavilla, Troja Nova in upper Calabria. 20
Co^sentia, between Crathis that turns hair yellow, and silk white; and
Busantus, that dies both swarthy: desolate Rhezo over against Messana, Castro
Villare, Belmont, and Altamont, St. And Ni^astro three miles from Sea.
Euphemie in Golfo, St. Euphemie Pest, where Roses grow thrice a year; Midland
Dian, and the seashore Policastro in the lower Calabria and the Basilicate on
the seashore, famous for Tunnies so like man's flesh; besides some little Isles
in the Adriatique and Tyrrben or Tuscan Sea, and something bigger ( viz.
impregnable Ischea with its Thence called Oenotris.
Wines, Allom, Sulphur, Hares and Conies: Prochita with its Baths, Pheasants
and Fish; ( Augustus and Tyberius his Capreae and Aenaria) in the Bay of
Puteoli, over against the hill St. Angelo the Revenues three millions of
Crowns, whereof twenty four thousand goes to the Pope; Archbishops twenty,
and Bishoprics one hundred twenty seven.

II. In Sicily, (over the straight of Messana in the Mediterranean) within the
Tuscan sea or the Called so, because they lie East of us, etc.
Levant seven hundred 84 miles round under the 4th Climate; famous for cruelty
in the Sicilian Vespers, and their ingenuity in the Gerrae Siculae, called
Trinacria, because it shooted forth into three Capes, Capo de foro, N. Cape
Passaro, W. Capo Coro, S. yielding Wine, Oil, Gold, Silver, Allom, Salt, Sugar,
(which they sell in Canes to the Venetians) Agates, Emeralds, Silks, Fruits,
especially Particularly wheat, for which the King of Spain receives yearly one
hundred thousand Crowns.
Corn, it being now h^rdeum Italicum, Hispanicum and Affricanum, as well as
formerly it was called Romanum, famous for its flaming Aetna or Montgibel.

1 It has Lentini and its Lake The fishing of which yearly is worth five
hundred thousand Crowns.
Palicoro. 2 Noto, and its fair harbor under Cape Pascari. 3 Strong and
ancient Syracuse in Vallis de Noto. 4 Gergenti, where the people eat, as if
they should not live long, and build, as if they would live ever. 5 Palermo
toward Sardinia, with its artificial haven; and the Port Trepani, Monreal,
Segesta in Muzara. 6 Midland Nicosia, Milase. 7 The fair and well Its so
strong, that the gates of it are kept open in dirision of the Turks.
fortified town and haven Messana, with its watchtower, and way of cooling
wine in Snow. 8 The hollow bay'd, and little traded Messina in Mona; besides
the burning Vulcanian Isles, now called Stombolo: the Island Lipara with its
Bath, Allom, Sulphur and Bitumen. The Isles Favognana and its capacious bay;
the barren and unpeopled Isle Hiero. In Sicily are three Archbishops, and nine
Bishops.

III. Sardinia, (where the King permits no Cutler) W. of Sicily five hundred
and sixty miles round under the fourth climate; receiving no venomous or
hurtful Ye^s, and the herb, which if a man eat, he would laugh and dye; whence
Risus Sardonicus, it has no water in Summer, but what it has stored up in
winter.
Creature, except the Fox. The Language, a corrupt Catalonian; 1 High Calaris
with its fair and well frequented haven toward Africa in Cape Cagliari,
Aquilastro, Sessari with its Aqueduct twelve miles long; Fenny Orestage,
wholesome Alghes-Bosa, and its fair and frequented haven: Here are three
Archbishops, and fifteen Bishops.

V. The Patrimony of the Church, * three hundred miles long from the Adriatique
to the Tuscan Sea, has 1 in Romandiola. 1 Bononia Boulogna a Civil Law, Half
Italy.
populous and well built University on the River Anosa. 2 Ariminium or Erimini
on the East of the River Rubicon, well traded and seated among Olives, Vines
and Figs. 3 Cervia on the Adriatique and its Mart for Salt, yielding the Popes
Costomers sixty thousand Crowns a year. 4 Pleasant Furlii, between the Ronchus
and Montonas. 5 Faenza on the calm Anemus with its Flax Now called Pissatello.
and earthen Vessels. 6 Strong Sarsina and Cesena on the Rubicon. 7 Ravenna on
the meeting of the Montonus, and the Ronchus in their fall to the Adriatique,
with its large but choked haven, and drained Fens. 2. In Ferrara toward
Venice Commanchia and its Eeles. 2 Graffignan. 3 Carpi. 4 Sancti, and Ferrara
on the Po five miles round, with its Iron Mines, Marketplace and Palace
Belvedere.

III. In unwholesome Vrbin, with its Wines of Which they vend to Venice, as
they do their Figs to Bologn. The eating of Fruits make funerals plenty here in
August, few living here to fifty years old.
Pesaro, and dried Figs and Oils. 1 Pesara well fortified, and garrisoned on
the Adriatique in the mouth of the Isaurus. 2 Pleasant and well built Vrbin at
the foot of the Appennine. 3 Senoguille, on the large but troublesome Metrano.
4 Cabo or Cagli, and Fano on the Sea. 5 Fessombrune and St. Leon; Augubeo and
strong Camerine.

IV. Marca Anconitana; Ancona, over the Sea, begirt with Hills and its fair
Haven. 2 The much frequented Wine-Mart Recanati on the River Mu^fio. 3 Strong
Fermo, and famous Macerata. 4 Well fortified though little Loretto between
Recanati and the Sea; The Church whereof is infinitely rich by Pilgrimages.
whither our Ladies Chamber was carried in the Air from Palestine. 5 Ascoli on
the Influx of the Tronto. 6 Adria and Humana, all these along the Adriatique.

V. In Spoleto, 1 Citta de Castello and Todi on the Tiber. 2 Fair and populous
Spoleto with its strong fortress. 3 Destroyed Assise. 4 Nocera and its wooden
vessels at the foot of the Appennine. 4 Riete and Nursia among the hills,
shaded with Olives, Vines and Fig Trees. 5 Maligniano and Ocriculum on the
Tiber. 6 Narnia on a Creek of the Nar, where the ground is made dirty by the
Sun and Wind, and dusty by Rain.

VII. In St. Peter's Patrimony; 1 the useful haven Civita Vechia. 2 Porto and
Ostia, not making one good haven between them both on the mouth of the Tiber. 3
The pleasant University Near which is Lago de Perugico formerly Thrasymene.
Perugia on the banks of Tiber near Appennine, which had been once taken, but
that a Soldier as he was cutting the chain over the Gate, cried, Give back,
whereat the Besiegers all took their heels and fled. 4 The high Orvieto
Surrounded with hills like a theater, with a Lake in the midst.
and Viterbo. 5 Farnese, Bracciano, and Baccano.

VIII. In Campagna de Roma, is now, 1 The rocky and double Castled Neptunum. 2
The dammed haven The Bishop of which place consecrates the Pope head of the
Church.
Ostia in the Tibers mouth. 3 Preneste. 4 Tivoli with its musical Fountain and
Engines, like the Nymph playing on the Organs at St. Germans. 5 Velitri among
the Vines. 6 Turracina on a Rock over the bay of Mola, over against Cajeta in
Naples. 7 Rome on the East side of Tiber, fifteen miles from Sea, about a
eleven miles round on Campus Martius, including much wast ground. Two hundred
thousand Inhabitants: One hundred and twenty thousand Clergymen and Courtiers;
remarkable for St. Peter's Church; the Castle St. Angelo; the Popes Palace
Belvidere; the Vatican Library, and the Grots, called Roma Sotarranea all
within the Popes Jurisdiction, they say by the Donation of Constantinople, with
an inexpressible Revenue. Pope Sixtus the fourth having declared that a Pope
could never want money as long as he could hold a pen in his hand; able to
raise twenty four thousand Foot, and six thousand Horse: Here are forty four
Archbishops, and fifty seven Bishops.

VI. Venice Seignions, W. Millain, S. Ferrara, with its grave and reserved
Inhabitants, who get by Money and Treaties, what they loose by the Sword and
War: Has in Marca Trevignana toward Ferrara and Millain with its Lime; Kibnes
has the pleasant Vincentia on the navigable Bacchilio and Retone with its
Quarries and Silks. 2 Tri viso and its wheat on both sides the Silis. 3 The
pleasant Physick-University Haud alias Paradisum quaereret Paleologus quam plus
in persuavi Patavina omaenitute.
Padua on the Poe, with its Garden of Simples. 4 The healthy, populous and
fruitful Brescia on the little River Garcia with its Corn and Minerals. 5
Verona on the Athesis, with the hill Baldus, whither the Doctors go a Simpling.
The strong Fortresses Crema and Bergomo against Millain in good soyles;
Liniacum is against Mantua, and Castle France against Ferrara, besides old Esle
and Where good Armor is made.
Seravat. 2 In The Original.
Friuli the ill inhabited, and worse aired Aquileia a Patriarchate on the River
Natisco, Trieste and its capacious Called Golfo de Triesto.
bay, with the haven town Porto Gruare. 3 Mount-falcon and its medicinal
herbs. 4 The well fortified Cividad de Austria, Vden and Palma. 3 Histria
toward Germany near Friuli with its Quarries are 1 Cape a' Istria. 2 Polu. 3
The Midland Quevero, Parenze, Pliun, and Citta Nova. 4 Rovigno with its The
poor Mariners there conducting ships over the bars of Malamocco, to Venice.
poor but convenient port, Simples and Marble. 5 Laas. 6 Bellano, besides which
there is the fair haven Malamocco at the S. W. end of the Causey Illido in an
Isle of the name, the unwholesome Isle Torcellono; The Sound Muriano, where are
the best Venice Glasses. The Bullwark of Venice Chioggia; the Jewish Judecha
and Povegia, with their brave Gardens: there are seventy two little Isles,
whereon lies Venice, joined by four thousand Bridges, and ten thousand Boats
in the Gulf, from which preserved by the Causeway Il Lido, thirty five miles
long, opening in seven Ports, Brendolo, Chioza, Malamocco, the three Castles
Litto Maggiore, St. Erasmus and Treports, surrounded with a Marsh on the West
and North sides, and on the South, with Isles, Monastries and Churches not to
be taken but by an Army that can lie one hundred and fifty miles in compass;
famous for the Palace- Riolto; the Church of St. Mark, and their Arsenal, able
to furnish two hundred and twenty Galleys in a weeks time. The Government
Aristotratical, and the exactest and most lasting in the World, most things
being done thereby Lots. Their Forces thirty six thousand foot, and six
thousand horse: Here are two Patriarks and sixteen Bishops.

VI. In the Dukedom of Florence, S. St. P. Patrimony, W. Genoa, N. Appennine
hills between it and Romandiola, with Marca Anconitana; has 1 In Florence
peculiarly so called, besides the At the foot of the Apennines.
Village Fiesuli, ruined In the Streights of the Apennine.
Pizoria, where began the faction of the Guelfe for the Pope, and Gibelline for
the Emperor: Curious Velterra walled by stones without mortar, with five
Gates, and a fountain to each Gate: the well fortified Monte Pulceano and Where
is a retiring place of the Great Dukes, with curious water works.
Prato; old Cortona and Arezzo, and the good Bulwark toward Spoleto Borgo San
Sepulcro, Florence on the confluence of the Arnus and Chianus fortified with
hills; a City, Arch Duke Charles said, not to be seen but upon holy days:
famous for the the great Dukes Rarities. 2 In Pisa on the Amo and Serchinus,
observable for an Arsenal, an University, and an Archbishopric. 3 The
Strongest City in the World Legorn, on the Orno, fortified against the Genoese,
as is Perin Sancta. Terrucicla and its large Bay on the Mediterranean;
Castellana and the poor Ship station Porto Berrato. 3 In Sienna, besides Posted
by the Spaniard.
Port Longone, commanding the Mediterranean. 1 The Promontory, Monte
Argentorati, and Port Hercule on the East of it, over against Orbitello.
Strong Piombino, with its Leaden Mines, well situated and fortified
Montalcino, high Castro Cartald, where Willy Boccace is buried with a witless
Epitaph. The chief City is Sienna on the spring of the Treissa pleasantly
seated; not to mention Ilva with its Iron (that grows in the Mine once in
twenty five years and will not melt in the Island;) Sulphur, Allom, Tin, Lead,
Marble, and the Lodestone. Giglio opposite to Monte Argentorato, Caprana near
Legorn and its Goats. Gallinaria and its Hens. Isles in the Tuscan Sea; the
Dukes the Popes made Kings in Tuscany, though not Kings of Tuscany, being so
absolute, that it is a proverb, Qui sub medilis vivit, misere vivit.
Archbishops three; Bishops sixteen.

VII. The State of Luca, W. of Florence, has the City Luca strong with the
neighboring Mountains, and rich by the Manufactory of the Florentine Silks,
and Cloth of Gold.

VIII. The Coast and Common wealth of Genoa contains, 1 In Liguria rich among
the hills in With excellent Wines, called La Vemozza, and L' Lagrime de
Christo; whence a Dutch man cried, O utinam Christus lachrymatus esset in
nostris Regionibus.
Citrons, Raisins, Figs, Lemmons, Olives, Oranges; the people free, whence the
reserved Italians say, That here are Mountains without Woods, Seas without
Fish, Men without Faith, and Women without Shame. Great Usurers, especially
since they settled St. George his bank; whence its jovially said there, that
there are not Scholars Gentlemen or Jews enough in Christendom, because of so
many pluralities, new Honors, and so much Usury. 1 The good French haven
Monaco near Provence. 2 Sweet Ventimiglio and Savona. 3 The good harbor Nola
on the Sea, and Port-town Finali, and Milesimo. 4 Gonoa six miles round upon
the side of an hill on the Ligusticke Seas, well fortified toward Sea and
Land; paved with They build two stories high with Marble, the Laws forbidding
them to build higher.
Flint, and therefore Horse-litters and Sedans are used here instead of
Coaches. The King of Spain owes this City many Millions. 2 In Corsica, an
Island in the Ligurian over against Genoa sixty miles off, N. of Sardinia,
three hundred and twenty five miles round, where there are good Horses,
Mastiffs and Mufolies; is, 1 Bastia on the N. E. of the Island over against
Alleria, with its convenient haven. 2 Porto Vtrechio. 3 The good ports, St.
Florence and St. Boniface the first, N. between Nebbio and Mariana, and the
second South.

IX. Millain, E. Mantua and Parma, W. Piedmont and Switzerland, S. Genoa, N.
Marca Trevignana, one branch of Lombardy; where not to mention, 1 Pavie on the
Ticinus within four miles of the Po, where is the richest Cathedral in Europe,
worth three hundred thousand Crowns p. an. 2 Modoecur, where is the Emperors
Iron Crown. 3 Como, on the Lago de Como, through which the Addua runs, not
mixing with it. 4 Rich and Industrious Lodi. 5 Vna turris in Cremona, unus
Petrus in Roma, unus portus in Ancona.
Cremona on the Po. 6 New Novara and Alexandria. 7 Millain, with the strongest
Castles in the World. Two hundred thousand Inhabitants of great The private
shops here equalling the public stores Houses.
trade under the King of Spain, who spends as much here as he gets.
Archbishops one, Bishops six.

X. Mantua, W. Millain, S. Parma, N. E. the Church, and the Venetian Lands,
where the highways are over-shadowed with Vines, 1 Mantua on the Whence there
is a passage to Venice, and 5 miles off the delicate Palace of Mirmirollo.
Sarca which near there falls from Lago de Garda to the Po round which are the
waters where the Dukes take their pleasure in the Bucentaure. 2 Pleasant
Bozilia with its Cloisters, besides Lucera, Capraena and Petula near Mantua
where Virgil was born, Archbishop one, and Bishops four.

XI. Modena, with its good natured people has 1 strong Reggio. 2 Modena near
the Apennine in a very good soil, both yielding the Duke one hundred thousand
Crowns.

XII. Parma, N. Millain and Mautua, S. Liguria, E. Modena and Romandiola, W.
Montferrat. 1 Monticella between. 2 Old Parma, whence Parmesan cheese; and 3
Placentia on the Po, where Salt Pits and I on Mines, over against Cremona in
Millain on the other side the Po. 4 Briscello and Mirandula near Parma, the
richest place in Italy.

XII. Montferrat on the Po and Tenarus between Lombardy and Piedmont, 1 Alba on
the Po in a rich soil. 2 The impregnably fortified Casal, the Key to Mantua. 3
Aique and its Baths. 4 The strong forts Pont de A River of the name.
Stura, St. Saviors, Villa Nova, Belzale, Liburn. Four Bishops: in Italy, One
Pope Three Patriarchs. Thirty five Archbishops. Two hundred ninety two
Bishops, and seventeen Universities.

XIV. Over the Alps, which reach in seven branches from the Mediterranean by
France and Germany as far as the Gulf Cornero in Istria under the 6 and 1 part
of the 7th Climate, affording two well guarded and eminent passages to Italy
through the Grisons Country, commanded by the Valtolin, and through the Country
of Tiroli, commanded by the fort Eresbourgh.

I. Savoy, E. Millain and Montferrat, W. Daulphine, S. Provence and the
Mediterranean has 1 In populous Piedmont, called a City of three hundred miles
compass; 1 Duglian, the through-fare between Piedmont and Genoa. 2 The well
ammunition'd and impregnable Carman Loglae and Raville. 3 Strong Whose Castle
has Rooms in it for every season of the year.
Salusse on the Poes Spring; these in the Marquisate of Salusses. 4 Large Ast
and Tossed. 5 Strong Ville Frank toward the Sea. 6 Busque, Quiers. 7 Important
and well fortified Pignarolle, and the Fort Perousa in the French Hands, a
commodious passage from the Daulphin to Italy. 8 Suse in the through-fare
between France and Italy. 9 The haven Fortified by D. Charles upon occasion of
some words of the D. of Burbon passing that way with his Army, and saying,
Here Is a Situation, they know not the importance of.
Nizze on the Mediterranean at the Varo toward Provence, with an impregnable
Citadel. 10 The Royal Court Turin, with its pleasant Park on the Poe, the Guard
of Italy. 11 Fair and well-peopled Mondeni. 12 Important Vereilli toward
Millain.

II. In Savoy strictly so called, S. W. Daulphine La Bress, N. Switzerland and
Geneva, is besides the well fortified St. Catharines, Montmelian, Charbonners,
Mauriene, Constans, Bele on the Rhosne, Nun the Bishop of Genevaes Seat since
his expulsion: sweet Rapaille on the South side of the Leman-Lake: Lunebourgh
on the road from France to Italy, is most eminent for the well fortified
Chambery in a Vale on the bank of the River L' Arch, and Aque Belle.

II. Goneva and its Seigniory on the Leman-lake and the Rhosne over against
Lozanne in Berne, much resorted by young Gentlemen: well traded, as being the
through-fare between the Mart of Lions and Germany, doing homage to the Dukes
of Savoy, the territories not three leagues, yet their Revenue sixty thousand
pound per annum; kept by neighboring Princes, from falling into the French or
Savoyards hands.

III. Wallistand in a bottom, E of Savoy (with its Salt, Saffron, Wine, Corn,
Baths, and a famous wild Buck) where they pay dearer for their Water than their
Wine. 1. Strong- Sion in a plain on the Rhosne. 2 Old Marchinact. 3 The Key of
this place St. Monts, Leache, Sider, Intremont, Gombes, in league with the
seven Popish Cantons, as Geneva is with Bern.

IV. Switzerland, E. Grisons and Tirol in Germany, W. Geneva, S. Millain;
rugged as their stout and brave Soldiers the Switz, in pay, with several
Princes who pay them yearly Pensions. Thirteen Whereof Zurich is the most
eminent, having the authority of summoning Diets, and presiding in them.
Cantons, Seven Catholic, and Eight Reformed, where is only St. Gall, Baden,
large Zuriche on both sides the Limat near the Lake Zuriche-See an University;
Friburgh on the Sana; Solothurn on the Auar; great and rich Basil on the Rhene
running through it; well traded Lucerne on both sides the Russie, the ordinary
Road from Germany into Italy, near the hill where they say Pontius Pilates
Ghost walks. Berne encompassed with the Auar Lausanna on the Leman;
Schaffhausen on the other side of the Rhine; the Government popular, the people
having an antipathy to Monarchy.

V. The Grisons, E. Tirol, N. Scwaben, W. Switzerland; containing three
leagues; 1 the upper, where 1 Ruffla, Masox, Deserntis, Galanckter. 2 Liga Cade
Deo, or the league of the house of God, where is 1 Tintzen between Chur and the
Valley of Bergel. 2 Mur. 3 Stalla. 4 St. Jacomo. 5 Sinnada, and 6 Chur. 3. The
lower league, called Liga Diturre, where is Meienfield, Malans, Tanaas and
Castles; to which you may add Plurs, Chiarama, Valtoline, Bormio, Teio,
Sondrio, all in the Italian Prefectures as they are called. In all these
Provinces of the Alps, the Government is Popular, the Archbishops are two;
Bishoprics thirteen, Universities four.

GREAT BRITAIN. I. In ENGLAND, an Isle bound E. with Germany, W. Irish, S.
British Seas, N. Tweed and Solway, called Albion from its white Cliffs toward
Well fortified by nature but since our differences with Rome and other foreign
States, better fortified by Art.
France, whereof it is supposed a part divided by the sea: famous for 1
Mountains, such as Mendip, Malvern, Cotswold; 2 Rivers three hundred twenty
five, Thames, Severn, Trent; Humber, etc. 3 Bridges, London Bridge, Rochester
Bridge. 4 Churches. 5 Women, an English face on French shoulders, with a Dutch
body is the beauty. 6 Wool and broad-Cloth sold to Denmark, Germany, Turkey,
Persia, with rich Mines of Coals, Lead, Tin, Iron, Bells; and seven hundred
forty five Parks, besides almost sixty Forests, and three hundred Chases: and
Fish, the trade whereof if improved, would amount to Millions: Flesh, there
being before the burning of London, no less than sixty seven thousand six
hundred Beeves, and six hundred seventy six thousand Sheep, besides Calves,
Lambs, Hogs-flesh and Poultry uttered there yearly; Beer and Ale. When Henry
the 7th was moved to pursue his Title to France, answered, France was indeed a
flourishing Country, b^t England in his mind was as fine a Seat for a Country
Gentleman, as any could be found in Europe. The Language a decompound of
French, Dutch and Latin: the Religion generally reformed, planted by Joseph of
Arimathea: the Soldiers and Seamen valiant. The Clergy best preferred of any
among the Protestants. The Government, a sweet mixture of the Kings
Prerogative, with the peoples Liberty; divided into six Circuits for Judges:
twenty two Diocesses for Bishops, and ^o Shires, comprehending eight thousand
seven hundred and seven Parishes. Twenty two Cities. Five hundred eighty five
Market Towns; As 1 London a Mart on the Thames. 2 York, pleasantly and stately
seated on the Ouse. 3 The well traded town Bristol on the meeting of the From,
and Avon, with its good Sewers. 4 The fair University Oxford on the Ouse. 5
Fair Salisbury and its Where there is as many windows as days, pillars as
hours, and gates as months in the year.
Cathedral on the Avon 6 Neat Gloucester on the Severn. 7 Chester on the Dee. 8
Dover on the Sea, the Key of England. 9 Canterbury. 10 Hastings, a Cinque Port.
11 Exeter on the Ex with its Kersies. 12 Bath and its waters. 13 Falmouth on
its large bay. 14 South Hampton on an arm of the Sea. 15 Well traded Ipswich,
Norwich and Yarmouth. 16 The other University Cambridge. 17 The well traded
Kendal. 18 The Frontier Carlisle, besides the Inland places, affording as
appears by the Muster-Rolls near 4 hundred thousand fighting men: the Revenue
One Million two hundred thousand pound per annum.

II. In Wales adjoining to England thirteen Shires, four Bishoprics, 1
Shrewsbury on the Severn a great Mart for Welsh Cottons. 2 Haverford-West, and
the excellent haven of Milford.

III. Here Is a Lake, where half the water congeals in winter, and half not, and
is most tempestuous in a calm, having fish without finns; and a stone on the
one side of which you cannot hear a musket shot on the other.
Scotland over the Tweed and Cheviot Hills, three hundred and twenty Italian
miles long; affording course cloth, fish, hides, lead and cole, leagued with
France before; united to Britain: 1 the long street Edinburgh, with its strong
Castle. 2 The well fortified Sterling. The Universities and Arch-bishopricks,
Glasco, St. Andrews on the Sea. 4 The rich Port Dundee, Aberdeen, Perth, Scone,
and the impregnable Dun-fritton.

IV. Ireland with its unruly Sea, called St. Georges Channel; its nimble
inhabitants, its great Lakes and Pastures, its peculiar language and conversion
by St. Patrick, where no venomous creature lives. 1 The University, Court, and
sandy Port of Called in Irish, Balechleigh.
Dublin on the Liffe. 2 Wexfort on the Slane. 3 Kilkennie on the Newre. 4 The
Inland town Kildare. 5 The important Leighlin and Caterlegh, in the Province of
Lempster. 6 Tredah, with its commodious haven on the Boine in Mead. 7 Armagh
on the Kalin. 8 The Sea-towns Carlingford and Dundalk. 9 Strong Knocke-fergus
and its capacious bay. 10 Dungall, A colony of London.
Dungannon and Londonderry in Vlster. 11 The noted Empory Galloway, of which a
Foreigner asked an Irish man, in what part of Galloway Ireland stood, Tuam,
Letrim, Slego, Roscommon Athlone, Thomond in Connaught. 12 The well situated
and fortified Limrick on the Sea; Cassiles, strong and important Clonmel; the
well traded Port of Well privileged, because faithful to the English.
Waterford; the well walled and havened Cork and Kinsale on the Bany, the safe
roads and convenient havens of Baltimore, Youghall and Berehaven; in Munster,
the Country is overgrown with Woods and Boggs for want of Inhabitants.

V. To this Crown are annexed, 1 the Holy Island on the Coast of
Northumberland. 2 Sunderland, N. E. of Durham, an Island in high water famous
for coals. 3 The unhealthy Thanet in Kent. 4 The Rich and fruitful Isle of
Weight over against Hampshire, well fortified and ammunition'd, especially at
Yarmouth, (as is Brook, rich and well traded Newport.) 5 the 146 Isles of
Silly, within 24 miles of the W. Promontory of Cornwall. 6 Safe and strong
Lundy, with three more Isles on the Severn Sea. 6 Anglesey Mon Mam Cymri.
the mother of Wales; 1 Flat Beumaris near the Menay. 2 Holy head, the passage
from Wales to Ireland on a Promontory toward Ireland. 7 The Isle of Man, with
its Flax, Hemp, Oats, Barley and wheat, and its proper Language; the Mankin
over against Cumberland. 8 The 44 Hebrides; and 9 the 32 Orcades in the North
over against Caithness in Scotland; and 10, two days sailing North of these
Orchades, Schetland, supposed the ancient Thule.

Great Britain has in England 2 Arch-bishopricks, 20 Bishoprics, and 2
Universities: in Wales 4 Bishoprics: in Ireland, Arch-bishopricks 4,
Bishoprics 19, one University. In Scotland, Archbishops 2, Bishops 12:
Universities 4.

Pass we to Belgium, or the Neatherlands: and there,

I. In Flanders, bounded E. with Hainault and Brabant, W. with the English or
German Sea. 3 N. Zealand Seas, and the Scheld, S. Picardy, between Callice and
Graveling; one great town of one thousand one hundred fifty four Villages
within 90 miles. 1 Gaunt, Ten Miles round on the Schela and the Lie. 2 Bruges,
four miles round, very pleasant on an Artificial Channel three Leagues from the
Sea. 3 Impregnable Ypres, with its leaden Pipes to every house. 4 Commines and
its Castle on the Lie. 5 Little strong Bourbough belonging to the French. 6
Ardenbourgh and its great Horse-fair. 7 Where the salting of Herrings was first
invented.
Beerulet and its convenient haven. 8 Strong Graveling on the Sea. 9 Oudenard
on the Schild with its Tapestry and very fine Linen. 10 Dunkirk, with its
small but safe Port. 11 Scluse and its fair haven on the Channel of Bruges. 12
Newport, with its well frequented, but not safe harbor, and Ostend. Of which
the Arch Duchess Isabell said, She would not change her Smock till she took
it; but the town was three years in taking.
12 Strong Alost on the Dender, and its yearly Hop fair. 13 Well fortified
Dendremond on the confluence of the Dender and the Scheld with its Furtians,
and weekly Market of Flax. 14 Rupel-mond on the Rupel-Grandmont on the Dender.
15 The well resorted and traffiqued Listle. 16 Strong Doway on the Scharp and
its Seminary. 17 Orches and its Kersies. 18 Armentiers and its cloth. 19 Rich
and strong Tournay on the Scheld. 20 St. Amand its rich Abbey on the Scharp.

II. Artois, the Granary near Flanders and Picardy; 1 Arras, large and well
fortified, known for its Cloth of Arras near the Scharp. 2 St. Omer and its
Seminary on the Ava. 3 Old and strong Air. 4 Betune and its Cheese, Which
cannot be besieged for want of fresh water.
Beaupelm. 5 The Frontire towns Renty, Hedinfort and Turwin, la Bassei,
Lilliers, most under the King of Spain.

III. Hainalt, S. Picardy and Champagn, W. Flanders; good for Pastures, Mines
and Quarries; 1 Maubuige a Mart on the Sambree; as 2 Monts is on the Hain.
Where is a Nunnery of Ladies, that wear their Nuns habits in the morning, and
the habit of their quality in the afternoon.
3 The goodly Valenchiennes on the Scheld. 4 Chimay on the Blanck. 5 Halle on
the Sein. 6 Ath the staple of Linen on the Dender. 7 Angien, the Mart for
Tapestry. 8 Gonde and Bouchant on the Scheld. 9 Cambray, a goodly Merchant City
on both sides of the Scheld, giving name to a Country or a Bishopric of the
name.

V. Namur, W. Liege, N. Brabant, S. Luxenburgh, with good Grains, Mines and
Quarries. 1 Sausin on the Maes; strong Valercourt, Charlemont and Bovines: rich
^^mur, and its Castle on the Confluence of the Scamore and the Maes.

VI. Luxenburgh, S. Lorrein, N. Hainalt, Namur, E. Triers; ^ Strong Roche de
March, Mervil, Danvilliers, Monmeal on the Chiers; the Frontier Theonville
toward Lorrein on the M^selle: Large and strong Luxenburgh on the A^^^.

VII. L^^^^ah with its They say there that their bread is better than bread,
fire better than fire, and iron better than iron.
good Corn, Fuel and Iron, W. Liege, N. Brabant. 1 Inaccessible and pleasant
Limburgh on the Wesdo. 2 Walkenburgh. 3 Dalem. 4 Carpen. 5 Rhode le Duche.

VIII. Liege, N. W. Brabant, E. Namur, fruitful in Corn, Wine, Fish and Flesh
of all sorts; Cole kindled with water, and quenched with Cyl and Salt.
Cole, Brimstone, Marble, Alabaster, Gold, Lead, Iron: 1 Liege on the Maes four
miles round, and very pleasant, an University, and called the Paradise of
Priests. 2 Dinand on the Meuse, as is Bilsen and Museche, Huy, Borel^m,
Tungres, near which among the woods of Ardenne is the Spa, so good for Tertian
Agues, the Stone, the Sciatica, the Dropsy, etc.

IX. Brabant, W. Flanders, N. Holland and Gelderland, S. Hainault, Namur has
the well traded cloth Shertogen Bosch or Bois le Duc on the Dees. 2 Bergen ap
Zome on the Z me near the Scheld and Sea, well traded and fortified. 3 The
pleasant and strong Breda, on the Mark, belonging to the Prince of Aurange. 4
Die on the Dennere. 5 The good fishing place for Shads, Salmon and Surgeon on
the D uge Gertradenburg, as the Grave is upon the Maes; as is 6 Where the
Children are subject to that Government, to which there Mothers were subject.
Maestricht, besides Werit and Raveistein; Lovain four miles compass on the
Dyle, a pleasant University. Brussels on the Sin, with an Artificial Channel
to the Dile and Scheld; a delightful and rich place by making Armor, Cloth of
Arras, Silk, Gold and Silver. Nivello and its fine Linen: The well seated and
traded Antwerp on a goodly plain on the Scheld, with eight Channels to convey
Commodities to the Sea, seventeen leagues off: these in the Marches of the
Empire, called the Marquisate, near which is Machlyn a City and Seigniory on
both sides the D^le, rich by Linen, Artillery, Bells, Painted works, in the
center of Brabant not to be taken, because so easily surrounded with water.

X. Holland, bounded E. of Zuiderzee, Vtrecht and Gelderland, W. N. German Sea,
S. Zealand and Brabant; fenced with Ramparts against the Sea on which the
people Only the women make Stuffs, Butter and Cheese.
live, having no Commodities, they live by improving all.

1 Famous for the Synod, 1618.
Dort, commanding the Trade of the Maes and the Wael on which it stands large
and well peopled. 2 The rich and daily Butter and Cheese-market Gorichem on the
Wael. 3 The strong and well traded port Rotterdam on the Bank Rotter. 4
Schoonhoven and its goodly haven on the Leche. 5 Strong and rich Goud, Oudwater
and Ysselstein on the Yssel, with their Cables, Cordages and and other trade. 6
The University of Leyden, upon its forty one Islands. 7 The large Cloth trade
town of Delph; these in South Holland. 8 The good Butter and Cheese town in the
Marshes Alkemar. 9 The fair haven town A thousand ships ride in and out before
it every tide, and the richest Fleet is brought up there in a week.
Amsterdam on the Gulf Tie and the Dike Amstel. 10 Pleasant and large Haerlem,
on Haerlem-Meer. 11 Important Enchuysen on the Gulf Zuiderzee over against
Friezland, with the good and rich Haven Hoora and Edam, famous for making Ships
and Cheese, and Medembleck on the Sea, besides such Villages as the Hague, the
best Village in Europe, etc. On the Continent and Briel, commanding the Road to
most places in Holland; the Excellent Bay of the Texel and Wyerengch, where a
Lady was delivered of as many Children at once, as there are days in the year,
(viz.) Three hundred sixty five.

XI Zeland, supplied with fire out of England and Scotland; has 1 the strong
and large Empory on a Creek of the Sea Middleburgh. 2 The good strong hold of
Flushing, with the goodly haven of Ram and the Fort Ramkin, the Key of the
Neatherlands: In the Isle Walcheren. 3 Goes and R mersal in South Beverland. 4
The Mader, and salt town S^rickzed, with its commodious haven, with poor
Brewers haven in the Isle of Schowen; there be but seven of eighteen Islands
left here by the Sea.

XII. Westfreizland, E Groaning land, and W st Phalen, N. W. Sea so drained that
it feeds the best Horses and Cattle in Europe; has Harlingen and its haven on
the Sea with the haven Staveren; the University Franekir, and the Low Snecke in
Westergo: strong and rich Lauwarden in Ostergoe, with the Isle of Schelinke,
and its Dog-Fish.

XIII. Vtrecht bound W. N. S. with Holland, and E. with Guelderland; 1 Wiche on
the middle Channel of the Rhene. 2 As is About which they digg much turf for
fuel
Rhenen. 3 Amesfort on the Ems. 4 Montfort on the Yssel. 5 Vtrecht on the
middle channel of the Rhine, so seated, that you may go from it to fifty walled
towns to bed, and to thirty to dinner.

XIV. Overyssel, E. West-phalen; 1 the goodly Hanse town Daventer on the Yssel.
2 As is Swoll and 3 Campen, and the well furnished Castle Wallen hoven on the
Zuiderzee.

XV. Guelderland, E. Cleveland, S. Brabant, has strong Nimegent over the Wael,
with Tiel, Bomel and Ghent (with the Fort St. Andrews on the meeting of the
Maes and the Wael Rivermond in the mouth of the Ruer; strong Venloe on the
Maes, Gueldres still under the Spaniard; well fortified Stael the well seated
Arnhem: Washeninghen on the Rhene: Harderwiche on the Swiderzee and Harlem on
the Yssel.

XVI. Zutphen, E. Westphalen, S. Cleveland; 1 Doesbourgh on the Yssel-Dorp. 2
Lochen on the Berkel, the Garrison Bredesvord. 3 Zutphen in the Fen on the
right shore of the Yssel.

XVII. Groningland between E. and W. Friezland has 1 Dam near the Ems, Kykyrk,
an old haven on the Sea. 2 Groaning well built, and several convenient channels
for trade: These last Provinces are Free States Governed by themselves, met in
the States General of the Seven United Provinces: All the Neatherlands have
three Archbishops, fifteen Bishops, and seven Scholae Illustres or Accademies.

VI. GERMANY, bounded on the W. with France, Switzerland and the Neatherlands,
S. Italy: the people wary and warlike, and well skilled in ruling their Whence
CaRacalla said, that Nation only knew how to rule their wives; who added the
Faeminine Article to the Sun, and the Masculine to the Moon, as the Germans do.
Wives; who have much meat, but not well dressed, as the French, little, but
well Cooked, and the Italian neither; the Honor of the Father descending to
each Son, who though never so poor, will not marry with the richest Tradesmans
Daughter, though good themselves at the Here was the wooden Eagle, that went a
quarter of an i will to meet the Emperor, and returned with him to his Lodging;
and the Iron Fly.
Mechanical part of learning: Swart a German inventing Powder by chance,
studying Chemistry, and letting fall his candle upon sulphurous Earth.

I. In Cleveland near Westphalia and the Neatherlands; 1 Old Cleve on three
hills over the Rhine, and Santen. 2 Rich Wesell under the States, on the
confluence of the Rhene and the Lip, over against French Burich. 3 Old
Duisbourgh, and Cravenbourgh; well frequented Emmeriche, Griethusen, Griet and
Rees on the Rhene. 4 Calcar, noted for Cloth, Beer and Ale, and Gennep on the
Niers near the Maes in the Dukedom of Cleve. 5 Muers in Muers with Orsey and
Augar on the French side of the Rhene. 6 Gulicke on the Roer and Dueren. 7
Munster Eyphel on the Erfae. 8 Caster, Berken and Berklen with Mewden and
Enskerch on the Erpe, in Gulick.

II. In Colenland, S. Triers, E. Bergh; 1 Colen, a magnificent Mart on the
Rhine, where the Magi are said to be buried, called therefore the three Kings
of Colen. 2 Rhineburgh on Berk, opening a well customed passage up the Rhine,
under the States. 3 Sontina, Nuys and Bon on the Rhine pleasantly seated, the
last the Court of the Spiritual Elector of this place.

III. Triers, E. Luxemburgh, W. Franconia, S. Palatinate of the Rhene, good for
Wood and Minerals; 1 Cobolentz on the confluence of the Rhine, and the Moselle
over against Embretstein, and its commanding Castle over that River. 2 Bopport
on the Rhine, and its commodious Creek, with Sarbrooken on the Sar belonging to
Nassaw. 3 The Metropolis and University Tryers on the Moselle, with Obert
Wesel, an Imperial Town belonging to the Palatinate, under a Spiritual Elector.

IV. As is Mentz, where 1 Bing on the Rhine, where a Bishop that hoarded Corn,
notwithstanding the Fortifications raised by him to secure himself, was
devoured by Rats and Mice. 2 Long Mentz, commanding the Main and the Rhene; an
University in a fruitful place, and a Bishops Residence, with Hasford,
Lausterr, Middlebourgh, Koningspergh, Biscoff stein, Alderburgh.

V. Palatinate of the Rhene, E. Wittenburgh and Franconia, S. Alsatia, seventy
two miles long, and ninety broad; good for Rhenish Wines, and Silver Mines etc.
1 Strong Frankendale, and Manheim with Femersheim on the confluence of the
Rhene and Neccar. 2 Mospac on the Neccar, Ladenburgh and Winheime. 3 Coub and
the Castle Psalts on the Neccar over against Hesdebergh unhealthy, Palsgrave,
quasi Psalisgrave.
as shut up with hills every where but toward the West, Newstad, Laden,
Keisars, Lauterne on the Lauterne, Swet brucken, and Simmeren; here are the
Imperial Cities of Spices and Whither Luther went, saying, He would go, if
there were as many Devils in Worms, as there were Tiles on the Houses.
Worms on the Rhene; strong and commanding Vaenheim and Rotenbergh, under the
Elector Palatine.

VI. Alsatia or Elsats, E. Baden and Schwaben, W. Lorrein, S. Switzerland; has
1 Famous for a Clock and Steeple.
Stratsburgh on the Ill and Brusch, a strong Imperial City, and Granary,
Saverne, Altrip, Selts, Weissenbergh, Hanegaw, all on the Rhene and Hasle on
the Brusch, in the most Called Germaniae Nutriae.
fruitful Lower Alsatia. 2 A severe place to thieves, whence it is said, That
the Old Gallows at Ruffach is made of Oak.
Rufach on the Ombach. 3 Ensheim on the Ill. 4 Imperial Colmar in the middle of
Alsatia, well watered with four Rivers. 5 Schlestad, well shadowed with Chestnut
Groves between the Rhene and the Fens; Gebwile and Watweil, with Keisersbergh
in Higher Alsatia. 6 Mulhansen on the Ill, Befort, Muzmaster, neat Thanne and
its high Castle; Altick, Pfi^t, in Sangow near the Canton of Basil, which it
furnishes with Provision; and strong Montbelgard in Montbelgard under the
French.

VII. Plentiful of excellent fish, as Salmons, Perches, Tenches and Carps.
Lorrein, W. Bar and Champeign, N. Luxenburgh and Friars, with its Forests
has, 1 Metz on the confluence of the Sore and the M ssel, as Toulis Verdun on
the Maes. 4 The commodious Nancey on the Marta or Meart. 5 The well seated and
rich Pilgrim place, St. Nicholas. 6 The University Pont-a Mouson on the Mouson.
7 Where Joan the Maid that rescued France was Born.
Vancelor. 8 The well fortified and important, Stenas Amance on the Mets,
Neauf, Chatteau near Barrois; La Moth and Churmes on the Moselle; besides
twelve other Inland Garrisons, maintained by the custom of Salt.

VIII. Scwaben, E. Bavaria W. Wirtenbergh and Alsatia; has Or the town of
Boats, a Canton of Switzerland.
Sciffe-hausen near the Cataracts of the Rhene to the Lake ^ell, where Ships
are unladed, and the goods carried thither in Skiffs; rich and pleasant Scindaw
and Arbon on the Lake of Constance, with Vberlingen and Buchorne, Merspurgh;
and Constance on both sides the Rhene, where was a Council 1414, that declared
a Council above the Pope, where were four Patriarchs, nineteen Cardinals, three
hundred forty six Arch bishops and Bishops, five hundred sixty four Abbots and
Doctors; one thousand Secular Princes and Noblemen; four hundred and fifty
Common Harlots; sixteen hundred Barbers, and three hundred and twenty Minstrels
and Jesters: these in the Hegow.

2. The well traded Mimmegen three miles round; Buchau on Feder-zee,
Ravensburgh on the Ach, Kempten and Wongen and Auspurgh, nine miles round;
rich, well traded and fortified, all these in Algow toward Bavaria.

3 The Imperial Offenbach and Gegenbach on the Kintrick These three belonging
to the Marquess of Baden.
Hockber Zell and Badenwiller, Walshat on the Rhene the well seated and
fortified Brisach on the Rhine, and the better traded Friburgh on the Triesse;
these in Brisgow near Wettenburgh and the Canton of Basil. 4 Well traded
Norlingen and Boptingen on the Egra; Gmund on the Rheemes, Dinhel, Spuel on the
Warnitz A confederate of the Switz.
Rotweil on the Neccar, Donawert on the Donaw and the Werd^ V^l^engen on the
Bregen; Vlme well frequented and populous six miles round on the meeting of the
Blave, the Iler, and the Danow in North Scwaben.

IX. Bavaria, bounded N. with the Upper Palatinate, S. Tirol, E. Austria, good
for Swine. Timber and Fuel; 1 The delicate and rich Munchen on the Iser among
Ponds and Groves: with its famous Library, Guild Hall. 2 Dismantled Lansbergh
on the Leche. 3 Martenwald near the Alps. 4 The Bullwark Fridberg, and Schyre,
these in higher Bavaria. 5 Rain on the Leche. 6 Newburgh on the Danow. 7 The
impregnable Ingolstad, and the Imperial Regensburgh on the Danow, where it
receives the Regen. 8 Passaw on the Danow, the Inn and the Ils. 9 Frising on
the Ambra. 10 The beautiful Landshut on the Isar, and Imperial Friested, in
the lower Bavaria. 11 Saltzburg and Newkirk on the Saltzach; Rottenburgh on the
Inn, Traunshaim on the Traun Weldesmet and Bishops Stoff in the Bishopric of
Saltzburgh.

X. All the nine foregoing places have peculiar Princes of their own
subordinate to the Emperor himself.
The Arch Dukedom of Austria, E. Hungary, W. Bavaria, S. Stiermark, rich in
Grain, Wines, Saffron, Salt, Ginger, and Silver Mines; 1 Lintz on the
Confluence of the Drawn and the Danow. 2 Gmund on the Gemundersee. 3
Walkeinstein and Ens on the Ens. 4 Waidoven, and Ips on the Ips. 5 Haimburgh,
Wells, Newsal on the Danow. 6 Newstadt, and strong Vienna on the Danow, with
its good Cellarage, and goodly Site, Model and Building, with Freistad, Rets
and Crems, the first of the Emperors hereditary Countries.

XI. Steirmark E. of Hungary, S. W. Corinthia, has 1 Cratz, Pruck and
Rachtlspurgh on the Mur. 2 Stechaw, Petaw, Lamboch and Celi on the Draw. 3
Voilspergh on the Kainach. 4 The well fortified Canisia.

XII. In Carinthia and Carniola, are 1 beautiful St. Veil, Vittach and Lavamont
on the Draw, and Freisach on the Oltza. 2 Newmarkt, Saxenfel, Marsperg, etc. on
the Savus. 3 Laibach and Goritz.

XIII. Tirolis with its Mines of Brass and Silver; has first richly seated
Insbrucke, with its goodly Armory. 2 Famous for the Council there held for 18
years, according to directions from time to time, received by the Post from
Rome; whereupon a Bishop of Hungary said there, That the Holy Ghost was sent
them in a Cloak bag from Rome.
Trent on the Adise, between Italy and Germany. 3 Falkeinstein and its brass
Hall, and its Saltwitches: Skwas and its Silver: Meran, Tirol, Pollen and Malk.

XIV. Nassaw, Hannaw and the Solmes, have 1 Dillingburgh. 2 The University
Herburn. 3 Wildborough on the Lou. 3 Nassau near the fall of the Lou to the
Rhene, Catzenelbiget all belonging to the Princes of Aurange, in Nassaw. 4 The
University Hanaw, enriched by Printing for Frank-fort-Mart; besides Croneburgh,
Branufels and Solmes.

XV. Frankenland, E. S. Palatinacte and Sewaben, N. Hassia and Thuringia
overgrown with woods; has 1 Wurysburbe, pleasantly situated on the Mein, and
Impregnable. 2 The birthplace of Melancthon, the Phoenix of Germany.
Gemand on the Mein, and Sal. 3 Where Pontius Pilate was born.
Forchein. 4 Stapheilstein. 5 Bamburgh on the Mein, with the plenty of
Liquorish about it; Schleistat. 6 Onaldsbach Hailbrun near Wirtenburgh and
Pleinfelt near Nuremburgh, Henneburgh, Hohenloe, Rheineche, Castle, Wortheim,
Swartzenburgh, all these enjoyed by several Lords of them: fair Nuremburgh, in
or near the upper Palatinate, Stweinford on the Mein, and Frankford, rich and
well traded by the Marts held there in Lent and September, and and sweetly
situated, with Rotenburgh on the Tuber.

XVI. Wirtenburgh, very temperate, and happy in Silver and Brass Mines, has 1
Richly and pleasantly seated Tubing, Stutgard, and Constat on the Necear,
Weiburgh with its Silver Mines, Schornedorfe on the Rheems, and its hot Baths,
New-burgh on the Ents; the Imperial towns, Haybrun and Reviling on the Necear,
Gepping on the Vils, noted for their Paper-mills, and Imperial Paper.

XVII. Baden, has 1 Baden and its three hundred and six Baths. 2 Leibenzel,
and its Medicinal Springs. 3 Durlach. 4 Lichtal. 5 Gerspach. 6 Pf^ortheim. 7
Susenburgh. 8 Badenwile and Rotelen. 9 Milburgh.

XVIII. Bohemia, S. Bavaria and Austria, N. Misnia, Lusatia and Silesia, E.
Moravia, stored with Wood, Tin, Brass, Iron, Saffron, Medicinable Drugs, has 1
Budweyes toward Austria. 2 Augst, Jaromir and Molmuche on the Elbe the Royal
Mudwall, dirty but large Near which the battle was fought between the Emperor
and the Bohemians on the 23d Sunday after Trinity in the Gospel, for which day
was that famous passage, Roddite qua sunt Caesore,
Prague divided into four towns on the Muldaw, Pilsen, Elbogen, and Egra on the
Egra.

XIX. Moravia, E. Hungary, S. Austria, N. Silefia, W. Bohemia, fruitful in Corn
and Frankincense, near Gradisco, The Frankincense grows there like men and
women's privy parts.
especially Newburgh, Brin on the Schwatz, the University Olmuntz on the Mark
and Iglaw, Niclasburgh, and Swaim on the Teia.

XX. Silesia, E. Poland, W. Lusatia, N. Brandenburgh, with its Woods and
Minerals; 1 Jegendoorf. 2 Munsterburgh. 3 Glatz, a strong place. 4 Strong and
well contrived Glogaw, Oppolen and Breslaw on the Odera, besides Reichenbach
and Straten.

XXI. Lusatia, Lausnitz, S. Bohemia, N. Brandenburgh, W. Misnia, E. Silesia,
populous and fruitful; 1 Laatsen on the Spre. 2 The well fortified and
frequented Gorlitz, and Trabel on the Nisse, Zittaw, Lauben, Lubben and Camitz.
3 Sprenburgh and Gotthuse on the Spre; these last Provinces are Incorporated
within Bohemia.

XXII. Brandenburgh, E. Poland, W. Saxony, N. Pomerania and Mecklenburgh,
plentiful in Corn; has 1 Stendal, Gurleben, Soltwedel, Osterburgh, Tangermond
on the Elbe, Senhunsen in Old-mark. 2 The well fortified Spandaw, and Butzaw on
the Elbe. 1 Oderburgh and Frankfort on the Oder, a flourishing University and
Empory; Brandenburgh, and Havelburgh on the Havel; and the Princes Residence
Berlin on the Spre, in upper march. 3 Strong Falkenburgh, Seldin, and Berlick
toward Pomerania: the well fortified Castrine on the Wartz and Odera,
Sunnerburgh and Landsburgh on the Odera; these under the Elector of
Brandenburgh.

XXIV. Pomerania, N. Baltic, E. Prussia, rich in Corn and Flax, wherewith it
furnishes the Mart of Dantzick; has 1 the well traded Barth on the Startz. 2
Welgast on the Baltic, as is the the great Mart Fraelsand, and the University
Gripswald, with Anclau on the Pone in the upper Pomeren. 3 Strong Camin,
Colbergh and Coslin on the Baltic. 4 Stargard on the Ina, Griffenburgh on the
Roga, and Stetin on the Odera in the lower Pomeren. 5 Berga, Sugart, Vicke,
Bingst in the Isle Kugen, called the Granary of Straelsand, over against which
it lies: the well seated Vsedom and Woollen in the Isles of that name: this
place divided between Brandenburgh and the Swede.

XXV. West of Pomerania is Mecklengburgh, with 1 The Swedish Hans-town and safe
Port Wismar on a bay of the Baltic. 2 The well traded Rostoche on the Waine,
with its out-work Lau. 3 Strong Damin near Brandenburgh. 4 Pleasant and strong
Fitchel and Friedland near Pomeren. 5 Sternbergh, Sarentine, Stargard, Swerin,
and Malcaw.

XXVI. Saxony, E. Bohemia and Brandenburgh, W. Brunswick, Lunenburgh and
Holstein, S. Frankenland and the Palatinate, has Torgow with its Lake on the
Elbe and Warlitz, and fair well fenced, and well traded Wittenburgh Wisenberck,
Kemberk and Butterfelt between the Elbe and the Mulda; these in Os per Saxe, or
Upper Saxony.

2 Dresden on the Elbe, well magazined and fortified Mersburgh and Naumburgh on
the Salza; Meissen and Mulburgh; the famous Philosophy University Leipsich and
its store of The custom whereof affords 2000 l.
Beer: Friburgh and its Mines of Silver; Rochlite and its Tin, discovered here
by a fugitive Cornish Man. Culmback and Schneber, these in Missein and Voetland
toward Lusatia and Brandenburgh.

3 Levelled Gotha on the Lonne, pleasant Weymar on the Ilma; Hale and its Salt
on the Falza: the imperial Malhuysen, North Huysen and Smalcald; the Hanstown
Erford fair and populous on the Gers, and the famous Physic University Jene on
the Salza in Turingia near Hassia and Frankenland.

4 Stong Coete, Bernburgh, Dessaw, Stervest, Bullensted in Anhalt. 5 Querefort,
Weyeper on the Wipra, Rotenbergh, Helderung, Luthers birth place.
Isleben, Manifield on the Weyper, in the Earldom of Manifield near Brunswick,
and The Bishopric of Madgeburgh.
Madeburgh: where 6 is Grabatz, and Mickern on the Sruma, Lunburgh and Barleben
on the Elbe Wormested: large and well begirt Madgeburgh on the Elbe. 7
Lawenburgh on the Elbe, over against the well fortified Erdenburgh, with Moeln
and Ra^eburgh (...) the same River: in Lawenburgh North west of Madgeburgh.

XXVII Lawenburgh and Brunswick, W. Westphalia, N. Denmark, Mountainous and
Woody: have: Amelungsbume, Hetfield, Halberstade, Whofchaiton the Duke of
Brunswicks Court Where the Pied-Piper being not satisfied for piping out the
Rats that troubled the Town into a Mote; piped also peoples Children thither.
Hamelen, well fortified and moated on the Weser, the rich, populous and
strongly walled Brunswick on the Onacter: fair, strong, and well traded
Hannover on the Lem, Quedelnburgh, Grubenhagen, Heldosheim: strong Helmastad,
between Madgeburgh and Brunswick: Imperial Goflar on the Gose, these in
Brunswick. II Resenburgh, 2 the Lay-see Bishopric of Venda annexed to the
Crown of Sweden, Oldendorp between the Venan and the Esca: Gethern, and its
strong Castle Lunenburgh, fair, pleasant and well ditched, with its Salt
Fountain and House, where eight Tun of Salt is made a day: and Cella the Duke
of Lun, seat: these in Lunenburgh.

XXVIII. In Hassia near Brunswick, Wederaw, Lorrein and Westphalia, rich in
Pasture, Wild and Tame Beasts, Wool, Brass, Lead, etc. Are 1 well ditched
Cassels with the University Geison. 2 Diez on the Lon, as is the University
Marpurgh among its Vines and shades, with a magnificent Castle. 3 Fuld,
Melsingen, and Darmstad on the Fuld. 4 Frankenburgh, well walled and pleasant
Fristar on the Eder: Alendorf on the Weser with its Salt: Eschewege near the
Were, with its Woad, besides Corbach and Witterburgh between the Twist and
Abra: Waldeche on the Eder, Mengerhuse, and its fair Where the Earls of
Waldeck resided.
. Castle Veldung and Isenburgh, rich in Veins of Silver and Coals, in the
Earldom of Waldeck.

XXIX. Westphalia, and its well-relished Bacon, fed with its Acorns, N.
Holstein, E. S. Hassia, Brunswick and Lunenburgh, W. Cleveland, Over-Yssel, and
Friezland, has 1 Munster, well seated and fortified on the Ems, strong
Rintelen, Mindelen, Ringlestein, Quahenburgh, Warendorp, Puderborn, Geseck,
Homburgh, Shamlat, Rhenen, Arusburgh, Walenborck, Warburgh on the Dimula, and
its good Ale: Strong and well governed Heervorden and Brakel, Ravensburgh,
Lip and Aremburgh on the Weser, all in Westphalia. 2 Rich, populous and well
traded Breme, with its strong fortifications on the Weser among Fens, easily
drowned on all sides; Osenbrige near Breme, affording England a great deal of
Linen yearly: Arusten on the Weser, Oterenburgh on the Bolla: Buxter trade on
the Elbe; Formerly having the praeemption of Rhenish Wines.
Stead, a Hanse well traded by reason of the resort thither of the English
Merchants, whose Staple revived it: these in Bremen.

XXX. East Friezland, E. Westphalia, W. Groningen, N. German Sea, S. Mark in
Gleveland, furnishing other Countries with Wool, Horses, Corn, Oxen, Swine,
Butter and Cheese; has 1 Emden on the Ems with a fair haven, enriched by the
Herring Fishing upon our Coast, a confederate of the States General. Anseling
with its hunting Forests; Esen on the Sea, strong Vredburgh, Bwicke, Norden
and Dunort, and Lingen on the Ems; besides strong Oldenborch on the Honta,
Delmonhorst of great importance on the Delm, Beckhusen near the bay Die Jade;
strong Butiada between Die Jade and the Weser: Westerburgh and Vri Jade on the
Jade, the important Jadelle and Mellum on the Jade, and the Ocean: These are
the Parts of Germany (most of them enjoying their own Government, with a kind
of loose Homage to the Emperor, who is called Rex Regum, as the French King is
Rex Asinorum, the English, Rex Diabolorum, and the Spanish, Rex Hominum) which
has 6 Archbishops, 34 Bishops, and 21 Universities.

VII. DENMARK, from the middle parallel of the 10th Clime, or 55 degree of
Latitude to the 71. no night for some time in some places; the people Civil,
Provident and Industrious, the Religion Lutheran, and Church Government
Episcopal; has 1 Lubecke, with its capacious Port Tremeren on a hill, on the
confluence of the Trave, and the Billew within five Italian miles of the
Baltic; Civil, pleasant, and well The Conduit pipes of this place, being the
pattern for those of London.
accommodated and fortified; near Segebert, Oldesto and Stendorp on the Trave
and Newkirk on the Baltic; these in Wagerland. 2 The Key of Denmark, Cremp
near the Elbe and store; Tychenburgh commanding the Elbe and Hamburgh; strong
Bredenburgh, Pippen-burgh, Jetzebo; Glucstad, commanding the passage up the
Elbe and Store; and the large, pleasant and well traded Where was 177 Brewers
to 40 Bakers, one Lawyer, and one Physician.
Hamburgh on the Billing, where it falls into the Elbe, with its stately
buildings, and chained Haven; its staple of Cloth and Linen, Cordage, Pitch,
Tar, Deals, Wax, etc. these in Stormarsh, rich Meldorp on the Sea, where they
cover their houses with Copper in Ditmarsh.

III. The capacious and well traded haven Kyel on the Baltic; the strong
Niemunster and Regensburgh in Holstein, the South part of the
Cimbrick-Chersonesse toward Germany.

IV. The commodious haven'd Flensburgh on the Baltic Sea; Husem on the German
Sea and the Eyedore; Hadersleeve and its Castle Hansburgh, surrounded by the
Baltic; Gottorp with its capacious bay and Where there is custom paid for
50000 head of Cattle passing from thence into Germany.
custom-house on the Baltic; and the commodious haven'd Sleswick on the Slay,
where it runs into the Baltic. Ripen, Koldings on a Creek of the Baltic Sea,
as is the well frequented Port Arethusen, Schunderburgh, strong Kalla within a
large bay; Wiburch near the bay of Limford; the Public Judicature of those
parts Alborch on the bay of Limford near the Baltic, Morsee and Nicopen on the
Sea, with the Sea-mark Rock Skaringelint near dangerous Quicksands; the Castle
Scagen: all these in the two Jutlands the other part of the
Cimbrick-Chersonesse.

V. The well haven'd Or Haven of Merchants.
Copenhagen, better fortified than built, with its good road Amager; the Kings
retiring place Fredericksburgh among the Beeches; the University Sore and
Roskild; the two Castles Croneburgh and Elsenore commanding the Straight,
called the Sondt, and the Imposition laid by the King on all Passengers; and
Where Tycho Brach studied.
Vrenburgh in Wheen: these in the Baltic Isle Seland.

VI. The great traded Odensee, with eleven haven Towns, more defended by so
many Castles on the Baltic in Fuinen; besides Neistad, with its Corn and
Chestnuts in the Isle Laland; neat Called the Naples of Denmark.
Nicopen and Stabcopen in the Isle Falstre; Niburgh and Ascens in the dangerous
Isle Tusing; Pettersborn, Stabul and Derborch in the important Femeren; the
good Castle and town Sunderburgh, Gomelgards, Osterhorm in Atsen; Bornholm
furnishing Mariners with powdered Beef and Mutton, with almost ninety more
little Isles.

VII. The good havens of Warburgh, Laholm, Halmstad, Falkendorch, on the
Baltic in Halland, rich in Fish, Brass and Iron; poor Lunden and its rich Dial
and Clock: the well traded Port Elbogen over against Coppenhagen: the strong
and useful Lands-Crown, and the Castle of Helsenburgh, over against
Croneburgh, a Key to the Sondt: Impregnable Christendorp in Schonen with
Christenburg; Aduis and Vsted in Blecking on the Baltic toward Swedeland.

VIII. Norway bounded E. with Sweden, N. S. W. Sea under the same clime almost
with Denmark (the honest and plain people of it, trade with other Nations in
Deal-boards, Stock Fish, Furrs, Pitch, Masts, Cables, Train Oil, Dealboards for
necessaries; and are troubled with field-mouses like Locusts at land, and Which
they drive away now with the Oil of Castor.
Whales at Sea;) has the Mercantile Congel over against Scagen on the Sea,
Marstrand and its Herrings, Aestoes bay, Koningsburgh, Frederickstrad, Schon
with its Iron and Copper, the two Hammars on a Bay, Saltzburgh; Bergen, a noted
and impregnable Port on a Creek of the Sea, called Carmefart, where they
exchange Fish, Furrs, Cordage, etc. for strong Waters, Wine, Beer, Corn, Flesh,
etc. Waraduys on the Isle Ward in the extreme The best in the world, which with
Stock Fish is their bread.
Northpoint of this Kingdom, well traded in the way between Norway and Muscovy
by the English and Dutch; besides the Haven town Haffenford, where Merchants
under Tents barter necessaries for The best in the world, which with Stock Fish
is their bread.
Iseland-Ling, and little Ladies Dogs, Butter, Hawk, Fish, Brimstone, which is
the reason of the Fires in Hecla, Helge and La Croix, and the Baths in Iseland,
where it freezeth eight months, as it does in Fritzland; where is 1 Fritzland
on the East shore of it: Sorund, Samescot and Andfort, much frequented for Fish
by English, Scotch, Dutch, as is Ilou, Munderpre and St. Where is a Monastry
that is warmed, and has its meat boiled by the fires under ground there
Thomas in Greenland for the Whale Fishing: these are Isles in the Baltic. In
Denmark are Archbishops two, Bishops thirteen, Universities two.

IX. SWETHLAND, E. Muscovy, N. Frozen Sea, S. W. Denmark and Norway, Liesland
and the Baltic: of the same situation with Norway, but more * temperate and
fruitful in Malt, Barley, Brass, Lead, Steel, Copper, Iron, Goats-hides,
Buck-hides, Ox-hides, Furrs, Fish, Firr, Oaks, Pine-trees, Tar and Honey: The
Religion Lutheran, and Church Government Episcopal; the People active, And
wholesome, unless it be over a putrified lake or two.
patient, provident, civil, valiant, and very much inclined to Mechanics, Arts
and Inventions; has 1 In Fighting best in the winter when they see their
breath, being well disciplined, making and mending their own things themselves.
Goth-land, or Good-land, W. Norway and Denmark with good Corn, Mines and Fish;
Gottenburgh, and its commodious, and well traded haven on the Baltic, with the
well-known and fortified Port Cromar, strong Walburgh, and the fair Haven
Loduse; besides the important Elseburgh, flanked with two strong Holds,
Croneburgh and Goldburgh. 2 In Sweden, W. Norway, Vpsal on the bay of Bodner;
Stockholme the Kings Seat, with its safe and large Haven on the mouth of the
Meler in a Marsh well traded, with the strongest Castle in the World; with
Nicopen, Arose, and its Silver Mines, Lesinger and Helsing, with the strong
piece Ozebi on the bay of Bodner: not to mention the wild and enchanting Where
they sell winds.
Lapland. 3 The well traded and seated Barhara, Gernia and Kerleby with their
rich Skins; on bays in Boden. 4 In Finland, Vdden and Wiburgh on the Gulf of
Finland; well fortified against the Muscovite; Abo on a S. point toward the
Baltic, Verna on the Bodnerzee, Decala on the Hosela. 5 In the Isle of
Gothland, Wisbich, the great, but now decayed Northern Empory of Europe. 6 The
Castle Castrolme, Vames and Viburgh in the Isles of Vlandt, all under
Swedeland, who has got footing, besides in the Territories Council: Eight
Ports of Germany: In Swethland are Archbishops Bishops eight; Universities one.

Russia, E. Tartary, W. Finland, S. Poland, 6465 Italian miles long, and 3300
broad, between Day sixteen hours long in some places, and no night all the
summer in others.
the 8th and 20th Climates, the barbarous, lusty malicious, slavish They will
steal their good into one another houses, to hang one another for them.
men forbid to be drunk but three times a year; Say, God and the great Duke
knows all things: and the Women love that Husband best, that beats them most:
both rude Christians, who send a Letter with the dead to Heaven; has,

1. In Muscovy, Mosco on the Mosco, defended by two Castles, Sloboda near the
Volga, Ruscha, Jaroslave, Rustow and Vologoda with the Port St. Nicholas, where
Merchants unlade and pay Custom, trading for Timber, Furrs, Pitch, Rozin,
Honey, Wax, Flax, Hemp, Whales grease, Nuts; with Cloth, Silks and Tapestry.

2. In Smolensko, woody and great Smolensko on the Nieper, with its rich skins.
3 Mosaisk 4 Vast Plescow. 5 The great and fair Mart Novograd on the Na^ or Ny,
carrying all the trade of Muscovy, till the N E. Passage to the Port St.
Nicholas was found out; besides that the Swede commands the Bay between this
Town and the Baltic. 6 Strong So well fortified by a Polonian, that his eyes
were put out least he should build any more.
Narve on the Dwina, near the Bay of Finland. The strong frontiers Pozow and
Volocolue near Poland, as Vobsco; and Juvanogrod is against Sweden. 8
Nordenburgh and Hexholm near St. Nicholas. 9 Simple Petzora in Petzera. 10
Pustorzea, with its Sables Ermins and Beavers over against Nova Zembla in the
Lake Ozera in Condora. 11 Sibier on the Ob and Zeznigo, Potuvolo, Branbim,
Sibior. 12 Perme and Sicwiar^key on the Viscore on Permia, where they use Dogs
and Staggs instead of Horses. 13 Rhezan on the Ocque Lorsira, C^llisga and
Tulla in the most Where every grain brings forth 6 ears of corn.
fruitful Country in the World Rhezan well fortified toward Tartary. 14
Suriche and Where they worship all day the first Beast they meet with in the
morning.
Casan on the Sure and Volga, safe Stages for Merchants near Tartary in Casan.
15 Astrachan near the fall of the Volga, in one of her 70 mouths to the
Caspian, a commodious Mart where the Armenian Merchants barter their Silks and
Manufactories for the Russes Furs, etc. 16 Novogrod the great, on the
confluence of the Ocke and Volga in Novograd the lower. 17 St. Nicholas, a well
traded port, and St. Michael, the great English Staple in Dwina; not to reckon
the intolerable cold Where Sir H. Willoughby was frozen to death under the
Northern Star, to which the people sacrifice their deer yearly.
Willoughby Island, and Nova Zembla: in Muscovy, the Revenue is infinite,
because Arbitrary: the people resolute, and obedient Soldiers: the
Patriarchates One: Arch Bishoprics two: Bishoprics eighteen.

XI. POLAND, W. Germany, N. Baltic and Russia, S. Mountainous Hungary and
Walachia, E. Tartary and Russia, and its Ale; mixed, religious, studious, but
inslaved people has 1 in Where they drink to their dead, and bury with them
meat, drink, a hatchet, and money.
Leifland near Russia, Finland and Lithuania (where store of Corn, Ermins,
Sables and Castors: 1 The good Port Rivalle on the Gulf, and strong Pernow
under the Swede, his Key to this Country. 2 Strong Derpt and Velin under the
Muscovite. 3 The well fortified and ammunitioned Rig or Rica, a famous Mart for
Hemp Flax Pitch, Wax, etc. with the strong Garrison, and Toll-places, Dunamund
and Blokaws; Wolmar on the Treiden and Kokenhan on the Dwina, there being no
commodious haven in Curland, though it lies along the Baltic, nor any
remarkable place in Where they till the ground with spades and mattocks, saying
they have ill corn when they do it with plough.
Samogytia, where the people nourish Serpents for their Household Gods. 2. In
Lithuania, whither we carry Wine, Salt, etc. for Timber, Pitch, Wax, Honey,
Ermins, Sables, Bugles, etc. is Vilna well walled, and traded by the Muscovy
Merchants on the Vilna. 2 Destroyed Kiof on the Nieper, Grodua and Grumwald on
the Cromus, and strong Str^ssin.

III. In Podolia, N. of Desert Volnia and Russia, S. Moldavia very fruitful,
one tilling, with a little shaking of the Corn, serving for three years; but
not well inhabited by reason of the Turks, Tartars and Walachians incursions,
against which Camienecz only is impregnable, to which Limburgh affords Salt
meats, Orczakow, Vaszow and Barclow on the Nieper and Boy, other provisions.

IV. In Russia N^gra, Where a Pine Tree left on the ground three years turns
stone.
Chelme with its Furs Sables, Ermins, Beef, Wool, Honey, Wax and Mede; and the
well traffiqued Lemburgh, Belzo, Grodeck, Halitz.

V. Masscovia and P^alassia, affording only a few Garrisons in Prussia, W.
Pomerania, S. Poland, E. Lithuania, famous for Meth and Used there to heal all
diseases almost.
Amber, are 1 belonging to the Duke of Brandenburgh, the Port and Mart for
Lithuania Mimel, Koningspurgh on a Bay, where Pregel falls into the Baltic
near Bradenburgh, with eighty good Towns more, and fifty four Castles. 2
Belonging to the King of Poland, the commodious, rich and well traded
Braunsburgh, Frawenburgh, Elbing on a bay of the Baltic: Strasburgh near Where
leather Ordnances were first invented, 1628.
Poland: Culme, with the well garrisoned and ammunition'd Marienburgh,
Newburgh, well fortified Darsaw, and the fair Corn Granary Dantzick on the
Wessei, a free town with the noted English Staple, and Port for the Baltic
Melvin.

VI. In Poland, especially so called, with its Rye, are 1 Posna on the Warta,
with its great yearly Marts: Strong Koschten: woody Ostresow, old and well
walled Guesca the Primates seat Petrocow on the ship-road Bard: Ploscow and
Warsaw that well traded place on the Vistula, where the Kings Court, Being a
very famous University and Mart.
and the public Diets are kept in Great Poland. 2 Cracow, well fortified and
frequented on the Wessel, for learning and trade: strong Lubtix and its three
yearly Marts for all Nations on the Marshes: Lelow on the B^a^^: ^endomir on
the Wessel, W^zlaza on the N^d^ in less r Poland, a place of little trade
though on the sea the Swede Dane and Hans-towns do incroach so much upon them:
in Poland are three Romish Arch Bishop, and nineteen Bishops: two Greek
Archbishops, and six Bishops: and four Universities.

XII. Hungary, bounded N. with the Carpathian hills, and Poland between the
middle parallel of the 7th and 9th clime; yielding abundance of Cattle and
Silver to the neighboring coun^ries: the people rude and strong, not esteeming
themselves men, till they can wear a feather for killing a Turk, has 1 Raab on
the meeting of the Rabi with the Danow. 2 Viennaes outworks Altemburgh and
Castle Novo. 3 Gomorra circled by the Danow. 4 Presburgh, with its pleasant
Castle near Austria on the Lyet a Metropolis; with strong Filecke Nitri on the
Bock Vacceia on the Danow: Cassovia near Transylvania and Lip: 5 Strong and
faithful Tokay. 6 Well fortified Eperia and Now under the Turk, as are the
following places.
Newhausel on the Gran. 7 Well fortified and stately Buda, though unevenly
built on the Danow, with its Medicinal Baths. 8 The unwholesom, but strong
Stul-weisenburgh between the Danow and the Dravus, in a Marsh blocked in three
Causeways, leading to it with three Bullwarks near Walpo. 9 Well fortified Gran
on the Danow near the Gran. 10 Fivekirken, commanding the Dravas. 11 Sirmisch
and its good Wines, between the Danow and the Saw. 12 Strong Zigeth on a Marsh,
North of the Draw. 13 Belgrade, made impregnable by the Saw, and the Danow on
the one side, and Walls, Ditches and Ramparts on the other. 14 Pest and Col^cza
on the Danow; with strong Agria commanding that Country. 15 Strong Temeswar,
Hatroan and Guyla toward Transylvania: Indeed, this whole Country is
garrisoned; having two Arch-bishopricks, and thirteen Bishoprics.

Between the Emperor, the Turk and the Venetian.
XIII. Sclavonia, E. Greece, W. Germany and Venice, N. Hungary, of a fruitful
soil for all Italian products, besides rich Mines, inhabited by a drudging
people; has 1 Windischreits on the Dra, Sagona, Gradiska-Zagabria, Novigrod,
Petrowin, Sissey on the Sa^: in Windiscland. 2 The strong Frontier Mosth Whitz:
Modrisch, Tarnaw in poor Croatia. 3 Jaitza on an unfordable River, with an
inaccessible Castle Warborson, Cazach, Dorocixa, Schwani^a and Clyssa in
Bosnia. 4 Sebenic on the Sea, Salona, where the Emperor Dioclesian turned
Gardener: the Sea town, and Archbishopric The seat of Antonius de Dominis,
our famous Spalato.
Spalato, impregnable Almissa; Stayno on the Naron, Castle Novo, Antibari,
Cathoro on Golfo de Catharo, Dulcingo, and inaccessible Scatari, Alesio, and
Medon; in Dalmatia with the commodious Port Ragusi, strongly fortified, and
well traded. 5 Zara's safe and large Port on a Promontory over the Adriatique,
where according to a Vow, Sailers tempered the mortar of a Church they built
with Malmesey: tempestuous Flavona, Albana, Zeyna Nonae in The seat of the old
Liburni, the Sedanmen, beadles of Rome.
Contado de Zara. 5 Pago and its Salt Pits; Lezina and its large and safe
harbor, and Viglio also, with its Wood, Wines, Corn and Cattle, Confu, etc. in
the Isles of Sclavonia, which are many but not considerable: All Sclavonia has
4 Archbishops, and 26 Bishops.

XIV. Transylvania, W. Hungary, N. Poland, S. Walachia and Russia, E. Moldavia;
rich in Wine, Wheat, Cherries, Damascens, Malacotoones, Musk-Melons; Mines of
all Metals, with Salt and Sulphur; besides Medicinal Plants: the people like
the Hungarians; has great and strong Hermansted: The vast Mart and University
Cronstad, Noren, Meduish, Schesburgh; well fenced Laiz; well seated
Clausenburgh and Weisenburgh: Varaden, Thorda, Enguedine; Millenback commanding
a narrow passage leading to Hungary, Venuschium and Deva its good Wines, with
many other strong places, as there are in desolate Moldavia, Walachia, Russia,
Servia, Balgaria, so harassed by Turks, Tartars and Cossacks, that you can
hardly meet with any people, much less towns, unless it be here and there a
Fort, which is the condition indeed of all Dacia.

XV. Greece, divided by Mount Hamus from Dacia and Sclavonia, W. Adriatique, N.
this Mountain, S. the Ionian, E. Propontique, Aegean, Hellespont under the 5th
and 6th Clime; rich and pleasant, inhabited by a merry but a perfidious people;
has 1 Chiarenza on Cabo de Chlarerza, fortified by Castello di Lepanto;
Vostiza, Xilocastro, Chaminisa; the much frequented and traded (...)
Patrae on Golfo de Patras, famous for Olives and Iron, in Where the English
had a Consul, called Consul of Morea.
Achaia. 2 Sconria, formerly that Olympia, famous for its Games, and Ep cha
called Olympiads, or four years duration; and Tornese in Elis. 3 The well
fortified and large harbored Metlon on a Dena Island Messene on Golyo de Corn
called so from the strong Corn; as Golfo de Arcadia is by Arcadia in Messenia.
4 Near which Epaminond died, leaving 2 Daughters, as he said viz. the Victories
at Lectra and Mantinea.
Mantegra, Leontari in Arcadia. 5 Malvasia on Golfo de Napoli, with its sweet
wines, called Malmesey. 6 The Cabo, Malio, Manapart, Colochina, etc. in
Laconia, where stood old Sparta. 7 The good ship station Napole on Golfo de
Napoli in Argolis. 8 Great Corinth sunk into the small Village Crato in
Corinthia. 9 The memory of Athens in Achaia, Attica, shrunk into a Borough,
called Selines. 10 Megra in Megaris. 11 Thesbia, Lebadia, Thebes, reduced to a
poor Village in Baeotia. 12 The memory of Helicon, Anticyra, Pytho, the middle
of Greece, and the World: The port Cyrrah to the Oracle place Delphos; Elatea,
Scarphia, Crissa in Phcis; as of the like places in Locris, Doris; Aetolia,
(where is only memorable the bay of Corinth, called the bay of Lepanto),
Epirus, Albania, Macedonia, Thrace, and the dispersed twenty one Isles of
Greece, where nothing is remarkable besides Candia or Crete, so much assaulted
by the Turks, and defended by the Venetians; Corsu in Corcyra the Bulwark of
Venice, and the Staple of Lemmons, Oranges, Fig Trees, Olives, Pomgranates
Honey, Wine, Oil and Corn; the strong Cephalen, with the large Ports Argastoly
and Sydre in So dry, that the Cattle gape morning and evening for dew.
Cephalenia, with its Wheat, Honey, Currants, Muscadels, Manna, Cheese, Wool,
Turkies, Scarlet, Powder. Zant, and its commodious haven toward Greece in
Zant, whence Currants, Wines, Salt. etc. Canea with its Commodious Port Porto
Della Suda and Spachea in Canea, which has two hundred forty two Towns and
Villages, with the Port Allimora, Candie, and four hundred and sixty Towns
more in Lying Creeet, one of the tria Cappa (...). Cerigo, the old Cithera near
Cabo Malo, with its Marble and many Havens, Namphio among the scattering
Sporades; the Ruins of Cia, now Zea, Seriphus now Serphena; Milo, with its
spotted Marble, Milstones, Pitch, Brimstone and Baths; in Melos the names of
Scyros, Vnde aliquid brevibus Gyaris, etc.
Gyaros, the banishing place of Rome, Paros, Naxos, Andros, Tenos, Delos, with
their Marble, Wines, called the Cyclades in the Achipelago, Engie, Aegina on
Golfo di Engia, opening to the Aegean; Salamis nigh Megaris, Caristo, and its
marble, Negropont on the goodly Gulf of Negropont in Where Palamedes first
invented Sentinels, and the watch word.
Eubaea or Negrapont near Euripus, with many fair harbors, rich Wine, Oil,
Corn, Fruits, Timber, and marble; Lemnos, with its mineral Earth, called,
Terra Lemnia, or Sigillata, hot Baths, and Cochino in Lemnos and its convenient
Creeks and Havens; Thassus and its good haven in Thassus, famous for Wines and
marble; Samothrace in Samothrace with its goodly havens; these in the Aegean:
The two Castles in Sestos and Abidos, now called Dardanels the outwork of
Constantinople, commanding the passage out of the Mediterranean into Mare
Maggiore, or the Black sea: besides that,

1. In Thrace, we have the Renowned Constantinople, Commanding the Propontis
Bosphorus and Euxine, well fortified toward Land and Sea eighteen miles round,
containing Eight hundred thousand Souls, with the Temple of St. Sophia, and the
Seraeglio three miles round with its Groves of Cypress, Gardens, Fountains and
Prospect: with a deep and convenient haven; narrow streets, and poor buildings;
over against it, the Mart and Factory Pera; Adrianople near here: Callip lis,
the good harbor between Europe and Asia; Selimbria, Sisopoli and Phinopolis,
convenient Ports; as is Philipocopolis, Lysimachia, Anus and Polystilo.

2. In Albania is Impregnable Croia, Petrella, Stellusa, Petra Alba; the
commodious haven Apollonia, and Aulon over against Otranto; this Province and
Epirus known for the Exploits of Scarderbeg.

3. In Thessaly, there remains only the names of the famous old places, as
Philippi, Pharsalis, Pegasu; strong Demetrias, etc.

4. In Macedon, Ceresi, V^dena, mount Athos, inhabited only by working
Hermits; Saloniche, formerly Thessalonica on the Bay of the name, commodiously
seated, and much frequented for the Indian Trade; Sydero-Caspae, with its mines
of Gold and Silver; Eryssa on the Bay of the Holy Mountain; Torene near Golfo
de Aeomama; All miserably destroyed by the Turks, as is indeed, all Greece.

The Names of all the known and most remarkable Capes, Ports, Beys, and Isles,
Rocks, Rivers, Towns and Cities in Europe, with their Latitude and Longitude.
La. Lo. ABbeville 50 26 Aberdone 58 22 Aberdora 58 22 Aboa 65 45 Abskon 46 66
Achas 63 46 Acnari 41 51 Acques mortes 43 30 Acqui 44 34 Acria 36 Acrote 42 55
Aczud 46 53 Adnich Adria 45 49 Adzul 57 52 Again 45 24 Ahuys 56 39 Ajamont 38 18
Aipheran 37 52 Air 44 24 Aito 40 43 Aix 43 31 Aken 50 31 Alarcon 39 24 Alba 44
34 Albenga 44 34 Albis regalis 47 46 Alborg 57 34 Alby 44 26 Alcala de henares
41 22 Alcala-Real 38 22 Alcamara 40 19 Aldernay 50 22 Aleipo 38 50 Aleficon 49
14 Alexin 54 64 Alicante 39 26 Almeria 38 23 Alta 62 40 Alvata 46 52 Amalti 41
41 Amantea 39 44 Ambois 48 25 Ambrunsch 61 42 Amiens 50 26 Amphipo 42 55
Amsterdam 52 30 Anai 53 13 Anatoria 39 50 Ancona 43 41 Andenes 63 35 Andre J.
39 57 Andrinopoli 44 57 Andujar 39 52 Anenas J. 69 38 Angenes J. 72 42 Angiera
45 34 Angiers 48 23 Anglesey J. 53 20 Angoulesme 46 25 Angustow 53 49 Anholt J.
56 36 Anogh 55 14 Anslou 59 34 Anthedon 39 54 Antipachsu J. 38 49 Antwerp 51 30
Aquila 52 41 Aquileja 46 40 Arbeth 48 68 Arboge 59 39 Arbret 57 22 Arcadia 36
52 Archem 52 31 Arcim 45 52 Ardal 65 40 Arelo 52 15 Argiro 40 49 Argos 37 54
Arki 46 45 Arles 43 30 Armiro 40 52 Arol 52 64 Artos 36 52 Arxdruja 56 53
Ashvow 54 13 Asperosa 42 56 Aspromiti 48 68 Assow 50 70 Assuma 65 42 Astolli 41
43 Astorga 43 18 Athena 38 55 Atri 43 41 Augata 42 53 Augburg 48 37 Aviero 41
16 Avignon 44 30 Avilles 44 18 Auranches 49 22 Aux 44 25 Axipolis 45 56

B
Badajor 39 18 Badgenoth 57 20 Baera 38 22 Bajona 42 15 Bajone 44 23 Balaguer
42 27 Bamberg 50 37 Bambourg 56 23 Banden 47 34 Bangor 53 20 Bar 48 29
Barcelona 41 29 Bari 41 45 Barka 44 46 Barlengas 39 15 Barry 57 22 Barsa 51 47
Barton 53 24 Barwick 56 23 Basa 38 23 Basas 44 25 Basel 48 34 Bastia 39 49
Baston 53 24 Bath 46 47 Bausk 56 49 Bayeux 49 24 Beauvois 49 26 Bebz 50 51
Bedela 53 67 Behembroda 50 41 Beiza 42 54 Beja 38 17 Bela Osera 60 61 Bele 46
31 Beleeck 54 12 Beleff 53 64 Belgoff 52 63 Belgrado 46 48 Belle Isle 47 21
Belliza 44 52 Belluno 47 39 Beraun 49 40 Berck 51 32 Berga 68 57 Berga 62 41
Bergamo 46 36 Bergen 53 38 Bergen 60 30 Berlin 52 38 Bern 47 33 Beroe 45 57
Berro 53 14 Berry 48 28 Befancon 47 31 Besignano 41 44 Beskaw 52 38 Bestat 62
30 Bialacorkiew 50 57 Bialigrod 46 58 Bialogrod 47 58 Bielha 57 59 Bielica 53
52 Bieocha 37 51 Bigaa 66 46 Bilbao 42 22 Binitro 39 49 Biradomus 68 40
Bircarli 67 46 Bircola 62 46 Birzo 56 50 Blanc 47 56 Blavet 48 21 Blois 48 26
Bloine 52 47 Bogia 44 52 Bologna 44 38 Bolzano 46 37 Bon 63 34 Bona 38 44 Bonus
Portus 49 64 Boria 42 23 Borysow 54 55 Borissa 50 67 Born 50 38 Bosch 51 30
Bosine 43 49 Bougan J. 71 46 Bovino 41 43 Bouloigne 50 26 Bourbon 46 29
Bourdeaux 45 24 Bourges 47 27 Bourneuf 47 22 Braclow 49 56 Brady 50 52 Bragmea
42 18 Brago 42 16 Brandenburg 52 58 Brask 52 50 Braslaw 56 52 Braunow 48 40
Bregentz 47 36 Breknoc 52 51 Bremen 52 34 Breneski 53 60 Brescia 45 36 Breslaw
41 54 Bressia 52 51 Breast 48 20 Briadisi 41 46 Briancon 44 32 Briel 52 29 Brin
49 44 Bristol 51 21 Brixen 46 38 Brock 53 49 Bross 47 51 Bruck 47 34 Brunswick
52 36 Brussel 50 29 Bubuz 46 44 Buckingham 52 23 Buczacz 49 51 Buda 47 47
Buillon 50 30 Burglos 48 50 Burgos 42 21 Burnholm J. 55 39 Byri 64 50

C
Cabardi 50 69 C. di Ratoma 36 54 Cadoz J. 37 10 Caen 49 20 Caffa 47 67 Cagly
43 40 Cahors 45 26 Calakorra 43 22 Calatajut 42 23 Calatrava 39 22 Calcis 39 54
Calis 51 26 Calmin 51 14 Camarina 43 15 Cambray 50 28 Cambridge 52 25 Camora 42
20 Campen 52 31 Campiegne 49 27 Canarie J. 28 10 Candavia 41 50 Candia J. 34 58
Canisia 44 45 Canosa 41 44 Cantazaro 39 45 Canterbury 51 26 Capel J. 41 41
Capel J. 56 41 Capitanei Bircanorum 68 41 Capodistria 46 41 Capua 41 41 Carania
36 56 Carcar 43 23 Carcassona 43 28 Carchi J. 36 61 Cardiga 52 20 Cargapol 62
64 Cariati 39 45 Carlisle 55 21 Carpa 62 64 Caermarden 52 20 Carmagnol 45 34
Carmarna 53 20 Cartagena 38 26 Cartisan 39 54 Cas 41 51 Caselska 55 64
Cassendro 41 53 Cassio J. 35 60 Castle 51 35 Castello 42 29 Castillon 47 30
Castri 37 55 Castro 42 38 Castrum Reg. 65 41 Cataro 42 47 Cavan 54 14 Cavida 48
68 Cefalonia J. 38 50 Cell 52 35 Cercum 48 68 Cerigo J. 35 55 Cerina 44 45
Cervia 44 40 Chalon 49 29 Chalon 46 30 Chameez 45 32 Charlis 67 49 Chelm 58 57
Cherfo J. 45 42 Chester 53 21 Chianad 46 48 Chichester 51 24 Chielm 51 50
Chimera 40 48 Chinco 44 45 Chiorlich 43 59 Chiretie 39 51 Chissar 43 58
Chlinino 53 54 Chrastowitz 46 44 Chur 47 35 Ciechanow 52 49 Ciecieresk 53 58
Cisteron 44 32 Citraro 40 44 Cittanova 46 41 Civ. di pena 43 41 Civ. vechia 42
39 Clermont 46 27 Cleve 51 31 Clin 56 64 Clomsk 52 52 Cloney 52 15 Coblentz 50
32 Coeverden 52 32 Cognac 46 24 Coimbra 40 16 Colchester 52 25 Colmar 56 40
Colme 59 19 Colmagro 64 69 Coln 50 32 Colochiva 36 54 Colocza 46 47 Colonia 48
51 Coluge 54 65 Columna 55 67 Como 46 35 Compostella 43 15 Conra 44 40 Coniga
40 51 Consprack 57 36 Constances 49 22 Constantinopolis 43 59 Constentz 47 36
Conza 41 42 Copenhagen 55 37 Coporga 60 55 Compreiniz 47 44 Copriza 44 57
Cordova 38 21 Corelenborg 66 58 Coria 48 18 Corinta 38 54 Cork 52 14 Cornstat
51 47 Coron 36 52 Corrunna 44 15 Corsica J. 41 36 Corsu 36 52 Cosioria 48 65
Coslo 47 63 Cotbus 51 40 Cracow 50 47 Cram J. 56 16 Crema 45 36 Cremona 45 36
Crenay 54 12 Crepivina 53 65 Cresholm 64 46 Cressona 47 65 Crim 48 66 Crisden
55 24 Croatia 45 43 Cronoburgh 62 48 Crossen 51 41 Crossida 48 64 Crusis 51 48
Cuenca 40 23 Cuidadreal 39 22 Cuidadrodrigo 41 18 Cuitri 37 54 Culdinga 57 47
Culn 53 43 Culta 44 59 Cumana 50 66 Cuminza 43 48 Curzola J. 43 45 Cusa J. 43
45 Custo 61 46 Cwarszaw 52 47 Cyprus J. 36 68 Czartorisko 51 52 Czausi 54 58
Czeben 49 47 Czernihow 51 51 Czernobel 51 58 Czirpach 55 66 Czograd 47 48
Czudnow 50 55 Czyrkassy 50 59 Czyrsko 51 48

D
Dachden J. 58 47 Dalow 53 41 Danielsca 59 67 Dantzick 54 43 Darby 53 23
Dartmouth 50 20 Daulton 54 21 Dax 44 24 Deckendorf 49 39 Denbig 53 21 Denboviza
45 53 Dentshenbroda 49 42 Dernoos 57 30 Derpt 58 53 Destor 46 58 Deventer 52 31
Dieppe 50 26 Digne 44 32 Dinan 48 22 Dineprsco 56 63 Dingle 52 13 Dingwall 58
20 Dinow 49 49 Doari 54 41 Dol 49 22 Dolcigno 42 47 Dole 47 31 Domshaff 68 49
Dondalk 54 16 Donerole 52 13 Dorchester 51 32 Dorgabusa 56 61 Dort 52 30 Dovay
50 28 Dover 51 26 Doxico 54 5 Doyon 47 30 Draben 53 41 Drema 39 52 Dresda 51 39
Dresen 52 42 Dreux 49 26 Driesna 55 54 Drin 44 48 Drinakar 45 47 Drinaste 43 47
Droghdah 54 16 Dronten 64 36 Dubinki 54 53 Dubitz 46 45 Dublin 53 16 Dubrowica
51 54 Duisburg 51 32 Dunbar 56 22 Dungano 55 15 Dunkel 57 21 Dunster 51 21
Duracona 64 63 Durano 42 48 Durasme 55 24 Durosiorum 45 55 Dury 49 45 Dwershok
57 61

E
Ecwitoldi 57 60 Ecya 38 20 Edesto 42 51 Edinburg 51 21 Edipso 39 54 Edswelt 60
34 Eerholms J. 40 55 Egnisia 47 44 Egra 50 39 Elatea 38 53 Elatria 39 50 Elba
J. 42 37 Elbing 54 44 Eleholm 56 40 Elis 37 51 Elsenburg 56 38 Elsenor 55 37
Elvas 39 17 Elvedale 61 38 Embrun 44 32 Embden 53 32 Emstofelt 47 44 Enchuysen
53 30 Engelholm 56 37 Ens 48 41 Epcries 49 48 Eres 43 42 Erfart 50 37 Ericula
J. 39 41 Erille 63 42 Erinistat 45 54 Eropus 42 50 Escurial 41 21 Estardal 61
32 Evello 38 52 Everlothoa 57 18 Evora 38 17 Eureux 49 26 Excester 51 21 Ezekt
46 47

F
Fach 50 36 Falconara J. 35 59 Falmouth 50 17 Falster J. 54 37 Falxin 46 56
Fano 44 40 Far 59 20 Faro 37 17 Felborg 66 42 Feltre 46 49 Ferden 52 34
Fermentia J. 38 57 Fermo 43 41 Feral 44 16 Ferrara 45 38 Ferreira 39 17 Festeen
58 30 Feti 47 64 Finlator 58 21 Fiumaradimur 38 44 Fiume 46 42 Flensborg 54 34
Flint 53 21 Florence 43 38 Fondi 41 40 Foyles 59 19 Frankfort 62 39 Francsurt
50 34 Frankendael 49 34 Frawenburg 54 44 Frejuls 43 33 Fridlant 54 46 Friesach
47 41 Frisland J. 62 355 Fromal 61 50 Fulstyn 49 54

G.
Gaeta 41 41 Galacz 45 57 Galato 38 51 Galetz 59 69 Galitz 60 70 Galway 53 13
Gamanum 48 68 Gardiana 41 51 Garlitz 51 41 Garnsey J. 49 22 Gelben 59 37 Gelder
51 31 Gelitz 51 68 Gell^sont 63 36 Gendt 51 28 Geneve 46 31 Genova 44 35
Georgenburg 55 47 Geroslaw 58 65 GCesta 61 42 Gibralter 36 20 Girdrocie 55 51
Giffeberg 53 40 Ginzonda 47 65 Gipisan 52 68 Girace 38 44 Girona 42 29 Glasquo
56 20 Gleneg 57 18 Gloucester 52 21 Glogaw 51 42 Gloven 51 12 Golnaw 53 40
Goloebitza 60 70 Gorodinc 57 63 Gotlands J. 57 43 Gradiskia 46 44 Gramata 40 48
Gran 48 46 Granada 38 22 Granca 42 52 Grandent 53 43 Grave 51 31 Gravesend 51
25 Grein 48 42 Grenoble 45 31 Grina 56 34 Grodno 53 50 Grodzecko 59 61
Groenigen 53 31 Groenland 65 345 Grossetto 42 38 Gyrp 62 35 Gradalquivir 37 19
Guadix 38 23 Guarda 41 17 Guardo 46 36 Guben 51 41 Guebzen 55 18 Guerdeq 48 21
Gyula 47 49

H
Habicz 49 52 Hamaz 63 43 Hambourgh 53 35 Hanmar 60 34 Hanna 51 50 Hapsael 59
48 Harle J. 60 29 Haversleve 54 34 Haure de grace 49 25 Hellensley 54 24
Helmsburg J. 72 48 Helsigia 61 48 Helston 50 17 Herachia 43 53 Hermanstat 47 51
Hereford 52 21 Hesene 60 41 Heyligelant J. 65 35 Heyligerlanderleen 64 35 Heys
J. 47 22 Heysant J. 49 19 Hilse 60 30 Hitlant J. 61 22 Hoel 54 43 Hogelander J.
60 52 Hoki 54 58 Holesa 63 49 Holker 56 33 Holland 54 44 Honowitz 69 43 Horodak
51 45 Horton 56 23 Horwell 52 57 Houdon 53 24 Huesca 42 26 Hull 53 24 Humad 46
21 Humdal 63 34 Huntington 52 24 Husbay 60 37 Husz 46 56

I
Jaca 43 25 Jainvelle 48 30 Janna 40 50 Janova 53 46 Jarsey J. 49 22 Jawernes
58 21 Jazy 47 55 Ibar 44 50 Jeresia 35 57 Jeropoli 39 51 Jerse 63 42 Jesi 43 41
Jesko 49 50 Jetaborg 68 44 Jezael 50 49 Jezaw 51 45 Ighia 67 52 Ihedra 59 59
Ikaknia 55 53 Incoronata J. 44 43 Ingelstat 49 38 Ingen J. 72 47 Inkerme 47 65
Insbruch 47 38 Jockena 68 68 Jokis 66 52 Jorhi 62 53 Jorum 42 51 Isburg 58 54
Ischa 44 52 Ischia 41 41 Iserma 42 41 Islandia J. 65 55 Isle de be 47 23 Isle
d'oleron 46 23 Isle Trinitati 42 44 Isli J. 45 42 Isola 39 45 Ivangorod 59 54
Jusk 53 16

K
Kalb 49 34 Kalia 63 70 Kalis 53 42 Kalloe 55 34 Kamienier 49 54 Kandelex 67 63
Karelagorod 61 57 Kare^^^ff 52 62 Kassch 48 47 Ke^^wick 71 50 Kelleran 57 17
Kemi 66 60 Kerislaw 55 69 Kett 53 13 Kiezemievezik 50 19 Kilia 46 58 Kilia Nova
46 58 Kilo 65 50 Kind 70 45 Kiow 51 57 Klekotin 49 55 Knocfergis 55 17 Kofstain
48 39 Koffdake detti 66 62 Koekehaus 56 61 Kolding 55 34 Komar 48 46
Konigingretz 50 42 Konigsperk 54 46 Kosian 56 56 Kourno 54 50 Krasnigrood 57 53
Krasnissaw 51 50 Kroze 55 48 Kruiczow 54 58 Krulow 49 43 Krzemieniec 50 53
Kunesma 65 60 Kyro 65 48

L
Laas 46 42 Labrazza 44 45 Labro J. 42 58 Lacus salsi 49 59 Lacy 53 15 Lada 50
40 Ladeck 47 36 Ladoga 60 58 Laen 38 22 Lago J. 37 59 Laia 65 47 Lairia 40 16
Lalonicz 45 55 Lamia 60 54 Lamego 41 17 Lamia 39 52 Laniley 55 22 Lancastar 54
21 Lanbro 67 47 Landsperg 18 37 Langenes J. 72 44 Langesondt 58 37 Langres 48
30 Lapas 45 44 Lapuzna 47 57 Larissa 41 32 Larmind 47 42 Laroslaw 50 50 Latra
67 53 Latra 39 50 Lawlant J. 54 37 Ledes 53 29 Leipzig 50 39 Lember 51 42 Lena
49 66 Lena 49 67 Lenita J. 37 59 Leon 43 20 Leopolis 50 52 Lepanto 38 52 Lepuy
45 29 Lereal 64 39 Lerhum 54 21 Lerida 41 26 Lero J. 37 59 Lesina J. 43 45
Lesma 45 29 Lesu J. 57 35 Leta 59 38 Lettal 59 35 Leubus 51 43 Leurmeriti 50 40
Leursch 49 47 Leusen 51 53 Jews 59 15 Leyden 52 30 Lian 44 50 Liaste 47 57
Liba 54 42 Liba 56 46 Lick 53 48 Lida 53 51 Lida 63 41 Lieuwart 53 31 Lille 47
32 Limbac 47 44 Limborg 50 31 Limerick 52 14 Limoges 46 26 Limonia 36 61
Lincoln 53 24 Lingen 52 32 Linstrod 64 43 Lion 45 30 Lipa 46 49 Lipara J. 39 42
Lipsk 53 54 Lititz 50 42 Litra 39 53 Livina 52 67 Livoro 43 37 Liu 52 49
Lixbona 39 16 Locdaosoil 64 67 Lodi 45 36 Lodria 42 48 Loeffoet J. 68 36 Loinza
52 48 London 51 24 Lorco 40 54 Lorne 57 18 Losonna 46 32 Louwoburg 53 36 Lowics
51 46 Lubec 53 36 Luben 48 42 Luben 52 39 Lubiecz 51 58 Lubin 51 49 Lubits 53
37 Lubowlo 49 47 Lucca 43 37 Lucera 47 34 Lugo 43 17 Lukniki 56 48 Lukow 52 49
Lula 62 48 Lunenburg 52 35 Lurzenburg 50 32 Lusna 56 53 Lusson 47 23 Luxa 61 48
Lux^ul 48 32 Luyck 50 30

M
Madrid 41 22 Maelstroom J. 67 35 Magere J. 72 52 Majorca J. 39 29 Malaga 38 22
Malte J. 39 42 Man J. 54 20 Mandael 60 32 Mande 45 27 Mandria J. 38 59
Mandzakeleis 50 61 Man's 48 24 Mansfelt 51 37 Mantova 45 37 Marano 46 40 Marbach
49 35 Marburg 50 34 Mardon 57 32 Mare 58 18 Margosest 47 55 Maria 37 54 Mark 59
31 Marieawar 53 44 Marieborg 56 52 Mariza 43 57 Marogina 43 56 Marseille 43 31
Marton 51 20 Mascon 46 30 Matera 41 44 Meaux 49 29 J. Medea 42 47 Medlin 39 19
Medin 43 50 Medniki 59 47 Megalopolis 36 53 Megaricho 48 62 Meisen 51 39
Meislaw 54 59 Melada 43 46 Melck 48 42 Mellito 42 58 Melssmyn 50 47 Melsy 41 42
Memel 46 56 Mentz 50 33 Merdra 55 17 Mere 57 17 Mereck 54 50 Mersburg 51 38
Meschena 53 63 Meseritz 52 41 Messena 36 52 Messina 38 43 Metellino J. 40 58
Metz 49 32 Meydburg 52 37 Miadzial 55 53 Michael Archang. 64 68 Micola 58 65
Midleborg 51 28 Miels 49 40 Milano 45 35 Miltz 50 48 Milo J. 36 57 Miltuburg 50
36 Minorca J. 39 31 Minsk 52 48 Minsk 54 54 Miranda 42 18 Mirepoix 43 27
Misitra 36 47 Mo 63 54 Mochelen 51 30 Modena 44 38 Modon 36 52 Moerse 63 35
Mohilow 54 57 Mola 41 45 Moldania 47 53 Molins 46 28 Mologa 58 62 Momouth 52 21
Moncon 42 26 Mondonedo 43 16 Monfalco 46 41 Monforte 43 17 M. S. Angelo 42 44
Mons 50 29 Monsterham J. 59 29 Montauban 44 26 Montbrisson 45 29 Montgommiry 52
21 Monte Bey 42 17 Mont pellies 43 29 Mora 61 38 Morawiesk 51 59 Morgeburg 53
44 Morgo J. 37 58 Morlais 49 21 Mosaiske 55 65 Moscua 55 66 Mosti 53 50 Motala
57 39 Mozin 52 56 Mula J. 56 17 Munchen 48 38 Munden 51 35 Murcia 38 35 Muros
43 15 Munster 52 33 Mys 53 52

N
Nalibokt 53 54 Namen 50 30 Nancy 48 32 Nantes 48 22 Napoli 41 41 Napoli 37 54
Napurk 49 38 Narbonna 43 29 Narden 58 30 Narceno 44 46 Naria 59 53 Narni 42 40
Nascel 52 42 Naubarum 50 64 Nawos 51 58 Negroponte 39 55 Nerpis 63 46 Nesinsiam
53 54 Netra 65 44 Nevers 47 28 Newburg 49 37 Newcastel 55 23 Newstat 48 44
Nicaria J. 38 59 Nicastra 39 44 Nicola Karielska 64 68 Nicola Mocroy 60 67
Nicola Strelitza 60 70 Nicopen 58 41 Nicopolis 45 53 Nicotera 39 44 Nicsia J.
38 58 Nidael 59 71 Niesolone 50 56 Nigropoli 49 65 Nileus 57 36 Nisari J. 36 59
Nissa 43 33 Nitria 48 46 Nittaw 56 49 Nomendael 65 33 Nona 45 43 Nona and Osoil
64 67 Normora 62 38 Northampton 52 23 Norwich 52 26 Nottingham 53 23 Nova
Wasily 52 67 Novibazar 44 49 Novigrad 45 44 Novigrado 42 50 Novigrodeck 53 52
Numantia 42 23 Numberg 49 37 Nuware 56 19 Nyslot 63 52

O
Odense 61 40 Oder 49 44 Oenoe 38 55 Oescus 44 52 Oesel J. 58 48 Olaw 50 43
Oldeborch 53 33 Oldense 55 35 Oldevad 58 35 Oleron 44 24 Olica 50 53 Olluenca
38 18 Olmuniz 49 44 Olsby 61 55 Olsiani 54 53 Olsnit 50 38 Omba 67 64 Ommega 72
55 Onia J. 45 42 Onna 64 69 Oosterdal 62 34 Opaczeo 58 55 Opato 50 48 Oppelen
50 44 Oraco 44 47 Orange 44 30 Orbai 47 53 Orcades J. 60 21 Orebro 59 39 Orense
43 16 Oressokal 60 56 Ogront 60 42 Oria 41 45 Oribvella 39 26 Orleans 48 26
Orrelsburg 53 46 Orsa 62 39 Orsa 55 57 Orso 40 48 Orvieto 42 39 Orzakow 48 59
Osdova 59 54 Osemburg 47 50 Oskala 56 56 Osmiana 54 52 Osmo 43 41 Osica 47 59
Ossia 42 40 Ostafford 67 39 Ostamkirmen 49 60 Osterre 61 29 Ostra 49 44 Ostrog
50 54 Ostrz 51 58 Osuna 38 20 Otranto 40 46 Oviedo 43 18 Owar 48 44 Owrocze 51
56 Oxford 52 32 Oxma 42 22

P
Pachsu 39 49 Padua 46 55 Padova 46 39 Pagesca 63 51 Palace 52 14 Palaelug 47
66 Palastra 50 68 Palio 65 49 Palmossa J. 38 59 Pamplona 43 23 Pandia 43 59
Pangropoli 47 46 Paola 39 44 Paparoma 50 68 Paretotto J. 39 42 Pario J. 38 57
Paris 48 26 Parma 44 37 Pasiris 50 64 Passow 49 39 Patras 38 52 Pavia 45 35
Pain 53 15 Peckola 64 49 Pedrosa 39 20 Pelagola J. 43 44 Pele 69 52 Pella 42
52 Peniscola 40 27 Perecon 48 66 Perislaw 57 66 Periguex 45 26 Perleberg 52 37
Pernaw 58 50 Perpinha 42 29 Perrowar 46 47 Persora 66 48 Perva 61 ^0 Perugia 43
39 Pes 45 50 Pesaro 44 40 Pescara 43 42 Peterburg 52 24 Petrokowicze 52 56
Philippie 42 55 Philippopoli 44 46 Piacenza 44 36 Pianzi 53 68 Pidea 48 63
Piente 63 48 Pierge 41 48 Pinsk 52 52 Piombino 43 37 Piottkow 51 56 Piritz 52
40 Pisa 43 37 Pifa 45 57 Pisan 50 69 Piscopia J. 36 30 Pistoja 43 38 Pitas 67
47 Plazentia 40 19 Plazo 52 45 Plesco 58 55 Plessa 58 69 Plymouth 50 20
Poictiers 47 25 Policastro 40 32 Polokzo 55 55 Ponieuresk 55 49 Ponte vedra 43
15 Po. quir 41 52 Poralegre 39 17 Porchow 58 56 Porky 67 52 Porohas 50 61
Portere 50 67 Portland 50 22 Porto 41 16 Portra 66 53 Posagor 72 53 Posna 52 44
Potzap 53 60 Praga 50 41 Pretzite 63 71 Prisna 42 50 Proposk 53 58 Provins 48
28 Pulciano 43 39 Putima 52 62 Pultuwsk 52 50

Q
Quefa 39 26 Quipercorentin 48 21

R
Rab 48 45 Rabnick 46 54 Racznow 50 48 Radord 54 58 Ragusa 43 46 Rain 46 43
Rapan 36 55 Rasteburg 54 47 Ratibor 50 45 Ravenglas 55 21 Ravenna 44 39 Recrea
43 49 Redkirk 55 21 Rees 51 31 Regenburg 49 39 Regio 43 59 Regio 44 37 Rhenus
flu. 51 32 Reims 49 28 Remorantin 48 26 Renes 48 22 Renthi 52 34 Resan 54 68
Resio 63 48 Revel 59 49 Ribadeo 43 17 Rieux 43 26 Riga 57 50 Rincoping 55 32
Ripen 55 3^ Rippina 52 44 Rissel 50 29 Rit 45 53 Riva 46 37 Robaczow 53 57
Rocha 43 48 Roche 47 22 Rochel 47 23 Rodelvick 69 45 Rodes 44 27 Rodes 42 29
Rodhest 53 60 Rodholm J. 59 29 Rodus J. 36 62 Roin 49 26 Romdho 62 31 Rome 42
40 Ronda 37 20 Ronenburg 57 52 Rosievie 55 48 Rosowolo dimrowa 56 61 Rossano 39
45 Rosse 51 13 Rossin 59 21 Rossund 64 41 Rostick 53 37 Rostof 57 65 C. Roxent
39 15 Rugia J. 53 38 Rust 67 34

S
Sable 48 23 Sagan 51 41 Sagra 41 53 Saints 46 24 St. Andra J. 44 44 St.
Andrea 44 22 St. Andrews 57 22 St. Anzolo 35 55 St. Bees 55 21 St. Coley 71 47
St. Denis 49 46 St. Flour 45 27 St. Georgen 46 45 St. Giorgio 42 53 St. Jeand
Angeley 46 26 St. Kilda J. 58 15 St. Leuca 40 46 St. Lucar 37 19 St. Malo 49 22
St. Maria 57 55 St. Mary J. 57 15 St. Miguel 40 25 St. Nicolei 57 57 St.
Panagia 40 57 St. Papoul 43 28 St. Patribus J. 58 15 St. Petrus J. 57 15 St.
Pons 43 29 St. Romans 45 30 St. Severina 40 42 St. Severino 39 45 St. Starti J.
41 57 St. Ventico J. 36 52 St. Zorsi 37 53 Sala 67 51 Salamanqua 42 20 Salatina
43 18 Sale 38 55 Sale J. 45 43 Salerno 40 43 Salesbury 51 22 Salinea 49 66
Saline 39 41 Salmona 42 41 Salona 38 53 Saloniche 42 52 Saltzburg 48 40 Salusi
42 49 Samo J. 39 59 Samos 48 49 Samoscie 50 50 Sandomisi 50 48 Sanien 70 39
Santillana 43 21 Sapienza J. 36 52 Saragoka 42 24 Saragoca 37 43 Sarburg 49 32
Sardinia J. 39 36 Sardo 40 46 Saribroa 44 51 Sarmar 48 49 Sarmont 42 56 Sarwar
48 45 Sarzato 43 37 Sathamaer J. 56 40 Saumur 48 24 Savona 44 43 Scabla 52 65
Scada J. 40 56 Scagen 57 34 Scara 58 57 Scarpanto J. 35 60 Schafsausen 48 35
Schippepois 54 46 Schongen 64 36 Scio J. 39 58 Sciro J. 40 56 Scopuli J. 39 48
Scurari 42 47 Scutenes J. 58 29 Sczepanowice 48 54 Sebarad 45 49 Sebenico 44 44
Sedan 49 30 Sedreps 47 52 Sees 49 25 Sefola J. 38 50 Segni 42 40 Segovia 41 21
Seguja 40 42 Selisa 45 43 Seolge 47 30 Senka 55 62 Sens 48 28 Sereth 48 42
Seosca 60 69 Serpa 38 17 Setubal 39 16 Setzenin 51 46 Sevilla 38 20 Sfinga 44
45 Shrowsbury 52 21 Sia 64 70 Sichem 67 44 Sicilia J. 38 42 Sicyon 38 53 Sidra
J. 37 55 Siemina 49 59 Siena 43 38 Siguenca 42 21 Silivo 37 16 Sillies J. 50 17
Silmes 63 51 Silopha 39 56 Simbalo 47 65 Simly 53 17 Siphano J. 37 57 Siphano
J. 38 57 Sisopoli 44 58 Sitinza 44 49 Skee 54 14 Skira 66 44 Skirkby 68 52
Skokirkia 62 42 Skou 64 43 Skya J. 58 17 Slonim 53 51 Sluezk 53 54 Sluys 51 28
Smolenska 55 58 Sanaim 49 43 Sinatin 49 51 Sobaex 45 47 Soczara 48 53 Sode 62
48 Sokol 56 54 Soldaja 47 66 Solis 49 27 Solway 55 20 Sopsia 44 53 Sorka 48 56
Sorles 46 46 Sossona 41 28 Sotoaler 62 38 Souloski in angra 65 65 Souye 65 59
Spalatro 44 45 Specie J. 37 55 Spiers 49 34 Spinarsa 41 48 Spolcera 43 40 Stade
53 34 Stafanger 58 30 Stafford 52 22 Staguara 64 59 Stain 46 42 Stalimini J. 42
57 Stampalia J. 36 59 Standia J. 35 58 Stanhop 55 23 Stappen J. 72 49 Staradub
52 60 Starigur 67 58 Staritz 57 61 Stat 62 29 Statby 63 33 Steinaw 51 44 Stepan
51 59 Sterlin 56 11 Stezyca 51 48 Sticholm 57 40 Stick 64 37 Stirtungsburg 70
45 Stockholm 58 41 Stoepenof 64 70 Stognio 43 46 Stoir 48 41 Stramo 52 15
Stratdone 58 21 Straver 62 33 Strengis 58 40 Stripnich 44 47 Strobane 55 14
Stromboli J. 39 42 Subistaw 49 54 Suda J. 38 56 Suderhem 59 32 Sudmer 62 31
Summa 65 60 Sunenberg 52 41 Surass 56 57 Suroy J. 72 46 Susdal 56 68 Sutuo 38
55 Suycope 57 40 Suydforde 61 29 Swain 55 13 Swislocz 53 56 Swynar 45 46
Szowlo 56 49

T
Tabor 49 41 Taff 56 23 Taintz 49 40 Talandi 39 53 Talmont 47 22 Tamarica 49 64
Tamopol 50 53 Tanger 35 20 Taracona 42 23 Tarantaile 46 32 Tarasoncze 48 33
Tarento 41 44 Tariffa 36 20 Taristo 47 57 Tarnow 50 48 Tarragono 41 28 Tartaga
44 45 Tatrosa 62 49 Tavila 38 17 Tehenica 49 59 Tehinie 48 57 Telin 55 13
Tenedo J. 41 58 Teramo 43 41 Tere 44 50 Ternova 44 54 Tervel 40 25 Teschea 49
45 Tetiow 50 57 Tevan 59 15 Texel J. 53 30 Tgroot Eylant 60 29 Thebe 40 53
Thebe 38 54 Thespie 38 53 Thisbe 38 53 Thorn 52 44 Thun 47 33 Tieswina 59 59
Tigues 43 52 Tilla 55 47 Tina 45 44 Tirol 47 37 Tizia 49 49 Tiliet vandronten
63 32 Toastri 37 54 Tody 43 39 Tokoy 48 48 Toledo 40 42 Tolsberg 59 52 Tolton
43 32 Tomar 39 16 Tomoewar 46 48 Torki 54 50 Torn 67 51 Torna 48 47 Toropiecz
57 58 Torraeca 49 64 Tortona 44 35 Tortosa 40 27 Tosdael 59 32 Tovasta 49 54
Toul 48 32 Toulouse 44 26 Tours 48 25 Toy 45 52 Tracheberg 51 43 Traenooch J.
66 34 Tragorod 47 53 Tragovisco 46 53 Trajanopoli 43 57 Trait 43 55 Tran J. 44
44 Trani 41 44 Trapono 37 52 Trento 46 37 Trevigio 46 39 Tricari 41 44 Tricca
40 51 Tricorn 45 49 Trier 50 22 Trinici 47 64 Triscola 40 51 Triste 46 41
Triwento 42 42 Troje 48 29 Troitskoy 56 66 Tropea 39 44 Troppa 50 44 Trosonis
45 57 Tule 53 66 Tulle 45 26 Tuna 61 38 Turin 45 53 Turow 52 55 Turowla 55 55
Tursi 40 44 Turzik 53 51 N. Tusse 60 38 Tusta 49 51 Tustwon 69 40 Tuy 42 16
Twere 57 62

V
Valence 44 30 Valencia 39 26 Vallodolid 42 21 Valona 41 48 Vanes 61 49 Vannes
48 22 Var 43 29 Varandin 47 48 Varlara 43 50 Varna 45 58 Vary 48 49 Vasluy 47
55 Vaziazolnock 48 47 Ubed 39 22 Udden 62 31 Udine 47 40 Vegilia 46 42 Vekelax
61 52 Vema 61 45 Venasque 43 26 Venetia 46 39 Verdun 47 30 Verdun 49 31 Verga
65 47 Veria 41 49 Verma 63 46 Verona 46 36 Verta 67 55 Vesikila 64 46 Uglitz 58
63 Ugogna 45 34 Vianna 42 15 Vich 42 29 Vicenza 46 38 Vieste 42 44 Vilak 46 47
Vilna 54 51 Villach 47 41 Villanea 40 19 C. S. Vincente 37 15 Vista 65 53
Vistica J. 39 40 Vitarbo 42 39 Vitolei 42 52 Vitoria 43 22 Ulielant J. 53 30
Ulm 49 35 Ulmcherat 60 37 Uma 65 44 Unaosoil 64 66 Ungwar 49 49 Unissa 41 49
Voltorra 43 38 Upsalia 59 40 Urbino 44 40 Urdowa 57 60 Urego 42 48 Urzedow 50
48 Ustia 57 30 Ustuzna 59 60 Uswiach 56 57 Utaarx 55 56 Utillo 35 54 Utrecht 52
30 Utual 63 43 Vulcano 39 42 Uzais 44 29

W
Waesberg 57 37 Walcopen 59 37 Waldres 61 30 Waldshut 48 34 Wandwag 68 40
Waranger 72 56 Warasin 47 44 Waren 53 38 Warington 53 21 Warkworth 55 24
Warsburg 51 34 Waxford 52 16 Wedrapusta 58 61 Weilkenburg 47 49 Weins 57 23
Wekel 51 32 Welky 49 54 Wells 51 21 Werden 57 51 Weroy 67 34 Wesenburg 59 52
Wesina 56 61 Westerdal 60 35 Westerisen 57 31 Westerwick 57 40 Westkiel 58 33
Weysen Stein 58 52 Whitby 54 24 Wiburg 56 33 Wieliss 56 58 Wielkielakie 58 56
Wien 48 44 Wight J. 50 23 Wihitsch 45 44 Wilcomirz 55 50 Wiliki Novogorod 59 58
Wilton 51 22 Winchester 51 23 Windaw 57 47 Wineta J. 53 39 Winnica 49 56 Wismar
53 36 Wisoczk 51 44 Witep^k 56 56 Wladislow 52 44 Wlodimer 56 70 Wlodzunerz 51
52 Wlogda 60 76 Worm J. 53 39 Wolmer 57 52 Wolluck 51 66 Wolok 56 56 Wolossok
58 60 Worcester 52 21 Worms 49 34 Woronies 52 68 Wortzbu 50 36 Wtsiers J. 58 29
Wyborgh 61 53

X
Xarie 40 23

Y
Yarmouth 52 26 York 54 23 Youhall 51 14 Yrnen 56 19 Ynica J. 34 28

Z
Zachapeita 64 65 Zagori J. 48 62 Zagrahia 46 44 Zante J. 37 50 Zara 45 44
Zarnis 43 55 Zaslow 50 54 Zator 50 46 Zawolocze 57 55 Zea J. 38 57 Zeby 57 34
Zell 48 42 Zenobiz 45 48 Zenonis 48 67 Zers 45 52 Zeverinum 46 49 Ziericzee 51
29 Ziget 46 46 Zilz 44 52 Zysseza 57 58 Zolaritzo 64 64 Zornajam 56 64 Zurich
47 35 Zwonik 44 47

THE Description OF AFRICA.
AFRICA, Bounded South with the Sea of Aethiopia, W. by the Atlantique,
between it and America; N. Mediterranean and Europe, W. Red Sea and Asia: like
a Pyramid reversed; has,

I. Egypt, N. Mediterranean, S. Abbissine Empire; W. Barbary and Lybia, E. Bay
of Arabia, very hot, but for the high Towers they build to Air themselves on;
and Called Horrewn populi Romani.
fruitful by the overflowing of the Nile, (for it never raineth there) in
Corns. VVines, Pasture, Cattle, Lemmons, Pomgranates, Cherries, Figs, Citrons,
Oranges, the useful Where they make Sallads with the pith, bedsteads and
latices with the branches, cordage with the husk, Baskets, mats, fans with the
leaves.
Palm Trees, where first were taught Hyeroglyphicks, and afterward Letters;
the People tawny and degenerate, famous for the Labirinth, the Pyramids and the
Pharos; the Crocodile and the Ichneumen: the Nilus overfloweth June 15. and
returns to its Channel, September the sixth: The People and Cattle in the mean
time keeping the Hills, having Inned their Harvest in May, it must overflow
between fifteen and sixteen Cubits above water, else it betokens an Alteration
in the State; on the Banks are the Papyri, which served for the first Paper;
and Frogs would eat the People, but that the Storks eat the Frogs. Here is the
Red Sea, over which the Spices of India and Arabia are carried into Alexandria:
Here Is 1 Damiata on the Ruins of Pelusium toward Idumea; Heroes and Betsames
on the Arabian Gulf Zioth; Sues, a poor station, for making the Turkish ships
out of the woods of Cilicia to command the Gulf; Burned by a King, who being
told, that an honest woman's water might cure him, and trying many to no
purpose, burned them in this town.
Gleba Rubra; Scanderia, formerly Alexandria, famous for its University and
Library, on a Promontory over the Sea, and the Lake Maeotis, pretty well traded
by all Nations, near the much frequented Rosetta on the Nile, and Munia,
Sibuit; the ruins of Memphis: Caire arising out of the Ruins of Babylon eight
miles round, full of large and impregnable Streets, with its strong Castle,
rich and pleasant accommodations, and a Pestilence every seven years; the too
rank soil of Matared, with eight or nine other little Towns on the Sea or
River: the fair and large Sayet, Tentira, Coptos, Diospolis; the Ruins of
Thebes, Ptolomais; these in the Provinces of 1 Egypt, properly so called. 2
Augustanica. 3 Arcadia. 4 Thebais, Libia Marmorica and Cyrene, being now little
other than Deserts.

II. Barbary, has I. Tunis, bounded N. Mediterranean, VV. Algiers, S. Atlas,
E. Cyrene; which has 1 in poor Ezab, enriched by Mesurata and Sibeca, two
trade-towns on the Sea.

II. West of that Tripolis; where 1 Tripolis on the Ruins of other little old
Towns, well traded and governed by the Turks, the retreat of Pirates that
infest the Coasts of Sicily, Italy, etc.

III. Tunis, West of Tripolis, where besides the Ruin of Carthage, and other
places, stands now 1 Tunis raising upon the Ruins of Carthage, well frequented
by the Genoan and Venetian Merchants, with the strong fort. 2 Goletta, built
for the defense of its Haven. 3 Cairoan, where all Turks desire to be buried.

III. Constantina St. Augustines birthplace.
Bona, affording Fruits and Butter to the Merchants of Genoa, Tunis and Zerby,
Cucutina, well traded for Wool, Cloth, Silks, Oil: Fruits, Dates, Slaves and
Hot baths.

IV. Bugia, most westward, which has in it rich Bugia on the side of a hill
near the Sea in a fertile soil; wealthy Collo, pleasant Where is good store of
Goats, Horses and Wood.
Nicaus.

II. Algiers, W. Fez, Morocco, E. Tunis; where 1 the Pyratical Trade Towns
Tetuan, Sargel, and the fair Algiers on the little chained and unsafe Haven,
with its several trades in several streets on the rising of a steep hill, and
the Pirates that infest the Mediterranean. 2 Decayed Tremesen, Siga, Guagyda,
unhappily seated between the Algier men and the Arabians, with Tigedent, Butha,
Ned Rima Where the people paint their cheeks and hands with a black cross.
Brosch. 3 The good Haven town Oran on the Mediterranean under Spain, with
Tebocrit and its Weavers.

III. Fez and Morocco, W. of Algiers, plentiful in Grain, Pulse, Oil, Honey,
Sugar, Dates, Grapes, Figs, Apples, Goats and Chamlets; 1 Has the rude and
unpeopled Guzula. 2 Susa, with its Gold Mines, Sugarcanes and Amber; where the
important Cape de Aguer; rich Tagavast and Tejent on the Sus; and poor Massa on
Cape Gilon; Tarodant the French and English Staple for Sugars. 3 Morocco, where
though defaced by the Portugez, are rich and large Morocco; Jewish Antera;
Heretical Where is a new heresy of Mahumetans.
^emnella; fruitful but ruined Agret, Secfi^a Where it snoweth all the year.
Elgiumba on the Session; well fortified Tenezze, Imizmizi; Tes^ust upon the
Asifnuad. 4 Barbarous Hea, where nothing of ingenuity, but Chyrurgeons to
circumcise their Children, and Readers to teach them the Law; here is Tednef on
the Tensift, where the Gentry cast lots which shall entertain a With his Barley
meal pap, which they eat on the ground.
Stranger; the Sea Towns Tenent under the Portugez, as the well traded Port
Tecubeth, Iguillin, Guiguil; the little Haven Tefethne, Tesegdelt, and the
cutthroat Tefethne. 5 Depopulated Ducala, where only Tic, Azafi, Azame,
Elmedina on the Ommiroboli; Old Ezo, Elviniana, Alemdine, Togodast, most trade
towns under the Portugez, as are Tezza and Ezza; these places in Morocco. 6
Desolate Temesna, where poor Iejet on the Ommirabili and its Smiths I hagia,
well fenced Adendum, destroyed Amsa, Munso, Nuchaina, Rubat, Fanzara, Allahmer;
fair Against which Chapter I. sent, and upon the King of Moroccooes request, and
subdued it for the general advantage of trade, 1632
Salla, formerly well traded, but since turned a nest of Pirates on the
Atlantique. 7 Fruitful Fesse well inhabited on the hills; there is 1 Fesse on
little hills over the Fesse, conveyed into the City by Aquaeducts with its
Gold, great Trade, Exchange, Baths, Hospitals, twenty eight thousand Families,
and seven hundred Mosckes; old Maquille; Agla where Lions will run away at the
crying of a Child; and Peteira Rossa. 8 Poor Chaus, and its rich Tezza, Benni
Jesseten, with its Iron Mines; Adaggia in the confluence of the Muluso and
Malva, Chesusa, Tezzora, Pennon in the Spaniards hand; the good and well
guarded Port Larache. Habatau along the Atlantique Coast to the Streights
mouth, where is the Spanish Septa: The English Tangier, and its new Mole,
thirty miles from the Streights; the good Sea town Arzilla forty miles further;
Alcazaer, withsome other desolate Ruins. 9 Errif, where is Mazagon near the
Streights very strong, and Important Beni, Jerso, Tegassa, etc.

IV. The sixteen Isles of Barbary, whereof the most noted are, 1 Malta, with
its Pomgranates, Citrons, Oranges, Melons and Cotton wool; where Malta; St.
Hermes defending two Havens, as does Valesse well fortified, the Friar over the
Knights, who must be Gentlemen by 6 descents.
Great Masters Residence: Burgo, commanding the Eastern Haven, Impregnably
fortified Isola on a Promontory. 2 Poor Cosyra, or Pantaban, with its Cotton
wool, Melons and Figs, and a strong Sea town. 3 Inconsiderable Carchana and
Zerby. 4 Gaudica, with its fruitful Land, an enemy to all poisonous Creatures;
a strong town, and capacious Haven belonging to Malta.

III. The Date Region, Libia Interior, and Libia the desert on the other side
of Mount Atlas, with Tafilete, Teffet, Where they entertain strangers at free
cost.
Techort, Segelmesse; the Merchantile Fighig, Tebelbeti, not worth a discourse.

IV. The Land of the Negroes, where since the Portugez came among them, who
took their ships, for Bagpipes, Cannon for Living Creatures: 1 The Havens Por
to de Dio, and Porto del Riscasso, with the fortress Arquin near Cape Blance in
One of the twenty five Kingdoms of this land.
Ora Anterosa on the Western Sea; Gualata. 2 The well traded They trade hence
to Tree-
Agudez in desert Agadez. 3 The wealthy staple Cano, with its Corn, Rice,
Citrons, Pomgranates, Cotton wool, in Cano. 4 Rich Sanaga, reaching to the
Atlantique, and CapeVerde. 5 The trade to Fesse at Tombato, and Gago in
Tombuto. 6 Rich Meli. 7 Well traded Geneoa and Guber by Barbary Merchants. 8
Guinea from Sierra Leona, 10th degree long; to Benin 30th, rich in Gold, Iron,
Rice, Barley, Cotton wool, Guinea Pepper, Dates, Poultry, Apes, Birds, With the
tree Mignolo, of whose bark they make their feasting drink where the Maids come
out of their Cloisters, and are chosen by their husbands.
Elephants; here is Castlemina, Vxoo, Songus, Budomet. 9 Wealthy Benin, E. of
Guiner, Guangara, N. of Benin, Bornum and its Market Towns, where all things
are common; W. of Guangara and Gaoga, with the desert of Nubia.

V. Upper Aethiopia, N. Egypt, E. Red Sea, where among seventy several Kings:
the most remarkable, is, 1 The Island Guagere, with its Gold, Silver, Brass,
Iron, Ivory, Mineral Salt, and there the brave town Meroe, Salcolche, Eser,
etc. 2 The large Sea Coast Tigremaon. 3 Angote, where they use Salt, Pepper and
Iron instead of Money. 4 The Paradise of Amara, and its most pleasant Mountain
of that name, and the two great Monastries impregnably fortified. 5 Damut. Rich
in Gold, Ginger, Slaves, Fruits, Oxen, and the Isle of Gold, called Couche. 6
Goiamy, with its drossie Gold. 7 Bagamedrum, along the course of the Nile
toward Guagere, with rich Mines of Silver, but not inhabited; Merchants and
Travelers, going no further than the Seacoast, as they do not; in 8
Barnagassa, frequenting only Barna, Zameta, Suachen, and its secure and large
Haven, wealthy, and well traded under the Turks, Bisam, and a Monastry of three
hundred Monks: the Port Errocco on the Arabian Bay Abarach, Giabel, Suntar,
Laccari, etc. 9 Nor in Danguls or Dobus on the Arabian Bay, only using Babel
near the Streights Babel-Mangel; the well traded Port Veila; Docono on a Cape
of the name, Doba, Bally. 10 Adel, whose Gold, Ivory and Wool they fetch from
the noted Ports, Zeila, Barbora, Near Cape Guardafuni.
Met, Bidar, Selir, Assam, Arar, etc. 11 Adea, and the Madagazo, much
frequented for Honey, Wax, Gold, and what they esteem the best Commodities,
Slaves and Carfur. 12 Fatigur, Barus, Xoa, etc. all these under the Abassine
absolute Monarch.

VI. Lower Aethiopia has fifteen Provinces, (viz.) 1 Melinde, affording
Melons, Citrons, Rice, Mill, etc. 2 Mombaza, and its two or three Sea towns.
Where they sow their Female Childrens privy parts, until they are married,
only leaving a place for Urine.
3 Quiloa, and one port town. 4 Mosambique, and the town of the name, well
traded and harbored, being in the middle of the Indian Merchants Road. 5
Sofala, with its great Factory for Gold and Ivory in a town of the name. 6
Moenhemage, where they barter Gold for Silks and Taffaties. In I. Sanguevar. II
Monomopata toward Cabo Corriennes affording plenty of Gold and Elephants
teeth. III. Barbarous, and desert Cafraria, wherein nothing memorable but the
Road, called the Cape of Good Hope. VI. Monicongo, where 1 Angola and its rich
Mines of Silver and Copper, which they barter for Dogs and Horse Tails. 2 Well
traded Bamba, with its Metals and Parrats. 3 Wholesome Pemba, and its
Midicinal Herbs, Palms. 4 Warlike Bassa. 5 Pango. 6 Sunda, with its Furs,
Sables, Mattrons, and various Metals. 7 Songo on both sides of the Zair. 8
Barbarous Anzichana, with its Copper Mines and Sanders. 9 Loungo, with its best
Elephants, with its Haven Penga. etc.

VII. The Affrican Isles, such as from the Red Sea to the Atlantique, are 1
Socotara against Guardafa, where the Ports Zocotara, Tamarind, Delisha, Coro
and Benin. 2 Madagascar, the greatest Isle in the world, to whose Shore (for
they are admitted no further) the Merchants come for Sugars, Cotton wool,
Lemmons, Ginger, Cloves, Sanders, Saffron, Amber, Gold, Silver, Copper, Iron,
Ivory, Coconuts, Pomeitrons, as they do in Mohelia, Mauritius Island, Meottie,
Chamroe, Englands Forest, in the Indian Sea. 3 St. Hellens, W. off the Cape of
Good Hope not inhabited, but used as a Road to and from the Indies; the ascent
to it so high, that the Mariners say, that a man may choose, Whether he will
break his Heart going up, or his Neck coming down. 4 St. Thomas and its stores
of Bartered for wheat, wine, cheese, hides.
Sugar in Pavosun, a Portugez City on a fair Haven. 5 The Isles of Cape Verde,
St. Jago, and its fair haven; Delfogo and its smoke, Majo, and seven more not
worth naming. 6 The seven Canary Isles, where the first Meridian; as 1 Canarie,
with Whereof almost 4000 Tun vended yearly in Enland, and the Neatherlands.
sober Wine, Birds, VVoad, Cheese, Skins, Sugarcanes, Wax, Honey, Goats; and
as rich 2 Palma, where the Spanish Fleets victual as they go to Brasile or
Peru; and 3 as fertile Tenariffe with the highest Pike or Hill of that name in
the world. 4 Where a cloud falls on the leaves of a tree, and rains every day
to supply their defect of water.
Hierro and its Iron. 5 Gratiosa, Gomera, Lansarote, Fuerte-Ventura, Alegranco,
Infiermo, Lobos, Roca, etc. 7 The Maderaes over against Cape Cantin in Morocco
made fruitful (by the ashes of the woods burnt there) in Mader, Sugarcanes,
Wines, rich Fruits, Honey, Wax, with its town Fouchial, and to name no more
fruitful Porto Sarcto or Holy Port.

The Names of all the known and most remarkable Capes, Ports, Beys, and Isles,
Rocks, Rivers, Towns and Cities in Africa, with their Latitude and Longitude.
La. Lo. ABerno 26 12 Abutig 28 65 Acanes grande 11 26 Acanes pequeo 09 27 Adel
05 74 Adia 25 51 Adwe 08 27 Aecha 28 18 Aegyptus 28 62 Agades desert 22 28
Agades 21 26 Agades 19 28 Agades Reg. 21 35 Agades 22 37 Agag 03 56 Agag 03 56
Agag 18 63 Agag 17 64 Agla 34 22 Agmet 31 17 Agoada de Boa Pas 24 65 Agoas
people 09 64 Agoch 13 68 Agola 11 65 Agor 09 67 Agrasele 23 59 B. das Agravadas
21 73 Alachi 19 71 Casta dos Alaios 04 24 Alaufera 07 31 Albaiad 18 54 Albari
33 27 Albarch 15 73 Alboran 35 23 Alcudia 35 23 Aldea 07 27 G. das Aldeas 16 44
Alderradeira 30 61 Alexandrera 37 72 Alexandria 32 64 Alger 33 30 Algier 32 39
Algucet 27 64 Alhamara 25 13 Alion 14 79 Almacor 34 18 Almedina 33 30 Almona 27
67 Terra Alta 29 62 C. d. Alvare nunes 04 43 Amanir 18 74 Amarmochdi 01 72
Amara 19 58 Amara Mons 01 64 Upon this Mount are kept in Custody the Ethiopian
Kings Sons, till the time of choosing one of them. Amasen 09 55 Amazones 08 60
Here are they said to be. Ambadora 07 60 Ambiami 08 57 Ambian 01 58 Ambian
cantiva 06 57 Ambian cantiva 05 58 Ambrizi Reg. 08 45 G. de S. Ambrosio 21 45
Amfoloz 28 12 Aminela 30 34 Ammon 29 57 Ammonis 32 33 Anclia 02 61 Anamor 33 15
Ananbolo 23 79 Ancinhe 04 73 Anda 03 64 R. d. S. Andre 16 77 Terra de S. Andre
17 76 C. de S. Andre 34 53 Angeha 11 69 Angela 12 46 Angela 28 54 Angelo 14 83
Angesa 19 53 Angigi 09 69 Angoa 06 48 Angoada 16 82 Angote 07 66 Angote 06 68
Angotina 06 71 Angra das Arcas 17 44 Angra praii 13 44 G. d S. Anna 08 19
Anpasa 01 75 C. de Anquilhas 33 49 Anseir 11 46 Antipeta 24 78 S. Antonio 358
18 Anzicana 03 48 S. Apolonia 21 84 Aqua de S. Aldulia 33 49 Aqualon 03 71 Aqua
d. S. Bras 34 51 Aquifagi valley 05 66 Aquilunda Lake 10 50 Arairata 03 63
Arachiba 32 26 Arava fount. 17 19 Arco 18 81 Ido Arco 09 77 Ardra 07 31 Das
Areas 31 49 Arguin 19 09 Arguin 21 11 Armarote 17 08 Armetu 17 56 Aro 13 83
Aron 03 75 Arox 34 20 Arquipe 14 75 Arvoredas 05 17 Arzem 35 27 Asaphi 32 16
Asarcus 35 37 Ascencion 08 15 Ascor 25 65 Asoia 24 67 As Serras 25 47 Assuan 22
67 Astagoa 15 65 Asum 07 84 Asuto 05 26 Asuga 01 61 Atlas 28 16 Atlas Mount 26
19 Atlas Mons 26 17 Atondo 05 71 Ave 05 25 C. de S. Augastino 23 75 R. Auro 04
09 Ausichi 28 18 Axanga 11 07 Axen 05 25 Azahad fount. 21 21 Azamor 33 15
Azanhaga desert 23 15 Azar Mount 22 61 Azirut 28 67 Azohad desert 21 22 Azugo
11 66 Azze 11 69

B
J. de Bacarate 22 67 Bachla 07 72 Bacin 11 66 Bacorees 07 24 Badvis 07 84
Bagametro 14 52 Bagametro 14 55 Peop. Bagamidri 12 51 Bagamidri 03 63 Bagio 05
24 Baia das vacas 12 44 La' Baida 29 48 Baixas de S. Anna 07 14 C. da Baixas 05
30 Baixas de Buguha 12 10 Baixas de S Rafal 07 72 Baixos 19 75 Baixos d. S.
Miguel 10 94 Baixos dos India 21 71 Baifara Reg. 08 43 Beleza 29 14 Beleguance
04 66 Baleguance 02 62 Balleto 09 72 Balli 08 76 Balli 08 76 Bamba 08 45 Bandel
03 79 Bangama 13 24 Bango 19 66 P. dos Banhos 04 82 Bansa 07 45 Bara 12 68 Bara
07 66 Baranboa 01 76 Barbola R. 05 48 R. S. Barbara 04 36 L. da Barca 01 40
Barcena 01 71 Barcha 31 51 Barcha Mount 30 55 P. das Barieras 03 42 Barieras 26
09 Barnagasse 15 68 Barras de Po. 04 21 Barva 12 69 Baru 02 72 Baru 02 74 Basat
22 53 Basazara 33 41 Base 18 48 C. de Basbel 11 81 Batta 07 49 Batta, or
Agisimba 08 52 P. das Baxas 17 44 Terra Baxo 14 44 Baza 09 63 Becolick Mount 24
50 Bedeium 27 11 Beif 18 59 Beleguras 28 57 Belincluch 09 73 Belis 35 22 Bello
21 67 R. d. S. Bencto 02 41 Bengo 09 44 Benibisseri 33 22 Benigorai 28 27 Benin
09 35 Whose King is adored by the People for a God, and will not be seen; they
also believe that he does not eat. Benin 08 34 Benisibiba 30 20 Benitz 33 17
Bera 18 56 Berden 29 59 Berdoa 24 49 Beregnicke 15 07 Berincho 32 50 Berton 31
59 Besseque 11 12 Betmori 08 67 Betsemos 29 66 Bichangor 13 12 Bichest 34 28
Biledulgerid 31 37 Bifalim 12 74 Billbrano 02 64 C. Blanco 21 07 Boamaro 14 83
Bogador 27 10 Boene 23 67 Bona 32 35 C. Bona 37 38 Bonandria 32 52 Borca 05 44
Bore 05 26 Rorgi 31 33 Borno Lake 14 50 Borno 18 51 R. da Boroa 03 41 Boyla 13
13 S. Bracas 12 99 Bramas Peop. 01 45 Bramidos 29 58 S. Brandon 18 95 Brata 32
44 J. Brava 15 359 Brava 01 76 Bresch 32 28 Bucone 18 66 Budumel 15 11 Bueni 04
72 Bugana 05 68 Buge 22 71 Buge Desert 22 69 J. Bugi 13 81 Bugia 32 31 Bumas 05
25 Bunace 09 67 Burna 19 56 Buro 23 61 Here are Mines of Gold.

C
Caanza Ri. 11 49 B. das Cabaias 21 73 Cabella flu. 03 68 Cabite 09 14 Isles of
Cabo Verde, anciently Hesperides and Gorgades. 15 360 Cacers Anquines 09 22
Cachen 13 11 Cadi 15 78 Cafates 08 68 Cafates 07 68 Cafili 18 66 Cair 29 66
Cairaaham 35 37 Calamati 32 31 Calamati 32 31 Cahul 14 12 R. das Calinhas 07 16
Calis 36 19 Calmira 21 51 Calotsa 13 71 R. dos Camaroneso 04 41 Camarva 11 66
Costa de Cambo 04 41 R. Camboas 08 16 R. dos Camelos 18 65 R. de Campo 02 41
Camur 17 62 Camur 17 62 Cana 25 66 Canaria 28 08 Canaries J. 32 08 Canatudi 34
33 Cancuba 18 81 Candia 35 53 Cano 15 31 Cano A plentiful Country for Corn,
Rice, and such like. 17 33 Contozy 14 16 Canvia Reg. 17 17 Canvia 16 16 The
Cape of Good hope 34 49 Caphsa 28 39 Carabalin 31 56 Caragoles 12 19 Carazoli
17 14 Caraze 10 46 Carco 04 26 Carfur 09 86 R. Carmo 04 36 Carno 13 68 Carunba
11 44 Caruociro 22 07 Casar 33 37 Casar le Mol 34 37 Caso 07 25 Cassali 18 14
R. d. Casse 09 14 Cassena 15 35 Castle 21 56 Cassumo 10 72 Castelhenas 28 98
Catamanu 08 25 Catambo 14 24 Catania 37 42 C. de Caterina 02 40 J. d. S.
Catharina 34 52 Cavalles 24 09 Cavalos 24 09 Caveo Desert 24 47 Causelcheber 24
37 Cazales 31 58 Cazelle 09 71 Ceffalonia 38 48 Cemeia 08 58 Centa 32 20 Cernit
11 69 Chedellan 03 57 Chelonides Lake 21 51 Chercem 35 38 Chilout 12 65 S.
Christovao 14 75 Churis 33 38 J. d. S. Clara 24 79 Clearte poole 23 53 S.
Clement 05 19 Coal 21 64 Cofla 02 66 Coffala 21 67 Colberia 11 71 Comano 04 25
J. d. Comaro 12 77 Comizani 09 83 J. d. Comoro 13 76 Conato 05 20 J. d. Concalo
Alvarez 36 27 G. d. Conception 24 47 R. Conde 05 38 Congo 54 45 Congou 07 50
Constantina 33 34 J. Content 33 57 Coquette 13 66 Corco 31 49 Corcora perva 09
66 Corcora mag. 07 69 J. d. Corimba 12 72 Corincape 13 72 Cormentia 05 27
Corisco 02 42 Corisseno 10 26 Coroberi 31 61 Coror flu. 09 75 Corpo Santo 05 88
Cortuda 29 58 C. das Correntas 23 67 Cossar 24 70 Cossir 23 67 Costa de S. Tho.
23 46 Cotla 01 56 Couzza 24 65 S. Croce 05 68 R. da. Cruz 05 37 S. Cruz 30 15
Cumana flu. 22 65 Cumare 05 82 Cumissa 27 52 G. d. Dona ma. de Cunha 17 77 R.
Custos 05 17 Cyprus 36 66

D
Dacono 12 75 Daffila 17 66 J. Dagoada 17 75 R. Dalagoa 04 19 Damaita 31 67
Damut 01 55 Damut Reg. 01 54 Here Is Gold in abundance. Danda 09 49 Danga 05 54
Dangala 19 64 Dangali 11 76 Dangali 11 76 Dara Reg. 30 20 Dara 30 21 Dara 03 66
Daragul 25 59 Darga 13 58 Daroem 08 31 C. Darra 17 08 Davia 10 30 Dayo 05 27
Dazarzo 08 71 Debsan 12 55 Dege 21 63 Deger 23 56 Degma 23 60 Demba 15 61
Derazara 19 57 Descobar 01 22 Desert of Barcha 28 52 Desert of Eleobat 25 63
Desert of Thahid 24 67 Deusen 32 32 Dia 25 66 J. d. Diego Roiz 21 92 Digir 21
39 Dinda 13 72 Doara 07 81 Doara 08 78 Dobas 09 72 Dobas 08 74 Dobatoa 17 69 G.
Es Domingos 12 72 Doldel 18 53 Douna 09 29 Dud 14 67 De Duone 13 11

E
Ebaida 25 57 Edevet 33 18 Elbuchiar 29 64 Elcama 29 49 Elchiam 25 65 G. d. S.
Elena 31 49 Eleocat 27 65 Elguimet 32 17 Elis 35 22 Elisio 06 54 Ellonemono 02
66 Eltevet 29 16 Emendera 13 15 Euggi 23 56 Enscada 13 77 Enscadado 11 77 Erin
ita 11 64 Ernet 24 65 R. dos Esclavos 08 34 R. Eseranes 04 19 Esere 14 66 C.
dos Esteiros 01 40 Estrario eictra 4 Journadas 09 82 Esza 32 18 Eustomegobe 04
82

F
Fabarcha 32 36 C. Falco 08 73 C. Falco 33 49 Falnasa 32 37 Fanard 32 53 Porta
Farina 32 37 Farson 31 65 Fatigar 04 74 Fatigar 04 72 Felles m. 08 82 J. da
Fera 34 50 J. d. Ferdinano de Lorenho 04 359 J. Ferdinando de Poa 31 39 R. d.
Fernandovaz 02 40 Ferro 29 05 Fessen 28 43 Fez 33 21 R. Fezz 33 20 Ficte 24 70
Finasen 14 70 R. Forcas 06 34 C. Formosa 04 35 B. Formose 01 75 Forte ventura
28 10 Fortuna 12 76 Francisco Ceden. 24 51 C. d. S. Francisco 33 58 Fremosa 11
11 B. Fremosa 54 34 G. Frio 19 45 Fuingi 21 67 Fulli 21 15 Fulli People 21 20
Terra dos Fuinos 27 62 Fungi 01 67 Fungi 05 62 Fungi 08 62 J. del Fuogo 15 359
Fuxnado 11 12

G
Gademes 28 39 P. del Gado 04 40 C. del Gado 11 72 Terra del Gado 20 75 Gafat
09 67 Gago 12 24 Gale 09 88 Gale 25 52 Gallila 15 53 C. del Gullo 03 40 Gamba
17 66 Gandia 21 12 Ganfila 19 68 Des Ganiis 15 91 Garama 21 46 Gara Mo. 09 62
P. de Garioa 02 40 Garion 29 43 Garma 25 53 Garman Mount 09 76 Garmantes 21 42
Gasabela 10 64 Gasabela 11 63 Gavi 09 62 Gavi 11 61 Gaza 32 69 Gemen 03 66
Gemen 03 67 Gebaghe 19 55 Genehoa 18 12 R. Genoeses 04 18 Gerid, or Berdoa Reg.
23 41 Gerselvin 33 24 Ghir 21 26 Ghir 21 27 Giabel 18 72 Giara 02 57 Giberamel
32 33 Gibralter 31 20 Gien 37 32 Giero 21 57 Gigiari 32 33 Giras flu. 21 41
Girat 03 63 Gnargale 27 36 Goaden 27 15 Goagan 21 57 Goagan Reg. 22 54 Godia 19
21 Golfo de Serra 22 76 Goiame 03 52 Gomer 29 05 Goram 30 55 Goram 14 65 Gorga
07 67 Gorga 08 68 Gorva 03 60 Part of Grace 36 50 Gronde 29 67 Guada 29 20
Gualata 22 11 Gualata Reg. 22 12 Guangara 15 40 Guangara 15 43 Not far from
this Town is store of Gold. Guarde 15 27 Guegene 15 21 C. de Guer 31 15 Guere
14 65 Guidan 03 52 Guigo 14 11 Guinea 09 23 Gulta 11 45 Gunza 13 47

H
Hair 24 28 Hair 23 27 Hair fount. 21 27 Harode 04 54 Hebedesex 20 12 J. de S.
Helena 16 22 Hibelezeit 27 69 Hiero 11 66 Hini 17 65 Hoden 19 11 Hoden 19 13
Humelbefet 31 24 Humeledea 32 24 Husugagen 29 16

J
Jadie 12 56 S. Jago 16 360 Jalofes 14 10 Jamber 14 13 Jaslitem 30 42 Jessa 32
18 Ighidi 24 34 Iherva 01 58 C. de Ilaccas 34 50 Ilagala 21 58 Ilhas d,
Cosmoledo 9 81 Ilhas dos Ongolonga 08 72 C. do Ilheo 03 39 Ilheos Chaos 33 57
Po do Ilheos 23 46 Iliera 21 61 Ingue 15 66 R. St. Jon 01 40 Jotama 23 58 Part
of Italy 38 43 Juan de Nova 10 85 J.d. Juan de Novo 17 73 J don. Ju. de Castro
11 76 J. de Juan Atiz 11 74 Jugabolla 03 69 Jugingliglia 32 15 C. d. S. Julian
24 76 R. d. Junco 06 17 Jungo 01 76 G. Juntas 25 47 Jura Bramo 13 11

K
Kaffa 33 70

L
Labara 08 27 Laben 20 60 Labor 08 23 Lacca 12 71 R. d. Lagoa 24 60 R. Lago 04
22 R. de Lagoa 07 32 Lagra 14 12 Lambesa 33 33 Lanco 01 74 Laquacoya 02 75
Larissa 32 68 Latremit 01 64 S. Laurences J. 13 90 Lebida 33 43 Lecoala 14 09
C. Ledo 01 43 Legula 04 54 Lelunda 07 43 Lelunda 07 48 Lemba 08 43 Lempadisa 35
39 Lempta 24 36 Lempta 22 35 Isla and Po Leonda 09 43 Leuma 15 64 Libia 19 29
Licomedes Poole 27 59 Limosa 36 39 Linde 18 67 Linola 11 46 Lomba 08 49 Lomfara
32 38 C.d. Lopo Conzaluez 01 39 S. Loreno 08 26 Losa 02 62 Lucho 32 56 S. Lucia
18 359 Po. de S. Lucia 29 61 S. Lucia 24 78 Lu Dayas 12 29

M
Maboga 12 65 Mabra 32 33 Macada 21 67 Machada 06 44 Macaia 02 77 Macalinge 17
69 Macara 31 33 Macarone 18 67 Moceira 01 41 Madera 32 06 Mafute 17 68 Magadox
03 77 Magadoxo 06 77 Magdia 33 21 Maggo 32 22 Magundo 03 40 Mahometa 36 36
Maiba 22 79 Maimo L. 16 27 Maitachasi 18 57 Maitagaze 03 54 Malagueta 09 16
Malemba 01 52 Malta 35 41 Malva 11 69 Manadelli 08 67 Mananiam 21 79 Mandinga
14 18 Mandinga 13 17 Manica 23 64 Mantra 06 77 Mara 21 66 Maranma 06 56
Marbunha 08 44 S. Maria Ancona 04 70 S. Maria da Goffu 19 06 C. d. S. Maria 25
78 G. d. S. Maria 13 44 J. d. S. Maria 17 83 P. de S. Maria 27 62 Marique 02 77
Marnecos 32 17 Marochi 31 16 Martagasi 17 56 J. d. Martin Vaz 21 08 Masab 29 33
J. d. Masearenhas 02 86 Mataca 22 67 Matama 13 51 Matangute 04 72 Matatana 21
79 J. d. S. Matheo 02 21 Matinga 04 43 Mavavi 19 79 Maxinara 35 19 J. d. May 16
01 Mazuam 15 75 Meacho 23 59 Mechvasa 34 20 Meda 18 08 Medaos d. Oaro 28 61
Median 06 53 Medna 32 28 Medra 08 51 Milinde 02 68 Melinde 02 73 Melli 12 14
Terra dos Mesas 15 44 Mesurato 32 44 C. Mesurado 06 16 Meti 01 54 Milangana 25
62 Milonia 33 24 Mocango 15 71 Mocovar 08 83 Mogar 24 57 Mogincato 16 71 Mogula
11 72 Mombolas 07 45 Mombasa 03 73 Monapatan 22 79 Monster d. vistone 14 74
Monatenga 23 79 Monomotapa 25 57 Monsia 08 73 Monta das 28 47 C. Monte 07 16 C.
Monte 05 31 Monte megro 14 44 Monte d. S. Lucia 32 49 Montes alombada 31 49 4
Montes 05 29 Morea 36 51 Morosda 29 48 Morua 16 70 Moscata 28 54 Mosselbay 34
56 Mostaga 32 27 Motola 09 46 Mountains of the Moon 15 56 R. Moxquita 08 15
Mozambique 14 71 Mozambique 14 70 Mumia 27 66 Mumunuta 32 24 Muniare 29 66
Musti 36 35 Mutuapa 02 73

N
J. do Natal 07 79 Napata 20 67 G. d. Nazare 01 41 J. d. Nazare 17 87 C. Negro
16 43 Nesta 29 35 Netriota 29 64 S. Nicolas 17 359 Nichlisoia 32 36 Niger flu.
14 16 Niger flu. 08 54 Niger Lake 03 53 Niger River 13 34 Niger flu. 14 43 This
River has the same properties as that of Nilus. Nilus River 02 57 Nilus flu.
97 19 This River overflowing his Banks constantly every year moisteneth the
Country, and makes it exceeding fruitful. Nilus flu. 06 59 R -- Non 07 16 J.
da Nobon 02 34 Nova 03 61 Nova 05 61 Nuba Lake 19 54 R. Nuba 17 58 Nubia 18 65
Nubia Reg. 17 55 They were once Christians, but now almost of no Religion; They
abound in Gold, Ivory, Corn and Sugar: their houses of Chalk. Nugat 04 78
Numidia 22 37

O
Ocanu 09 25 Offmi 28 13 Ogne 01 62 Olabi 03 70 Olabi 04 72 Omot 20 63 One 33
25 Opadram 02 73 Opin 04 82 Orati 33 26 Orgabea 02 68 Orgubra 05 76 Orzoni R.
09 46 Os Bariaros 04 82 Os 3 Ormaos 07 72 Os Montes 14 44 Oygna 02 70 Oz 04 25

P
Padagra 07 43 Palma 04 44 Palma 29 05 C. d. Palmar 04 43 Palmar 16 08 Palmar
11 12 Palmar 09 13 Palmar 04 17 Palmareco 15 09 Palmari 34 39 R. Palmas 07 33
R. dos Palmas 07 15 C. das Palmas 04 21 Pan 05 27 Pango 05 47 Pantabari 36 39
Paosa 11 44 Pascoa 13 75 C. S. Paul 05 28 Pedra 29 51 Pedrenonas 21 07 S. Peiro
05 71 Pemba 04 74 Pembo 08 47 Penada das Fontes 33 58 Penadat 29 51 R. de
Peraida 02 40 Pesearea 04 39 Pesearea 31 34 Pesquerras 06 25 C. d. Pichel 22 67
J. dos Picos 22 10 Pitirees 07 23 C. d. 3. Pontas 04 24 Porto Santo 32 08
Portugal 21 57 Posada 21 72 B. de Pracel 18 76 Praia 17 44 Praia dos News 21
45 Praia das Pedras 19 44 Praio Ruyna 18 08 P. de Prasa 06 43 Terra Preta 13 44
J. del Principe 02 37 R. Primeiro 06 33 C. Proi 04 21 Ptolemai 29 65 Punda
Pescia 29 61 Punee 14 24 Punse 15 28 Punta d. Ilha 26 48

Q
Qualimane 21 66 Quara 06 61 Quara 05 59 J. Queriba 11 73 Quilimania 17 69
Quilinesmi 17 67 Quiloa 08 69 Quiloa 09 73 Quingega 09 47 Quinionberim 08 26
Quirigo 08 68 Quitanaone 14 71 Quitigui 02 55 Quixungo 09 72

R
T. d. S. Rafal 07 71 R. Ramos 05 34 M. Rapasa 07 28 C. Rasoacor 33 51 R. Real
04 37 Region 17 12 Resquato do Cido 17 08 Rhodes 33 42 Richel 10 13 Riffa 22 67
Rio 15 12 Rio do Infanta 31 56 J. dos Robins 15 74 C. d. S. Roman 24 78 Dos
Romeyros 28 98 J. d. Roquepiz 55 98 J. d. Roqui 11 92 Rosamesa 33 42 Roseto 32
36 C. Roxo 12 18 R. del Roy 05 39 Ruenea 21 57 G. d. Ruinas 25 09 C. d. Rui
pizdas noires 18 44

S
Sabaha 19 69 Sabia 28 59 Sabu 05 26 Sachaf Lake 17 53 Safiga 25 13 C. Sagros
09 14 Sahona Bango 19 66 J. d. Sal 17 01 Sala 34 18 Salina 29 49 Salout 15 61
Salroti 31 49 Salvages 30 07 Saluce 14 26 Samot 28 52 San 23 71 S. d. Santo 21
07 Sarahoesun 13 64 Sarane 07 72 Sarra 17 30 Scarlata 35 37 Scidmese 31 24 C.
d. Sebastian 12 84 C. d. Sebastiano 22 68 C. d. Sebastiano 25 78 Sech delle
Gazze 19 08 C. Seguido 03 42 Sensar 33 39 Serca 27 58 Sercolli 33 28 C. das
Serra 34 54 Serra Bota 53 40 Serrado 29 48 C. Serra Liona 08 13 Sesili 03 62
Set Montes 25 09 Sibeca 31 46 Sibit 09 68 Sibit 11 68 Sicily 37 41 Sierras d.
Ferd. Poo 04 39 Sierra de S. Spirita 02 41 Simis 03 70 Sini 29 54 Siri 08 71
Soalgi 09 84 Sova 08 64 Sousos 12 17 S. Spirito 11 71 J. S. Spirito 14 76 Rio
de Spirito Santo 24 60 Stefa 34 32 Sterra Liona 08 14 Stora 36 33 Streights of
Gibralter 35 19 R. Streto 04 37 Suaquem 20 73 Costa d. Suaquem 19 74 Suffelula
34 36 Sugabil 31 24 Suguan 28 68 Sundal, or Salvador 05 46 Sire 08 55 Syrtis
Major 32 56

T
Tachtessa 29 17 Tacui 04 35 Taffetana 31 15 Tagovast 29 16 Tajoneff 32 49 C.
Talhado 34 51 Talemet 28 61 Talometa 33 51 Tambu 14 24 Tanca 01 74 Tangier 35
19 Tangon 04 72 Tardante 30 16 Targa 23 31 Targa Reg. 27 30 Taunt 24 11 Taut 29
28 Tazitia 23 67 Tebelbest 30 34 Tebes 32 66 Techort 28 35 Teculeth 29 17
Tednest 32 16 Tedsa 33 20 Tedza 30 17 Tegazza, Here are Salt Mines. 22 19 Tegda
31 23 Tegdemen 34 30 Tegenent 31 24 Tegnat 29 28 Tegorarin 29 29 J. d. Telesni
34 28 Tenedest 29 17 Teneriffa 29 07 Tenes 32 28 Tesegdel 28 17 Teserim 32 24
Tesset 27 14 Tesul 29 16 Tetuan 35 21 Teusar 28 37 Tialso 23 51 Tigisac 33 27
Tinda 08 48 Tirut 12 66 Tirut 11 66 Tocror 17 15 Tombotu 16 15 Tombotu Reg. 15
16 P. d. Tonobaia 24 75 Tremissen 33 25 Tremissen 34 25 A. Trinitade 19 360
Tripoli 33 41 Tripoli vechio 33 40 J. d. Tristan de Cunha 36 24 Tububasan 31 25
Tucca 35 36 Tunis 35 33 Tunis 36 37 Tupsa 14 30 Turna 19 08

V
Vabi Lake 24 51 Vagne 08 73 Vallonta 28 56 Vamba 02 51 Vangue 02 55 Vaugue 01
54 Vellio 04 79 C. Verde 15 07 Vigitunagna 29 54 Villadi 09 44 Villa longa 07
21 R. S. Vincent 04 19 S. Vincente 18 359 Vingangora 14 81 Vis Bay 34 55 Vleiis
Bay 34 54 Unbia 36 37 G. dar Voltos 28 48 Usargala Mons 28 30 Uxoo 09 24 W.

X
Xabanda 09 24 Xoa 01 64

Y
Y.

Z
Zachet 05 75 Zafareni 33 24 Zaflan 04 65 Zaflan Lake 05 65 R. Zaire 03 50
Zaire 09 53 Zaire Lake 09 54 There are Tritons and Sirens said to be. Zama 13
74 Zanara 31 49 Zanfara 12 42 Zanfara Reg. 13 43 Desert of Zanfara 13 40
Zanhaga 24 15 Zante 37 48 Zanzibar 05 73 Zefala 19 63 Zegzeg 12 34 Zegzeg 11 33
Zeit 04 76 Zembre 13 56 Zembre Lake 11 55 Zendico 31 45 Zereni 33 25 Zet 11 58
Zet 11 57 Zet 17 53 Zibid 23 71 Zigide 12 54 Zihil mo. 17 49 Zimbaolo 25 61
Zingi 09 84 Zingi people 08 85 Zinibro 23 53 Zit 27 27 Zoca 08 51 Zuenziga 28
26 Zuenziga Reg. 24 24 C. La Zuiha 32 45 Zumetta 11 71

THE Description OF AMERICA.
AMERICA, Discovered in part by Americus Vespusius, though some contend that it
was known before; among others to Madoc a Welsh man, who left there some Welsh
words, as Penguin, etc though it be uncertain how they could find it without
the use of the Compass, not then known.

The discovery whereof, when some alleged easy Columbus desired them to set
an egg on its head, which when they could not do, he bruised one end gently,
and did it; showing them how easy it was to do a thing that they saw done
before their faces.


bounded S. by the Magellane Streights, and the unknown World, W. Mare del Zur
and Asia, E. Atlantique, Europe and Africa, a question whether an Island or a
Continent; the known parts of it (discovered since Flavio Malphi found out the
Compass and its eight winds at Naples,) peopled with a race of Tartars, stored
with Gold, Fruits and Spices, exchanged for Hammers-Knives, Axes, etc. the
defect of which formerly they supplied with fire, are,

I. Estotiland, with its rich Mines, known only by such Capes and Promontories
as have English names, as Prince Henry's Foreland, Cape Charles, Cape
Wolstenham, Kings Foreland, Hudsons Streights and Bay.

II. Terra de Laborodor^, or New Britain, with its Breast, Sancta Maria, and
Cabo Marzo possessed by the French.

III. New Foundland, and its fair Haven Roigneuce on the good fishing place
Cape de Raz, the fair haven; broad and safe Thorn-bay, and Thinity-bay, Bona
Vesta, White bay or Cape Blanck, port Trespassez, port Presenza, port des
Basques, and St. Georges bay.

IV. Bacaeloos, an English Island and Colony, 1608. furnished with Cod-fish,
Sables, Musk, Wheat Rye.

V. Nova Francia, S. of New Britain, with its Skins, Fish, Jewels; Esurgnie, 1
Hochleda. 2 Studac. 3 Quebeche, or St. Croix. 4 The safe but small haven
Tadonsac. 5 The sorts Francoroi and St. Lewis.

VI. Nova Scotia, where Port Royal on the large Bay Francoise, St. Lukes Bay,
the noted port Gasp, and the fair bay Gachepe under the French.

VII. Fruitful, temperate, but not well inhabited or traded, being
shallow-coasted: Norumbega between Nova Scotia and Virginia, Rammeae,
frequented by the French for the Morse-fish and its Deer and Antidotal teeth,
and Oil, Brion, Britton and its good fishing English haven Newport; the not
planted Isle de Sable.

VIII. New England, between Norumbega and New Belgium in a temperate Zone
between forty one, and forty four degrees, like Italy or France, affording
besides all necessaries and convenience, for living in as great plenty as
England; Timber, Salt-fish, Venison, all Fowls, Furrs, Amber, Flax, Linen,
Iron, Pitch, Masts, Cables, Oysters for trade; the people Liking our Religion
at first so well, that they would say, King James was good, and his God good,
but Tanto naught.
tractable, but not (to our shame) well instructed, having near upon forty good
havens; whereof these of note, Boston, Quillipiache, Bristow, Barstable, St.
Georges Fort on the mouth of the Sagahadac, New Plymouth, etc.

IX Nieu-Nederlands, N. W. of New England, S. E. of Virginia, of a temperate
air and soil, affording Timber, all Grain Flax, Hemp Fowl, Sturgeons, Salmons,
Nuts in a little Isle near which on the Noordt Rivier is New Amsterdam, and
Orange-Fort.

X. Virginia between Niew Belgium and Florida, where the heates (from thirty
four to thirty eight degrees Nor hern Latitude) are tempered by cool Brizes
from the Sea, with its woody hills and fruitful dales, its Allom, Pitch,
Turpentine, Cedars, Grapes, Oil, Gums, Iron, Copper, Timber, Fish, Fowl,
Curistal, Pearls, Fruits; and industrious Over whom here and at New England,
they are after several surprises very watchful.
Negroes well watered, eight or nine large Rivers, and in the south side of a
large Bay, where the English settle are: 1 The well traded port Ketoughtan on
the Chese poacke. 2 Bermuda. 3 Dales-gift. 4 Henry's town; and 5 James town.

XI. Bermudaz, with its Cedars, Silkworms, Pearls, Amber, Fruits; Whereof it
yields two harvests.
Maes; impregnable, healthy, but tempestuous; well traded for Tobacco: well
fortified and peopled.

XII. Florida, N. W. of Virginia, E. of Mexico, rich in Gold, Silver,
Emeraulds, Tarquoises and Pearls, Cedars, Timber, Chestnuts, Cherries, Grapes,
Plums, Cypress-trees, Fowl; watered by twelve Rivers, has planted St. Helens
near Virginia; Port Royal on the Majo, well frequented Ante, Ocalis; St.
Mathews, and St. Augustine, St. Philip, and St. Jago, famous for Cape Martyrs,
Lucaios noted only for land Marks by sea men: not to mention the large, rude,
cold and unpeopled Quivira; cold Cibola, with its Cedars and Cotton, not
observable but for the names given in the Maps, as Po de St. Clara, Cape de La
Plaidas, St. Michael, Laques del Oro, Rio de Teron, and Rey Coronado, Cabo
Blance, Cape St. Clare, Cape St. Lucas; the good haven St. Crosses; the
convenient haven St. Andrews, the Isle St. Thome, Cape Trinidado, Cape Enganni,
Puebla de las Canoas In Nova Albion discovered by Sir Fr. Drake, as he went
round the world.
Po de Francisco Draco, and the Streights of Anian.

XIII. New Gallicia, N. W. of New Spain, temperate, inclining to heats and
tempestuous, rich in Brass, Silver, Gold, Iron, Lead, Wheat, Maiz, Fish, Honey,
Beasts, Aples, Peaches, Citrons, Figs, Malacotoons, Cocheonele, Sugarcanes,
Cotton wool, has 1 St. Jahn's de Cicola a Spanish Colony, and St. Philip and
Jacob in Cinaloa. 2 Quinola El Leon, etc. destroyed in Culucan. 3 Ill seated
Compostella, Xalisco; Purification on the port Natividad, St. Sebastian and its
rich Mines in Galesco. 4 Fair and well seated Guadalaira on the Barania, the
forts Sancta Maria, and del Spiritu Sancto in Guadaliera rich in mines. 5 Los
Zacatecus N. of Guadaleira, neighboured by most rich mines, and industrious
slaves, as is St. Lukes, de Avinno, Erena, the rich Nombre de dios, Durango,
Xeces de Frontera all under Spain, Vnitisia in Zacatecus. 6 St. Barbara, St.
John's end, peopled by the Spaniard in New Biscay for the adjoining rich
Silver, and Lead Mines. 7 New Mexico under the Spaniard.

XIV. New Spain, bounded E. with the Bay of New Spain, and the Gulf of Mexico;
has 1 Panuco Northward W. of the Gulf of Mexico, with its Gold Mines, and
Mangey, a tree that has forty leaves for forty several uses, where remain the
well traded St. Steven de Puerto, with its Salt Pits, St. Jago de los Valles,
Tampice, St. Kallap, Tameclipa and Tanehipa after the desolations made by the
Spaniard. 2 Mechuacan, eighty leagues on the sea coast, rich in Amber, Silk,
Honey, Wax, and and It has ninety free Schools and nine Spittles, the air fo
healthy, that the very coming into it, is a remedy against any disease.
Medicinal Herbs; Zacatula, Colima, St. Jago de Buon Speranza and its shore of
Pearls, the noted haven Natividad; the safe road Acatlan; Guaranato, and its
rich Silver Mines; Conception de Saylaa, St. Michael the way from Mexico, the
Mines of Zacatecus; Vallidolit and its pleasant Lake Pascuar. 3 Mexicana, with
its Mines, Arts and Manufactories, has Mexico on a The Stage for those that
travel Northwards.
salt lake in a Vale of seventy leagues six miles round, with an University, a
Cathedral, a Mint, Presses, Hospitalls, Monastries, etc. Vast Tezcuco,
Quitlavaca like Which over-flowed it in 1629, before which time it had 4 fair
things, Women, Apparel, Horses, Streets.
Venice; Vz^acpalapa; Stately Chulula, fair Mexicaltzingo; well-shaded
Mestitlan; Delicious Ante Peque; the capacious haven town and Dock Acapalco
well fortified. 4 Tlascala, very fruitful where the great Mark Tlascala,
Angelos, Zempoallan; Napuluca and its Cattle-fair Guaxo-Cingo, Segura, Vera
Crux, the through fair Town to Mexico near the Gulf; Therefore styled Venezuela.
the noted and well fortified Port St. John de Vllua, Medellin.

5 Guaxaca, rich in Gold Sands, Silks, A rich grain used in dying Scarlet.
Coccineel, Cassia, Silver, and other Metals, where is Del Spiritu Sancto,
three Leagues from the Gulf: The Port Guatulio known in the way from Peru to
Mexico, and the Southern Ports; as is Tacaon Tepeque, St. Jago, Illofonso,
stately Antequera, Cuertlavaca and its Labyrinth.

6. Poor Zucutan where is Tabasco, Pontoncan, Campeche on the Gulf Vallidolit
and Merida; near which are twelve little Islands within the Gulf of Mexico and
without, among which is Santa Crux, Los Nigrellos; the Isle of Women, Cozamul,
etc.

XV. Guatimala, S. of Jucutan has in, 1 Chiapa, Cividad Real, Chiappa in a
rich and Medicinal Vale; Tecpatlan and its Monastry, Capavavachla, St. Near
which is a pit, into which, if you throw a little stone, you hear a clap of
thunder.
Bartholomews near Buo Blanco, that turns wood to stone. 2 Guverapaz, with its
Amber, Mastick, China Wood, but one little Port Golfo Dulce. 3 In Guatimala,
with its good Corn, Balsom, Cotton wool, Druggs, Guatimala, between the
Vulcanoes, St. Salvador on the Noted for Sulphur and Allom.
Guacapa, and its Port Acaxulta; St. Trenidad, the Empory between New Spain and
Peru; the haven Fonseca, and St. Michaels: Xeres de la frontera near the Bay of
Fonseca, and ten little Islands. 4 Hondura on the Sea, where Vallidolit,
Gracios de Dios, St. Peter's, the noted Porto de Cavillos, strong St. Thomas de
Castile, St. George de Olenchc and its Golden Sands near Cape de Hondura.
Called by the Spaniards, The Paradise of Mahomet.
5 Pleasant Nicaragua with its Parrots, Sugarcanes, and Cotton wool; woody
Leon, rich Granada, and its Sugar-works; Segovia and its veins of Silver,
Jaen, Realeio, Regoa, Cartago. 6 In Barren Veragua, with its endless Mines of
Gold is Conception on the River Conception; La Trinidad on the River La
Trinidad, St. Foy, where they cast their Metal into Ingots, Carlos,
Philippina, and thirty little Islets.

XVI. Castella del Oro, W. Mare del Zur, E. and N. Mare del Noort; has 1 In
Panama, with its Timber and Gold, the Ruins of unhealthy Nombree de dios, St.
Philip, on the strong and safe Haven, Porto Belo, the staple between Spain and
Peru; Acla, St. Jago de Nata near Veragua; Pannama, through which the wealth of
Spain and Peru passes yearly near St. Crux la Real. 2 Darien, happy in Melons,
Grapes; the wholesome shaded Hovo, and its Medicinal bark juice, it is in a
manner depopulated, being unwholesome. 3 In new Andalusia with its Especially
the Balsome of Tola.
Gumming Trees, and barren land, is the strong and rich Haven Carthagena, ten
degrees from the Equator: Villa de Maria; Sebastian de Buena Vista on the
mouth of the Bay Vraba, Baramo de Molambo on the Magdalen, where the
Commodities of North Granada are unloaded, and sent by Vessels into the
Country: Santa Crux de Mopox on the confluence of Martha, and Magdalena, Tolu,
etc. 4 In St. Martha, with its Pomgranates, Lemmons, Oranges on the hot grounds
near the Sea; Ramada and its Brass, Ocanna, Cividad, de Los Reyes,
Tanalameque; St. Martha and its Haven.

XVII. New Granada, S. of Castle Oro, W. Mare del Zur; has 1 in Granada (which
is rich in Emeraulds, all Metals and Woods, especially those that are
Medicinal: St. Foy, Where much Crystal, Emerals, Adamants, Chalcedonians.
well traded St. Michael, Toicama, Tudela, Trinidado, La Palma; the well-traded
Empory Eunia, Pampilona, and St. John de los Lianos, with their rich Veins of
Gold, and store of Cattle. 2 In Popayana, Popayan, Antiochia, Caramanta, Patia,
St. Anne, St. Jago de Arma, rich in Gold: Carthage, Cali, Bonaventure on a Bay,
conveying the Commodities of New Spain to Popayan, Timana, Sebastian de la
Plata, Madrigal, and their Gold.

XVIII. Very cold, beyond the Tropic of Capricorn.
Chile E. Atlantique, S. Magellan Streights, N. Deserts of Alacama and Peru,
productive of Gold, Silver, Honey, Cattle; has 1 in Chile, Castro on the large
bay of Ancad; St. Juan de Frontera, and Osorro with its Gold: Baldivia on a
safe and capacious haven, with infinitely rich Mines of Gold: Villa Rica;
wealthy Imperiale, with its fortress on the Cautex: De los Confines, defending
the Mines of Ongol: well fortified Conception on the large bay of Benco, So
that the Natives dare not eat their Swine or Poultry, without the Spaniards
leave.
commanding the adjoining Isle of St. Man's; Gopiapo, and its little haven
Serena, with its Golden Mines upon Rio de Coquimbo, well fortified; St. Jago,
with its goodly haven Val Paradiso on the Topacalma.

2. In Magellanica, is no more but some Capes or Ports, as Cabo de las Islas,
Cabe de la Victoria; the Cape of Virgins in the Called Magellanica from
Magellan, that first discovered them.
Streights, the Port of St. Stephen; the Valley Neustra, Sennora, Punta,
Delgado, Porto de los Reyes, Ancon, Sinsalida, Cabo de Quade, Cape Gallant,
Cords Bay, Porto Famine, the Port Desire, Cabo St. George; the goodly haven
Puerto de los Leones: The Bay of Amegada, Cape St. Andrews, whereof nothing
memorable but the Names.

XIX. Paraguay, Rich in Brass and Iron, some Gold, Amethysts, Monkeys, etc.
has 1 In Rio de Plata; the Ports de Guay Bamo, de la Candelaria, and de los
Reyes, Buenos, Aires on the South Bank of the Plata; St. Fe and its Which they
exchange with the Brasilians, for Sugar, Rice, etc.
clothing; well built, and frequented Assumption between Peru and Brasil; Poor
and unhealthy Bividad Real on the Parana, as is St. Anne and Salvadore. 2 In
Tucuman, little St. Jago de Estew, St. Michael de Tucuman; Tolavera, and its
Manufactories of Cotton wool; well traded Corduba, being the Road from Peru to
Brasil, etc. 3 In S. Crux de Sierra is pleasantly seated Santa Crux, Neyva,
Rioja, Baranca; the three forts Lagunilla, Tarexa, Tomina, etc.

XX. Brasil, having North Guiana, East Mare del Noort, rich in Sugar Canes,
Brasil Wood, where the Men Lie in, and are tended instead of their Wives; Has
1 in St. Vincent near Rio de Plata; the commodious havens, Santes, St. Vincent,
Itange, Cananea, St. Paul, St. Philips, with their Golden Mines 2 In Rio de
Janeiro, Collignia on the Janeiro, S. Sebastians, and Angra des Reyes, Spiritu
Sanctoes good Haven and Cotton wool, the good Havens Porto Seguro, and Sancta
Crux, Ilheos and its fair Bay. 3 S. Salvador, Seregippe del Rei, with its
Silver mines, on the bay of Todos Les Santos belonging to the Dutch. 4 In
Fernambuche, rich for Tobacco, Sugar and Brasil wood: large Olinda, and its
little haven; its neighboring Amatta de Brasil, St. Laurenzo, Garasa, Poineur,
Antonia de Cabo and Garasa and its Sugars, under the Hollanders: the Spanish
haven Tamaraca, commanded by a Dutch Fort; Pairaiba, with its large haven, and
strong Fort kept by the Portugez; Siaraes haven, traded for Crystal, Cotton
wool, and Precious Stones. 5 Maraynon, stored with Cotton wools, Saffron,
Brasil wood, Tobacco, Balm, and Amber, Timber, Feathers, etc. kept under by
some Portugal Forts.

XXI. Gujana on both sides of the Line, yet As most of these Countries are by
Briezes.
temperate, and rich in Sugar Canes, Tobacco, Cotton, Fish; has Caripo an
English Colony on the WiaCopo, as is Gomeribo troubled with Fleas, called
Ningas, which will breed instantly if you clap not melting wax on the place
infected: and in a Province called Oroneque, rich in Mines of Gold and Silver,
Crystal, Fish and Foul, the known Port Morequitto; the yearly Women-fair
Comolaha,; St. Thome, well fortified on the Oreneque; with the Isle Tabago and
its safe harbors; and Trinidado on the narrow Gulf Paria, unhealthy, but
abounding in Mace, Sugar Canes, Cotton wool, the best Tobacco and Pitch.

XXII. Paria, N. Atlantique, W. New Granada, has known only Cumana, with its
convenient harbor on a River of the name; the Fortress St. Jago, protecting
the Salt-lake, and St. Michael de Neven. 2 In Venezuela the Granary of the
Indies, with its Silver and Gold; the port Maracapana, Venezuela, with two
havens Caravalleda on the Sea, with an unsafe Harbor, Nova Valencia, new Xeres
on the Baraquicemiti, Lucayo, and its Sugar Canes; Truxillo, and its Factory. 3
In Margarita, Monpater, built by the Spaniard, to secure their Trade of
Pearle-fishing and their Haven; El Vail de Sancto Luzia. 4 In Cubayna, New
Cadiz, and its Trade for Pearls, and the Bituminous Oil, especially in the
Pearl Isle Cock; the Isle And Medicinable association.
Torgula and its harbor; the Isle of Providence under the English; Curacaos,
Araba and Bonair under the Spaniard.

XXIII. The Islands of America:

1 Either in Mare Del Zur, where the barbarous Los Ladrones, and John
Fernandes; or in Mare del Noort, as 1 Jamaica, having on the North Cuba, twenty
four leagues in breadth, fifty three in length, one hundred and fifty round; of
a rich Soil and Pasturage, Eminent for the Root Jacca and Cotton wool; and
there Oristan, Mellila, Where Peter Martyr, says Dr. Heylin was Abbot who has
written in some Decads about those Islands.
Sevilla, now under the English.

2 Hispaniola, hot in mornings, and extraordinarily fruitful, always
flourishing, rich in Ginger, Sugar Canes, Golden Mines, and since Silver, Brass
and Iron, but not Inhabitants; where 1 Puerto de la Plata, and its convenient
and well fortified bay. 2 The Sugar Haven Compostella. 3 The fair and safe
Haven Jaguana, Cotuy and its Mines of Gold. 4 St Domingo, with its fair haven
on the West of the Ozama. 5 St. Salvador, this Island was attempted by the
English, but without success, and therefore they took Jamaica.

3 The Banbees, as 1 Barbados (well known by particular Descriptions) rich in
Tobacco and Sugars, an entire English Colony. 2 St. Christophers, six mile
long, possessed by the French, with its Salt-wiches and Tobaccoes. 3 Granada,
and a good Haven. 4 St. Vincent, and two or three good Bays, rich in Sugar
Canes. 5 Deserted Martinigo. 6 Barbarous Dominica, with its hot Water and Which
they sell for Knives and Hatchets.
Tobacco. 7 Deserada, in the way from the Canaries to America. 8 Guadalupe,
with its good Ports and fresh water. 9 The English woody and inaccessible
Antego. 10 The well wooded and watered Neives, with its hot Baths and Waters.
11 St. Crux, with its good fresh waters, and safe Roads; and Eleven
inconsiderable Isles more.

4 Porto Rico, with its Ginger, Sugar Canes, Hides, Cassia, and the Mines,
where is the large built and convenient Porto Rico, with a fair Haven, secured
by a strong Castle; St. Germans, and the well known Port Luysa.

FINIS.
The Names of all the known and most remarkable Capes, Ports, Beys, and Isles,
Rocks, Rivers, Towns and Cities in America, with their Latitude and Longitude.
America Pars.
La. Lo. ABancay 12 305 Abangobi 25 337 Abrotha 03 356 Abrothos 18 352 Acapuli
18 273 Achachisa 21 276 Achalaque 37 291 Acemeaon 10 356 Acla 09 298 Acos 11
303 Acurate 12 304 Ho. Advanced 60 306 Agreda 02 298 Almaguer 02 298 Almaguer
01 305 Almerica 20 280 Alpueito 08 305 Amackamanecky 59 309 B. Amatode 13 282
Anchusi 31 385 J. d. S. Andreas 22 268 C. d. S. Andreas 40 329 C. S. Andries 48
301 S. Andreo 12 296 Anegado 20 314 Angeles 19 276 R. d. Anguchi 36 253
Anguilla 24 299 Anguilla 19 315 J d. S. Anna 23 350 Anna e Porcho 43 320
Antequea 18 279 Anthonis Hoeck 57 326 Antiochia 08 303 J. de S. Antonio 36 331
R. S. Antonio 17 352 C. S. Antonio 12 354 Apalache 39 297 Punta de S. Apalmat
25 255 S. Apolonia 29 328 Apracclada 41 327 Aqueseperdo 48 302 Arabir 17 305
Aracauwa 02 332 Aramenes 09 296 Aramocoura 09 323 R. Ararungo 29 342 Costa d.
Arbeteda 27 276 R. Arbiter 19 30^ B. des Arefices 02 348 J. des Arena 23 285 J.
d. Arenas 22 286 B. d. las Arenas 28 252 Las Arenas 49 311 Arequipa 14 302
Arica 18 305 Arma 07 304 Arowacas 02 327 Arrowari 01 335 Assumption 26 327
Astablan 30 265 Auconsin 49 301 C.d S. Augustine 08 354 Aux 38 282 Auzerma 03
299 Aganaca 06 298 R. Ayuttan 12 287

B
Bahama 21 300 Costa Baixa 29 281 C. d. las Baixas 43 319 B. d. Balenai 31 296
Le Barana 09 307 Barbabda 13 322 Barbadada 19 318 S. Barbara 25 271 R.
Barbaranna 33 330 R d. Barbaranna 33 310 C. d. las Bareras 47 313 C. d. las
Bareras 49 313 R. Bariquicemeto 08 316 R. Barmeio 27 320 Barmudas 31 319 Barra
de S. Matheo 30 298 Barray Bobupituba 24 344 S. Bartolome 19 316 Punt. d. S.
Bartholome 29 25 Bascherepos 21 323 Baxos d. Babacca 21 310 B. d. Bayarres 32
301 Beata 18 306 Bequia 12 318 Berbie 08 326 La Bermia Negrillos 23 288 Po.
Bermia 10 298 Bernarda d. la Frontera 23 314 Beza 01 299 Biesa 24 339 P. d.
Biobio 37 302 Biveras 18 297 C. Blanco 07 354 C. Blanco 05 295 C. Blanco 37 331
C. Blanco 47 319 P. d. Blanquisales 10 320 Bloes J. 41 312 Boldivia 39 303
Boloe 16 286 Bonaire 12 314 P. d. Borica 08 296 R. Boweue 13 352 Brigges his
Bay 59 272 Bristow 43 315 Buela 29 275 Buenos Airs 32 330 R. Buero 41 303 Buga
02 304 Buova 03 304 Burango 24 267 Buttens Isles 61 311

C
Caceres 07 307 Caicos 22 307 Cali 03 303 J. d. los Calopegos 01 290 P. Calvo
09 354 R. del Camaren 41 314 Camarigibe 09 353 R. Canada 50 320 Canadiens 48
324 Canal d. S. Barbara 36 247 C. d. Canaverall 29 298 C. Cantick 36 305
Caoo^sal 24 298 Cupurapan 08 318 Caracas 10 317 Caramanta 07 299 Cardinals Hat
58 315 Cariaco 09 317 Coriores 29 340 P. d. Carinda 34 242 B. d. Carlo 28 294
Carlos 09 296 Carrapi 08 317 J. d. la Carre 28 249 Cartago 09 296 Cartagena 11
301 Casma 09 298 Cassiopora 06 334 Castla 18 275 Castra 42 301 S. Catalina 13
298 S. Catharina 07 354 J. d. S. Catharina 28 344 J. S. Catherin 32 246 Cayepa
13 353 Cayman Grand 19 299 Caymanes 21 299 J. d. Ceintas 29 249 P. d. Cenou 26
2^7 Chalaque 37 290 Chauge 38 282 C. d. Chanqui 41 301 C. Charles 38 304 C.
Charles 66 292 Chavola 19 278 B. d. Chealeuo 48 325 Hope Check 61 273 Les Isles
a Chevaulx 49 336 Chiacha 39 287 Chiapa 17 284 Chiape 08 297 Chicasa 33 287
Chinca 13 302 Chiquana 12 307 C. Christianus 61 329 S Christoval 18 315 S.
Christoval 08 309 R. d. S. Christoval 28 253 Ciguatao 28 307 Cividad d. Los
Reges 09 319 B. d. S. Claro 49 335 J. d. Cocos 07 390 C. Cod 42 316
Cojojutahaga 39 305 R. Colalie 13 285 Comana 09 316 Comaquasu 01 340 Compostel
21 266 La Conception 36 303 P. de La Conception 33 246 C. Consort 68 290
Copenama 28 317 Copiapo 28 314 C. d. Coquibacoa 13 307 J. d. Coquinba 39 302 R.
de Coral 33 255 G. d. los Corandos 41 301 Corduba 32 323 C. d. Corrientes 03
298 7 Corrientes 28 329 C. d. Corrientro 20 269 C. Corso 49 301 Costa d las
Arenas 41 321 Costa d. las Arenas 40 328 Costa dos Ilheos 47 317 Cotara 01 305
R. Courban 02 347 Coximai 23 295 Coza 33 285 Crocatano 08 317 C. d. S. Cruz 21
299 S. Cruz d. la Sierra 22 317 R. d. S. Cruz 49 311 C. d. S. Cruz 29 285
Cumberlands J. 70 305 Curacaa 12 312 Curateo 24 306 R. Curubaba 19 351 Cusco 12
307

D
J. Damonelle 52 320 R. Danne 03 316 Darien 09 299 Daule 02 296 C. d. Descada
52 301 La Deseada 18 320 C. Deserto 29 284 Desire 47 320 Desolation 64 330
Diego Gallogo 48 301 C. Discord 61 338 Dominica 17 319 S. Domingo 19 307 P. d.
S. Domingo 44 302 Doxa 07 297 Bocas del Drago 10 296 Drakes Islands 53 300
Duquada 09 301

E
Eleana 09 293 Elantiqua 18 319 Elizabets forland 66 339 Ellena 33 296 Ellerena
24 268 Endelie 25 288 C. Escondito 29 289 Essebocke 09 324 R. Estero 28 320

F
C. Farewell 59 339 C. Of Fear 32 303 S. Fedate 08 305 J. de Ferdinand de
Lorenha 05 358 3 Fichot 52 334 P. S. Fili 23 272 C. d. Florida 24 295 K. James
forland 59 294 R. dos Frados 18 351 C. Frances 21 311 S. Francesco 29 252 S.
Francesco 13 307 R. d. S. Francesco 02 345 L. S. Francesco 11 350 J. dos
Franceses 21 351 Franche Bay 44 319 B. d. Francisco 31 249 Po. S. Francisco
Draco 38 238 C. d. Franco 01 294 C. d. S. Fresaye 48 335

G
R. d. Gallego 52 312 J. d. Gallo 02 296 C. d. Gamas 53 330 R. d. la Gartos 50
310 C. d. Gate 53 333 B. d. Genes 48 3^0 Gilberts Sound 68 325 Goddins point 41
309 Gordas 39 332 Gorgona 02 298 C. d. Gracias a dios 14 259 Granada 11 290
Granada 11 219 R. Grando 32 339 Groin Blancke 54 331 Guadalaiain 21 268
Guadalupo 18 318 Guamachaco 08 301 Guamanga 12 303 J. Guan 23 304 Guana, or
Guanivos 20 305 Guancalaniba 07 298 Guancane 37 291 R. Guanna 07 352 Guanuce 09
301 Guaraz 09 299 Guarci 12 301 Guasa puim 02 345 B. d. Guatinia 12 289 V.
Guavi 11 300 Guaxanato 23 273 Guaxaropos 18 320 Guaxille 36 287 Guayaquil 02
298 Guebecusis 21 320 Gueaca 03 299 Guevetlan 12 286 Guiana 02 323

H
R. Hacho 11 305 P. d. la Hatradura 34 302 Hattuncolla 13 305 P. d. S. Helena
02 296 C. Henery 37 304 Hirrigua 31 296 Hivagua 21 305 Hocaiari 03 329 R. d. la
Hoia 21 304 Hollands Bay 55 324 C. Honder 21 297 B. Hondo 17 293

J
Jaen 11 294 J. S. Jago 07 306 S. Jago d. Effero 28 318 S. Jago de los valles
08 305 S. Jago 18 280 S. Jago de Gua timala 13 286 Jamaica 19 298 James Town 38
303 R. Janeiro 21 344 J. S. Jean 48 335 S. Jean Dulco 19 280 R. d. Ignape 02
348 S. Ilefonco 19 280 P. d. Terra Ilana 42 328 Iiheos 14 351 Jocalia 21 311 B.
d. S. Josepho 29 295 R. Ipochi 16 351 J. Iraquois 46 301 C. d. Islas 43 301 S.
Ivan 02 307 S. Ivan de la Frontera 32 308 J. de Ivan Ferdinando 32 299 R. d. S
Ivan 32 331 P. d. S. Ivan 11 296 S. Ivan 25 270

K
Krouwen Il. 01 334

L
Lacane 38 281 Lago de Ora 39 252 Champlain Lake 43 310 J. Lanublada 19 247
Laramada 11 305 C. Lavera 19 278 Laxa 17 308 Lays 02 334 R. d Laza 32 278 J.
S. Lazaro 31 331 Leicester point 95 339 Po d. los Leones 45 318 Lermitens J. 58
308 C. Lima 19 268 V Lima los Reges 12 300 R. d. Limara 31 302 La. pun Lita 25
296 J. d. Lobas 24 303 J. d. Lobos 22 280 C. de Lolias 18 307 G. of St. Lovis
50 330 Lovis d. Tampice 4 278 Loyola 03 303 Lucayoneque 28 305 C. d. St. Lucas
23 261 S. Lucia 13 319 G. d. S. Lundire 48 320

M
Macaraquar 08 318 Macha 19 309 Macurowaray 03 321 R. d. Madasena 28 276
Madrigal 02 301 Magdalena 24 255 Mahecary 01 329 Maicuri 02 333 Maiguana 23 305
L.e Maires Streights 55 316 Malebarre 41 316 Malpelo 02 295 Mangook 38 304
Manoa el Dorado 01 320 R. Manpe 02 342 Mansfield J. 61 290 Manta 01 295
Manuamori 06 330 Mapoch 31 306 Marapa 01 336 Po. Marauhon 02 342 Marcapana 09
317 J. S. Marco 30 249 S. Maria 09 304 C. Dona Maria 19 306 J. di S. Maria 03
341 C. de S. Maria 34 336 C. Henrietta Maria 54 285 Las tres Marias 22 265
Marigalanta 17 320 P. d. la Marque 27 255 Las S. Martha 11 305 S. Martin 24 268
P. d. S. Martin 25 257 S. Martin 19 315 R. S. Martin 34 338 J. S. Martin 32 242
Massamomes 28 302 Matanina 12 319 Matauwaes J. 41 310 S. Matheo 29 295 B. d. S.
Matheo 41 320 Matique 32 296 Mauritius Land 55 310 Mechoacan 21 272 R. Meiari
12 330 Mendoca 32 309 Mendocina 39 239 Mepenes 28 324 Merchants Isles 56 294
Merida 09 308 Merida 21 288 Mexico 21 274 S. Michael 07 296 S. Miguel 06 306 G.
d. Miguel 31 291 Minos Mindos 24 268 Minpuacetis 39 336 Miraflo 08 298 La Mochi
39 301 Mogges Il. 41 310 Mollova 32 296 Molopaques 22 346 R. d. Montalias 30
282 La Montuosa 08 297 Morequito 09 317 Moromoro 20 310 Mosquitos 13 295 Mount
Rilogh 07 315 R. de Mucheres 24 265 Mucoso 32 296 J. d. Muxillones 29 303

N
Nagater 40 281 C. Nassao 53 310 Nata 09 295 Natauwaes J. 41 310 Natiscotec 49
328 R. d. Navito 27 265 R. Naule 33 304 Nazarette 09 354 C. Negro 42 323 R.
Negro 28 333 Po. Nelsan 58 375 Neyua 05 307 P. d. Nicao 19 308 C. d. S. Nicolas
21 307 G. d. Niquesa 18 296 Nisoona 39 281 Nogges J. 41 310 B. Noma 01 336
Nombre d. Dios 25 268 C. de Nord 01 336 Rio del Norto 31 257 S. Nuguel 22 273

O
R. Obarro 05 316 Ocanna 08 306 Ochil 36 295 R Omapalchas 15 315 Omatepeo 18
276 Onatheaqua 33 296 Onda 06 305 Orebilla 11 306 R. d. Juan. d. Oreglio 07 314
R. Orenoque 07 316 Orich 03 302 Oropeka 12 303 Oropesa 21 303 Oruba 12 310
Osorno 41 305 Ossachile 36 295 Ototy 02 344 R. Ovahumaco 27 264 Oug 36 303
Ouliacan 28 260 Ozumel 19 290

P
Paiembos 23 323 R. d. Palma 24 277 R. d. Palmeras 03 345 Pamplona 07 310
Panani 09 297 R. Panuco 24 273 S. Paola 24 343 Rio d. Para 08 344 Paraguaes 19
321 Rio Parana 26 330 R. Parannama 24 320 Paria 18 308 J. d. Parraras 30 247
Partida 08 296 La Pas 17 309 P. d. la Pas 23 249 Pascamano 08 298 R. d. Pascua
26 254 Pasto 01 300 J. S. Paul 46 327 J. d. Paxares 29 302 Payta 04 295 R. das
Pedras 12 354 R. d. S. Pedro and Paulo 22 280 Pearl J. 11 296 Costa of Pearls
27 254 Cost. d. Pefeadores 27 276 C. Pembrok 62 286 B. d. Penco 35 302 G.
Penquene 43 320 Penquin J. 51 306 Pernambuco 08 353 R. d. Peros 47 319 R. d.
Petatlan 27 254 Peterlan 39 259 Phillippa 23 339 C. Phillips 62 275 Pico 11 304
R Pileomas 27 327 Pinces 09 301 J. d. Pines 21 295 Piqueri 24 334 Po. Pissagno
19 304 Placentia 07 306 Plaia 39 275 J. Plata 01 295 La Plata 21 303 Rio del la
Plata 35 335 Las Playas 32 255 Poraguoma 17 351 Porco 21 310 B. Port 47 315
Portillo d. Corora 09 311 Portuga 11 318 L. Possession 11 295 Potengi 05 353
Potosi 21 310 Poucarcolla 15 306 Pouhatan 38 299 Pouroma 08 325 Puchucha 21 275
Pueblo nueva 15 308 Pueblos d. Moqui 37 258 Puela 18 275 Puerto d. los Reges 15
320 Puerto Rico 19 306 Puna 02 296 Purtameio 01 295

Q
Queen Annes Forland 63 305 Quenate 36 290 Quibec 47 315 B. d. S. Quintin 32
042 Quio 22 290 Qulata 31 284

R
C. d. Rago 47 327 Raloghs Mount 64 315 Ranas 18 304 Rancher 12 305 C. d. Raz
45 337 R. Real 12 354 Redondo 18 316 C. Redondo 43 321 Punta. d. los Reges 37
241 N. S. d. las Remedia 07 305 Renove 25 296 Renseraers hoek 41 309 Resolution
J. 62 313 Po. d. monteRey 37 242 Rhiobamba 01 298 Rio d. las Amazones 08 322
Roca Partida 19 252 Roces 11 306 C. d. Romano 32 298 P. d. Roqui 29 251 C.
Rouge 51 335 J. Rougez 44 326 Port Royal 46 320

S
C. d. Sable 43 324 J. d. Sable 44 328 Saddle Islands 58 318 Salada 28 322
Salamancoa 18 285 Con Cetton d. Salaya 21 273 Salinas d. Guavi 12 299 Salida 49
302 Golfo d. Salinas 10 288 B. Solomon 52 319 Salta 24 317 S. Salvador 24 310
S. Salvador 13 352 S. Salvador 25 304 J. Salvage 21 351 Salvage 63 313 Samana
24 306 C. Samana 19 313 Sancta 09 299 Sankikans 40 305 Santa 29 327 Santana 28
330 B. d. Saon 31 296 Sauwage bay 54 326 Sayma 02 316 Sebald de Weerdt Islands
51 316 S. Sebastian 24 265 C.d S. Sebastian 24 344 7 Seco 18 352 Segovia 42 291
N: Segovia 08 315 Porto Seguro 17 351 S. Sele 06 306 R. d Sempoal 19 279
Sennecas 40 307 J. d. N. Sennara del Socorro 37 301 M. d. Seredo 33 334
Seregippe del Rey 11 352 Sesembre 44 346 Sevilla 19 305 Sewapois 37 305
Shebetueba 24 340 Sir Tho. Shinds Forland 59 294 R. Siara 04 252 N. Signom 21
271 B. d. S. Simon 30 250 Po de Sineloa 28 260 Siquisica 18 308 Sisal 21 289 R.
de Solis 33 334 Sorenama 07 326 Southampton 43 315 C. Southampton 62 285
Soutpan 04 348 B. d. S. Spirito 31 283 To de Spirito Santo 31 283 S. Spiritu 31
328 Spiritu Santo 20 35^ Statan Land 45 318 Sterra d. Aquamumme 04 384 Sterra
nevada de las Audes 26 310 S. Stevan 23 276 Po d. S. Stevan 46 301 First
Straight 51 308 Second Straight 51 307 Third Straight 52 306 Sucurusis 21 323

T
Tabago 11 320 Tadonac 48 315 R. Taeur d. los Magos 20 350 R. Tagoaribe 02 349
N. S. de Talavera 27 321 Tali 39 285 Tamalanoque 09 306 R. Tamangabug 31 341 J.
Tamaraca 08 354 R. Tambonalla 15 303 R. Tapecuru 02 344 J. Taportopera 01 340
Tascatusa 32 286 Tatainba 02 348 B. de Tauro 28 294 Taximaroa 21 273 R. d.
Tecon 34 255 Tenerife 59 306 Terra d. S. Marco 42 32 C. d. S. Thomas 22 351 P.
Thomas 33 302 S. Tiago d. laen 09 316 Tiascata 20 276 G. d. Tibus 10 300 Tobiso
22 305 Tocanaura 24 337 Tocayma 06 305 Baia d. Todos Santos 32 294 Toluco 21
274 Toparima 08 317 Topimanbasses 12 350 El. Toral 28 304 C. dos Torments 48
316 R. Tororaen 18 352 Torre de Gaboto 32 328 Toru 09 302 R. d. Trebaios 44 317
Trinidad 07 305 La Trinidade 12 290 J. d. Trinidad 19 359 J. della Trinidad 10
320 Tritibi 21 350 Truxillo 04 298 Truxillo 01 306 Truxillo 08 312 Tucape 39
301 Tuculula 18 278 S. Miguiel d. Tucuman 27 318 Tucurella 01 298 Tucuyo 08 315
Tudela 07 306 Tula 33 289

V
Vaassunho 04 352 Valadolid 20 289 C. d. la Valena 42 301 Valladolid 05 302 Val
paraysa 31 302 Vall Mariquina 40 309 Rio Vasabris 11 354 Ubicpanemme 03 349
Velez 09 289 Po. d. Vellivio 40 301 Vera paz 14 288 J. Verde 23 304 P. d. Vetos
24 304 Viacha 17 307 Villa 06 305 Villa 22 342 Villa de los Infantos 37 304
Villa des les lagos 21 273 Villa Rica 39 304 Villa dos Santos 23 346 Villa de
N. Sennora 47 302 S. Vincente 01 305 C. N. Virgin 51 310 B. d. las Virgins 31
249 Virribaracuxi 33 295 C. d. la Vittoria 51 301 Ullao 21 238 Ne Ultra 66 380
Umera 23 305 Uncos 12 307 Bar. de Uqua 25 343 Uramanca 12 305 Vulcan 12 289

W
C. Walsingham 68 318 Dela Ware bay 38 304 Watieira 08 326 Weibinge 24 326
Winthunds Bay 55 313 Wonari 06 334 Wya 07 331

X
Xand 07 303 Jag. d. los Xarayes 12 322 Xauxaflu 11 310 Xree 11 292 Xeres d. la
frontera 23 268 N. Xeres 09 314 Xuda 38 288 Xuxuy 25 316

Y
Yaen 04 301 R. d. Yair 12 291 Porto Ycatiara 04 351 Yetes 07 309 Y. d. S.
Graviel de los Peidros 32 332 Y. de Lobos 33 336 Po. d. Ylo 18 303 R. Ytata 35
304 Yuntas 25 319

Y
Zacatecas 23 269 Zacatula 19 270 R. Zagatula 19 273 Zampago 19 274 R.
Zarcaranna 32 321 Zoropalto 03 296 Zuma 01 301

FINIS.
map of the Americas A NEW AND EXACT MAP of AMERICA AND ISLANDS THEREUNTO
BELONGING; Published and are to be Sold by Thomas Ienner at the South Entrance
into Royal Exchange, of LONDON 1666.


map of Europe The Newest and most Exact map of EVROPE Anno 1666


map of Asia A New and Exact Map of ASIA and the Islands thereunto belonging.
Anno 1666.


map of Africa A New and Exact Map of AFRICA and the Islands thereunto belonging
Anno 1666



