A TRUE RELATION OF THE GELDING Of a Lascivious Franciscan-Fryer, On BOARD the
EXCHANGE-FRIGAT By the BOATSWAINS BOY.
As it came in a Letter to a Merchant in London from Legorn. Dated October.
18/28.
WE are, thanks be to God, Arrived safe at Legorn. Amongst several Eminent
passages that we met with in our Voyage from Scanderoon, there is one I cannot
forbear to acquaint you of, and the rather because you know what Discourse past
between the Captain -- and my self in our different opinions about the Papists
way of Dying, and the strange Spirit that Acts that party of Men, that would
fain make us to claim their Saintships.

In June last we were at Cyprus, where we received a Popish Priest on Board, of
the Order of St. Francis, who came in a little Bark over from the Holy Land,
where he had been to Worship the Holy Sepulcher; he gave a large Account of his
Pilgrimage, the Hardness and Tediousness of his Travels, the several Dangers
and Difficulties of his Journey: But withal, the great satisfaction he had
taken in so blessed an Undertaking, behaving it at his first coming, as if an
austere mortified life and he had been well acquainted; whereby he endeavored
to persuade the Commander and Ships-Company, that as was his habit, such was
his heart, greatly Religious and Devout. The Boatswain has a Lad of great
Innocence, and comely of Body, to whom this Franciscan presently began to join,
and to Consort himself with; and whenever he could get him alone, would not
only be giving him what good things he could obtain for him, but also be
pressing Money upon him: All which the Lad could digest very well. But then the
Priests undecent behavior toward him, every foot kissing and slabbering his
face, and thrusting his hand into his Breeches, not only rendered the Company of
this Sodomitish Franciscan Priest, very troublesome and burdensome to him, but
increased the Lads wonder, what the Friar would be at, as no way apprehending
his meaning.

At last he grew so unsufferably impudent to the Boy, as made him decline being
alone for his sake; and complaining to his Master the Boatswain, and two other
of the Ships-Company, then in the Cabin, they could not forbear smiling to
think what a Sanctimonious Sodomitish Hypocrite they had got Aboard; and the
better to detect his Hypocrisy, and lay open his Roguery, told the boy in
plain terms what they guest the Priest would be at, and therefore advised him
to defend himself from him as well as he could; scarce had he got from these
persons, but the Priest followed him in all places where he could meet him
alone, thrusting his privy Members into the boys hands, with other suchlike
abominable treatments, not fit to be named. The poor Youth being by this means
almost wearied of his life by this profane Priest, consulted ways how to get
rid from the continual Conversation of such a beastly wretch, at last was
advised to fall upon this course.

He gets a good Courage, and at last pretends to yield to his Lust, appointing
him a dark place in the Ship, at such an hour to meet him, and to let him have
his will of him; at which the Priest was so over-joyed, that he gives the Lad a
sum of money, and many kisses, and so departs. At the time appointed the boy
comes there, having first provided himself with a good Knife, which he had
prepared on purpose, made as sharp as a Razor: The Priest, he is for Courting
the boy to pull down his breeches, the boy bids the Priest pull down his first;
at which the Priest made not many words; but the boy not being so forward as
he, he begins with his old trade of thrusting his Privy-members into the boys
hand, which he never suffered him to do so willingly before; for so soon as he
had got good hold of it, he cuts it off to the very root, leaving only the
stump to distinguish Sexes; at which the Friar roared out, and made such an
horrible Cry, that affrighted the Ships Company that were near that place, who
all come running to them with what haste they could make; and having a light
brought them, there they found the poor Buggering-Fryer with his breeches about
his heels, and his shirt about his waste, and his hand upon his wounded parts,
not daring to let go, lest all the blood should run out of his beastly body,
and he dye upon the spot.

The Chyrurgeon of the Ship and his Mate were soon called, and all possible
means used to stench the blood; which, in fine, they did, and by Application of
proper Medicines, set him upon his legs again, that he was able to walk into
the Larazetto, among others to undergo his quarintine, as is usual; but so soon
as the wound was healed, and himself well, he flees out of the Larazetto before
his time, and marches off, having never been heard of to this day.

Yours, J. M.

Printed, and are to be Sold by Richard Janeway in Queens-head Alley in
Paternoster Row. 1680.


