GOOD NEVVS TO THE Good Women, And to the Bad Women too that will grow better.
The like to the Men.

But here the WOMEN are put in the first place, (the which is now out of their
place) because this Book chiefly Treats, Of the WOMEN.

SHOWING, What the Scripture says of the Good Women, and also what the
Scripture says of the Bad Women. And for Satisfaction to the Jews, herein is
proved whose Seed it is, the Serpents Head shall bruise.

Though the Lord be high, yet has he respect to the Lowly: But the Proud he
knows affar off,

Psalm. 138, 6. Pro. 16.18. Pride goes before Destruction, and a haughty Spirit
before a fall.

LONDON Printed and Sold by S. Darker, in Jewen Street at the Corner of Bull
head-Court, at the Sign of the Stationours Arms, and at John Gouges in
West-Minster Hall at the Sign of the Castle, and at Elizabeth Degrate's next to
the Fountain Tavern in the Strand. 1700.

ADVERTISEMENT.
By the same Author is Published a New Book, In which is given the full, clear,
and whole Account the Scripture gives of the Deity. It also shows where Hell
is, and the being of the Heaven of Heavens, before the Six Days Creation.

The Second Edition of Truth Vindicated; the Seed of the Woman, and the Seed of
the Serpent Distinguished; with the Two Sorts of Latter days, and when the
Elder People or Nation are to serve the Younger. Proved Es^u and Jacob, Figures
of the two Worlds; with the Explanation of the New Testament, and the Signs of
the times. These Books bound up together. Pr^ce 2 s. 6 d.

The Book of the Figura^ive Speeches, the Christian Belief, and the Three
Worlds, with the Chief Points, Bound up together, Price 2 s.

By which Books the Scriptures are made Plain, and the Mistakes removed, as the
Word of the Lord may be fulfilled Dan. 12 4.7.

There is yet to be Printed a Book, to prove that the Jews are not to be called
into the Gospel of the Christian Warefare, which is but the Preparation for the
Gospel of Peace Ephe 6.15. which is to be Published by an Angel after the
Messiahs Second coming Rev. 14.16.

But the Jews when they come to know who their Messiah is, that Great Prince
that standet^ up for them, Dan. 9. They are then to Pra^ to God as Daniel did.
That God would do what he had promised them, for the Lo^ds sake. Dan. 9.17.
Which Lord is the Mesiah or Savior.

There is al^o to be Printed an Explanation upon the Prophecy of Ezekiel from
the 33 Chap. to the end of the Book.

And the Beast in Daniel, And the Beast in Revelations, and the Two Witnesses.
With a Concordance how rightly to divide the Scripture, as to Christ first and
Second coming, without the knowledge of which, none can Preach Sound Doctrine;
whosoever will set their helping hand to the Press will therein do God good
Service.

This Gospel of the Christian Warfare, the Christians were but to hold fast
till the Lord comes, Rev. 3.11, 12. Who will appear the Second time, to them
that look for him, without S^^ unto Salvation Heb. 9.28. But in this time there
was no other Expel to be received then what was first delivered.

Not the BLACK RAVEN, but the SHE DOVE brought the glad Tidings of the Earth's
Restoration from the Deluge or Flood, by her returning again to Noah with an
Olive-leaf plucked off; whereby he knew the Waters were abated from off the Face
of the Earth, Genesis 8.11.
AND it is the female Seed that had the Promise of God, the Serpent's Head to
bruise, Genesis 3.15. And by whose Seed it is the Earth and World will be restored
from the bondage of Corruption, under which they groan, Rom 8.22. For the Lord
of Life came of a Maid or Virgin, without Man, Luke 1. 26, 27, 34, 35.
According as it was by the Prophet foretold, Isa. 7.13.14. Hear ye now, O
House of David; is it a small thing for you to weary men, but will ye weary my
God also? Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a Sign, behold! a Maid or
Virgin shall conceive and bea^ a Son, and shall call his Name I^manuel. We are
here to take notice, That this Son who is called Imm^nuel, was given as a Sign
to the House of David, and not to the King that desired none. For this Sign was
not to be in his Day. And of this Immanuel, the Prophet says, verse 15. Butter
and Honey shall he eat, that he may know how to refuse the Evil, and choose the
Good. From which Words is a clear Information, that this Son was to be good:
And therefore not as the Jews have represented him. And for farther Proof, that
this Son here spoken of, was not to be in that King's days, as the Jews
imagined; The words of the Prophet make plain from the 16 verse. For before the
Ch^ld shall know to refuse the Evil, and choose the Good, the La^d that thou
abhorrest shall be forsaken of both her Kings. This seems to be spoken of
Assyria, and Babylon, because the Prophet says, the Land which thou abhorrest.
And both Assyria, and Babylon were, conquered Kingdoms before this Son was
born, and so forsaken of both her Kings, as well as Israel and Judah were
forsaken of both their Kings before this Child was born. This is the Son on
whom the Government shall be upon bis Shoulder, Isa. 9.6. Who, at his first
coming, was laid as a Stone of stumbling, and for a Rock of offense to both the
Houses of Israel, Isa. 8.14, 15, 16, 17. Isa. 28.16, 17. Isa. 49. 7, 8, 9. Isa.
53.2, 3, 4 But Emmanuel, which being interpreted, is God with us, when he comes
the second time he will appear in glory. And Immanuel's Land, Isa 8.8. will
then be restored. And this Immanuel, is the it, or one Seed, or he that should
bruise the Ser pent's Head, and the Earth or World restore again to that
perfect state, as at the first Creation. The which he will accomplish at the
time of the restitution of all Things, Acts 3.19, 20, 21. For he will return to
Sion, and build again the Tabernacle of David, which is fallen, Acts 15.15, 16.
And then the Lord will not only restore, but secure all his People in that
perfect state they were in before the Fall: And then the Punishment that Sin
brought into the World, will be excluded from all God's People, so as then the
Husband will not be above the Wife, nor the Wife above the Husband; but as they
were in the first Creation, before Sin entered into the World. Ne there now is
there any disserence between them in the Lord, Gal 3.28. But them that love him
best are best accepted of him. But because Woman was first in the
Transgression, Women have been laid under subjection in this time: But the Lord
of Life coming by Woman, he who is the Reconciler between God and his Creature,
by him the Women will be delivered from that Bondage, which some has found
intolerable.

And in reference or allusion to this glorious Kingdom, the good Women have all
along bore great sway. For though it was said, that Sarah obeyed Ahraham, yet, as
concerning this Kingdom, she commanded: For she said to Abraham, cast out this
Bondwoman and her Son, for the Son of this Bondwoman shall not be Heir with
my Son, even with Isaac. And the thing was very grievous in Abraham's sight,
because of his Son, Genesis 21.10.11. Yet notwithstanding, God said unto him, in
all that Sarah has said unto thee, hearken unto her Voice, verse 12. God could
have declared to Abraham his Mind and Will as to this thing, without Sarah his
Wife showing her Authority herein. But that this thing was of God, to show that
the Women in the Kingdom which is to come, should be restored to that perfect
state Woman was in before the Fall.

And likewise the Church or Spouse of Christ, is always compared to a Woman,
the which, in time to come, will bear sway above all the Queens, and Concubins,
and V^rgi^s without number, Cant. 6.8. For that Nation and Kingd^m that will
not serve thee shall perish, Isa 60.12. Which thee, is Israel in the glorious
time: And then it is, that those who afflicted them, shall come bending unto
them, and all they that despised thee, shall bow themselves down at the Soles
of thy Feet, verse 14. And none can come into the Glory promised, that does not
in this time come in as the Seed of Abraham.

And as concerning this Kingdom, also Rebeckah, after Esau had sold to Jacob
his Brith-right, and so he by Purchase became the Firstborn, Jacob then by
obeying the Voice of his Mother, obtained the Blessing, Genesis 27.8 28, 29. Unto
which is annexed the promised Glory. The which is to be made good in time to
come, when the promised Land will be their own so as they shall move no more. 2 Samuel 7.10. When they, according to Promise, receive it for an everlasting
Inheritance. Genesis 17.8. And then it is, Japhet shall dwell in the Tents of
Shem, Genesis 9.27. For the true Believer is to come in with them. And then it is
they shall be all taught of God, Jer. 31.31, 32, 33, 34. And then it is of
which the Lord said, Isa. 59.21: My Spirit that is upon thee, and my words
which I have put into thy Mouth, shall not depart out of thy Mouth, nor out of
the Mouth of thy seed, nor out of the Mouth of thy seeds seed, says the Lord
from henceforth and forever.

And Mi^iam the Prophetess, when Israel was gotten from under the Egyptian
Bondage, and through the Red Sea, she took a Timbrel in her hand, and all the
Women went out after her, with timbrels and with dances, Exodus 15.20. in token
of Victory. According to which, it will be in time to come, Jer. 31.10, 11, 12,
13.

And when Sisera, the chief Captain of the King of Canaan, was with his host to
be destroyed, whose Land was given to Israel for an Inheritance; at the time of
this great Conquest, Deborah the Prophetess governed Israel. And then it was
that Jael the Wife of Heb^r the Kenite, killed Sisera, for Deborah, had before
told Bar^ck that was to be the Leader of the Army, that the Victory should not
be to his Honnour, for the Lord should sell Siscra, into the Hand of a Woman,
the which did not make Barak refused to do the thing, that was reqired of him,
and made known to him by Deborah, and then did the hand of the Children of
Israel prosper, and prevailed against Jabin King of Canaan, until they had
destroyed them. And of Sisera's mighty host, with nine hundred Chariots of
I^on, there was not one man left, Judge. 4.4, 9.16 21, 24. Hereby is represented
Israel's Victory in time to come. And likewise we are to take notice, That the
Government and Victory was not given to Woman, until Israel, by their often
transgressing, did evil in the sight of the Lord; for which he sold them into
the Hand of the King of Canaan, verse 2. And the Lord wrought their
de^iverance, and his destruction, in the time the Woman had the Government; so
likewise when the Lord and his raised Saints, and Spouse does Rule, then
Isreal's Enemies will be subdued, Isa. 60.14.

But whreas it is said, Isa. 3.12. As for my People, Children are their
Oppressors, and Women rule over them. Here God by the Prophet must have his
reference to those Women that usurpt Authority over the Men, and were not of
his setting up. For God set up no Woman Ruler in Israel to judge the People,
but Deborah. Judges 4.4. Of whom the Scripture does not say, she did any thing
amiss. The like of which is not in Scripture, to be found of any King. But in
this place God speaks of those women that set up themselves in Authority: Such
as Jezabel, who sttirred up Ahab to work wickedness, I Kings 21.25. And she
said to Ahab, I will give thee the Vineyard of Naboth the Iezreelite, verse. 7.
And by her wicked contrivances, she did accomplish it. And also Athaliah the
Daughter of Ahab, 2 Chronicles. 21.6. drew King Jehoram to walk in the ways of Ahab.
And likewise her Son Ahaziah walked in the ways of Ahab; for his Mother was his
Counselor to do wickedly. Chap. 22.3. And after her Son was Slain by Jehu, She
then arose, and destroyed the Seed Royal of the house of J^dah. verse. 10. And
set up herself to reign by Usurpation and Murder. And when such Idolatrous
women rule, there can be no good Government expected.

And it was Idolatrous women that drew King Solomon to Worship false Gods 1
Kings 11.4. For he should not have taken of the Heathen women to wife, until
they had been brought to the worship of the true God; but he let his heart go
out to Idolatrous women, and took to him seven hundred Wives, princesses, and
three hundred Concubins. Now in that he said, One Man among a Thousand have I
found, but a Woman among all those have I not found. Eccle 7 28. And no wonder,
that among those Thousand he found not one good one. And that he spoke of them
Women by whom he was entangled, is farther Evident from his words in the 26.
verse. For he says, I find more bitter than Death. the Woman whose Heart is
Snares and Nets, and her hands as bands, etc. The which he had found by woeful
experience, And we often read and find the good to be drawn away by the bad,
but rarely that the bad are drawn by the good. Now without doubt King Solomon
kept company with the best of Men, though not with the best of Women; and
therefore no wonder to find a good Man amongst a Thousand. But as King Solomon
declares against evil Women; So he does as highly extol the Virtuous and good
Women. Pro. 12.4. Chap. 11.16.

And it was a Woman, Rahab by Name, that received and Hid the Spies, that was
sent to view Jericho. Josh. 2. 1. And she believed in the God of Israel because
of the great Signs and Wond^rs that had been done. And therefore She covenanted
with the Men which she had hid, for the Saving of her self, her Househould, and
Relations. By which means they were preserved. And she believing in the God of
Israel, She was afterward taken to wife into that Line of which the Messiah
came. Mat. 1.5.6. Who when his Enemies are made his Footstool, he will take to
himself his own great Power, and Reign. Rev. 11.15, 17.

And Ruth, for the Love She had to her Mother-in Law, and Isreal's God: She
forsook her Country, her Kindred, and her Fathers House: And resolved to cleave
with her Mother to the true God. For which she was taken to wife into that Line
of which the Messiah came Ruth 1.16. Chap. 4.13.

And after the Reign of many wicked Kings in Judah, who had set up false Gods,
and worsh^ped them; and the Law of the Lord was cast aside by them. But when
Hilkiah the Priest found the book of the Law of the Lord, he sent it to the
Good King Josiah; who when he heard the Words of the Law, and the threatened
Punishments which God had pronounced against those Sins which his Predecessors
had committed in that Place, He rent his clothes. And at the time of this good
King, and good high Priest; Huldah the wife of Shallum, was Prophetess, and the
good and humble King did not disdain to enquire of the Word of the Lord by Her;
and the humility of the good High Priest was such, that he went unto her, 2 Chronicles. 34.14, 19, 22. to understand the mind of the Lord, tho he was the high
Priest of Gods setting up. And with the high Priest was the Ephod, with the
Breast Plate, in which was the Vrim and Thummim, Exodus 28.28, 30. And the High
Priest might have said, I will rather enquire of the Lord by the Ephod, by
which the Lord does answer the High Priest. 1 ^am. 23.9, 10, 11, 12, than go to
a woman to know the mind of the Lord. But his humility was such as to desire
the knowledge of the Word of the Lord; let the Lord declare his Mind by whom he
pleases. And now, though there is no Prophets nor Prophetesses as was formerly,
yet by whomsoever God makes the Scriptures to agree, it is visibly evident the
Lord must be assisting therein; seeing no Mortal of themselves could do it;
Since by men they have been set at an unreconcileable difference. The beast
desiring to charge Times and Laws; and it was given into his Hands until a
time, and times, and the dividing of time, Dan. 7.25. By which we have lost the
right Sentiments of the Word, and of the World to come; By which means the
Scriptures are made to contradict themselves: So as thereby the Sheep of Christ
Eat that which others have trodden, and Drink that which others have souled
with their Feet, Ezekiel. 34.19. But by whomsoever the Lord shall make the
Scriptures to agree, whether by Man or Woman; Man is bound to acknowledge it,
and to own the whole Truth, without they will for the sake of by-ends be found
in wilful Rebellion against God, and thereby draw the threatened Judgments upon
themselves; which otherwise they might escape: And man by the Apostasy having
laid the World in darkness, therefore God accordingly brings forth the whole
Truth another way.

Now Moses did prophesy to the Time of this Kingdom that is yet to come. For he
prophesied of the Vine, whose Grapes are Gall, and Clusters Bitter. For which
their Foot shall Slide in due time, from the greatness and Grandeur they are
in, when the Lord does Wh^t his Glittering Sword, and his hand take hold of
Judgment. And then it is the Lord will restore his People, and cause the
Nations to rejoice with them, Deu. 32.32, 35, 41, 42, 43. This Song gives an
account of Israel's being brought into the Land of Canaan; their waxing fat,
and kicking therein: their being cast out of their Land, their being moved to
Jealousy, and provoked to Anger by a foolish Nation. They were moved to
Jealousy, because the Heathen were brought in to be the Vine of the Earth at
the Messiahs first coming; and they were provoked to Anger by a foolish Nation;
for the Romans took their Country, and destroyed their Cities and Temple. And
the Romans were termed a foolish Nation because, when they had embraced the
Faith, they soon let go the Truth.

Now Moses prophesied of this time, and of the day of Judgment; but Hannah was
she that first prophesied what should be done in the Kingdom or World that is
to come. That God will raise the Poor out of the Du^t, and lift up the Beggar
from the Dunghill; to set them among Princes, and to make them inherit the
Throne of his Glory, 1 Samuel 2.8. according as in Psalm. 113.4, 5, 6, 7 8. And
though the Lord be high, yet has he respect unto the Lowly, but the Proud he
knows affar off, Psalm. 138, 6. And before destruction, the Heart of Man is
Haughty, and before Honor, is Humility, Pro. 18.12.

And in this time it was, the Women Midwives that saved all the Male Children
of the Hebrews alive, when Pharaoh, through Self-interest, Pride, and Cruelty,
ordered them to be destroyed. For which the Lord rewarded the Midwives, Exodus
2.15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. And it was Pharaohs Daughter, who brought up
Moses as her Son, And he was the Type of the true Messiah. And for Pharaohs
Wickedness and Cruelty, God hardened him in Unbelief of his Power, so as he
followed Israel into the Red Sea, in which he and his Host were overthrown,
Exodus 14.28.

And when Christ came into the World to suffer, he did not only come of a
Woman, but the knowledge of his coming, first came amongst the Women. For the
blessed Virgin went and acquainted her Cousin Elizabeth with the Glad tidings;
who upon the hearing of the Sound of her Salutation, was filled with the Holy
Ghost, Luke 1.41. We are here likewise to take notice, that Women were first
said to be filled with the Holy Ghost. And the Blessed Virgin said, He that is
mighty, bath done to me great things, and holy is his Name. For behold from
hence forth, all Generations should call her blessed, Luke. 1.48, 49

And it was Anna the Prophetess published in the Temple Christ's first coming,
to all them that looked for Redemption in Jerusalem, Luke 2.38.

And it likewise was a Woman that anointed Christ's head with the precious
Ointment, at which some murmured, the Ointment being of such Value Mark 14.3, 5.

And it was a Woman that washed the Lords Feet with her Tears, and wiped them
with the Hair of her Head, and anointed them with Ointment, Luke 7.38.

And it was Women that did Minister to Christ of their Substance, Luke. 8.2.

And a Woman of the Gentiles, a Samaritan, the Lord Christ declared himself to,
and she made him known to the Men of Samaria; and brought them to Christ, John
4.26, 28, 29, 30, 39, 40, 41, 42.

And at the time of Christ's Sufferings, the Daughters of Jerusalem wept for
him, Luke, 23.28. But the Sons of Jerusalem, cried, Crucify him, Crucify him,
Verse 21. And Herod with his Men of War, sit him at naught, and mocked him.
Verse 11.

But the Women that followed Christ, stood beholding him all the time of his
Crucifixion, Mark. 15.40 41. Luke. 23.49. When all his Disciples forsook him
and fled. Matt. 26.56.

And it was the Women that was first at the Sepulcher, where the Body of the
Lord, was laid, early in the Morning, when it was yet Dark, John 20.1. Matt.
28.1. And So by their Love and Diligence, they got the first sight of the Lord
after he arose, And the Lord sent them to be the first publishers of the
Resurrection to his Disciples. Matt. 28.10.

And it was the Women of Macedonia, who first embraced the Faith in that Place.
For a Vision appeared to Paul in the Night: There stood a Man of Macedonia, and
prayed him, saying, come over into Macedonia and help us. Acts 16 9. Which
accordingly he did. And he, and they that accompanied him thither, were in that
City abiding certain Days, Verse 12. In which time it does evidently appear,
they had gotten to themselves Hearers. For it is said in the 13. Verse. On the
Sabbath Day we went out of the City by a River side, where Prayer was wont to
be made. A place chosen Suitable to their purpose: that those that embraced the
Faith, might there be Baptized. And we are to take Notice, that it was the
Women that met there; For St. Paul says, We Sat down, and spoke unto the Women
which resorted thither. But the Men of the City rose up against them, And the
Magistrates rent off their clothes, and commanded to beat them, and when they
had laid many Stripes upon them, they cast them into Prison, Charging the
Jailer to keep them safely. Verse 22, 23. At which time the Jailer and all his
were convicted, and baptized. Verse 30 31, 33. And Lidia was a Succourer of
them, both before and after their imprisonment, Verse 15, 40.

And it was the men that pretended to be knowing in the Scriptures, that
withstood the Apostles Doctrine and stirred up the devout and Honorable Women,
and the chief Men of the City, Acts 13 50. against St. Paul for declaring the
Truth. And of the Greeks it is said, That the Honnourable Women Believed, Acts.
17.12. where by it is signifiyed that there was not many honorable Men that
did there believe, because there is no mention made of them.

And that God, who for Abrabaws Love and Obedience to him, became his exceeding
great reward: So that for Abraham's sake, all the great Blessings promised are
to come upon him and his Seed in time to come, Gen, 12.2, 3. Chap. 15. 1. Chap.
22.15, 16, 17, 18. So the Lord will not let the Love of the Women pass
unregarded by him. Who has promised, that those that Love him, should be
Beloved of him, Pro. 8.17. John. 14.21.

And the Messiah being the seed of the Woman, so as Women with the Tribe of
Judah may say, 2 Samuel 19.42. The King, the Lord Christ, is near of Kin to us,
therefore let us prepare, and wait and pray for his return, that we may be
found ready for the Bridegroom of our Souls. When, as for them that will not
prepare, of his Supper they shall not have any share, Luke 14.24. For of such,
the Lord says, They shall not taste of his Supper.

And of Woman came the chief Corner stone: And by Man has been lost the right
knowledge both of Christ's Kingdom and Throne. Therefore God saw good, that from
his Word, Woman should conceive aright how to bring the true knowledge of both
again to light. And as Zerubabel laid the Foundaaion Stone, so his hands
finished it, Zech. 4.7.9 And accordingly Zerubbabel truth to Woman does Join 1
Esd. 4.13. because she was to bring to light, that truth which Man had declined.

And that God that caused a Woman, Anna by Name, to declare in the Temple the
Coming of Christ to all them that looked for Redemption in Jerusalem, Luke
2.38. When the Scribes and Pharisees understod it not. Therefore no wonder that
God should now again bring to light the truth of that Doctrine, which Man did
first Slight.

Now whereas St. Paul says, 1. Cor. 14.34. Let your Women keep Silence in the
Church, for it is not permitted unto them to speak, Verse 35. And if they will
learn any thing, Let them ask their Husbands at home. These words of St. Paul
could have no general reference. For many of the Women did embrace the Faith
before their Husbands. As those of Macedonia did. So as had they been to ask
their Husbands at home; it had been the ready way to have turned them to have
been Insidels again. But St Paul wrote this to the Church of Corinth, where
without doubt, he found the Men more industrious to understand the Truth: and
that the Women might be too troublesome to them, by asking them too many
impertinent Questions, in the Church or public Meetings. Therefore he says,
Let your Women keep Silence in the Church, for it is not permitted unto them to
speak, but to ask their Husbands at home.

And whereas St. Paul says, 1 Timothy 2.12. I suffer not a Woman to teach.
Thereby showing he spoke this from himself. And if it is to be taken as here
expressed, the which I cannot so understand him, because then he contradicts
himself: and also it not being agreeable to the rest of the Scriptures,
therefore of no force. And he desires the Churches to be Followers of him, even
as he is of Christ, 1 Cor. 11 1. But the Churches are to follow none, but as
they follow Christ. But Christ gave no such Command as this of St. Paul, but
left other Examples, as I have before cited. And in St Paul's time one Man had
Four Daughters, Virgins, which did Prophecy, Acts 21.9. And were they not to
speak in the Church, which then were in the Believers Houses: to whom were they
then to declare their Prophesies to? And the Women were to instruct and teach
their Children, and Neighbors and acquaintance in the Truth, And St. Paul
says, The Elder Women should teach the Younger Women, Titus 2.3, 4.5. And
their Husbands too, no doubt, if they were Ignorant in the Faith.

And Timothy knew the Holy Scriptures from a Child, being taught by his Mother
and Grandmother, 2 Timothy 1. 5. Chap. 3.15. And Aquila, and Priscilla took the
learned Apollo to their House, Who is said to be Mighty in the Scriptures; him
they took and instructed in the way of God more perfectly, Acts 18.24, 26. And
St. Paul says, Priscilla and Aquila were his helpers in Christ Jesus Romans
16.3. And in that Priscilla is put foremost it does signify she was the better
instructor of the two. And likewise the same Apostle wrote to his Yoke Fellow
to help those Women which labored with him in the Gospel, Phil 4.3. Whereby it
does plainly appear they were to instruct and teach the People, though not in the
great public assemblies or Synagogues, as the men were, neither were they
sent, but to them that had before embraced the Faith; that they might further
instruct them therein. For if they had been sent to others, they might thereby
have been Slandered, and so brought a Scandal upon Religion. Thus we see, by
laying the Writings of St. Paul together, we may understand his meaning, which,
if we take them, not considering how they were spoken, then they are plain
Contradictions as we here see.

Now one Woman being first in the Transgression, was the cause that God laid
Women under Subjection in this time, and Pain in Childbearing. And has given
the Men the ruling Power in Church and State, and in their own Families: Now
that Judge that has been so severe on the Woman's side, is near at the door to
call Men to an account how they have ruled in Church and State, and in their
own Families, and what good example they have showed, Therefore it is best for
them to consider, and order their Conversation a right, before it is too late,
that they may not be reckoned as part of that Vine that will be trod without
the City, when the Lord comes. Rev. 19 15. Chap. 14.18, 19, 20.

Eve was beguiled through the Serpents Subtilty, 2 Cor. 11.3. And did not
willingly betray her Husband, for She gave him of the Fruit, before she had
found the evil effects thereof, But Men who were entrusted with the word for
themselves and their Posterities, and they by their changing Times and Laws,
Dan. 7.25. and Eating the good Postures, and in treading down the residue of
the Postures, and fouling the deep waters, Eze. 34.18, 19, 20. And hiding the
Talent, Matt. 25.18. of the Word, which was left to mankind to improve their
time thereby, the which man by his turning things upside down Isa 29.16. (...)
the World in Darkness, and made Merchandise of the Souls of the People, Rev.
18.13. For which God has declared, That the Prophets, the rulers, the S^ers
has he covered, and the vision of all is become, as a book that is Sealed,
Isa. 29.10, 11. And the Apostle says, God has chosen the weak things of the
World, to confound the things which are Mighty. 1 Cor. 1.27. Isa. 44.25. From
which it is plain, that the whole truth of Gods word was not to be brought to
light on that side by which it was first lost. And for those that will not read
nor consider because they will not understand, it is wilful Ignorance, and
wilful ignorance is like to wilful Rebellion, and that man that will
persist to set up his Wisdom above Gods word, shall certainly fall thereby, for
none is to add unto it nor diminish from it, De^. 4.2. Rev. 22.16. Number. 12.8.
and all that would not be Sharers of Gods Wrath, should declare the whole
truth, when God again brings the true meaning of his Word to Light. But how
ready is Man in Religion to differ with one another for trifles, because
Interest lies at the bottom. But when all Men are found in Mistakes, as to the
great part of their Fundamentals, then the Generality of all Parties, is
willing to Smother it, by reason they think it not to suit with their interest;
but what advantageth it for a Man to gain the whole World, and lose his own
Soul, Matt. 16 26. But it is want of a belief in the truth, which makes many so
regardless, and unwilling to deny themselves the Enjoyments of this World, for
the hopes of that of a better. And others thinking to put off all, to, A Lord
have mercy on them at the last. Whereby multitudes will find themselves
miserably deceived. Therefore let every thinking Soul, break off their Sins by
Working righteousness; and such as are Rich show mercy to the Poor, 1 Timothy,
6.17, 18, 19. And Labor to attain to the true knowledge, and Love of God; And
the Patient waiting for of Christ, knowing that our Labor will not be in vain
in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.58.

FINIS.

