TWO SERMONS Both PREACHED At NORTHAMPTON, ONE AT THE ASSIZES March 1693. THE
OTHER AT A VISITATION October the 10th. 1694.

By JOHN MANSELL, L.L.B. Rector of Furthoe in the County of Northampton.

Imprimatur,

Humf. Hody R. in Chapter Pac. D.D. Johanni Archiep. Cant. a Sac. Dom.
Nov. 18. 1694.


LONDON, Printed by J. Richardson, for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons
over against the Royal Exchange in Cornhil, MDCXCV.

A SERMON Preached at the ASSIZES HELD AT NORTHAMPTON, IN March 1693.

By JOHN MANSELL, Rector of Furthoe in the County of Northampton.

LONDON, Printed by J. Richardson, for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons
over against the Royal Exchange in Cornhil, MDCXCV.

TO Francis Arundell, Esquire LATE High Sheriff OF THE COUNTY OF NORTHAMPTON.
Honored Sir,
WHEN you was pleased to Impose this Piece of Service upon me, and thereby
drew me out of that Privacy which I confess my self fond of, because very
sensible how well it becomes me: I did not in the least think of being made
more Public. But since the repeated Importunity of some to whom I owe
Obedience, being joined to your own Desires and Encouragement, have at last
laid a kind of necessity upon me; I gladly, Sir, Embrace this Opportunity of
Expressing the Sense of a whole Neighborhood, who find themselves extremely
happy in your Presence, and Authority amongst them. Whilst, leaving the
Extravagant Persuit, of I know not what Imaginary Gallantries, to those Vain
Souls that are not capable of more Rational Satisfactions: You, Sir, Live
Honorably in your Country, where by an approved Loyalty to Their Majesty's,
upon whose Prosperity that of the Whole Nation does Depend; By an Unshaken Zeal
for our Holy Religion and Established Church, in whose Happiness that of the
State is Inseparably Included; By a Well-Regulated Family; an Exemplary
Economy; an Upright Justice, sweetened with a Peaceful Pacifying Temper, You
Worthily Endear Your self to all that are Wise and Good: And do indeed Appear
that Magistrate I have here endeavored to describe.

May so Great a Merit never miss of as Great a Reward, But may the Abundant
Mercies of God continually Descend upon You, Your Excellent Good Lady, and most
Hopeful Children; that so my Country may never want an Arundel to do it
Service and Credit; nor any of Your House ever want that Respect and Honor so
long Enjoyed by the Cranes Your Ancestors. This is part of the Daily Prayers of

Sir, Your most Obliged Humble Servant, JOHN MANSELL.
Old Stratford, October. 15. 1694.
A SERMON Preached at the ASSIZES AT NORTHAMPTON.
PSALM lxxxii. ver. 1. God stands in the Congregation of the Mighty, he
judges among the Gods.


The Old Translation renders it thus:

God stands in the Congregation of Princes, he is a Judge among Gods.

Whatsoever would have been the Condition of Mankind, had they lived up to the
God-like perfection wherein they were at first created: Yet this is certain,
that in their lapsed State, they could not have maintained themselves in any
tolerable Peace and Order; without the benefit of Humane Laws, and the
institution of Governments. But though God so far indulged the necessities of
our fallen Nature, as to allow us Lawgivers from among our selves; Yet he kept
the Supreme Legislative Powerstill in his own hands; He himself always standing
in the Congregation of those Mighty who prescribe Laws to all beneath them: And
though the Civil Magistrate be indeed his Minister, invested with his
Authority, and bears not his Sword in vain, yet the most Sovereign Power of
Life and Death is still in God himself; who is therefore said to judge over
those very Gods that pronounce sentence upon the Lives and Fortunes of
Inferior Men. Thus God stands in the Congregation of the Mighty, and judges
among the Gods.

In this Psalm the inspired Asaph instructs Princes both in their Dignity and
their Duty: Beginning his Discourse with that Solemn Preamble in the Text,
wherein he adorns the Civil Magistrates with the most glorious of their Titles,
and yet presses them with the most awful considerations; thereby showing how
reconcilable the Faithful discharge of a Preachers Duty may be to the Rules of
Civility and good Manners: Thus he Complements them with the Names of Princes
and of Gods, and yet warns them of an Almighty Superior, who stands above and
overlooks them all, and judges all they do: For, says he, God stands in the
Congregation of the Princes, he is a Judge among Gods.

For the more useful handling of which words, I shall, 1. Inquire who are the
Mighty, the Princes, and the Gods here spoken of: 2. What is meant by Gods
standing amongst the one, and judging among the other. 1. Then by the Mighty
and the Gods are doubtless understood Kings, Princes and Governors, and all
that are put in Authority under them; that is, all Civil Magistrates in their
due Subordinations: And though perhaps to suppose, that by the Mighty are meant
only inferior Magistrates, and by the Gods Sovereign Princes themselves, might
sound like no ill gloss upon the words; Yet I find that Expositors generally
look no farther in both Expressions, than to those Judges of Israel that used
to Assemble in the Great Council of the Sanhedrim. And to give unto them the
Titles of Mighty and of Princes is not at all uncommon in Holy Scripture:
Verse. 6.
So for the more lofty Epithet of Gods we find it twice repeated in this
Psalm: And again, Exodus 22.28. Thou shall not revile the Gods, nor curse the
Ruler of thy people: So also Exodus 21.6. where it is observable, that what we
translate Judges is in the Original Elohim, Gods, and so in several other
Texts: But when we consider that what is rendered Mighty in the former part of
the Verse, is in the Hebrew the same Elohim, and in the Septuagint the same
(...) with what we translate Gods in the latter part, I think we need make no
nice distinction between the two terms. And though the Learned Grotius, in the
former clause, sticks to the version of Synagoga Dei, which is no more than the
Congregation of God, or Gods Congregation; yet since in the latter clause he
allows the Title of Gods to that Congregation, the sense is not at all altered
by his Criticisme. But 2. For Gods standing in this Congregation and judging
among those Gods; Whether we take standing only for being present, as in 1
Kings 17.1. or for being the Chief in Government, Ezra 2.63. 2 Kings 8.20. or
for the Person that pronounces Sentence, which the Ancients oftentimes did in
an erect posture, which seems to be aimed at, Isa. 3.13. In all these Senses
God is present, God presides, God himself pronounces Sentence among them; so
that standing and judging seem to be as nearly allied in Sense, as Mighty and
Gods.

From the words thus opened, give me leave to present you with these Three
Considerations. 1. The Civil Magistrates Dignity. 2. Their Subjection, 3. Their
Duty consequent to both.

1. Their Dignity, They are called Princes and Gods, and indeed when we look
upon Princes as standing in the foremost Rank of Men, and consider God as
infinitely exalted above all the Ranks of Men and Angels; we must needs confess
their Names are properly made use of to denote what is eminent either in
Office, or in Honor: and that there is very much in Civil Magistrates that
raises them above the Level of other Men, and makes them approach nearer to
Deity, will appear, if we consider: 1. Their Eminent Authority, which in its
Original, is Gods. 2. The Eminent Virtues which ought to qualife them for their
High Office. 3. Those eminent benefits which they confer upon the World. 4. The
eminent Honors that are due to the saithful discharge of their weighty
Employments. In all which there is a certain (...), somewhat that carries a
stamp of Divinity upon it.

1. Their Power and Authority which in its Original is Gods. I have said ye are
Gods, says our Author, ver. 6. that is with respect to their Power; for it is
a remark of the forecited Grotius, That the Title of Gods is never put upon
Men, but when it signifies the power of Life and Death; as may be seen in his
Notes upon Exodus 4.16. All Civil Four therefore is Originally derived from
God. The Powers that be are ordained of God, Romans 13.1. and therefore the Old
World looked upon their Princes but as so many visible Deities, all Sons of the
Supreme Jove: All Children of the most High. Verse 6.
And thence it was that we see the Ancient Crowns composed of those golden
Spires that best represented the rays of Glory, wherewith they circled the
heads of their Divinities: Thus God was generally owned to be the great
sountain of all Government and Authority

But for the better understanding in what limited sense I take all this. I
shall here premise,

1. That it is only of Civil Right and Power that I am now speaking; and
therefore I do not think my self obliged to take notice of Paternal Authority,
though doubtless the first in the World: Since that was a right purely natural,
and so comes not up to the present case. Besides I suppose the full Natural
Authority of a Father over his Children, did in the beginning last no longer
than the Son continued a Member of that Family, and so lived one of his
Domestic Subjects; But when he married and began a Family of his own, then he
became as much a Monarch in his own House, as his Father was in his. But since
this Natural Authority, as to its chief Regalities, has long since ceased in
all civilized Nations: And all the Governments now in the World are wholly
founded upon Civil and Legal Right: And I take it for granted, that what was
merely a Civil Right in its Original, can never either by long prescription, or
continued Succession become a Natural Right: Since the Nature of things never
alters, howsoever their circumstances may. I wave therefore the first
Government that was founded in Paternal, that is, in Natural Right: And,

2. I premise father, That somewhat else besides the mere permission of God
(that only Universal Monarch, without whose leave none of the Creatures he had
made could have any Power over themselves, or others; and without whose
communicating that Power to them, they had no right to dispose themselves into
any kinds of Civil Governments) I say that besides all this, somewhat else did
contribute to the Establishment of such Humane mane Authorities as are now
exercised in the World. And that I humbly suppose to be, the Natural
Necessities of Fallen Men, together with the Rational Use of those Faculties
wherewith God had endued them: For God having planted such Faculties in Men as
enabled them to consult their Common Good, and to provide for their own Peace
and Interest: And leaving them to the free use of those Faculties, they soon
found, by an early experience, how necessary it was to unite into Civil
Societies, which could not be done without the Enacting of Laws, and the
Constitution of Governors: So that Men were naturally obliged to enter those
Mutual Compacts and Politic Relations, wherein some were to be governed and
protected, and others to be honored and obeyed: Neither yet was all this
without God's Sovereign Intervention, for though I do not find that in the
beginning there was any particular Revelation commanding Men to Model
themselves, into such Methods of Civil Government; But they were all at first
merely the Dictates of Natural Reason, grounded upon the Sense of Humane
Necessities: Yet seeing it was God that planted this Principle of Reason in us,
therefore all that duly springs from that Principle may justly be said to
proceed from God its Author; and so to have a Divine Authority, though not
immediately founded upon any positive Divine Command. Add to this, that what is
founded in Natural Reason, is one Branch of the Law of Nature, as much the Law
of God as any Revealed Law whatsoever. But farther, God set his own Seal to
this Institution of Civil Government; and by several of his own subsequent,
positive Laws, required Men to submit unto those Methods of Government, to
whose Birth the Necessities of Humane Nature, and the Dictates of Humane
reason, seemed so much to contribute.

Lastly, God himself took the very same Methods, when he chose the Jewish
Nation to be his own immediate Subjects; whose Government though fundamentally
a Theocracy, yet it underwent various kinds of outward Administrations;
Aristocracy, Oligarchy, Monarchy, both Elective and Hereditary: And at last,
after the mixed Government between the Great Captains and the Sovereign Pontifs
which succeeded the Babylonian Captivity; it settled in a compound Title of
Success, Merit, and Election in the Asmonaean Family: I do not add that of
Conquest; there being a wide difference between Conquering a Nations Enemies,
especially by the Assistance of its own hands; and Conquering the Nation it
self. Thus the Machabaean Line excluded that of David; and those Hero's rising
up the great Deliverers of their Church, and Country, from the extremest
Oppression both in their Religious, and Civil Rights: Nothing less than a Crown
was thought an Equal Reward for so Glorious a Merit. Neither was the Old
Davidean Title ever put in as a Bar to the more deserving present Possessours:
But the same Providence watched over them, and doubtless by its Ministers
required the same Allegiance to them as to the Princes of the former Race: The
case is easily applied.

Thus the Origin of all Government is absolutely from God, from his leave, and
permission; from those Laws of Reason that he planted in Men's Natures, enabling
them to take the best measures for their common Good, and Safety; from his own
following positive Commands confirming what that Reason had dictated, from his
own Example, and from that visible Providence whereby he supports Civil Right
and Government in the World.

Gods to other Men.

For whether we consider that Natural Capacity, Ingenuity, and Probity which
ought to prepare the Soil for their Riper Virtues to grow in, (it being seldom
seen that the best Education, and greatest Erudition do ever sufficiently
Correct, and Cultivate those Depravations of Nature, whereby some Persons have
infamously distinguished themselves, and after their Advancement to the Seat of
Judicature have made their very Scarlet blush at the Extravagant and Outrageous
Deportment of those that wore it): Or whether we consider the profound
Knowledge, and the vast Experience, the Solid Judgment and the Wisdom like an
Angel of God, the Unwearied Industry and Uncorrupted Integrity, the Generous
Courage, and the Invincible Patience, the Heroic Justice, and the Saintlike
Mercy which are all required to the making up of one Accomplished Magistrate;
we must needs confess that there is much of God in the Great Man. And if we
examine wherein the Image of God in Man did at first consist, we shall find
that in a great part it appeared in the Moral perfections of his Nature, in a
near Resemblance of the Divine Wisdom, Goodness, Truth, Purity, Justice, and
Mercy, and the like Moral Attributes, which are the only imitable perfections
in God; he therefore that is most qualified with those Moral Excellencies, has
certainly most of God in him, and the Divine Image is most beautifully revived
in his Virtues. So that Magistrates in the Just, Wise, Upright Discharge of
their Duties are Gods best Representatives; the Divine Wisddom shines through
theirs, and the Divine Justice Illustriously appears in all they do. Thus by
qualifying themselves with more Eminent Virtues than other Men, they stand like
so many Gods above them: A Bold Hyperbole I confess, was it not Licensed by the
Holy Spirit it self: But,

Gods in it. Thus we know Idolatry arose, whilst Men Deified their Public
Benefactors, and those who had done any signal good to the rest of Mankind were
rewarded with Temples, and with Altars; with Sacrifice and Adorations. And thus
God himself recommends himself to the Love of his Creatures, by his Universal
Goodness and Beneficence; All his other Attributes may indeed engage our
Veneration, and perhaps our Fear, but it is only perfect Goodness that
irresistibly Charms our Affection: We may admire all that is Great, but we love
only what does us good: The Nobler Nature may have a Right to our Wonder, but
it is only the more Useful that has a Right to our Kindness: And therefore
though the Civil Magistrates by their Mighty Power may strike an Awe into other
Men, though by their Excellent Accomplishments they may command their respects,
yet it is only their Mighty Usefulness that recommends them to their Love; They
are the Blessings which such Communicate to the World that make them dear as
Public Benefactors, and beloved as Gods in it.

Thus whilst they secure every Man's Property, and Protect every Man's Life;
whilst they are the Keepers of Gods Peace upon Earth, and the Dispensers of his
Common Justice amongst Men; whilst they impartially determine all Disputes
between Man and Man, whilst they are Terrors unto evil doers, and the
Encouragers of those that do good; And in fine, whilst they are the Ministers
of God for good to the World, Romans 13.4. In all this they much resemble the
Divine Justice, that gives to every one its due, and the Divine Providence that
upholds Peace, and Order, Right, and Equity in the World: And may well
therefore be looked upon as so many Gods in it: Since there would be no living
in this World without them, but it would soon turn into a mere Wilderness, and
Man himself run Wild and Savage in it: And all the Foundations of the Earth be
quickly out of course; as our Author expresses it, when he charges those
Mighty with their Maladministration, ver. 5. But now in the midst of our
Disorders the Presence of an Upright Magistrate is as the Appearance of a God,
his Awful Brow strikes the Guilty dumb, his Well-known Justice raises up the
Head of Oppressed Innocence, and his Solemn Sentence, like the Almighty Fiat,
turns Confusion into Peace and Harmony.

Thus whilst they become the Public Ben factors of Mankind, the Noble Pillars
upon which all Humane Societies do rest, the Glorious, as well as Useful
Preservers of Peace and Justice in the World, they are indeed the fairest
Images of God in it.

And so they may be called,

Render, says that Apostle, Honor to whom Honor is due, Romans 13.7. And it is
of the Civil Magistrate, that he is there speaking, for to those he thought the
greatest Honors due, and therefore to those he commands them most especially
to be rendered: And there is all the Justice in the World in it; that they, who
are clothed with so much of God's own Power, should shine also with some part
of his Glory; that they, who do so much of God's own Work, should be dignified
with some small Share of his Honor too.

Thus when Kings communicate part of their Sovereign Power to their Viceroys,
they communicate part of their Royal State to them also: And therefore much of
that outward Pomp and Ceremony, which has been thought necessary to support the
Majesty of Crowned Heads, has been proportionably allowed to Judges and
Inferior Magistrates: Thence come their Maces, their Sword-Bearers, and their
Robes of State; the Bench and Bar set forth with so much Venerable Solemnity:
All to Command a Reverence to the Magistrates Persons, and to render the great
work of Justice as Glorious as it is useful.

And yet all this is but mean Pageantry, if compared to the inward Veneration
that every Wise and Good Man pays to those Living Images of the Divine
Justice; to those great Representatives of God governing the World; for with
what profound respect do we behold such a Person, for whom a whole Nation fares
the better? And how do our very hearts bow before that Superior Virtue to
whose well employed Authority we owe the quiet of our Possessions, and the
security of our Lives? And whose Names do more Illustriously fill up the
Records of History, than those of Just and Good Princes; of those Patres Patria
who have made their Peoples happiness the Business and Glory of their Reigns;
and than those of Incorrupt and Upright Judges? Their Persons are at present
regarded with the highest Honor, and when they die their Memories shall be
Embalmed in the precious Ointment of that good Name, which they secured by
repeated Acts of Virtue in their Lives: And for all these Reasons the Scripture
does justly dignifie them with this Sacred Title in the Text. And thus much for
their Dignity.

Deuteronomy. 10.17.
for though they are called Mighty, though they are called Gods; yet there is a
God above them, Psalm. 94.2.
A God that is Allmighty, that is literally the God of Gods, and Judge of all
the Earth. And this Subjection of the Civil Magistrates is implied in their
very Dignity; whose greatest Excellency does consist in a likeness of God, and
in their resembling him; they therefore must needs be subordinate unto that
God, to be whose Representatives is their greatest Honor: For if their Chief
Power consists in their being Commissioned by God to execute part of his own
Authority upon Earth; if their Chief Accomplishments are but saint and dim
reflections of the Divine Wisdom, Truth, Goodness, and Justice; if their
greatest usefulness consists in being God's Instruments for good to Men, Agents
for Divine Justice, and Factors for Almighty Providence here below; in Short,
if their Chief Glory consists in being God's Mortal Representatives, then all
this Dignity being but a Reslected Luster, but a Relative and Dependant thing;
and all their Divinity being but an Imperfect Copy of his, in whom dwells the
whole fullness of the Godhead: This very Dignity proves that though they are
Mighty, they are still Subordinate; that though they are Great Lights, yet like
the Moon they only rule this present Night, and borrow all their Brightness
from that greater Luminary which rules the Everlasting Day, That is, from God
the Giver of every good and perfect gift. As therefore all that is Eminent in
them flows from a Higher Spring, so it shows their Subordination to it. And
this Subjection is in the Text set forth, 1. By Gods standing in the midst of
them: And 2. By his Judging among them: That is by his being both the Witness,
and Judge of all they do.

1. Mighty as they are, they are still under Gods Immediate Inspection; he
stands by, not only to assist them, which is a Sense the words might very well
bear; but to observe both all they do, and how they do it; he not only
overlooks all their Proceedings, but he reads their very Thoughts too, and
pearceth into the Darkest Corners of their Hearts, to see whether any Secret
Self-Interest, Partiality, or By-Respects Influence those Acts of theirs which
outwardly, perhaps, carry a plausible Aspect: Thus God is the Great Supervisor
of all their Actions, and of all the Reasons of those Actions. Whllst, like
some Inquisitive Princes, he sits behind the Curtain when his Great Officers
are Administering Justice; where he sits no Idle Spectator by, for we read, that
he has often thrown aside the Curtain, and by extraordinary interposing
Providence has Publicly appeared on the behalf of Injured Innocence, and
wonderously detected the Iniquity either of Prosecutors, Juries, or Judges.

2. Mighty as they are, God is still their Judge, and passes Sentence upon all
they do; which Judgment of his, though at present it be only Secret, and
confined to the Cabinet Council of his own Immutable Wisdom and Justice: Yet at
last it shall be made most Public; when those Gods shall come to dye like
other Men, and in the day when God shall judge the secrets both of People and
of Princes; When Monarchs must descend their Thrones, and Judges come down from
the Bench to the Bar, there to take their Trials in the midst of Ten Thousand
Spectator Angels, and as many Accusing Devils, and by the Witness of their own
Consciences, every of which is Ten Thousand strong. Deuteronomy. 16.9.
When neither Fine Parts, nor Great Learning, nor Court Favor, nor Popular
Esteem, nor Bribes that blind the eyes of the wise, shall stand them in any
stead; but it will then appear, notwithstanding all former outward Differences,
yet that all Souls are Equal. Which puts me upon my third and last Observation,
The Magistrates Duty consequent both to their Dignity, and their Subjection.

1. Their Duty with respect to their High Dignity, If they are in some sense
Gods, then how ought they to behave themselves answerable to that glorious
Title; and to Act like the Divinity whom they represent? Every Magistrate
therefore ought to stand very much upon his Honor: And to consider in all he
does, whether he be true to his High Quality; whether it be Great, and God-like
Justice that he is then doing; whether he believes that God himself, if he was
there visibly present, would act in those Cases as he does. Thus our Mighty,
Being inspired with a Noble Pride, and a Holy Emulation, should scorn to do any
thing unworthy the God whose Name they wear, whose Person they represent, and
whose Work they are about: And as Nehemiah, when warned to withdraw himself
from the surprise of his Enemies, answered with a generous Zeal. Neh. 6.11.
Should such a Man as I flee? So should every Magistrate, as conscious of his
own High Dignity, be ready with a Devout Bravery of Mind to say, Should such a
Man as I do thus or thus? Should I who represent the Great God fear the face of
any man though ever so great? Should I respect Persons? Should I take a Bribe?
Should I justify the wicked for favor? Or condemn the Righteous for fear?
Would this become the Heavenly Character I bear? Or this be at all like a God?
Thus from a due sense of their Dignity may the Magistrates argue themselves
into their Duty.

And,

2. From a Sense of their Subjection too; since as much Gods as they are, yet
there is a God, an Infinite Power above them: A God that is now the Infallible
Witness of all they are doing, and that will hereafter be the Impartial Judge
of all they have done.

Thus when they consider that theirs is but a borrowed Greatness, a deputed
Authority, a vicarious Power, a temporary Regency, and that e're long their
large Commissions will be out of Date, their Magistracy come to its end, their
Ensigns of Honor be all laid by, their Robes of State be put off for ever,
their Titles and Dignities be buried in the Dust, and their Persons, divested
of all their former Grandieur, must appear in the Crowd of Common Malefactors,
that Judges themselves must in their turns be judged, and all our Mortal Gods
must render an Account to him that is alone Immortal; and that the Judgment of
God will prove as much more strict and terrible, as his Wisdom and Justice are
infinitely more perfect than theirs; the Sense of such a Subjection must needs
instruct them in their Duty, and become a more powerful memento to them, than
that severe Prince gave, who stead off the Skin from a Corrupt Judge, and
spread it on that Seat of Justice upon which he caused his Son to succeed him;
that so by the Horror of his Fathers Fate he might be terribly warned to avoid
his Crime.

But here though it might be thought presumption in me to intrude my Counsels
upon those who are in so many respects above me; yet, as the humblest of your
Attendants, give me leave to follow this days Solemnity with these honest
Wishes.

That you Mighty and Princes, that you who like Gods determine of other Men's
Lives and Fortunes, would consult both your Dignity and your Duty, and consider
that you are Gods Ministers as well as the Kings; that you act by a Divine
Commission, as well as a Civil; and that you are as much accountable to Heaven,
as to the State; My Wishes therefore are, that you may be as Zealous for Gods
Interest, as for their Majesty's; and do our Holy Religion as much Service, as
you do the Nation; That Atheism, Debauchery, and Profaneness, may be as
severely animadverted upon by you, as Dishonesty, Injustice or Oppression: And
in sum that you would, at least, use an equal care to see the Laws of God
executed against all Irreligion, Vice, and Immorality, which are the Scandal
and Bane of pure and undefiled Religion, as to see the Laws of the Land
executed against those other sins that are destructive of Humane Society. That
so we may be a Nation thoroughly reformed in our Lives and Manners, as well as
in our Faith and Public Worship; and that we may be delivered not only from
other Men's Violence, but from our own Reigning Vices the Blacker Slavery of the
two.

And as I wish you thus concerned for the Practical part of our Religion, so
for the Political part also; that the Established Church of England may be
happy in your Encouragement and Protection. Consider O ye Mighty that you are
not only Christians at large, but also Baptized into the particular Communion
of the Church of England; show therefore your Affection to that Venerable
Mother which so early received you into her bosom, and take some care, I
beseech you, that the more she indulges the worse she be not used, and that the
Charitable Liberty she has yielded to others may not embolden them to appear
the more Virulent Enemies against her.

Lastly, Let me beg that our Neighbors of the Country Magistracy would admit
my good Wishes also. Gentlemen, though yours is not the Highest Station, yet
perhaps it is that upon which the motion of the greater Wheels does more depend
than is usually considered. For Kings and Parliaments may make as good Laws as
they can; and Judges may give as Severe Charges as they please; yet if you are
either remiss or partial in the discharge of your Trusts, the course of Justice
must needs be extremely obstructed: You are placed like the Dii Minores, like
Lesser Gods in your Country, by your Diligence, Justice, and good Examples to
carry on the orderly Work of Providence here below: But if you cool in your
Offices, and for any private Respects of your own suffer our Laws to lie
unexecuted; You fail in the Duty you owe to your God and your King; to your
Country and your Character; to your Honors and your Consciences; and the
guilt of disappointed Justice must needs lie heavy upon your heads. And you
will be so far from hearing any part of that God-like resemblance in the Text,
that you will rather prove mere Wooden Images of the Divine Justice, and all
the respect that is paid you will be but so much State-Idolatry. Rouse up
therefore the Old English Public Spirit! And be warmed with a Generous
Ambition of making good the High Character in the Text. And as you stand like
so many Gods above other Men, so be useful as Gods, Active, Upright, and
Impartial as Gods in your several Stations.

And as Our King when he rose up like Moses, to be the Deliverer of God's
Church and People from an Egyptian Bondage; Exodus 7.1.
like Moses he became as a God both to our Pharoahs and to our Aarons; Exodus
4.16.
that is, the Scourge of Heaven upon our Persecutors, and the Relief of Heaven
to our Holy Ones; and as he like Moses still heads the Body of Distressed
Christendom, Traveling through a Wilderness to a Land of Peace: Whilst he as
the Soul of that vast Body, Animates and gives it both Life and Motion; Life by
that High Courage that has so much of the Hero in it, and Motion by that deep
Wisdom that has so much of the God in it. May you all be provoked by so great,
so glorious an Example! And become as Active and as Zealous to advance
Religion; True Christian Virtue, and Peace at Home, as he is to procure and
extend them abroad: May you all be concerned to Conquer and Exterminate Vice,
Profaneness, and Debauchery in your Country, Tyrants more dangerous and more
destructive to its Success and Happiness than either France or Rome can ever
prove without their fatal Assistance. That as our Monarchs may in the Language
of the Text be called Gods to you. Ye may be also Gods to us, the Nations good
Genii, each of you one of Gods lower Vice-Royes in your respective Posts.

That so the State may be faithfully served, Their Majesty's Loyally Obeyed,
Our English Laws impartially Executed, Our Holy English Church Defended and
Encouraged, that God may be glorified in you, and you in him; that you your
selves may share in that Honor which you procure for him; and that he may
graciously reflect part of the Glory back upon your own heads which he shall
receive upon your Account.

Do thus, and as the great Reformer Jehosophat said to his Ministers of State,
Deal Courageously, and the Lord be with the Good. And now Grant O Lord we
beseech thee that the course of this World may be so peaceably Ordered by thy
Governance, that thy Church may joyfully serve thee in all Godly quietness,
through Jesus Christ our Lord; To whom, etc.

FINIS.
A SERMON Preached at NORTHAMPTON AT A VISITATION October the 10th. 1694.

By JOHN MANSELL, Rector of Furthoe in the County of Northampton.

LONDON, Printed by J. Richardson, for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons in
Cornhil, over against the Royal Exchange in Cornhil, MDCXCV.

To The Reverend THOMAS WOOLSY, D.D. ARCHDEACON OF NORTHAMPTON.
SIR,
GIVE me leave to repeat the first Answer I returned to that Obliging
Complement, wherewith you softened the Command laid upon me to make this Sermon
Public; which was, that hitherto it was mine, and I alone was accountable for
all its Imperfections; but if it came forth under the Authority of your Name,
it would become yours, and you would be engaged in its Protection.

Be pleased therefore Sir to receive what is yours into your Patronage: And I
hope the World will do me the Justice to allow, that howsoever I may have
failed in any other part of my performance, yet I have given a very bold proof
of my Obedience.

But Sir, That discreetly managed Zeal which you express for true Practical
Piety, together with that great Temper^ and exceeding Sweetness of Nature which
appears in the severest Exercise of your Authority, as they have in general
procured you the Affections of your whole Clergy; so they have particularly
engaged me to pay this Testimony of my respect to your Place, and Personal
Merit.

And if this poor Discourse prove but as successful in contributing to the
advancement of Religion in the World, as it has been in the kind acceptance of
my Reverend Brethren of the Clergy: I have all that could be wished, and more
than could reasonably have been hoped for, by

Reverend Sir, Your most Obedient, Humble Servant, JOHN MANSELL.
Old Stratford, October. 22. 1694.
A SERMON Preached at the VISITATION IN NORTHAMPTON.
1 TIMOTHY iv. 16. For in doing this thou shall both save thy self, and those
that hear thee.


THE saving of Men's Souls out of that Universal Chaos of fallen Nature, wherein
all was without Form, and void, and full of Darkness: Was a work that had as
much of the God in it, as the first Creation of Humane Bodies out of the Dust
of the Earth. And though this great work was first set on foot in Heaven, and
God himself first put his own Almighty hand unto it, yet by an Act of the most
condescending Goodness Man was in time admitted into an Infer our Partnership
of the Mighty Undertaking: Servat Deus nos sed non sine nobis. Ar.
And that not only, whilst every Man, as assisted by Enabling Grace, is to work
out his own Salvation; and so that which was first the Free Gift of God,
becomes the Work of Man too; But also, as there was a certain Order of Men
instituted to carry on this Gracious Design, who were set aside, by Divine
Designation, to take care of their own and other Men's Souls; and who by doing
so should both save themselves, and those that hear them.

In this Epistle St. Paul Preaches particularly ad Cleran: So that the whole
may be looked upon as one short, but very full Visitation Sermon.

In the words immediately before the Text, He presents the Clergy with a brief
Summary of their Duty, under those two heads, their Doctrine and their Manners:
Take heed to thy self; that is, to thy own Life and Conversation; and take heed
to thy Doctrine; that is, both how and what thou teach, that the sound and
useful Truths of the one may receive an experimental proof from the bright
Example of the other; That their most Powerful Sermons being only Instructive
Comments upon their own Holy Lives; They themselves living as they speak, as
well as speaking as they would have others live; by that twofold Rhetoric of
their Living Doctrine, and their Speaking Lives, they may advance the Glorious
Work of Man's Salvation.

But this Subject of Instructing the Clergy in their Duty, has not been more
often handled upon such occasions as this; then I believe it needless to be
urged in such an Audience as this: wherein, it becomes me to suppose the
Reverend Hearers much better able to inform the Speaker, than the Speaker them.
Setting aside therefore those words, doing this, which immediately respect
their Duty, from the remaining part of the Text I shall observe briefly.

1. God's admirable Design in instituting the Priestly Order, it was to employ
it about the Salvation of Souls. 2. The extraordinary Honor of those whom God
imploys in so great a Work. 3. The Incomparable Reward proposed to those who
acquit themselves well in that great Employment. 4. The Harmonious Order and
Connection between the Work, the Honor, and the Reward.
And all these parts seem to be summed up in in that single word save: God
designed to employ them about the saving of Souls: It is their Honor to be
employed about the saving of others; and it will be their Reward to be saved
themselves; and the Method to be observed in both, is first to take heed to the
saving themselves, that so they may the more effectually save those that hear
them.

1. Then we have God's design in instituting the Priestly Order, the
Ministerial Function, it was to employ it about the Salvation of Souls: And he
was pleased betimes to discover this Gracious Design of his to the World: For
if we look back to the Original Institution of the Priesthood, we shall find
that Adam the first of Men was the first of Priests also. And though it may
pass in the Number of Problems, whether there was to have been any certain
Order of Priests in Paradise, since there would not have been any occasion for
some particular Persons being employed between God and other Men: But as it
will be in Heaven hereafter, so probably it would have been in that lower
Heaven upon Earth, all would have been Kings, and all would have been Priests:
Neither the Regal nor the Sacerdotal Power, as it is likely, would have found
any place in that Equality which was necessary to make even Eden it self
equally a Paradise to all Men.

But waving this Speculation, it is certain that Man no sooner fell than the
Priesthood rose; God in his very first Discourse with guilty Adam, not only, as
it is plain, revealed the Eternal Priesthood of his Holy Son Jesus; but, as it
is more than probable, instituted the Priestly Office amongst Men too. And
though we can trace no footsteps of any one Man's Offering Sacrifice for
another in the Antidiluvian World, the Two Eldest Sons of Adam, each offering
his own Sacrifice; as if in Conformity to the Paradisical State every Man was
still to be his own Priest; and the first Notices we meet with of a contrary
custom was at Noah's coming out of the Ark, where indeed he Sacrificed as a
Public Person; yet from thenceforth we find the Priestly as well as Kingly
Office, continued down in the Fathers of Families, Omnes Primogeniti ex stirpe
Noah. St. Hierome.
All the first Born of the Line of Noah were Priests, as that Father observes.
Until God was afterward pleased to Establish the Priesthood in the Tribe of
Levy: Which Family he accepted of, by way of Commutation, instead of the first
Born of all the other Tribes. Numb. 3.12.
And at last in compliance to the gross Conceptions of the Jewish Nation, he
after the manner of Earthly Princes, fixed the Seat of his visible Empire in
his Temple at Jerusalem; and there set forth his Revealed Religion with all the
Pomp becoming so great a Majesty: Making that House his own Royal Residence,
and the Priests of the Aaronic Order his Principal Ministers of State, Adorning
them with their particular Insignia of Honor, and the Visible Regalia of their
Sovereign Master: Gold, Purple, and Embroideries, Jewels, Precious Ointments,
and Arabian Gums, Solemn Instruments of Music, and whole Hecatombs of Beasts
for Sacrifice, gloriously contributing to the Magnificence of their Public
Services. And thus the Priesthood stood even equal in State to the Crown, and
long supported it self in all that Grandeur; until God saw fit to remove those
(...) those Elements at once both Rich and Beggarly, Gal. 4.9. together with
their Attendant Statutes that were not good, Ezekiel. 20.25. that is, had no
Essential Moral Goodness in them: And setting up a new Scheme of Religion as
full of Plainess and Simplicity, as the former was of Awful State and Gaudy
Ceremony: He ordained a new Order of Priests also; who, what they wanted in
Outward Pomp, were to make it up in the Inward Gifts of the Holy Spirit. When
the Church it self, though it had no longer its Garments of wrought Gold, yet
became the more Glorious within: And the Ministers of Jesus Christ instead of
vieing with Earthly Princes in their Glory and Magnificence, more nearly
resembled their Blessed Jesus in his Exemplary Humility. When Shadows shining
and yet dark gave place to Substances more beautiful in their Naked Simplicity;
and Types and Figures, though set off with all that was Gay and Glittering,
made room for the things themselves signified; and the Ministers of the Gospel
Covenant were more Divinely consecrated by that Unction from the Holy one
spoken of, 1 John 2.20. than the High Priest of old, upon whom and whom alone
the anointing oil of the Lord was poured out, Lev. 8.10. Thus they became a
Kingdom of Priests, as the most Ancient Hebrew reads it, Exodus 19 6. or Kings
and Priests as St. John speaks Rev. 1.6. referring to the Targum on the
forecited place; or a Royal Priesthood as St. Peter conforms his words to the
Septuagint Version of the same, 1 Pet. 2.9. Though to do strict Justice to
those Texts, it must be confessed, that they regard the whole Body of faithful
Christians; but yet they may in a more particular manner be applied to
Christian Ministers, without putting much force upon the words. In fine, God
being now to be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth, those who attended his
Public Worship were to be Men of Spiritual Understandings, Col. 1.9. and to
pay to God no longer a Typical Ceremonial, but a Reasonable, that is a Rational
Service.

And thus we have traced the Institution and the Establishment of the
Priesthood: It is almost as old as the World, as Universal as Mankind, It has
been the Honor of Princes, the most Ancient of whom, by uniting the Sacerdotal
and the Regal Power in their own Persons, became truly Patriarchs; and in the
most flourishing Empire upon Earth, the Title of Pontifex Maximus was thought
an Additional Honor to that of Emperor. To conclude this head, and to speak
it greatly, it was an Office not Unworthy of Jesus our Incarnate God; who to
those other Offices of King and Prophet was pleased to annex this of Priest
too: A Priest for ever after the honor of Melchisedec, Heb. 7.21. And all this
leads me directly to my

2. Consideration, Namely, The extraordinary Honor of that Order which God
imploys in so great a work as this of Salvation; when God from the beginning
designed the Salvation of Souls, he resolved to Employ the Priesthood in that
Gracious Design, and thereby he highly honored those whom he so employed: And
this Honor does particularly appear. 1. In the Subject Matter about which they
are employed: And 2. In the Glorious End to which all their Work was designed.

1. The great Honor of the Priestly Order appears in the Subject Matter about
which they are Employed: And that is Humane Souls, which certainly next to God
himself, are the most Noble Subjects Men can be Employed about: Thus the
Ministry is said to watch for Souls, Heb. 12.17. Humane Souls the breath of God
himself, his own Immortal Images, the Seat of the Rational Life, the Scene of
Thought and Reflection. It being highly Unphilosophical to suppose, that Life
and Thought could arise from mere Matter, though ever so justly modified, or
ever so evenly put in motion: Prove. 20.27.
This Candle of the Lord lighted up in Man is the Exalted Subject about which
the Priesthood is employed. A Subject nobler than what exercises the Heads and
hands of all the Busy, Guilty Great Ones of the World; Greater than any that
amuses the Cabals of Politicians, or the Cabinets of Princes; greater than all
that ingages the Ambition of Fighting Monarchs, or of Rival Kings; whose most
weighty Concerns are mere gilded Nothings, if compared to the worth of one
single Soul; which we find to be set above the acquisition of the whole World,
Matthew. 16.26. and which does indeed infinitely excel all that the World looks
upon with respect or wonder. For to take one of the Highest Instances, what are
Victorious Generals, or Conquering Armies; though set out in all their Martial
Bravery, and all the Glorious Terrors of successful War? If compared to a Holy
Man of God, to a Guide of Souls, kneeling and praying in the midst of a Devout
Congregation, whom he seems to have inspired with part of his own Devotion,
whilst performing those Holy Offices that belong to his Sacred Function he
wrestles mightily with God, and offers a Holy Violence to Heaven it self, which
suffers it self to be taken by that Zealous force. This doubtless is a
Spectacle incomparably more pleasing and agreeable in the Eyes of God, of
Angels, and of good Men, than all the Criminal Triumphs of Humane Conquerors,
though raised upon the Ruin and Devastation of Flourishing Provinces, the
Ashes and Rubbish of smoking Cities, and the Carcases of Thousands of Men, all
Sacrificed to that Devouring Moloch, the Wild Ambition of one Restless
Disturber of the Worlds Peace and his own.

Whereas these Soldiers of Jesus Christ, for so his Ministers are called, 2 Timothy 2, 3. these Leaders of Gods People: Isa. 9.16. these Watchmen over his
House, Ezekiel. 33.7. Carry on the Mighty Work of Souls at no other Expense but
that of Sin; at the Ruin of no other strong holds but those of Satan; and in
short, with the hazard of no other Blood but their own in times of Persecution.

Neither is the Work of Souls only thus comparatively great, with respect to
all besides that is accounted great upon Earth, But it will appear still more
great, if we consider the Almighty Master-Workman under whom the Ministry is
engaged in it: For it is Gods own Work, and therefore they are called (...),
Fellow Laborers with God, 1 Cor. 3.9. and in sum it was the Work of Jesus
Christ himself, when humbled into Man; who therefore owns them to be his
Fellow-Work-Men, all engaged to carry on that great Design that he himself
first began; and Able Builders in that Fabric of which he himself laid, as
well as was, the Chief corner stone: Thus the Work of Souls being the Work of
Heaven, the Work of God, the Work of Christ; to be admitted into ever so
Inferior a Coadjutorship of so Divine a Work, must needs be one of the highest
Honors of which a mere Creature can be capable. But 2. This Honor of those
whom God imploys in so gracious a Design will appear more conspicuous, when we
consider that great End to which all that Work of theirs is directed; and that
is to save those Souls about whom they are employed: And this gloriously
differences their Work from all others though about the same Subject: For
though the Philosopher busies his Speculations about this greatest of Created
Subjects; yet it is only to inquire into its Nature and Operations, but not to
advance it to the highest possible degree of Perfection and Happyness; Nay the
Devil himself is busy about Souls too, but it is only how he may destroy them
So that it is the Honor of the Ministerial Function alone to be imloyed in the
saving of Souls: And therefore St. Paul speaks of his saving his Countrymen,
Romans 11.14. and of his becoming all things to all men that so he might by all
means save some, 1 Cor. 9.22. La^n Ministe^em causam. Vorst.
Briefly these are the Instrumental, the Ministerial, Saviors Prophesied of
Obad. 21. verse. Saviors therefore they may modestly be called, though of a
much Inferior Rank; Proper Instruments in our only Proper Saviors hands.

And so great has this Honor of saving, though but of Bodies, been accounted;
that the Emperor deserved the Surname of Pius, who said he had rather save one
Citizen then destroy an hundred Enemies: And the Generous Romans used to decree
particular Coronets to such as had saved a Citizen. And indeed of all whose
Names are Enrolled in the Records of Fame, we find two sorts of Men especially
Celebrated: One who by Conquering Nations gave beginnings unto Mighty Kingdoms,
extending their Dominions as wide as their Ambition: And the other who by the
wonders of their Virtue Succored the Distressed, Protected oppressed
Innocence, Deposed Tyrants, and Exterminated Monsters; The business of the one
was Destroying others to make themselves great, the business of the other was
to Expose themselves for the Benesit of others. And whereas the first had the
honor to be styled Monarchs and the Founders of Empires, the latter were
Entitled Hero's, and Canonized among their Demy-Gods: So well did wise
Antiquity distinguish between the Destroying and the Saving Work.

But yet what is all the Honor of such as Save only Bodies, and Succor
Distressed States? If compared to those Champions of Religion; these Hero's of
our Holy Faith, who themselves make it their great business, as God has made
it their Indispensable Duty, to labor for the Saving of Souls. Which Saving of
Souls is set forth, in Holy Scripture by very Lofty Expressions. He that
converteth a Sinner from the Error of his ways, shall save a Soul from Death,
and shall hide a multitude of Sins, James 5.20. He that wins Souls is wise,
Prove. 11.30. Those that turn many to Righteousness shall shine as the Stars for
ever and ever. Dan. 12.3. So Superlatively great will be the Honor of all such
as faithfully Labor in the Lords Vineyard, at present they appear like so many
Subordinate Saviors in this Lower World, and hereafter they shall shine like
so many Stars in the Everlasting Firmament.

My 3. Observable was, The Reward which God has proposed to the faithful
discharge of this Great Work,

When God designed to Employ the Priesthood about the Salvation of Souls, he
designed that it should be as much to their own Advantage, as to other Men's;
and therefore he pronounced that by doing this, by taking heed to their great
Work, they should both save themselves and those that heard them: Where you see
the Reward is not only as great as the Work, but of the same Nature too.
Salvation is their Work, and Salvation shall be their Wages: Which Salvation,
if it be so very considerable in the Work, how much more considerable is it
like to prove in the Enjoyment?

And this Promised Reward is twofold in the Text. 1. They shall save
themselves: 2. Those that hear them.

1. By doing this they shall save themselves. A short Expression, but full of
mighty Sense, Save themselves! And what could more be added for their
Encouragement? For what above Heaven can be proposed to the most Holy Industry?

And this Encouragement must needs carry a much greater force with these, than
with other Men; for their Studies and Employments ought to make them the most
proper Judges how great a Blessing Salvation is like to prove: Since this has
been the business of their Lives, for this they Read, for this they Meditate,
for this they Watch and Pray and weary out themselves, to make some, though
Imperfect, Discoveries of Heaven before hand, to measure as much as it is
possible of that Infinity; to sound, as far as it is possible, into that Abyss
of Glory; to comprehend beforehand as much as it is possible of those Joys,
which neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard, neither has it yet entered
into the heart of man to conceive, what they shall be; only this they are
assured of, that whatsoever they are like to be, they will be theirs in Excess:
For we may rationally suppose that the future happiness of good Pastors will
exceed that of most other Men: Not only because they have been nearer to God in
their Sacred Employments, and done him more Valuable Service: But also as they
are fitted and prepared for the reception of greater Bliss. For as God has all
along suited his Commands to the present Capacities of his Creatures; so
doubtlesly he will at last suit his Future Beatitudes to the Capacities of the
Receivers also.

Those therefore who by a long course of Heavenly Exercises, and by a continued
Engagement in Holy Offices, have dilated and extended the Capacities of their
Souls, are likely at last to obtain those higher degrees of Glory, that are
fully suited to their enlarged Faculties; for though it is certain that all the
Vessels of Mercy shall be equally filled with Glory, yet I look upon it as
certain that all those Vessels shall not be of equal size; and it is plain that
a more capacious Vessel when filled will receive more than a lesser Vessel
though equally full. Faithful Pastors therefore, as having most exercised, and
consequently most enlarged their Graces, will be capable of greater degrees of
happiness; since they not only abound in all the Graces of other Christians,
but in the additional Graces peculiar to their own Holy Function: And so come
with a double capacity to receive those Rewards, which God without doubt will
then proportion to the Capacities of the Receivers. So that if there be degrees
of Glory hereafter, then certainly the highest Stalls of Honor shall be
secured to those, who have faithfully labored in the Word and Doctrine: And so
Salvation will be more to them than to other Men.

When from attending upon the Altars of God, they shall be advanced to those
Seats that surround his Throne; from putting up Prayers and Supplications, the
chief Work of the Ministry here, they shall be there preferred to the present
Work of Angels, perpetual Praises and Hallelujahs; there to enjoy the Eternal
Sabboths of their Rest; to be made Kings and Priests for ever in the New
Jerusalem; and to wear those Crowns upon their own glorified Heads, which they
have so zealously recommended to the pursuit of others. But,

2. As they shall thus save themselves, so they shall save those that hear them
too: And that is a mighty addition to their promised Reward: For such Souls as
theirs which have so long glowed with Divine Love, and breathed the most
fervent Charity, must needs be sensible of the fullest Satisfaction to behold
others happy as well as themselves; Nay to behold others happy by their means.
And O the generous, the God-like pleasure! To see how many they have brought to
Heaven along with them; whilst they enter those Everlasting Doors in no
ordinary State, but attended by throngs of followers, who shall all own their
Holy Leaders, and all do honor to the Blessed Instruments of their great
Salvation: Whilst those happy Guides double their own happiness by the sight of
their followers; and shine the brighter for the addition of their Lights;
whilst they take their particular Share in every one of their followers Joys,
and, if you will pardon the boldness of one Expression, I would say, whilst
they seem to tithe their very happiness, bp partaking of all those Joys of
which they have been the Instrumental Causes. Thus doubly happy, both in
themselves and in their Flocks, they will seem to enjoy two Heavens in one. But,

4. And Lastly, The Text presents us with the Beautiful Order, and Harmonius
Connextion between the Work, the Honor, and the Reward. Do this and thereby
save your selves. Take heed to your own Salvation, and so ye may the more
successfully take heed to the Salvation of others. For it is too sad a Truth,
that he who neglects his own Salvation, is never like to take much care of
other Men's: We must therefore begin with our selves, and like other young
Artists make our first Experiments at home, before we can hope to work
successfully for others. And this same Order is observed in the former part of
the Verse, wherein the taking heed to our selves obtains the first place,
before taking heed to our Doctrione; and that with all the reason in the World,
since he, who has first taken all due Pains with his own Soul, is like to have
both the larger Experience, and the tenderer Concern for the Souls of that
Flock which God has entrusted him to feed. Whereas they, who take little heed
to themselves, will in all probability take less to those that heat them: Such
though they may have ever so many other Accomplishments, yet they will want the
one thing necessary: They may perhaps study hard, and Preach plausibly, for
their Credit; but there will be little of Conscience in the Case: they may hold
the most saving Truths Notionally for the honor of being Orthodox, but Duty
will be very little concerned in all they do; such may possibly be great
Scholars, but by no means good Pastors; They may Preach Themselves, but not
Jesus Christ; who is best Preached by a Holy Life, and indeed is never well
Preached without it: So that to these the words of the great Schoolman may not
unaptly be applied, though in a Sense differing from his own intention. Aquin.
Sic attendunt Doctrinae ut sui curam negligunt, they so aim at the honor of
being Learned Men, that they neglect the greater of being Good Men; and so they
do but improve their Excellent Parts, they are little concerned for the more
Excellent Improvement in Christian Virtues. But now the faithful Feeder of
Christ's Sheep, whose Study is all in Order to practice, Venatorius.
Qui recte docet nec minus recte vivit, who lives what he Preaches; he by
beginning with his Life will proceed the more happily with his Doctrine, Calvin.
Vt Doctrinae non repugnat vitae, and takes care that his Life do not
contradict his Doctrine, the grossest Solaecism of which a Preacher can be
guilty. And this Method is observed again in Acts 20.28. Take heed to your
selves, and to the whole Flock: To your selves in the first place, and so ye
will succeed the more effectually with your Flock. For alas it is matter of
daily and deplorable Observation, that the People are much apter to learn from
one ill Action of their Preachers, than from a hundred good Discourses; and we
see them more ready to repeat the Failings of his Life, than the Excellencies
of his Doctrine; and if the last be ever taken notice of, it is usually but to
slur the more sly Reproach upon the former; He is a Rare Man in a Pulpit -- but
he is thus or thus out of it. This calls all the Sacred Truths we utter into
question; for all Mankind have that Natural Logic to conclude, that there is
no great reason to believe him, who does not much seem to believe himself: And
indeed who can comfortably hope to be saved by him, that is himself like to be
a Castaway.

Not as if the Efficacy of the Word and Sacraments depended absolutely upon the
worthiness of the Instrument; Since it is certain that God both can, and
oftentimes does, save many by the Ministry of such as are not likely to be
saved themselves: And without doubt Judas, at the Apostles first Mission,
wrought as many Miracles, and made as many Converts as any of the others that
were sent.

But though God does not always bind himself to the most proable Means, yet
all this is no thanks to the Unworthy Tool; Cui enim, cui similes Dixerim
Sacerdotes malos, nisi aquae baptismatis, quae peccata baptisatorum diluens,
illos ad Regnum Coeleste mittit, at ipsa poslea in Cloacas descendit? Greg.
Hom. 17. in Evang.
though abundantly to his Glory, who can make such Excellent Use of so improper
Instruments: Whereas by all the Rules of Moral probability those are most
likely to save them that hear them who have first taken all necessary heed to
save themselves: And the whole, both Honor and Reward of the Ministerial
Function depends absolutely upon this Method.

And now instead of taking upon me to conclude with a word of Exhortation; give
me leave to turn it into a Congratulation. And O happy we my Brethren! Whom God
has so graciouslyy admitted into the Meanest Share of so Divine a Work, a Work
attended by so great an Honor, and like to be crowned with so Glorious a
Reward: Happy we! whom God has set apart for his own immediate Service; and to
employ us about the Salvation of others; that we are Commissioned to speak to
Men on the behalf of God, and to God on the behalf of Men; that to our care is
committed the Conduct of those precious Souls for whom Christ died, and that
the dearest Concern of Heaven is entrusted to our Management. But more happy
we! if convinced of our own Happiness, and warmed with a Holy Sense of our
Sacred Employments, we take such heed to our Lives and Doctrines as may keep up
the Dignity of our Divine Commissions; and so Live and so Preach that no Man
may have Reason to despise us; Tit. 2.15.
but that we by faithfully heeding the Duty laid down in the Text, may secure
to our selves both the Honor and the Reward proposed in it; Still remembering
that Heaven is our great Province, that Souls are the Noble Subjects which we
are to work upon, that Salvation is the Glorious Affair in which we are
employed, Most happy we! if we can untie our Affections from all Lower, Meaner
Engagements, and leaving the eager pursuit of those things to such as have not
so much of Heavenly Business on their hands; after the Moderate Provision for
our own Families, (you will excuse this short Digression) after the Moderate
Provision for our own Families, which whosoever does not provide for is worse
than an Infidel: and I am not yet convinced that we are bound to Preach and
Beg, or which would come to much the same thing, to trust our necessary
Maintenance to the Charity of such, as are not like to be over Liberal in
Voluntary Contributions, since they so much repine at our Legal Establishments:
But especially our Gentlemen of Estates ought not in Justice to call us
Mercenary, unless they will vouchsafe to take our Work upon themselves, and so
coming well provided with their own Patrimonial Possessions, they may if they
please do the Work of the Lord gratis, and then indeed our Pains and Pensions
may both be spared: But until then, it is most equal that those whose Portions
have been spent to prepare and fit them for this Employment, should find a
Decent Livelihood in it; that those who serve at the Alters should be
maintained by the Altars; and that those who Preach the Gospel should live upon
the Gospel; these Laborers being certainly as Worthy of their Hire as any
others. But this care being thus moderately taken, and we not minding the
Maintenance more than the Altars, nor the Living more than the Gospel, nor yet
working chiefly for filthy Lucre like mere Hirelings: But knowing that the care
of our Selves and Families ought to come vastly behind the care of our Peoples
Souls: Happy we! If we take such heed to our selves, and to our Doctrine as to
save our selves, and those Flocks of ours that ought to be as dear to us as our
selves.

And Happy You our Brethren of the Layity, for whom God has made so Wise, so
Gracious a Provision; and called forth Men so completely qualified for the Care
of your Souls, and to carry on the great Work of your Salvation; God himself
calls them your Watchmen, and his own Angels, teaching you thereby to look upon
them as so many of your Angel-Guardians. Happy you therefore if you behave your
selves neither Unworthy of Gods Care nor theirs; if you neither disappoint
God's Gracious Design, nor their Pious Endeavors: if you neither disrespect
their Sacred Character, nor grieve their Righteous Souls by obstinate and
perverse Refusing their Instructions; nor yet put a slight at once both upon
Gods Common Providence, and their Holy Labors, by lightly forsaking their
Ministry merely because you fancy some others better. For the Established Laws
of every Christian Land are Gods Common Providence in that Land; And if you Act
contrary to those Laws, by separating your selves from our Legal Assemblies,
without being fully convinced that you cannot be saved in them, (and believe it
no other reason will pass either with God, or Wise Men; and they would be Bold
Accusers of the Brethren who durst to charge us thus highly.) If you do thus,
you affront Gods Providence by pretending to provide better for your selves,
and are indeed grown wanton with too much Bread. But happy should both we and
you be, if we would both join to carry on that great Work which God designed
for both our good; and both having that Heaven in our View which he has
proposed for both our Encouragements: We Zealously Leading, and you diligently
following; we drawing you on with all the fervency of Words, and the more
powerful Motives of Holy Examples; and you yielding your selves up to the force
of that double Conduct, we following our Lord Jesus, and you following us, God
may be faithfully served by us all, and all of us may be graciously accepted of
by God; that so Heaven may be our Journeys-End, and Salvation our Mutual
Entertainment, when you shall all be Priests as well as we, and we shall all be
Great and Rich as well as the best of you.

And as we have both joined, like Companions Guides and Friends, to go into the
House of the Lord together here below, so we may there be for ever United in
Love and Charity; in Peace and Glory; in the Beatifick Vision of our God, and
in the Everlasting Arms of that Jesus whom our Souls have loved: Keep we
beseech thee, O Lord, thy Church with thy perpetual Mercy, and because the
frailty of Man without thee cannot but fall, Keep us ever by thy help from all
things hurtful, and lead us to all things profitable to our Salvation, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with thy Self and the Blessed Spirit be all
Adoration, Honor, and Obedience both now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Books Writ by his Grace JOHN, Late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.
FOrty Two Sermons and Discourses upon several Occasions, most at Court; in
Four Vol. 8 vo. The Rule of Faith: Or, An Answer to the Treatise of Mr. J.
Sergeant, etc. 8 vo. Six Sermons concerning the Divinity and Incarnation of our
Blessed Savior; Of the Sacrifice and Satisfaction of Christ; and of the Unity
of the Divine Nature, and the B. Trinity, etc. against the Socinians, 8 vo. Six
Sermons, (newly Printed) one concerning Resolution and Stedfastness in
Religion; One of Family-Religion; Three of Education of Children; and One of
the Advantages of an Early Piety, 8 vo. Now Re-Printing in 12 mo. A Persuasive
to frequent Communion in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, 8 vo. alone
stitcht, price 3 d. or in 12 mo. bound, price 6 d. A Discourse against
Transubstantiation, 8 vo. alone, price 3 d. stitcht. The Exact Effigies of His
Grace John Late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury; on a Large Sheet of Paper
Curiously Engraven by R. White, Price 12 d.
All Printed for B. Aylmer and W. Rogers.


