PRAISE and ADORATION. OR, A SERMON ON TRINITY-SUNDAY BEFORE THE University at
Oxford. 1681.

By THOMAS MANNYNGHAM, M. A. late Fellow of New-Colledge Oxford.

LONDON, Printed for William Crook at the Green Dragon without Temple-Barr.

PSALM 103. V. 1. Bless the Lord, O my Soul! and all that is within me bless
his holy Name!


THere is an Habitual, and also an Actual praising or Glorifying of God: the
first consists in a regular conformity of our Lives, or the general course of
our Actions to the holy Will and Commands of God: But Actual Adoration, which
is to be the Subject of my Ensuing Discourse, is it self a peculiar and solemn
part of Divine Worship: which does not only consist in an open recitation of
Hymns and Spiritual Songs, but also in a silent Exultation of our Faculties,
and a Religious warmth of Soul wrought by Heavenly Objects.

Now there are many Words and Phrases in holy Scripture, especially in this
Book of Psalms, which are often used to express the same Duty of Blessing or
praising the Lord; And though they are promiscuously inserted (as certainly
they ought to be, either in Popular or Poetic Writings) yet are they, many of
them, of peculiar limitation and significancy; which being somewhat stated and
explained, may serve to establish a full and easy notion of what in my
following Discourse I shall make more copious and less nice reflections.

Wherefore our most humble and worthy Apprehensions, our sincere devout
resentments of the Divine Perfections, are necessarily required to constitute
the Invisible Adoration of the Heart, and Soul, and Spirit; which from its
Vital and inward heat, is continually displaying it self into great variety of
External Evidences, according to the diversity of those objects about which it
is immediately conversant. So that we may be said to praise the Lord, when we
declare his free and most excellent works of Mercy and Justice, of Creation and
Providence: to Magnify and Adore him, when we set forth his incommunicable and
Natural Excellencies, such as his Omnipotence, Immensity, etc. which jointly
considered, with his Universal Dominion and Sovereignty over all Creatures, may
seem to signify all that we mean by the Glorious Majesty of God. We may be
said to Bless the Lord by our wishes and words; and being the good we wish is
Extrinsick to his Nature, and not yet obtained, as, that the whole World may be
converted and fear his Name, etc. we must be sure to bless him with our
endeavors too: But chiefly this Blessing is effected by our most solemn
Gratulations; for seeing we cannot confer any real good on God, we must
continually express our joy and gladness for his actual possession of all
possible perfection. To worship him, usually denotes a most humble posture of
Body, when we incline toward, or prostrate our selves on that Dust out of
which we were made. We Glorify God with our Mouths; and accordingly the
Psalmist calls his Tongue his Glory, Awake thou my Glory. Thanksgiving is an
open profession and a hearty acknowledgment that we have received a Benefit
most freely, and without any merit of our own. Adoration and Thanksgiving seem
to differ in these respects: we adore God for things that were acted long ago,
which concern not us any more, than that they were the Effects of his
Omnipotence, as for all the Wonders done in the behalf of the Children of
Israel: Thanksgiving relates to those Benefits which either we immediately
receive, or whose effects are communicated to us. Also we adore God for his
Judgments and his Vengeance, however displayed, either on our Enemies, or on
our selves; for which we are not properly said to return Thanksgivings; because
Adoration respects the Justice of the Action, Thanksgivings the goodness of it.
These Words and Phrases being thus somewhat explained, I shall make no scruple
to use them again in their popular sense and freedom, according as I shall find
occasion for them, in my farther amplifications on the Text, which I will
endeavor to handle in these three respects.

I. You may be pleased to consider the Necessity and Excellence of Praise and
Adoration. Bless the Lord, O my Soul. II. I shall endeavor to show what are
those Faculties and Capacities of the Soul, whereby this Adoration is
performed. All that is within me. III. I will point out some of those Benefits
which will arise from a Worthy performance of the Duty. Bless the Lord, etc.
I. You may be pleased to consider the Necessity and Excellence of Praise and
Adoration. Bless the Lord, O my Soul.

Prayers and Praises, which bear the name of all that we can properly call
Divine Worship, are as well the Eternal Dictates of Nature, as the most Sacred
Commands of Revelation; and if there may be allowed any remarkable precedence
in these higher Duties of Natural and Revealed Religion, Praise or Adoration
seems justly to challenge that Prerogative: for should not we first acknowledge
our Being, before we view and lament its imperfections? should not we return
our sacrifices of Gratitude for what we have already received, before we
implore the Divine Benignity for further accessions, fresh supplies, and new
assistances? Common Justice obliges us at all times, first to look back and
magnify the Lord for our actual preservation, before we presume to put up our
Petitions for pardon and future security; and it requires a Psalm of
Thanksgiving, that we are in a capacity to know our Wants, to survey our
Infirmities. The meanness of our nature has indeed placed us below the
possibility of making any Recompense, and yet the indigency of our condition
still calls upon us to make fresh acknowledgments: and however imperfect these
oblations are, yet are they the only show of real service we can render, the
only Image of Requital which our Creator has indulged us.

And as this Adoration is our indispensable Duty, so it is our Advantage and our
glory too: it is not only the business of our Creation, but the Excellency of
it; and we never appear in a more exalted State, than when we Glorify. In the
performance of this Duty, we more eminently make good our Communion with Saints
and Angels, whilst with those blessed Spirits we constitute the same Choire,
and make one Universal Hallelujah.

Nothing surely can be more Just and Natural, than to employ our breath to the
glory of him who gave it us: nothing more profitable, than to magnify the Lord
into greater Mercies to our selves: Nothing more delightful, than to be always
full of glorious Conceptions, always pouring forth the Language of Blessing and
Affection! Prayers are but the Mournful Draught and Table of our Misery, the
representation of our Ship-wreckt Nature: Repentance has a gloomy side; but
Praise is Faiths and Reasons Triumph, a bright, unmixt, immaculate Joy, and
only wants some few degrees of being all we can conceive of Heaven. Therefore

II. You may be pleased to consider what are those Faculties and Capacities of
the Soul whereby this Duty is performed.

Now the powers of the Soul which are more eminently concerned in the Acts of
Adoration, seem to be these Three.

1. Our Reason. 2. Our Imagination. 3. Our Affections.
For we may be said to Praise the Lord with our Reason, in these two respects.
1. When it perfectly and freely submits to the High Mysteries of Faith, or the
Doctrines of pure Revelation. 2. When it humbly and devoutly busies it self
about the Nature and Attributes of God, manifested in the Works of Creation and
Providence; and though they are objects of Revelation too, yet have they a sure
foundation in Right Reason and Natural Religion, and therefore may safely admit
of a modest and affectionate enquiry. We may be said to praise the Lord with
our Imagination, when we study to adorn our Divine Conceptions with the most
Excellent Idea's, with the most lively Representations we can invent.

Lastly, We may be said to Praise the Lord with our Affections, when the whole
Duty is performed with strong vehemence of Soul, and intenseness of Spirit,
with the Unions of Love and Wonder, and such like bright Affections as perfect
and exalt our most Spiritual performances. Of these in their Order.

1. We may be said to Praise the Lord with our Reason, when it perfectly and
freely submits it self to the High Mysteries of Faith, or the Doctrines of pure
Revelation.

And is it not an especial Excellency of the Christian Religion, that as all
its Precepts for Life and Manners are so perspicuously delivered, and so
perfectly agreeable to the best conceptions of Mankind, that the humble Person
cannot mistake his way to Heaven; so also there are such Hights and Depths in
the recesses of our Faith, as perhaps the Seraphims cannot comprehend? And
although these Propositions of our Belief also be as clear and Evident as
History and Language can make them; as infallibly true and certain as that God
who has revealed them; yet even in our modest contemplations on them, the
excessive glory of the Revelation is apt to strike back, and scatter our
Natural light into the Confusions of Broken Knowledge and Admiration; into
Humility, Love, Praise and Resignation; thus perfecting our Natures, whilst it
confounds our Enquiries! So that the most Speculative Mysteries of
Christianity, how Incomprehensible soever in their Intrinsic Natures, are yet
as serviceable and conducive to the Ends of Religion, (viz.) the glory of God,
and the promoting true Holiness, as the most practical and familiar Doctrines
and encouragements of the Gospel.

Were indeed our Mysteries like those of the ancient Heathen, whose Adyta and
Penetralia were but so many Cloisters of Separated Impurity, so many
Concealments of Spiritual Craft, or of Mystical and Appropriated Lust; then the
nice examining World might very well complain of the Impostures of Priests, of
the absurdities of a Superstitious Faith: but when the Mysteries we pretend to,
are not such as are made so by Shrines, Templecharacters, and a Traditionary
Caution; but such as are exposed to the promiscuous, yet humble view of all
men, in Confessions, Creeds, and Catechisms; and being thus exposed, they are
no Incongruities to our Moral conceptions, as most of the Heathen's were; nor
yet Contradictions to our Natural Reasoning, as some would have them; (for they
are not such objects as lie within its Sphere, or within the reach of its
common Axioms) but are rather so many Humiliations of our Understandings, so
many Gracious Affrightments, and incomprehensible indearments of our Souls unto
Love and Obedience: So that if the thoughts of a Trinity in Unity, and a Unity
in Trinity, amaze thy mind, thou may presently relieve thy self with this
contemplation, That all this Unconceivable Distinction of Subsistences extends
it self to thy Benefit and Comfort, to reach thee out of Perdition and thy
Primitive Curse! that all this Ineffable economy of the Divinity is thy
Redemption, thy Sanctification, in a Word, thy Multiplied Salvation! And
considering likewise, that on one side we have the express Declarations of Holy
Scripture, the Definitions of General Councils, the Writings and Devotions of
Primitive Fathers, the Blood and Consciences of Holy Martyrs, to testify and
seal their early Antiquity, their Venerable Certainty, and most faithful
Conveyance; and then on the other side, that there is nothing but Scholastic
Subtilty, and presumptions Enthusiasm, to Weaken or Corrupt them; bold
Philosophy, malicious Cavilling, and impious Blasphemy, to oppose them; I say,
considering all these things, what possibly can deter any good and humble man,
even in this perverse disputing Age, from triumphantly embracing the Mysteries
of Faith with a strong and heroical Assent, with a noble captivity of Mind, and
the most vigorous Acts of Adoration?

Happy had it been for the Christian World, if these Eminencies in Religion had
been always guarded with a Flaming Cherubim, and been only made the illustrious
Themes of Praise and Adoration! But now, alas! the Controversies of the Church
about these higher points, will hardly suffer us to speak Devotionally of our
Mysteries! Grammatical niceties, and Socinian figures, have weakened the Native
Reverence of many Texts! Every Dutch Systeme is arrogantly big with the bold
Explications of the Mysterious Trinity, and of those heights and depths before
which the very Angels tremble and vail! What if some holy Persons of old,
perhaps of more Piety and devout Affections, than Learning and Philosophy, were
admitted (like Moses into the Cloud) humbly to converse with God about this
Dreadful Mystery, to be a Bank and a Mound against an eager and impetuous
Heresy then raging in the Church, and to be a standing Authority against all
future swellings of proud Contention; yet there is no reason but that there
should be some restraint also about this Mountain too, to fence off the
Multitude and Common Beasts, and to keep the Viler Herd at awful distance, lest
they break through unto the Lord, to gaze and perish! Exodus 19. v. 21.

2. We may be said to Praise the Lord with our Reason, when it humbly and
devoutly busies it self about the Nature and Attributes of God manifested in
the Works of Creation and Providence; And although they are Objects of Divine
Revelation too, yet have they a sure foundation in Right Reason, and Natural
Religion, and therefore may safely admit of a modest and affectionate enquiry.
Bless his holy Name.

Where, by the Name of God is meant all that we are able to conceive of his
Perfections, his Nature and Attributes; and those not as they are
Metaphysically handled, and jejunely mingled with the Definitions of the
Schools, but as they are most pathetically set forth in Holy Scripture by his
miraculous works, and gracious dispensations to Mankind.

Alas! it is not the dry Skeleton of dead and shapeless Reason, or the
Scholastic joynting of prodigious Terms, (which represent an Image rather
Ghastly than Admirable) that can excite and animate our Gratulations and our
Praises; but there must be the Life and Features, and all the Moving Elegance
of the Frame, to give us bright conceptions of its Dignity. And therefore we
find that Holy Scripture scarce ever meddles with an Attribute in its Absolute
Nature, but only in a Relative and endearing way; and that Creation and
Providence, (which are richly pregnant with all those Divine Perfections which
most nearly concern us) are the two chosen and most sublime Topi's on which the
Eucharistical Psalms are chiefly spent.

And who among us can forbear from breaking forth into acts of Praise and
Adoration, when he considers how the Almighty was pleased out of his Infinite
and Boundless Goodness, according to the Freedom of his Eternal Decree, I must
not say to Empty, but to Irradiate himself into this amazing variety of Beings,
this stupendous Fabric of the World, indefinite to our most Traveling
Conceptions, and only less infinite than He who made it? Here we may behold his
Wisdom in its Throne, and praise him in the Firmament of his Power! whilst we
attentively recall how by his Word the Heavens were made, and all the Host of
them by the breath of his Mouth! how he spread out the Sky like a Molten Glass,
and ordered the ballancings of the Clouds! how he stretched out the North over
the empty Place, and hung the Earth upon nothing! how he formed the first Man
out of the Dust of the Ground, breathed into his Nostrils the immortal Halitus,
or Breath of Life, and made that last Imperial Draught to stand the Beauty, the
Dominion, and the Sabbath of all his wondrous Works! in a Word, how ravishing a
Reflection must the Creation needs be to Men and Angels too, when God Almighty
is Represented in the second of Genesis, as it were sitting down,
Contemplating, and with all intellectual Complacency surveying the Accomplished
Miracle!

And, as for Providence, what fuller matter for our Celebrations have we, than
to consider, how all the unaccountable Passages here below, which seem so
rugged, and like wild Contingencies to us, are notwithstanding particularly
directed by the certain guidance of an Almighty Wisdom, and in their proper
seasons produced by a Beautiful Order of Causes! that not only Universal
Nature, but Nations, Cities, Private persons, their Policies, Justice, Thoughts
and Contrivances, are evermore Actuated, Advanced, or Confounded, by the
imperceptible streams of a Divine Prerogative! And that all that multitude of
strange Appearances, which look like so many Monstrous and Extravagant Lines to
us in this position, will one day be reflected into a Regular piece, and make a
glorious Figure in the Beatific Vision!

I cannot well conceive how the Epicurean could ever be thought effectually to
Praise and Worship the Deity, only for the bare Excellency of his Being; whom
he fancied to be like some Persian Monarch, Morosely Great, full of himself,
and his one Solitude, of a Cloistered Majesty, or a Providence that never
stoopt below the Heavens; whereas the Stoic more truly tells us, Nulla Majestas
sine Bonitate; and we are sufficiently satisfied that there was nothing so
powerful to awaken Gratitude, and reconcile men to the Sacrifices of Religion,
as that Transcendent goodness and particular Care which men evidently found to
flow from what they Worshipped. I grant the Sun, by reason of its bright
Appearance and resplendency, will naturally excite a Transient Wonder in
Beholders; but yet I question whether ever it would have been Adored, (as it
certainly was by the greatest part of the Heathen World) and have had its own
Frankincense offered it again, if it had not been for that Annual and
Experienced Course of Benefits, which its continual Influences Hatch, produce,
and perfect, for the Generations of Men.

What weighty ingredients, and commanding Subjects of Adoration, were the
Extraordinary Managements of Providence in behalf of the Jews and their
Religion! And accordingly we find the Royal Psalmist every where paraphrasing
on those great and numerous Miracles of Egypt and the Desert, in an exceeding
sublimity of Phrase, in all the Raptures of Eastern Poesy! and here might be
one reason given why the Inanimate Creation is so distinctly called upon in the
Old Testament to Praise the Lord; because so many of those Beings had started
from their own Law and Natures, to be either an Eminent rescue, or a mighty
Conduct to the Chosen people; that in the Jewish economy it is hard to
determine, whether greater Miracles were performed by the Ministry of the
Elements, or of the appointed Angels.

2. We may be said to praise the Lord with our Imagination, when we study to
adorn our Divine Conceptions with the most Excellent Idea's, with the most
lively Representations we can invent: for not only Reason and Judgment, but
also Imagination and Fancy; not only the Firmament, but even the Meteors too,
are called upon to praise the Lord.

The Imagination is the chief Spring and Engine of our Affections; it gives
Sublimity, Spirit, and Vivacity to our Conceptions, Beauty and color to our
Expressions, and communicates all those agreeable Illustrations which serve to
adorn the severity of Reason. The exactest Science we are acquainted with,
cannot supply us with such cautious forms of Speech, but that they are full of
Solecism, extremely defective and inadequate, when applied to Notions
concerning God and Heaven: The most accurate wisdom of Words that can be
invented, cannot defend it self from many Absurdities, when positively
conversant about an Infinite Object, and which cannot be fully comprehended;
because in such a case there is a greater Latitude of still showing what a
thing is not, than what it is. But then what we want of strict scientifical
propriety in our Discourses concerning Divine subjects, may be nobly supplied
by raised and figurative adumbrations: And this is wholly the business of the
Imagination; which, when it has warily received the Truth and Worth of its
Object from a superior faculty, may be allowed to raise the Mind into a nobler
Amplitude of thought, and to kindle it into vaster Conceptions; and then to
beautify and set them forth with all those proper Ornaments which usually
recommend a speculation to our Affections.

Fancy, indeed, is not permitted to give a Positive and definitive sentence, or
to close up its Period with an Anathema; but it may search for lively
Representations: For such similitudes of things as may best suit with the
Analogy of our Natures; also for such transcendent and superlative Terms, as
are most apt to inflame the Soul, and to shadow to us the spiritual secrecy of
Mysterious Truth. And therefore the Holy Scripture has every where exhibited to
us its heavenly Wisdom in Parables, and sensible Types; and proportioned its
Revelations mores to the Imaginations of Men, than to their more subtle modes
of Reasoning. Therefore also God appeared to Moses in a Cloud, and his Glory
shone through a Veil; that since the Prophet was not able to sustain his more
open Appearance, he might with safety understand his Infinity by the
concealment of an indefinite and mysterious Declaration; and more ardently
desire a further Manifestation of those Excellencies, which were but
imperfectly revealed to him in remote and distant Scenes: for no man seemed
more acquainted with God than Moses, and no man seemed more importunate to know
him better: I beseech thee show me thy Glory, Exodus 33.18.

Similitudes and Metaphors in Religion, are those Clouds of Incense wherewith
at the same time we both enter and obscure the Sanctum Sanctorum: We receive
those sensible Representations, and gracious Condescentions which God has been
pleased to make us of his own Nature and the other World, in the same manner as
the Disciples did the Discourses of our Savior going to Emmaus: we have not a
full comprehension of what is thus Figured to us; but yet we are religiously
affected, we have a spiritual Sensation of its unutterable import, and our
hearts burn within us.

The Strength and Vehemence of the Imagination will sometimes carry forth the
Reason and Judgment to make new Discoveries; 'twill excite them to take such
Circuits and Travels in the contemplation of Eternal Beings, till the Soul is
ready to swim and grow giddy, and the speculation turns almost Apoplexy; it
will sometimes actuate the mind to a stretch and emanation beyond its present
Order, to a taste and immature anticipation of unproportion'd Knowledge: And
this does not proceed from the heat and elevation of contemplative and
splenetick Heads, but it is the sober attestation and examined experience of
more fixed and solid Brains.

It is reported of a Metaphysical Divine of our own Church, that by a long
assiduity of thinking and a constant ardour of Meditation, he could sometimes
refine and sublimate a Theorem to that degree, till it became too nice even for
his own examination, when he had abated of that Temper in which he first framed
it; that when the intellectual fire was out, and his Brain was sunk into its
ordinary dimensions, he could not justify that speculation to his cooler
review, which he was certain had an exact conformity to his more raised
Capacity.

However, we need not fear any Illusion, any Phanaticism from the innocent
Excesses of the Fancy, whilst they are only made the private Nourishment of an
Holy Life; whilst they only promote our Adorations, not determine our Opinions;
whilst they only enter our Closet-Devotions, not our Public Services, or
Creeds. It being also easy to distinguish by the concomitance or absence of
Humility and Love, when our minds are gently filled with Divine Images, or when
they are Enthusiastically possessed with presumptuous Enquiries. And thus the
Imagination, the meanest and most trivial faculty of the Humane Soul, under a
good management may be an admirable Instrument and incentive of Divine Praise
and Adoration; even as God Almighty thought fit to choose the Rainbow, that
Circle of phantastic colors, for the Symbol and Sacrament of his Beloved
Attribute, his Mercy.

3ly. We may be said to Praise the Lord with our Affections, when our Adoration
is performed with strong vehemence of Soul, and intenseness of Spirit, with the
Unions of Love and Wonder, and suchlike Bright Affections, as perfect and
exalt our most spiritual Duties.

The Will is also comprehended in the Affections: For as the Common Passions in
their worst acceptance are the Deformities and Turbulencies of the Animal
Nature; so the Affections are only the fresher gales of Virtue; the more
enlivened Acts of the Rational and Superior Will: and as the former raise
commotions and irregularities in the Blood and Humors of the Body; so these
latter invigorate the Faculties of the Soul, making them Heroical and Divine in
their Emanations.

Now as the capacity of the Intellect is much larger than that of the Senses,
so the amplitude of the Will and Affections far surpasses that of the
Understanding; and therefore God has required that our Desire and Love of him
should be more perfect and complete than our Knowledge of him: for we are bound
to entertain his Perfections with the closest adhesion of Heart and Soul,
though we can apprehend them only with a Partial and enigmatical Knowledge.

Let men therefore boast of their Mighty Reasonings, their close Deductions,
their strong linked Consequences, and their elaborate Demonstrations in
Religion; when they have done all to justify themselves in a cautious advance
toward Heaven, they will find that the Best Divinity consists in Love and
Wonder; and that there are such enlargements of the Soul arising from these
Affections, as none can signify, none can conceive, but those who have lain
under the Blessed Experience.

III. I will endeavor to point out some of those Benefits which will arise
from a worthy performance of the Duty.

Now this Holy Exercise being worthily performed, will exalt our Faith beyond
the reach of Sophistry or Profaneness; 'twill establish in us a permanent love
to Goodness, and a temper of antipathy to the contradictions and contumelies of
Vice; 'twill convey our fervent Meditations to such safe and peaceful Heights,
till the false Beauties of the World make no Impression on us, and its keenest
Temptations are out-distanc't: It will secure all the stages of an holy Life,
and reduce that Barbarous, Warlike, Stubborn, and Malicious Religion, which is
now in Vogue, to the truly Ancient Primitive Christianity; to a cheerful and
serene Principle of Meekness, Humility, constant Obedience, and Universal Love.

When the Soul is made tender with this Heavenly Converse, made apt to kindle
at every representation of Divine Goodness, to meet and embrace with every
attribute; how vile and loath some must the deformity of Sin needs appear? The
very Transports of Adoration, whilst they continue upon us, are a natural
preservative against the Encroachments of Vice; and when the Holy Agitation is
ceased, it commonly settles into a lively calm of lasting Gratitude and Love.

But to speak more particularly, Praise and Adoration are actions perfective of
those very Faculties which perform them.

For, they give a Divine Brightness to our Reason, free it from the illusions
of Sense and Passion, fix it on useful enquiries, and in all its Discoveries
make it serviceable to the Sanctuary: for not only Religious, but even Natural
objects may be contemplated and examined by the humble Adorer into Mysterious
subjects of Devotion and Wonder.

The True Christian Philosopher, even from his common observations in secular
Learning, will by a due Analysis of Meditation open to himself a delicious
prospect of Heavenly Glories; pursue every Motion and Effect to its first Cause
and Author, till he finds his Scale of Contemplation to look like Jacobs
Ladder, with Angels ascending and descending: whilst the proud Enquiring
Naturalist, who sacrifices more to his Hypothesis than his God, will reap
nothing but Presumption and Contempt of Heaven from his Conversation even with
the Divinest Objects. He will call a True Miracle the Luxuriancy of Nature, an
Extraordinary Act of Providence only the sudden eruption of a Natural, though
hidden Cause; or at least he will debase these immediate Operations of the
Almighty to some cheap piece of Motion and Mechanism, that may serve to ease
and pacify his Wonder; thus loosing the improvement of his Faith and Humility,
by the Arrogance of his Wit and Invention!

This exalted Exercise of Praising and Blessing the Lord, will also fill the
Imagination with Heavenly Imagery. 'Twill adorn it with the Vine and Pomgranate
of the Temple, making that Faculty an holy Receptacle of pious Emblems, which
in its Corrupt Nature is the chief Seat and Empire of Original Sin; the
Infernal Theater, where all the busiest Scenes of Temptation are displayed.
'Twill teach us not to lay out our best superlative words on Earthly things;
not to embalm Rottenness and Corruption with the Epithites of Divinity; not to
Deifie the Ambitious with sacred Oratory, or to commit Idolatry with a too
Bounteous Invention; but to reserve a peculiar Hierarchy of Language for our
Superior Intercourse.

Lastly, It will spiritualize our Affections, call them off from the
defilements of the World, make them languish in unaccountable Unions, and give
them a tender Sympathy with all the Endearments of the Canticles: It will
create in us such an Habitual Indulgence toward the sweetnesses of a Religious
life, that amidst the Avocations of the world, the disturbances of secular
business, and the Afflictions of Common Conversation, we shall be able to
maintain a secret Under-current of pious Aspirations and Affections.

Let us therefore summon up all that is within us, all the Faculties and Powers
of our Souls to Bless and Praise the Lord with fervent Gratulations! For
surely, Christianity is not only a bare Avoydance of Evil, a plausible course
in Moral Actions, or an External living up to the Decency of a Station, (which
yet in a Degenerate Age are no mean Patterns and Examples) but certainly there
are required some Affectionate Heats, some Breathings and Pantings after
further degrees of Holiness, and an Indefinite Perfection. And though the cold
Logicians are apt to call this a Spiritual Romance, and the effect of a
Religious Spleen; yet we know of what Complexion they were, who styled the
miraculous effusions of the Holy Ghost, Drunkenness, and the fumes of New Wine;
St. Paul's Learning, and the Sobriety of his Reason, Madness and Distraction.

Surely, no man can be an Heretic in his secret Communions with God, or a
dangerous Enthusiast in his Inward Adorations: And if some Weaknesses have been
found among the private Ardours of the Retired; alas! what are they, but the
glorious Frailties of the Pathetic Soul, the Noble Extravagancies of a
Seraphick Temper, and an impetuous Devotion!

I know there is a lower Draught of Christianity; but I speak a practical
Mystery to the Wise, to the Perfect, to the Prophets, and Sons of the Prophets;
who know how to be warm and affectionate in Religion, without being
Superstitious; how to Adore, without being Idolatrous.

I speak to you, who are placed in all the Circumstances of an Extatick life;
who are so nearly acquainted with the intelligible World, that what is but
plain Picture to the Vulgar, is Hieroglyphick to you; they must be contented
with the bare External View, whilst you enrich your minds with the more
Excellent Moral and Mystery: To you, who are able to compose and consecrate the
Recollection of your Daily Studies into an Evening Hymn; whose constant
Employment consists in such an Eminency of Spiritual Duties, as others faintly
attempt in seldom Festivals with secular Mixtures and divided Powers. To you,
lastly, who are perpetually attending on the Altar; who love to speak of the
Glory of Gods Kingdom, and to talk of his Power; who are continually standing
before the Throne, having your lives hid with Christ in God, in Internal Joy,
and the secrecies of an Incomprehensible peace; who live under such an
Extraordinary sense of the Divine Wisdom and Goodness, that you find it
difficult to refrain from publishing his Perfections continually, and from
letting the Mistaken world know, that it is our Privilege, our Duty, and our
Excellency, never to cease from uttering in some measure our Gratulations and
Praises here on Earth, till they Expire into Greater; till we arrive to those
Perfect Harmonies above, where our Glorified Souls and Bodies shall for ever
dwell in an Eternal Triumph of Adoration and Amazement! where, like the voice
of Trumpets of Thunders, and like the noise of many Waters, we shall for ever
sing Hallelujah; Salvation, and Glory, and Honor, and Power be to the Blessed
Trinity: And again we shall sing Hallelujah!

FINIS.

