I Do Appoint Thomas Cockerill and Benjamin Alsop to Print this Narrative, and
that no other Print the same.

RODERICK MANSELL.
November. 17. 1679.
An Exact and True NARRATIVE OF THE LATE Popish Intrigue, TO FORM A PLOT, And
then To cast the GUILT and ODIUM thereof UPON THE PROTESTANTS. Wherein are
contained, I. The Contrivance it self, with the Principal Agents and
Instruments, viz. The Lords in the Tower, Mr. Dangerfield, etc. II. The manner
of carrying on the said Contrivance, III. The Continuance of the Popish Plot to
Assassinate the KING. IV. The Book found in the House of Mrs. Cellier, in a
Meal-Tub, by Sir William Waller. V. The several Attempts to Murder the Right
Honorable, Anthony Earl of Shaftsbury. VI. The manner of Conveying a List of
Names and other Treasonable Papers, into the Chamber of Col. Roderick Mansell.
VII. The full Examination of the whole Affair before the Lords of His Majesty's
Most Honorable Privy Council. With the Exemplification of diverse Informations,
Examinations, Depositions, etc. relating to the said Intrigue.


Faithfully Collected by Col. RODERICK MANSELL.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Cockerill and Benj. Alsop, at the Three Legs, and at
the Angel and Bible in the Poultrey, against the Stocks-Market, 1680.

A Solemn ADDRESS TO All true ENGLISH PROTESTANTS, BY Col. RODERICK MANSELL.
Most Honored, and Worthy Gentlemen,
WHat accursed Designs have formerly been set on foot to undermine, and blow up
the Religion, that is, The true interest of England, your own Concerns therein
have made you too apprehensive to need a Remembrancer; and that your Enemies
are no Changelings, but as unwearied as pregnant (and, thanks be to God, as
unsuccessful) in their malicious Contrivances as ever; had you no Friends, they
themselves will do you that one and only friendly Office, to become your
faithful Monitors.

Some have observed, that Quicksilver, the Devil, and a Jesuit can assume a
thousand various shapes, and yet under all those Disguises, Mercury, will be
Mercury; the Devil, a Devil; and a Jesuit, a Jesuit; when he ceases to Be, he
may cease to be mischievous; and when he puts off his Essence, may possibly put
off his pragmaticalness.

In all their other Plots, they have outdone the World; in this last trial of
their skill, they have outdone (and we hope undone) themselves; for it is a
Question, (and must remain so, for any solution of mine) whether their Malice
in contriving; their Activity in pursuing; their Impudence in denying; their
Fruitless Attempts for corrupting the Evidence; or this their last Essay, to
devolve the Odium, of their execrable Treason against the King and Kingdom,
upon the Protestants, have been more (though all have been beyond example)
Devilish.

I acknowledge this is no modern Artifice, nor the Invention of junior Heads,
their Ancestors have traveled in the same Argument, wrought in the same Mine;
for when they had formed the Powder Plot, they consulted to lay the Bastard at
the Puritans Door; and what they had the pleasure to beget, others must have
the reproach to Father; though the Deformed Brat, to all discerning eyes, would
apparently own its Sire.

Now although in laying the groundwork of their late Project, they had a
confused Idea, or rude draught of that Ancient Policy, yet could they not lick
that unformed lump into a perfect shape, till time had ripened and sharpened
their Inventions. Mr. Dugdale, in his Evidence against Mr. Whitebread, and his
Accomplices, (page 25.) swears, That a Letter came from Paris, through Mr.
Harcourt 's hands into the Country, to prove, That it was the Opinion of them
at Paris and St. Omers, to fling all this upon the Presbyterians, that is, The
death of the King, that if any thing of this nature should happen, they should
be ready to give the first Allarm, and give it out that it was the
Still-King-killing Presbyterians that had done the Fact, and so they thought
they should bring the Protestants into their company, to revenge themselves of
the Presbyterians; to which the Lord Chief Justice replied, It was pretty
Advice indeed, to have it first laid on the Presbyterians, that they might get
the Episcopal to join and cut their Throats, and then their own Throats should
be cut.

But because it was impossible, and therefore incredible, that ever Protestants
should so grossly mistake their Interest, as to conspire the destruction of
their King, who is the Center and Head of it; they had been long preparing the
People to entertain the belief of it, against that happy juncture of time,
which should invite them openly to assert it; for these Theologico-Political
Quacks, knew well that so great a Dose of Improbabilities would work too
rigidly upon the Body Politic, without due Preparatives to mittigate its surly
Operation; and therefore, some good while before, they had been slily
insinuating into the credulous Brains of those whom either simplicity, or a bad
Interest, had made capable of such Impressions, That the Presbyterians were a
dangerous Generation of men; that their Principles and Practices were
inconsistent with Government, but carried a specific malignity against
Monarchy; that they were certainly a brewing some desperate mischief, which a
little time would discover; (and they could have told us the time to an hour.)
That whoever were tolerated, the Presbyterians were intolerable! and still with
great Zeal they reminded us of forty one, that we might not dream of seventy
nine.

Marchemont Needham, in his Scurrulous Advice to the men of Shaftsbury; the
Author of the Countermine; and R. L'Estrange, in their Politic Burlesques,
always bore hard and downright upon the Presbyterians, but what is more
remarkable, a day or two before the attempt to fasten this imaginary Treason
upon my self, the World was saluted with a Pamphlet, under the name of Tom. the
Joyner, wherein we are gravely advised to come out from amongst them (the
Presbyterians) and not to partake of their Sins, lest we received of their
Plagues, which God had prepared for them; for they were conscious to themselves
what Plagues they had prepared for them; and it is but the privilege of their
great Familiarity with God to make him espouse their Quarrels, and employ his
Thunder according to the direction of the Consult; but he goes on, That we
should not fear their Power, it would be but a Summers Storm; but e're long
(within two days, if Mr. Dangerfield's Flint was but well fixed) their turn of
suffering would come about; for God would make their Hearts to melt, and their
Loins to tremble; and for his part, he could be content his life were given in
Sacrifice, that the King and his good Subjects might be preserved from the most
Damnable Havoc John Presbyter designed to make amongst us; but was it not
easy to tell the World what the Presbyterians would do, when the Papists had
formed for them a piece of Villainy, which they must do, whether they would,
whether they knew it or no? The Devil can certainly prognosticate those
Plagues, which he has Commission or Permission to execute; and the Pope is not
more infallible in his Determinations de fide, than John Gadbury in his
Predictions de facto, when he is a part of the Confederacy, and privy to the
Intrigue.

Yet though these Pamphlets (which were only the Title Page to the Plot)
suggested danger only from the Presbyterians, Providence having unsealed and
opened the Book it self, we read there that the main Body of the Protestants
were to be involved in the design: They had preferred the Right Honorable the
Earls of Essex, and Radnor, the Lord Hallifax, all Members of His Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Council, to be Counselors in this their feigned
Rebellion; nay they had introduced the Lord Wharton, and re-introduced his
Grace the Duke of Bucks, and the right honorable the Earl of Shaftsbury into
the Plot; they had Commissioned the Lord Gray, the Lord Gerrard and his Son,
and Sir Thomas Armstrong, to be Lieutenant Generals; but above all, his Grace
the Duke of Monmouth was most beholden to them, whom, to compensate the loss of
his General-ship over an Army of real men on Earth, they had now created
Generalissimo over an aerie Army of their own listing, mustered in the Clouds;
and that they might not seem ridiculously contradictory to themselves, to
pretend a Presbyterian Plot, without one Presbyterian in it, they had
graciously given a Commission for Major General to Sir William Waller, and
sprinkled here and there a Dissenter, like a Train to the Trap, and so from the
less part, and almost no part, had denominated (by Jesuits Logic) the whole to
be Presbyterian, which gave occasion to an ingenious Clergyman to say, That
Mr. Dangerfield had made more Presbyterians in a day, than they withal their
Conventicles and preaching could make in twenty years.

It is a stated Maxim, That Interest will not lie: No man in his wits would
cut down that Bough of the Tree upon which he stands; nor shear asunder that
single Cord upon which he hangs. How then is it credible that Protestants
should conspire to take away that life by which they live? Can they be so vain
as to promise themselves fairer Quarter under any Successor whom the Laws
favor, than under the Auspices of his Majesty? When the combined fates of both
are so interwoven, that they must weep and laugh, live and dye together: but
the Papists have drawn a Protestants face by a Jesuits heart, and whatever of
Devillism they find in their own breasts, fancy it to be lodged in other men's
brains.

I cannot but admire too, at the imprudence of some, who seem to be Protestants
(and of those some, some are, I hope, really such) that understand their own
Interest no better, than to join with the Papists, if not directly in their
Counsels, yet obliquely in their Actions, to ruin any who are firm to an
English Interest; pleasing themselves that they shall deliver up Dissenters to
the Romish Polyphemus, when their only privilege must prove to become the last
(if the last) Morsel. Nor could I ever yet discern the Truth or Justice of that
Charge, which loud Clamor has drawn up against those who bear the name of
Presbyterians; that they are Enemies to Monarchy. I have read that about
threescore of them have openly protested against the Trial and Execution of the
late King, when some others were then silent, who are most clamorous: That they
refused the Engagement whereby the Royal Family was renounced, when yet others
swallowed it; that many of them were sequestered for their Loyalty, when some
others enjoyed considerable Benefices: That some of them were Imprisoned,
Executed, for adhereing to his present Majesty's Interest, when others declined
it; and that a considerable Army of that Persuasion asserted his Majesty's
Right with their Swords and Lives in their hands, when of the numerous Zealous
Royalists scarce three hundred in the three Kingdoms appeared to join them: How
forward they were with the foremost, and actively instrumental in the
restoration of His Majesty to his Crown and Throne, the World remembers, and
his Majesty has not forgotten; and how they have ever since demeaned themselves
without any spot of Disloyalty that could justly be fixed upon them, is so well
known, that their Enemies can sooner envy it, than deny it: Nor can I perceive
that they have repented of their Loyalty, though some have ordered matters so
to tempt them to it. They have fallen under the severities of the penal Laws,
even those made against Papists, and yet have suffered with as much
cheerfulness, as I believe 'twas possible for flesh and blood to do: And that
they should be brought under a suspicion of hatching Treasonable designs, had
been utterly unaccountable, but that the Discovery of this late horrid
Contrivance has convinced me, that the Masterpiece of Papal policy lies here,
To forge a false Plot against them, that they might conceal a real one of their
own; and then to persuade the credulous world, that the Protestants had forged
an Imaginary Plot for the Papists, last year, that they might hide that which
they had designed to execute this present year.

In which hellish Intrigue though I cannot tell whether there was a greater
Mixture of Policy, or folly; yet this is evident, there was a great Mixture of
both, of which, with your Patience (Gentlemen) I will now give you some short
Account, that you may have a through light into this work of darkness.

I. The Policy of the Papists in contriving this present horrid Plot.

1. The Papists finding the Sword of Justice (which so long had slumber'd in
the Scabbard) drawn against them for their Devilish Treason, judged it
necessary to divert the edge another way; if therefore they could bring the
Protestants under a suspicion of that guilt whereof they stood clearly
convicted, 'twas hoped the Current of the peoples fury, together with the just
indignation of the Magistrate, would turn also, and not run so violently
against their Party; for all men naturally fortify against the present evil,
and set themselves against the latest, and freshest Enemy; and therefore it
could not otherwise fall out, but that they must ease their own Shoulders,
whilst they loaded other men's Backs; and the Fire which threatened to burn them
up, would slake, when they had provided it other Fuel: Their former Treasons
would be buried in the Grave of new Protestant Rebellions; and fresh Crimes
would be a kind of an Act of Oblivion for their State-Villanies.

2. They promised themselves, that if their Plot had made those Impressions
upon his Majesty's belief, as to look upon so considerable a number of his
Protestant Subjects as Enemies to his Person, and Government, they should then
be the only White-boyes, and immediately jump into the Embraces of his Royal
Arms: for what other Consequences could follow from those Premises? If the
Protestants lose ground, they must win it, and pitch their conquering Tents
upon the deserted Field.

3. It must be Infinite satisfaction to their Revengeful Spirits, could they
once see the most Eminent Protestants drawn to Tyburn in the same pompous
State, wherein their Reverend Fathers, and glorious Martyrs, so lately rode
thither; nor could any thing be sweeter to such a heightened Malice, than to see
those who had been their just Accusers for Treason, to suffer, however
innocently, for the same pretended Crimes.

4. Though their whole design be now laid open; yet may they hope for this
considerable advantage, that now the Nation may be tempted to think, the late
Popish Plot was but a Contrivance of the Protestants: since it evidently
appears, that the present pretended Plot of the Protestants, is but a
contrivance of the Papists; Thus they would use their own notorious Lies to
persuade us there is no Truth; and that all the world are Knaves, because they
have given us such demonstration of their Rogueries.

Wise men indeed despise these reasonings, but the far greater part of mankind
is none of the wisest: and the Game is worth the Candle, if they can but
captivate the belief of the many, who may prove good tools, though errant
Fools: The Catholic Plot was apparently to their advantage, but this feigned
one, had it really been, and been effectual, had ruined the Contrivers: Every
man is supposed the Author of those Counsels, by which he reaps benefit, hut
there could be no temptation to the Protestants, to remove a Protestant Prince,
to make room for one that is otherwise minded: The real Popish Plot, was
confirmed by such a harmony of concurrent Circumstances, such a cloud of
Witnesses, who from all parts without knowledge of each others testimony, fell
in with admirable proportion to the same thing, when this new Romance had
nothing of self consistency, nor agreement with the Truth; And lastly, the
Popish Plot was discovered by those that had a hand, a head, a heart, in it,
and were a great part of it, but this upstart Forgery never was owned by any
Protestant, and the very Authors, and main Engineers therein, haled by a guilty
Conscience, are come in to justify us, and condemn themselves of unpardonable
wickedness and folly; which leads me to the second thing I promised to
discourse of, viz.

II. The notorious folly of the present Popish Figment designed to be laid upon
the Protestants.

I profess I was somewhile inclined to think that the refined sublimated Wits
of the Jesuits (who were never yet blamed for bungling at Mischief,) could not
possibly be the Authors of so dull a contrivance; but that some Phlegmatic
Seculars, or heavy headed Bigots of the Laity, had the hammering of it: But we
have had some pregnant instances, of the wisest Counsels, which by ill success
have been chalkt of the back for Follies: For malice sends such thick fumes into
the head, as often disturb the understanding; great haste makes the nimblest
stumble, to which if we add the consideration of the Divine Justice, whose
glory it is to snare the wicked in the works of their own hands, it will go far
to assoil the difficulty.

1. The Heterogeneous mixture of the persons, joined, or rather jumbled,
together in one Conspiracy, speaks it is ill Contrivance: The Papists, I
confess, have one singular advantage above all other men for a cleaver piece of
Villainy, in that they can be all of a piece in forming, and executing any
design for promoting their common cause, and opposing their common Enemies, for
though they quarrel bitterly amongst themselves, the Dominicans hating, and
hated by the Franciscans: The Molinists persecuting the Jansenists, and these
again undermining those; yet they all conspire in advancing that unweildy
Kingdom, whereof the Pope is the Head; whereas the Protestants in England
having no other point, wherein they can politically unite, but in the Person,
and Government of his Sacred Majesty; if once you suppose them to divide in
that Center, they must divide in infinitum, and can never meet in any Third.

2. 'Twas but a raw project, to Introduce as discerning and apprehensive
Persons, as the Nation, perhaps as the world, can boast of, so silly as to
engage in a work which must inevitably involve them in destruction: Either
their Plot would succeed, or not: If it miscarries, the Law destroys them; If
it succeeds, their Enemies destroy them; for I doubt not to avow to all the
World; that some of the most considerable persons, whom these Plot-makers had
assigned to dig in the Mine, must with all their concerns be blown up, to all
intents and purposes, as soon as ever the Mine was sprung: Who sees not that
many of them hold their Estates, Honors, Dignities, Offices, Preferments, yea
Liberties and Lives, for Term at longest, of his Majesty's life and Throne; so
that to feign them his Assassinates, is but to suppose them self-murderers; and
were they in Chains in a Dungeon, yet so far as life is desirable they are
bound in their own defense to make it a standing Petition in their Orisons, God
preserve the King of Great-Brittain.

3. 'Twas but odly laid, to assign the Cabals and Clubs, for forming and
manageing this hair-brained Plot, to public houses, The Kings-head-Tavern, the
Sun-Tavern, the Green-Dragon-Tavern, and a Chandlers Shop in Westminster, where
to be sure (if any were) all the Knavery must come to light; that they should
meet in common Rooms, the through-fares for the Family, at stated days, fixed
hours, with a mixed multitude, of various Interests, Humors, Tempers, and
Inclinations, who could not possibly understand each others propensities, nor
how the pulse of their Affections beat; where without precaution any might be
admitted, and the Trapans were admitted, and all this to expedite a Project so
dangerous to themselves, so damnable in it self, so improbable to succeed; this
is it which poses my belief, and strands the faith of any considering thinking
person.

Observe but with what Circumspection the Jesuits convene in their Consults;
how shy and cautelous they are of their own Friends, who are not actually
engaged in the Confederacy: that famous Letter found amongst Harcourt's Papers,
produced in the Trials of Ireland and Whitebread, might have taught us some
Policy, had we needed their finesses to subserve any vile occasions of our own.
-- Every one is minded also not to hasten to London long before the time
appointed, nor to appear much about the Town till the Meeting be over, lest
occasion be given to suspect the design: Finally, Secrecy, as to time and
place, is recommended to all those that receive Summons, as it will appear in
its own nature necessary. Surely these grand Statesmen might have supposed us
to have some small pittance of Brains, and not to engross all the Subtlety, as
they have monopoliz'd the Knavery, to themselves: They that were so timorous,
even to Superstition, in their own Intrigues, might have allowed us common
sense, and not have represented us in a Plot, as they have done some Religious
Persons in a Play, for a company of crack-brain'd, non-sensical fools; and I
assure them, were I capable of a provocation to bring an Action of slander
against them, I would lay it, not only for personating me as a Traitor, but a
Coxcomb.

4. The manner of Mr. Dangerfield, and his Privadoes, fastening this Plot upon
my self, speaks notorious folly; he tells Capt. Bedford that his friend for
whom he had taken the Lodging was not yet come to Town, and yet he tells Mrs.
Harris before Bedford, that this Capt. Bedford was that Friend for whom he had
taken it; he informs the Officers of the Custom-house, that there were
Contreband Goods to the value of 2000 l. stowed in my Chamber, and yet was
sollicitous to remove me one pair of Stairs higher. Now how inconsistent this
was with a supposition that I had such a quantity of Goods in my Chamber, is
obvious: for what a noise must we have had with Joyners to contrive new Cells,
Drawers, Closets, Lockers, to conceal them? What an oversight was it to direct
the Searchers to look behind the Beds-head, before he had lodged his Papers
there; had he been his Crafts-master, he should first have deposited the
Treason, and then have left the Officers to remove the Bed; which their Zeal,
hot in pursuit of a Prize, would infallibly have advised them too; what Foolery
was it to cry out Treason, before he had read more than the usual Preface to a
Letter? I do really believe, the Devil and his Jesuits never sent a more
simple Child on their Errands! and what madness was it, to inform of prohibited
or uncustomed Goods, when he knew there were none such there? and to make that
the umbrage to search for Treason, which he as little knew to be there, seeing
the tracing him a Liar in one instance, might have raised some dust of
suspicion in the Spectators Eyes, that indeed all the rest was but a great
Forgery?

And yet the same wretched Impolitickness have they used in their other
Actings, When Hettervile's design to Corrupt honest Capt. Berry, proved
abortive, they are presently at work again with Capt. Bedlow; and when Reading
was so handsomely over-reacht, yet they are incapable of fair warning, and
attempt the same threed-bare Method with Dr. Oats. And when that pitiful
project proved unsuccessful; they proceed in the same dull, baffled track with
Mr. Dugdale: and when they have cast up the accounts of these particulars, the
total is thus much, a real proof of their true Plot, and their infatuation in
the Conduct of this false one: And still they proceed with that Confidence, as
if they were absolute Masters of all Events, and could Command success to wait
upon their Stirrup, whatever Idle means they use, or in whatsoever Improper
Methods they proceed.

5. Nor does it argue more of Wisdom, to rear such a Massive Towering Structure
as that of a Plot, against his Majesty's Person and Government, upon so slender
and sleighty a Foundation; Some persons it seems, according to the custom of
the Town-converse, do divert themselves in Clubs at Coffee-Houses, Taverns,
etc. Where with a certain frankness of Conversation, agreeable to a people that
abhor starcht pedantry, they toss the Gazets, and Intelligences up and down;
and some one perhaps has picked up a Pamphlet of more Wit, than Discretion, and
fuller of Drollery, than Honesty, which exercises and whets what Ingenuity the
company can spare; now in the Career of discourse, some one perhaps applauds
what is discommendable, another Censures that of which he is no Competent
Judge; and now for these Sculking Limitors to Wiredraw Treason out of every wry
expression, or misplaced word, is wretched duncery, if it has not a more severe
and agreeable Name: But these Sharkes having the Jaundise in their own eyes,
think all the world yellow, and whatever of baseness they bear in their own
bosoms, presently conclude it to be working in other men's brains.

To Conclude (Gentlemen) let their defeated folly teach us Innocent and Loyal
Wisdom, for if the designs of Papists will not teach us to oppose our united
strength against their combined Fury, some or other will take the Foolscap off
from their heads, and put it upon ours. If you either divide your selves, or
suffer your selves by their little wheadling tricks to be divided, you must
perish, either cruelly by their hands, or shamefully by your own: What progress
their Scouts that creep into your Quarters have made that way, and what hopes
they have raised upon such progress, wise men see in the Cause, but Fools only
feel in the Effects. If like Eteocles, and Polynices, you cannot maintain
concord, alive; your enemies will make the experiement, whether your Flames and
Ashes will also divide in Smithfield.

Nor let us think it enough to have convicted them of Treasons, except we can
approve our own Loyalty: The smoke of suspicion, as well as the fire of sin,
must be avoided; it is not sufficient, that brave English tempers are honest,
unless our Enemies be convinced we are eminently so.

We have yet one encouragement left us, that those bloody and deceitful Men
shall not Outlive their own Plots, nor live out half their own days: For the
ruled Cases of Providence upon Record, do abundantly prove, that where Men deal
most proudly God is above them; and he whose care extends to the meanest Fly,
his Power controuls the great Leviathan; when Egyptians pursue, and the Angel
takes off their Chariot-wheels, and yet they will pursue still, they will find
it ill striving against the Stream and Current of Vindicative Justice; when the
builders of Babel will go on, and nothing will be restrained from them, which
they have Imagined to do; the next news we hear is, Let Us go down, and confound
their Languages; And if our Romish Adversaries, not owning that hand of
disappointment, which is so visibly stretched out against them, shall persist to
add one Conspiracy to another, they may expect their own Policies will find
them out.

Thus much of trouble to have given, was your Concern, and his Duty, who is,

Honored and Worthy GENTLEMEN, Your most Humble Servitour, R. MANSELL.
Novem. 3. 1679. Axe-Yard, Westminster.
An Exact, Full, and particular NARRATIVE OF THE Popish Intrigue, to form a
PLOT, AND Then to throw it upon the PROTESTANTS.
IF Truth in its richest dress, that is Nakedness, will please, I cannot
despair of the Readers acceptance; but if nothing but Oratory will recommend
this Piece, Let him seek elsewhere: The nature of a Narrative will not bear it,
the Judicious loath it, I have not the faculty to do it, and if I had, am quite
out of humor to scratch him where it itches, or to gratify a vanity that
argues so much distemper of Soul.

Whatever is maintained by Wit, by a greater Wit may be destroyed; what
Rhetoric can say for the Plaintiff, it can say also for the Defendant; only
Truth sincerely proposed to the eye, takes and captivates all the World: I
shall not, for ought I know, (as I have not hitherto) call this Contrivance a
horrid, hellish Devilish Conspiracy, for when I have Plainly from the best
Records I could procure, (and I deal openly, I think I have the best that are,)
laid open the matter of Fact, with the professed declared designments of it,
every Reader will load it with such Epithets, and give it more poignant Terms
than I can readily invent, who am naturally barren in my Invention.

I am not curious in my method, but have indulged my own humor in this single
point, to represent the whole in distinct paragraphs, that so the meanest
reader (who deserves, and may challenge an interest in these papers,) may more
easily digest that in parcells, which perhaps would overset his capacity if
swallowed in the lump, and further Preface let not the Reader expect from me.

1. The whole of the Intrigue was thus much: That whereas the Catholics former
design upon His Majesty's Person, and Government; and the design of that design
to extirpate the Protestants, and the Protestant Religion, was clearly
discovered, and probably would now be prevented, and that all their hopeful and
promising attempts to corrupt the Kings Evidence had to their great surprise
miscarried, yet still though success were wanting to their endeavors, they
would not be wanting to themselves, but push for it once more, that if possible
they might retreive the game, which seemed utterly lost to all, but themselves,
who had great faith against great discouragements. That a Plot might be
contrived with such fair probabilities, and presumptions, having witnesses laid
in at every stage to prove the particulars, which being prudently fastened upon
the Protestants might so win upon the belief of His Majesty, and so approve it
self to the Consciences of the Judges, and Juries before whom any of the
Plotters should be indicted, arraigned, and tried, that the Protestants would
be found guilty of conspiring against the Person, and Government of His
Majesty, and thereupon being justly and openly sacrificed to the Justice of the
Law, the Catholics might appear, as they have confidently avowed themselves,
to be the Kings best Subjects; and then it might be left to the Ingenuity of
the Impartial world to draw this conclusion, That it was now evident that the
last years Plot, which by the malicious Artifices of the Heretics, had been
fathered upon the Innocent Catholics, was but a color to take away their
Lives, and sieze their Estates, which being considerable, was sufficient to
render them guilty with those whose covetousness had prepared them for the
spoil.

And this is the substance of what in the sequel of this Narrative shall
brancht out into its particulars, in which the Narrator does most solemnly, and
religiously promise to surrender himself a slave to Truth, Faithfulness, and
Impartiality.

2. It must be observed, that though the Papists were so active in forming this
New Treason for the Protestants, yet they had not laid aside their own; but
with the same Zeal pressed for the assassinating of His Sacred Majesty as
before; whether their rage were the more inflamed because it was restrained; or
that like losing Gamesters they were resolved to double the stake or quit all;
or whether thy fancied they had got better instruments to effect that out-work,
with which all their other designs must succeed proportionably. I say whether
for these any, or all of these or other Reasons it was, it is none of my part to
determine, only that thus it was, Mr. Dangerfield in his information upon Oath
before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor of London, assures us, which
information was taken, October. 31. 1679. I was sent for to the Tower, whither I
went in disguise, and after much discourse with my Lord [Powis] in the dining
Room, he took me into his Chamber, and there was the Lord Arundel, who first
said (after some discourse) will you do any thing to make your Fortune? I
answered yes! I would do any thing! well then said he will you kill the King
for a good Reward? I was amazed, and said, Sir, you jest surely? then he again
asked me: and I said, any Body but the King and His Royal Brother, Nay said he,
I mean not so. But Tell me, will ye do it? I again answered, no! without time
to consider o'nt; Then said my Lord Powis, No! no! come! Lord Arundel does only
this to try you; and pray my Lord Arundel (says Lord Powis) what will you give
him to do so? it is worth (said Lord Arundel) 2000 l. No! no! ( said Lord Powis)
you shall do that to my Lord Shaftsbury; and shall have 500 l. for your Reward:
[but of the Honorable Persons interest in their hatred, in its proper place:]
the same Deponent says further, That when he had acquainted the Lord
Peterburgh, that Sir Robert Peyton would meet him at Mr. Gadburies house, the
next Tuesday night at 5 a Clock; he went also to Mr. Gadburies, and gave him
notice of it: who liked it well, but was angry that I had displeased the Lords
in the Tower, and especially the Lord Castlemain, who did design to make my
fortune: I demanded if he knew the ococcasion of their Anger, he answered, yes;
it was because I would not kill the King. I wonder at you (said he) when you
knew no way to get out of Prison whilst you lived (had not good Charity done
it) that you should refuse it: nay it might so easily have been done, by your
own hand, that no hurt could have befallen you. Why, said I, Mr. Gadbury, can
it be any other but death? yes, with you (said he) for before you were released
out of Prison, I had by Mrs. Celliers a true Account what time you were born,
and the Countess of Powis ordered me to Calculate your Nativity, and it is so
clear, that you were adjudged by all a person allotted to that bold and daring
Enterprise; and in Mr. Willoughbie's further examination before the
Council Board, Nov. 1. 1679. he affirms That after he had been introduced to
the King by Mr. Chiffinch, where he had been alone with His Majesty in his
Closet, and told Mrs. Cellier that he had so been; O, said she, what an
opportunity have you lost? and soon after the Lady Powis said the same thing,
in Mrs. Cellier's hearing, And, how bravely he might have killed the King if he
had been provided!

3. This Plot was unanimously agreed, should in the outward and discursive part
of it only touch the Presbyterians; if I should adventure the credit of this
one point upon Common fame, it were no vain thing, for the Ears of all men were
alarmed with a continual noise of a Presbyterian Plot; the Pamphlets rung of
nothing but a Presbyterian Plot; and the Coffee-houses ecchoed to the common
Prints, a Presbyterian Plot; so that the Eyes of all who received the
Impression, were fixed upon that kind of men, as the quarter from whence this
prognosticated storm would arise: but I shall not content my self, much less
the Reader, to rest this observation upon popular outcry, but show that it was
a designed, and a politickly designed thing too: Mr. Dangerfield in his
Information, of October 31. 1679. Deposes to this purpose, That the Countess
[Powis] told him he must go into Buckinghamshire to one Mrs. Webb's at
Peterley, with a Letter to one Mrs. Jean; and when he came thither, he finds
this Mrs. Jean, not a Woman, but a Man, nay a Priest; who immediately upon
reading the Letter, made him Confess and Receive the Sacrament, to be true to
the whole cause: and this Jeane, made up the Papers for the Plot against the
Presbyrians: which [Paper] was only the ground of it, and was to be drawn up by
the Lords, and Mr. Nevil, ( as he told Mr. Dangerfield. And afterward Mr.
Woods, told me the Lords had consulted together, that before Oats was
Indicted, there should a Rumor be spread abroad of a Plot amongst the
Presbyterians, and something of it made appear; and that I may not be tedious
in a matter so acknowledged, he further deposes, That one Dowdel came to him
with 27 Letters to be transcribed, most of them written by Mr. Nevils own hand,
That Mr. Turner the Lord Powis his Priest desired Mrs. Cellier to get some
Catholics to write out several Copies which he then had; accordingly she sent
for one Singe a Schoolmaster, who wrote there a week more or less. The
Contents of as many of them (as I can remember (says he) are as follows; 'That
their business here at London went on very well, and hoped theirs did the same
in the Country, and Commissions would shortly be ready; mentioning in some
Letters, many Noble Persons Names: and that we will now be our own choosers in
matters of Government, and take our own pleasures, with Popery:' Many or most
of them Importing the same sense with those taken by the Custom-House Officers,
etc. These were to be sent into all parts of the Kingdom where any
Presbyterians Lived, to be put into their Houses privately, and then by some
other Persons, the House to be searched, and these Papers produced in Testimony
against them: This is the fact, so it was, and so they projected the matter,
and judged themselves very politic in the projection: for how readily would
the sparks of such a suggestion take with great Multitudes against the
Presbyterians, when their old animosity did yet smoother, nor could the old
grudge be quenched: And though many rayled at the Presbyterians out of custom,
because they had contracted an evil habit of railing and could not leave it;
others from Example, swearing and railing because their Companions whetted
their already too keen inclinations; others perhaps out of Ignorance, who
neither knew what a Presbyterian, nor Presbytery was, yet it was a Common Theme
to rail on, and therefore were the more ready at it; yet the Designers had a
further reach, to weaken the Protestant Cause, by rendering so many of them
unserviceable to the Interest of England, which by such scandalous reflections
they must needs be.

4. Another step I would make is this: However the vogue carried it for a
Presbyterian Plot, yet the inside was a Protestant plot, which if my proper
Province were to Reason out the matter might be easily demonstrated; for the
Church of England is an object more adaequate to Papal Covetousness, and Envy,
then the Dissenters and their Friends can show; what great temptation is there
in the Skins of a few half-starved Non-Conformists, when the Revenues of the
Church of England, and fair Estates of the Nobility and Gentry of that
Communion, were a morsel that might awaken the dullest appetite; but the fact
is that I must clear: let it therefore be noted, of All those Noble Persons
that they had nominated for a Council of State to manage this War against the
Government, not above one could be with any tolerable propriety of speech
called Presbyterian: none being more worthy Personages, nor any more really,
and zealously devoted to the true Interest of this Church: The Duke of Monmouth
whom they created General over this terrible Army; the Lord Gray, the Lord
Gerrard, and his Son, who with Sir Thomas Armstrong were Commissioned for
Leiutenant Generals, were none of them ever suspected of Presbyterianisme, and
should I look over the Clubbs, where the Meal Tubb Intelligence informs us,
that the Persons who were there employed as Writers and Messengers into the
Country, when occasion should require were all to be Field Officers, yet
amongst these I cannot pick out half a dozen Presbyterians, and its harsh to
denominate an Army that must overturn the Government of three Kingdoms, from so
inconsiderable a Number: but of this there will be further evidence, when we
come to exemplify the platform of this design as it was laid in the
abovementioned Papers.

5. Having got this general Idaea of the Plot in their Heads, which yet was not
a piece of exact proportion, but left to more mature Counsels to be polished.
It was time to think, and pitch upon fit Instruments for the executing of it,
that is to make it stick to those persons, whose forward Zeal against the late
Popish design against His Majesty's Person, Government, and the Protestant
Religion, had made must obnoxious to their Malice, and revenge: And herein they
proceeded with much caution, as became their wisdoms, who knew well, that many
well laid designs, such as promised great hopes of a good issue had miscarried
through the insufficiency of those to whose Hands the management was committed:
Madam Cellier, by Calling a Midwife, whose Employ chiefly was with Catholic
Ladies, and Gentlewomen, was very serviceable in delivering the Catholic Cause
of this birth, wherewith it had gone so long, and was now in the pangs, and
throws of bringing forth. This Gentlewoman by the means of one Mrs. White, was
brought to Mr. Danger field, than a Prisoner in Newgate: She there examined his
capableness for business, and because Instruments may be used but cannot be
formed, for a trial of his Abilities. Let me see (says she) how you can draw up
Articles against Captain Richardson. Hereupon she gave him Instructions, who
performed the first Essay of his Art to her satisfaction, and then told him,
She had something of greater moment for him to undertake: but Mr. Dangerfield
being then a Prisoner, some Expedient must be used for his Enlargement, that he
might enter upon his charge; and to this end she advises him to Complain to Mr.
Recorder, in whom she would make such an Interest by Alderman Jefferies, as to
get his Petition granted: Then she employs one Mr. Williams a Solicitor to
Bail him out, which yet could not be effected in less then three weeks: however
Madam Cellier sent her Maid Margret every day to supply his wants with money, to
support his Spirits with good words such as administered hope, and not long
after he was bailed: after that this charitable Person through whose hands much
of the Romish benevolence passed, had cleared the Fees, and expenses of the
Prison.

But he was no sooner discharged from Newgate, but he was Arrested, and thrown
into the Counter; This surpised Mrs. Cellier, yet she sends her trusty Maid
Margaret to assure him, that if he would forthwith be at Liberty, she would
purchase it at any rate, for she had ordered business for him the Tuesday next;
And first she furnishes him with money to remove himself to the King's Bench by
Habeas Corpus, here he is releived by her again, receiving twenty shillings in
hand, and twenty shillings per week, with promises of a speedy Release: but
because the good of the Catholic Cause was the main end that must overrule
lesser projects, she had found a notable job of work for him there, which was
to practice upon one Mr. Strode, then and there a Prisoner, whose story will he
taken up in due order: here a piece of service was also enjoined him with
Captain Bedlow, by the Lords in the Tower, (as Mr. Mounson told him) viz. that
he should send for the Captain, and pretending he knew something of the Plot,
when he was in Flanders, that he would gladly discover it, if he might be
examined, which would be a great piece of Service to the Lords; first being
sworn an evidence for the King, and then to swear such other matters as Mr.
Mounson should instruct him in, but because they could not Contrive any secure
footing to proceed upon in his treating with Captain Bedlow the business fell.

Some while after being furnished with Money (as he deposes) by the Lords Powis,
Petre, Arundel, Bellasis, and Stafford, to Compound his Debts, and Five pound
given him by Mris. Cellier to clear his Fees, Mr. Dangerfield is fully enlarged.

And being at Liberty after so long durance in several Prisons, he looked on
himself a competent Undertaker in the greatest Affairs, and was brought by
Mris. Cellier to the Lady Powis, who thanked him for his diligence in the
business of the King's Bench, and withal told him, that his faithfulness in
that Affair should make his Fortune, provided he would undertake other
business; which he promised to do.

But now he must come under Discipline, to make him tight to the Cause; and
accordingly is charged to continue steadfast in his Religion, (what that was,
perhaps every body, perhaps no body knows) to Confess once a Week to Mr.
Mounson, which he promised to do. And indeed, when he was in the King's Bench,
he was advised to scowre his Kettle, that is, to Confess, and Receive; but
because his Practices would need a little latitude, he was Indulged to be drunk
with Strode, and told it was no sin, because it was for the good of the Cause.

Being thus prepared, it was time he should be encouraged; and so he was, the
Countess Powis sends him with a Letter to the Lord Castlemain, who received him
kindly, and promised to make his Fortune, if he would use his endeavor to
support the Catholic Cause: and presently returns him with a Recommendatory
Letter to the Lady Powis, to this purpose: This person I like well, and though
he be no Scholar, yet he may serve to instruct the Youths, according as he
shall be directed, and in so doing, I shall be eased of much suspicion.

And now Mr. Dangerfield must go into Buckingham-shire, to Madam, or Mounsieur
Jeane, (for it was a Priest in Woman's disguise) and from him he receives the
Rudiments of this Presbyterian Plott; and comes up to the Lords in the Tower,
to have it reduced to a consistent Form: And when Mr. Dangerfield was sent with
a Letter to the Lady Tuke, she seemed to like him well, and sent word he was
fit to be employed, and gave him two Guinneys; and asked him, If he was one that
durst do any thing of desperate consequence: He answers, Yes! But the Lady
Powis meeting with some Rub in an Affair she had with a Noble Person, and not
being able to procure Mr. Mounson out of Prison to be an Assistant in this
grand Intrigue, tells Mr. Dangerfield, I thought I could have got Mr. Mounson
out, but since it can no better be, you must do all our business; and from that
night by order of the Lords sent by Mris. Cellier, he was to fall upon the
execution of this black Design.

6. Mr. Dangerfield is now Plenipotentiary to manage the whole Negotiation,
under the Conduct of his great Lords and Masters; and that he might the better
expect success, they consult how to prepare the People to receive and believe a
Story so incredible, that the Protestants would actually Rebel: Their first
attempt was, by dispersing several scandalous Pamphlets, written by Nevill, and
others, against the Presbyterians, to refresh the Peoples Memories with any old
Actions of theirs, which might render it credible: And the next was, that by
several Agents assigned to their respective Posts, the Coffee-houses might ring
of the general apprehensions of some Notorious Villainies ready to break forth
from the Presbyterian party. This Mr. Dangerfield deposes, That he gave the
Papers he received from Mr. Jean in Bucks, to the Lady Powis, who opened, and
read them, to this effect: That good store of Pamphlets must be writ and spread
abroad against the Presbyterians, and persons must be employed to go to
Coffee-houses, and rail against the Presbyterians, and if they met with any
that offered to contend, matters of Treason or some such thing might easily be
laid to their Charge, and so have them secured; but there must be many persons
employed in these matters, and it would be great prudence not to let them know
one another, nor any one to know more than the part he was to act: And again;
From that night, by the Lords Order sent me, I began going about to
Coffee-houses, and had an Account from Nevill what to go to; and I chose Farrs
Coffee-house; whither I went every night, till Mr. Kinnaston and I differed.
And here it seems for want of other idleness, his discourse was (as the Lords
had instructed him) That Sir Edm. Bury Godfrey was Murdered by my Lord Danby
's Order, who joined with the Presbyterians to overthrow the Catholics: A
story so incredible, as might justly shake the credit of the rest amongst
considering persons: Then he was sent to drop the Danby Reflections, and
Timothy Touchstone, and diverse other base Pamphlets written by Nevill, in the
Coffee-houses, and to send them sealed up in Papers to Man's Coffee-house, to
Farrs, and to Proctors, and others: Let us note by the way, that this Mr.
Nevill was a person great in repute for the happiness of his Pen; And I have
been credibly informed from the Minutes of the Council, that Mr. Dangerfield
before the Honorable Board affirmed, Nov. 7. 79. Fryd. afternoon;

That Mr. Nevill by the advice of the Lords in the Tower, should be again
confined; forasmuch as when he was formerly in that Condition, he had been very
industrious in writing of Papers in their business, but now he was at liberty,
he chiefly followed the Playhouse.

But the Information of Mr. Bedford, Nov. 4. before the Council, is very
remarkable; That about six weeks before, he went with Mr. Willoughby to one
Thompson in Fetter-lane, who was then printing The Presbyterian Unmasked; in
which famous piece, if the Reader will consult it, there are intimations of
great havoc that would suddenly be made by John Presbyter, but that vengeance
would suddenly overtake them; And this may further be observed, that this
Thompson has been a notorious Engine in all Popish Designs, and to this day
abuses the World with his weekly Domestic Intelligence. And lastly, let me
note but one Paragraph more out of his Information: I met (says he) the Lady
Powis soon after at Mris. Celliers, and told her of their proceedings, who
liked it well, but told me, I must go forward, with all speed, in some Intrigue
against the Duke came to Town, to make him believe the Presbyterians were
plotting against the King; then the Way was consulted, and the next day upon
Mris. Celliers return from the Lady Powis, who had sent for her to the Tower,
she told me, I must give Money to some people that were idle, and appeared
well, to go to the Coffee-houses and Clubs, and endeavor to learn how things
stood; where I sound all things very hot against the Presbyterians, and that
the Plot was discovered to be theirs; This being first set on foot by some of
our Accomplices, as Wood, Dormer, the Virginia Merchant, Gadbury, and diverse
others, and I was to further it.

But because this was a matter of great moment, and that upon the right conduct
thereof, the Prosperity of their whole Cause depended; It was thought
advisable to crave Foreign Counsels, and accordingly a Letter was sent to
Bruxels, to Mr. Holder, stating the whole Design, and earnestly desiring his
Advice therein; and further, to procure the Impressions of several Coats of
Arms to be cut there, which were fixed to the Margin of the Letter; which Letter
was conveyed by one Mris. Katherine Holder, living in St. James's, to her
Uncle; and in one of the Answers to these Letters, I heard (says Mr.
Dangerfield) the Lady Powis read as follows.

If you had taken this Course sooner, much blood might have been saved; but I
doubt it is now too late, and fear the St. Omers Testimony being so baffled, has
much empair'd our endeavors, yet to my power I will assist, and advise you to
go on.

7. Though matters seemed so well concerted, yet there were some difficulties
in the way, which in order to a happy procedure must be removed; And the
greatest Obstacle in their way, was the Life of the Earl of Shaftsbury: A
person whose fixedness to the true Interest of his Majesty, and the Protestant
Religion, they well knew; whose profound Judgment to dive into all Mysteries,
and whose Wisdom to obviate their Designs they feared; and therefore his Person
was by them mortally hated, and nothing can quench their fiery rage but his
Blood.

The Lady Abergaveney told Mr. Dangerfield, it was as easy for him to kill the
Lord Shaftsbury, as a Bird on a Tree; and when he demanded, How? she then and
there proposed Diverse ways, saying, She was often with the said Lord, who
talked so cruelly against the Catholics, that she could not endure to hear it,
but yet was forced to hold a Candle to the Devil; amongst others (wherein Mr.
Knolles and Mr. Sharp also agreed) one was, That Mr. Dangerfield should pretend
himself a person good at Curing the Gout; and that she would recommend him to
the said Lord; this the Lady Powis liked well, but said, she would let the
Lords know it: And now if by this Expedient he could be admitted to such a
nearness to his Lordships person, he might have picked some convenient time to
Cure him of that, and all other Diseases.

We must remember, that when Mr. Dangerfield was in the Tower with the Lords
Powis and Arundel, who offered 2000 l. for the Murder of the King; that being
refused, Immediately 500 l. was offered for the Murdering the Earl of
Shaftsbury; and when Mr. Dangerfield asked them how it might be achieved? they
both replied, Easily enough: For (said the Lord Powis) two nights since my man
Woods was there to deliver a Message, and he sorely repented he was not
provided, though there more twenty or more persons in the Room: But if he were
out of the way (said the Lord Powis) we might easily overrun the rest of our
Opposites: Then (says Mr. Dangerfield) I promised I would, and the Lord Powis
gave me ten Guinneys, and told me, a Virginia Merchant should come to me the
Sunday following, to Mris. Celliers house, and advise with me about it: And
accordingly this Merchant came at the time, and place appointed, who entered
into discourse with me about it, and I seemed to be very willing to undertake
it; and he advised me to consult with Mr. Dormer, and all the persons concerned
therein, how to carry it on, and on Monday I went to Confession to Mr. Knowles,
and received the Sacrament.

Yet still something or other Intervened, which deferred the execution of the
design against the Lord Shaftsbury; till the Lady Powis came to me, and bid me
(these are his own words) go to Mr. Sharp to Confession, and Receive, for I
must speedily, or on the next Order, go to the Lord Shaftsbury; I did then go
and Confess, and Receive of Mr. Sharp, who conjured me by all that was good, to
use all speed imaginable for the stabbing the Lord Shaftsbury, which I promised
to do, and left him.

But Mris. Cellier received a Letter that night; that I must go to the said
Lord, and say as follows: My Lord, I am a Stranger, and am neither introduced,
nor sent by any Person, but desire to know if it be in my power to serve your
Lordship, if your Honor will show me favor? Then Mrs. Cellier gave me a
Dagger, ( three or four such being brought to her the Sunday before by the
Virginia Merchant) and dispatched me away.

Mr. Dangerfield (under the Name of Mr. Day) addresses himself to this famous
Exployt; and coming to the Earls house, desires a Servant to acquaint his Lord,
that a Gentleman had some Affairs with him of great Importance: His Lordship
commands him to be conducted into the Diningroom, whither his Lordship, as soon
as he had dispatch those persons who attended him, came, waited on by his
Servants. Mr. Day intimates to him, that he had something to discover to his
Honor, of the highest Concern for his Lordship to know, but withal such as
required the greatest secrecy, and therefore humbly requested, that his
Servants might be discharged their present attendance; which his Lordship as
peremptorily refusing as it was importunately urged, Mr. Day replied, That
because he had not his Proofs ready at present, which yet in a little time he
should, he would take his leave at present, and within a few days wait again
on his Lordship; and for that time he departed.

Mr. Dangerfield at his return gives an account to Mrs. Cellier, That he was
disappointed, but would take some other opportunity; she gives advice of this
to the Tower: And about two days after, meeting with the Lady Powis at Mrs.
Celliers, she tells him, he must go again to the Lord Shaftsbury's, and tell
him as follows, Viz. That if he should be sent for before the King and Council,
and there have several Impeachments of High Treason drawn against him, and be
thence committed to the Tower, and the Testimony in many of the said
Impeachments to be from Letters written with his own hand, that then I might
hope his Lordship would believe I was his faithful Servant.

Thus instructed, Mr. Dangerfield attends the Earl (being armed as before with
his Dagger) his Lordship being in discourse with a person of Honor, commanded
Mr. Day to be put into a Chamber which had a passage into the Dining Room, till
his Lordship could be at leisure. Mr. Day thought he might now effect his
matters, and coming softly into the Entry that leads to the Dining Room, stood
listening to hear when that Noble Personage should depart, presuming, as indeed
it fell out, that the Lords Servants would wait on that Noble Lord down to his
Coach, and that the Lord Shaftsbury being for a while left alone, he might
dispatch him, and clear himself of the House before the return of the Servants.
As soon as that Nobleman departed, the Servants there waited on him down the
Stairs, but unhappily for Mr. Day; just at that Lords going out, came another
Gentleman in, who entertained his Lordship with some discourse; but Mr. Day
hearing no voice, presumed the happy hour was come, and therefore throwing open
the door, was coming up toward his Lordship, when he unexpectedly espies a
young Gentleman with him: This surprised him, and finding the season lost, he
retires to the Room where he was before. This Action gave some apprehension to
his Lordship, who as soon as his Servants were returned, and the Gentleman
withdrawn, sends for Mr. Day to come to him; who after his former Preface, That
he had matters of great Concern to communicate to his Lordship, desired that
his Servants might be commanded to withdraw; but his Lordship being somewhat
the more awakened by the late Carriage of Mr. Day, told him, He must not expect
that from him, but that if he had business of moment to Impart, as he
pretended, he should impart it: He thereupon begins to tell his Lordship; that
he was in danger of being questioned for his Life; that his Servants were false
to him, that they did copy out his Letters and Papers, and communicated them,
whence would be drawn matter to form an Impeachment against him: His Lordship
asked, Which of his Servants they were that had thus Copied out his Writings?
And when Mr. Day replied, That he knew not; his Honor returned, Sir, I can now
tell you, that every word of what you say is false; for I have no Papers, no
Letters, which if known to all the World would endanger one hair of my head;
and therefore it cannot be that any such Impeachment should be formed out of
any Letters of mine: If that be your Lordships opinion, (answered Mr. Day) I
shall take my leave.

Mr. Day being thus a second time disappointed, sends the Lords word of it by
his Boy; and the next day Mr. Woods came, and said, His Lord wondered I had
been so great a Coward; and so ordered Mr. Day alias Dangerfield to go to the
King, and tell him that he had been again with the Lord Shaftsbury, lest the
Lord Shaftsbury should first acquaint his Majesty with it.

Mrs. Cellier sends him to Lord, Peterburghs, to tell him what had happened,
and how he had been twice at Lord Shaftsburies; and he was well pleased (as Mr.
Dangerfield upon Oath informs,) and promised him, when any Forces were raised,
he would put in for a Regiment of Horse, then he would make Mr. Dangerfield
Captain of a Troop: And added, Be sure you do his business the third time. And
when the Lady Powis came next to Mrs. Celliers, she would have persuaded him to
a third attempt upon the Lord Shaftsbury, which he refusing, she struck him
gently with her Fan on the hand, calling him Cowhearted Fellow, and said, She
her self would go. But Mrs. Cellier answered, No Madam, that shall never be,
for I will make the World know, That our Sex are braver than they of the
Masculine, and my self will go and do the work. To which the Lady Powis
returned, Alas! all our men of Courage are sent out of the world, or secured
for to be so.

And she was as good as her word as to the Attempting part; for the same, or
the very next day, this Virago, that deserves a place amongst the worthy
Confessors in the Roman Calendar, visited his Lordship, and Complementing his
Lordship highly for his Moderation toward the Catholics, would have
insinuated her self into his good thoughts; but his Lordship made perhaps more
cautelous by the late demeanor of Mr. Day, kept a strict eye upon her, and
observing her to be fumbling about her Petticoat, or Pockets, gently (as if
between Jest and Earnest) laid his hands upon hers, and pleasantly drolled with
her, till she seemed ready to take her leave; but she was not gone far toward
the door, but that reflecting upon her self, that she should promise so high,
and come off doing as little as Mr. Day, whose Cowardice she had scorned, she
suddenly returns toward his Lordship; which he observing, steps to her, and
laying his hands on hers as before, dashed her out of Countenance, that she was
forced to depart, to tell a sad story of her failure to those who waited to see
the fruit of her great and daring Promises.

8. These Conspirators being thus frustrated in their designed Death of the
Earl of Shaftsbury, yet were not discouraged in the main of their Contrivance,
which was to fasten this grand Treason against His Majesty's Person and
Government, upon the Protestants: And therefore being resolved to drive the
Nail home, it was judged absolutely necessary to possess His Majesty with it: A
mighty Point it would be, if they could make it, to impose so far upon His
Majesty's well-known Judgment. That His Protestant Subjects should grow so
weary of His Person, and Government, as to desire a change, when he knew that
they knew how much their Interest, and that of their Religion was wrapped up in
His Majesty's Life and Prosperity: And therefore they would first endeavor to
lodge this Intreague with His Royal Highness, who being then returned to Town,
the Lord Peterborough (says Dangerfield) sent for me to give him an account of
this New Plot, but I was unprovided: But I met with Mr. Woods, and he sat
down, and wrote what came uppermost, or what he was ordered (at least as he
told me) but some things I was forced to put in also. Then the Lady Powis
recommended me to the Lord Peterborough, and desired him by a Letter which Mrs.
Cellier carried (as she told me) to take me to His R. Highness, which he did;
but first demanded of me what I could say? or if the Lady Powis had given me
any Directions in the same: We staid in the Lord Peterboroughs Closet in his
Lodgings in Whitehall, for some time, till the D. returned from Supper, then he
took me and Mrs. Cellier to the Ds. Closet, where we both had the honor to
kiss his Royal Hand; and me he took from the ground where I was kneeling, and
then I delivered the Papers, and spoke according to my Orders. After this the
Lord Peterborough told me, I must go again to the D. as by his Lordships means
I did, and His R. Highness told me I must go to the King, and give His Majesty
an account at large of all that the Papers mentioned, and told me the King
would order me money to proceed in the Discovery, and then he gave me twenty
Guinneys; and I came away, and gave an account to the Lords of all; and that I
must go to the King, and desired to know what I must say: That night I received
no Answer more than that the Lady Powis would be with me the next day at three
of the Clock, and so she was, at Mrs. Celliers house, where she told me, I must
stick hard [against the Lord Shaftsbury, Lord Gray, Lord Howard, D. of
Monmouth, Lord D. of Ducks, Sir Will. Waller, Coll. Blood, and diverse others]
And that I must tell what Clubs I had enquired out, and where, and that they
were all of the Faction; and that if His Majesty had died at Windsor, they had
posted about the Town and Suburbs, a considerable Army, to have taken
possession of the Government, and did design to bring the same to a
Commonwealth, and set up the D. of Monmouth therein; and that the Lord
Shaftsbury, and others, were issuing out Commissions to that effect, and had
promised some to diverse persons; and that I had the promise of a Commission
from one of the Presbyterian Party: To this effect I told His Majesty.

His Majesty, no doubt, saw through this thin Contrivance, and yet that he
might not seem wholly to reject an Information that pretended so highly to his
Service, he encouraged me (says Dangerfield) and ordered Coll. Halsall, that I
might be furnished with moneys, and I received soon after from the said Coll. 40
l. who told me, I must make out things plainer, or the King would not be well
pleased; which I promised to do, and so took my leave.

Mr. Dangerfield now goes home, and sends Mrs. Celliers to the Tower, to let
the Lords know what had happened, and all were well pleased, and much rejoiced
at his good success; but desired he would not apply himself any more to the
King, by the means of Coll. Halsall, for they believed he would discover him.

9. What Informations were given to His Majesty at this and other times by Mr.
Dangerfield, we must now make out from that Book found in Mrs. Celliers house,
in a Meal-Tub, by Sir William Waller, whose diligence nothing could escape,
whose industry no pains could weary; and whose courage no terrors of Popish
Enemies could abate.

A true and exact Copy of the Book found by Sir Will. Waller at Mrs. Celliers
house in the Meal-Tub on Wednesday, October. 29. 1679.

Major Alsop's promise to me for a Commission.

Mr. Goodings promise to support D. M. if banished.

Friday night the 12th. of September. D. Monm. went to the Sun-Tavern to converse
with Player and Jencks, for the settling Affairs, and also a supply for himself
if banished.

The manner of the meeting of four several Clubs, viz.

At the King's-Head Tavern, at the Green-Dragon Tavern, at the Sun-Tavern, and
one at a Chandlers-Shop in Westminster, which are at present employed, as
Writers and Messengers, into the Country, but when occasion shall require, they
are to be Field-Officers.

The manner of sending those Messengers.

The manner of their meeting for the better concurrence of all matters.

Their way of contributing, how often, and for what purposes it is done.

The posture they were in for a Rising in the City, if His Majesty had died.

The design of Rising in the North to join with the Scots, and what shall
occasion that Rising there?

Gooding's Account of the Chief Persons and Commanders there among them, viz.
Lord Shaftsbury, Lord Hallifax, Lord Radnor, Lord Essex, Lord Wharton, D.
Buckingham,
Councillors. D. Monmouth, General. Lord Gray, Lord Gerrard, and his Son, Sir
Tho. Armstrong,
Lieutenant Generals. Blood and Waller to be Major Generals.


The Field, and other Officers, most of them meet at the several Clubs,
together with some that are in the Country.

The considerable Parties would come from His Majesty's horse and foot Guards,
to join them when occasion should require.

Alsop, and Gooding promise to introduce me to Lord Shaftsbury to be employed
as a spy, and to have the promise for a Commission.

That only the consent of Sir J. P. D. B. Sir W. W. Sir R.P. was wanting to
give the stroke, but if they would not comply, it should be done otherwise as
at the Parliaments, etc.

A Parchment was seen in the hands of Captain England, by Bed. on Monday, the
22d. of Sept. 79. which was written on in indented letters. These are to
Authorize etc. And thirteen Label seals to it. This at Bloods Club.

On the same night was a secret Cabal held at Bloods house.

The next being Tuesday night was one at Sir, W.W.

Gooding told me a Corporal of his acquaintance was going to be listed, to
discipline men.

Friday the 19 of September, a person was sent from Bloods Club to Huntingdon,
about weighty business, and is not yet returned, which causes some fear of
miscarriage.

Sept. 30th. the Messenger returned from Huntingdon, who said he had finished
the business he went about, and that all that part of the Country, was in good
readiness.

Saturday, the 5th. of October, a Cabalmet at Wallers to consult about the
affairs of other Counties: but particularly for the present, the County of
Dorset, Devon, and Cornwall, and in order thereunto two persons were sent away
with great Pacquets, and in one of them were diverse Papers like printed
warrants, and names, and seals to the same, but the person who saw them could
not come to read one; my Author is Alsop.

Monday, the 7th. a Cabal met at Wallers in order to the Dispatch of diverse
persons into the North, and to York City to a Club there at one Lees house a
Tallow-Chandler. These go into some part of Scotland too, before they return,
and yet are obliged to return before the 30th. of this Month.

Sir W.W. promise to B. for a Commission.

Lord S. promise of a Commission to etc.

Goodings promise to me of the list of 5000. etc.

Sept. 9. Brown produced a paper to the company, who all approved of it, but
especially one Desny, who said, Cursed be the man whose mind is not suitable to
this Paper.

One Mason at the same place said after some discourse of affairs, that all
within 20 miles round London, were raedy to strike, whenever they should be
commanded, and that against the Kings Interest too: and said it was not the
French Kings pretended Invasion, should put them in fear of any Army the King
now had, or could raise.

It Is also Resolved, that when any Commissions are given out for the Raising an
Army for the King, that some of the Faction shall privately put in for Employs,
in order to the better serving that Party by the corrupting His Majesty's
Soldiers. Wit. Curtice.

Wednesday the 15th. of October. I was with Lord S.

Saturday, 19. B. told me Sir W.W. said he had 300 Horse at his command to
oppose an Army that the D. and Lauderdale were going to raise in the North; and
that if they made not too much haste, he should have more.

This is the true Copy of the Paper-book found in the Mealtub, which being
since well sifted to the Bran, appears to be a Tale of a Tub.

But that the Reader may be more fully satisfied of the matter of the
Informations given in to the King, I shall give him the true Copy of a Letter
sent by Mr. Willoughby to His Majesty.

SIR, May it please your most Sacred Majesty,
ON Friday the 26th. of this Instant September. was seen by a person whom I
employ, in the hand of one England, a Paper like a List of men's Names, and a
Parchment in the likeness of a Commission, with thirteen Label-seals, and as
many Names thereto, and at the top, was in great Indenture Letters (viz.) These
are to authorize, etc.

I my self was informed, that a Corporal now in your Majesty's Foot-Guards, was
to be sent into the North to discipline a considerable number of Men: My Author
for this was one Gooding, a Nonconformist Parson.

Friday the 26th. was a person sent with a Packet, very considerable, (supposed
to be so by my friend who saw the outside thereof) to Huntington: the said
person is not yet returned, nor to be heard of, which much amazes the gang he
was sent by, and at present puts a stop to their Party.

It was spoken publicly in a Club, That all things were in a ready posture,
and they only expect your Majesty's Command to make the onset; but if that be
not, it is designed at the sitting of the Parliament, if your Majesty answer not
their expectation.

I have also discovered a great Correspondence between the same Party and the
Dutch; and believe at your Majesty's return to give a good Account of the same
by Gods help; till which time I shall use my utmost endeavor to make my self

Your Majesty's most Faithful and Obedient Subject Willoughby,


These were the great Informations given in against the poor Protestants; the
Result of all the Wit of the Popish Faction; a Project so full of
Self-inconsistencies; this His Majesty must look through, and through it, at
the first glance of his Eye, only his Wisdom might let them play with their own
Fancies, till they were snared in their own Nets. In the Meal-Tub Information,
it was the 22th. of September that the Parchment was seen in Captain Englands
hands; but in Mr. VVilloughby's Letter to His Majesty it was September. the 26th.
Again, in the Meal-tub Paper, it was Friday the 19th. of September that the
Messenger was sent to Huntingdon; but in this Letter to His Majesty it was said
Friday the 26th. a whole week later: But let them study at their leisure to
reconcile Contradictions.

10. Matters being thus laid, and His Majesty now returned to London, by the
Lords Order, he must go with another Story to the King, but much what of the
same tendency; and by Mr. Chiffinch 's means, Mr. Willoughy is brought to speak
with His Majesty: An Account of which being given to the Lady Powis, and what
His Majesty said, her Ladyship answered, he could carry something of moment,
but that till he heard further from her, he was commanded to be diligent to
enquire after one Coll. Mansfield, which I easily did (says he) and sent word
by Madam Cellier to the Tower, where he lodge; upon which I received Orders
from the Lady Powis to be at home in the Afternoon, and she would come to she
did so, and commanded me to go to Confession, and receive the Sacrament. After
some time the aforesaid Lady said (after some discourse) will you take these
Papers, and privately put them into some of his Clothes, or into his Trunks, or
any where about his Chamber? I answered, I could not do that, because I knew
him not; then she told me, I must go and pretend to some acquaintance, and take
him to a Tavern, and drink hard, and so convey them into his Clothes, and
immediately cry out, he had spoken Treason, and call the Constable, and cause
him to be apprehended and searched.

And in order to Mr. Dangerfield's being acquainted with Coll. Mansfield (for
so the Countess mistook his Name) he was advised to take lodgings near him, and
insinuate himself into his acquaintance, and therewith the Lady gives him 15
Letters, and a list of Names, whereof one was written with her Ladyships own
hand. These she desired might be transcribed, and when Mr. Dangerfeild,
officiously offered his service; she replied, O no! the King having some
remarks already written with your hand, will know your hand again, for these
must be showed to the King and Council; and therefore sends him to a Scrivener
that lives over against Somerset House who copied them out; and then he brings
them to Mrs. Cellier and showed them to her, who with Mrs. Webb advised him to
proceed, and wished him good success, and both warranted him he should be well
rewarded.

Mr. Dangerfield goes now into Axe-Yard, to the Collonel's Lodgings, and there
views the Rooms, and found all things look very hopefully toward the executing
his design; but at that time he took no Lodgings there, but sent an Account to
the Tower how things stood, and then went in person (as he deposes) to the Lord
Peterborough, and Mr. Gadbury, and told them the Design, as he was ordered by
the Lady (Powis) who well approved of it.

At his Return to his own Lodgings he meets with a Letter from the Lady,
whereby he is ordered to proceed forthwith, which he obeys, and presently goes
and takes the Lodgings, and puts the fatal Papers behind the Bed, and came
away, and sends word to the Lords in the Tower what he had done: then the
persons concerned commended him, and consult one another by Letters, and gave
him order to Acquaint His Majesty, and to go to Mr. Secretary Coventry, and
make Affidavit, what he had seen in the Collonel's Chamber; but Mr.
Willoughby, or Dangerfield, fearing, it seems, from some jealousies he had, to
be proved a perjured person, was resolved to let it fall, till they sent word
he must now go forwards, and he should be well provided for: And these heads of
the Conspiracy direct him by a Letter to Mrs. Cellier, to go to some Officers
of the Custom-house, and inform them of some prohibited goods, which were in
Colonel Mansfield's Chamber, which he did, and brought them in pursuance of
that search to detect the Imaginary treasonable Papers conveyed behind the Bed.

11. Mr. Willoughby having proceeded thus far, yet apprehended himself within
reach of danger, and therefore fearful of being suspected, as soon as the
Officers had seized the Papers, and carried them to the Custom-house, he
withdraws to send word to the Tower that the Papers were seized: And the Lords
there were not without apprehensions that the Papers might be conveyed away;
and therefore immediately send him word, to acquaint His Majesty how the Papers
were seized, who sends Mr. Dangerfield to Mr. Secretary Coventry, that he
should come forthwith to White Hall; but in the mean time Mr. Dangerfield, not
knowing what further to say when he should attend the King, goes home to advise
with Madam Cellier, where not long after he was apprehended; but the Justice
taking Bail, and ordering him to attend the Council next morning, the Lady
Powis meets him in the Stone-Gallery, encourages him to stand fast, assuring
him, that if he were committed, he should be brought off, and want for nothing.
That night he stood again upon his Bail, and was ordered to attend the Council
next day at three a clock, which gave him a convenient time to be better
instructed.

And full instructions he received the next day from the Lady Powis her own
hand, as she met him in the stone Gallery, with a strict charge to stand fast,
which he resolved and promised to do. These Instructions he transcribed whilst
in the Messengers hands, and kept close to them in his pleading before the
Council, as by comparing his Defense with his Instructions will evidently
appear, a Copy whereof at the conclusion of this Paragraph shall be presented
to the Reader.

But notwithstanding whatever defense he could make, and though according to
the charge of Mr. Sharp his ghostly Father, he stoutly denied all that was
alleged against him before the Council; yet was he committed to Newgate; the
place (as he observes) from whence they had fetched out at first, and now by
these intrigues had returned him back thither at last.

To the Prison Mrs. Cellier sends her Maid with that old repeated charge To
stand fast; promising him he should want for nothing; and encouraging him to
hope he should be removed to the King's Bench; and the same time she sends him
one Guinney, and twenty shillings in silver, and a of paper filled with
Crosses, and by the hand of Mrs. Cellier this grave sentence written, I will
never change: but Mrs. Cellier was her self it seems got into prison too; and
not knowing but that if Mr. Dangerfield should find courage enough to stand
fast and resolute, as she enjoined him, yet the wisdom of the Council might
possibly entrap them in some contradictions; she sends therefore her servant a
second time with a Letter of advice to him, which sounded to this purpose: I am
in custody; and if examined how I came to know you, will declare I employed you
to gather in desperate debts; I would have you say the same if you be examined;
and say also that it was you that sent me to the Lord Shaftsbury, and I will
say so too; for this cannot worst you. And with this Letter she sent him their
Debt-books, that he might from thence be instructed to make his tale good.

A true Copy of the Instructions sent to Mr. Willoughby by the hands of the
Lady Powis, teaching him how to make his Defense before the Council, and answer
all Objections.
FIrst, I am suspected to have put the Letters behind the bed, when I went to
take the rooms.

The improbability of that is plain: for I neither knew what Room Mansell would
lie in, nor if I my self should be entertained there.

But when I had been told which Rooms were to be let, it plainly appears I did
not desire Mansell should out of his Lodging to give me place.

And after I had taken the Lodgings, they cannot prove that I was any more in
Mansell's Lodgings till the search was made.

Secondly, Stretch swears, I at the same time that he was searching, went round
the bed, and he believes I then put them there, for the reason that I first
espied the papers.

But it is strange that the Mistresses Brother, one Messenger more, and others
in the room, at the same time, could not see me go round the bed as well as
Stretch.

This is twice I am suspected, for that he also swears I declared the Letters
to be treasonable papers before I see the inside of any one; and that he never
read any Letter to me.

To prove he did, let Mr. Bedford be examined: I also desired them to seize all
the rest of his Letters and Pamphlets, which were of great consequence, and a
considerable number of both, and bring them immediately to the Honorable
Council, whither I went expecting to find them; but it seems they were carried
to the Lord Shaftsbury, and afterward sent to Justice Warcup, when five or six
of the Letters found behind the bed, had been taken out, and all the Pamphlets,
and two or three hundred Letters more, and a Parchment or two with great seals
to them, were returned to Mr. Mansell again, and only such as were thought fit
to be withstood by him, here produced.

To testify the other Letters, Mr. Bedford.

I also desire to know what time, and where the Writings were delivered to him
again, and why they were not all produced, as well as those that are?

And why they were not from that time forthwith by him carried before some
Secretary of State to peruse?

And by what power he could examine the Boy, and give him Wine?

And why the Boy was threatened to be sent to Bridewell, or with a Constable?

And why he was afterward called good Boy, and told he was the prettiest Boy
they ever see?

Now if the Boy (who if asked can declare I never preinstructed him in the
least tittle) would not tell the truth (as they call it) without being thus
prompted and threatened, I humbly conceive little credit can be given to what he
says; but if it were truth, and had come freely from him (as it did not) he is
not of age to understand an Oath.

Pray let Mr. Bedford be asked if this Mansell did not at any time use to go to
a Factious Club in Westminster-Market; or if he did not bring a scandalous
Pamphlet, titled, The Word out of doors, and there applaud the same.

I desire to know if he does not know Captain Brown, Mr. Disney, Mr. Hamey, Mr.
Alsop, Mr. Kenniston, Mr. Philips, Mr. Wray, Mr. Murray, Mr. Pemberton, Mr.
Whitaker, and many of the Faction about the Town? and if he had not frequented
their Meetings? If he has, then he may justly be suspected; for these are most
notorious persons amongst the Faction, who cannot love or endure to hear any
speak well of His Majesty, or the present Government.

Now I would fain know how Doyley could be so well acquainted with me, to know
my name to be any other but Willoughby, and by what power he examined the Boy?
and when he see me at the Tower? and how often?

And how long he has had the counterfeit Guinney, and from whom? And how he
came to attend the Council just that morning I was there? And if I mistake not,
he has since declared, If I had not spoke to him, he would have said nothing to
me: Why then should Mr. Doyley now pretend to produce the counterfeit Guinney
against me?

Or, why not when he see me in the Tower, or since? for he has met me diverse
times in the streets: Can this appear to be any more than envy in the highest,
or some mercenary act of Mansell, or his Interest, to invalidate my testimony,
and strengthen their design?

Now, my Lords, I humbly conceive, that the Guinney being counterfeit, is
Treason; and if Mr. Doyley knew me the author of it, it must also be Treason in
him for concealing it thus long: for though he may have His Majesty's
Commission to apprehend such, he is not to conceal, compound, or smuther any
such crime, after twenty four hours, of himself, which he has done in this.

He also went diverse times to one William Leigh, a prisoner in Newgate (and by
him apprehended for clipping and coining) and offered to sue out his pardon for
sixscore pounds, and he not be indicted for the crime; which had been done, had
not some friend prevented, and so he would have done with diverse others which
were tried in Yorkshire.

By all matters and things it is clear as the Sun, they have stirred up all the
firebrands could be thought of, to burn me with: but I know I am before a Just
and Wise King, whom I humbly implore to inspect and consider my honest
endeavors to do your Majesty service.

Having given the Reader the Copy of his Instructions, I now proceed to Col.
Mansell's part of the story more explicitly; where we shall see how exactly
Mr. Dangerfield kept to them.

The true manner of Mr. Dangerfield's leaving the Treasonable Papers in the
Lodgings of Colonel R. Mansell.
ON Wednesday October 15. 1679, Mr. Willoughby under the feigned name of Mr.
Thomas (who the same day under the borrowed name of Mr. Day, had attempted the
Lord Shaftsbury) came to the house of Mr. Alexauder Harris in Axe-yard in
Kingstreet Westminster, and enquired for Lodgings; but because nothing would
please him but the two rooms of one floor, and one pair of stairs high, of
which the room forward was already disposed of, and of which the Gentleman in
possession could not be dispossessed without his consent, which at that time
could not through his absence be desired, Mr. Thomas for that time departed.

He had then many Irons in the fire, and some of them if he were not very
nimble, would cool; for he was not to take a step without advice from his great
Masters; which having gotten, he returns, and on Friday October. 17. drives a
bargain at first word for those two rooms, giving at first word whatever the
Gentlewoman of the house asked; for a little money must not break the squares
in an affair of this weight; Col. Mansells favor being obtained to remove one
pair of stairs higher forward, that he might not hinder the house of so
beneficial a Lodger as Mr. Thomas promised to be. When he came this day, the
Gentlewoman of the house being abroad, he was conducted by a kinswoman into the
room whither the Colonel was to remove, and there left to his own thoughts for
about half an hour; in which time, it now appears by his own confession that he
fixed the Troublesome and Treasonable Papers behind the beds head. He promised
to come that night with his friend, for whom he pretended to have taken the
other room; but having advice to give what he had done, and advice to take how
further to proceed, he came not till the next day, Saturday October. 18. when he
enquired whether his Trunks were come? but they had heard of none. After much
impertinent discourse, he departs a second time, promising to come to take
possession the next night, for that night he could not, his friend being out of
Town; yet he failed then also; but on Monday October. 20. he visited them, with
short inquiries whether his Trunks were come; and being answered negatively, he
once more disappears. On Tuesday night, having by that time gotten full
instructions how to proceed, about ten of the clock at night he appears with
one Captain Bedford in his company, who as he told the house, was that Friend
for whom he had taken the other Lodging; and both lay in one bed in the room
one pair of stairs forward.

On Wednesday between seven or eight a clock in the morning, Col. Mansell being
gone out about his occasions, came two Officers of the Custom-house, with a
Constable, to search for prohibited or uncustomed Goods: They first went into
the Chamber where Mr. Thomas and his friend lay, and from thence conducted by
Mr. Thomas into the Colonels Chamber, where they made a thorough search,
breaking open the Colonels Trunks and Boxes, examining the Bed-clothes, and at
last after intimation given by Mr. Thomas, they proceeded to remove the Bed,
which they did three foot from the Wall, but could find nothing, till Mr.
Thomas went behind it, and there espied a Packet of papers (he that hides, can
find) and presently asks, What Is that there? Mr. Thomas with great haste
snatches a paper out of the Officers hand, and ere he could have time to read
the contents, cried out, Here Is Treason. It was a list of names, some at
length, others only with the initial letters. The searcher opening another
paper, and beginning to read, Mr. Thomas again cries out, There Is Treason
against His Majesty, and therefore the papers (and the person upon whom they
were found, had he been present) ought to be secured. The Officers knowing
better what belong to their own Office, than that of a Justice of the Peace,
take these papers, and carried them not to a Secretary of State (as Mr. Thomas
charged them) but to their own Masters at the Custom-house, permitting a
Gentlewoman there present, at the request of Mrs. Harris, to go along with them.

Mrs. Harris being in a great perplexity at this unexpected and surprising
seizure; yet lost not the use of her prudence, but sends her brother, and
presently follows her self, to find out the Colonel at the sign of the Cat in
St. Paul's Churchyard, where the Colonel left word at his going abroad, he might
be spoke with at eleven of the clock; and she met him just going to the
designed place.

She relates him (all amazed) the whole of this affair; and out of her too
great care for his safety, advised him to take Lodgings in the City, promising
to convey to him the rest of his goods. But the Colonels Innocence and Courage
would not suffer him to follow the well-meant, but really ill counsel; for then
his withdrawing had been a flight, his flight had proved his guilt, and his
personal guilt had involved hundreds of innocent persons with him in the
condemnation. He therefore answers, That he was not conscious to himself of any
Treasonable Designs, and therefore would go to the Custom-house to know by what
authority his Box was seized, and what was become of these pretended papers.
Whither immediately he went.

There he meets with one Mr. Bostock that had searched his Chamber; who informed
him, That one Mr. Willoughby, the Monday before, came and informed of 2000 l.
worth of Flanders silver and gold Lace, stowed in such a place; and this was
the Contrivance of Mrs. Celliers own Mother-wit, who when Mr. Willoughby was at
a loss how to proceed with the Colonel when he had fixed the Papers behind his
bed, waving the old thredbare artifice of searching for arms, advised to make
the discovery by the Officers of the Custom-house. But here Colonel Mansell
understands that his Papers were all returned, all his own, and more than his
own, the Treasonable ones to boot; and accordingly at his return he finds the
Box restored, and the Papers lying on the Dresser, superscribed by the Master
of the house, For Col. Mansell. These Papers he opens in the presence of Mr.
Harris, Mrs. Harris, and Mrs. Orde; desiring them to take notice of them and
their number, which was Nine; and desired, for more caution, Mr. Harris to put
his mark on them, that he might more certainly know, and confidently own them
to be the same when they should come to be examined before Authority; which he
resolved they should presently be. In order to which, he carries them with him
to advise with a Friend what to do in the case. Whose ready advice was, To go
forthwith to a Secretary of State. This he endeavored, but not finding my Lord
Sunderland or any of his Clerks at the Office, nor Mr. Secretary Coventry or
his Clerks in their Office, the Earl of Essex and Sir Henry Capel being also
from home; he addressed himself to a worthy Gentleman, Mr. Justice Warcup, to
whom he opened the whole affair; and having got together the Officers of the
Custom-house, the Master and Mistress of the Colonels Lodgings, and whatever
other Evidence they then had; he was pleased to take their Depositions: Upon
the whole matter it appeared to him, That it was a malicious design of this Mr.
Thomas, and therefore granted out a Warrant for his apprehension; which being
delivered to a Constable, this worthy Gentleman went along with him to Mr.
Celliers, a French Merchant, and a Papist, where Mr. Willoughby now, and the
St. Omers Boys formerly had lodged; where the Justice, Constable, and Warrant
found him.

As soon as Mr. Willoughby understood their errand, he cried out, Oh! this is
Mr. Mansell's doing! What has he cried Whore first! but I have been this day
with the King my self, and with Mr. Secretary Coventry, and have acquainted
them with the business; so that I suppose there will be some to enquire for him
ere his return. Col. Warcup answered him, That if he found Sureties to appear
at the Council Board next morning by nine of the Clock, he should at present
give him no further trouble. And Mr. Cellier the Frtnch Merchant, and an
Apothecary entering into Recognizance for that end, he was bailed.

Thursday October. 23. forenoon. That morning as the persons concerned attended
the Council in the Lobby, Mr. Willoughby met with a very unhappy rencounter;
who as he was going down the stairs of the Lobby, met with one Mr. Doyley an
Officer belonging to the Mint, who had formerly known and prosecuted one Mr.
Willoughby for disposing of false Guinnies, and Clipping of Money: Mr.
Willoughby espying him, and being perhaps Conscious of his former Crimes, began
to Curse without any Provocation, Damn and Sink him! what had Doyley to say to
him? Threatening, that if he had him out of the Court, he would run him through;
and that when ever he met him in Convenient place, he would be Revenged of him:
Mr. Doyley was indeed Surprised at such course Language; and the more, because
he knew a person of his Character could not have any Affairs that were good
there.

But my Lord Chief Justice North passing by toward the Council, and
Over-hearing the Repartees, Mr. Doyley made Application to his Lordship; and
presently Mr. Justice Warcup was sent for in, and Ordered to take the
Information of Mr. Doyley against Mr. Willoughby, with order to a Messenger to
take Mr. Willoughby into Custody: Mr. Justice Warcup directs the messenger to
take him to the King's Head Tavern; whither as soon as the Council was risen, he
promised to come: and during the stay there, Mr. Willoughby, (who had his Boy
in Livery to wait on him, for his trade would have maintained it) Writes a
Note, and directs it to Mris. Cellier, to this purpose; That she should go to
the Lord, and Lady Powis, and acquaint them that he was taken up, for the old
business they knew of. This Note the Messenger would not suffer the Boy to
Carry till he read the Contents of it, and then he dismissed him, who carried
according to direction.

This morning, the Council had the Affair of Mr. Dugdale before them, so that
when Colonel Warcup had delivered in his Examinations taken the day before,
about Mr. Willoughby, they were all Commanded to appear in the afternoon at
four of the Clock.

Thursday Oct. 23. Afternoon.
MR. Willoughby was first called in, and presently coming forth, Colonel
Mansell was called in, to whom the Lord Chancellor was pleased to say: What
Correspondencies are these you hold? Here are Papers of dangerous Consequence,
such as intimate the Levying of Men, and raising Rebellion against his Majesty!
Here is also a List of men's Names whom you have Enlisted. The Collonell humbly
replied, that he knew nothing of those Letters, and Papers; neither had he, or
did, or ever would hold any Treasonable Correspondence with any person living.
He humbly prayed the Favor of the Honorable Board, that he might be permitted
to give an account how he came by the sight of those Papers, and then he did
not Question but he should make it appear, that those Papers were designedly,
and maliciously brought into his Chamber by Mr. Willoughby.

Hereupon the Colonel gave to their Lordships, a full and clear, yet Concise
Account of what he knew, or had been informed in, by Persons of the Family
where he Lodged, and the Officers of the Custom-house: and being Commanded to
call in his Witnesses, he accordingly did so

Mr. Alexander Harris was first Sworn, who Witnessed, that the Papers before
that Honorable Board, were the same left at his house for Colonel Mansel, by
the Officer of the Custom-house.

Mr. Stretch, and Mr. Bostock, were next Sworn, who deposed amongst other
matters, That Mr. Willoughby having informed them of certain Prohibited Goods
concealed in Ax-Yard, appointed them to come to him at Mr. Celliers House in
Arundel-Buildings the last Monday; Whither being come, in order to the Search
and Seizure, Mr. Willoughby told them he was not yet Ready, having not yet
Lodged at his New Quarters; but would not Fail to be there that present Night,
and therefore appointed them to come thither on Wednesday Morning. That at the
time prefixed they came, and found Mr. Willoughby with his Friend in their
Chamber; that Mr. Willoughby took him aside, and Whispered to him, that the
Goods were in the Room above-head, and desired him to charge himself to Assist
them: That after a narrow Search, finding no such Goods as were informed of,
Mr. Willoughby pointed toward the Bed, which they drew out Three Foot from the
Wall, and Searched with all Exactness; but still Mr. Willoughby pointing to the
Beds-head, Mr. Stretch went once more behind the Bed, with a Candle; but with
the same Success. At last Mr. Willoughby going behind the Beds-head alone,
called to the Officers; What Is that hangs there? Showing them a Packet of
Papers, pinned to the Beds-Head. The Officer taking them down, Mr. Willoughby
snatched one of them out of his Hand; and ere he could Read any thing, cried
out, Here is Treason! The Officer taking another Paper, and reading it, there
were Words to this Purpose: I wonder at your Delay, and that the Four Lords
have left Us; for now the Old tyrant has declared himself a Papist! At which
Words, Mr. Willoughby cried out; Ay, That Is the King! That Is the King, he
means! Did not I tell you, these were Treasonable Papers? and that you ought to
Secure them, and the Person too, if he had been here; and carry them either
before the Council, or a Secretary of State? Mr. Stretch also swears, That
these were the same Papers, that were taken from behind the Beds-head; and that
he did verily believe, they were put there by Mr. Willoughby.

It was now late; and the Council rising, ordered Mr. Willoughby to be
Committed to a Messenger; and Colonel Mansel, with his Witnesses, to appear
the next Day, at Four of the Clock in the Afternoon.

Friday, October. 24. Afternoon, at the Council Board.
THe Council being met, Colonel Mansel put in his Humble Petition, That the
rest of his Witnesses might be heard: Upon which His Majesty was pleased to
order, That the Cause should be heard the next Council-Day.

Mr. Willoughby moved, that till that time, he might stand upon Bail; but an
Order was granted, That he should remain in the Messenger's Custody, as before:
With which Order, the Messenger acquainted him very Civilly: But he stormed,
and swore, He was confident, there was no such Order; for he knew, there were
those within, that would not suffer him to be so treated. But the Messenger
insisted upon his Order, and demanded his Sword; which he refused to deliver to
him, but to another Messenger. However, Mr. Willoughby was safely Conducted to
the Messenger's House.

The Council that Night, after a short Recess, sat again; And his Majesty was
graciously pleased, to appoint the Collonel's Affair to be heard on Monday
following, at Four in the Afternoon: And then a Motion he made, That Colonel
Mansel should also be Committed; The Right Honorable, the Lord Chancellor
opposed the Motion, and so it fell.

Monday, October. 27, 1679. At the Council Board.
ABout Five or Six of the Clock, in the Afternoon, the Colonel, and Mr.
Willoughby, were called in; where, after a short Repetion of the Charge against
the Colonel, employed in the Papers, he prepared to make his Defense.

Mr. Willoughby, having received Instructions fresh out of the Mint, in the
Tower, addressed himself to his Majesty, with a peculiar Confidence; affirming,
That there were Sixteen of these Papers found in his Chamber; and therefore, he
desired to know, what was become of all the rest? As also, of the Box of
Treasonable Printed Pamphlets, and Two or Three hundred Letters? Adding, that
Mansel had got together a Company of Witnesses, to disparage the King's
Evidence, and to palliate his own Treasonable Practices: And desired, he might
have the Leave to ask the Colonel some Questions.

It was granted; and Mr. Willoughby proceeded: Whether did not the Colonel
frequent the Angel Clubb, behind the Exchange, and diverse others in the City?
Whether he did not keep a Clubb of his own, at one Street's, a
Tallow-Chandler's House, in the Marketplace, Westminster? Whether he did not
know one Disney, Grange, England, L'isle, and one Capt. Brown? Whether he did
not bring into his Clubb one Night, a scandalous Pamphlet, called, A Word
without Doors; and there publicly read it? And afterward, used Treasonable
Words against his R. Highness? The Colonel owned, that he knew many of the
Gentlemen by him mentioned; but that they were all very honest Gentlemen, and
Loyal Subjects; and all of them Inhabitants of Westminster, saving only Capt.
Brown; who had been Lieutenant to Major Russel's Troop of Horse, in his R.
Highnesses Regiment: But all Treasonable Discourses with them, or any other, he
utterly disavowed; and was thereupon commanded to call the rest of his
Witnesses.

Mr. Harris, and Mrs. Harris, first appeared; who witnessed, as before, That
the Number of the Papers (contrary to Mr. VVilloughby's Allegation) were not
Sixteen, but Nine.

Mr. Bostock confirmed the same; and further, That those Papers, then before
the Honorable-Board, were the same Papers found behind the Beds-head; And that
he did verily believe, Mr. VVillonghby had placed them there.

Mr. Stretch being Sick, appeared not; but his Depositions were read, tending
to the same Effect.

Colonel Mansel then produced a Record, to prove, That Mr. Willoughby had
been Indicted, at an Assize held at Salisbury, for the County of Wilts, in
Three Indictments, for uttering Counterfeit Guinnties to three several Persons.
That upon his Trial, he confessed all the Indictments; and was Fined Five
Pound, upon each Indictment; and further Sentenced, to stand in the Pillory, he
broke the Goal, ran away, and escaped the Execution of the Third.

The Lord Chancellor, and the Lord President, asked Mr. Willoughby, What he
Could say for himself? Who denied, that ever he had been at Salisbury in all
his Life. His Majesty was pleased to ask him, Whether he would take his Oath,
that he was never there? He readily answered, That he would not only take his
Oath, but take the Sacrament upon it also! The Lord President replied; What,
will you swear against a Record? Here Is a Record brought in against you! Yet he
persisted to deny, that he was ever there.

Capt. Bedford, his Friend, was then called in; who gave a full Relation, how
Mr Willoughby came to him on Tuesday Night before, to desire him to Lodge with
him at his New-Lodgings. He confirmed the Evidence of Mrs. Harris, and the
rest, as to the manner of Searching the Collonel's Chamber, and the finding of
the Papers: Adding, further; That going to Mr. Cellier's House, to speak with
Mr. Willoughby, he told him what an Evil Thing he had done, not only to the
Colonel, but himself, to engage him in so vile a Business, which now was so
clearly laid open: And therefore, desired him to discover the whole Truth, and
who had Engaged him in it. To which Mr. Willoughby replied; Pish! I doubt not
to come off; for the Greatest Man in England, has engaged me in it. To which
Capt. Bedford rejoyned, Whom do you mean, The King? Ay! said Mr. Willoughby,
The King! And further; That he understood, that Mr. Willoughby held
Correspondence with the Lord Powis, in the Tower; and that he had seen the Lady
Powis her Coach, on Saturday before, standing before Mr. Willoughby's Lodgings.

Mr. Doyley was the next Witness called in, who Deposed, that he had Prosecuted
the said Willoughby at two several Sessions held in the Old-Bayley, for
Clipping of Money, and Vending of False Guinnies. Mr. Willoughby being Asked
what he could say to that? Answered, That he had been twice there Prosecuted,
by the said Mr. Doyley, but all was out of pure malice. He confessed that he
had been Fined Fifty Pounds for the First Offense; and for the Second, had
obtained His Majesty's Gracious Pardon; so that he hoped those Matters should
not be remembered against him. The Right Honorable the Earl of Essex, demanding
of him, Who had Solicited His Majesty for his Pardon? He Answered, Capt.
Richardson had put his Name into a Pardon, for which he gave him Three Guinnies.

Capt. Richardson was then Examined, who upon his Oath, Witnessed, That he had
this Mr. Willoughby in his Custody two Sessions: That the first time his Fine
was remitted, and he Discharged: That the second time, he had put his Name into
His Majesty's Newgate-Pardon; but that he never received any Guinnies from him,
upon such account; and indeed, he believed he was then not worth a Guinney.
That he never had a more Notorious Rogue in his Custody; who, during the time
of his Imprisonment, was always contriving Mischief, and creating Disturbance
amongst the Prisoners. That whilst he was there, he had practiced Forgery. That
in or about last May, one Mrs. Celliers, a Roman Catholic, and a Midwife, whom
he had observed to come to the Prison, to Visit and Relieve the Papists then in
his Custody, committed upon the account of the late Plot, paid Ten Pounds for
the Discharge of the said Willoughby, rigged him out in handsome Apparel, and so
took him away: Of which he took such particular Notice, That he acquainted Mr.
Justice Warcub what Mrs. Celliers had done; and that this Willoughby was a
dangerous Person, and desired him to keep an eye upon him. That he had observed
the said Willoughby, at Sir George Wakeman's Trial, to take Notes, and that he
carried them to the Lord Powis in the Tower. And Mr. Doyley further Witnessed,
that he saw the said Willoughby in the Lord Powis his Lodgings, the day after
the said Trial; where he heard him villifying Dr. Oats, and Captain Bedlow,
and the rest of the King's Evidence.

Afterward, one Smith (Mr. Willoughby's Footboy) was Examined; who testified,
That he was sent with a Message, and a Note from his Master, then in the
Messenger's Hand, to Mrs. Cellier, desiring her, to acquaint the said Lord
Powis, That he was taken into Custody for the old business he knew of. That for
two Months before, he had Lodged in the Lord Powis his house in Queens-Street.
That he had several times waited on his Master to the Lord Powis his Lodgings
in the Tower, which described to be in the Mint; that he had rode behind the
Coach, to attend his Master thither: That he had several times carried Letters
or Papers from his Master, to the said Lord Powis; and brought Answers back
again to his Master. And lastly, that the Lady Powis had several times been at
his Masters Lodgings at Mrs. Celliers; and that particularly on Saturday was
seven-night, the said Lady had been with his Master in a Tower-Room, in private
discourse with him alone, above half an hour.

The Lord Chancellor was then pleased to ask Mr. Willoughby, whither he had
been at the Lord Shaftsburies. To which he Answered, That he had been several
times with him, and had Discourses with his Lordship; some of which he there
Rehearsed. To which the Lord Chancellor replied, You are a fine Fellow; first
to come to His Majesty, and there to tell him one Story: Then to the Lord
Powis; and from thence to my Lord Shaftsburies; discovering to one, what
Discourse you held with the other: And thus brought one Story to the Council,
another to the Earl of Shaftsbury.

All were commanded to Withdraw, there being no need of the Testimony of the
rest of the Colonels Witnesses in a Matter so plain and clear. And presently a
Warrant was issued out from the Council Board, to Commit the said Mr.
Willoughby to Newgate, where he now remains, in his old Quarters; and an Order
was given for his Prosecution, to the Mr. Attorney General.

Wednesday, October. 29. 1679.
THis day Sir William Waller, whose known Activity, and Zeal for the Service of
His Majesty, and the Protestant Religion, did never yet abate; upon some
information, thought it Expedient to make a through Search in the House of Mrs.
Cellier, if perhaps something might be further discovered, to give Light to
this Mystery of Iniquity; where he found that Book, containing the Rudiments of
their designed Plot upon the Protestants; which has been already Exemplifyed:
And I shall only now, give the Copy of the Examination of a Maidservant, in
the House, which was as follows.

The Examination of Anne Blake, Servant to Mrs. Cellier, taken on Oath before
Sir William Waller, the 29th. October, 1679.
THis Examinant says, that Mrs. Cellier delivered into her Custody two parcels
of papers, desiring her to lay them up for her, so as they might not be
discovered, or words to that effect: And that in obedience to her Mistresses
commands, this Examinant hid one parcel of Papers behind the Pewter in the
Kitchen, and the other parcel wrapped up in a sheet of white paper, amongst which
was a little Paperbook tied with red Ribbons, which for the better security was
hid in a Tub of Meal, both which parcels were seized by Sir William Waller:
This Examinant further says, that one Lane was this day, at the said Mrs.
Cellier's House to speak with her; and further this Examinant says not at
present.

Cap. and Jurat. coram William Waller.
The Mark of Anne Blake.

Saturday November 1. 1679. At the Council Chamber in White Hall.
THis day the Right Honorable the present Lord Mayor came to White Hall, and
delivered to His Majesty, or to His Right Honorable Privy Council the
Information of Thomas Dangerfield given upon Oath before his Lordship, an
Extract whereof the Reader has already had in these Papers, as the Particulars
referred to the matters discoursed of.

This day also several other Persons were examined before the Lords of the
Council as follows.

Susan Edwards Servant-Maid to Mrs. Cellier, who lives in Arundel-Street being
sworn, says: That she carried the two little Papers which were showed her to
Mr. Willoughby, in Newgate, with Twenty Shillings in Silver, and a Guinney; and
two Books of Accounts, that he might be perfect in them, and that he looked on
the one, and not on the other, and that on Tuesday Night last, she carried a
Message to the said Mr. Willoughby, from her said Mistress. That her life was
in his hands.

And that the Lady Powis had been thrice at Mrs. Cellier's House in five weeks
time, that she had lived there, and that once the said Lady Powis had there
spoken with the said Mr. Willoughby.

The Mark of the said Susan Edwards.



Note, that the little Papers mentioned in this Information, are these. PAPER I.
I have said you were taken into my House to get in Desperate Debts: They bring
me to L. S. They will ask me who encouraged me to go to him? I will say, it was
you! It cannot worst you.

PAPER II.
I never change.





Then was Mr. Dangerfield alias Willoughby further examined, and to his
Information before the Lord Mayor he made the following Additions.

That he had Orders to burn all Papers.

That all the Lords in the Tower gave him money; One a Guinney; Another Thirty
Shillings; One half a Guinney, Others Fifteen or Sixteen Shillings, and desired
him to go to Turner to print his Remarks on the Trials: There were others who
wrote short Hand, and his Remarques were put amongst theirs.

When Lane lay at Powis-House, that Lord advised he should be sent out of the
way, for said the Lord Powis, Oats searches for him, and if he be found at my
House, 'twould Ruin us all.

That Mr. Stamford, the Newburg-Agent, and Mrs. Celier walked together in
Lincolns-inn-Walkes, to discourse of Sir George Wakeman's escape, and that the
Informant found them there; and Stamford did then show him the Copy of a paper,
that had been posted up at Sir George Wakeman's Door, importing a Menace,
Though he had escaped at his Trial. That he saw Sir George at Stamford's House,
in whose own Room he lay; and Sir George told him, he was there fain to abscond
for fear. And that he had five hundred Pounds by the Queens order for his
Transportation.

That the Informant advised him first to buy a small Boat for thirty or forty
Pounds, to carry him over: then proposed the passing in one of the Chaloupes
that used to transport Wool. That Sir George likeing the same, went down to
Rumney-Marsh, proposing first to go in his Calash, and pass for a Frenchman,
and to take the Informant with him, to return with advice of his Success, but
that he did not do. That being with a Friend in Rumney-Marsh, he writ up for
new advise to Mr. Stamford, and the Informant hearing thereof, advised that one
should go over, and bring a Chaloup from Calice, to take him in, about six
miles from Dover, which accordingly took Effect, and he escaped to Newport.

That Dormer did write, The tranfforming of Traitors into Martyrs; That Gadbury
had writ a Ballad, and several other Pamphletts.

That being brought to the D. with the Paper he had received from the Lady
Powis, the D. knew not but that it was real, and said it seemed considerable.

That when he first returned from the Lord Shaftsbury and gave Mrs. Cellier an
account of the disappointment of the matter for that time, Mr. Cellier the
Husband was present.

That he had twenty Guinneys from the D's. own Royal Hand, when he came at
another time to him about the Plot.

That when he went the second time to the Lord Shaftsbury, if God had not
prevented, he had certainly stabbed him, intending to have put out the Candle,
and under pretense to go down to light it, give it to one of the Servants, and
then escape. That his Lordship refusing to speak to him alone, but would have
his Servant by, did prevent it.

He says they were angry that he did not make Oath, as Secretary Coventry
required him, before he would give him a Warrant to Search. And that having
pined the Letters on Mansells Bed, he was ordered by the Lords to go and tell
the King thereof, least the Custom House Messengers should have concealed them.

That When he was put into Custody, Mrs. Cellier sent presently to one Wiggs an
Attorney to get him out by Habeas Corpus.

That the Lord Powis bid him follow his Ladies Advice, and consult with Turner
his Priest, and be sure what his Lady advised came from him, and the rest of
the Lords in the Tower.

He did acknowledge the two Books to be his Handwriting, whereof one was found
in the Meal-Tubb, and said that the Lady Powis, did declare all those Names
with her own Mouth.

That it was a while after Sr. George Wakeman was transported, that the Lord
Arundel spoke to him in the Lord Powis's Bedchamber about Killing the King.

That in his ordinary Discourse with Mrs. Cellier, the King went by the name of
the Lady Mary, and the Duke by the Name of the Lady Anne, by agreement between
them.

The same Day. Afternoon.
Mrs. Cellier being sent for out of the Gate House, and examined upon the
Information of Willoughby, alias Dangerfeild, Said.

That he had for some time layn at her House. That she having Money to
distribute at the Prisons. Willoughby begged there of her, and she collecting
three Pound ten Shillings, got him released. That her Husband having great
Debts due to him, which looked desperate, he was employed in recovery of the
same, and was to have six Shillings in the Pound for what he could get in: and
besides she employed him to Bayl out two or three Prisoners, and that was all
which Willoughby did for her. She denies she paid either twenty Pound or five
Pound to get him out. That she never sent him of any Errand to the Tower.

That being troubled in her House with Sr. William Waller's Searches, she
obtained leave to be at the Lady Powis's House, and Willoughby's Lodgings at
the Got, being troublesome also, he was desired to go and be at this Examinants
House with her Husband. That she never saw Willoughby and the Lady Powis at her
House speaking together but once.

That she did not write to Willoughby at his late being in Newgate. But when
the Note was shown her, with a Seal thereon, and some Crosses on the Paper,
and these words I never change, she confessed the same.

She pretended Ignorance also of another Paper, Importing what excuse Mr.
Willoughby should make, but that also being produced, she could not deny that
it was her Hand.

She said she knew not of any Design to kill the Lord Shaftsbury, but that
being told her House was to be searched, she did go to the said Earl on Monday
was seven-night, and he gave her a kind Answer.

She says she never employed Willoughby to draw Articles against Capt.
Richardson, but yet confessed she had seen some he had drawn himself.

Willoughby was here called in to Confront her, who acquainted the Board: That
about the latter end of March Mrs. Cellier enquiring of Mrs. White for a man
of desperate Nature, she named him: That he was first employed by Mrs. Cellier
to draw Articles against Cap. Richardson: That she sent by her Maid three
Pounds ten Shillings, in order to get him out, and afterward more, near five
Pounds. That he Was arrested immediately and carried to the Counter; that Mrs.
Celliers Maid brought him there fifty Shillings, and by the means of Bannister,
and Scarlett, he was removed to the King's Bench: there he was visited by her
with Bannister, she commended his looks, gave him twenty Shillings, and so much
afterward per week. She ordered him to observe the motions of Strode, who was
there in Prison, to get those Papers from him, which concerned Bedlow.

That he was advised by Hitton a Priest, and others to put Opium in Strode's
Drink, in order to search him when fast asleep for Papers. That Margaret, Mrs.
Celliers Maid, brought him Opium, from her Son's in Law, Blasdell the
Apothecary; that Mounson told him how to use it, and to drink Brandy with him
in the Cellar, with which Strode was only drowzy: that a double Dose was sent,
which he put for him into a Tankard of small Beer, but it tasting bitter, and
he being grown jealous, flung Tankard, and all upon the Ground; he says also,
that Mounson gave him leave to drink and be drunk too, as a thing lawful for
the good of the Catholic Cause.

Mr. Willoughby continued to make a Repetition of his whole Information,
wherein Mrs. Cellier was concerned, to which she answers by denial of all,
falling down on her Knees, beseeching his Majesty, she might not be tortured;
for what ever she should say by reason of Torture, then that she said at
present, would be false.

She denies to know any thing of Mr. Sharp the Priest at VVild-House, she owns
to have seen Willoughby at Mass, but never at Confession.

Willoughby speaking of his Papers, said; that at Mrs. Celliers he had from
the Lady Powis, the List of the Counselors, and that it came from the Tower:
that two thirds of that Book came from the Lady Powis, and the rest of the
Information from Capt. Bedford.

Mrs. Cellier Confesses at last that she hid the Papers in the Meal-Tub, but it
was his desire: she acknowledges she did give him caution to call the King Lady
Mary, and the Duke, the Lady Anne.

Willoughby says, that Knowles the Priest, and Sharp, advised him, on all
occasions to stand firm to what he undertook, and that he would thereby merit
Heaven.

Mrs. Cellier, acknowledges the business of calculating Willoughby's Nativity,
but that Gadburie's Papers made it appear that Willoughby was to be hanged.

Then was the Lady Powis called in, and examined upon the Information of Mr.
Dangerfield, who generally denies all: That she sent any Letter to Mounson in
the King's Bench: That Margaret ever carried any Letter from her, to get the
Papers out of Strode's hands; or that she gave Mr. Willoughby thanks for his
diligence therein: She denies that she has seen him above three times in her
life: That she had any Letter from Mr. Jeane at Peterley by Willoughby.

Yet acknowledges she paid Mrs Cellier ten Shillings per week for Mr.
Willoughby's Diet.

She says that his Lodging at Powis House, was without her knowledge.

She owns, that about a Fortnight since she called at Mrs. Celliers, that Mr.
Willoughby came into the Room where she was, which was the only time she
conversed with him there; and then he told her of some Treasonable Letters hid
at Westminster, and that the Secretary had refused him a Warrant to search for
them without making an Affidavit. And that then Mrs. Cellier had advised him to
make use of the Custom-House Officers to search for them.

She knows nothing of Colonel Mansfield, nor of any Papers put by Willoughby
into his Chamber; nor never gave him fifteen Papers, and a List of Names, nor
mentioned any Scrivener to him to Copy any Papers: She knows not she had any
occasion to advise him to burn his Papers.

She denies giving him any Instructions, and knows nothing of his going to the
Earl of Shaftsbury. She saw him in the Stone-Gallery, but was not within
distance of speaking to him: She never heard of any proposition of
VVilloughby's killing the King: She abominates the thoughts, or mention of any
such wickedness; and denies she ever spoke of his neglecting any opportunity,
as to the King, or the Lord Shaftsbury, and denies that Willoughby evet told
her he had been in a Room with the King alone.

Mr. Wood being examined, says, he knows Willoughby, and has seen him at Mrs.
Celliers, and other Places, but never at the Tower: When Willoughby dined with
the Lord Powis's Servants there, he was from home; he owns he paid Mrs. Cellier
twenty pound for the Prisoners; but denies he brought Willoughby any money for
Lane.

MIDDLESEX and WESTMINSTER.
The Information of Mrs. Jane Bradley of Westminster Widow, taken upon Oath,
this First Day of November, 1679. Before me Edmond Warcup Esquire, one of His
Majesty's Justices of the Peace, in the said County, and City.
THis Informant says, that upon a Saturday about three weeks ago, one Thomas
Curtice late of Lancashire, now in, or about London, came to Heaven, where this
Informant lives, and as she was lighting him out of doors, he told her, that he
heard there were Commissions giving forth, and that Mr. Blood had the giving
them out, and added, that if he could get one of them, it would be Five
thousand pounds in his way; and that this Informant should have part of it;
whereupon this Informant asked him, what way he propounded to get one of them?
who answered by Captain Brown, who was one of his Countrymen, with whom he was
acquainted: Sometime after which, the said Thomas Curtice, brought the said
Captain Brown to the same House, but they then discoursed nothing of the
business in her hearing: but this Informant did, and does apprehend, that the
said Curtice meant that those Commissions, were to be given out against the
King. And she further says, that she sent for Mr. Blood, and acquainted him
with the said Discourse, who answered 'twas very well done, to tell him
thereof, but there was no such thing in being; and about a week after, Mr.
Blood gave this Informant a broad piece of Gold, saying you are a poor woman,
and directed her to know as much as she could of the matter; and accordingly
this Informant did enquire of the said Curtice about the 5000 l. but could get
nothing out of him, more than that he was well assured of the 5000 l. And she
further says, that Mr. Blood, and Captain Brown, had been at Heaven, together;
before that time; and she remembers that she did tell the said Brown, that one
Lawton, one Pember, and one Tresby were acquainted with the said Curtice, and
she heard the said Lawton, was a Priest-taker. And further says not at present.

Jurat. Die, and Anno supradict. coram me Edm. Warcup.
Jane Bradley.

The said Jane Bradley does further say upon her Oath, that the last time she
spoke to the said Thomas Curtice, which was when he fetched a strawhat from
Heaven, she said unto him words to this effect: When is it that we must get the
5000 l? to which he answered: I will not meddle in it; it troubles my
conscience, and it were but treachery in me if it were done, and it is to no
purpose, to meddle in it, for there is a List found out, or to that effect.

Jurat. Die, and Anno supradict. coram me Edm. Warcup.
Jane Bradley.

Sunday, November 2. 1679. At the Council Board.
1. John Gadbury being examined, says, he has seen Willoughby once or twice
at his House with Mrs. Cellier, and that he believes he may have cast his
Nativity, by the name of Thomas, at the desire of Mrs. Cellier, and two more
Nativities for her two Daughters. He says, that looking upon VVilloughby's
Horoscope, it prognosticates a bold and adventurous man; but does not remember,
that he said to Mrs. Cellier, that he would be hanged; but it is possible he
might. That he cast likewise the Lord Powis's Nativity, as he does that of all
Persons of Quality, the certain time of whose Birth he can be assured of.

2. Matthew Hopkinson a Scrivener over against Somerset House, acknowledges,
that he transcribed a List of Names, and a Letter of Mr. VVilloughby's, in a
Room, two pair of stairs high; but he does not remember, that it was out of a
woman's hand.

And the List, and Letter being showed to him, he owned them to be his
handwriting.

3. Sir James Buttler, owned the taking of an Affidavit, of Lane, about Buggery
charged upon Mr. Oats, and that a woman came with the said Lane to him.

4. Thomas Jolly the Tailor, being sworn, says, he carried a Letter, from Mrs.
Cellier to the Lady Powis, and brought back an Answer, Mr. Willoughby being
then present. That he has seen Mr. Willoughby half a dozen times at Mrs.
Celliers.

Upon the full hearing of these several Informations and Examinations, we have
this public account of the result of the Council.

White Hall, November 2. Mr. Thomas Dangerfield, alias Willoughby, having
been examined the 27th. past by the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council,
concerning certain dangerous and treasonable Papers, seized in Colonel Roderick
Mansel's Chamber, which it appeared to their Lordships, had been by him
conveyed thither, was thereupon by Order of the Board, committed to Newgate, and
having since given in an Information, to the Lord Mayor of London, of several
treasonable practices against His Majesty's Person, and Government; and of his
having been prevailed with by several of the Popish Religion to counterfeit the
abovementioned Papers and Letters, by which diverse Noblemen, and other
Protestants were to have been brought under a suspicion of carrying on a Plot,
against His Majesty's Government. And the said Information being yesterday
morning brought to His Majesty by the Lord Mayor, and by His Majesty sent to
the Council Board, Mr. Dangerfield was sent for, and further examined by their
Lordships; who thereupon the last Night, committed the Earl of Castlemain to
the Tower, and Mrs. Cellier to Newgate; and did this day likewise commit Mr.
Gadbury to the Gate House, and Mr. Rigaut to Newgate, several other Persons
accused, being in the Custody of His Majesty's Messengers; and their Lordships
have appointed the further Examination of this Matter on Tuesday next.

November. the 2d. the same day.
1. The Deposition of William Woodman, taken upon Oath on the 2d. of November.
1679. before the Lords of His Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council.
Who says, That he has known Mr. Willoughby, at the Lord Powis his House, for
about Two Months time, and that he has seen him and Mrs. Cellier, write there
very often. That he carried a Packet of Letters from Mr. Willoughby, or Mrs.
Cellier, to the Lady Powis at the Tower, and that her Ladyship opened the
Packet, and read some of the Letters, and gave others to him the said Woodman,
who carried them to one Nevile, in the King's Bench, and that he has carried
Letters diverse times between Mrs. Cellier, and Mr. Willoughby and Nevile.

William Woodman.

2. The Information of Mary Ayray, taken upon Oath, the 2d. day of November.
1679. before the Lords of His Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council.
This Informant says upon her Oath, That she went with Willoughby and Duddell
to Nevile in the King's Bench, and left Willoughby at a Coffee-house by the way,
and carried a Sheet of Notes taken at Langhorne's Trial, which Willoughby writ,
but was given her by Mrs. Cellier, to carry to Nevile: And she says she
carried a Letter from Nevile to Mrs. Cellier, and a Letter from Mrs. Cellier to
the Lady Powis; she has also seen Singe, with Mrs. Cellier, and she has seen
Willoughby write the Speeches of the Five Jesuits, the which Mrs. Cellier did
dictate to him: And says also, That she has seen Lane at Powis-House, who went
by the name of Johnson; and that Mrs. Cellier ordered him to be called by that
Name. This Informant also says that she went with my Lady Abergaveny last
Winter, to the Earl of Shaftsbury, about her being Indicted as a Popish
Recusant, but has not been at any other time since with the Earl of Shaftsbury;
but knows nothing of the Earl of Shaftsbury's being threatened to be killed by
the Lady Abergaveny: And says, That Mr. Nevile did bid her tell my Lady Powis,
that he would write to his Friend.

Mary Ayray.

3. The Information of Bennett Duddell a Joyner, Taken upon Oath before His
Majesty in Council: Nov. 2. 1679.
The Informant says, That he has wrought at Powis House, and has there seen
Mr. Willoughby; that he went with Mrs. Ayray, to see one in Prison, in the
King's Bench, but knew not that his Name was Nevile, that Mr. Willoughby stayed
in the mean time at a Coffee-house thereby. He says, that when they returned,
they brought some Papers with them, and that soon after Mrs. Ayray went to the
Tower. That he has at Powis House seen Mr. Willoughby, Mrs. Cellier, and
others often Writing: He remembers that one Mr. Lane lay there in the House,
and that Mrs. Cellier was once in great fear, when she thought that Lane was
lost. He does remember that Mr. Willoughby did once ask him, if he could make a
Hand-Press, in order to Printing, and he made answer, he would ask the Lord
Powis and his Lady, if he might make such a thing: He says he went Once or
Twice, with Mrs. Ayray to the Gatehouse; who went with money to the Prisoners:
But the reason of his being the more with Mrs. Ayray, was by the reason of a
Match proposed by Mrs. Cellier, between him and her: That in Powis House there
is a private place made by him, and by the Lady Powis Order: Sworn before the
King in Council.

Bennett Duddell.

Tuesday November, 4th. 1679.
His Majesty sat in Council, in the Afternoon, to Examine further into the
Discovery made by Thomas Dangerfield, alias Willoughby.

1. The Lady Powis was called in, to whom the Deposition of Woodman being read,
her Ladyship said:

That to her knowledge she never had Packet from Willoughby, or ever sent a
Packet to Nevile: That she has had several Letters from Mrs. Cellier, and
perhaps she may have given at sometime a Packet to her Ladyships Boy, written
from some body else. That her Ladyship never went to see Nevile at the
King's Bench, but going thither to see the Lady Gage, some body pointed to
Nevile as he was at the Window, and once before that she thinks she saw him
elsewhere: That she never had Letter from Nevile, though perhaps she might have
had one from Willoughby.

2. To the Deposition of Duddell, she says:

That it is true, one Mr. Ayray did bring to the Tower some Remarks upon
Langborn's Trials; but she never saw any thing brought from Nevile at the
King's Bench.

3. To the Deposition of Susan Edwards, she says:

That though she had been at Mrs. Celliers, she never had once allighted out of
her Coach to have Discourse with Mr. Willoughby.

4. To the Deposition of Mrs. Ayray, she says (as before)

That she never brought her Ladyship any Message from Mr. Nevile.

5. To the Deposition of Jolly a Tailor, her Ladyship says:

That she had Two or Three short Notes from Mr. Willoughby, as also a great
Packet of Papers brought by Jolly from him, but looking them over, she found
them very Insignificant things; that once or twice she had some short Notes
from Willoughby, but was much surprised to receive them.

She affirms, That Willoughby never told her of his having been alone with the
King; though she was indeed told it by Mrs. Cellier: But for any such answer,
as to lament that he was not then prepared to kill the King: She never gave it,
and abhors any such thoughts, having never heard of any such thing, or any
other Treason in her life.

That for Willoughby's Lodging so long at her House, all the Servants are able
to testify, that it was without her knowledge, and when she came there, he
still endeavored to keep out of her sight.

Willoughby said, That after he was Taken, Mrs. Cellier went to her Ladyship to
the Tower, to frame an execuse touching 40 s. that should have been lent him by
one of her Ladyships Servants.

Her Ladyship answered, It Is true; Mrs. Cellier came to her about some
contrivance of a Story about 40 s. to be owing to one of her Servants, but her
Ladyship chid her severely, and told her she would keep no Servant that could
be guilty of such a thing. Her Ladyship added, That she never saw Willoughby
but Twice.

Mrs. Cellier being called in, and asked, Whether she had not been at the Tower
with the Lady Powis, to frame some excuse against Willoughby? She flatly denied
the same; but being told that the Lady Powis had even newly owned it: She then
confessed, That on Thursday Seven-night, she was there, and told her Ladyship how
her Husband, and her Son, were bound for Willoughby 's appearance, when Justice
Warcup came, and took him from her House.

That Willoughby did indeed advise her to say something touching Money due to a
Servant of the Lady Powis; but that her Ladyship hearing thereof, was
displeased at it: Then she railes at Willoughby.

And being told of her Industry to get Willoughby 's Nativity Cast: She said
that Willoughby having desired the same, she got Mr. Gadbury to do it: But Mr.
Willoughby affirmed, that Mrs. Cellier sent her Maid Margaret, whilst he was
in Prison, for the time of his Birth; and that he did not understand for what
intent it was.

Mr. Edward Bedford, was then called in, who referred himself to the Account he
had given of his Correspondence with Mr. Willoughby, by Information to Mr.
Justice Warcup.

And further says, That he went about with Mr. Willoughby to several Clubs.

That he went with him also to Thompson in Fetter-Lane, who was then Printing
the Presbyterian Unmasked: That Mr. Willoughby has brought with him to the
Coffee-House, Papers fresh, and wet from the Press: That Mr. Willoughby went to
pay Moneys to Mr. Dormer in St. John's: That Mr. Willoughby enquired of him
after Clubs; and that he nameing the King's Head Club, thither they went, and
would have got a List of the Names, but the Drawer refused. The like happened
at another place; but at the Green Dragon they got a list of about 60. Names of
such as used to meet there.

Afterward they went to the Sun and Ship Taverns, to enquire if the D. of
Monmouth had not been there the Night before his departure.

That Willoughby told him, How by Gadbury's means he was acquainted with Sir R.
Peyton, and by him was getting into the King's Head Club, but that Sir Robert
dissuaded him upon the account of the Charge, for that they did sometimes make
a Purse of One or Two Guinies a Man, about special service.

That Mr. Willoughby lay for a time at the Goat near Exeter-House, and that
going with him once thence to drink Cock-Ale, it so flew up into Willoughby's
head, that going to a Coffee-house, he raised a great Quarrel there, about a
word relating to Sir Thomas Player; the matter of which had been heard by Mr.
Secretary Coventry. That Willoughby showed him a Paper called the State of the
Three Kingdoms; that Willoughby told him, that the Lord Shaftsbury, Dr. Tongue,
Sir William Waller, etc. had private meetings about Fox-Hall about the Plot,
and that it was there hatched by them: That Willoughby had Lodgings at Mrs.
Celliers, and lamented once unto him his wanting of 20 l. for some great
design. That he had been at the Lord Clarendon's, whom Mr. Willoughby
complained of as a dilatory man.

Willoughby asked Bedford, If at their being together in Cliffords Inn Garden,
he did not receive from him a gift of 40. s. And if he did not discourse to him
so, and so, Concerning the D. of York, and of the D. of Lauderdale, and about
Scotland? And touching 300 Horse that were to be raised by Sir William Waller?

Bedford denies any Gift of 40 s. in the Garden, but that he borrowed 40 s.
from him at two other times. That he never spoke to him of either of these
Dukes, or of Scotland: And as to the 300 Horse, he has given an Account of that
Matter to a Minister of State.

Willoughby replied, That as to this of the 300 Horse, he spoke it also to Mr.
Stanford, the D. of Newburgh's Agent, who if called upon, was able to testify
the same.

Mr. Secretary Coventry telling Willoughby, That he had affirmed how two thirds
of the Names mentioned in his Paper-book, were dictated to him, by the Lady
Powis, which he again affirming, was ordered to Mark the said Names with a
Cross in the Margin, which accordingly was done by him.

Mr. Justice Warcup coming in, acquainted the Board, That Mr. Cellier and his
Son in Law Blasden the Apothecary, did both attend: But that there were yet
wanting the Examinations of some of their Servants: Upon which the Lord
President directed him to take those Examinations.

Blasden called in and Sworn, says, That Margaret brought him a Note for
Opium, to cause rest, but he refusing to follow that direction, he mixed
something that was less dangerous, which the Maid afterward told him was so
weak, that it signified nothing; and therefore ordered him to mix somewhat a
great deal stronger.

Mr. Cellier being asked about the Paper of the Nativity, says, He read it not
himself, but that his Daughter read it to him. He remembers only something of
Prophecy, or a Man's Fortune. That there were in it, the words Horoscope,
Venus, Mercury, etc. That the man should be hanged the latter end of his life;
but he knows no more of it, or of whom it was, but that he burned the Paper,
and owns that he is a Roman Catholic and a French Merchant.

But Mr. Blasden, in whose House the Paper was read, says it set forth; How
that his adventure should be very various, and that he should come before some
judge, and be in danger in a Sea Fight.

Willoughby asked Cellier if he did not remember, when in the presence of his
Wife, He said he was then come from the Lord Shaftsbury. This he denies, and
also that he heard any Discourse extraordinary between Willoughby and Rigaut;
but that Rigaut had supped twice at his House, and Willoughby and he played at
some Game together. He denies also, That he saw any Dagger in his House, or
that ever any was hid under his Beds-side. He acknowledges to have seen the
Lady Powis at his House, but not six times.

But Mr. Blasden says, He has seen her Ladyships Coach a dozen times, which he
can see plain from his Shop; but does not remember to have seen her Ladyship go
into Mr. Cellier's above twice.

The Lord P. is called in, and having been told what was objected against him,
as having encouraged Mr. Willoughby at Gadbury's House, to go again to the Lord
Shaftsbury, and to be sure to dispatch him the third time: His Lordship flatly
denies any such thing, and then in a large discourse, Appeals to the known
Method of his Life and Conversation, his constant Services to the Crown, and
how little he is concerned in this matter, as being known by all good Men not
to be capable of such a thing: That as to the Earl of Shaftsbury, he came
lately over with great expectation of his aid and favor in Parliament,
touching an unhappy difference arisen with a great Ally (meaning his
Son-in-Law's Father) and that the Earl of Shaftsbury, had already testified so
much Countenance in this matter, that he came over full of Inclinations to do
that Lord greater Services than he can well express.

That before his Daughter was disposed of in Marriage, then a very Noble Lady,
The Lady Powis, who had testified very great Inclinations, to have her married
to her Ladyships Nephew: Upon which Obligation, he then grew Intimate with the
said Lady; and being a person that is not wont to forget his friends in their
afflictions, had often gone to that Lady to give her the best Comfort he could.
That waiting on her Ladyship, when he came lately from Flanders, she
recommended to him just at parting, a very charitable Woman, one Mrs. Cellier,
unto whom the late Duchess of York was a Debtor in 5 or 600 l. That his
Lordship being one of the Duke's Commissioners, did promise to further her
business: That in further recommendation of this Woman, the Lady added, That
she was a great Servant to the Duke, and also to the King: and also being a
Woman of great Understanding, and getting acquaintance, by her opportunity of
being a Midwife, into many considerable Families, she had wrought about several
incensed Persons to be of better Principles and Inclinations, both to the King,
and the Duke; and more particularly, That this Woman had now found out a man,
who was very able to discover very dangerous practices against the King.

That Mrs. Cellier came soon after to his Lodgings, That she gave a great
Character of one Willoughby, who had much improved himself abroad in the
Service of the Prince of Orange, and under the D. de Villa Hermosa; That this
man coming over, and resorting to the Coffee-houses, was much scandalized, at
the Rebellious discourses, that he heard, but that concealing his thoughts, he
grew familiar with the most mutinous, who liked him so well, that they carried
him to their Clubs and private meetings, and being admitted to their secrets,
he found, that great and dangerous things were preparing against the Parliament.

That she desired his Lordship but to procure a Warrant for making a search,
and that all the whole matter would be plainly discovered, but she desired,
that this Warrant might be obtained without the Kings knowledge. That of all
this Information his Lordship gave an account to the Duke, who refusing to have
any thing acted therein without the Kings knowledge, Willoughby came with Mrs.
Cellier to his Lodgings, where the Duke saw him, and he was afterward handed
to the King.

That when Willoughby came afterward to his Lordship, he mentioned the
difficulty of getting a Warrant, and complaining of want of Zeal in the Kings
Ministers, he said he would yet do his business without a VVarrant, and by the
Custom House way.

That as concerning the Lord Shaftsbury, Willoughby told him that there was
some woman about the Duke, that Writ to the Earl of Shaftsbury, all the
dangerous things she could invent, and to make proof of this, came afterward
to show two Letters which his Lordship presently saw were Written in Sir Rich.
Bulstrodes hand, and contained nothing touching the Duke, but such matters of
common intelligence from Bruxells, as he himself, or any other man might fitly
write.

Whereupon Willoughby pretended to him, that there was a third Letter of
greater importance, which he had lost, but as to those two Letters his Lordship
says they were given to the King.

Soon after this, Willoughby came to him, at midnight, and said, he was going
to Prison, to which his Lordship could only say, that if he were guilty of any
harm, he knew not how to help him, but if he were to suffer by mistake, the
Kings Ministers would soon discover it, and set him again at liberty.

His Lordship upon Willinghbies Question, did own that he being at Dinner at
Lambs, Willoughby did there come to him, about a meeting to be had at Mr.
Gadburies with Sir Robert Peyton, and perhaps it might be upon a Letter from
the Lady Powis, as Willoughby affirms.

His Lordship does acknowledge, that he gave his Servants charge to admit
Willoughby, when ever he came: and that he did also call him Captain
Willoughby: but the occasion was, that he telling his Lordship, that he hoped
His Majesty would gratify him, and provide him as good an employment, as he
had refused from the otherside, his Lordship did say, Doubtless His Majesty
would provide for him, and that when ever any forces were sent abroad, he need
not fear but that he should have a Company.

That he did not wonder at all at Willoughby's confident words, since they have
been the best Cards he had to Play for his Life: but that his Lordships actions
in the World have been such, as will exempt him from any shadow of reflection
that can happen by such a Creature as this.

As to the business of Sir R. Peyton, he would conceal nothing that the Council
desired to know. And first, he says, that he knows not that Sir Robert was
privy to any thing relating to Willoughby; but that Mrs. Cellier telling him,
(as he said before) the good offices she had done the King, and Duke, with some
that were inflamed against him, she named Sir Robert Peyton for one, who told
her, that if he could be forgiven what was past, he would come in, and help the
Government, but his greatest fear was from the Duke, who was thought to be a
person of Animosity, that could not forgive: That when his Lordship assured
Mrs. Cellier of the contrary; she told him, that Sir Robert would not be
willing to meet at any public place, but at Mr. Gadburies he would. Where
accordingly they met; where Sir Robert Peyton declared he would come in to the
Kings service to all purposes; that he seemed to complain of some hard measure,
and doubted much of the Dukes reconciliation: but his Lordship going far
toward Sir Roberts satisfaction, he afterward met the Duke at his Lordships
Lodgings, and had all the assurance he could desire; which is all that he
knows, or could say concerning Sir Robert Peyton.

Willoughby does acknowledge, that he told his Lordship of an ill woman in the
Dukes Family, that corresponded with the Lord Shaftsbury, and that, he said, he
had lost one of the Letters.

His Lordship tells the Board, that he cannot but be troubled to have his name
mentioned by so infamous a person as this was, but yet, if any whoever should
come to morrow to him again, and tell him of any dangerous practices against
the King and the Government, whether the Lord Shaftsbury, or any other Lord
whatsoever, he should hold himself bound in duty to hearken to any such person,
and to endavour to discover such danger by all the ways he could.

His Lordship being withdraws: Willoughby added, that the two Letters mentioned
were by him found in a drawer at the Lord Shaftsburies. That he gave them to
Mrs. Cellier, complaining they were Writ in an ill hand, but she carried them
to the Tower, saying the Lady Powis could read any hand. And further says, that
although the Lords in the Tower, found upon perusal of them that they were of no
importance, yet because they might testify that he was admitted to privacy
with the Lord Shaftsbury, they thought fit he should make use of them, in the
manner he did:

Mr. John Webb of Missenden in the County of Bucks, being called in says. He
knows Mr. Willoughby, but remembers not when he went down to his house, but
that he was sent by Mrs. Cellier, not by the Lady Powis, that he knows nothing
of any Letters sent down by him, or of one Mrs. Jean, or any other Priest at
his house: that he only went down to fetch up a Child.

Willoughby obejects, that he knows Jean so well, that at his last coming from
home, he brought him a Letter from Jean, being then at Mrs. Celliers, Webb
denying this, the very Letter found by Sir William Waller, is produced, and
read, upon which Mr. Webb said, it was possible, but he had forgot it. And
Willoughby saying, that Mrs. Cellier was by, when that Letter was delivered to
him, Cellier denied it, but Willoughby replied that Webb knew all, as well as
what he would now excuse.

The Copy of the aforesaid Letter from H. Jean to Mr. Willoughby.
SIR,
I Received yours on Monday last, and think my self much obliged to you, for
that you remember your Captive Friend It is some divertisment to my retired
Life to hear sometimes how affairs stand, both that I may the better know how
to set my steps that are laid for Innocent men and learn also how to value an
innocent solitude more than the tumults of a confused World. I perceive by
yours, the old Sticklers are still busy, and strive to blind the peoples Eyes
with a Popish Plot, that their own may not be seen; when was there ever
Mischief or Treason hatched against Monarchy, but under the Cloak of Religion,
and Zeal against Popery? Things are so plain that who is not wilfully blind,
must needs see the good Old Cause, taking Life again: God bless the King, and
direct his Council. That we may live in Peace, and Justice under him. This is
the Prayer of

SIR, Your very humble Servant, H. JEAN.
October. 1st. 1679. Pray present my humble Service to Mounsieur Cellier, and his
Lady.




John Porter Butler to the Lord Powis, being sworn says, that he is a
Protestant. That he has seen Willoughby at Powis house several times, and that
he lodged there, but not by the knowledge of the Lord, or Lady, as the Porter
told him: he remembers that Lane was also there by the name of Johnson: he does
confess he gave Willoughby a bottle of Sherry, at the Tower, but not by the
Lords order: and that Willoughby, dined there another day: and that he did
lead Willoughby to the Lodgings of the Lord Arundel, and the Lord Bellasis.

John Lane, being called in, says, that he lay at Powis house, for a Month or
six Weeks, by order of Willoughby, and Mrs. Cellier from whom he had his Diet.
That he went by the name of Johnson, fearing to be arrested by Mr. Oats, for
what he had testified against him, and in that fear he went down to Grayes,
near Gravesend, and had a pair of Shoes given him by Willoughby, who also got
him out of Prison, which was a chargeable work. He says, he made an Affidavit
before Sir James Butler. And being ask't by one of the Lords, whether he had
not before the House of Lords, made two contrary Affidavits, he acknowledged
that out of fear he did so: but that the first drawn by Willoughby, as Mr.
Nevil had directed was true, and the other false.

Mr. Knox being called in, says he knows Willoughby, when he met at Powis
house, going there in search of Lane, who was to give Evidence for him; that
the Examinant knowing in whose house he had been, was much troubled, inasmuch
as he is a Protestant. It is true, that he being in Prison, Writ little Notes
to his Brother, under the door, but knows not who conveyed them. That he knows
Mrs. Ayry that he has seen Mr. Willoughby at Mrs. Celliers house, and there has
had some money of him, though he was ever Cautious of him, fearing he was a
Papist. That he met him once at Procters Coffe house, where an Affidavit made
by Osborn was read unto him, and owns that Willoughby did deliver Papers to
him. He also owns that Rogers, and Shereman the Sadler did tell him, that they
heard Nevil report how he had furnished money to get the Examinant out of
Prison; which he with anger questioning Nevil about, Nevil made answer it was
true, and plain demonstration.

Mr. Dormer being called in, says, he knows Mr. Willoughby, having seen him at
Mrs. Celliers, from whom Willoughby once brought him five pound. And that he
had seen Mr. Willoughby twice or thrice at Powis house, where he has been to
wait upon the Lady, to whom he is related: and that he has been at Mrs.
Celliers to see a Child brought from Peterley, that is his Nephew. That Mr. Web
of Peterly is his Kinsman, that he knows not of Mr. Jean nor any such man
there: having not been for these three quarters of a year at that house. That
he knowns nothing at all of any ground of the Presbyterian Plot mentioned by
Willoughby, and says he never carried to the Tower, the Pamphlet called
Traitors transformed into Martyrs; but that indeed, he had one of those books,
and remembers he gave it to Mrs Cellier, meeting her once with Willoughby in
Tower-street. He owns that he saw Willoughby once at the Rainbow Coffe House,
and there pulled of his Hat without speaking to him, that he has seen the Danby
reflections, but knows not who Writ them.

Being asked if he heard any thing of the murder of the Lord Shaftsbury, he
said that several Months ago, there was such a report, and that one Adamson a
Watch-maker, with a Barber, and others in Holborn were concerned in it: but
that he never heard any thing else thereof, much less ever consulted such a
thing with the Lady Abergaveney: that he knows Turner the Bookseller, and had
the Pamphlet aforementioned from him, but denies that ever he Writ the same, or
that he ever delivered five pounds to one Sharp to pray for any man's Soul.

Mrs. Woodman who lives in Drury Lane; at the Corner house of parkers-Lane,
being called in, says, that Margaret formerly Maid to Mrs. Cellier had been
without attending, but would be gone, tho she advised her to stay, and that
being out of Service she knows not where to find her.

The Lords bid her tell Margaret, (if they meet) that a Messenger shall take
her in Custody, unless she attends the Clerk of the Council of her own accord.

Middlesex and Westminster.
The Information of Thomas Curtis of Westminster Clothworker, taken this 5th.
day of November 1679. before me Edward Warcup Esquire one of His Majesty's Justices
of the Peace in the said County and City.
This Informant says, that about half a year ago, he became acquainted with
Mr. Thomas Willoughby, taking him to be a very civil Gentleman, and not knowing
that he had any other name: and about the second day of October last, he met
the said Willoughby at the Hoop Tavern on Fish street Hill, and there drank a
Bottle of Rhenish Wine with him, in the drinking whereof the said Willoughby
told this Informant that he looked on him as an honest man, and one that loved
his King and Country, and expressed himself to be a Protestant, and much
against Rebellion; and he further added, that he would put this Informant into
a way to serve his King and Country, whereunto this Informant replied, that he
would serve his King and Country to the last drop of his Blood in any thing
that is just; to which the said Willoughby replied, he would not put this
Informant, on any thing but what was honorable and just, and he would make it
easy: but at that time he refused to tell the business, but appointed this
Informant to Dine with him at Mrs. Celliers on the next day following, which
this Informant did, and after Dinner the said Willoughby took this Informant
into a private room above, and there told this Informant, that there were
Commissions giving out privately by the Phanaticks, and persuaded this
Informant to get one, and if this Informant did so, he would bring this
Informant to the King, and that it should be 5000 l. in this Informants way,
besides being taking care of for the future, but this Informant replying, he
did not believe there was any such thing, the said Willoughby answered, he knew
it to be true, and that he had been at several meetings with them, and named
one in Holborne, another which he called Sir Thomas Players, or my Lord
Shaftsbury's in London, a third that was Sir Robert Peytons, and he
particularly said that Bloods party issued out these Commissions; and this
informant had heard before, that Mrs. Cellier had harbored the Gentlemen, that
came over from St. Omers, and that she was a Papist, but the said Willoughby
did never intimate to this Informant that he was employed by the Papists in
this affair, and he charged this Informant not to say any thing of this matter
to Mr. Nevil, because he had no correspondence with him, nor desired any, nor
to Mrs. Cellier, because she was a woman: and then this Informant promised
him to see what could be done, and so left him, resolving not to insinuate
into any secret trust on purpose to betray it; about four days after which,
this Informant returned to Mr. Willoughby, and told him he had been at the Club
in Westminster Market, but could not learn any such thing, and when this
Informant has not seen the said Willoughby, and this Informant went to Mr.
Nevil, and Mr. Nevil bid this Informant never to meddle with such Villainous
treacherys. And this Informant, further says, that he likewise told Mrs. Jane
Bradley the same Story, and that he heard that Mr. Bloods Party, the
Phanatiques had the giving out those Commissions, and she then said, she would
use her interest with one Capt. Brown (who had formerly been her Sweetheart)
to get one, and the said Jane Bradly has several times since wished we could
get the 5000 l. saying she would share therein: And this Informant did tell
her, that he heard, those Commissions were given out by Mr. Bloods Party, by
those people where he was concerned, and that this Informant would beg his
bread, before he would be guilty of such treacherous designs; and that it was
to no purpose to meddle in it, for there is a list found out, as he heard. And
this Informant remembers the said Willoughby asked this Informant, if he knew
Colonel Mansel, which this Informant said he did; and he also told this
Informant, he had been in the Earl of Shaftsbury's company or Club, and further
says not.

Jurat. Die and anno supradict. cor. me Edmund Warcup.
Thomas Curtis.

This Informant further says that Mrs. Bradly asked him, in whose name the
said Commissions were to issue out, where unto this Informant answered that he
heard that it was in the name of the Keepers of the Liberties of England: and
did further say, he heard some should hold that the long Parliament was not yet
dissolved: But this Informant does not rember from whom he heard these
particulars.

Jurat: codem Die. Edmond Warcup.
Thomas Curtis.

Friday November 7th. 1679. in the Afternoon.
Mr. Dangerfeild, was sent for, and in his presence Margaret Jenkins formerly
Servant to Mr. Cellier being Sworn and Interrogated by him, says,

That she carried money to him in Newgate, but remembers not how much it was,
that he was afterward in the Counter, and sending earnestly to her Mistress to
get him out, she sent the Examinant to him with 50 s. but the same not being
sufficient she brought it back again, and 3 l. was afterward sent.

She acknowledges that her Mistress bid him get out by Tuesday, and that being
out he should presently come to her: that she did carry several letters between
him, and her Mrs. but knows not what they were.

That she did carry two small Vials to the Kings Bench, but knows not what they
concerned, nor whether the Lady Powis was concerned in that Advice. That after
carrying the first Bottle she went next morning to the Kings Bench, and that
Willoughby sent her for a second Bottle, it being in a little Vial Glass.

She ovvns that he spoke to her about sending to Mr. Bedloe, and told her also
of his acquaintance with Strode, for that they had formerly been padding
together.

That she once brought money to him to give to Mounson: that Mrs. Cellier did
acquaint the Lady Powis, of Willoughby's desire to see Bedlow, to which her
Ladyship ansvver'd. He might do what he pleased, for she would not meddle
with that matter. That Willoughby told her, he had made Strode high in drink,
having taken something that hindered him from being in the same Condition: and
that he gave her some Notes of what he had then learned from Strode.

As to the cause of her turning away, she says it was on this account: An
Irishman who is a Solicitor, came once and told her, that her Mistress had
got an ill Repute, by keeping Willoughby for her Stallion. And that the truth
was, they lived in such a manner together at Powis- house, that the old man her
Husband was sent up thither to keep them honest. That of this she gave some
account to Mrs. Cellier's Daughter, and upon this occasion she was turned away:
her Mistress also telling her, that seeing she could not live quietly at her
own House, she had no farther need of her Service.

She says, she saw Willoughby twice at Powis-House, the time she was there
waiting at the Table on her Mistress and him; and that she poach'd Eggs for
them both: being asked whether she did not lately hear from Mrs. Cellier by way
of advice and instruction how to behave her self, she denied that she had any
Letter or Message from her, or had seen her of a long time.

Mr. Nevil, alias Pain, is called in, and unto what Mr. Dangerfield objects,
he says he knows Dangerfield, and has seen him four times at Powis-house. That
he knows not of Willoughby's going to Mr. Webb's in Buckinghamshire. That he
never had Letters or Papers from the Lady Powis in his life; but that with Mrs.
Cellier many Letters and Papers have past: and denies not but that the
Danby-Reflections past out of his hands.

That by Mrs. Cellier, the Papers of Knox, Lane, and Osborne, were brought to
him for his advice; which having given, he sent back. He remembers that
Willoughby did attend in the Rules, when Mrs. Ayry and Dowdell came over to
him: but knows nothing of twenty seven Papers that he should send back; and
desires if any such thing be objected to him, that he may see his hand.

That for the many Lists objected he should send over, he denies the same. He
says he knows Mounson and Kemish from many years acquaintance. He owns that
Mrs. Cellier came to him in the Fleet, to tell him of Tortures used against
Prance, and how that the Lord Shaftesbury was setting up Strode to be a new
Witness. He says Willoughby told him, that he had turned Strode the wrong side
outward.

He denies the sending of any Letters, or Lists to his remembrance; and never
any Letter to the Tower by any Woman: he knows not of the Affidavit made by
Lane, but will not deny such a thing. He says that Knox was troubled he should
declare as he did, for that he was told, that by the Charity which Mrs. Cellier
dispersed, he was taken from Prison.

He says that the second discourse he had with Willoughby at Powis-house, was,
how that Mrs. Cellier had offered to procure him an Ensigns place under the
Duke of Monmouth in the late Expedition to Scotland, or else to stay and depend
upon her.

He says farther, that Mrs. Cellier, from being his Friend, became his utter
Enemy.

Willoughby replies, that Mrs. Cellier had sent him 80 l. and that her Husband
had been his Security to keep him from Prison; but that upon some difference
arising, upon complaint made that Nevils Daughter was like to turn Whore, old
Cellier withdrew his Security, and so Nevil was returned to Prison.

Nevile in answer to this reviles Willoughby with many passionate expressions;
and as to the writing the Pamphlet Timothy Touchstone, he denies it, and says
he knows nothing of Mr. Jeane the Priest in Buckinghamshire.

As to one Cox in Covent Garden, he has been his Agent about his business in
Ireland, but denies to have heard any thing from him about Ten thousand pound
which Mr. Willoughby does object. He does acknowledge that he was still for the
Advice for Indicting false Witnesses, and had twenty times advised the
Indicting Oats and Bedloe; but as for the framing a Presbyterian Plot, and to
draw Men in it, it had been a great villainy, and he utterly denies the same.

That he only had from Mrs. Cellier Fifteen pound, but that she had of his
money Seventeen pound: That the Commerce between her and Willoughby was very
scandalous, and she was suspected to defraud the Charity which came through her
hands, which by the collection of all sorts of Catholics was about Twenty two
pounds per week.

He acknowledges, that he advised Willoughby to compound his Debts, and not to
depend on shifts of Law.

He owns that he received all the Trials that were printed, and had fingerd
them out, as will still appear by the Books he has by him: for that seeing how
ill things hung together, and that some things look like Perjury, he thought it
was easy to frame Indictments against the Witnesses.

That as to his informing Willoughby of a List of Mutinous Coffee-houses, he
denies the same, having never been in four or five in his life; but it was
notorious enough how all the Coffee-houses were factious.

He declares his great hatred and animosity against Mrs. Cellier, who formerly
indeed came to him every day; but that she caused her Husband to withdraw his
Bayl, and he was again clapped up.

To this Dangerfield objects, That it was not altogether Mrs. Cellier, but the
advice of the Lords in the Tower, that he should be again confined: forasmuch
as when he was formerly in that condition, he had been very industrious about
writing of Papers in their business; but that being at liberty, he chiefly
followed the Playhouse.

Nevile here reflects upon him as a lewd and infamous person. To which
Willoughby replies, If I were such as you say, it makes it the more plain, that
I could not proceed in such weighty Undertakings as I have managed, without
considerable Counsel and Direction; which is agreeable to what I have affirmed.

The Narrator's Conclusion to the whole Work.
READER,
THe Net must be cunningly cast, that takes all the Fish in the River; and this
Narrative, though it can modestly mention its own industry, yet dares not
presume that nothing has escaped its diligence: but besides, it might seem
uncivil to leave nothing wherein the Pen of another might travel: to reap the
Fields so clean, that there should be no gleaning for the Poor, is Cruelty; to
leave no Clusters after the Vintage, would be interpreted Covetousness: and yet
I dare avow, that he that complains of Penury in this Collection, will hardly
furnish out his Table with a more plentiful Treat. But because there are some
particulars which might have been crowded in before, yet not without
Incoherence, which I thought the Reader would grudge if he knew they had
escaped him, I was willing to add a few Remarkables, which I rather purposely
reserved for this place, than carelessly omitted in the body of the Discourse.

1.
Then it deserves a special Remark, that this Mr. Dangerfield, who whilst he
was a servant to an Instrument in the carrying on their grand Intrigue, was a
man of great parts, amongst them a gallant Gentleman; as soon as he begins to
be honest, to reflect upon those Mazes of Villainy wherein by their seduction he
had trodden, now all of the sudden hears nothing from them, but an infamous
person, one of no Credit, whose Testimony must not pass for any thing. Strange!
that he who was thought a credible Witness to have fastened a Paramount Treason
upon so many Noble Protestant Lords, and worthy Gentlemen, should lose his
Credibility when he comes to recriminate, and cast the Guilt where it ought to
lie, upon a small number of Catholics. It Is a singular happiness that our
Papists have, that their Agents are all honest whilst they do mischief, and
presently Villains when they discover it. Thus they dealt with all those, whom
remorse and a timely reflection upon their own evil ways, wrought upon to
discover the late Plot; used their Agency, abased their simplicity to execute
their Projects, and then decryed them for debaucht Criminals, when they could
serve themselves and their Cause no longer of them: from whence we learn, that
there is no Crime so great amongst them as Repentance. I will here give the
Reader the Minutes of the Examinations before His Majesty in Council, Tuesday,
November 4. 1679. relating to this one Remark.

1. The Lady Powis says, She hopes the Oath of an infamous person shall not
bring her in danger, for that no body of common sense would ever confide any
thing of Importance to such a Creature as he: A very ingenuous Reflection,
first, to make him infamous, by his Ghostly Fathers Indulgence to be drunk, and
then to plead his Infamy to cover their own: but let Mr. Willoughby answer for
himself, who gave this smart Repartee to her Ladyship, That he was not so
inconsiderable in their Opinion, but that they were willing to get him out of
Prison at the charge of Sixty pound, which in all places it cost him, as may
appear by his Book which was taken out of his Closet by Sir Will. Waller.

2. Mrs. Cellier, to whom Mr. Willoughby was such a Croney, that they were hand
and glove; she that used to admire his excellent parts, and rare dexterity in
the manage of business, yet now says, She never caused Willoughby or any body
else to put forth Pamphlets, but that indeed he did make some, and put them
forth; which were very inconsiderable things. That Willoughby did once read to
her two Pamphlets, wherein was no matter of hurt; but the things were foolish,
and mere Chimaera's. Then she rails at, and reviles Willoughby, etc. And yet
this good Gentlewoman when she came to introduce Mr. Willoughby to the Right
Honorable the E. of P. gave a high Character of him, that he had much improved
himself abroad in the service of the Prince of Orange, and the Duke de Villa
Hermosa.

3. The Lord P. called in, says, That he gave his Servants charge to admit
Willoughby whenever he came, and that he did call him Captain Willoughby; yet
his Lordship tells the Board, he cannot but be troubled to have his name
mentioned by so infamous a person as this was.

4. Mr. Nevile, alias Pain, called into the Council on Friday Nov. 7. 1679,
says, That Willoughby had writ him a kind of a Challenge, which he rejected
upon knowledge of his infamous life; besides, that he was grown in his
behavior proud, and as high as a Prince. That the Commerce between Mrs.
Cellier and Willoughby, was very scandalous; that she was suspected to defrand
the Charity which came through her hands, which by the collection of all sorts
of Catholics, was about 22 l. per week.

2.
I must apologize for the Nonappearance of the so-much-celebrated List of
Names fixed or endeavored to be fixed upon the Lodgings of the Narrator in
Ax-yard, which I have many cogent Reasons to conceal. 1. Lest it should tempt
the worthy persons therein to study some revenge upon the Catholics, which
being so inconsistent with Protestant Principles, those gallant Gentlemen will
satisfy themselves with their own Innocence, and willingly want what might
have awakened even a just Indignation. 2. I know not how far such a List might
provoke any person against my self: and yet I must say thus much; I could be
content to be half hanged, to save the lives or the longings of such honorable
persons. 3. I have a Reason worth two of these; I did not, because I could not
publish it, all my industry and interest not having been able hitherto to
procure it: It was once in my Chamber, it seems, when I was willing to be
honestly rid of it; but now I wish it there, it will not come: and I profess I
will forgive Mr. Dangerfield from the beginning of the world to this day, if he
will once more come and pin it at my beds-head, and the Key shall lie under the
door against he is at leisure.

3.
One particular, omitted in the Information of Mr. Dangerfield, must here be
retrieved. The next day (says he) I went to Lord Castlemain, who demanded, Why
I was so unwilling willing to do that for which I was taken out of the Prison?
and frowned much on me, and sent his man down; and I fearing his fury, laid my
hand to my Sword, and came down stairs, he not approaching, and went away, and
told Mrs. Cellier my Lord Castlemain was angry with me: Oh (said she) it is his
custom to fall out one hour, and be good friends the next. Then she advised me
to go to Confession and Receive; which I did of Mr. Sharp; and he having notice
of my Refusal to my Lord Powis and Lord Arundel, would scarce let me come from
him, but told me, I must do Penance, for denying to serve God in that which the
Scriptures taught: Then I demanded, If they taught me to kill my King? He
answered, Yes, if he were condemned thereby. But I got from him, and was then
about to have discovered all: But coming home, I found the Lady Powis with Mrs.
Cellier; and when she saw me, sent for me in, and laughed. I said, Madam, it is
not a laughing matter I Then she said, Know you what I laugh at? I answered, I
did. Well, well, (said she) Mr. Willoughby will be honest, and do us no harm, I
am sure. Then I sat down, and had some discourse; and she said, The Duke of
York was coming, and that would somewhat qualify the Rage of the Presbyterians.

What these Romish Zealots will be at next, time must discover; and when time
shall discover it, I wish the Protestants may make a good improvement of their
Mercies.

FINIS.

