Imprimatur.

Z. Isham, R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a sacris Domesticis.
Feb. 18. 1686.
A SERMON PREACHED AT THE Hampshire-Feast, ON Shrove-Tuesday, FEB. 16. 1685/6.

By THO. MANNYNGHAM, Preacher at the ROLLS.

LONDON: Printed by F. Collins, for W. Crook, at the Green Dragon without
Temple Bar. MDCLXXXVI.

TO THE Very Worthy STEWARDS OF THE Hampshire Feast. Sir Benjamin Newland,
Thomas Tutt Esquire; Mr. Henry Howell, Mr. Jonah Mapleton, Mr. David Feilder, Col.
William Beeston, Mr. Thomas Hobbs, Mr. Gabriel Jones, Mr. John Clement, Mr.
John Pinck

Much Honored Gentlemen,
YOU are but just Eased of your Stewardships, and have taken a greater Trouble
upon you, of being Patrons to this Discourse; which I fear will hardly find so
kind an Acceptance as you were pleased to bestow upon it: For it is seldom
known, that Men love to find Bad Manners severely Taxed, unless they themselves
are in a good measure Innocent, or in a ready Disposition to be so.

I looked upon my Text as an admirable Abridgment, of the purest Morality of
the Ancient Philosophers; and that St. Paul had an Eye to their Writings,
seemed very probable to me, by his making a particular mention of their Chief
Subject, Virtue; and their most Celebrated Motive, Praise; this prevailed with
me to have some regard even to their Rules, in my Directions about Manners;
which I hope were not altogether improper for the Moderating the Jollities of a
Shrove-Tuesday, though they were not severe enough to improve the Penitential
Sorrows of a Lent.

Any one of the Parts might have supplied me with a just Discourse; but I was
willing to hint some of the more remarkable Virtues and Vices of Common
Conversation, and to leave the rest to your larger Observations, and greater
Experience in the World.

Well Gentlemen, I may without Flattery commend you for your extraordinary
Management of your Public Feast; for you were the first that ever showed me an
Exact Order and Decence in a Rejoicing Multitude. The most Vngovernable thing
that I perceived, (for it was that which gave me the first surprise) was in the
Loud Expressions of your Loyalty: and that I suppose is now the only Tumult,
which your Excellent City will allow of.

May your most Generous Designs prosper, your Christian Charity flourish, your
private Friendships increase, and your United Loyalty remain for ever firm: May
you bring Honor to your Church, and to your Kingdom; and may you never want a
Blessing and Success in your particular Employments: May you continue to
Respect your Clergy, as they are ever mindful of your Truest Interest: And may
all our Enemies wonder at our Love, dread our Meekness, and imitate our
Charity: Which is the hearty wish of

your Most Sincere and Humble Servant THO. MANNYNGHAM.

PHILIP. Chap. 4. v. 8. Finally, Brethren, whatsoever things are True,
whatsoever things are Honest, whatsoever things are Just, whatsoever things are
Pure, whatsoever things are Lovely, whatsoever things are of Good Report; if
there be any Virtue, if there be any Praise, think on these things.


THE Apostle St. Paul having laid down in this Epistle, the more Solemn Rules
of our Religious Conversation; such as are to build men up into Unity, Love,
Humility, Perfection, Heavenly Mindedness, Moderation, and Equanimity,
Constancy, and Perseverance, with Continual Supplications and Thanksgivings; He
sums up in this verse the more Comprehensive Rules of Universal Goodness, such
as relate to Truth, Justice, Venerableness, or Decence, Purity, Loveliness, or
whatever things are Commendable and Praiseworthy: These he enforces upon our
Consideration and Practice, by the general Motives of Virtue and Praise;
Motives, which did usually prevail among the more Civil and the Wiser Heathen.
Upon this account, I suppose, I shall not be very wide of the Apostles meaning,
if in my present Discourse I suit these Rules to the due regulating of our
Ordinary Conversation: which cannot be such as becomes Christians, unless it do
some way or other promote Virtue, Sincerity, and Purity of Manners, severe
Justice, real Charity, and solid Discretion, in all our Undertakings,
Employments, and Conferences; in all our Relaxations and Diversions.

It is presumed both by the Church and the State, that these Voluntary
Societies and Combinations had their first Institution, and have their Annual
Celebration for the encouraging and maintaining of the truly Noble and
Christian Acts of Charity, Loyalty, and Friendship: But yet there is a great
Caution required (and I humbly conceive you have placed me here to mind you of
it) that the Festival part of these so Commendable Meetings, do not degenerate
into Seditious or Profane Discourses, into Luxury or Strife, Wantonness or
filthy Jesting; but that these Provincial Solemnities may be always managed
with that Sobriety, Decence, and Circumspection, that they may be as pleasing
to God, as they are Acceptable to Men; and that they may in some measure
resemble the ancient Love Feasts of the Primitive Church; where good Christians
conspired only to be obedient to the Empire, and made their care of Discipline
and good Manners their chiefest Entertainment.

In order to this, I shall endeavor to enlarge a little on those Excellent
Rules of Christian Behavior, which the Apostle has here drawn into a
Compendium; that they may be as it were a Moral Opiate to mingle with your
Wine, your Music and your Mirth; that you may depart with as much Temperance
as you now meet; full of Love and of Good Works; and that you be talked of for
nothing more than the largeness of your Charity.

Let us therefore consider, how that Christianity is not only a peculiar way of
Worshipping God, contrary to all other Religions; but that it is the most
certain, universal, and most powerful method of making all Mankind Virtuous,
Wise, Loving, and highly Beneficial to each other; that it does not oblige us
wholly to retire and separate from the world, but to fit our selves as soon as
we can to converse in it with Innocence, Prudence, and Safety; and having
bettered our own Tempers, to make them Instrumental to the improvement of
others.

1. Therefore whatsoever things are True, Real, or Sincere, ought to be
promoted in our common Conversation.

There is nothing more suitable to the Nature of Man, than plain and open
Truth; his mind is covetous of all just and faithful Informations, that he may
build up a knowledge firm and secure, and such as may continually supply him
with Maxims of Wisdom, and prudent rules of life.

When Man, through the strength and violence of his Passions, and the weak
beginnings of his Reason, which very much depends on Sense and Imagination, is
liable to Error, even under the clearest light, and surest principles; how
injurious is it to him, to have his Understanding scribled over with false
Images of things, and thick prejudices so strongly woven into him, that they
shall seem to be of the same growth with his Soul? how difficult is it for one
of such a prepossessed mind, ever to receive any fair Impressions of things
real, and fit to be confided in? Whatever you propose for the regulating his
Judgment will seem suspected to him, as not agreeing with the Fundamental
Delusion he has already espoused; and to tell him, he must renounce his whole
frame of thoughts, when built upon an Original Error, may look fine in a
Philosophical Proposal, but is very rarely reduced to practice in the common
government of Life.

Let the mind of man be always reverenced as a most Sacred Recess, where only
Truth and Goodness should inhabit, and in which nothing but what is sound and
substantial should be deposited; nothing but what may be serviceable to Moral
or Religious wisdom.

How cautious therefore ought men to be in their public Instructions, nay in
their common Reports and Conferences, that they may not be the fatal occasion
of leading others into Error? how carefully ought they to examine matters
beforehand, that they may not prove the Confident Assertors of False News,
Lies, and Scandals, which the Credulous Multitude are apt to swallow to the
ruin of themselves, the Commonwealth, and the Church.

In respect to the Commonwealth. What an heinous offense is it for men of Wit
and Parts, to vent any colorable pretenses for Sedition? to extol the
happiness of other Kingdoms with a Factious Eloquence, and erect new Schemes of
Government contrary to what is already most wisely and providentially
established amongst us? for although such Discourses in themselves may be very
raw and inconsistent, yet there are always some passive Heads, that are a
common sink for all foolish and absurd Opinions to run into; and there are
other more airy heads made giddy with a spirit of Rebellion, which are apt to
think every Seditious Novelty, though never so weak and trivial, some rare and
newly invented Political Machin, sufficient to turn the whole Earth about.

Whereas, if men were willing to converse like Faithful Subjects, they would
often take occasion to declare the excellency of their own Laws and Government,
the noble Exploits of their Ancestors in the defense of the Crown, and that
invincible Rage of Loyalty which swelled the breasts of those who were at any
time animated with the true English Gallantry. They would take all occasions to
declare what a difficult Province Kings have to manage, even in the most
peaceable and obedient times, but especially after a rebellious ferment has
been long time sowring the Apprehensions and Passions of men. What Cares and
Perplexities do attend the most prosperous Thrones! How public Business does
often come down to us infected with private Malice, and retaining a strong
tincture of the Mineral through which it runs; and that we are not able to
discover all the secret springs and movements by which the body of Affairs is
turned.

Did men enter their Coffee-houses and their Taverns, their Assignations and
their Feasts, with these preparatory Reflections, they would be more wary in
their Censures, more deliberate in their Judgments, and harmless in all Events;
their Mistakes would be seldom, most times honest and sincere, and serviceable
to Peace and Goodwill.

As in relation to Government, we are to promote nothing but Truth and Reality
in our Communications; so we should be especially concerned to carry the same
circumspection with us in all matters of Religion; where Fraud and Artifice are
never to be endured. For the plain Truths of Religion are able to shift of
themselves; and scarce ever fail, but when men undertake to prop them with
their Additional Cunning. We know how Christianity broke through all the Arts
and Policies of the Heathen Empire, not only by its passive Courage, and meek
Subjection, but by its solid plainness and active integrity: and if men think
to render it more secure by guarding it with subtilty and nice distinction,
they are mistaken; they only weaken it, and make it suspected, whilst they
labor to turn the Counsel of God into the Imagination of Man.

Let there be but Simplicity and Integrity enough in our Affairs, and True
Christianity will prevail. Had our Reformation nothing else to recommend it,
yet the very taking of all disguises from Religion, were sufficient: for it was
that which chased away the shadows of Superstition, and discovered the
Foundations of Real Piety; it was that which brought an amazing light, an
unexpected day into the dark Cloisters of Legends, and Relics, and forged
Miracles; Men were presently ashamed of the gross Cousenage they had promoted;
they were confounded for the false Wares of Imposture they had so long time
vended: The Monsters of the Night soon fled away out of this Land, after the
full glory of the Reformation arose.

Then the True Righteousness of the Gospel was vindicated, a sober judgment of
Discretion asserted, and Christianity was again fitted, as it was at first
designed, for all Hearts that were sincere, and for all Heads that could be
contented with the Truths of Heaven, as Christ and his Apostles had revealed
them.

For it must be acknowledged that many have abused the Reformation, by their
too Scrupulous and Endless Enquiries; who because they were once imposed upon,
grow unreasonably suspicious, dread a cheat in every Article of their Faith;
and from being Protestants against the Corruptions of Rome, are grown Scepticks
and Seekers in the plainest Truths of Religion.

It Is ordinary indeed for New Discoveries at any time, to raise an Unseasonable
Curiosity, but then it is as easy to mark it for a common Error, and avoid it:
and to look upon all loose and Academical Doubtings in Religion, as the
Leprosy and Plague of Conversation, which will eat deeper than most are aware
of, even into the very Principles of all Reason and Piety.

It Is not to be endured, that those who profess themselves Men, and Christians,
and Reformed Christians, should favor any Objections against the Existence of
a God, the Immortality of the Soul, a Judgment to come, and the Truth and
Excellency of the Holy Scriptures: we are to bless God that these things are
made as it were, the very instincts of our Nature, or the pious prepossessions
of our youth; that some of them are the inward Sensation of our Consciences,
and unite with the first reflection of our Thoughts, and that all of them are
the early infusion which we have received from our Parents and Masters, and the
groundwork upon which we are afterward built into all Truth, and Wisdom, and
Holiness.

2. Whatsoever things are Just ought to be promoted in our ordinary
Conversation.

The Ancient Commonwealth of Rome has been deservedly admired through all
Christian Ages for its Civil Wisdom, its Justice, and its Equity; and yet the
great Nos very Juris, Germanaeque Justitiae solidam and expressam effigiem
nullam tenemus: Vmbra and Imaginibus Vtimur. Cic. de Off. l. 3.
Orator, and Civilian, and Flatterer of that State and People has confessed,
that they had not any express Image of the true Law, and sincere Justice
amongst them, but only some faint resemblance of it; and that the Original was
to be expected only from Truth and Nature: and behold we have received it from
the God of Truth and Nature, who came to make us more like Doves than Serpents,
more Just than Cunning; more upright and sincere Despisers of the World, not
more shrewd deceitful Adorers of it, than Jews and Pagans: Who came to root all
Covetousness out of men's Minds, wherein the strength of Injustice lies; to
lessen their esteem of Temporal Advantages, to acquaint them with the Riches of
his Mercy, to tell them of Treasures worth all their Industry and Care, to
inspire them with the most generous Principles of doing all the good that lies
within their reach, and of copying after his Example, who went about doing
good, and in whose mouth there was found no Guile. Wherefore all Cheating,
Lying, Dissimulation, and overreaching one another in Bargains and Contracts,
is directly contrary to the Righteousness of the Gospel, which has not only
confirmed the Laws of Natural Right, the Rules of Civil Justice, and the more
excellent precepts of Morality; but has added stricter Measures of its own, and
bound them on the Conscience with more Authority and severer Sanctions.

For the Gospel has heightened all the Relative Duties between man and man,
into parts and Acts of Religion: All Natural, Political, and Domestic
Obligations are bound upon us with the Fear of the Lord, and are to be directed
to the Glory of God: And nothing seemed a greater care with the Apostle St.
Paul, than that men might adorn their Christian Profession, by showing the
admirable influence it had upon them in those lawful States and Callings in
which it found them engaged.

The immediate Acts of Religion, are either so secret that others do not see
them; or else so outward and solemn that Hypocrisy can act them; but Business,
Commerce, and Trade, give clear and obvious Testimonies of men's Hearts and
Natures, of the falseness or sincerity of their Intentions and Designs: and by
these Works we may soon discern either their Faith, or their Infidelity.

If we ever expect to Convert the Indians, the Justice and Integrity of our
Merchants and Factors must prepare the way; for they will never think the
Christian Religion better than their own, unless they are well assured by men's
Practices, that it injoyns more Honesty than theirs: They will no more believe
the Gospel, whose Professors Cheat and Lie, than they will go to Heaven with a
Spaniard.

Wherefore all those may be said to offend highly against Christian
Conversation, who make it their business to endamage their Neighbors by crafty
and specious pretenses; who think they may take the advantage of another
weaknese, and make their own profit the measure of other men's Rights: Whereas
the Justice of a Christian ought always to be accompanied with some degrees of
the Charity of a Christian; and we should ever remember, that we are not only
of one stock by Nature, but of one Blood by Redemption, that we are all
Children of the same Father by Adoption, Heirs of the same hopes and promises;
and that in these little Societies here on Earth it nearly concerns us, that we
no ways unfit our selves for that Everlasting Society which we expect in the
highest Heavens.

3. Whatsoever things are Honest, Venerable, Grave, or Decent, ought to be
promoted in our common Conversation.

It is a good Rule that is laid down by some Moralists, that in our most
familiar Converse, we should often reflect on the Dignity and Prerogative of
Man, that our Thoughts might be awakened to noble Designs, and that we might
do, or say, nothing that is below the Excellency of that Nature we carry, and
always pay a proportionable respect to those who bear the same Image with us:
And this may be called the general Decorum of Life, against which all
Intemperances, and Sensuality, and base Compliances do immediately offend: But
we that are Christians, are able to raise this Rule higher, by carrying our
thoughts beyond the present Dignity of our Nature, to the expectation of that
Glory to which through Faith and Obedience it may be advanced: let us think
what a gravity and seriousness becomes those who acknowledge themselves to be
always in the presence of God, always contending for a Crown, and to be endued
with Souls capable of Thoughts and Affections that immediately relate to those
concerns that are Infinite and Eternal. And although we are not bound to keep
up these reflections continually in their full Solemnity, but may sometimes
unbend to an innocent refreshment, yet ought their Authority and awe to be so
Habitual to us, as to put a check to all extravagancies and excesses, to all
foolish Talking and Jesting, which are not convenient: for Man was not made
Levity, but for grave and weighty Affairs; and only so much Recreation is
allowed him, as may fit him for more important Duties.

There are two Extremes relating to this Rule, which require some reflection.

The first is concerning those who will hardly allow of any other Discourse in
company, but what is purely Religious: the other concerns those, who make it
their whole business to be vain and trivial, and count nothing so uncourtly as
a solid and a serious Temper.

As for the first opinion, though it may sometimes proceed from Zeal, and an
honest meaning, as it does oftentimes from mere Hypocrisy; yet I cannot
foresee what advantage it could bring to Christianity, unless the generality of
Men were better disposed, than I am sure they are in this present Age. It is
true, there is nothing more delightful than Heavenly Discourses to those
persons, whose hearts are inflamed with the love of God: nothing is so joyful
as to communicate their thoughts of Religion, of the state of their Souls, and
of the surest way of being happy; nothing so pleasing as to unbosome their
Experiences, their Spiritual Sorrows, and their comforts; they could be willing
never to admit of any secular talk, but to seek their whole diversion in the
variety of Divine Arguments: but alas! this is the hidden Manna of some few
selected Souls, who are able to make up a little circle of Love and Adoration
in this lower world; and not fit to be proposed for the common Theme of
promiscuous conversation, lest it occasion more Blasphemy and Profaneness.

It is well, if we can prevail with Men to be Rational and Moral in their
familiar Communications, and to reserve an appropriated reverence for Diviner
Duties. When it shall please God by great judgments and Calamities to take off
the egregious vanity from men's Minds, to consume their Ambition, Luxury, and
Lewdness, by the fury of his indignation powered out upon them, then the advice
may become more seasonable, and may attain its proper effect: then may
Repentance become the Cry of the streets, every man asking his Neighbor what
he shall do to be saved, and Religion be made the hinge on which all our
thoughts and words shall move.

But however, let the world be never so bad, evil Customs never so prevailing,
we are to set our selves against the second Extreme, and to declare the
intolerable insolency and vileness of those, who make it their whole business
to be vain and tryvial, and turn the most venerable matters, into the subjects
of their Jests and wilder mirth.

This is that Lunacy, which some call Wit, the Delirium of a Frantic Brain,
and an overheated imagination; whereby some men commit such horrid indignities
with much facetiousness and laughter, which others tremble to hear related:
it is a familiar venom of the Tongue, which spares neither God nor Man, not
their best Friends, or their own Souls. Whereas all that are judicious must
allow, that there are certain things which ought to be more especially
privileged from all Satirical and Scoffing Wit, such as Bacons Essays.
Religion, Matters of State, Great persons and Magistrates, any man's present
business of importance, his Reputation and Credit, and any case that deserves
our pity.

There are indeed some Men's Vices which are above the Authority, and some Men's
Humors which are below the notice of Laws; and these seem to have given the
first rise to sharp and Comical Reflections: but seeing all things whereby Ill
Nature is in the least indulged, are very liable to excess; it would be the
wisest way to avoid all such manner of Jesting, which even Rhet. (...)
Aristotle has defined to be but Witty Contumely: There are required many
Limitations, many Restrictions, and many Cautions to make it innocent; only a
little modesty and reservedness to let it quite alone: for though the thing may
possibly be so stated as to contain no real Turpitude in it, but to be
indifferent in its own Nature; yet when through the corruption of the Age it is
fallen into a general abuse, I am sure the Pulpit ought generally to forbid it.

This is spoken chiefly of that sort of Wit, which is Satirical and Scoffing;
whereas True Wit is such as is founded on strict Virtue and Morality; it is a
cheerful vivacity of good thoughts and Expressions, which offends no one, and
which every one favors: it is a Rational gayety, or the good humor of the
Mind, the health and joy of the Understanding; it is always joined with
Simplicity, Candor, and sweetness of behavior: it is then alone that Wit
becomes a pernicious Instrument, when either ill Nature, or Pride, or a
Lascivious mind has the management of it. Which brings me to my fourth Rule.
That whatsoever things are Pure and Chaste, ought to be promoted in our common
Conversation.

We can hardly instance in any one sin that is so directly contrary to the
Christian Religion, as is Uncleanness: When St. Paul gives us at any time a
long Catalogue of sins, almost half of them spring from this Head: It was so
prevailing in the Heathen world, about our Saviors time, that it had not only
corrupted their Manners, but their Laws too, and had crept into the most solemn
Ceremonies of their Religion; and an unclean spirit was then an Emphatical
Title for the Devil, who was worshipped by his Votaries with all the detestable
filthiness of Body and Mind, as the ancient Apologists have declared, perhaps
in a way somewhat too plain and Cynical.

'Twas this sin that called down the most miraculous Judgments that we read of
in the Old Testament: and I believe there are few Histories, but will acquaint
us of a most notorious Lewdness in all sorts of Men and Women, which was as a
forerunner to every Horrible Calamity that befell a whole Nation. Even its
immediate punishment in this life, as it many times happens to single persons
and Families, seems to be more than Natural, and to be inflicted by a Divine
Vengeance: for it often brings a present Disease, and conveys a Contagion to
Posterity; that whilst the Parents Rot, the Children Languish.

Yet notwithstanding the wonderful severity of Gods Judgments against this sin,
and the peculiar Holiness and purity of the Gospel; how is Lasciviousness
become the very Character of the Age? the practice or the pretense, the real or
the vainglorious sin of the highest and the lowest amongst us! it is the pest
that has in a manner corrupted all Conversation, the nauseous repetition of
almost every great Table, and every private Club; it is the Song and Poetry of
the Young, and the filthy Jest of the Aged.

But if we would behave ourselves as Christians, we must maintain a most strict
Chastity in all our Thoughts, Fancies, and Desires; in our Looks, Gestures, and
Apparel; we must not countenance the least Uncleanness by an ambiguous Word, by
a complyant Smile, by a wanton Metaphor: but when others talk Lewdly, let us
pray inwardly; what they call Comedy, let us represent to our selves as the
deepest Tragedy; and let Impure Flames put us in mind of the Fire and
brimstone, that fell on Sodom and Gomorrah.

5. Whatsoever things are Lovely, Courteous, and Obliging, ought to be promoted
in our common Conversation.

This Rule takes in all the Lower Arts of Civility, whereby a man is rendered
most acceptable to Company, and by which he does not only avoid those greater
Scandals which may provoke, but those lesser Indecencies that may offend. It Is
a prudent observation of those Ceremonious Addresses, that Place, and Time, and
Custom, and the Quality of Persons do require, a readiness to give every one
their due Respects, and rather more than less. It Is such a guard upon all our
Behavior and Discourses, as suffers no Contempt of others, no Insolency, no
Anger, or Affectation to appear. But on this subject, I must be sparing,
because I may be better taught it by many of my present Auditors.

Yet I humbly beg leave to observe a little further, That Conversation, when it
is truly Genteel and Complaisant, is only an obliging Scene of Kindness and
Modesty, a peculiar shine of virtuous Inclinations, or a making Good Nature
most visible, grateful, and lovely. And although this cannot be so takingly
effected without some fashionable Ceremonies; yet when all is done, solid
Virtue is the most lasting Ornament of Conversation, and an hearty plainness
has many Privileges allowed it in Company, which without it are denied to the
most Honorable in Station or Descent. Where there is substantial Honesty, all
things are in a manner Becoming, and where that is wanting, the finest Language
of Affection is but emptiness and dissimulation; and the most exquisite
Address, only the hiding of a real Defect.

Lastly, Whatsoever things are of good Report, or deserve the Approbation of
the Prudent and the Virtuous, ought to be promoted in our common Conversation.

And I know nothing that has a better claim to this Character, than your
present Design of laying a foundation for perpetual Charity, by bestowing a
Christian Education, and a thriving maintenance on those, who shall owe all
their future prosperity to your present Bounty, and transmit the same Example,
with an additional Gratitude and Zeal to late posterity. These are actions and
designs in which the brave and generous love to move as in their proper
Element; they carry such a light and such an influence with them, as will make
the most covetous Heart unfold it self, to receive the reflected warmth and
glory of a well-plac'd Alms.

It Is by your Emulation in such discreet Acts of Charity as these, that you
bring Honor to your Religion, to your Nation, to your City, to your County, to
your Persons and Families.

This is the True English Reformed Charity, which is not upheld by Artifice,
Superstition, or Presumption, but is a solid and entire Building of it self,
wholly separated from the rubbish of Monastic Cheats and Forgeries, and not
blasted with the Pride of Merit: it is openly persuaded, voluntarily
undertaken, deservedly praised. It is founded upon the true Basis of
Christianity, it is encouraged by a just sense of Duty, and it may be quickened
by a moderate regard to Reputation and Praise, for it is the Apostles Motive in
the Text. If there be any such thing as Virtue allowed of in the World let
Charity be esteemed such: If there be any Praise, any Generosity, or Greatness
of Soul, any Joy or Satisfaction in the voices of deserved Honor, let them
prompt you forward to the most Commendable Acts of Charity.

Though Honor ought never to be the principal motive to any Christian Duty,
yet nothing more justly challenges the second place, or more illustriously
fills it: for a Man of Honor is the next to a Man of Conscience; nay, Honor
it self, is a kind of Civil Conscience.

To conclude, Knowledge, Learning, Commerce, Civility, etc. perhaps were never
higher in this Kingdom, and Conversation never lower; for we are to account all
things low and mean, that are contrary to Godliness, Righteousness, and
Sobriety: and if ever we expect a Reformation by ordinary means in this
particular branch of Christianity, it must begin from Men of parts and fashion,
from such as You.

Let us not imitate the Vices of the Heathen, their Virtues we may; I am sure,
we may in Civil Duties, and the lower instances of Manners: for whatever was
good, commendable, and praiseworthy in any of their Religions, Laws, and
Philosophies; whatever was true, was just, decent, pure, whatever was lovely
and of good report in any of these, all that is contained in our Christianity;
all that, and more. Whatever our particular Professions, Employments, and
Callings are, let us still remember that our General one, is that of
Christianity; and before every undertaking, let us examine whether the action
be becoming one who professes the Gospel of Christ, the highest Rule of
perfection that was ever given to Humane Nature.

Let us be careful in the government of our Mirth, never to betray any vice or
defect in our Manners: and let us never be so complaisant as to go hand in hand
to sin and destruction.

In this Age of Good Nature, a little governable reservedness may be no mean
security to our Virtue and our Innocence; for where one does really offend by
being too sullen and austere, thousands miscarry by a too easy compliance.

Let nothing false, nothing unjust, nothing profane, scurrilous, or obscene
proceed out of your mouths; but let Truth, Righteousness, and Decence; let
modesty, friendship and reverence of all things Sacred; let Charity, Loyalty,
and whatever things are of good report, be the continual ornament of your
Christian Conversation. Let nothing be the diversion of your less careful
hours, that may any ways unfit you for greater Duties: and let not the Freedom
of this present Festival heap up new matter for to-morrows Humiliation, and the
following Season of Sorrow and Repentance.

FINIS.

