A SERMON Preached before the Right Honorable Sir ROBERT CLAYTON Lord Mayor OF
LONDON, AT GUILD-HALL-Chappel, December 7. 1679.

By THOMAS MANNYNGHAM, M.A. and Fellow of New-Colledge in Oxford.

Printed by the Lord Mayor's especial Order.

LONDON: Printed for William Crook at the Green Dragon without Temple Bar.
1680.

TO The Right Honorable Sir ROBERT CLAYTON, Lord Mayor of London
Right Honorable:
IT is maliciously observed by a late pretender to History, that London has a
great Belly, but no Taste: whereas its Refinement is of such Eminency, and its
Judgment so accurate as well in Religious as Civil Concerns, that it must be
held for no ordinary achievement to be Master of any Discourse that may rise
up equal to its Approbation, and strike gratefully on its palate: And I am
persuaded, that no man who enters on this Stage, will ever find any just
occasion to fear, lest too much Learning should make him a Barbarian to his
Auditory. How this present Sermon, in the general, has been received, I ought
not to acquaint the world; it is a sufficient recommendation, that it has been
acceptable to your Lordships better Judgment, and has made the Author
unexpectedly known to your Favor: For whilst I paid my your Favor: For whilst
I paid my Reverence to your Dignity, I found a Friendship from your Person. My
Lord, I esteem it an extraordinary Felicity, that my first Obligations are so
well placed, that it may be said hereafter, that I Lived under your Consulship,
and that all my future Gratitude may henceforth run in one Channel. My Lord, I
can scarce refrain from publishing very great things of your Honor, but that I
think this is no fit Paper wherein to attempt your Character; and besides, your
Lordships real Worth would go near to spoil the best Oratory: for solid Virtue,
like a natural Rock, has always something massy, and bravely rough, which the
best polishings of Art would but deform: Some counterfeit, or imperfect
Virtues, might receive a strange Advantage from Invention and Language; such
might do well in Landscape, to be viewed at a Distance; but a true Eminency is
better showed, than described.

Perhaps I am come abroad in a false Season, where the best prospect which can
be taken is terminated in a sullen cloud of doubtful affairs; however, this is
no discouragement in the least; for although a large measure of Political
Divination may be requisite to make a man cunning, yet a small foresight will
serve to make him honest: And every one may rationally presume, that he, who
without any worldly Interest, loves and clings to a persecuted Church, loves it
as a Church; it being easy to distinguish a person of Naked Valor, and an
unbenefic'd Affection, from such, who grow resolute only from a Confidence in
their Armor; or who (like the Tragoedian, that lamented the ruin of this
Country over the dead Bones and Coffin of his Son) cast an earnest and private
eye on their dear Preferments, and then are Nationally afflicted. I never found
my Pen more ungovernable, or a greater Temptation to write on, than at present.
But lest the Epistle Dedicatory (as it usually happens) should prove the
strongest Prejudice against the ensuing Discourse, I shall beg leave to
subscribe my self,

Right Honorable, Your Lordship's most obedient Servant, Thomas Mannyngham.

PSALM. 119. v. 67. Before I was afflicted I went astray; but now have I kept
thy word.


THE Lot or Distribution of Afflictions, especially on the Good and Wise, which
by many of the Heathens was urged as a grand argument against Providence, and
which served to countenance either their total denial of it, or their
Murmurings against it, is now amongst us Christians made the great
conformation, as of its Existence, so of its Justice and Goodness too; since
our Holy Gospel has assured us, that suffering for righteousness sake Martydom,
and the scandal of the Cross, are promised and Phil. 1.29.
graciously appointed for the privilege, triumph, and glory of the Heroical
Christian. And albeit those severer blessings, which were so proper for the
Infancy of the Church, requiring a most strict Discipline, and glorious
Examples for a standing Rule and Encouragement to Posterity; and which were so
remarkably verified in the immediate persecutions of the Apostles, and the
succeeding Centuries of Martyrs: I say, albeit those more rigorous mercies
seemed now to have expired in these our days, since our Emperors are become
Christian, and our Kings nursing Fathers; since Credit and Security are the
ornament and guard of Piety, Affluence and Honors the National rewards of
Virtue and Religion; yet notwithstanding all these smooth Appearances, these
hopes and flatteries of a new Paradise, and a Triumphant Church, the Gospel
must be fulfilled; and Luke 14.27.
whosoever bears not his Cross, cannot be a true Disciple, a true follower of
Christ; but every person who has entered himself into the Covenant of
sufferings, must with all humble resignation wait, and with patience undergo
his Romans 8.29.
predestination to Afflictions.

Now the reason and justice of this proceeding with wise and virtuous men, has
continually tortured the enquiries of the Learned through all times and Sects,
although with very different events; rendering the Epicurean careless and
independent on Providence, the Stoic sententious and witty, but the true
Christian wise and humble, who considers that the best man on earth is still a
grievous sinner, and highly deserving the severest Temporal Afflictions; that
according to the Law of rational nature, the wicked are in a great measure,
without the immediate interposals of Omnipotence, permitted the freedom of
their wills, a dominion over their ordinary actions, and consequently the
molestation of others; who, with a pious confidence, expects a mighty
recompense in the next world, at the revelation of righteous judgment; who
glories to follow the Heb. 2.10.
Captain of his Salvation, made perfect and consecrated through sufferings; and
rejoices with St. Paul to complete and Col. 1.24.
fill up in his flesh the remainders and relics of Christ's sufferings; as if
every Christian were to be in some measure even crucified for himself.

These are some of those most powerful considerations which may sufficiently
evince the justice and the necessity of our Afflictions; but the Royal Psalmist
in my Text presents us with a further argument, even of their goodness too, in
relation to those manifold advantages which they bring to Religion. And that,

I. As they respect every Individual, and may be called Personal Afflictions.

II. As they respect a Church and Nation, and may be called Public Calamities.

And first, as they respect every Individual, either the Wicked or the
Righteous; being often found the best expedients to convert the one from their
vicious Habits, to confirm and improve the other in their course of Piety.

And first, Afflictions are often found the best Expedients to convert the
wicked from their vicious Habits.

It is reported of Porphyrius in vita Pythag.
Pythagoras, that he could tame wild beasts with the Morality of his presence,
and suspend their natural horror with a Precept: but the commanding part of the
world has long since lost this secret of Restraint, even in more proportionate
objects: every bold sinner is become more Magical in his constitution, than
that hardened German Sennertus writes of; his obstinacy has steeled his very
infirmities into Armor; so that the sharpest reproofs men dart at him, either
reflect, or drop short, like a charmed Bullet: if their Invectives are poignant
and severe, he sets himself on his guard, and holds those sins the closer about
him, with which he is covered as with a garment; if their insinuations are
gentle, mild, and beseeching, they fall like the Dew on the Rocks, which only
serves to nourish those Serpents that inhabit them; for he makes their
indearments but forms to offer up his Lusts in, and gathers Courtship from
their phrase: Grant that he hears them Mark 6.20.
gladly for the newness of their Topic, or becomes Acts 26.28.
almost a Christian by the terror of their Eloquence; yet will his next
disorder so scatter those discourses, that they usually prove no more
beneficial to him, than the quick moments of Lightning to a Traveller in the
night, who before he advances one step forward, has lost his direction, and is
only more amazedly relapsed into his former darkness.

And how can it naturally be otherwise, when the whole system of his thoughts
and inclinations, the great bent of his nature stands contradictory to
Religion? how can persuasions work on a petrified heart, or the 1 Cor. 1.21.
foolishness of preaching reform the chayr of the scornful? his daily
voluptuousness corrupts his natural Conscience, extinguishes his first
Principles, and afterward draws a thick vail before his understanding: for
whilst his eyes are caressed with the visits and interviews of beauty and
dress, his Tympanum dancing to the soft Vibrations, the delicate Modulations of
Harmony; whilst his Tongue and Palate, with their exquisite Membranes, lie
bathed in all the variety of Luxury, and a studied Epicurism; his Smell
incensed with the costly sacrifice of Odours, every return of breath bringing
with it the Treasures of Arabia: whilst, I say, the busy Machin is in this
Tumult of sensual Ecstasy, this Tyranny of delight, how desert, how neglected
must the Cells of Reason lie? In this Riot of the Senses, how shall he attend
to the still voice of Judgment and Conscience? Or how shall he perceive the
little spiritual appulses of reflective thoughts?

Such Methods are for the Ingenuous and the Tractable, the humble and the
relenting Sinner; but when either the powers of the Soul lie dissolved in
Prosperity, or Contumacy has skinn'd the Tumor, then can no other discipline
prove effectual, than that which sacrifices unto health, that which stabs the
Imposthume. Accordingly the Royal Psalmist having seriously considered the
blasphemies of the wicked, entreats the Lord to take their Reformation into his
own hands, to arise with sudden vengeance, and Psalm. 74.23.
maintain his own cause. An eminent example of this proceeding, we may read in
the Conversion of St. Paul, Acts the 9th, who whilst he was raging throughout
all the Synagogues of Damascus, and breathing out slaughters against the
Disciples of our Lord, was struck down into an Apostle by a voice from Heaven;
had his malice purged away, by the Lightning that shone round him; and from his
blindness, recovered a most glorious Illumination: for as soon as his scales
had dropped from his eyes, he from thenceforth beheld nothing but Christ and him
crucified.

And although we cannot promise that the Lord will appear to every desperate
sinner in such a Miracle, such a mercy of consuming fire; yet doubtless before
the full measure of their iniquity is completed, there are never wanting to
the wicked some such seasons of Afflictions, as may create in them serious
thoughts, and furnish their minds with a true judgment of things; and they are
never permitted to Matthew. 26.45.
sleep on till the whole Agony of Divine goodness is over.

How conspicuous was this method in the Ancient Excommunications? when the
sinners were not only excluded from the Service and Sacraments of the Church,
but were delivered over to the buffetings of Satan, to sicknesses and torments
of Mind, to terrifying Dreams and horrid Illusions: These were the severities
that reduced them to a captivity of thought, to poverty of spirit, to their
whole years of prostration, and to the humbling of themselves through all the
degrees of Penance.

The obstinate and the sensual must have the Law again delivered to them in
darkness, Clouds, and dreadful Thunders; and when the terrors of the Lord
shall have opened their ears to discipline, and set scourges over their hearts,
then may the standing Ministry take effect, and the arts of persuasion enter;
for so we have read of a deaf person, who as easily perceived the least whisper
of a voice whilst a drum has beaten at his ear.

That Luke 16.19.
rich man in the Gospel (as we may probably guess from his delicious fare)
scarce ever once thought of Heaven, till he lifted up his eyes in Hell; whereas
if he had received but a small portion of those Torments in his lifetime, he
might from hence have taken a surer prospect of Heaven, through a less Chasm,
and have discovered a place for himself in Abraham's bosom.

Those young Courtiers of Abdera, who went distracted from the Andromeda of
Euripides, ran raving about the Town a whole Summer, Acting and Reciting in
every corner of the Streets, with all the Rabies of the Play in their Mouths;
and notwithstanding there were made several applications for their Recovery,
continued on their frantic Jollity, till the following Winter starved their
Poetic Fury, and cooled them into Common Sense.

A Bed of Sickness may reform that man, whom the Law, the Prophets, the Gospel,
nay, and one risen from the dead, would never have reclaimed: for, when having
danced through various Scenes of false pleasure and wild mirth, and drawing
near to the last Act of that Fable, Life, his distemper shall then chance to
give him the dreaded leisure of his thoughts, how quickly will the Gospel break
in upon his retirement, and set all its contempts, all its prophanations in
array before him? how will his Objections against Revelation Exodus 15.15.
then melt away, like the Canaanites before Joshua; and his strong Skepticism
grow sickly, and consume at the victorious appearance of Truth? how different
will his Imaginations then be, from those that were the entertainment of his
hotter bravery, when his Constitution was Athletick, and his blood in all its
boast and pride; when his vital Sulphur was strong, and his Pulse beat high
within him; when in his prosperity he said, That Virtue was a path too narrow
for the Generous, only a beaten way for the loaded Ass; that deliberation was
the cowardice of thought, Vice the exuberancy of Parts, and Piety the wisdom of
the Spleen? But lo, now the long-resisted notion of a Deity breaks out and
kindles upon him, it even haunts and persecutes his reflections; it is about his
paths and about his bed, and spies out all his ways: If his thoughts can Psalm.
139. v. 8, 9, etc.
ascend into Heaven, it is there; if they go down into Hell, it is there also;
if they take the Wings of the Morning, and remain in the uttermost parts of the
Sea, even there they shall perceive the terrible works of the Lord, and his
Wonders in the Deep; if peradventure darkness covers him, yet behold, the Lord
comes riding on that Cloud, and then even that darkness will be day: now will
his long-abused Soul grow Conscious of her own Immortality, and his Mind swell
with inward Argument; 'twill be no more accounted a vapor in the nostrils, or
a little spark in the moving of the heart, but an eternal subject of Glory or
Confusion: now let him tell me, if he can, how ravishing the Psalms of David
are, beyond the Odes of Pindar, or the Lunacy of Lucretius; how venerable a
plain Homily appears, how full of Sacred Apothegm, how each Paragraph contains
somewhat Infinite and Immense, and a Canaan distills from every Text!

Wherefore if now, even in this his day, he will be obedient to the vast
infusions of his Conversion; if he will constantly maintain the great Current
of Repentance in its proper Channel, and with all Sincerity live up to the vows
of his Sickness; then may he be advanced into my Second part, and be numbered
amongst the Righteous, where Afflictions are sure to meet him again, though
with another face; for as they are often found the best expedients to convert
the obstinate from their vicious habits: So,

Secondly, They do confirm and heighten the Righteous in their course of Piety.

He that considers the slow progress of virtuous Habits, the constant
solicitations of the World without him, the continual Treacheries of his own
Nature within, the secret and malicious Insinuations of all the Powers of
Darkness that are round him, will readily confess, That the frequent and most
instant admonishments of Afflictions, are the best Guards against Vice, the
surest strong Hold against all those Enemies; and that the Implacable Canaanite
only defends that Land, that Israel against which he fights.

We find this state of Afflictions almost every where recommended by the wiser
Heathens; which did not proceed from any Ost^ntation of Wit, was not any Rant
of Stoicism, but the result and sobriety of their best Reasoning, and sprang
from the cooler Counsels of Philosophy; consonant to which, we meet with a most
remarkable sentence of Plato, in his Plat. 2. Repub. (...) etc.
Republics, whereby you would imagine that he prophetically described one of
our Primitive Martyrs; where he says, That to approve a man heartily righteous,
he must be scourged, tortured, bound, have both his eyes burnt out; and in the
close, having suffered all evils, must be Impaled or Crucified.

Neither was it the affectation of the retired, or a melancholy Doctrine of the
Cell, but grew a Maxim even amidst the softnesses of Courts, and gained the
Suffrage of the Noble too: Let one instance out of many suffice, and that of
Philip King of Macedon, concerning whom profane History relates, that having
in one day succeeded in three notable Enterprises, he immediately implored the
gods, that they would be so propitious to him, as to expiate that immoderate
prosperity with some misfortune, and temper it into a draught fit for Mortality.

Moreover, what is more remarkable, 'twas chiefly from this State, that most of
their eminent Heroes were Canonized; for after they had been broken and
dissipated here on earth by vast Calamities, then were they placed amongst the
Stars, and their mighty Souls collected into their assigned Orbs.

Even the ancient Patriarchs (who lived before the Mosaic Institution) passed
away their numerous years in Sorrows and Pilgrimages, mighty Judgments, or
Egyptian slavery: And about those times (according to the best conjectures of
Ecclesiastical Authors) the righteous Job flourished in his Afflictions, and
now remains to all posterity, a stupendous example of Religion and Misery.

Besides, in the established economy of the Jewish State (which though it was
so full and pregnant of the happiness of this world, that its Political
appearance was nothing but the promise of a Temporal prosperity) yet we find,
that for the most part, amongst the Jews, their stoutest Leaders, best Kings,
and noblest Prophets, were most severely treated with Crosses and sharp
Afflictions.

And now, if the constancy, equanimity, and all the gallant worth of the best
of Heathens, the Righteousness of the ancient Patrianchs, the Valor, Wisdom,
and Integnity of the more renowned Jews, have been signalized and made
conspicuous chiefly by their Afflictions; surely Christianity, which has placed
Immortality in a fuller light, which has set an exceeding glory before us to
animate our Contentions in Tribulation, and has given us an infallible
assurance of that astonishment of Men and Angels, a Crucified God; ought in all
natural reason to be productive of infinitely more illustrious effects under
its severer dispensation: especially if we consider, that there is not a Virtue
proposed to our Imitation through the whole life of our Savior, which has not
for its appendage that which the Animal man calls Misery, although it proves,
in the event, the only winging of the Soul, the highest exaltation of Humane
Nature, which had never been honored with the Union of God, if it had not been
in order to suffer.

But yet Christianity would be a strange irrational Doctrine, and as eagerly
derided as the Stoical Apathy, if from its Principles and Duties we should
endeavor to persuade men that in Afflictions and Miseries there was a
sensitive pleasure, or at least no sensitive regret: Virtue and Piety do not
charm us into to a Lethargy, do not lessen the Impressions of Pain, or the
resentments of Injuries; they rather improve them, by how much the Temperate
and the Intellectual are more keen and exquisite in all their perceptions, than
the Sensual and Debauched; so that the true Christian is altogether as sensible
and as conscious of the Wounds and Indignities offered to his Nature, as the
Voluptuous and the Revengeful; but he bears them with an entire submission to
the Providence, Correction, or Trial of his Heavenly Father, not only without
Murmurings, but with Joy, 2 Cor. 7.4.
exceeding Joy, by reason of that Prospect that is still before him; a
Prospect, which shows the duration of his Misery short and vanishing, the
Recompense of it immeasurably great and Eternal. This was St. Paul's comfort in
the midst of his 2 Cor. 11.
perils, fightings, and jeopardies; of his stripes, prisons, and deaths: when
he was a Gladiator in the world in the behalf of Christ, a Spectacle and 1 Cor.
4.9.
Theater to Men and Angels. Even our blessed Savior himself was pleased to
sustain his suffering Humanity with the full Confidence and Expectation of the
Heb. 12.2.
Joy that was set before him; for then he despised the shame, and endured the
Cross, when he looked through the darkness of his Agony and Crucifixion, and
beheld his Ephesians. 1.20, 21.
Glorification above Principalities and Powers, his Exaltation at the right
hand of God.

Afflictions are those storms that six and strengthen our Principles, that
settle and secure our Fundamentals; that fasten our Religion, not on the
complacencies of our Affections, and the accidental deliciousness of a
prosperous Piety; but on strong reason, deep consideration, and an invincible
wisdom in spiritual concerns. On these waves are we dashed the nearer Heaven,
till our Hope and our Faith advance into Hypostasis, into the Heb. 11.1.
evidence of things not seen. These are the two-edged swords, the sharpnesses
that perform the true Anatomy of the Christian, that pierce and search to the
Heb. 4.12.
dividing of Soul and Spirit, joints and marrow, to the distinguishing of true
Piety from Temper: for many specious acts and offices in Religion, do
oftentimes proceed more from Constitution than Precept; are not so much the
certain effects of a steady Judgment, as the casual efforts of a warm
Imagination; as it is not strength and choice, but weakness and infirmity, that
makes a man Run, when he should only Walk; whereas, Afflictions prove us
invincibly constant to our Resolutions, and pursuit makes us cling to the Horns
of the Altar.

Besides, they are Trials which Hypocrisy can never stand; they pluck off its
disguise, and make it quit the Stage; they shake and ruffle the man till they
discover a true vital Devotion from a Mechanic Impulse; which, like the motion
of a Paralytick, argues not progression, but disease.

They give us an exquisite relish of those Mercies we do enjoy, wean our
Affections from the world, prevent our surfeits of prosperity, and place us in
a continual preparation for Death: Moreover, what is not so commonly insisted
on, they enlarge our Experience, and give our Faculties a miraculous
perfection. For, do but consider what excellent discourses are owing to the Pen
of the Mourners? what Divine Boeth.
Consolations we have received from the damps and horrors of a Prison? what
Lipsius.
constancy and peace of mind from the incirclings of War? What Meditations from
a Martyred King? as if men's understandings had been purged and refined by their
Afflictions, and their faculties vexed into Intuition: as it is observed of the
more Intellectual Platonists, that by long fastings, and frequent severities,
they raised themselves unto those Abstractions and pure Idea's, which some men
are not yet Dieted to apprehend: whereby they did in a manner resemble those
Prophets of old, who received their Inspirations, and delivered their Oracles
in Tortures. Nay, perhaps the renowned wisdom of ancient men is not so much
extracted from long observations and repeated experiences, as from the Lectures
of their Gout and Stone, as from those infirmities which accompany their Age.

Neither do they give a perfection only to men's natural powers, but more
especially an extraordinary advancement and supereminency to their Spiritual
Capacities; making them Heb. 12.10.
partakers of Gods Holiness. It must be confessed, that many have very
resolutely undergone great and formidable Torments, even death it self, in its
most cruel and vilest cumstances, out of false and unworthy Principles; such as
Phanatick Obstinacy, National Custom, Secular Gallantry, mere Sullenness and
Stupidity, blind and misguided Zeal, and what is more remarkable, even
Jesuitical policy: but these spurious and equivocal examples are so palpably
discerned from those excellent persons who have suffered in the behalf of the
Religion of the Gospel, with true Christian meekness and patience, that they
need not in the least disturb our present argument: for had these false Martyrs
that general conspiration of Graces, which Afflictions always produce in the
truly Righteous? did they manifest in their demeanor and conversation that
fruit of the Spirit summed up Gal. 5.22. viz. love, joy, peace, long-suffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, and temperance? if so, they could never
have been enemies to Civil Government; they could never have scornfully
rejected the humble addresses of holy Confessors, and good men; have wilfully
stifled the Evidences and convictions of Truth; have designed and acted
barbarities, contrary to all natural justice, moral goodness, and heathenish
civility. No, the afflicted righteous man has no such concerns upon earth; he
leads a Col. 3.3.
life hid with Christ in God, dwells in the Contemplations of Heaven, is
exercised in pious Raptures, and encompassed with the Ministry of Angels: his
earnest Devotions gather vigor and accent from the acuteness of his pains,
from the overwhelmings of an horrible dread; whilst he considers and knows,
that all his persecutions will arise into the enlargements of future happiness,
and his fiery trials be purified into a glory round his head.

Where would have been the Annals of the Heroic? Where would have been
victories of Faith mentioned Hebrews the 11, if it had not been for Swords,
Tyrannies, wild beasts, for the numerous inventions of persecuting malice?
Hence have proceeded all those Miracles of patience, courage, humility,
resignation; that inspired complacency under Torments, suitable to what St.
Chrysostom Rhetorically writes of the three Children in the Furnace, (...),
that is, they expatiated there with as gay a freedom and relaxation of mind, as
they would, had they been on the plains of Mesopotomia, or walking in the
gardens of the East.

No Joy like to that of the Righteous under the glory of his Tribulations: How
dead and vapid are all the Blandishments of the world to him, who is exercised
in spiritual Agonies, in the Olympies of the Soul? who when Persecution ceases,
can yet obtain for himself a Crown of Martyrdom by strict Abstinencies, holy
Discipline, and the rigours of Mortification? That even by these methods can
completely conquer and make innocent that Triumvirate of afflictions, Poverty,
Disgrace, and Sickness, which the world has dressed in such frightful
representations.

For what relish can there be in the abundance of Riches to one, who has
tasted the recollections of a Religious Poverty! who can be sedate and divinely
busy amidst the peevishness of Want, and with Socrates maintain a deep and
quiet Contemplation, with a Xantippe at his ear? who considers, how Poverty is
a state so tolerable, that it has been courted and chosen by many persons,
before ever any particular Providence had pointed out the Necessity, or laid
the Constraint? A state so commendable, that it is made one of the most solemn
Vows of those who at any time engage themselves in a Religious Order; that it
was always recommended by men who were best able to give a true judgment of
things, and had dedicated their lives to Wisdom and Philosophy. But above all,
that it is sanctified and made Evangelical, by the History and Example of our
Blessed Savior, who has not spoken a much harsher thing in his whole Gospel,
than what relates to a confidence in riches and great abundance; allowing only
a Matthew. 15.26.
bare possibility, a possibility with God, with whom all things are possible,
for the refuge and salvation of the wealthy: as it were, not receiving them
within the ordinary extensions of his love and tenderness, but referring them
to the omnipotence, and last reach of his mercy.

What are the acclamations of Fame, or the obloquies of Scorn to him, who
considers how intoxicating a great Reputation is, how apt to raise Tumors in
the imaginations of the best of men, and to tincture their reflections with
pride and vain complacency? who calls to mind, that there is not usually a more
precarious thing on earth, than he who has been nursed up with flatteries and
applauses, who has lived upon public breath, and been the Idol of the admiring
multitude; that such an one is the Creature of every Hyperbole; that he may be
transformed and fashioned by every modish Epithet, and complemented into all
the absurdities of opinion and action: who sadly reflects how the voluptuous
and plausible, with Herod in the 12.22.
Acts, are often panegyric'd to Death and Hell, by the officious Blasphemies of
the Rabble: who considers that an abused Reputation does often break more
illustriously through a cloud of Infamy; and let whatever happen, yet a Blot on
his name here, may give it a fairer Character in the sight of Angels, and make
it more legible in the Book of Life.

Lastly, it must be confessed, that Health is an inestimable Blessing; that it
was the chiefest of all Temporal Promises in the Old Testament, without which
no other could have been enjoyed. But yet if we consider what nourishment and
fuel it often administers to the grossest sensualities, what dangerous
temptations lie in the bosom of the healthful continually pressing for
admission, and how greedily they are many times entertained by those who are
strong to undergo the labors of iniquity; we shall be apt to acknowledge that
sickness is a proper season for the exercise and acquisition of many graces, or
at least that it is a happy impotence, in respect of the most wasting vices we
are subject to; that a firm constitution of mind is often wrought from the
diseases of the Body, and the Soul grows more active and refined, by still
working out its own separation; that the mortal part of us, by a continual
succession of little dissolutions, may be better prepared to drop with ease,
and just maturity, into that final one of death; which, when it meets a man in
the full Tide of his prosperity, and the luxury of his Temper, with what
confusions it assaults his Triumphant mind, with what violence it rends his
strong ligaments of Life? No one will more readily part with his earthly
Tabernacle, than he that by indispositions and long sicknesses, has been taught
the trouble of keeping it Tenantable; he will rejoice to sleep with his
Fathers, to be eased of the ruins of Adam, the dishonours of Original sin, and
to resign up his dust and ashes for Immortality, and a glorious form.

Thus we have seen by what gracious arts, strengths, and assistances,
Afflictions may not only be patiently born by the Religious, but also improved
into real comforts, and heightened into all natural and spiritual advantages;
and this may be done, not only by persons in their private concerns, but also
in their relative and public capacities, and as they constitute a Church or
Nation: which brings me to my second General, viz.

II. Briefly to consider what advantage Afflictions bring to Religion, as they
respect a Church or Nation.

Those narrow Reasoners, who, measuring Divine Providence by the modes of
humane inspection, thought it trivial and perplexing for it to direct every
Ordinary Agent, and to mingle its concourse with particulars; have
notwithstanding been very generous and liberal, in allowing a constant and
ample superintendency over Churches and Nations: and that there might be
nothing wanting to the magnificence of Providence in their Government, have
super-added peculiar Stars and Angels for subordinate ministrations. What
appropriate Schemes of Government God Almighty is pleased to establish to
himself in his presiding over those greater Bodies, is no man's Province to
inquire, nor within his capacity to declare; but however, this we may be
certain of, and it has been confirmed by the experience of all Ages, that
ordinarily Nations may expect their prosperous or their adverse seasons,
according as their Virtues or their Vices shall exceed.

And although prosperity be the Vote of Nature, the thirst and instinct of the
Soul, insomuch that Isaiah brings in the Jews begging a kind cousenage from
their Prophets, Esaias. c. 30 v. 10.
Speak unto us smooth things, prophecy deceits; Torment us no longer with your
Desolations and Captivities, those prodigies of a distempered sleep, but let
your Dreams be a continued Pageantry of Heaven, and all your Visions a
Shechinah: I say, although this be the universal voice of Mankind, and that
with the Israelites, we lust for a Canaan in the very wilderness, are calling
for new luxuries of mercy, whilst we are despising the former; yet the Lord
graciously hears our Prayers, and grants us a denial; knowing, that in plenty
and ease, we are apt to forget our Maker; but when he smites us, we turn back,
we seek him, we inquire of him; we publish Fasts by Law, transfer our Policies
into Piety, and make the depths of Empire serve Religion: even so the
appearance of a Comet improves Astronomy, better than all the ordinary motions
of the Stars and Planets; and the Sun invites more eyes toward Heaven by sits
Eclipse, than by its constant splendor.

The certain vicissitude of sins and judgments, mercies and provocations, has
in a manner rendered all Church History but Repetition and Tautology: Thus God
dealt with the ancient Jews, thus with the first Christians, and so he
continues to deal with us: and although we cannot without detestation and
amazement recall those Psalm. 106.
numerous ingratitudes of Israel, committed within the space of forty or fifty
years; yet if we reflect on our own Chronicle, within near the same circuit of
time, we shall be apt to conclude the Jews but puny sinners, as the horror of
Regicide seems to lessen the guilt of Murder: for did not the memories and
obligations of our Fathers, immediately cool upon almost as great a
deliverance, as the Miracle of the Read-sea? and did not we within a while
after murmur and rebel against Moses and Aaron, the best Monarchy, and the best
Hierarchy? and in that Interregnum, when our King was but gone into the midst
of the Cloud, to learn Afflictions, and to commune with the Lord; did not some
of us set up a Calf in Horeb, and worship that molten Image? when we were
brought into the promised Country, (...), with the secret, but most powerful
hand of Providence, did we not run after the Counsels of Balac, and commit
Whoredom with the Daughters of Moah? and has not the Lord visited for this too,
with as great a Plague? and, having now a while enjoyed the lots and divisions
of our Inheritance, are not some amongst us erecting Altars on high places,
serving Baal and Ashtaroth, and returning to the ancient Idolatry of the Land?
These are our parallel provocations with Israel, and shall not our judgments be
greater? even in this our Land, our sins are become our severest Executioners;
for do not Heresy and Schism, profaneness and hypocrisle, like the four winds
in the description of a Tempest, blow all together! insomuch, much, that we may
paint our Church, like the Planetary figure, with a dart in every limb; for its
whole body now appears only a larger constellation of Wounds.

Wherefore now is the proper and advantageous season, nobly to maintain the
Purity of our Faith, and to defend the wisdom of our Discipline; to lay aside
all peevish Principles, and sullen Separations; to conspire in nothing but
mutual Charity and public Love; to heighten our Devotions by numbers and
ardency; to encompass and besiege the mercy-seat of Heaven with importunity and
holy violence.

Now let our witty Gallants leave off their foolish Jestings, and irrational
Skepticism, their customary, if not malicious levity in Sacred things; and with
their solid Ancestors, grow wife and severe in their Conversation, faithful and
friendly in their ordinary dealings, generous and brave in their public
Actions, manly and solemn in their Religious Duties. Let our Magistrates assume
an Heroical spirit, and dare to be righteous where the wicked prosper; let them
with wisdom, integrity, and zeal, execute Justice and Judgment in this our
Land, and then the Lord will withdraw his: for who can tell but that the
courageous and fervent Magistrate, like Psalm. 106. v. 30.
Phinehas amongst the Jews, may even now remove a National Calamity with his
Javelin, with his speedy and zealous execution? Let our Princes be clothed
with Sackcloth, and for a while make their Thrones in the dust: Let our Priests
be decked with Righteousness, Courage, and the preparations of Martyrdon; let
them rejoice to be made an Anathema for our Church, and to bless our Nation
through the midst of their flames.

And now to sum up all our foregoing discourse as briefly as we can.

1. Let the bold and prosperous sinner, who after many afflicting Calls to
Repentance, continues still to sin on with an high hand, let him with fear and
trembling conclude, that his Impunity now proceeds from Gods greatest
vengeance, and the not Afflicting of him any more, from the very fury of his
wrath and indignation; as those Arrows fly swiftest which fly invisible; and
we often miss the blow, by the excess of anger. Let the obstinate Atheist, who
will not be reformed by present judgments, but even after melting becomes
nothing but dross; that asks who the Lord is; after so many plagues of
Conviction, let him know, that he wants but few degrees of being reduced unto
the utmost Analysis of hardening, of being consummated into the constitution of
the damned, the eternal glass of Hellfire.

II. Let the Afflicted righteous man rejoice, that his infirmities explore the
strengths of Heaven; that by his Trials is manifested the Victory of Faith, the
omnipotence of grace. That it is the (...). St. Chrysostom.
business of Afflictions to create in him a due consideration, hearty
contrition, strong cries, increase of reverence, and the inlargements of Piety.

III. And let us of this Church and Nation consider, that as we certainly are
(and without ostentation or any secular interest be it spoken) the most
perfect, and the sincerest part of the Catholic Church now existent, so we
trust that it is the particular indulgence of Almighty God to keep us up to this
our refinement, by constant persecutions: to correct and abate our personal
defects, but to confirm and make our Doctrines more Illustrious, by the
implacable oppositions of Phanatick rage, and Jesuitical malice: and if we
farther reflect on that unparalled wisdom, learning, and moderation; that
most rational and substantial Piety, Charity, and Devotion, which integrate the
constitution of our Church, we shall be ready to acknowledge it highly
expedient, that, with St. Paul, we should have a Thorn in the flesh, and be
often under the buffetings of Satan, the designs and attempts of unreasonable
and malicious adversaries; lest we should be exalted above measure with our
super-eminency of Doctrine; lest we should be puffed up 2 Cor. 12.7.
(...), with our abundance of Revelation.

And let our Enemies now destroy our City, let them burn down our Temples; if
we cannot sing Praises under their Roofs, we will Repent under their Ashes; we
will meet in Dens and Caves of the Earth, and by those obscurities, those
stealths of Worship, render our Religion more Apostolical, more Primitive. Yet
will we set our Moses in the gap, to see if peradventure the Lord too will
Repent, and turn away his Displeasure from us; to this end we will humble and
prostrate our selves, grow Pioneers in Devotion, and countermine them with our
Prayers; and should the Destroying Angel be already come forth, should
Judgments be already Commissioned for our Ruin, yet will we pray against
Decree, against Predestination it self; and Mar. 26.39.
Lord, if it be possible, let this Cup pass from us!

FINIS.

