Mahmut The. Turkish spy. Aetatis suoe 72.
F. H. Van. Hove. Sculp:


THE Third Volume OF LETTERS Writ by a Turkish Spy, Who lived Five and Forty
Years, Undiscovered, at PARIS: Giving an Impartial Account to the Divan at
Constantinople, of the most Remarkable Transactions of Europe; And discovering
several Intrigues and Secrets of the Christian Courts (especially of that of
France) continued from the Year 1645, to the Year 1682.

Written Originally in Arabic, Translated into Italian, and from thence into
English, by the Translator of the First Volume.

LONDON, Printed by J. Leake, for Henry Rhodes, near Bride lane, in Fleet
street, 1691.

TO THE READER.
OUR Arabian having met with so kind Entertainment in this Nation, since he put
on the English Dress, is resolved to continue his Garb, and visit you as often
as Convenience will permit.

He brings along with him many Foreign Commodities, to gratify the Various
Expectations of People: His Cargo consisting of Jewels and other Rarities,
which are the Genuine Product of the East; and some Kinds of Merchandise, which
he has purchased here in the West, during his Residence at Paris.

It will be Pity to affront this Honest Stranger, by raising Scandals on him,
as if he were a Counterfeit, and I know not what. This will appear
Inhospitable, and Unworthy of the English Candor and Generosity.

To speak without an Allegory, in this Third Volume of Letters, as in the
former Two, you will find an Exact Continuation of Modern History, acquainting
you with all the Memorable Sieges, Battles and Campagnes, that were in Europe,
from the Year 1645, to 1649. As also, with all the Remarkable Negotiations and
Transactions of State, Embassies, Leagues and Overtures of Princes; the
Policies and Intrigues of Public Ministers, especially those of Cardinal
Mazarini; the Great and Stupendous Revolutions and Civil Wars, in England,
China, Naples, Turkey and Paris; the Prodigious Rise of a Poor Young Beardless
Fisherman, to the Height of Sovereign Power; the Dismal Tragedies of an English
King, and a Chinese Imperor; with the Murder of a Turkish Sultan. And, all
these, intermixed with Proper and Useful Remarks, Pleasant and Agreeable
Stories; couched in a Style, which being peculiar to the Arabians, cannot be
matched in any other Writings that are Extant.

If his Philosophy will not abide the Test of our Learned Virtuosi, yet it may
pass Muster in a Mohammedan; since it is taken for granted, That the Men of that
Faith, rarely apply themselves to such Studies; or, at least, not in the Method
used in Christian Schools. They may have the same Idea's of Natural Things as
We; but they express themselves in a different Manner.

As for his Morals, they are Solid and Grave, and such as could not be
reprehended even in a Christian Writer, if we reduce what he says to
Vniversals. For, abstracting from the Particular Obligations he had to his
Native Religion, and to the Grand Signior, whose Slave he was; there will be
found little Difference, between his Ethics and ours. He every where
recommends Loyalty, Justice, Fortitude, Temperance, Prudence; and all those
other Virtues, which are requisite to fill up the Character of a Hero, or a
Saint.

And, who will not bear with him, for Patronizing the Religion and Interest in
which he was bred; it being Natural for all Men, to adhere to the Notions, they
have sucked in with their Mothers Milk? In this also, he shows great
Moderation; and a more unbiased Temper, than one would expect from a Turk:
Which may, in Part, be ascribed to his Studying in the Christian Academies, his
Conversation with the Learned Men in Paris, and some of the most
Accomplished Persons in the World. Hence it was, that he was accused by his
Superiors at the Ottoman Port, of Inclining to Christianity or Atheism; as he
takes Notice, in his Apology to a Religious Dignitary, in the First Letter, of
the Third Book of this Volume, Page 255. to which the Reader is referred for
farther Satisfaction.

In his most Familiar Letters, such as this last mentioned, and others to his
Intimate Friends, you will find some Expressions, discovering a certain
Fineness and Strength of Thought, which is not very Common in Christian
Writers. Which is an Argument, That the Mahometans are not all such
Block-Heads, as we take 'em for.

And, though his Picture, which we have affixed to Our Translation, since we
had the Italian Tomes, represents no Extraordinary Person, yet you know
Juvenal's Remark, Fronti mulla Fides. And, it has been a Common Observation of
one of the Greatest Philosophers in this Age, That by his Outward Aspect, no
Man would guess, what an Illustrious Soul lodged within.

If you would know, how the Italian came by this Picture (for, in his Preface,
he asserts it to be the True Effigies of this Arabian) he says, That being
acquainted with the Secretary of Cardinal Mazarini, and frequenting his House,
he saw a Picture hang in his Closet, with this Inscription at the Bottom, TITUS
DE MOLDAVIA, CLERICUS. Aetatis suae LXXII. He asked the Gentleman, who this
Titus was, who informed him, That he was a great Traveller, and understood many
Languages, especially the Sclavonian, Greek and Arabic; on which Account,
Cardinal Richlieu, and his Successor Mazarini, had made great Use of him; and,
That the Latter had caused that Picture of the Moldavian to be drawn, and hung
up in his Closet, from whence he had it. Our Italian being satisfied, after
some Discourse about him, That this Stranger was the very Arabian, whose
Writings he had so happily found, got leave of the Gentleman, to have a Draught
of the Picture taken, by a Skilful Limner, which he afterward placed in the
Front of his Translation.

There is one of these Letters, Page 306. wants a Beginning in the Italian
Copy. Which the Author of that Translation takes Notice of in his Preface,
saying, That by some Accident or other, the Arabic Paper had been torn
asunder, and one, Part was missing.

There needs no more be said, but to acquaint the Reader, That we are going
forward with the English Translation of these Letters, as fast as we can. So
that in all Probability, you may expect a Fourth Volume before Christmas.
Wherein you will find, more Particular Remarks on our English Affairs, with
Political Discourses, on the Original and Dissolution of Governments. As also,
many Curious Passages during the Wars of Paris, which have not hitherto come to
Public View. In fine, you will there be informed, of all the Remarkable
Events, that happened at that Time, either in Peace or War on the whole Globe.

Adieu.
A TABLE OF THE LETTERS and Matters-contained in this Volume.
VOL. III.
BOOK I.
LETTER I. MAhmut, an Arabian at Paris, to Nathan Ben Saddi, a Jew at Vienna.
p. 1. He exhorts him to be prepared for the Worst Events: To stand upon his
Guard against the Christians; but, above all, to beware of himself. He tells
him a Story of Carcoa, Nathan's Predecessor.

II. To the Kaimacham. 7 Of the Transylvanian Agent's Business at the French
Court: Of Monsieur Croissy's Negotiation with Prince Ragotski. The Speech of
Prince Ragotski's Son.

III. To the Instructed in all Knowledge, the Venerable Mufti. 13 He makes a
Comparison between the Christians and Mahometans; prefers the Devotion and
Charity of the Latter: And relates a pleasant Passage of a Christian that Whipped
himself.

IV. To Mustapha, Berber Aga. 16 Of the Battle of Mergentheim, between the
Germans and French. The Unfortunate Adventure of a French Officer.

V. To Shashim Istham, a Black Eunuch. 19 He pardons the Scandals cast upon him
by the Eunuch; commends his Apology; advises him to set a Watch on his Tongue;
and relates the Adventure of a Busy-Body.

VI. To Zelim of Rhodes, Captain of a Galley. 23 He acquaints him with the
Execution of Three Witches at Naples, who were hired to destroy him by
Enchantments.

VII. To the Invincible Vizir Azem. 29 He compares France to the Four Great
Monarchies: Relates the Battle of Allersheim, and the Progress of the French
Arms.

VIII. To Cara Hali, a Physician at Constantinople. 34 Of a Blind Man who
distinguished Colors by his Touch: Of another who Carved to the Life. Of the
Mute Saqueda; and of a Deaf Man, who apprehended ones Words by the Motion of
the Lips.

IX. To Vseph Bassa. 39 He congratulates his New Dignity; Informs him of the
Dissolution of the Diet of Francfort, and of the King of Poland's desiring the
Queen of Suedeland in Marriage.

X. To Ichingi Cap' Oglani, Praeceptor to the Royal Pages of the Seraglio. 44
He expostulates with him concerning his Calumnies.

XI. To the Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of State. 46 Of the taking of
Canea, and the Policy of Sultan Ibrahim.

XII. To the Magnificent and Redoubtable Vizir Azem. 49 Of the Duke of
Enguien's Return to Paris. Mahmut extols the Hardiness of the Ottoman Generals.
He relates a Private Amor of Cardinal Mazarini.

XIII. To Egri Boinou, a White Eunuch. 57 He thanks him for his Intelligence of
what is practiced against him in the Seraglio.

XIV. To Mustapha, Berber Aga. 59 Of the Elector of Saxony's falling in Love
with a Suedish Lady in Armor: And of the odd kind of Articles, agreed on
between him and General Koningsmark by that Means.

XV. To Mahummed, Hogia, Dervise, Eremit, Inhabitant of the Sacred Cave, at the
Foot of Mount Vriel, in Arabia the Happy. 66 He extolls his Abstinence, and the
Happiness of a Retir'd-Life; Rehearses the Blessing which the Angel pronounced
on that Cave.

XVI. To Vseph Bassa. 70 He acquaints him with the Marriage of Uladislaus, King
of Poland, with Louise Marie de Gonzague, Princess of Mantua.

XVII. To the Kaimacham. 73 He relates the success of the French Arms in
Flanders, Catalonia and Italy, that Year; with an Adventure, that happened to
the Duke of Orleans, in his Camp before Bourburgh.

XVIII. To Dgnet Oglou. 77 He entertains him with a Familiar Discourse of his
Sickness, and of the Mind's Tranquillity: Telling him a Story of a Man, whose
Brains were turned to a Nest of Serpents.

XIX. To the Selictar Aga, or Sword Bearer to his Highness. 83 He reproaches
the Europeans, with their Rebellions and other Inhumanities. Of the Assemblies
at Munster and Osnaburg. Of a Private Treaty between Spain and Holland.

XX. To the Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire. 87 Of the
Mighty Fleet the French were fitting out to Sea. Of the Predictions and
Adventure of an Old Prophet, who went to Cardinal Mazarini. Of Monsieur Chanut,
the French Ambassador in Suedeland.

XXI. To William Vospel, a Recluse, in Austria. 93 He advises him to turn
Eremite, for the sake of Silence and Contemplation.

XXII. To the Captain Bassa. 96 Of the Preparations the Europeans were making,
to assist the State of Venice. He tells him, what the Christians say of him.

XXIV. To Adonai, a Jew at Venice. 98 He desires him, to send some Remarks on
the People he has seen in his Travels. A short Character of Italy, with some
Reflections on the Goths and Vandals.

XXV. To Mustapha, Berber Aga. 100 Of the Present War of Candy. A Memorable
Saying of the Duke of Orleans, at the Surrender of Graveling, with a Generous
Action of that Prince.

XXVI. To Nassuf, Bassa of Natolia. 104 He congratulates his New Honor, puts
him in Mind of his Name-sakes Fate, in the Reign of Achmet III. and gives him
many good Counsels.

XXVII. To the Kaimacham. 107 Touching Morosini's quitting the Port of Canea to
the Turks.

XXVIII. To Cara Hali, a Physician at Constantinople. 110 Some Remarks on the
Spring, and on the Difference between living at Constantinople and Paris. The
Quest of the French Philosophers.

XXIX. To the Tefterdar, or Lord-Treasurer. 113 Of the French Designs by Sea,
and other Matters.

XXX. To Nathan Ben Saddi, a Jew at Vienna. 116 He applauds his Resolution, not
to take Religion on Trust, but to enquire into its Grounds. And sends him an
Abstract, of the Mussulman History.

XXXI. To the same. 120 He exhorts him, not to let Interest bias him in the
Choice of his Religion. Of the Duke of Brandenburgh's demanding the Queen of
Sueden in Marriage.

XXXII. To the Kaimacham. 122 Of a Private League between the Venetians and the
Bassa of Aleppo, discovered by Adonai the Jew. Several Instances of that
Bassa's Justice.


BOOK II.
LETTER I. TO the most Magnificent and Illustrious Vizir Azem, at the Port. 127
Mahmut's Project, to divert Cardinal Mazarini, from attempting against the
Ottoman Empire.

II. To Ismael Mouta Faraca, a White Eunuch. 143 He condoles the Misfortune of
Egri Boinou, whose Eyes were put out by the Grand Signior's Command.

III. To Dgnet Oglou. 145 He discourses more frankly to him, on the same
Subject.

IV. To Dicheu Hussein Bassa. 148 Of the Early Campagnes the French made that
Year. The Hardiness of a French Officer.

V. To Kerker Hassan Bassa. 150 He thanks him for his Present of Coffee;
compares Part of Arabia, with the Fields of Tempe. Concerning his Fathers
hunting of Lions, Tigers, etc.

VI. To Hussein Bassa. 153 Remarks on the taking of Retimo in Candy. A
Character of Monsieur Varennes, the French Ambassador at the Port.

VII. To the same. 156 Remarks on the Nature of the French, and their Method of
obtaining Victories.

VIII. To the Venerable Mufti, Sovereign Guide of the True Believers. 158
Touching the Books of the Ancient Pagans. Certain Memorable Passages of
Alexander the Great.

IX. To Murat Bassa. 167 Of the taking of Courtray by the French. Of the Want
of Rain, and Scarcity of Provisions at Paris.

X. To the Aga of the Janissaries. 169 Of the Benefit of Reading Histories; and
the Ill Consequences of Printing in Europe.

XI. To the same. 173 Of Gustavus Adolphus, King of Sueden, and of Queen
Christina, his Daughter. Remarks on Queen Elizabeth.

XII. To the Selictar Aga, or Sword Bearer to the Grand Signior. 180 Of the
Duke of Orleans his Return to Paris, after he had taken Mardyke. Of the Diet of
the French.

XIII. To Abubechir Hali, Merchant at Aleppo. 182 He exhorts him, not to grieve
for the Loss of one of his Wives, who ran away with his Slave: Relates a Story
of an Italian Lord.

XIV. To Solomon his Cousin. 185 He reproves him, for deserting the Public
Assemblies of the Faithful, and following of Schismatics.

XV. To Hasnadar-Bassy, Chief Treasurer to the Grand Signior. 187 Of the Duke
of Enguien's Triumphant Entering into Paris, after the taking of Dunkirk.

XVI. To Ibrahim Hali Cheik, a Man of the Law. 189 Touching the Suppressing of
Brothel-Houses in Paris.

XVII. To Mustapha, Bassa of Silistria. 192 He attributes the Loss of Asac, to
the Valor of the Moscovites. A Character of that People, with the Manner of
the Czars Succession in Former Times.

XVIII. To Solomon Kyzlar Aga, Chief of the Black Eunuchs. 196 He acquaints him
with the Death of the Prince, of Conde. The Character of that Prince, with a
Brief Account of his Life.

XIX. To the Kaimacham. 199 Of the Count d' Harcourt's Disgrace, in Decamping
from before Lerida. The Success of the French Arms in Italy. Of a strange
Fountain in the Isle of Elbe.

XX. To Bajazet, Bassa of Greece. 201 He acquaints him, with his Suspicion of
some deep Designs in the French Court. Of a Fellow, who raised a Sedition in
Paris.

XXI. To Pestelihali, his Brother. 206 He thanks him for the Journal of his
Travels; Congratulates his Escape from Male and Female Thieves; tells him a
Story of the Mogul's Father; and another of a Merchant's Widow in the Indies:
With other Discourses of that Nature.

XXII. To Afis Bassa. 218 Of a Quarrel between Monsieur Chanut, the French
Ambassador at Stockholme, and the Suedish Secretary of State. The Repartee of a
French Ambassador to the King of Spain.

XXIII. To the Mufti, most Venerable, and worthy of all Honor. 222 A
Comparison of the Three Ministers of State, Ximenes, Richlieu and Mazarini.

XXIV. To Danecmar Kesrou, Cadilesquer of Romania. 228 Of the Perfidy of the
Scots, in selling King Charles I. to the English Parliament. A Story of Bishop
Hatto.

XXV. To Ragel Hamet, Antiquary to the Sultan. 234 Remarks on Old Magical
Statues and Images: Of the Palladium and Ancilia: Of the true Name of the City
of Rome.

XXVI. To the Vizir Azem. 238 Mahmut acquaints him, with his Return from
Orleans. The Reason of the great Conflux of Strangers to that City.

XXVII. To the Aga of the Janissaries. 240 Of Joan d' Arc, the Maid of Orleans.

XXVIII. To Dgnet Oglou. 244 Of Eliachim's falling in Love with a French Lady
on the Road, as he accompanied Mahmut to Orleans.

XXIX. To the Captain Bassa. 251 Of the Bold Proposal, which a Sea-Captain made
to Cardinal Mazarini: And of a Magnificent Ship, which Queen Christina
presented to this Minister.


BOOK III.
LETTER I. TO Bedredin, Superior of the Convent of Dervises, at Cogni in
Natolia. 255 He makes an Apology for his Faith, against such as slandered him.
Of a Hermit then living near Paris, who had almost doubled the Years of
Bedredin.

II. To Murat Bassa. 262 Of the Christians Joy, for their Victory by Sea and
Land. A Comparison between Sultan Ibrahim, and Sultan Amurat.

III. To Mahomet Techli, Bassa of Bosna, at his Camp in Dalmatia. 266 He
reproaches him with Cowardice, in Decamping from before Sebenico.

IV. To Achmet Bassa. 268 He tells him of an Attempt, to Murder Queen Christina
in her Chapel.

V. To Cara Hali, a Physician at Constantinople. 272 He Discourses of the Manna
in Calabria, some of which he sends him.

VI. To Kerker Hassan, Bassa. 277 Of the Revolution in China.

VII. To Darnish Mehemet Bassa. 286 Of Masanello, and the Revolution in Naples.

VIII. To Solomon his Cousin. 291 He again reprehends his Manner of Life, and
persuades him, by the Example of his Grandfather, to observe the Laws of Purity.

IX. To the Kaimacham. 296 Of the Cruelty executed by the Turkish General, on a
Christian Priest. Of the Veneration the Ancient Mahometans paid, to
Scanderbeg's Bones. Of Porsenna's Generosity.

X. To the Mufti. 301 Remarks on the Spanish Misfortunes, the Insurrection in
Sicily, and particularly, on the Revolution in Naples. He prays him to furnish
Nathan Bed Saddi, with Religious Books.

XI. This Letter wants the Title and Beginning. 306 Of the Christians Revenge
on the Son of Ali, Sangiac-Bey of Lippa, for the Sufferings of the Christian
Priest. The Extravagant Revenge of an Italian Captain.

XII. To the Venerable Mufti. 308 Of Cardinal Mazarini's supporting the Tumults
in Naples. Remarks on the Duke of Guise his Attempt to succor the Revolted. A
Description of the Extent and Riches of that Kingdom.

XIII. To Abdel Melec Muli Omar, Superintendent of the College of Sciences at
Fez. 315 He Discourses about the Duration of the World: The Vision of Omar,
Successor of Mahomet. Of Adam's First Wife Alileth. That the Earth was
Inhabited for Many Ages before Adam.

XIV. To the Mufti. 323 He relates to him the Tragedy, of the Sicilian Vespers.
Of a Woman and her Daughter, that were Immured Seventeen Years by a Scribe in
Naples.

XV. To the Kaimacham. 327 He informs him, what Reason he has to be jealous of
Cardinal Mazarini's Designs against the Ottoman Empire. Osmin the Dwarf's
Dexterity, in prying into the Cardinal's Secrets, and those of the Grandees.

XV. To Pestelihali, his Brother. 332 He farther commends his Journal. A Rare
Example of Indian Charity. Of the Ingenuity of the Chinese. Of the Conquest of
that Kingdom by the Tartars. He discourses of the Original of Nations, and the
Unmixed Blood of the Arabians and Tartars. Of a Gu^ ^in, Two Thousand Years Old.

XVII. To the Aga of the Janissaries. 339 Of the Famous Victory the French
obtained at the Battle of Lens. Of the Tumults at Paris, and the King of
France's Speech to the Senators. Mahmut informs him, how he imploys certain
Agents, to foment the Public Sedition.

XVIII. To Achmet Beig. 344 He acquaints him, with the Death of Uladislaus,
King of Poland, for which the Court of France was in Mourning; as also, with
the Duke of Bavaria's Death. Of the French Campagnes in Flanders. Of a
Sea Fight between the French and Spaniards. Of a Formidable Conspiracy, against
the Czar of Moscovy.

XIX. To the Mufti. 347 He seems to approve of Sultan Ibrahim's being Deposed,
etc. Censures his Attempt on Sultan Amurat's Widow, and his Rape of the Mufti's
Daughter. The Continence of the African Scipio. The Stratagem of Athenodorus
the Philosopher. He incites the Mufti, to encourage the Translation of Greek
and Latin Historians.

XX. To Chiurgi Muhammel, Bassa. 351 Of the Conclusion of the Peace of Munster.
Of the Troubles of Paris, and the Duke of Beaufort's Escape, out of the Castle
of the Wood of Vinciennes.

XXI. To Dgnet Oglou. 353 He complains of the Unjust Proceedings of the
Conspirators against Sultan Ibrahim: Refuses to Defame him after his Death:
Owns that he did but Dissemble in his last Letter to the Mufti. Of the Statue
of a Famous Wrastler, which fell down, and crushed to Death, a Man that through
Envy went to Demolish it. Of the Motto, on Plato's Ring.

XXII. To Danecmar Kesrou, Kadilesquer of Romania. 357 Remarks on the Murder of
the English King, Charles I. and what Cardinal Mazarini said, when he first
heard the News of that Horrid Tragedy. Of Matchiavel's Corrupt Principles.


LETTERS Writ by A SPY at PARIS.
VOL. III. BOOK I.
LETTER I. Mahmut, an Arabian at Paris, to Nathan Ben Saddi, a Jew at Vienna.
I Believe, the News of my Imprisonment, might fill thee with Doubts of thy own
Liberty; and, make thee careful to avoid at Vienna, such a Misfortune as befell
me at Paris. Yet, if thou were much surprised at this Accident, it is an
Argument, that thou art but a Novice in the World, and art yet to learn the
first Rudiments of Useful Wisdom, which teach us, That there is no Stedfastness
in Humane Affairs.

There has Nothing happned to me in this, which I was not before provided for;
neither did the suddenness of the Event, make me change Countenance. I smiled
at the fulfilling my own Presages; and, went to Prison as unconcerned, as I
would have gone home to my Lodging. Not, that I would have thee think, I was
insensible of a Loss so afflicting as that of Liberty: but, my Chains did not
appear so very formidable, having made them familiar to my Thoughts long before.

When I first came to Paris, I looked on my self, but as a Prisoner at large;
owing the freedom I had to walk about, only to the Carelessness of the State,
and the favor of Destiny. So that when that Indulgence was retrenched, no new
thing happened to me. What I had expected for Seven Years together, could not
seem strange when it came to pass.

By what I have said, thou may learn to prepare thy self for the Worst
Events, which commonly steal upon the secure and unthinking; being wrapped up in
greater Darkness and Silence, than the Moments which bring them to Light. These
slide away without our Advertisement; unseen, unheard: Neither can our Watches
or Dials, inform us any thing of them, till they are passed. So, there is no
Index to point out to us, the Hidden Decrees of Fate, till they are
accomplished; no Ephemeris of Destiny, but our own Experience.

Thou, and all thy Nation, are suspected by the Christians: They esteem you
Enemies of their Interest, as well as of their Law. They despise and vilify
you, calling you, The accursed of God. Yet, they admit you, as Members of their
Commonwealth. They receive you to the Protection of their Laws, and entrust
you with their Secrets, that they may serve themselves of your Money. Thus are
you become Banquiers for your sworn Enemies: And, while you profess an Eternal
Obedience to the Injunctions of Moses, you make underhand Leagues with the
Disciples of Jesus. I do not accuse your Commerce with these Infidels; but, I
say, you have Reason to be upon your Guards, when you are environed with so
many Millions of Enemies. They are not ignorant of the Intimacies between the
Ministers of the Sublime Port, and those of Thy Nation: It is common in the
Mouths of the French, That the Jews are the Turks Intelligencers. Thou ought
therefore, to have a special Regard to thy Conduct, that no imprudent Action
may expose thee to the Jealousy of the State where thou residest. That Court is
full of Eyes; and, thou have need of a stricter Veil, than what thou wearest in
the Synagogue. The very Walls of thy House, will betray thee; and, thy
Domestics, may prove thy greatest Enemies: Yet, suspect none more than thy
self. This will not seem harsh Counsel, if thou reflectest Twice on it; there
being nothing more certain, than, That it is not so easy to defend ones self
from him in whom we confide, as from one we are jealous of: and, every Man is
apt to put too much Trust in himself. I believe, thou art faithful, and
abhorrest Treachery; yet, at the same Time, thou may be remiss and weak:
What could not be extorted from thee by an Open Enemy, may be discovered by the
Insinuations of a Pretended Friend. Thy own good Nature may cajole thee; and
therefore, 'twill be no small Point of Wisdom, to beware of thy self. As for
Contingencies, I advise thee not to be perplexed about them, or be uneasy. Thou
can not avoid the Inevitable Appointments of Heaven: Only, be ready for the
Worst that may happen; since, thou can never be certain of any Thing.

Thy Predecessor Carcoa, was a Man of exquisite Forecast; always on his Watch,
prying into the dark Orb of Futurities; yet, an Accident surprised him once, of
which his strictest Caution never gave him Warning. I read it in one of his
Letters to the Kaimachan, which thou sentest me from Vienna. The Story is this.
As he was one Day writing Dispatches to the Port, a certain tame Bird, which he
kept for his Divertisement, snatches from the Table, the Paper on which he was
writing to the Tefterdar; and, the Window being open, flies with it out into
the Streets. The Paper was dropped in the Garden of the Augustine Friars, at the
very Moment when the Spanish Ambassador, was walking there with the General of
that Order. It Is true, the Letter was unfinished, no Name subscribed, and so
Carcoa escaped an imminent Hazard of his Life. But, the Secrets therein
contained, gave a vast suspicion to the Imperial Court; it being soon carried
to the Principal Secretary of State, and by him communicated to the Emperor and
Divan. Strict Inquisition was made throughout the City for the Author of that
Letter. A Reward of a Thousand Rix-Dollars, promised to any that would discover
him. The Bird was seen by many, to fly along with a Paper in her Bill; but,
from whence she came, none knew. Nor had any curious Eye, attended her
uncertain Motions back: No Man divining, That that Paper was designed to
transmit to the Ever Happy Port, the most important Counsels of the German
Empire. Neither was Carcoa's Hand taken Notice of, having lived very privately,
and used another Character in his common Dealings. But, how near was he to a
Discovery when he says himself in his Letter, That he wanted but Five Words to
the Conclusion, where he would have subscribed his Name! From hence thou may
learn, That a Mariner in a Tempest, amongst Rocks and Sands, runs not greater
Hazards, than he who acts in thy Station.

However, thou may now continue thy Advices to Paris, but observe the
Directions of Eliachim, who brings thee this Letter. He will inform thee, of
whatsoever is necessary for thee to know; taking this Journey on Purpose, to
prevent the wakeful jealousy, and active Inquisition of Cardinal Mazarini, from
whom Nothing can be hid, that is trusted to the Posts. Receive him with singular
Honor; he is an incorruptible Friend of the Ottoman Port. From him thou shall
learn the safest Methods of our future Correspondence. He is the Apollo of thy
Nation; and, his Wisdom and Fidelity, will be recorded in the Register of that
Empire, which shall know no earlier Period, than the Moon, whose Crescent is
her Arms, and the Happy Omen of her Increasing Luster.

When thou beholdest that Noble Ensign of Mahomet, on the Top of the Chief
Temple of Jesus in Vienna, let it augment thy Veneration of our Law, and
convince thee, That all Nations must submit to the Messenger of God and Seal of
the Prophets. Be Faithful and Wise, and thou can not miss of Happiness.

Paris, 28th of the 7th Moon, of the Year, 1645. According to the Christian
Style.
LETTER II. To the Kaimachan.
SInce my Release, I have informed my self of some Passages, to which I was a
Stranger during my Restraint. The Transylvanian Agent, continues still at this
Court; and, his Negotiation is not now a Secret. Monsieur Croissy is gone
Ambassador Extraordinary to Prince Ragotski, on the same Errand, from this
Crown. The Subject Matter of both their Embassies, is a League. Cardinal
Mazarini suspected Tergiversation in that Prince, and that he would privately
treat with the Emperor, if the Grand Signior should withdraw his Assistance and
Protection from him; or, if he himself should grow weary of the War. Wherefore
Monsieur Croissy, according to the Cardinal's Instructions, would not sign the
League, till Ragotski had called Home his Ambassadors, who were treating with
the Imperialists at Tyrne, and sent away the German Envoy from his Camp.

The League being concluded, he insisted on the Necessity the Prince lay under,
of marching his Army nearer to Torstenson, the Suedish General, that so they
might support one another against the German Forces.

This was the Pretense; but, in Reality, it was designed to engage the
Transylvanians, beyond the Power of a Retreat; and, to post them under the Eye
of the Suedish General; who soon after possessed himself of Tyrne, the Place
appointed for Treaty between the Imperialists and Prince Ragotski.

It is a Town in the Lower Hungary, not far from Presburgh. The Suedes entered
this Place the 17th of the 5th Moon, but left a Garrison in it of Seven Hundred
Hungarian Horse, and Three Hundred Foot, according to their Articles with the
besieged.

These were soon forced to quit the Town by Count Forgatsch, an Imperialist,
the Suedes and Transylvanians being marched a great Distance off: And, it is
said, this Hungarian Garrison, yielded not unwillingly to the Imperial Arms.

It Is certain, General Torstenson puts but small Confidence in the Hungarian
Soldiers: For, above Six Hundred of the Common Sort deserted him, the 29th of
the 5th Moon, and the rest raised such frequent Tumults and Mutinies, that
their Commanders stood in more Fear of them, than of their Enemies. It Is
reported likewise, That there has been lately no good Understanding between
Ragotski and Torstenson, about the designed Siege of Presburgh: The former
seeming too much to favor the Hungarians, and being rather inclined to carry
his Arms into the Emperor's Hereditary Countries. Yet he would not consent,
that Presburgh should be in the Hands of the Suedes.

The French say, that this Prince is humorous and wavering, yet of a fair
Intention; but, that the greatest Part of his Officers, are corrupted by the
Emperor: And, that therefore, both they and the Common Soldiery, were for
Peace; only his Wife, his Son, and some few of his Counselors, persuaded him
to adhere to the Suedes.

They add, that the Young Prince, being instructed by his Mother, one Day in a
full Assembly of the Chief Commanders, made the following Oration, Ragotski
himself being also present:

PErmit me, most Serene and Illustrious Prince, my Royal Father, to perform the
Part of a Dutiful Son, a Faithful Counselor, and a Loyal Subject. The Law of
Nature and of Nations, entitles you to my Obedience; and, the particular Honor
you have done me, in admitting me to your Cabinet, obliges me to exemplify it,
in an humble Remonstrance of my Sentiments, at a Time when the Interest of
Transylvania calls for freedom of Advice.

It is with no small Complacency, that I now behold you encompassed with a
Circle of Heroes, whose Valor and Fidelity may give such a Luster to your
Victorious Arms, as shall eclipse the Glory of the Roman and Grecian
Conquerors. The Alexanders, Caesar's, Scipio's, and Hannibals, shall no longer
draw the World into an Admiration of their obsolete Achievements. The Register
of your Deeds, shall foil their antiquated Histories; whilst Plutarch, Tacitus,
and Livy, must veil to Modern Pens, the Recorders of your Matchless Actions.

Let not the crafty Insinuations of the German Court, warp your Resolutions,
and cajole you with the deceitful Umbrages of Peace, only to gain Time, that
they may more successfully carry on the War. Neither suffer your selves,
already in Part Victorious, to be amused with feigned Treaties, and Overtures
which you cannot but suspect. We are now in a Condition to give the Law; and,
should Fortune turn the Scale, it will still be in our Power to make our own
Terms of Composition. The Alliances of Sueden and France, have raised us to a
Capacity of braving all Europe: Whilst the One with a Potent Army on the Rhine,
the Other on the Danube, keep the Imperialists in such perpetual Action, that
it will be impossible for them to Barrier Germany from our Conquering Arms. Now
is the Time to raise Transylvania above the Title of a Tributary Province, and
restore this Kingdom to her Ancient Renown. If we miss this Opportunity, we
must for ever be Slaves to the Turks or Germans. Let us not seek any longer
Protection, but from the justice of our Cause and the Dint of our Swords. Let
not France and Sueden, boast of their Turenne, their Torstenson, as if no other
Nation could furnish the World with famous Generals! Whilst Prince Ragotski
lives, and lives at the Head of such an Army, your Fidelity and Courage, shall
render his Name more terrible than that of Tamerlain, and his Attempts more
prosperous than those of Scanderbeg. And our Posterity shall be obliged, to
raise Pyramids to your Honor; and, from your present Achievements, to date a
New Epoch, the Eternal Memoir of Transylvania's Redemption.

It Is said, that Ragotski was not very well pleased with his Son's Speech,
suspecting that he held some private Correspondence with Torstenson, for whom
he had no great Affection. Last Moon he insisted earnestly on the Money and Men
promised him by Rebenstock. But, General Torstenson thought it sufficient, that
he himself was so near him with his Forces. Yet, lest he should take an
Occasion of Discontent, he sent him a Supply of Money; though he was not
without some Apprehensions, that the Prince having received it, would underhand
treat with the Emperor.

It Is said here, that a Chiaus was arrived in the Transylvanian Camp, expressly
forbidding Ragotski to enter into the Hereditary Provinces of the Emperor. But,
that he, trusting to the Strength of his Army (which consists of Five and
Twenty Thousand Germans, Transylvanians, Hungarians and Walachians) was
resolved to pursue his first Resolution.

Thou know what Reasons the Port had, to send him this Prohibition. The
French say, 'twas out of Fear, that he would join with the Emperor's Forces.

By this thou may know, what Opinion the Infidels entertain of the Measures
taken by the Sovereign Divan. They descant at Liberty, whilst I send up Vows to
Heaven, for the Exaltation of the Ottoman Empire.

Paris, 4th of the 8th Moon, of the Year 1645.
LETTER III. To the Instructed in all Knowledge, the Venerable Mufti.
HAil, Holy Interpreter of the Sacred Law; may the Divine Light guide thee
beyond the Errors of Humane Frailty. I am amongst Infidels, Enemies to Truth;
who yet seem as certain of being in the Right, as thou art sure they are in the
Wrong. They hate us with an Inveterate Hatred. I must dissemble my Resentments;
whilst, with the lowest Prostrations to the Unity, I celebrate his Glorious
Mercy, who has sent us such a Star, to guide our Feet into the Way of Peace.

The Christians scoff at the Faithful People, as divided into several Sects.
Would my Death could wipe out these Reproaches, and vindicate the Honor of the
Holy Profession. I could retort, that Error shows it self infinite in them:
but, I must hold my Peace, and restrain my self, lest my Zeal transport me
beyond Discretion: Remembering, I am not sent here to dispute, but to act
secretly for my Great Master, whose Empire be extended over all the Habitable
World.

These poor Wretches, boast much of their Traditions, their Sacred Synods and
Fathers; as if we ever wanted Holy Men, working Wonders, and penetrating into
the profoundest. Mysteries, by only wiping their Eyes with the Dust of their
Feet.

They talk much of Faith and Reason; at which I smile, as knowing it to be only
Education. Yet, as the Worst of People have something that is Good; so, these
are not wholly destitute of Devotion. They pray often, but not so often as the
True Believers; it being, as thou know, a just Exception against a Witness
amongst us, That he prays not Six Times a day. They pray to Men and Women
deceased; whereas, thou know, there is no Deity but One. They fast often,
but not so strictly, as the assisted with the Virtue of the Supreme Dispenser
of Graces. They are Charitable; but, this hinders 'em not from excluding all
from the blessed Abodes, who are not of their Belief: Whereas, thou affirmest
(who art the Resolver of all the Problems of Faith) That it will go well at the
Last Day with all Honest People; seeing these have all the same Object of
Worship; and, their Different Religions, are but as so many Different Ways,
which lead a Man to the same Place of Rest, like various Roads to the same City.

These Christians whip themselves often with small Cords; which Humor, they
say, was set on Foot by an Hermit's Preaching and Example. Not many Countries
distant from that where I am, there happened such an odd Instance of this
Extravagant Zeal (which was to be heightened, it seems, with the Fumes of Wine)
as plainly justifies our Prophet's Wisdom, in charging the Faithful to avoid
it. It was particularly the Custom of several People in this Place, in their
Processions to whip themselves, till the Blood streamed down their Frocks;
which were so made, as to cover their Faces, and leave only their Backs bare.
One of these Zealots, distrusting the Firmness of his Constitution, had taken
such large Draughts of this intoxicating Liquor, that reeling up and down with
his Whip in his Hand, and his Head against the Walls, he was followed by all
the Boys of the Town hooting after him; which so lessened the Repute of this
sottish Religion, as made 'em abstain for the future, from this pompous Usage
of it. What low Thoughts have these People, of the Almighty Lord of All; when,
allowing him to be Omnipotent, yet represent him to themselves and others, as
delighting in Cruelty? Whereas, thou know, this Passion is only to be found
amongst the Weak and Miserable.

That the Divine Preserver of Men, may continue thee long for the Edification
of his Elect, are the passionate Wishes of the meanest of thy Servants, Mahmut.

Paris, 4th of the 8th Moon, of the Year 1645.
LETTER IV. To Mustapha Berber Aga.
WOuld to God, I could converse with thee Face to Face in the Seraglio, as in
former Times. I vent many passionate Wishes to Constantinople, that happy
Residence of my best Friends, the Nursery of my Childhood, the School of my
Youth; and, I hope, the future Repository of my Old Age. When I think of that
City, it is with a Passion hardly second to that, which I cherish for the Place
of my Nativity. In Arabia, it is true, I first saw the Light of the Sun; but,
'twas in Greece I received the more friendly Illuminations of the Moon, the
Splendors of the True Faith; which, though they disclose not to us, so clear a
Prospect of the Earth and all its Gayeties; yet, they present us with an
unveiled Discovery of the Heavens and Stars; showing us Paradise, with its
glittering Inhabitants, the purpl'd Colonies of True Believers, Champions and
Martyrs of the Eternal Unity. In the Desert I left my Father; or rather, he
left me before I found my self, being but an Infant when he dyed: but, in the
City I found Friends, which is not a less endearing Title. He gave me but my
Birth, whereby I entered on the Stage of Miseries, with which he soon after
left me to struggle, before I could distinguish Misery from Happiness. But,
they gave me Education, which taught me how to shun those Evils, which are the
Natural Consequences of our Birth. So that in the Main, I am more indebted to
them than to him. Let it be how it will, I cannot cease to love them, and often
wish my self with them. This is Second Nature. And, because I cannot have my
Desires fulfilled in that, I gratify my self by often writing to them. Should I
make Comparisons, thou will say, I am a Flatterer. Suffice it to tell thee,
That thou art one of the Number, whose Remembrance affects me with sensible
Complacency. Yet, I cannot write to thee, nor any of my Friends, so often as I
would, without entrenching on the Obligations I have to the other Ministers of
the Sublime Port. I send Dispatches to all by Turns, sacrificing my Private
Regards, to the Expectations of the State, and the Pleasure of my Superiors.

Had I been at Liberty, I could have sent thee the earliest News, of the
Slaughter which the Germans made Three Moons ago, in the French Army at
Mergentheim. It Is not too late now to say something of it. The Imperialists owe
that Triumph, to the Candor of Turenne, and the degenerate Craft of the Duke of
Bavaria; who, to lull the French in a Fatal Security, sent an Agent into
France, to negotiate a Peace, with deceitful Overtures, and Umbrages;
commanding also, that none of his Soldiers, should dare to call the French
their Enemies. Yet, some lay the Blame of this Overthrow, on the Suedes; whose
unseasonable Suspicion of a Private Treaty between the French and Germans,
hindered Torstenson from joining the former; and, exposed Turenne, with his raw
and unexperienced Forces, to the numerous Army of veterane Imperialists.

'Twas a Fatal Engagement, and the French lost many brave Men; besides an
Hundred and Fifty Commanders taken Prisoners, Fifteen Hundred of the Common
Soldiers, Fifty Ensigns, with many Wagons, and Four Mules laden with Money.

It is reported, that whilst Turenne, in the general Retreat and Flight of his
Army, betook himself to Mergentheim, as he lay on his Bed the first Night, one
of his Officers was coming to alarm him with the News of the Germans Approach
to that Town, but unfortunately stumbled at his Chamber Door: With the Noise of
which, Turenne awaked; and, fearing some Attempt on his Life, leaped off his
Bed with his drawn Sword; and, making toward the Door, just as the Officer
opened it, he run him into the Heart. By which Mistake, he himself, and the
Troops that were in the Town with him, had like to have fallen into the Hands
of the Bavarians. But, receiving Notice of their Approach accidentally by some
other means, he withdrew his Troops out of the Town by a contrary Road, and
escaped the Pursuit of his Enemies.

This Victory has given new Courage to the Imperialists; and has not much
dispirited the French, who are by this Loss, enflamed with greater Ardors,
meditating a speedy Revenge. The Genius of this Court, seems to be undaunted,
breathing Nothing but War.

I shall not fail to send thee such Intelligence, as will demonstrate, That
Mahmut passes not away his Time in vain.

I pray the Sovereign of as many Empires, as there be Worlds, to distinguish
thee, by some particular Mark of his Favor, from the Crowd of those he makes
Happy.

Paris, 4th of the 8th Moon, of the Year 1645.
LETTER V. To Shashim Istham, a Black Eunuch.
AT length thou have condescended to beg my Pardon, for the Calumnies thy
Tongue has loaded me with. I am not ill pleased with thy Letter. It abounds
with elegant Expressions of thy Sorrow, for an Offense to which thou had no
Provocation. Thy Submission, though late, abates my Resentment; and, if thou
performest thy Promise, it is banished. The first Crime so ingenously
acknowledged, claims a Title to Forgiveness: Let Eternal Oblivion seal it. I am
not by Nature revengeful. I rather blush for Shame, than grow pale with Anger,
at him that injures me. Yet, Self-Preservation will rouse our Choler; which is
the most active Humor, and precipitates many to violent Courses. The Effect it
has on me, is, to put me on my Guard, lest he who has wronged me, without any
Signs of Repentance, should continue his Malice to my Destruction. But, thou
have dispersed all my Suspicions, by thy seasonable Address; and, if I cannot
pronounce thee Innocent, I will believe thou art not Incorrigible. The best
Advice I can give thee, is, henceforwards to attend to thy own Affairs, and
refrain from those of others; remembering the Arabian Proverb, He that peeps in
at his Neighbor's Window, may chance to lose his Eyes. There is a great deal
of Wisdom, couched in these short Sentences. They are not the Product of one
Man's Experience, nor of a few; but, they are the Result of Universal
Observation. And, our Country has been happy above others in the choice of her
Proverbs. This that I mentioned is peculiar to the East: Yet, I can produce an
Instance, whereby 'twas lately verified in the West.

There is hardly a Night passes in this Populous City, wherein some Murder is
not committed in the Streets. Two Nights ago, a Man was found dead on the
Ground, whereupon a Tumult was gathered about his Bleeding Carkase. Among the
rest, a Fellow came crowding in, inquisitive what should be the Matter. Those
who stood by, beholding his Clothes bloody, which he was not sensible of
himself, seized on him as the Murderer. His wild Looks increased their
Jealousy; and, the incoherent Words with which he endeavored to excuse
himself, rendered him Guilty in the Judgment of the Rabble. They carried him
before a Cadi, by whom he was strictly examined: He stoutly denied the Fact;
and, no Proof could be brought against him, but his stained Clothes. It Is the
Custom here, to put to the Torture, Persons suspected of Capital Crimes, in
Order to draw a Confession of the Truth. This they did to this poor Wretch;
and, in the Extremity of his Pains, he acknowledged, he had killed his Wife
that Evening, but was altogether Innocent of this poor Man's Death, who was
Murdered in the Streets. All the Torments they inflicted, could force no other
Confession from him, save that which his real Guilt prompted him to make. For
which, he was condemned to Death, according to the Laws. Thou see by this,
that had he gone about his Business, without prying into other Men's Matters, he
might have escaped a Discovery. But, that mediing Itch of the Imprudent,
betrayed him (not without the particular Direction of Fate) to a Death, which
indeed he merited, but not on the Score of the murdered Man, whom he went out
of his Way to see.

Thou will say, this Story is not applicable to thy Case; since, thou have
never yet embru'd thy Hands in any Man's Blood. I tell thee, what I have said,
was not designed as a Reflection on thy past Offense (let it be forgotten);
but, as a Caution for the future, not to engage thy self, in Matters out of thy
Sphere. For, a busy Body, is never without Trouble.

Above all, I counsel thee, to practice the Government of the Tongue, which is
a great Virtue, especially in the Courts of Princes. The Arabians say, That a
Wise Man's Soul, reposes at the Root of his Tongue; but, a Fool's is ever
dancing on the Tip.

Thou have no Reason to take in ill Part, the Freedom with which I advise thee
for thy Good; unless, thou think thy self too Old to learn. But, I have a
better Opinion of thee, than to rank thee among Pythagoras's Asses.

I have said enough for a Friend; too much for an Enemy. It is in thy own
Choice to make me which thou please. Adieu.

Paris, 4th. of the 8th. Moon, of the Year 1645.
LETTER VI. To Zelim of Rhodes, Captain of a Gally.
THOU have never vouchsafed to acknowledge the Advice I sent thee some Years
ago, of a Christian's Design against thy Life. Perhaps he wanted an
Opportunity, to put. his Revenge in Execution that Way; and therefore, the
Caution I gave thee, looked like a false Alarm. Thou trustest in thy Courage,
the Strength of thy Vessel, the Multitude and Fidelity of thy Slaves, and
think thy self invulnerable. But, let me tell thee, That neither thy
Courage, nor thy Vessel, can defend thee from the Stroke of Destiny; and thou
have no greater Enemies than those who eat thy Bread. Whether it be, the
Continuance of thy Cruelty; or, the Natural Regret of Servitude has rend'red
them so, I know not; but, if what I am informed of be true, thou art the
miserablest Man in the World. Were thou only in danger to lose thy Life by a
Stab, a Bullet, or the swift Effects of Poison, it would be a Happiness, in
Comparison of the Method that is now taken to destroy thee: And, the Invisible
Death which thou were formerly to receive from a Prayer Book, would have been
soft as the Stroke of Cupid's Arrow, in Respect of the Tragical and Unheard Of
Fate, which is now preparing for thee. Think not I go about to amuse, or,
affright thee with Chimaera's and Tales, such as Nurses use to awe their
Children into Compliance and good Manners. What I tell thee, is Matter of Fact;
and, confirmed by many Letters from Italy, to several eminent Merchants in
Paris. I have seen some of them, and hear that the rest agree in the same
Relation.

They give an Account, That at Naples, on the Second of the last Moon, Three
Witches were seized, and accused of practicing Diabolical Arts; of enchanting
several Persons; of doing great Mischief; and, in fine, of having private
Commerce with the Devil. They stoutly denied all at first, and made very subtle
and plausible Apologies. Insomuch, as the Inquisitors were almost persuaded of
their Innocence; till it was suggested, That their Houses should be searched.
Officers were sent accordingly: who, after a narrow Scrutiny, found some
Magical Books, several Vials of strange Liquors, Pots of Ointment, with an
Image of Wax, resembling a Man, but partly melted. There were imprinted on the
Breast of the Image, several unknown Characters, Figures and Magical Symbols:
And, on the Forehead was to be read, ZELIM EBEN SAGRAN. All these were brought,
and exposed before the Inquisitors (of whose Office thou art not ignorant.)
Great Deliberation was had, about this unusual Emergency. The Imaums and
Cheiks, were sent for and consulted. The Witches were examined apart; and put
to the Torture, as is the Custom in Capital Crimes. Admirable was their
Constancy for a considerable Time; but, at length, overcome by the Continuance
and Sharpness of their Pains, they confessed, They had for some Years practiced
Magic Arts, conversed with Familiar Spirits, raised Tempests, Earthquakes, and
done other wicked Feats. Being examined about the Image of Wax, they declared,
That it was the Image of a Turkish Captain of a Gally, whose Name was written
on the Forehead: And, that they were hired, by certain Italians, who had been
Slaves in the Gally of the said Captain, to bewitch him to Death, in the most
lingering Method they could invent: That, in Order to this, they had made this
Image; That every Night they met together, with a Fourth of their Gang, (who
was not to be found) and made a Fire of the Bones of Dead Men, which they stole
from the Graves and Charnel-Houses: That they laid this Image down at a
convenient Distance, before this Fire, repeating certain Magical Words and
Charms; and, as this Image gradually melted, so the Body of the said Turkish
Captain, did insensibly waste and decay. And, to add to his lingering Death an
intolerable Torment, they basted the melting Image, with the Oils and other
Liquors, which were contained in the Vials and Pots: That, by this Means, he
was perpetually racked with most pungent and acute Pains in his Bowels, Head,
and all Parts of his Body; raging under most violent Fevers, insatiable Thirst,
and Want of Sleep. Finally, That this lingering Kind of Death would continue, as
long as they pleased to protract the Dissolution of the Waxen Image.

This Confession, though extorted from the Witches in the Midst of insufferable
Torments, yet was delivered without any Inconsistencies, and with all the
Demonstrations of a real Penitence. And, being seconded with the Testimonies of
many Credible Witnesses, who had overseen them in some of their Nocturnal
Ceremonies; the Inquisitors, moved with a just Horror of so nefandous
Abominations, sentenced them, To be burnt, and their Ashes to be scattered into
the Sea. Which was accordingly executed, on the Sixth of the last Moon, in the
Presence of infinite Spectators.

The News of this Extraordinary Event, is fresh in the Mouths of almost all the
Inhabitants of this City; Yet, no Man, I dare say, hears it with that Concern
for the Turkish Captain, as I do. Even those among the Christians who abhor
Witchcraft, would nevertheless rejoice, if not only thou, but all the
Mussulmans were destroyed with Enchantments; since, they can never hope, it
will come to pass by the Success of their Arms.

I am not credulous of every Story that is related of Witches, being satisfied,
That Superstition and Ignorance, has listed many in that Infernal Number, who
were Innocent and never deserved it: Some having been forced, by Racks and
Tortures, to confess themselves Guilty of practicing Enchantments, when, after
their Execution, there have appeared evident Proofs to the contrary. Yet, I
cannot be sure, but that there have been some in all Ages and Nations, who have
entered into Leagues and Associations with Devils, and have been enabled
thereby, to perform Things above the Power of Nature. However, I have a
Particular Desire to hear from thee, and to be informed, Whether thou have
experienced the Effect of their Enchantments. If thou have not, bless thy
Stars, that thou were born and bred a Mussulman, against whom the Magic of the
Infidels cannot prevail; and, that thou have swallowed the Impression of
Mahomet's Seal, which is of Force to dissolve and make invalid, all the Charms
of Men and Devils. But, if thou have felt the Force of their Enchantments, and
pinest away with unaccountable Pains and Languors; then, think with thy self,
That thou art defective in keeping some Point of our Holy Law; That Mahomet is
angry with thee, withdraws his Protection, and exposes thee to the Malice of
Evil Spirits. Neither persuade thy self, That because the Three Witches are put
to Death, thou shall presently recover thy former Health and Ease again: For,
so long as there is a Fourth living; and out of the Reach of Justice, thou art
not safe. Nay, if she were taken and executed too; so long as thy Enemies are
yet alive, who first employed these Hags, thou art still at their Mercy. They
will search every Corner of Italy, and of all Europe, but they will find
Instruments of their Revenge. They will rummage Hell it self, to gratify their
Fury. The best Counsel I can give thee in this Case, is, To pacify thine
Enemies, by extraordinary Acts of Civility to the Christians, wherever thou
meetest them; by using thy Slaves mildly, and giving them their Freedom, after
a limited Time of Service; without exacting a Ransom, which neither they, nor
their Relations and Friends can ever be able to pay. This will abate the
Rancour of the Infidels, and turn their Revenge into Kindness and Love. Thou will every where be free from Dangers; and, those very Persons, who now study
all Means to take away thy Life, will then hazard their own to preserve thee
from Death.

Think not, that I go about to persuade thee to change Temper with thy Slaves,
and, from the Resolution and Bravery of a True Mussulman, to sink into the
abject Timorousness of a Christian. Be fearful only of thy self, and stand in
Awe of none more than of thy own Conscience. There is a Cato in every Man, a
severe Censor of his Manners; and, he that reverences this Judge, will seldom
do any Thing he need to repent of. Let not the Authority of thy Station, tempt
thee to be Cruel or Unjust; but, in all Things, Do as thou would be done
unto. This is a Precept engraven on every Man's Heart; and, he whose Actions
write after this Copy, will always be at ease here, and transcendently happy
hereafter. Follow this Rule, and thou will experience the Effect. Adieu.

Paris, 1st of the 9th Moon, of the Year 1645.
LETTER VII. To the Invincible Vizir Azem.
IF One may judge of future Events, by applying to them the Symptoms of Things
past; and, if a Man may compare one Kingdom with another; I should think, that
France will in Time extend the Limits of her Empire, as far as any of the Four
Great Monarchies, that have been recorded in Histories for their Universal
Sway. I will not say, as far as the wide-stretch'd Empire of the
ever-victorious Osmans: Yet, the Genius of this Nation, seems in some Manner to
inspire the French with as ardent a Thirst of Glory and Conquest, as that which
has in all Ages, appeared to be the Inseparable Virtue of the Mussulmans. They
press forward to the Mark, for which they take up Arms; that is, to subdue All
before them, and lay Kingdoms, Provinces and Cities at the Feet of their
Sovereign. They are not discouraged at Difficulties and Losses. The Checks and
Oppositions they meet with, do but animate them with new and fresh Vigors. So
that it is become a sure Prognostic of some great Success to that Nation, when
at any Time they receive ill News from their Armies. In this, their Courage
seems to be of the Quality of Naptha; which, by pouring on of Water, takes
Fire; although, thou know, these Two Elements be Contrary to each other. So,
this Warlike People, instead of being dejected, or made timorous by any Defeat
given to their Armies, are rather inflamed with more active and valiant
Resolutions; as will appear, by the Repulse given them by the Duke of Bavaria,
not many Moons ago.

As soon as that News arrived in this City, one would have expected to have
seen some Tokens of Fear in the People; but, it wrought a contrary Effect. No
Tears of Women and Children, no compassionate Sighs for their slain Husbands,
Fathers or other Relations; no down-cast Looks, or ominous shaking of Heads; no
melancholy Whispers or portentous Stories, were murmured in the Ears of the
Multitude: But, all Things appeared lively and prosperous; the very Women
exciting the Young Men to list themselves Soldiers, and the Boys in the Streets
making all their Pastime consist, in imitating the Men of Arms, and learning
the Discipline of War. There was no need, to force Men to the Field. No sooner
was the King's Intention to raise New Forces divulged in the Provinces, but
Thousands came voluntarily and took up Arms; choosing rather to seek Honorable
Deaths in the Toils and Hazards of War, than to lead Inglorious Lives at Home,
in the soft Enjoyments of Peace.

These Things appeared to me, as certain Presages of the Rising Greatness of
this Monarchy, and an Evident Sign, That the French Nation in this Age, shall
outdo their Ancestors in Warlike Deeds.

The Stage of that Bloody Combat, between the Forces of the Duke of Bavaria,
and those under the Command of Marshall Turenne, was Mergentheim. Since which,
there has been a more fierce Encounter, between the French and Imperialists at
Allersheim. Wherein the former, have recovered the Honor they seemed to have
lost in the Spring, owing much to the Bravery of the Landgrave of Hess-Cassel;
who, with his Regiments, had a considerable Share in the Actions of this Day;
and therefore, has been presented with Magnificent Gifts by the Queen-Regent.
The Bavarians lost in this Battle, above Two Thousand Common Soldiers, besides
many Officers of Note. On the French Side, the Duke of Enguien (who had newly
joined his Forces to those of Turenne) was wounded in the Arm, with Two other
Commanders. Monsieur Grammond was taken Prisoner; but, honorably treated and
sent away with Presents by the Duke of Bavaria, together with Instructions
about a Neutrality; who is exchanged for a German of equal Quality. The French
have also lost in this Battle, above a Thousand of the Common Soldiers; so that
their Victory cost them dear.

The Duke of Enguien, notwithstanding his Wounds, marches on the next Day with
his Army to Norlinghen, offering to that Town a Neutrality, and Liberty for the
Garrison to march out, which consisted of Three Hundred Bavarians. But,
receiving a fierce Answer from the Governor, he caused the Approaches to be
made in Order to an Assault, which was begun that very Night, and a Breach made
in the Walls; upon which, the Inhabitants were forced to intercede with the
Duke, that there might be a Cessation of Violence till the next Morning,
promising, that then the Soldiers should surrender at Discretion; which was
done accordingly.

There he tarried Eight Days, to refresh his Army. Then he marched to
Dunkenspule, which was defended by a Garrison of Five Hundred Bavarians. He
took this Place by Storm, yet gave Quarter to the Soldiers, who laid down their
Arms, and yielded themselves Prisoners. Leaving a Garrison of Three Hundred
French in the Town, he removed his Forces toward Heilbrun. But, in regard this
Place was defended by Fifteen Hundred Men, he forbore to assault it, and only
Quartered his Army in the Neighboring Villages.

Since that Time, which was about the Middle of the last Moon, there has been
no considerable Action between the French and the Germans. Yet, those who
pretend to be versed in Military Affairs, laugh at the ill Conduct of the Arch-
Duke Leopold; who, when he had the French shut up in a Narrow Straight, through
which it was impossible for them to pass, but by single Files, neglected that
Opportunity to cut them off; deferring the Victory (whereof he was too secure)
till the next Day, by Reason of the present Weariness of his Soldiers. In the
mean Time Turenne, with his whole Army, passed the Straight in the Dead of the
Night, and came to Philipsburgh.

This Oversight of the General, is much talked of; because, had he pursued his
Advantage, he had not only entirely defeated the French, but, in all
Probability, falling with the whole Force of the Empire on the Suedes, he had
likewise vanquished them, and so put an End to the War. But, it seems, as if
the Inscrutable Providence had determined to infatuate the Minds of the
Germans, and reserve those Two Potent Nations, their Enemies, to be a farther
Scourge to the Empire.

Adieu, Great Guardian of the Eternal Monarchy, and believe Mahmut, when he
solemnly swears by Mount Sinai, and by the Tenth Night of the Moon, that he
adores thy consummate Virtue and Wisdom, which never fail thee in Extremities.

Paris, 8th. of the 9th. Moon, of the Year 1645.
LETTER VIII. To Cara Hali, a Physician at Constantinople.
I Am weary of writing News of Battles and Sieges to the Grandees; and, I know,
thou seldom troublest thy self with the Care of Foreign Transactions. Besides,
I have no certain Intelligence of Moment to communicate. But, I can acquaint
thee with something more agreeable to thy Studies and Genius.

Here is a Man in this City, who was not born Blind, but by some ill Hap lost
the Use of his Eyes. Yet, Nature seems to have recompensed that Misfortune, in
the Exquisiteness of his Feeling. Thou would say, he carried Eyes in his
Fingers Ends; since he distinguishes those Things by his Touch, which are the
only proper Objects of Sight. Believe me, I think there can be no Deceit or
Confederacy, whereby he might blind others, instead of being so himself. I saw
him muffled up with a Napkin which covered all his Face, when diverse Pieces of
Eastern Silks of various Colors, were laid on a Table before him. He felt them
attentively, and told us the Color of each Piece exactly. I, who was never
over-credulous of extraordinary Pretenses, suspecting that either the Fineness
of the Linen which veiled his Face, might give him some Glimpse of the
different Colors; or, that some By-stander, with appointed Signs, might inform
him; caused all the Company to withdraw, except a Learned Dervise, who was
intimate with me. We threw a thick Velvet-Mantle over his Face, which reached
down to his Navel, girding it about his Waste, so as to leave his Arms at
Liberty. Then I procured small Shreds of Silks, such as I could conceal in the
Palm of my Hand: These I caused him to touch with his Fingers, brought up as
high as his Chin, so that 'twas impossible for him to see them, had he had the
Use of his Eyes: Yet, he made not the least Mistake in Five several Colors. We
changed the Order of the Silks, and sometimes gave him the same Piece Four or
Five Times together; yet, as soon as he had felt it, he readily told us, 'Twas
the same Color.

I tell thee, O learned Hali, such an uncommon Experiment, afforded me Matter
both of Delight and Wonder. I concluded from hence, That Nature is no Niggard
in her Gifts, but supplies the Defects of one Sense, by the superabundant
Accuracy of another. We asked this blind Person, by what Distinction he thus
knew one Color from another, without the Help of his Eyes. He was not able to
express the particular Manner of this discriminating Sensation; but, only told
us in General, That he felt as much Difference between the Red Silk and Black,
as he had formerly done during the Enjoyment of his Eyesight, between the
Silks of Persia, and the fine Linen of Europe: Which, thou know, are as
different to the Touch, as fine Paper and Vellum.

Thou that daily pryest into the Faculties of Humane Bodies, art best able to
judge, Whether this Man's Excellency, lay in the Tenuity and Fineness of his
Skin, the Subtlety of his Spirits, or some unusual powerful, yet delicate
Energy of his Soul; or, whether it consisted in all these together.

The Dervise who was with me, seemed not much to admire at this rare Quality of
the Blind Man: Telling me moreover, That about Ten Years ago, in his Travels,
he had seen a Blind Statuary at Florence, who undertook to make the Resemblance
of an Image, in the Chief Temple of that City; which he finished so much to the
Life, that his Work could no otherwise be distinguished from the Original, than
by the difference of the Materials, that being Alabaster, his white Clay; which
he so tempered and molded with his Fingers, as he continually felt of the
other, that no Lineament was left unexpress'd.

Indeed, when I reflected on our Mutes in the Seraglio, and the unaccountable
Sagacity with which they apprehend those Words which they never heard, I ceased
to be surpised at what I had seen the Blind Man perform, or what the Dervise
had said of the Statuary. I remember in Sultan Amurath's Time, there was a
Mute, in whom the Grand Signior took infinite Delight. For, Besides a Thousand
pretty Gestures and Tricks, with which she used to divert that Prince, he often
made her his Secretary, employing her in Writing Letters to his Bassa's and
others, whilst he dictated to her by Signs. Although she could never receive
the Sound of Words, nor utter any that were articulate; Yet, I have seen her
transcribe a whole Chapter in the Alcoran, containing a Hundred and Seventy
Versicles, in as fine a Character, as the most celebrated Scribes of the
Empire; and, when she had done, would explain what she had thus written, by
Signs, which made it evident, that she perfectly understood the Alcoran.

These are rare Gifts, my Friend; yet, were all the Mutes educated, with as
much Diligence and Care as was Saqueda (so was she called) it is possible, they
would attain to greater Perfection. I have been told, That her Tutor, one of
the Learned Men in Arabia, bestowed Twenty Years in teaching her this Method
of Reading, Understanding and Writing.

This puts me in Mind of a Man, who was bred a Mohammedan, but being taken
Captive by the French, embraced their Religion, not in his Heart, but only in
outward Profession. When I first came to Paris, I fell into his Company by
Accident, and understanding that he was an African, I desired to ask him some
Questions; but, he was Deaf, so that I had almost laid aside my Hopes of
conversing with him; till perceiving that he moved his Lips, and opened his
Mouth as one that was Talking, I offered him Pen, Ink and Paper; making Signs
to him, that I would gladly know his Mind in Writing. He accordingly writ in
Moresco, That he was struck Deaf and Dumb about Eighteen Years since; telling
me also, the Place of his Nativity, and how he came hither. I took the Pen;
and, in the same Language, expressed my Compassion of his Misfortunes. When he
saw, that I understood Meresco, he writ again, signifying to me, That if I
opened my Mouth wide at the Pronouncing of every Syllable, he could understand
my Meaning by the Posture of my Lips and Tongue. I found his Words true, to my
no small Admiration; for, he would write down what I had said. We conversed
together often; and, at Length I procured his Escape, in the Retinue of a
Chiaus, that was returning from hence to Constantinople.

I beseech the Wise Architect of Nature, and Repairer of Humane Defects, either
to continue to us the Use of our Senses, or to supply that Want, by some
Superlative Endowments of the Mind.

Paris, 20th. of the 9th. Moon, of the Year 1645.
LETTER IX. To Useph Bassa.
THOU will say, I am unmindful of my Duty, in not Congratulating thy New Honor
before this; and, that I forget the good Offices which formerly passed between
us in the Seraglio. I tell thee, my Obligations are infinite, not only to thee,
but to many others of my Friends at the Port: It is impossible for me, to
acquit my self of so many Engagements. As for the Dignity to which the Sultan
has raised thee, I received the first News of it within these Fourteen Days.
And, I dare affirm, That none of thy Friends, or of those whose Dependence is
on thee, could with greater Complacency, behold thee Vested by our Most August
Emperor, than I read the Letter which conveyed to me this welcome Intelligence.

Long may thou Live, to enjoy the Blessings which thy Good Fortune has heaped
on thee. Yet, I counsel thee to enjoy them so, as not to forget thou must die.
Let not the Grandeur of thy Station, render thee proud and wilful: But
remember, when thou art surrounded with a Crowd of adoring Suppliants, That
Death shall level thee with the Meanest of thy Slaves. Thus, the Ancient
Philosophers, spared not to perform the Office of Monitors, to their Kings and
Princes: and, I hope, thou will not take in ill Part, the wholesome Advice of
Mahmut, who discovers a Temper void of Hypocrisy, in the Freedom he assumes.
If thou give Ear to Flatterers, they will compliment thee to thy Ruin; and,
when thou art on the Brink of a Precipice, they will persuade thee there is no
Danger; though, if thou go on, they know thy Fall is inevitable. They will
pride themselves in the Dexterity of their Malice, and insult over thee with
scornful Sarcasms, whom not long ago they idolized.

The Eminent Command thou have, requires thy frequent Presence in the Sovereign
Divan: And, that thou may not sit there, only as an Auditor of other Men's
Counsels, and incapable of making one in the Number of those, who become
Remarkable by their Orations, or Reports of Foreign Events; I will now
entertain thee with some Passages, which have happened in Europe since the
Beginning of this Year, whereof the other Bassa's may possibly be ignorant.

The Diet of Francfort, which had continued for Three Years, was dissolved on
the 12th. of the 4th. Moon. This may be known at the Port, while they remain
Strangers to the Reason of it. There are a Sort of Christians in Germany, whom
they call Evangelicks. These are opposite to the Roman Church, both in Religion
and Interest; and, their Cause is chiefly espoused, by the Dukes of Saxony and
Brandenburgh. It was to comply with these, that an Assembly was appointed at
Osnaburgh; but the Emperor and the Catholics, were either for continuing that
at Francfort, or translating it to Munster. While the contending Parties, were
bickering and striving to gain their several Ends, the Deputy of the Duke of
Bavaria, tired out with such intolerable Delays, departed from Francfort; whom,
the Rest of the Deputies followed. And, this thou may report, for the true
Occasion of the Dissolution of that Diet.

Thus, at the Beginning of the Year, the Disputes which these Infidels raised
about Safe Conduct, Exactness of Titles, Priority of Address, and many other
vain Punctilio's, hindered them from coming to any Conclusion about a Peace,
which was the Principal Cause of their Assembling. And, this is a Folly
peculiar to the Nazarens, That in all Public Assemblies, the very Strength and
Vitals of their Counsels, are spent in a vain adjusting of empty Ceremonies.

It is credibly reported here, That the King of Poland, earnestly sollicits a
Match with Queen Christina of Suedeland. It seems, he had formerly sent an
Ambassador on that Subject, to the Suedish Court; but, he returned without any
positive Answer, or effecting any Thing in it. In the Second Moon of this Year,
that Queen sent an Ambassador, to give the King of Poland an Account, that she
had taken the Government upon Her. While he tarried in the Polish-Court, there
were not wanting such, as by the King's Order, sifted his Inclination, in
Reference to this Affair. It was proposed to him, That this Match would be a
happy Occasion, to Unite the Two Kingdoms in a firm and durable League; That
the Evangelicks in Poland, would be much eased thereby; That Vladislaus, was
not much decayed in his Natural Vigor; That Suedeland might in the mean while,
be governed by the Council. With many other Proposals and Encouragements to
this Purpose: Among which, I must not omit, that it was suggested, How easy
'twould be for Two such Potent Crowns in Conjunction, not only to humble the
Germans, but also to put a stop to the Victorious Arms of the Ottoman Empire.
But, all this came to Nothing; that wary Queen suspecting, that there was a
deeper Design in the Courtship of this Old Fox: And, that by such a Match, the
Kingdom of Suedeland, in Default of the Issue-Royal, might be subjected to a
Foreign Crown.

However, it is easy to apprehend from this, That if the Poles maintain at
Present their Accord with the Sublime Port, it is for want of Strength to break
it; and, that they only wait an Opportunity, to make some Potent and Firm
Alliance, which may second the Designs formed by that Court, against the First
Throne on Earth, whereof thou art One of the Principal Pillars.

Remain firm in thy Station; and, let neither the Tempests of War, nor the
Convulsions of State, which are the too frequent Products of Peace, shake thy
Constancy. But, above all, suffer not thy Integrity, which is the Basis of all
Virtues, to be undermined by Bribes.

If thou followest this Counsel, God and his Prophet shall Establish thee, all
Men will Honor thee, thy Sovereign shall Exalt thee; and, Mahmut will rejoice,
to see thee in Time become the Atlas of the Eternal Empire.

Paris, 5th. of the 10th. Moon, of the Year 1645.
LETTER X. To Ikingi Cap' Oglani, Praeceptor to the Royal Pages of the Seraglio.
THere is a vast Difference between thy Letter, and that of Shashim Istham. He,
is Eloquent in the Acknowledgment of his Crime; thou, Rhetorical in thy own
Justification. Thou have plundered Demosthenes and Cicero, and robbed 'em of
all the Flowers and Tropes of Oratory, to dress up a faint, liveless Excuse.
Such an artificial Apology, instead of cancelling, heightens thy Offense. It
might have procured thee the Applause of the Academy; but, it comes short of
giving me Satisfaction, for the Injuries I have received at thy Hands. I have
Reason to esteem them such, because so designed, although they took no Effect.
For, Wrongs of this Kind, ought to be measured by the Intention of the Author,
not by their Success. The Ministers of the Divan, will hardly be prevailed on
to suspect Mahmut, who has given Substantial Proofs of his Fidelity.

Tell me, in the Name of God and Mahomet, what was the Motive that induced thee
to slander me? Wherein have I merited this Persecution at thy Hands? It could
not be Revenge, because I never gave thee Occasion: unless thou still retainest
a Grudge, on the Score of my studying in the Academies; and, that at my Return
from Palermo, thou were not able to expose me, in the Presence of the Mufti, in
any Point of Language or Learning. But, I had rather charitably believe, 'twas
thy Ambition not thy Malice, which gave Birth to those Calumnies thou have
vented against me. Thou enviest me the Honor of serving the Grand Signior in
this Station, thinking thy self capable of discharging this Office more
successfully than Mahmut. I censure not thy Abilities; but, I think it is best
for every Man to be content with his own Condition, since Destiny distributes
the Employments of the World among Men, by Rules into which we cannot penetrate.

Thou art Master of the French Tongue; but, do thou think that a complete
Qualification for a Man in my Post? Art thou fit to converse in the Court of a
Foreign Prince, who can not govern thy Tongue in that of thy Native
Sovereign? Thou art yet to learn a Courtier's Masterpiece, which is, To
dissemble even the necessary Art of Dissimulation. That is, as the Arabians
say, To have a Veil upon a Veil; or, as the Italians, To have a Mask with a
Natural Face on the Outside. Thou art so far from this, that thou can not yet
draw perfectly the first rough Strokes of a Counterfeit.

To speak plain, had thou by an Artificial feigning of Friendship to me, made
Way to insinuate thy Story into the Belief of the Grandees, thou might have
praised me to my Ruin. But, to go bluntly to Work, without preventive
Encomiums, discovered at once the Weakness of thy Judgment, and the Strength of
thy Passion; giving the Ministers Occasion to think, There was less of Truth,
than of Design in thy Accusations.

For the Future I advise thee, to mind thy Books and Scholars, and meddle not
with Mahmut, whose Business is, to study Men. Adieu.

Paris, 5th. of the 10th. Moon, of the Year 1645.
LETTER XI. To the Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of State.
WITH extreme Joy, I have received the certain News of the taking of Canea, by
the Invincible Ottoman Arms.

I must confess, when I first apprehended the Intentions of Sultan Ibrahim, to
make War with the Republic of Venice, I was apt to hearken to some thinking
Men in this Court; who, making their Observations, of the Sultan's indulging
himself in Female Pleasures, conjectured from thence (as by a Common Rule) that
he would not have discovered such a Martial and Active Spirit, in asserting the
Honor of the Ottoman Empire. His dext'rous concealing his Designs, even to the
very Execution of them, has struck a Damp into all the Courts in Europe;
insomuch as Cardinal Mazarini, this Day told the Queen-Regent, That he doubted,
lest Sultan Ibrahim would prove another Junius Brutus, who, being the Nephew of
Tarquin, One of the Primitive Kings of Rome, for some Years, counterfeited an
extraordinary Simplicity and Weakness of Spirit: but, having privately secured
a Faction to his own Interests, by Popular Arts; he, to gain the Sovereignty,
changed the Form of Government; procured himself to be made Consul, and
discovered a Genius, surpassing in Policy and mature Judgment, all his
Predecessors.

Though the Cardinal's Comparison, be disproportionate to the Grandeur of the
Sovereign Emperor of the World; who cannot, without a vast Injury, be
post-pon'd in Virtue, Wisdom or Power, as a Second or Imitator of any Prince
upon Earth: Yet, the Character holds good in the Main, That he has timely and
maturely dissembled, the most Sublime Abilities and Endowments a Sovereign
Prince is capable of, rend'ring thereby by his Enemies secure and careless;
till at length, all those Illustrious Attributes exert themselves on a sudden,
breaking forth like the Sun from an Eclipse; at once dazzling the astonished
World, and surprising the Enemies of the Ottoman Empire, in the Slumbers which
proceeded from the Contempt of his Sacred Majesty.

I thought indeed once, that the Venetians would have been in a Condition to
have faced the Ottoman Navy, and disputed their farther Progress on the Seas. I
expected no less, than that they would have made some huffing Attempts on the
Isles of the Archipelago; that they would have entered the Hellespont, braved
the Dardanels, and sailing forward, would have blocked up the Ottoman Navy in
the Propontis, or driven them into the Euxine Sea for Shelter. And, who could
have thought otherwise, had they been provided for a War? But, our Sage
Emperor, by Secrecy, which is the very Soul of all great Undertakings, has
anticipated their very Fears, and leaped upon the Prey, while the Keepers were
asleep.

Had the Christian Princes and States, laid aside their Private Punctilio's and
Animosities, when the Venetians first made their Application to them for
Assistance, it might have proved a doubtful War. But, instead of generously
uniting their Forces in the Common Defense of Christendom, they began to divide
their Interests and Hearts one from another; and that, upon the vainest Motives
in the World; One State disputing with Another, about Precedence of Posts in
the Army; which proceeded to that Height, as to frustrate the Main Design: For,
the Pope himself at last, is forced to raise the greatest Aids the State of
Venice are like to have; joining his Galleys with theirs, and sending a
Thousand Foot on Board, at his own Cost.

Thus does Divine Providence, out of the Discords of Christian Princes, draw
Occasions to enlarge the Sacred Empire of the Mussulmans; and to spread the
Ottoman Conquests over the Western World.

Paris, 20th of the 11th Moon, of the Year 1645.
LETTER XII. To the Magnificent and Redoubtable Vizir Azem.
IT appears, that the Queen of France is very Indulgent to her Generals, having
called Home the Duke of Enguien from the Toils of War. This Prinee neglecting
the Wounds he received in the Battle of Allersheim, not many Days after, fell
into a violent Fever: So that he was carried in a Horse-Litter to Philipsburgh,
with no small Danger of his Life. As soon as he recovered his Health, he was
commanded to return to France, and the Charge of the whole Army committed to
Marshall Turenne.

Such Tenderness is never showed to the Invincible Ottoman Generals, neither
would they esteem it a Favor, but a Disgrace. When they go to the Wars, they
make no underhand Leagues with the Elements to spare their Bodies; but, are
resolved to combat with Cold, Heat, Hunger, Thirst, and all the Hardships to
which Soldiers are liable, as well as with the Swords of their Enemies. They
take no other Armor against the Rigorous Frosts of a Russian Winter, or the
Scorching Sands of a Persian Summer, but an Unshaken Resolution, an Invincible
Patience, and a Mind incapable of bowing under the Worst Misfortunes. They are
not angry with the Weapons of their Adversaries, when they carve in their Limbs
the Marks of an Honor, which will far outlast the Pain of their Wounds; and,
in their Flesh hew deep Characters, of an Immortal Fame, and a Renown which
shall know no Period. They are not parsimonious of their Blood, but court their
Enemies to spill it on the Ground, from whence it will spring up in Laurels and
Wreaths, to crown 'em with Triumphs and Glory whilst they live, and to sweeten
their Memory with the Praise of Future Generations.

Thus, Magnanimous Vizir, do the Mussulman Heroes, the Props of the First
Empire, manifest their Courage, in defying of Dangers and Wounds, and scorning
to capitulate with Fortune, for Ease and Exemption from Death. They know, that
when they march against the Infidels, it is in Vindication of the Eternal Unity:
And therefore, instead of endeavoring to shun, they court a Death so glorious,
as that which will immediately transport them to the Bosom of our Holy Prophet,
and to the Inexpressible Delights of the Gardens of Eden. Where this Truth is
firmly rooted, there is no Room for Fear to plant it self. But, the Case is
otherwise with Infidels, who blaspheme that purest Undivided Essence. They
assert and believe a Plurality of Gods, and therefore in Time of Danger,
amongst so many Deities, they know not whom to address, or whom to confide in.
The Apprehension of Death, is terrible to them, whose Hope is only in this
Life; whose Consciences are stained with a Thousand Pollutions, and yet
renounce the very Method of being Clean. Who not only err themselves, but by
their Evil Example and Influence, (for I speak of the Princes and Great Ones)
draw Innumerable after them, to taste of the Tree Zacon, which grows in the
Middle of Hell.

People speak variously of the Duke of Enguien's Conduct in the Battle of
Allersheim. His Creatures, extol his Valor and Experience with Hyperboles:
Whilst his Enemies, endeavor to lessen his Reputation. Some say, he owes his
Revocation to the Queen's Dislike; Others attribute it, to the extraordinary
Concern she has for his Health. But, such as would be esteemed the Wiser Sort,
say, his Return is voluntary and sought by himself, scorning to hold his
Commission any longer at the Pleasure of Cardinal Mazarini; who, it is thought,
first procured him this Employment, only to have him out of the Way, and take
off his Application from the Domestic Affairs of France. These are the
Discourses of the People at present, who yet perhaps may change their Opinions
before the Sun goes down. They will always be censuring and descanting on the
Actions of their Superiors; few being willing to think their Tongues were given
'em to lie Idle. It is but a Little Member, but often does Great Mischief by
its Activity. One of the Ancients gave no good Character of it, when he called
it a Demon. Yet, we are not bound to believe all that the Philosophers said.
Aesop gave the most impartial Account of this Member, when he said, 'Twas the
Best and the Worst. Sometimes I sit silent many Hours together; not for Want of
Company; (for, here is a Glut of that in this Populous City) nor, because I know
not what to say, (for, I could speak a great Deal more, than it is sit for
others to hear) but, that I may study with less Interruption, how to serve my
Great Master. For, much talking enervates the Judgment, and evaporates the Mind
into Air. Besides, by thus practicing Silence in Private, I learn the Art of
restraining my Words in Public, when it is requisite to promote the Ends at
which I aim. It Is not for a Man in my Station, to be open and talkative; but,
to distinguish Persons and Seasons; to understand the due Stops and Advances of
my Tongue; sometimes to say Much in a Little, at other Times to say Little or
Nothing at all; but, ever so to speak, as not to lay my self naked to the
Hearers; yet, to seem a very frank, open-hearted Man, in what I discourse of.

I would not have thee conclude from what I have said, That Mahmut uses any
Reserve to the Ministers of the Divan, who are Mines of Science and Wisdom, and
can easily discern the Heart through the most artificial Veil of Words. But, it
is absolutely necessary for me, to use Dissimulation in this Court; seeming
many Times Ignorant of what I really know, that I may not be thought to know
more than they would have me. I was never yet so indiscreet, as to publish any
Secret that was committed to my Charge; whereby I have gained great Confidence,
with Men who delight to unbosom their Intelligence. They esteem me a Man of
Integrity, and fit to be trusted. Thus am I made privy to many Intrigues of the
Grandees, and a Repository of the Court-News: Whilst they whisper in Mahmut's
Ear, what is transacted in the Royal Bed-Chambers, and private Apartments.

By this means, I came acquainted with an Amor of Cardinal Mazarini, which is
known but to a few. This Minister has none of the Worst Faces, and a
proportionate Elegance in his Shape: Much addicted also to the Love of Women;
yet, he manages his Intrigues with that Caution and Privacy, as not to expose
the Honor of his Function. Among the Rest, he had frequent Access to the
Chamber of a certain Countess-Dowager, her Husband being lately deceased. This
was not carried so privately, but 'twas whispered about, That a Man was seen
often to come out of this Ladies Chamber a little before Day; but, no Body knew
who it was (for, the Cardinal went disguised.) At last, it came to the Queen's
Ear, who was resolved to unravel this Intrigue. She caused Spies to be placed
at a convenient Distance from the Lady's Chamber Door, which opened in a
Gallery of the Royal Palace, with Orders to trace him Home. That Night the
designed Watch was first set, it fortuned, that the Cardinal being in the
Countess's Chamber, her Maid (who was privy to this Amor) overheard these
Spies, talking to each other concerning her Lady; which made her more attentive
(being in a Place were she could not be seen) till at length she plainly
discovered, That they lay in wait to find out who it was, that had been seen
coming out of the Chamber. She quickly acquaints the Countess with this News.
She consults the Cardinal what was best to be done to avoid Discovery. In fine,
it was agreed between 'em, That the Countess should put on the Cardinal's
Disguize, and he a Suit of her Clothes; That she should go out at the usual
Hour of his Retreat, and walk in the Gardens; That, if examined, she should
pretend, This Disguize was to guard her from the rude Attempts of Men, who if
they found a Lady alone in the Nightime, would not fail to offer some
Incivilities; That soon after her Departure, the Cardinal should go forth in
her Dress, and shift for himself. This was performed accordingly. The Countess
walked into the Gardens in the Cardinal's Disguize, followed by the Spies,
whilst he goes to an Intimate Friend's House, (an Italian, whose Fortune
depended on this Minister) and changes his Female Accoutrements, for the proper
Apparel of his Sex. The Countess having walked about half an Hour in the
Garden, was seized on by some of the Guards, under Suspicion of some ill
Design. She was carried before the Queen, and examined. She then discovered her
self, begging the Queen's Pardon, and telling her, That a particular Devotion,
had obliged her to take that Course for several Mornings; but, if it offended
Her Majesty, she would hold her self dispensed with, and would forbear. The
Queen seeming satisfied with this Answer, dismissed her. Thus, the Amors of
the Cardinal and the Countess, remained a Secret; and, there are but Three
Persons (besides themselves) that know any thing of it; among which, Mahmut is
one.

Thou see, Illustrious Minister, that the Reputation of my Secrecy, has
gained me the Confidence of One of the Cardinal's Privados; for, I had this
Relation from the Italian whom I mentioned, at whose House the Cardinal changed
his Disguize. I am not without Hopes, by the prudent Management of this
Discovery, to penetrate farther into the Court Intrigues. For, he that told me
this Story, considered not, that he made me thereby, Master of his Fortune;
and, that it is no longer safe for him, to deny me any Intelligence I require
of him. He has put a Key into my Hand, which will open his Breast at my
Pleasure.

Yet, I need not magisterially claim Discoveries from him, as the only
Conditions, on which he is to expect my Concealing what he has already
disclosed. There is a more dextrous and serviceable Way to become his
Confessor, without such an ungrateful Insult; whilst with a well acted Candor,
I feign a Relation of such Things, as I suspect, yet cannot be certain are
true, till attested by himself; professing at the same Time, not to believe
those pretended Reports I heard. If I shall be so happy, as to do any effectual
Service to the Grand Signior by this Engagement, it will answer my Ends, and I
shall not repent of my Craft.

Mahmut Salutes thee, Sovereign Bassa, in the humblest Posture of Adoration,
lying prostrate on the Ground, in Contemplation of thy Grandeur. Beseeching
God, That he would grant this Favor to thee, To live happily, and to die in
thy Bed.

Paris, 20th. of the 11th. Moon, of the Year 1645.
LETTER XIII. To Egri Boinou, a White Eunuch.
THOU give me abundant Proofs of thy Affection and Friendship, in frankly
telling me, what they say of Mahmut in the Seraglio. I do not expect to be free
from Censure; and, am so far from being discouraged at the Obloquies some Men
fasten on me, that it adds to my Comfort; it being an assured Mark of
Innocence, To be traduced. I am not desirous, that the Arabian Proverb should
be verified in me, which says, That he deserves no Man's Good Word, of whom all
Men speak Well. I dread to be Popular at such a Price, and will rather court
the Slanders of the Envious, by a steadfast Perseverance in my Duty, than lay a
Train for the Compliments of Flatterers, by favoring Sedition. Thou know
what Reason I have to say this. There needs no Interpreter between us. Though
the Black Eunuch has recanted his Aspersions, yet there are others who persist
in their Malice; and, it will be difficult for the Master of the Pages, with
his best Rhetoric, to exempt himself from the Number.

I have received both their Apologies, and have answered them. I wish they
would reform this Vice; not so much for my Sake, who am Proof against their
Accusations, as for their own: For, the Injury they intended to do me, will
redound most to themselves. Misery is on him, that persecuteth his Neighbor.

He that is Merciful and Gracious, who has separated the Brightness of the Day
from the Obscurity of the Night, defend both thee and me from the Malice of
Whisperers, from the Enchantments of Wizards, and such as breathe Thrice upon
the Knot of the Triple Cord.

Paris, 20th. of the 11th. Moon, of the Year 1645.
LETTER XIV. To Mustapha, Berber Aga.
THOU will laugh at the Hypocrisy and Folly of the Nazarenes, when thou shall
know the Articles agreed upon between the Elector of Saxony, and Knoningsmark,
one of the Suedish Generals, on the 27th. of the 8th. Moon.

The Suedes had prevailed on the Son of the Elector, to intercede with his
Father for a Truce; but, the Old Duke would not hearken to any Thing of that
Nature, till Torstenson gave Orders to the Suedish Army in those Parts, That
they should oppress the Elector's Subjects, by exacting from them unreasonable
Taxes and Contributions; and, that they should lay desolate all the Countries
about Dresden, if they refused to pay what was demanded of them. Accordingly
they took a Castle, which commanded a large Valley of Meadows and Cornfieldsd.
The Suedes burnt the Corn on the Ground, led away the Peasants Captives, and
demolished many Towns and Villages; yet, not without some Loss on their Side:
For, the Saxons one Night stole upon them while they were securely sleeping,
and slew an Hundred and Twenty, taking above Three Hundred Prisoners. Those who
were left in Possession of the Castle, met with no better Fortune; being
compelled in a few Days, to surrender this their new Conquest, with Five
Ensigns, and a Hundred and Fifty Prisoners, which were all carried in Triumph
to Dresden.

One would have thought, That these Successes should have confirmed the Elector
in the Aversion he had already conceived for a Treaty, that he would rather
have pursued his good Fortune with Arms: Especially, when by entering into a
private separate Treaty with the Suedes, he must needs give a great Suspicion
to the Assembly of the Deputies. But, the Old Duke doated; and, what neither
the repeated Solicitations of his Son, nor the continual Ravages which General
Koningsmark made in his Territories, could procure from him, that he granted to
the charming Addresses of a Beautiful Lady.

The Elector's Son adhering much to the Suedish Interest, and finding all other
Means ineffectual to oblige his new Friends; It was agreed upon between him and
Koningsmark, That he should at least persuade his Father to a Truce of a few
Days: That during this Cessation of Arms, the Son should invite his Father to a
Banquet, where Koningsmark should be present, with some of the Principal Suedes
in his Army. All this succeeded according to their Wishes. The good Old Man
consented to a Cessation of Arms, and to give Koningsmark a Meeting at his
Son's Banquet. The German Gallantry, and indeed that of all North-Europe,
consists much in their Excessive Drinking: He is esteemed the most polite Man,
who can bear most Wine, with least Alteration of his Temper. This they call
Carousing. The Son had provided Plenty of those Wines, which grow on the Banks
of the Rhine, esteemed the wholsomest and most delicious of all these Parts. It
is not necessary to repeat particularly, their first Salutes and Addresses:
Both Parties seemed emulous to exceed in Civilities. They fell to their Wine
with Freedom and Mirth, after the Manner of the Country. When in the Midst of
their Glasses, whilst the Heart of the Old Duke was elevated with the Juice of
the Grape, came into the Room a tall Personage all in Armor, and making his
Obeisance to the Company, delivered a Letter to General Koningsmark. The
General having received it, the Stranger was invited by the Elector's Son to
sit down with them. He was Master of the Feast, and only Koningsmark and the
Stranger, besides himself, were privy to the Intrigue.

The Stranger unbuckling his Helmet, and pulling it off (for, all the Rest of
the Company were uncovered, it being the Hottest Day in all the Summer)
discovered a Face and Hair, much like one of those Nymphs, described by Poets
and Painters.

The Duke could not withdraw his Eyes from this surprising Beauty, nor fix his
roving Thoughts: Sometimes it put him in Mind of Ganymede, the discarded Minion
of Jupiter; but, Ganymede was never seen in Armor. Then he thought of Adonis,
then of the Babylonian Pyramus, the Indian Atis. In fine, he run over all the
Celebrated Youths of the East, to match the Beauty of this Illustrious
Stranger. He drank and gazed, whilst his Son and Koningsmark, were pleas^d to
see the Bait take. From ruminating on our Sex, he passed to that of Women: And,
remembering that in some former Battles between the Suedes and Germans, several
Ladies had disguised themselves in Armor, and followed General Torstenson to
the Field, he concluded presently, That this was some beautiful Female of
Suedeland.

This Thought, put the Old Duke into a pleasant Fit of Raillery, yet not
without some Mixture of Passion for this lovely Heroine. There was something so
peculiarly graceful in all her Carriage and Address, as charmed the Elector's
Heart. The Women in those Parts of Europe, are not so precise in their
Conversation with Men, as in the East. And, it is a great Point of Education, so
to adjust the Punctilio's of their Deportment, as neither to appear too open,
nor too reserved. This was her Masterpiece; for, she so equally divided the
Parts she was to act, both of a Maid and a Soldier, that neither entrenched on
the other, but she acquitted her self with exquisite Honor and Gallantry.

The next Day after the Banquet, the Son renewed his Mediation for a Treaty;
but the Elector seemed cold. All his Thoughts were busied in ruminating on his
fair Enemy.

Not to detain thee longer, in Expectation of the Issue; The Love of this young
Amazon had taken so deep Root in his Heart, that he would grant Nothing but for
her Sake, neither could he deny any Thing which she desired. Thus by this
Stratagem, they accomplished their Aims, and he condescended to a Treaty, after
Fourteen Days Debate on the Articles: Of which I here send thee a True and
Particular Copy, that thou may find some Divertisement in the Folly of the
Infidels. The Articles are as follows:

THAT it should be lawful for the Duke to keep due Faith to the Emperor; nor
should he be obliged, to admit any Thing contrary to the Interest of the Empire.

That the Elector should not lend the Emperor above Three Regiments of Horse,
nor should permit him to raise Soldiers in his Principality.

That the Suedes should have free and safe Passage through Saxony, provided
they came not within Three Miles of Dresden.

That there should be free Traffic, between the Elector's Subjects and the
Suedes, by Land and Water.

That at the End of Three Months, each Party should be obliged to declare,
Whether they would prolong the Truce, or break it off.

That the Elector should again enjoy his Revenues, except those which were
drawn from Leipsick. That he should pay the Suedes Eleven Thousand Rix-Dollars
a-Month, and a certain Quantity of Corn.

That the Elector should do Nothing, which might hinder the Siege of Magdeburgh.

These Articles, at first Sight appeared to be equally favorable to the
Saxons, as to the Suedes. But, in Reality, they served only as an Umbrage to
deeper Designs, which the Suedes had in Agitation. For, this was the First Step
to draw the Saxon off from the Emperor's Party; and Torstenson was now secure,
that whilst the Suedes rushed farther into Germany, the Saxons would not molest
them behind.

For my Part, I neither understand the Policy nor the Integrity of the Elector,
in signing these Articles; nor, how he can reconcile the First of them, with
any of the Rest: To give Safe Conduct, and kind Entertainment to the Enemies of
his Sovereign: To be obliged not to lend him any more Assistance, than his
Enemies shall allow, nor suffer him to raise Forces at his own Charges: To be
cheated of his own Revenues, and tamely yield to pay a Monthly Tribute besides:
To be tied up from succouring one of the Principal Towns in his Principality,
at that Time besieged by the Suedes; this is a new Method of keeping due Faith
to Sovereigns, or of observing common Prudence for ones self. But, Women and
Wine cause a Wise Man to stumble, as the Arabians say. And this Old Prince, is
blessed in a hopeful Son, who is not ashamed to turn Pimp, that so he may
betray his Father to his Mortal Enemies. But, let the Christians proceed in
their Falsehood and Treachery, one against another, while every good Mussulman,
prostrates himself Five Times A Day; and prays in his Integrity, for the
Consummation of that Time, wherein God has determined to put a Period to the
Monarchies of these Infidels, and to reduce them to the Faith and Obedience of
his Holy Law.

I wish some of my Friends, would send me some Relation of what passes in the
East: I have heard Nothing of Moment out of Asia, these many Moons. I could
almost think my self banished from the Eternal Providence, while I reside among
these Uncircumcised.

Think sometimes on Mahmut; and, if thou can not relieve his Melancholy, at
least pity him, whom all the Honors and Pleasures of these Western Parts,
would not be able to exhilarate, so long as he apprehends himself forgotten by
his Friends at Constantinople.

Paris, 20th. of the 11th. Moon, of the Year 1645.
LETTER XV. To Mahummed Hogia, Dervise, Eremit, Inhabitant of the Sacred Cave,
at the Foot of Mount Uriel in Arabia the Happy.
THY Remembrance is as the Dew of the Evening, or the Midnight Breezes in
Africa, after the scorching Fervors of a Summers Day, when neither Trees nor
Houses, nor highest Mountains afford any Shadow. Such are the Employments of
State, keeping the Mind in as restless an Activity, as that which the
Philosophers say, is the Occasion of Heat. Such also the Refreshment I find in
thinking on thee, whose Soul is a Mansion of Tranquillity, an Vmbrella of
Temperance and all Virtue. Thither I retreat for Respiration, from the Fatigues
of Worldly Business. Pardon the bold Access of an humble Slave, who cannot be
so happy, as to visit thee any otherwise than by Letters, yet would be
miserable in the Want of this Privilege.

Ever since I had the Honor to kiss the Dust of thy Feet in that Sacred
Retirement, I was filled with Love and Admiration of thy Sanctity. Thrice happy
are the Neighboring Shepherds, whose Flocks feed under thy auspicious
Protection. No fierce Lions, nor ravenous Tigers, dare violate that Sanctuary;
or, hunt for Prey within those Meadows, consecrated by thy Presence. That Rich
and Flowery Vale, was first secured, with an Eternal Immunity from Spoil and
Rapine, by the Blessing of our Holy Prophet. Now that Blessing seems to be
redoubled by thy Prayers and Abstinences, who inheritest his Spirit as well as
his Abode. 'Twas in that Holy Cave, the Messenger of God fasted for the Space
of Three Moons: Thy whole Life there, is one continued Abstinence. When thou
liftest up thy Venerable Hands to Heaven in Prayer, the Enemies of our Holy Law
are seized with Fear and Trembling: Thou art the Guardian Angel of the Ottoman
Empire. Thy Body attenuated with Twenty Years Fasting, is purified almost to
Immortality: Thou art become a Denizon among the Spirits. Neither the Beasts of
the Earth, nor the Fowls of the Air, nor the Fish of the Sea, will charge thee
with their Blood: Thy Table never smoked with slaughtered Dainties. Every Tree
affords thee a Feast, and the Meadows regale thee with a Thousand harmless
Delicacies. Thy Thirst is allayed with the Crystal Streams; and, when thou art
disposed to Banquet, the Arabian Sheep supply thee with Nectar. Thus, like a
prudent Traveller, thou accustomest thy self beforehand, to the Diet of the
Country whither thou art going: Thou live the Life of Paradise, here on Earth.

Thou art not privy to the Wickedness of the Age: That Cell guards thee from
other Men's Vices; while thy incomparable Humility, defends thee from thy own
Virtues. Thou art not puffed up with thy sublime Perfections. Pride is a
Serpent, which commonly poisons the Root of the fairest Endowments. But thou
have crushed this Serpent in the Egg.

In that Solitude, the Angel opened the Heart of the Sent of God, and took out
from thence the Devil's Seed-Plot. When Mahomet awaked (for, this was done
while he lay in a Trance) he said, I am a Worm. When Gabriel saw his Humility,
he pronounced a Blessing on the Place; That whosoever should dwell in that
Cave, should be Meek as Abraham, Chaste as Joseph, and Temperate as Ismael. Thou
have experienced the Effect of his Benediction.

There is another Happiness also attends thy Retirement: Thou live free from
Cares and Anxieties: Thou committest the Public Good to the Conduct of thy
Sovereign, and thy Private Welfare, to the Protection of Providence; neither
disquieted for the one, nor sollicitous for the other. Who rises, and who
falls, in the Favor of the Sultan; who purchase the Governments of the Empire
by their Merits, or who by their Money; whether it be better to remain in the
Seraglio, or to be made Bassa of Egypt, are Cares that never molest thee. Thou
can sit in that Sanctuary of Peace, and pity those whose Ambition, and the
Love of Glory, has driven into the Toils of War. Thou can behold with
Compassion, the burdensome Attendants of the Great; their Labors by Day, and
their Watchings by Night; their restless Thoughts, and busy Actions; macerated
Bodies, and uneasy Souls: While with indefatigable Pains they pursue mere
Shadows, endeavor to grasp the Wind, or secure to themselves a Bubble, which
is no sooner touched, than it vanishes. Thou in the mean time, art filling thy
Mind with solid Knowledge, and laying up Possessions which shall never be taken
from thee: For, the Soul carries her Goods along with her, to that Other World.

I often wish my self with thee; and, the Remembrance of what I once enjoyed in
thy Conversation, cannot be effaced by Distance of Time and Place. The farther
I am from thee, the more ardently do I long to see thee. But, even in these
Innocent Desires, there is necessary a Mortification; since, we are not born
for our selves, but to comply with the Mysterious Ends of Fate. I am appointed
to serve the Grand Signior in this Place: Where I endeavor to acquit my self a
Faithful Slave, and a Good Mussulman. If I fail in the First, my Great Master
will punish me; if in the Last, God and his Prophet will revenge it. Yet I hope
every Frailty, will not be esteemed a Transgression; since the Heart and the
Hands, go not always together. I often strive to imitate thy Abstinence, but my
Appetites are too Strong for me; I return to my Old Course again, like a Bow
that is forcibly bent. Yet I sin not in this, since it is not required at my
Hands.

Pray for me, Holy Man of God, that while I aim at the Best Things, I may not
fall into the Worst; and, by striving to arrive at Perfection, I may not crack
those Powers which are requisite to keep me steadfast in the Highway of Moral
Virtue. I leave thee to thy Contemplations, and the Society of thy Courteous
Angels, who ever wait at the Door of thy Cell.

Paris, 20th. of the 11th. Moon, of the Year 1645.
LETTER XVI. To Useph Bassa.
I Formerly acquainted thee, That Vladislaus King of Poland, sought Christina
Queen of Sueden in Marriage; but, that his Proposal was rejected. Now thou
may know, that this Monarch has made a more successful Amor, being married
to Louise Marie de Gonzague, Princess of Mantua. The Nuptial Solemnities were
performed in this City, by the Ambassador of Poland, who was his Master's
Proxy. The greatest Part of the last Moon, was spent in Masks, Banquets, and
Court-Revels, to Honor the Espousals of this New Queen; who is since gone
toward Poland, being attended to the Frontiers by a numerous Train of the
Nobility, with all the Ceremonies and Regard due to a Person of her Rank.

The French, who are never sparing in Words, are too liberal in the Praises
they bestow on this Princess. For, if all were true they say of her, she might
be listed in the Number of Angels: Whereas, some more impartial Eyes, have
discovered such Imperfections, as speak her yet on this Side a Saint. But,
ordinary Virtues in Princes, dazzle the Multitude; borrowing a greater Luster
from the Nobility of their Blood, and the Eminence of their Quality: Whilst,
their Vices are either shrouded from the Vulgar, or made to pass for Virtues,
in the Artificial Dress, which Flatterers put on them. It Is under this
Advantage, the New Queen of Poland is cried up for a Diana; though a late
Satyrist, vindicates her from being half so Cruel as that Goddess: It being no
Secret, That a Young Italian Marquis, had something kinder Usage, than had
Acteon, when he accidentally encountered this Princess, as she was walking
alone one Evening in a Grove belonging to her Palace.

I am no Patron of Libels; nor would I speak irreverently of those, whose Royal
Birth claims Respect from all Mortals. But, the Stupidity of the Nazarenes
provokes my Pen, who allow their Women all the uncontrollable Freedom and
Opportunities, that commonly give Birth to the most irregular Amors, and yet
believe 'em Innocent. They are perfect Idolaters of that Sex; not having
learned, with the illuminated Mussulmans, That Women are of a Creation Inferior
to that of Men, have Souls of a lower Stamp, and consequently more prone to
Vice; and, that they shall never have the Honor to be admitted into Our
Paradise.

But thou, who believe the Doctrines Clear and Intelligible, and have kissed
the Garment of the Sent of God, wilt not suffer thy Reason to be blinded by the
Enchantments of these deluding Fair Ones; but so love Women, as still to
remember thou art a Man, which is something more Sublime.

Paris, 1st. of the 12th. Moon, of the Year 1645.
LETTER XVII. To the Kaimacham.
IT is hard to guess, where the French Victories will terminate. Either Fear,
or the Desire of Novelties, opens the Gates of most Cities to them; and, when
that will not do, the Force of their Cannon makes a Passage into the strongest
Holds of their Enemies, and puts whole Provinces under their Subjection.

Their Enemies say, That the French never besiege a Town, but their first
Assaults are made with Bullets of Gold; and, when that will neither prevail on
the Governor, nor win a Party, then they only try the Force of the courser
Metal. Yet, this will appear but a Slander, if thou considerest a late Action
of the Duke of Orleans, when he lay down before Bourburgh.

He had scarce finished his Trenches, when the next Morning an Arrow was found
with a Letter fastened to it, not far from his Tent. The Letter was directed to
the Duke, and subscribed by the Governor of the Town. The Contents of it were,
to signify to him, That if he would give him Fifty Thousand Pieces of Gold,
and continue him in his Office, he would the next Night open the Gates, and let
in his Army; and, that before Midday, he would send a Messenger to know his
Pleasure. The Duke waited the Arrival of the Messenger, who seconded what his
Master had said. But, the Magnanimous Prince, in stead of accepting his Offer,
sent him back to his Master with this Message, That he came not before the Town
as a Merchant, to purchase it at the Price of a needless Treason; but as a
Soldier, at the Head of an Army flushed with continual Victories: Summoning him
forthwith to surrender at Discretion, That being the only Way to experience his
Generosity.

This Year has been signalized with much Action in Flanders, Catalonia and
Italy. The Field was shared among many brave Generals.

The Duke of Orleans had the Command of the Army in Flanders, where he took the
Forts of Vandreval, Bourburgh, Link, Dringhen, Bethune, St. Venant, Guisca,
Lens, Mardike, Lillers, Mening and Armentiers.

These Places were won by several Parties, under the Commands of the Mareschals
de Gastion, de Rantzan, and the Duke of Guize; who all acted in separate
Bodies, under the Duke of Orleans.

Nor was the Count d' Harcourt idle in Catalonia, where he succeeded in the
Charge of the Marshall de la Mothe. The first Effort of his Arms, was the
retaking of Agramont, which the Spaniards had seized; a strong City, and which
kept a large Part of Catalonia in Subjection.

From hence he marched toward Roses, one of the most Important Places for
Strength, under the Spanish King's Dominions, and governed by an experienced
Soldier, who failed not to defend the Place to the last Extremes; but, after a
Siege of Two Moons, was compelled to yield for Want of Provisions.

After this, the French General cut off Seven Hundred Spaniards, who were
posted to hinder his Passage over a River. The next Day, the whole Armies
meeting in the Plains of Liorens, there was a furious Encounter; in which, the
Spaniards lost Ten Regiments of Horse on the Spot; the Rest threw down their
Arms and yielded. The Marquess of Mortare, one of the Spanish Generals, was
taken Captive; with other Persons of Note; among which, was the Standard Bearer
of Spain.

Yet, this was but the Engagement of One Wing: For, when the Other entered the
Combat, the Slaughter was dreadful. Of the Spaniards were slain, Six Thousand
Horse, and Sixteen Hundred Foot. And Three and Twenty Hundred of them were made
Prisoners. The French lost not above Three Hundred in all, and had but a few
wounded.

This Battle has brought infinite Glory to the Count d' Harcourt. After which,
there happened Nothing remarkable in Catalonia, save the taking of Balaguier,
which is like to end this Years Campaign on that Side.

Prince Thomas of Savoy commanded in Italy, but had no great Number of French
in his Army, the Main Body being drawn off to serve in Catalonia. Yet, vexed to
see the Success of the Spaniards, who had possessed themselves of a Strong
Castle, and kept the Field in a Bravado, as if he were not able to face them;
he raised some Recruits, and entered the Milanez, where he took the City and
Castle of Vigevano. After this, designing to return into Piemont, he found all
the Passages blocked up by the Spaniards, who had a far greater Army than his.
Yet, assuming Courage, he attempted to pass the River Moura; and, the Enemy
presenting themselves to oppose his Design, he gave them Battle, and killed
Five Hundred and Threescore of them; among which were Nine Officers of
Principal Command and Quality: On his Side, were lost Two Hundred Common
Soldiers, and Twelve Officers; among which, was his Brother, Prince Maurice of
Savoy. These are the Chief Actions on that Side. As for Portugal, there has
happened Nothing in that Kingdom, worthy of Remark.

I have in this Letter, Sage Governor of the Imperial City, observed the
Method thou enjoined'st me. I have acquainted thee, with whatsoever has
Occurred in the present Wars of France and Spain during this Year.

It Is discoursed here, That the Venetians will lay Siege to Canea next Spring,
in Hopes to recover that Important Place, from the Arms of the Victorious
Ottomans.

The Duke of Orleans will be on his March to Flanders, toward the latter End of
the next Moon, resolving to make an early Campaign; being alarmed with the late
Loss of Mardyke, which the Spaniards took by Surprise, without much Bloodshed;
having not the fourth Part of a hundred men killed on their Side. Whereas, when
the French took it from them, it cost five Thousand Lives of the best Soldiers
the King of France had in his Army.

The Hour of the Post will not permit me to say more, than that I am the
humblest of thy Slaves.

Paris, 14th. of the 12th. Moon, of the Year 1645.
LETTER XVIII. To Dgnet Oglou.
I Will not make Trial of the Virtue of Friendship at this Time, in the Way
that Philosophers propose to be used between such as own that Title. I will not
complain of the Dolors I undergo, that so by making thy Compassion share them
with me, I may ease my self of a Part. It appears to me a pusillanimous, if not
an unjust Action, for a Man to transfer his Sufferings, by discovering 'em to
his Friend, and designedly throw that upon another, which is scarce tolerable
to himself.

I am sick; and, Custom has rendered this, almost as Natural to me as Health. My
Constitution, is not Proof against the envenomed Arrows, that are shot from the
Stars. Nor am I Constellated, to resist the Secret Contagions that lurk in the
Elements. The Herbage of the Field languishes, when poisoned with Invisible
Atoms from above; and, all the Leaves of the Forest wither, when touched with
the baneful Emissions of certain Meteors, or scorched with the winged
Exhalations of the Night. So our Bodies receive a Thousand Impressions from
Things without us, and not a few Maladies from our selves. The very Channel of
Life, proves many Times the Vehicle of Death; while our Lungs suck in
unwholesome Airs, and our very Breath becomes our Bane. We have Radical Poisons
in our Complexions, which though they do us no hurt, while we let them lie
dormant; yet, once excited by our Passions and Vices, they become noxious and
Fatal, hurrying us into the Chambers of Death, by unaccountable Diseases, and
Pains which are under no Predicament.

This makes me bear my present Distemper with an equal Mind, because I know its
Original, and it is not in the List of those Maladies which have no Name:
Whereby I can easily calculate its Duration, and almost point to a Day, when I
shall be well again. For, it is in the Number of those, Physicians call Acute;
and, the Anguish it inflicts, confirms that Title.

Take not this for a Complaint; nor, what I am about to say, for a Paradox,
when I tell thee, That I know not which is greater, my Pleasure or Pain during
this excruciating Fever. These Affections border so near one upon another, that
I find it difficult to distinguish 'em. They seem to be Inmates to each other,
and blended together in their Roots. Sure I am, they are so twisted and
interwoven in my Constitution, That I never felt One without the Other. Every
Man may experience, That his strongest Desires, are compounded of these Two
Passions; and, the very Moment of Fruition it self, cannot separate 'em. The
Minute of Enjoyment, is but consecrated to his Loss, while the Height of his
Joy is the Rise of his Grief, since the smallest Particle of Time, cannot
distinguish the Life and Death of his Pleasure.

Do but reverse this Contemplation, and apply it to my Sickness, and thou will
find no Riddle in my Words, when I assure thee, That as the Torment of my Fever
advances, so does my Ease. Pleasure and Pain, sit and shake Hands in my Heart,
embrace and equally divide its Systole and Diastole between 'em.

Yet I must needs own, I am indebted, for this Allay of my Dolors, to the
Presence of my Mind; which I suffer not to be torn from it self, or carried
away by the violent Motion of my agitated Spirits. Were it not for this, a
Fever would prove a Hell upon Earth, and every Pulse a Tormenting Fury. My very
Drink (which is all my Subsistence now) would appear but the loathsome
Distillation of that Tree, whose Vnpalatable and Scalding Gum, is appointed for
a Beverage to the Damned. The softest Entertainment of my Bed while awake,
would but be a Translation of the Tortures of Ixion and Sysiphus; and, the
flattering Intervals of Sleep, would but renew the Sufferings of Tantalus.
Whereas now, whether asleep or awake, my Mind keeping aloft in her proper
Sphere, busied in the Contemplation and Enjoyment of her self and Superior
Objects, partakes not in the Fever of my Body; but, as if on the cool Top of
some high Mountain, surveys all the Valleys beneath, without being sensible of
their raging Heats.

I owe this Tranquillity, in the Midst of Bodily Perturbations, to the Examples
of Ancient Philosophers, which, thou know, have far more Influence than
Precepts. Ever since I read, That Plotinus could chase away the racking
Tortures of the Gout and Stone, by the sole Force of his Thought, I daily tried
the Experiment, spurred on by Emulation of his Virtue; as judging it ignoble in
a Mussulman, to give the Palm to a Pagan in any Point of Masculine Bravery.

It Is recorded of the same Philosopher, That by the mere Strength and Majesty
of his Mind, he dissipated the Enchantments of Apollonius Tyaneus; and, the
Infernal Spirits confessed, They were baffled by that Thinking Man. As if his
Soul were of the Nature of Medusa's Head, which turned all into Unactive
Statues, who did but look on it.

Surely, great is the Efficacy of Contemplation, hinted at in the Arabian
Proverb, which says, He that can see his own Eyes without a Glass, shall be
able to move the Bulls Horns. Which Mysterious Expression, is thus interpreted
by the Learned Avicen. A Prophet or Spiritual Man, who always converses within,
shall have power to shake the Foundations of the Earth. Which, thou know,
rests on the Horns of a Bull, according to the Doctrine of our Holy Lawgiver.

I need say no more to convince thee, That I am in a Fever. My thus expatiating
and running from one Thing to another (when I thought to have said all in a few
Words) will satisfy thee what Temper I am in. Yet, recollecting my self with
Comfort, That I know my Distemper, I will crave Leave to tell thee a short
Story, of a Man who was sick for many Years, and yet the ablest Physicians in
Paris, could not discern his Malady.

This Person, was an Officer of the City; whose Business 'twas, to arrest Men
that were in Debt. He was observed, to be the subtlest of all his Brethren, and
the most dextrous at plotting another Man's Ruin. This augmented his Estate,
and he grew extremely rich. But, in the One and Fortieth Year of his Age, he
was seized with an unknown Malady, a Distemper to which the most skilful were
Strangers. He languish'd Five Years in a Condition, which moved all Men to
Pity. 'Twill be tedious to recount the Symptoms of his Illness. At length, he
died; and, according to his own Will, was dissected. The Physicians found all
Parts of his Body decayed and wasted; but, when they came to his Head, they
were above Measure astonished, to see a Nest of Serpents instead of Brains.
This was concluded by, all to be the Source of his Distemper; and, People
descant variously on it. Some say, 'twas a Judgment of God inflicted on him,
for his cruel Subtlety, in trepanning Men out of their Liberties by a Thousand
Wiles. Others are of Opinion, That it is a Natural Product; it being usual in
some Constitutions, for this Sort of Creature to be bred out of their Vitals. A
Merchant that had been in Peru told me, That in a Province of that Empire,
there were People, who by drinking the Water of a certain River, had Serpents
often engendered in their Bowels; That he had seen one presented to the King of
Spain, which was taken out of a Dead Man's Heart, a Cubit in Length. He said
'twas of a Crimson Color, without Scales or Eyes; neither was it Venomous.
This he asserted very solemnly, and with Imprecations.

I tell thee, Dear Friend, if these Things be true, who can be sure he harbors
not some such loathsome Inmate in his Body? Yet, I would not have thee grow
Melancholy upon it, and disturb thy Repose. The Day will come, when we shall
all be metamorphosed into Worms and Serpents in the Grave.

In the mean while, live thou happily, in the Favor of thy Sovereign, in the
Enjoyment of thy Health, the Vigor of thy Senses; and, have sometimes in thy
Thoughts, a Man full of Infirmities, without murmuring, Mahmut, that loves his
Friend in all Conditions.

Paris, 26th. of the 12th. Moon, of the Year 1645.
LETTER XIX. To the Selictar Aga, or Sword Bearer to his Highness.
I Wish I could time my Letters so, as to gratify all the Ministers of the
Blessed Port, by making each alternately, the first Relator of some acceptable
News, in the Mysterious Divan, where all humane Events are scanned with
Impartial Judgment. But, every Moon does not present us with Sieges or Battles;
neither can I receive Intelligence of all remarkable Events, so soon as they
come to pass. What I shall now transmit to thee, is an Account of what has been
omitted in my Dispatches to the other Ministers.

Europe is a Field, fertile in Rebellions, Tumults Disorders and Unnatural
Wars. No Part of Christendom, which is not polluted with Treasons, Perfidies,
and Massacres; no Corner undefiled with Human Blood. The Son conspires the
Death of him who first gave him his Life. The Brother lays Trains to ensnare
the Partner of his Blood, the Offspring of her that bare himself. No Bond of
Affection or Tie of Consanguinity, is of Force to restrain these Infidels, from
pursuing each other with Malice. Neither has their Religion any more Influence
on their Passions, than the Fables of the Ancient Poets. In Public and
Private, all Things are governed by Interest. Thus, while every Man and every
State, are only biased by the narrow Principles of Self-preservation; they
abandon the General Good of Christendom, and expose it as a Prey to the next
daring Invader.

There is no Reason, that we should grieve at this Folly of the Nazarenes. It Is
from their Impiety and Vices, the Virtue and Wisdom of the Victorious
Mussulmans receives the greater Luster; who are created to displant these
Uncircumcised, and instruct the Nations which they possessed, in the Faith free
from Blemish.

Yet, Since the Depredations which the Suedes have made in Germany and Denmark,
the neighboring Crowns and States, notwithstanding their Insincerity, have
seemingly interposed their Endeavors, to prevent the worst Effects of a War,
so destructive to the Common Interest of Christendom. Deputies were sent from
all Parts, to Munster and Osnaburgh, with Instructions from their respective
Sovereigns. They have squandered away much Time in vain Overtures of Peace;
whilst the Suedes daily get Ground on one Side of the Empire, and the French
are not Unsuccessful on the other.

The Enemies of France, sensible that they cannot reduce this Crown by open
Force, have Recourse to Artifice. They endeavor to corrupt her Allies, and
insinuate into the Minds of the United States of the Low Countries, all those
Apprehensions, which may serve to improve the Jealousy they had already
conceived of the French Neighborhood. Suggesting, That the Spanish Netherlands
are the only Bar, which stops the Armies of France from overrunning Holland,
and the rest of the United Provinces. In fine, they have prevailed on them to
enter into a Separate Alliance, and not to treat in Conjunction with the other
Ministers at Munster.

On the other Side, The French by their Agents in Holland, endeavor to unmask
the Artifice of the Spaniards; representing, That that they have no other
Design in these Insinuations, but to breed an Ill Understanding between this
Crown and the United Provinces; that so, by their ill Offices, in Time Things
may come to a Rupture, and the States be deprived of the Friendship and
Protection of France, which alone is able to support that Commonwealth, against
the Pretensions of their old Enemies, the Spaniards. All Europe is astonished
to see, that notwithstanding the utmost Condescensions of the French Court to
conserve Peace, yet the States led by their Ill Destiny, should embrace the
Proposals of Spain. This makes a great Impression on all the Ministers
assembl^d at Munster and Osnaburgh, who now conclude, That the Spaniards only
seek Occasions to perpetuate the War in Europe; that whilst the Princes of the
Empire are engaged in a Defense of their Territories, and the Suedes and French
are busi'd in pursuing their Conquests, they may pick a Quarrel with their New
Friends, whom they have deprived of a more powerful Protection, and reestablish
themselves in the Revolted Provinces.

The Deputies have had several Conferences about this Important Affair; and,
the Result of their Counsels is, to solicit the French Court, to use its
utmost Power, to prevent the ill Consequences which this Separate Treaty will
bring along with it.

It Is discoursed here, That Monsieur de la Tuillerie, will be recalled from the
Court of Suedeland; being esteemed the fittest Man, to dissuade the Hollanders
from this New Alliance; He having been already employed in several Negotiations
with the States, and is well versed in the Methods of treating with that Nation.

This some judge to be the Reason, of the Sieur Chanut's being sent to
Suedeland, that he may reside at Stockholm, and continue to act there in the
Absence of la Tuillerie.

So nice and delicate is this Affair, that all France cannot afford another Man
duly qualified, to manage it with any Probability of Success. If he show not
more Candor in this Negotiation, than he did when he was sent to mediate a
Peace between Suedeland and Denmark, he will receive but slender Thanks at his
Return. But, if he succeeds, it is said, That Cardinal Mazarini has declared, he
will merit to be installed in the Order of the Holy Spirit. I have formerly
spoken of this in one of my Letters, as the most Eminent Order of Knighthood in
France.

I wish the Christians may ever find Difficulties, to obstruct the Measures
they take to establish an Universal Peace; and may continue to amuse and vex
one another, till the Day of the Scourge.

Paris, 20th. of the 1st. Moon, of the Year 1646.
LETTER XX. To the Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire.
IT is not yet publicly known, what Designs have moved this Court, to order a
mighty Fleet to be fitted out to Sea. But, it is privately whispered, That they
will sail to the Levant, to assist the Venetians against the Turks.

People discourse variously, according to the Strength or Weakness of their
Reason; and, Five Days ago, an Old Man went to Cardinal Mazarini, pretending to
speak by Inspiration: He told him, That 'twas in vain to trust to their Winged
Castles, (so he called the Ships) the Multitude of their Armies, or in the
Treasures of their Money; for, a Decree was signed in Heaven, against all the
Nations in Europe; That the War was begun Above, between the Potentates who
have the Custody of Kingdoms and Empires; That they should soon see the Banner
of the Eternal, displayed in the Firmament; That the Stars should fight in
their Courses, against the Wicked Professors of Christianity; That the
Ismaelites should come out of their Holes, and should flow down like a Torrent
from the Mountains of the East, overrunning all Christendom. In fine, That
Germany, France, Italy and Spain, should be laid Desolate, their beautiful
Cities sacked, and the Inhabitants led into Captivity; That the Pope, with all
his Priests, should be exterminated; and, that all Nations should embrace One
Law.

They put him in Prison, but he was found walking next Day in the Streets. The
Keeper chained him in Irons; but, in the Morning he was standing at the Gate of
the Prison, preaching to the People. Some say, he is a Chemist, and has found
out the Master Secret: Others say, he is a Prophet: But, most judge him to be a
Magician. He seems now to have lost his Vigor, not being able to release
himself from the Chains, which fasten him to the Ground where he lies. Yet he
continues to foretell the Ruin of Christendom. It Is said, he will be sent to
Rome, there to receive Sentence of the Holy Father, according to his Demerits.
I am no Admirer of Visionaries; yet, there appears something extraordinary, in
the Constancy of this Man. Time will demonstrate, whether he be a True or a
False Prophet.

A Courier came to this City last Night from Suedeland, who brings Letters from
Monsieur Chanut, which say, That he has received great Encouragement to hope
for the Ships which he was to buy in Suedeland. Thou have already heard, that
Monsieur la Tuillerie, Ambassador from this Crown to Queen Christina, was
thought the only proper Instrument, to dissuade the United States of the Low
Countries, from entering into a Separate Treaty with Spain; and that therefore
Monsieur Chanut, was sent to reside in his Absence at Stockholm, to observe
what passes, and to continue the Alliance between the Two Crowns.

This Minister arrived in Suedeland, the 15th. Day of the Moon of December in
the last Year; where Monsieur la Tuillerie, had prepared all Things ready for a
speedy Dispatch of his Negotiation; having the Day before his Arrival, made
known to that Court, the Pleasure of the King of France and the Queen-Regent;
whose Letters were received by Queen Christina, with all the Marks of Royal
Affection; she telling the Ambassador, That she infinitely honored the Persons
of the King and the Queen-Regent; and, that she would give them such Proofs of
the Integrity of her Friendship, as would demonstrate, That she was sensible of
her Obligations to them, for what they had contributed to the good Success of
her Affairs: And, that there was nothing more dear to her, nor more fixed in
her Resolution, than to conserve inviolably, the League that was between them.
She farther told the Ambassadors, That it was with no ordinary Complacency she
now beheld Two Ministers of France in her Court, after she had been without any
for a long time. In fine, she assured them, That whatsoever could be spared
from the necessary Defense and Service of the Kingdom, whether Ships, Arms or
Men, should not be wanting to the Aid of the King of France.

By this thou may perceive, that though the King of France has powerful
Armies by Land, yet he is defective in Naval Forces: Or, if he has Ships enough
to defend his own Realms by Sea, and to serve as Convoys to his Merchants, it
must be concluded, that some Foreign Expedition is designed, which has put him
upon this extraordinary Method to increase his Fleet.

I thought it highly necessary to acquaint thee with this Passage, that the
Ministers of the Port, August and every Happy, may consult what Measures to
take with this Prince, if it be true, that he designs to break the League,
which he made with Sultan Ibrahim Four Years ago. There is but little
Confidence to be reposed, in the most Solemn Oaths of Christian Monarchs, who
hold not themselves obliged, to keep Faith with those whom they esteem
Insidels; and, thou know, that is the best Title they can afford the
Observers, of the most perfect Law in the World. Yet, the French, among all the
Nations of the Messiah, seem to bear the greatest Respect to the Ottoman
Empire. But they are inconstant, and changeable, which is an Argument of
Insincerity. They are very prompt and warm in contracting Friendships, and as
ready to infringe those Sacred Bonds, on the least Occasion, especially where
Interest and Ambition have the Ascendant.

The Venetian Resident at this Court, makes daily Visits to the Queen-Regent,
and has frequent Conferences with Cardinal Mazarini. Many Couriers pass between
Munster, Stockholm, and this City. Yesterday one arrived from the Venetian
Ambassador at Munster, giving an Account, That the Secretary of that Embassy,
whom he had sent to Queen Christina, was returned with the Promise of Eight
Ships of War, lent by that Queen to the Republic, to assist them against the
Allconquering Mussulmans.

It seems, as if Sueden were become the Common Arsenal of Europe, from which
the other Kingdoms are supplied with all the Instruments of War. But, what is
most observable, is, That the Venetians obtained not this Favor, without the
Mediation of the French Minister at Stockholm. By which it seems evident, That
this Court has newly entered into a Private League with the Republic; And,
that they Design to surprise the Ottomans, with some sudden Enterprise by Sea.

I shall not let a Moment escape, which may present me with the least
Opportunity, to discover what is in the Hearts of these Infidels.

If thou will favor me with thy Instructions, I shall make the safer Steps.
God, whose Eye penetrates into all Obscurities, enlighten us with a Ray of that
Wisdom, which once revealed to his Messenger, the secret Conspiracy of the
Corei's, when they plotted to destroy the Temple built without Hands.

Paris, 17th. of the 2d. Moon, of the Year 1646.
LETTER XXI. To William Vospel, a Recluse, at Halmerstadt in Austria.
I Received thy Letter with Abundance of Complacency, in that it argues the
Continuance of thy Friendship; and, that I trace therein no Footsteps of an
Angry Pen, notwithstanding the Liberty I took to descant on thy Manner of Life.
On the Contrary, thou sendest me an Apology full of Meekness. Thy Reasons have
a mavelous Force in them; they seem to spring from a Soul vegete and living,
yet dead to Passion. Thou almost perswadest me to affect a Monastic Life,
which may not unfitly be termed, a Sociable Solitude.

I much admire, what thou say concerning Silence; and wish I could practice
that Passive Virtue. It is the first Step to Wisdom, the Nurse of Peace, and
the Guardian of Virtue. Words do but ruffle and discompose the Mind, betraying
the Soul to a Thousand Vanities. Therefore, Pythagoras enjoined his Disciples
Five Years Silence, before he admitted them to his Mysterious Philosophy.

But tell me, why thou did not rather choose to live in a Desert, remote from
Men, where thou would have no Temptation to speak, unless thou were disposed
to hold a Conference with the Trees, or Beasts, or had a Mind to sport thy
self, and have thy Words retorted by mocking Eccho's? If a Recluse Life be thy
Choice, for the sake of Contemplation, I would advise thee to turn Hermit. But
perhaps, thou dare not venture thy self among the Satyrs of the Wilderness;
or, thou art afraid of the Wild Beasts. As for the First, there are either the
Dreams of Poets; or, if they be any such Beings in Reality, they will not hurt
thee, since thou voluntarily forsakest the Company of Men, to become a Sylvan,
as they are. As for the Latter, I must confess, I cannot discommend thy Fear,
there being no Friendship or Intelligence common between us and the Lions,
Tigers, Bears, etc. of the Forest. Yet, I can tell thee for thy Comfort, That
by long and assiduous Practice, the fiercest of these Creatures have been
taught to converse with Men, to obey their Commands, and to perform the Parts
of Diligent Servants, and faithful Friends.

The Wilderness will afford thee a fair Opportunity, of studying the Natures of
Plants and Animals, the various Alterations in the Elements, the Influence of
the Winds and Rains, Meteors and Exhalations; with many other Secrets, which
are hid from the greatest Part of Men, who are buried alive in populous Towns
and Cities, banished from the Familiarity of their Mother-Earth, and most of
her genuine Products.

In the Desert, the unforced Harmony of Birds, shall lull thy Soul in innocent
and grateful Slumbers; the gentle Winds shall waft Immortal Whispers to thy
Ravished Ears, breathing unutterable Sounds from Paradise. The murmuring
Streams, shall warble forth their soft and sweet, Eternal Stories. All shall
conspire to serve thy Contemplation, and to transport thy Mind with Sacred
Ecstasies.

If after all this, thou shall prefer the Menastick Enclosure; Follow thy
Resolution, and be happy. Only remember, That though thy Body be shut up within
those Walls; yet, if thy Mind straggle in Vain and Worldly Thoughts, thou art
no longer a Recluse. Adieu.

Paris, 25th. of the 2d. Moon, of the Year 1646.
LETTER XXII. To the Captain Bassa.
IF all be true, that I have Reason to suspect, thou will find a warm
Divertisement at Sea this Spring. Though the Europeans have seemed slow in
their Preparations to assist the State of Venice, suffering their separate
Interests to supersede the Care of that Republic, yet now they turn their Eyes
thither. Their Backwardness hitherto, is owing to the Secrecy, with which our
Sage Emperor meditated the present War. His Counsels were never whispered out
of the Seraglio, till the same Winds transported the News, which wafted our
Invincible Fleet to the Shore of Candy. Now they behold the Ocean, covered with
the Ships of the Eastern Empire, Fear surprises them; the Princes of the
Nazarenes tremble. They look no longer on the Republic of Venice with the Eyes
of Envy, because of her Pre-eminence in Traffic, but with another Regard:
They consider her, as the Bulwark of Christendom; the Tide of the Ottoman
Puissance, and stopped our Victorious Armies from overflowing all Europe.

I have informed the Reis Effendi, of what I knew concerning the Naval Forces
which are fitting out, in several Parts of the North and West, to aid the
Venetians; but I have not told him what the Christians say of thee; neither am
I willing to believe it. They speak of thee, as of a Man not more difficult to
be corrupted, than was thy Predecessor, who was strangled by the Order of the
Sultaness-Mother. this Censure, I hope, is an Effect of their Impotence; while
they flatter themselves with the Imagination of bribing him, from whose Courage
and Fortune they can expect Nothing but Defeats.

They trust much in the Force of thy Birth and Education, and discourse of a
certain agical Character, imprinted in thy Soul, when thou wast baptized,
which, they say, is indelible; And, they promise themselves, That thy Native
Christianity, has more Influence on thy Heart, than Forced Circumcision; and,
that thou will not Fight with any Zeal, against Men of the same Principles, as
those who gave thee thy Breath. But, they confide more in the Charms of their
Gold, with which they design to bribe thee. In fine, they drink Healths to the
Honest Renegado. So they term him who commands the whole Fleet of the Ottoman
Empire.

I do not give Credit to these Calumnies, having good Grounds to boast of thy
Integrity. However, I counsel thee, by some extraordinary Service to thy
Master, to give the Lie to these Infidels: And, suffer not that, which at
present may be but a bare Suspicion, to be improved by thy Neglect or
Cowardice, into a palpable Evidence, That thou art false and perfidious to the
Supreme Lord of the Globe.

Paris, 6th. of the 3d. Moon, of the Year 1646.
LETTER XXIV. To Adonai, a Jew at Venice.
NOW thou art fixed, it is Time to write to thee: Thou have been a Rambler these
Three or Four Years, and no Body knew where to find thee. I have received
Eleven Dispatches from thee, since thy first Departure from Genoua: Wherein
thou have informed me, of many Passages of State. Now I desire thee, to send me
some Remarks, of the different Nature of the People thou have seen, their
various Customs and Laws, with whatsoever was worthy Observation in thy Travels.

Italy is a fair Field, yet produces Darnel as well as wholesome Corn. It is a
Beautiful Garden, yet bears Aconites intermixed with her Roses: Great Virtues,
and no Less Vices. This Region is famous for the Wisdom of its. Inhabitants,
and for their Proverbs: It is the Arabia of Europe, in many Senses. Yet, much
lessened in its Renown, since the. Decline of the Roman Empire. The Goths and
Vandals, turned all into Deserts, where they came; and, have left such
Impressions of their Northern Barbarism behind them, as made the People they
conquered, half-Savages. Hence came the General Decay of Learning and Knowledge
in these Western Parts: Hence the Corruption of Ancient Manners. The Great, the
Noble, and the Wise, bowed under the Yoke of their New Masters, learned their
Fashions, and gloried in their Shame. Their Examples influenced the Vulgar;
Debauchery became Modish and Authentic: Thus, a General Depravation of
pristine Integrity took Place, and Men became Vicious by a Law.

Neither has Wickedness planted it self only in Europe: The Sea could not stop
this Boundless Evil. Asia is infected also, and the Vice of Italy is
transported to the Empire of the True Believers. Thou have seen all the Chief
Cities between the Alps and Rhegium, which is the utmost Angle of Italy, to the
South: tell me whether Sodom could exceed any of them, in Licentiousness: We
will not except, even Rome, the Seat of the Christians Mufti. These
Uncircumcised, have learned of thy Nation, to call the Ancient Philosophers,
Infidels; but, had any of those Sages lived to see the Abominations of the
Modern Nazarenes, they would have despised the Faith which produced no better
Works.

Adonai, put in Practice the Import of thy Name; be Lord of thy self; and, if
thou stumblest at the Light of the Mussulmans, walk in that of Moses, but shun
the Paths of the Christians; for, they are enveloped in Darkness, and grope at
Midday. Live according to Reason, and thou shall be Happy. Adieu.

Paris, 18th. of the 3d. Moon, of the Year 1646.
LETTER XXV. To Mustapha, Berber Aga.
THE present War of Candy, is like to render that Island as much the Subject of
the Worlds Discourse, as it was formerly famous, for being the Cradle of
Jupiter. In those Days, it was called Crete; much celebrated in the Writings of
the Greek Poets. Afterward, it became a Province of the Roman Empire; then of
the Grecians; next, it submitted to the Saracens. But, in the Time of the
Christian Expeditions in Palestine. when Baldwin, Farl of Flanders, was Crowned
Emperor of Constantinople, this Island came into his Possession: Which he gave
to a certain valiant Commander in his Army, a Man of a Noble Descent; of whom,
the Venetians purchased it; and, in their Hands, it has continued ever since.
But now, in all Probability, bability, it will be the Prize of those Arms,
which Nothing Sublunary can resist.

The Posts from Italy and the Seacoasts of this Kingdom, confirm each other's
News; all agreeing, That notwithstanding the Utmost Efforts of the Venetians
and Candiots, to hinder the Relief of Canea; yet, our General is got into that
Haven, with vast Quantities of Provisions, and a sufficient Reinforcement of
Men. They add, That Forty Thousand of our Soldiers have made a Descent in
another Part of the Island, have gained the Forts of Cisternes, Colmi, and
Bicorno, and were on their March toward Suda, with a Design to besiege that
Place. They accuse our General of barbarous Cruelty, in that he caused Five of
the Principal Noblemen of that Kingdom, to be put to Death; because they
refused to betray their Country, or enter into the Interests of the Grand
Signior.

I must confess, Magnificent Aga, That whatever may be said in Commendation of
this General's Policy, and Fidelity to his Master; It is no Argument of the
Goodness of his Disposition. I rather admire the Temper of the Duke of Orleans,
when who Graveling was surrendered to him, just as he entered the Town, was
heard to say these Words: Let us endeavor by Generous Actions, to win the
Hearts of all Men; so may we hope for a daily Victory. Let the French learn
from me, this new Way of Conquest, to subdue Men by Mercy and Clemency.

These are Heroic Sentiments, and agree well with the Character of this
Prince, who is said, Never to have been the Author of any Man's Death, nor to
have revenged himself of any injury: Yet, a valiant Soldier, an expert
Commander, and no bad Politician.

It is not hid from the Court, with what a matchless Virtue he dismissed a
Gentleman, that was hired to murder him. This Assassin, was suffered to pass
into the Duke's Bedchamber one Morning early, precending Business of great
Moment from the Queen. As scon as the Duke cast his Eyes on him, he spoke thus;
I know thy Business, Friend; thou art sent to take away my Life: What Hurt have
I done thee? It is now in my Power with a Word, to have thee cut in Pieces
before my Face: But, I pardon thee; go thy Way, and see my Face no more.

The Gentleman stung with his own Guilt, and astonished at the excellent Nature
of this Prince, fell on his Knees, confessed his Design, and who employed him:
And, having promised eternal Gratitude for this Royal Favor, departed without
any other Notice taken of him; and, fearing to tarry in France, entered himself
into the Service of the Spanish King. It was his Fortune afterward, to
encounter the Duke of Orleans, in a Battle in Flanders. The Duke, at that
Instant, was oppressed with a Crowd of Germans who surrounded him; and, in the
Conflict, he lost his Sword. Which this Gentleman perceiving, nimbly stepped to
him, and delivered one into the Duke's Hands, saying withal, Now reap the Fruit
of thy former Clemency. Thou gave me my Life, now I put thee into a Capacity
to defend thy own. The Prince, by this Means, at length escaped the Danger he
was in; and, that Day, the Fortune of War was on his Side. The French had a
considerable Victory.

Thou see by this, That Heroic Actions have something Divine in them, and
attract the Favors of Heaven. No Man ever was a Loser by good Works: For,
though he be not presently rewarded; yet, in Tract of Time, some happy
Emergency or other arises, to convince him, That Virtuous Men are the Darlings
of Providence.

Thou that art near the Person of the Grand Signior, may find an Opportunity
to relate this Story to him, which may make no unprofitable Impression on his
Mind. Princes ever stand in Need of faithful Monitors.

Adieu, Great Minister, and favor Mahmut, with the Continuance of thy
Protection and Friendship.

Paris, 25th. of the 3d. Moon, of the Year 1646.
LETTER XXVI. To Nassuf, Bassa of Natolia.
I Received thy Letter, as an Argument of the Continuance of that Friendship
which was between us, when we lived together in the Seraglio. Since that Time,
thou and I have been employed Abroad, in different Services of our August
Emperor, who has now rewarded thy Fidelity with a Command; which, if it be not
adequate to thy Merit, is nevertheless agreeable to thy Wishes.

I congratulate thy Honor, and wish thee a gradual Increase of it; for, sudden
and violent Leaps are dangerous. But, our Glorious Sultan, discovers his
Abilities in Nothing more eminently, than in adapting Places of Trust to the
Deserts and Capacities of his Faithful Slaves. So that, if he should in Time
think fit, to exalt thee to the Highest Dignity in the State, we might from the
Choice^ of so wise a Prince, presage thee a better Fortune, than befell one of
thy Name, in the Reign of Sultan Achmet III. who, from a Slave sold in the
Market for Three Sequins, was advanced to an Honor too weighty for his Virtue;
being made Vizir Azem, and Lord of the most delicious Provinces in Asia. But,
being Ambitious of absolute Sovereignty, he plotted Treason against his Master;
which being discovered, the Fatal Firm was signed, and all his Designs were
stifled with a Bow-string.

By this thou may comprehend, how necessary it is for Princes, not to
overload any Man with Dignities, beyond the Proportion of his Humility and
Faithfulness. Yet, Rewards well placed, give new Vigor to the Endeavors of a
Slave; whereas, when good Services are slighted, it does but quench the Ardour,
with which they were performed. Few Men are so Spiritual, as to do Great and
Heroic Things, purely for the Sake of internal Complacency. And, I doubt not,
but the Decii themselves, in so freely sacrificing their Lives for their
Country, had Regard to Humane Glory. Even Seneca, whom one would take for the
most mortified Stoic of that Age, by his Writings; yet, is conceived to have
found more Encouragement, in the Treasures of Gold, with which Nero's Bounty
had filled his Coffers, than in all his Morals, of which he had such refined
Sentiments, and elegant Expressions.

What I have said, thou have Wisdom enough to apply to thy Self, without being
vainglorious: Let those whom thou employest in any meritorious Services, and
who discharge their Trust well, be encouraged with the same Proportions of
Bounty. Munificence will not only add to thy Glory, but also advance thy
Interest. Since, thou will ever have Occasion for thy Slaves: And, he who has
once tasted thy Liberality, as a Reward for any Eminent Performance; had he no
other Motive, than the Pleasure of renewing so profitable an Experiment, will
freely hazard his Life, to serve thee in an Extremity.

This Method thou will find of no small Use to thee, in the Wars to which thou
art going; where it will be necessary for thee, to recompense the least
singular Bravery of the meanest Soldier, not only with Applause, but with some
Preferment in the Army. This will not only prove a Spur to others, but even to
the Person so rewarded; and put him upon new Efforts of Courage, to attract the
Eyes of his Munificent General. This will be the Way for thee, in Time, to have
an Army composed all of Captains, or Men qualified for such.

Yet let not this diminish the Severity of that Discipline, which is requisite
to retain a prosperous Army in their Obedience. I counsel thee, to be strict in
requiring the least Military Duty; and, Industrious in performing thy own Part,
which will be an Example to the Rest: Yet, rather be forward to lead in
Labors, than in Dangers; in Regard thou will be more serviceable in a Battle,
by thy Counsels and Orders, than by personally entering the Combat. In all
Things, prefer the Welfare of the Ottoman Empire, to whatsoever else is most
dear to thee; even to thy own Honor, which yet ought to be dearer to thee than
thy Life.

If thou think I have taken too much Liberty to advise thee, accuse thy Self
for having honored me with thy Friendship, which admits of no Reserves in
Conversation.

Paris, 7th. of the 4th. Moon, of the Year 1646.
LETTER XXVII. To the Kaimacham.
IT is a vast Disappointment to the Venetians, that our General in Candy has so
opportunely revictuall'd Canea, and increased the Garrison there. Morosini is
blam^ for this, by those that wish him no Good. What will not Envy suggest,
when it beholds a Man on the Top of Honor? This General, to give an Enemy his
Due, is a Man of Spirit and true Fortitude: neither courting, nor shunning
Dangers in the Service of his Country; but when once engaged in Perils for that
Cause, he is fearless as a Lion. If he has not hitherto had Occasion to give
the State so desperate a Proof of his Loyalty, as once did the Roman Curtius
(who bravely galloped into the Bottomless Chasm, to pacify their Angry Gods)
yet he has often demonstrated, That his Courage and Fidelity, come not short of
the Ancient Heroes. In a Word, he has done too much for the Republic of
Venice, to escape the Spleen of other Grandees. All must be Generals, or the
War will not prosper. Each Man's Ambition dictates this to the State, That a
Man of Conduct, wou^d soon expel the Turks out of that Island: Thus, in his
Conceit, laying a Train for his own Promotion.

Would thou know Morosini's Crime, that excites all this Passion? To speak
the Truth, it was an Oversight advantageous to the Ottomans. He put out with
his whole Fleet to sea, and left the Port of Canea open. By which means. Three
of our Ships got in with Plenty of Provisions. So that the Town is now in a
Condition to sustain a long Siege, and the Venetians despair of ever recovering
it. Yet Morosini has made so plausible an Apology, that the Senate have
acquitted him; not judging it consistent either with Justice or their Interest,
to suffer one Miscarriage, the Effect of a fair Intention, to outweigh his
numerous Merits and Services. For, the Occasion of his thus suddenly abandoning
the Avenue of that Haven, was, to chase some of our Vessels, then under Sail
not many Leagues off; and the Taking of those Vessels, on Board of which were
Abundance of Slaves justified to the Senate, the Truth of his Pretensions.
However, there are not wanting such as say, he held a private Correspondence
with our General: Others, That the present Governor of Canea, had formerly
taken Captive at Sea a Son of Morosini's, whom he now offered to restore, in
case he would withdraw his Ships from before the Haven, for a few Days. I know
not how far this may be credited. But, 'is a certain Truth, That Morosini has
his Son again, and he defended himself by pleading, That he redeemed him by
exchanging a Mohammedan Captive of Equal Quality, whom he had aboard his Ship.

And, thou know, That this Manner of Barter, is lawful in War. Adonai the
Jew, sends me this Intelligence; and, I dare believe him: For, since the
Instructions I sent him to Genoua, he has taken Care to ascertain his Reports.
I wish it were as true, That Morosini could be prevailed on, to accept the
Friendships of the Sublime Port. But, the Character of that General, gives me
no Encouragement to hope, for so fortunate a Treachery, from his severe Virtue.

However, I will hope and believe, That the Eternal Patron of True Believers,
will give such a happy Issue to the Ottoman Arms in Candy, and all other Parts,
as shall dispose the Nazarenes, that remain unconquered, to honor Him whom
they have hitherto despised and blasphemed; even the Prophet, who could neither
Write nor Read.

Paris, 7th. of the 4th. Moon, of the Year 1646.
LETTER XXVIII. To Cara Hali, a Physician at Constantinople.
THE Time of Year is now come, wherein the Earth turns her Inside out; and,
Nature calls forth the hidden Virtues of that Element, to grace the World with
an Infinite Variety of pleasant Forms and Colors. The Eye is lost in such a
Crowd of different Beauties; and, every Sense is ravish^d with delightful
Objects. The Young Men and Virgins throng the Fields, to behold the
Resurrection of Flowers and Herbs; and, the Old, feel new Vigours springing in
their Bodies, as though they had been in Medea's Cauldron. Even Mahmut himself,
who has drooped all the Winter, now begins to lift up his Head, and partake in
the Common Restoration of all Things.

If I am capable of guessing at the Occasion of my frequent Sickness, I believe
it may, in Part, be attributed to the Want of fresh Air, in the Place where I
lodge. There is a vast Difference between the Streets of Paris, and those of
Constantinople. I seem to my self to be buried alive in this close City, where
my Chamber-Window, affords me no farther Prospect than I can spit: Whereas, in
Constantinople, the Gardens are so intermixed with Houses, That it looks like a
City in the Midst of a Forest; and, by the Advantage of its Situation, is
always refreshed with Breezes from the Sea.

Besides the Impurity of these Infidels, who empty all their Filth in the
Streets, so that the Dirt of Paris may be smelt some Miles off; the Uncleanness
of their Diet, contributes in no small Measure to my Distemper; being forced
either to feed on Flesh with the Blood in it, or live on Herbs. They laugh at
the Niceness of the Mussulmans, who will eat no Meat, that was knocked down or
strangled. They seem to be greedy of Blood, saving it in Vessels; and, mixing
it with Flower of Wheat, make a certain Bread thereof, which they devour
without the least Squeamishness. A True Believer, would tremble at the Sight of
such Impiety. I tell thee, it is impossible to live among them, and not be
polluted: They have no Methods of Purification. They wallow, and hug themselves
in their Uncleanness: they are worse than the Beasts.

Now the Spring has provided a new Banquet wherein there is no Impurity, I am
resolved to live like a Mussulman, and conform to the Precepes of our Holy
Lawgiver; Who, when he beholds my Zeal and Abstinence, will send the Angel of
Health from his Paradise, to repair my decayed Constitution.

The French Philosophers, are busied in an Inquisition after certain Kinds of
Birds, which from the Second Day of this Moon, they say are not be found in the
whole Kingdom, though the Woods and Fields were full of them during the Winter.
Some are of Opinion, That they fly to the Moon; asserting, That if their Wings
will but carry 'em beyond the Magnetic Force of the Earth, it will be no Pain
to glide through the Upper Aerie Region, till they arrive within the Attractive
Energy of that Planet, where they will Naturally seek Rest. Others, with more
Probability, say, That these Birds take their Flight to some other Region on
Earth, whose Climate is more agreeable to their Natures, at this Time of Year.

I wish I could as easily once a Year take my Flight to Constantinople, where
my Heart is Winter and Summer. Adieu, Dear Hali, and pity Mahmut, who counts
himself unhappy in Nothing so much, as in being absent from his Friends.

Paris, 7th. of the 4th. Moon, of the Year 1646.
LETTER XXIX. To the Testerdar, or Lord-Treasurer.
IT appears, That France has some extraordinary Design by Sea: When and where
'twill be put in Execution, is not yet known; but the vast Preparations that
are making, seem to threaten some Foreign Invasion, rather than a Naval Combat:
It looks, as if they had an Expedition in Hand greater than that of Xerxes; to
make a Bridge over the Ocean, and join the Separated Parts of the World
together. New Arsenals are built, in several Maritime Towns; and, all the
Forests are cut down, to fill them with Timber for Ships of War: The Mountains
are left naked of Trees, and the stately Woods are transplanted into the
Havens. An Infinite Number of Men, are employed in making Cordage, Chains,
Bullets, Anchors, Ordnance, and all other Necessaries belonging to a Navy.

This is Cardinal Mazarini's Project, under Pretense of setting the Poor of the
Kingdom at Work, and disburthening the Commonwealth of Vagabonds and Idle
Persons. But, Mahmut is not placed here, to be amused with State-Umbrages. It
is evident, that this Minister designs to render his Master formidable on both
Elements. Agents are sent to buy Ships in all Parts; and, the very Peasants are
forced from the Vineyards and Fields, to Man the greatest Fleet that ever this
Kingdom fitted out to Sea.

Last Moon the Sieur de Quesne, was sent to assist Monsieur Chanut, in
purchasing Vessels in Suedeland. It seems, there had been some Demurrs in his
Negotiation; to remove which, this latter was sent with fresh Instructions.
But, Monsieur Chanut rejected him; And, Ten Day ago, came an Express from that
Minister, desiring, That a more Intelligent Colleague might be sent him; in
Regard, he found it difficult to treat successfully, with a People too much
elated with continual Victories.

Upon this, the Court have sent a Courier to Stockholm, with new Orders;
whereby he is forbid to make any farther Overtures in Order to the Continuance
of the League between these Two Crowns: That France may not always appear in a
Suppliant Posture, whilst the Suedes seem careless to conserve a Friendship,
which they themselves first coveted.

These Misunderstandings, may in a short Time proceed to a greater Alienation;
and, in the End, to an open Rupture. Which has the more Probability, in that,
General Koningsmark lately stopped some French Troops in their march, under
Pretense of seeing their Passports; but really, as it is thought, to corrupt the
Soldiers, and withdraw them from the Fidelity they owe their Sovereign.

This is highly resented here; and, they begin to discourse, of making Peace
with Germany.

What the Issue of these Things will be, is yet in the Dark; but God, from
whose Throne hangs the Chain of Destiny, which reaches to the Center of the
Earth, will, I hope, so dispose of all Humane Events, That the Quarrels of the
Nazarenes, shall minister Occasion to the Osmans, to increase the Territories
of our Puissant Emperor.

Paris, 1st. of the 5th. Moon, of the Year 1646.
LETTER XXX. To Nathan Ben Saddi, a Jew at Vienna.
I Cannot but highly Applaud the Resolution thou have taken, as thy Letter
intimates, to enquire into the Grounds of the Religion thou art of. This shows,
that thou set a Value on thy Reason, and think thy self beyond the
Pupillage of a Child; that thou esteemest thy self of Years, to make a Choice
of thy Religion, and not to take it up on the bare Credit of thy Forefathers.
It Is certain, that Error may be Traditional as well as Truth: And, the Pagan
Idolaters, pleaded a Greater Antiquity, for the Altars of their Gods, than
could the Followers of Moses, for the Temple of Jerusalem, the Tabernacle in
the Desert, or for the Promulgation of the Law it self on Mount Sinai: Since,
there was scarce a Region on the Continent, which had not Established Rites and
Ceremonies of Worship, long before Moses, or even Jacob, the Great Father of
the Israelites were born.

Among the Rest of the Nations, Arabia, my Native Country, was peculiarly
blessed with the Footsteps of the Illustrious Ibrahim, Grandfather to Israel,
from whom the Jews descend. In this Happy Country, that Renowned Prophet
sojourned, conversed with Angels: And, with the Majesty which cannot be
Uttered: he preached the Unity of the Divine Essence, Converted the People from
their Idolatry, built an Oratory at Meccha, and was taken up into Paradise.

Ismael his Eldest Son, and Heir of his Father's Spirit, as of his Territories,
trod in the Footsteps of the Assumpt of God. He brake down the Idols, asserted
One God, the Resurrection, the Day of Judgment, the Joys of Paradise, and the
Torments of Hell. His Offspring Multiplied, and Peopled all the East: The
Princes of this Holy Line, subdued the Infidel Nations, and rooted themselves
in the most fertile Regions of Asia, professing themselves Mussulmans or True
Believers. Thus passed the Light of God, from the Face of Ibrahim, to his
Posterity by Successive Generations; till at Length, it rested on the Face of
Mahomet, Our Holy Lawgiver, and was increased with admirable Splendors, by the
frequent Visits of the Angel Gebrail. He took the Root of Evil, out of the
Prophet's Heart; brought him down the Alcoran from Heaven, and gave him Victory
and Honor; called him by a New Name, THE SEAL OF THE PROPHETS; carried him to
the Throne of God, through Legions of Devils, that waited below the Moon to
destroy him. And finally, made his Sepulcher Glorious and resorted to, by the
Believers of all Nations on the Earth.

I send thee this Abstract of the Mussulman History, to the End, thou may see
what Pretensions the Children of Ismael have to the True Law; which you, of the
Posterity of Isaac would monopolize to your selves: As if, God had not sent
Prophets to all Nations, to lead them into the Right Way, and not into the Way
of Infidels. Nevertheless, take not these Things on my Credit, but examine the
Records of thy own Nation, and the History of past Times. Weigh all Things in
the Balance: Consult thy Reason, which is an indeficient Light, to those who
follow it. Your Law, was once Pure and Uncorrupted; but, in Time, the Devil
inserted many Errors: He seduced your Fathers; they returned upon their Steps,
and fell back into Idolatry. Then God raised up the Messiah, to reform all
Things; but, Him ye rejected. And when he was taken up into Paradise, ye
reported, That He was hanged on a Tree. In this, the Nazarenes are your Fools,
and fight against themselves; Whilst they assert, as you do, That he who is
Immortal and Triumphant, among the Hundred and Twenty Four Thousand Prophets,
Was Crucified betwixt Two Thieves; Thus bringing a Reproach on the Apostle of
God, and on their Own Faith; in believing Things, inconsistent with the
Goodness and Power of the Divine Majesty. Without Doubt, Jesus, the Son of
Mary, is* Ascended Body and Soul into Paradise; Who, whilst he was on Earth,
said, Worship One God, Your Lord and Mine.

Let me not seem importunate, or troublesome. I seek not to circumvent thy
Reason, but to direct it. Think Seven Times, before thou Change Once. I will
procure thee Books of our Law; Peruse them with Judgment; and tell me then,
Whether thou have ever seen any Writing comparable to the Alcoran? The Majesty
of the Style, speaks it above Humane Original: It is exempt from Contradiction,
from the Beginning to the End: It confirms the Old Testament, which thou
believe: It is all over clothed with Light. Doubtless, it is no other, than
a Transcript of the Book written in Heaven.

If after all thy Search, thou shall determine otherwise, follow thou Thy Law,
and I will follow Mine. We both Worship One God, Lord of the Universe.

Paris, 10th. of the 5th. Moon, of the Year 1646.
LETTER XXXI. To the same.
LET not the Fear of displeasing those of thy Nation, hinder thee from
embracing the Truth. God shall protect thee from the Malice of Unbelievers. Thy
Interest is already great among the Mussulmans; our August Emperor will
augment both that, and thy Honor. Take hold of the strongest Knot, and adhere
not to Tagot. The Cleanliness and Delicacy of the Mussulmans may invite thee,
which far exceeds that of the Jews, and yet is void of Superstition: We only
obey the sincere Dictates of Nature, which teach us, That so long as the Soul
dwells in this Mansion of Flesh, it partakes of Bodily Pollutions. It Is to
avoid these, we abstain from certain Meats and Drinks, which cannot be touched
without Contamination. To this End, do we observe that superlative Niceness, in
our Washings and Purifications, which discriminates us from all the World
beside. Doubtless, Our Law is but the Law of Moses, refined and sublimated from
the Dregs of adventitious Error.

Write often to me, and whatever Reasons may prevail on thee not to change thy
Religion, let no Arguments tempt thee to swerve from thy Fidelity to the
Sovereign of Sovereigns on Earth, the Grand Signior, in whose Veins runs the
most Exalted Blood of Humane Race.

Here is a Report in this City, That the Elector of Brandenburgh, will demand
the Queen of Sueden in Marriage: let me know if it be true, That I may inform
the Ministers of the Lofty Port, from whom Nothing ought to be concealed, that
occurs of Moment betwixt the Two Poles.

Inform me also, what passes of remarkable in the Assembly of the Deputies at
Munster, and whether it be true, That the Danube has lately overflowed its
Banks, and carried away Four Hundred Houses in its rapid Course.

Such Stories are told here, by those who know not how to pass away their Time,
but in hearking after Foreign News, to furnish themselves with Matter to amuse
the Credulous, and beget Admiration of their Intelligence.

I have sent thee a Watch of my making; If thou acceptest it with good Will,
it is a sufficient Acknowledgment.

May God, whose Presence fills the Universe, disclose himself to thee, in the
Way of Salvation, and continue to breathe good Motions into thy Soul.

Paris, 10th. of the 5th. Moon, of the Year 1646.
LETTER XXXII. To the Kaimacham.
A Donai the Jew, has much improved himself, in his late Progress through
Italy: He is grown a perfect Statesman; having found out the Way to penetrate
into Secrets, and to dispatch Business without any Noise. He may prove very
serviceable at Venice, during the present War of Candy. His Acquaintance in
that City, gives him Access to the Cabals of the Senators; who spare not, over
their Wine, to whisper the Counsels of the State, and to descant on the
Measures that are taken to defend that Republic, against the Invincible
Prowess of the Ottoman Armies.

It is publicly known, That they have sent Ambassadors to the Crown of
Moscovy, that of Poland, and to the Cossacks; inviting them to enter into a
League, against the Grand Signior. But, few are acquainted with the Private
Treaty they are making, with the Bassa of Aleppo. We owe this Discovery, to the
Diligence and Wit of this Son of Israel. He has drawn the Secret, from the
Mouths of several Eminent Counselors of State; and assures me, That the Senate
have made such Proposals to that Governor, as cannot fail of inducing him to
Revolt.

This may prove of ill Consequence, if not timely preyented: The pernicious
Example of this Bassae, may incite others to tread in his Steps, especially his
Neighbors of Sidon and Damascus, who have for a long Time meditated a
Sovereignty, Independent of the Throne which first established 'em in those
Charges. Besides, the single Forces of this Bassa, will be able to give a
powerful Diversion to the Arms of the Empire, already engaged in Candy,
Dalmatia, and other Parts, by Sea and Land. He says, the Venetians speak much
in Praise of this Bassa's Justice, whereof they relate many Examples: Among the
Rest, A certain Cook among the Franks of that City, was accused of dressing and
selling putrified Flesh, whereby many that eat thereof, were infected with the
Plague. Complaint being made of this to the Bassa, he sends for the Cook, and
examines him about it: He replied, That he sold none but good and wholesome
Meat; for, if it happened, That at any Time he was forced to keep any Flesh in
his House above Three Days, he so seasoned it with Spices and Herbs, as made it
very savoury, and without any ill Scent.

The Bassa, not having Patience to hear any more of this foetid Apology,
commanded his Arms and Legs to be cut off, and the Veins to be seared up:
Ordering, that during the short Time he had to live, he should have no other
Food, but what was made of his own Limbs.

They relate one more Passage, of a Complaint that was made by a Peasant, whose
Daughter this Bassa's only Son had ravished: The Bassa compelled him to marry
her with this Charge, Let me hear no more Complaints of thee, unless thou art
resolved to leave me without a Son.

It is reported here, That the King of Persia, has made a Peace with the Great
Mogul; and that they will both turn their Forces, against our August Emperor.

Here is also a Courier arrived from Marseilles, who brings News of the Revolt
of Cavarra; the Inhabitants of that Place, having shaken off the Obedience they
owe to the Sultan, and put themselves under the Protection of the Venetians:
and, that General Grimani, has taken Four Ships of Ragusa, laden with
Ammunition for our Army. He adds also, That Morosini has Thirty small Vessels,
besides Galleys, under the very Walls of the Dardanells. I long ago suggested
to the Vizir Azem, That the Weakness of those Castles, would one Time or other
encourage the Christians, to perform some notable Exploit in the Hellespont.
But, Mahmut's Counsel was not regarded: Now the Event justifies my Advice, the
Port will consult the Security of (...) Avenue. I wish they do not practice the
T^ Wisdom. The Venetians have a powerful Fleet; If they block up the
Hellespont, and hinder our Ships from sailing into the Archipelago; and the
Cossacks, in the mean while, cover the Black Sea with their Barks, committing a
Thousand Piracies and Ravages, What will become of the Imperial City? Whence
will they provide Sustenance for so many Millions of People, as inhabit that
City and the Parts adjacent?

These Things are Worthy of Consideration: And thou, who have the Care of that
Capital Seat of the Ottoman Empire, wilt not blame Mahmut, for putting thee in
Mind of the Danger which threatens even the Seraglio it self at this Juncture.
However, I have done my Duty, Sage Minister, and refer the Rest to thy Wisdom.
My Letters are all registered; and if Affairs should succeed ill, it will be
manifested, That Mahmut, who watches Night and Day, to serve the Great Master
of the World, has not been wanting to give timely Notice of what might be
advantageous to the Monarchy of the True Faithful.

Thou, who art celebrated for thy Justice and Probity, pardon the Liberty which
my Zeal for Thy Master and Mine, renders worthy of Excuse.

Paris, 19th. of the 5th. Moon, of the Year 1646.
The End of the First Book.
LETTERS Writ by A SPY at PARIS.
VOL. III. BOOK II.
LETTER I. To the Most Magnificent and Illustrious Vizir Azem, at the Port.
OSmin the Dwarf, whom I formerly mentioned, remains still in the Court; and
continues his good Offices, in communicating to me such Passages as come to his
Knowledge. He has a subtle Wit, and bears no hearty Love to the Christians,
though he be One himself in Profession. He frequently visits me, and trusts me
with his Secrets. One Day he convinced me by evident Circumstances, That
Cardinal Mazarini, was projecting to give some secret and sudden Blow to the
Ottoman Empire, for which Osmin seems to be concerned by a Natural Inclination;
being, as I told thee, born of Mohammedan Parents. He was uneasy, till he had
acquainted me with his Apprehensions; and, I gave him such Instructions, as I
thought most proper on this Occasion. I set my Thoughts on the Rack, to prevent
so dire a Mischief. And, having premeditated well on this Affair, I pitched on
a Course, which would at once clear me from the Cardinal's Suspicion; and, by
seeming to favor his Designs, would absolutely overthrow them. I went to him
boldly one Day; and being admitted to his Closet, I thus addressed that
Politician:

THERE are now Nine Years elapsed, Great Minister, since I first breathed the
Air of France; during all which Time, I have not only shared in Common with the
Natives, the Benefits which have accru'd to this Noble Kingdom, under the
Auspicious Ministry of Cardinal Richlieu, and his no less Eminent Successor;
but have also received many particular Honors from that Illustrious Prince of
the Church, to which Your Eminence, has been pleased to make some undeserved
Additions. It Is to you both, I owe the Character which has introduced me into
the Acquaintance and Favor of the Nobility; who, on that Score, have thought
me Worthy to Instruct their Children, in the Greek and Arabic Tongues; have
vouchsafed to admit me to their Salt; and to encourage me with the Hopes, of
finding a Comfortable Repose in the Bosom of the Gallican Church, after a
tedious Peregrination from my own Country.

When I reflect on all the accumulated Blessings I enjoy, under the Protection
of Your Eminence; Blessings equally transcending my Ambition, as they do my
Merits; I apply all my Studies, to find out some acceptable Way of
Acknowledgment, to my Gracious Benefactor. And, because nothing can be more
Welcome to the Guardian of France, than the Means of advancing the Public Good
of the Kingdom committed to his Care; I now presume, as a Testimony of my
Gratitude, to propose to Your Eminence, some Speculations, which if put in
Execution, will in my Judgment, not only render France the most Formidable and
Absolute Monarchy on Earth, but also tie the whole Catholic World in Eternal
Obligations to her; and give just Reason to change the Style of his Most
Christian Majesty, from Eldest Son of the Church, to that of Father of all
Christendom.

Your Eminence will not wonder at the Zeal of a Stranger, or the Care that
Titus of Moldavia takes for France: In being Sollicitous for this Kingdom, I
consult the Welfare of my own Country, and of all the Nations which profess the
Faith of Jesus; since it is ealie to see, That in the Fate of France, that of
all Europe is involved.

It is a long Time since the Dismembered Relics of the Roman Empire,
bordering on Asia, found themselves too weak to resist the Puissance of the
Ottoman Arms. All Greece was soon o'errun, by the Warlike Turks. Transylvania,
Walachia, Moldavia, with the greatest Part of the Upper Hungary, quickly became
Tributaries to the inveterate Enemies of the Christian Name. And, Germany it
self is so enfeebl'd by their repeated incursions, that all the Emperor can
do, is, to make dishonorable and costly Compositions, buying a Precarious
Peace with little less Charges, than would serve some more Fortunate Prince, to
carry on a Glorious and Successful War. Neither is the State of Venice in any
better Condition of Defense, the Turks having pared away whole Provinces, from
that once flourishing Commonwealth; and, by their continual Invasions and
Hostilities, reduced her to a Necessity of Merchandising with the Ottoman Port
for Peace. Which is no sooner concluded, but, on the least Pretense, is broke
again, by those, who hold themselves not obliged, to keep Faith with
Christians. Behold, at this Time, without Provocation on the Part of Venice, or
a Declaration of War by the Grand Signior, the late League broken on a sudden,
and in a most Clandestine Manner. Behold Candy environed with their Fleet by
Sea, and her fertile Plains, covered with Armies of Mahometans by Land. Behold
her Cities in the Hands of her Enemies, and her Villages laid Desolate; her
Nobles put to the Sword, and her Merchants led into Captivity. In fine, behold
this afflicted Commonwealth yet struggling with her Fate, and sending her
Ambassadors to all the Princes and States of Christendom, Demanding, or rather,
in a suppliant Manner, Imploring their Assistance. Yet, she finds little or no
Help from any but the Pope, and the Knights of Malia. And, his Holiness has
enough to do, to preserve the Patrimony of the Church from Violence. The State
of Genoua, is too intent upon her Traffic, to regard the Calamities of her
Neighbors. And, all the Princes of Italy have such Diversions at Home, as
render their Application to Things Abroad, very Cold and Indifferent. In the
mean while, the Turks gain Ground, double their Strength, and increase their
Victories! Oh Deplorable State of Christendom! Is there no Redress for these
Miseries? Yes surely, there is! and such a Redress, as only lies in Your Power,
Great Minister, to apply; which, in the Experiment, I dare assure will prove
Effectual.

I do not pretend to the Visions and Inspirations of Peter the Hermit, who
garbl'd Secular and Divine Offices; and arming himself in Habiliments of Steel,
went Dragooning up and down Christendom, at the Head of a Confused Rabble, to
render himself Popular, and acquire the Triple Character, of Pilgrim, Priest
and Captain. The ill Success of his rash Expeditions, showed, That he was only
stung with a Religious Caprice, and that God approved not his Folly. I do not
go about to propose another Crusade, or contrive a Way to shed whole Deluges of
Humane Blood, with no other Consequence, than to stain History, with the
Sanguine Memoirs of Christendom's Vanity and Misfortune. Besides, that would be
found Impracticable in this Age, which was easy to put in Execution, Five or
Six Hundred Years ago: The World is not so Devout now, as it was in those Days;
neither are Men so prompt to run the Risque of their Lives, on Religious
Errands, for the Honor of being esteemed Martyrs. 'Twill be difficult to find
out a New List of Godfrey's, Baldwin's, Guy's, and other Hero's, to lead the
Champions of the Cross, through all the Hardships of Sea and Land, so many
Hundred Miles, into Remote and Desolate Regions; to combat not only with Flesh
and Blood, but with Famine, Pestilence, And all the Miseries of Human Life;
And, as if this were not enough, to sheath their Swords also in each others
Bowels, for Punctilio's, mere Trifles of mistaken Honor, and illtim'd
Emulation. And, all this only, to purchase the Empty Title, of King of
Jerusalem; or the Precarious Authority of a Grecian Emperor: Both short lived
Honors; the One to be lost in a little Time, with all Palestine, to the
Saracens; the Other, depending only on the Pleasure of the Multitude! Such were
the Glorious Fruits of the Christian Arms in those Days! Such the Triumphs,
attending Our Victories! These the Trophies, which our Fathers erected to their
own Disgrace; when, after a War of so many Years, they left the Holy Land in a
worse Condition than they found it; and, of so many Hundred Thousand Men as
marched thither, threatening the utter Subversion of the Saracen Empire, there
scarce returned enough, to disperse the News of their own Overthrow.

Waving therefore these Visionary rash Expeditions, I now propose to Your
Eminence, an Undertaking, which though it may make less Noise in the World, yet
carri^ more Probability of Success; and, will not only promote the Interest of
France, but redound to the Advantage of all Europe,

No Man who is acquainted with History, can be ignorant, what Claims the Kings
of France have made to the Empire of the West, since the Days of Charlemaine,
the Royal Predecessor of his Present Majesty, who was dignified with the
Imperial Title, by the Sovereign Bishop. Neither is it unknown by what
Artifices the House of Austria have procured the Translation of this Sacred
Authority to their Own Family.

Your Eminence is sensible, by what Tyrannous and Unjust Methods, they have
maintained themselves in this highest Pitch of Humane Glory; and, not content
with this, how they have aspired after the Monarchy of the Whole World! All the
North have groaned under the Burden of their Insupportable Tyranny. And, their
Encroachments on the South, have rendered that Line, little less Infamous. They
spare neither Civil nor Ecclesiastical Rights, in the Pursuit of their
Ambition; not even the Patrimony of St. Peter, which has ever been esteemed
Sacred and Inviolable, by Christian Princes: they have sacked Rome it self, and
led the Supreme Pastor of the Church into Captivity. What should I speak of the
Hollanders, Suitzers, Grisons and other Nations, which, impatient of the
Austrian Yoke, revolted from their Cruel Masters; and, have ever since asserted
their Liberty, by the Force of their Arms? What should I mention, the frequent
Troubles in Bohemia, Transylvania and Hungary, when the Inhabitants of those
Countries, grown desperate with their daily Oppressions, have bravely
endeavored to redeem themselves and their Posterity, from perpetual Servitude;
but, for Want of a Powerful Protector, have been forced to yield to their Old
Masters? That Incestuous Race, are grown Odious to the Whole World: Even the
Princes of the Empire, are forced to smother their Resentments, when they Elect
One to possess the Imperial Diadem, whom they cannot but hate!

That therefore which I aim at in this Address, is, to represent to Your
Eminence, how easy it will be in this Juncture, for his most Christian
Majesty, to recover the Imperial Crown, which of Right belongs to None but the
Successors of the renowned Charleinaine; and, which even the greatest Part of
the Germans themselves, wish to see placed on the Head of Lewis XIV. Most of
the Electors, are already inclining to the Interests of France: It will not be
difficult to win the Rest. The Hungarians, etc. long for a Deliverer; And, the
other Provinces beyond the Danube, will freely open the Gates of their Cities,
to let in his Armies, whom they look on as the Hope of all Christendom. The
Helvetians, who are Allies of this Crown, will not fail to perform their Part.
The Suedes have already plucked many Feathers, from that Ravenous Eagle. And,
the Forces of this Crown, have blunted her Talons. Another Campaign will quite
deplume her, enervate her last Vigor, and end the tedious Controversy.

Let not therefore an Untimely Peace with the Emperor, so much talked of, stop
the Current of the French Triumphs! Let not the Sinister Practices of German
Pensioners in the Suedish Court, occasion a Rupture between Two the most Potent
and Victorious Crowns in Europe! Or rather, let not Queen Christina, reap the
sole Glory of so fortunate and profitable a War! His Majesty has a Formidable
Army by Land; and, in a short Time, will have an Invincible Fleet by Sea.
Continual Victories, court the Perseverance of the French Valor; whilst the
Justice of your Cause, invites to the Battle.

All Things conspire, to put a Period to the Austrian Grandeur. Only snatch the
present Opportunity; which once lost, may never be recovered again. 'Twas only
the sudden and unexpected Fate of Henry IV. this King's Grandfather, of
Eternal Memory, that hindered him from putting in Execution the same Design I
now propose. And, if Lewis XIII. did not prosecute it, 'twas because he wanted
a favorable Juncture. Now, behold, it offers it self: It Is in your Power,
Supreme Director of the State, under his Majesty, to build the Fortune of
France so high, that all the Nations of Christendom, may repose under its
Shadow. Pursue the Success which Heaven has already granted. And, when all
Europe is thus settled in a Durable Peace, either making Honorable Friendships
with, or entirely submitting to, this new Gallick Empire; then will be the Time
to call the Ottomans to an Account, for the Ravages and Spoils they have
committed in Christian Countries, and to carry Our Arms to the Walls of
Constantinople, and drive these Barbarians, back to their Primitive Rocks and
Deserts; from whence they have thus long straggled, to ruin the most desirable
Provinces of Asia and Europe; nay, and of the Whole World.

There is no other Way but this, in my Judgment, to stop the Progress of the
Turkish Victories. Since it is impossible, to make a Durable Peace among
Christian Princes, but by Conquest; I mean, such a Peace, as will inspire them
with the Resolution, and put them into a Capacity, to unite all their Forces,
in a War against the Mahometans. As for the present Condition of the Republic,
if their Losses were greater, than they are like to be, yet they will be
inconsiderable, in Comparison of the mighty Gain which will afterward accrue,
not only to them, but to all the Christian Nations, by advancing the French
Crown to that Height of Grandeur, designed for it by Fate. Hitherto the
Christian Princes, have only endeavored to apply a Remedy to the Part
particularly affected; from whence, if by Fortune they chased the Distemper, it
soon brake out in some other Member; Whence it came to pass, that we lost
Province after Province, and the Turks are almost gotten into the Heart of
Europe. If therefore, We design to drive them thence, it is necessary to follow
this Method, which will be found the only Way, to pluck this Evil up by the
Roots.

Go on then, Most Prudent and Illustrious Guardian of the Crown, destined to
Command the Earth; Go on, and lift up our Great Master, to the Wreath with
which the Tutelar Angel of Europe, is ready to environ his Sacred Temples. Let
not the German Deputies at Munster, any longer amuse You with feigned Overtures
of Peace. But, pursue the Propitious Fate of France, which waits to lead Our
Armies to Victories, Triumphs and Glories; and to establish a New Empire in the
World, to which all Nations shall pay Homage, and fly for Protection.

Thou see, Illustrious and Serene Vizir, That I have used much Flattery in
this Address. It is a necessary Vice in the Court of France, where no Diogenes
can have Audience. It cannot be expected, That I should discover by the
Cardinal's Answer, What his Sentiments were of my Project. He is of a debonair
Humor, and will rather feign Virtues to commend in another Man, than put him
to the Blush by mentioning his Real Vices. This is an Effect of his Natural
Disposition, which he is wise enough to improve to the End of Policy. There
being no subtiler Artifice to gain a Popular Esteem, than by the Reputation of
a Generous Temper.

However, I think I said Nothing that could justly offend Him, unless he were
endued with the Incommunicable Gift of discerning Hearts. For otherwise, at the
Worst, he could but tax me with a Loyal Presumption and Mistake, in proposing
Things altogether Impracticable.

These were such, thou will easily discern, when thou considerest, That though
they appear fair and easy in the Attempt, as the Circumstances of Europe are
at present; yet, the Revolution of a few Moons, may quite change the Face of
Affairs; new and unthought of Difficulties may arise; the Emperor may make a
Peace with Suedeland; the Pope might interpose his Mediation and Authority; the
Assembly at Munster might have a Conclusion according to their Wishes; the
Electoral Princes, might be more firmly fastened to the Interest of the Empire.
Besides, another Campaign may prove as fatal to the French, as the former have
been propitious. After all, if they should find Encouragement to begin this
Enterprise, and should meet with answerable Success in the Prosecution of it;
yet, a Thousand Occurrences would emerge, to hinder them from enjoying their
new-gotten Empire long; or, from being able to maintain a War against the
Empire, whose Subjects are Infinite, and Treasures Inexhaustible.

If thou, who art the Light of the Osman Monarchy, shall approve of what I have
done, my Happiness will be great; nevertheless, thy Reproofs will not make me
Miserable, since they are Arguments of thy Condescension and Favor.

Paris, 10th. of the 6th. Moon, of the Year 1646.
LETTER II. To Ismael Mouta Faraca, a White Eunuch.
THY Letter is come safe to my Hands, accompanied with a Munificent Present
from Egry Boinou, who, thou tellest me, is deprived of his Eyes by the Grand
Signior's Order. I condole the Calamity of my Friend, yet accuse not the
Justice of Him who is Master of us All. We are Mussulmans, and must not dispute
the Pleasure of Heaven, or the Commands of our Sovereigns. It is an Argument of
their Clemency, when they retrench their Anger, and spare the Lives of their
Slaves. The Sultan is merciful in a higher Degree, in not extending his Hands
to the Wealth of our Friend; but, has left that, and his Liberty untouched:
Whereby he is still in a Capacity, of enjoying many Pleasures, which are denied
to Thousands who have their Sight.

I do not write this, as if I were void of Compassion toward my Friend. I owe
him still the same Affection, as when he was able to read the Sincerity of it
in my Face. But, I would not have the Loss of his Eyes, abate the Sight of his
Soul, which is his Reason. Let him remember, That a Famous Philosopher has done
that voluntarily to himself, for the Sake of a less interrupted Contemplation,
which is imposed on our Friend as a Punishment. There is no outward Disaster,
can hurt the Optics of a Mind guarded with Patience, and shut up within the
Circle of its own Light. Such a Soul, is impregnable against all the Assaults
of Fortune, and triumphs over Destiny it self.

Besides, our beloved Eunuch, can still converse with his Friends; which is a
Privilege, the Deaf would almost give their Eyes to enjoy. It is hard to
determine, which of those Two Senses would be missed with least Regret;
especially, to a Man, who by his excellent Voice, and Skill in Singing, seems
to be the very Soul of Music.

What is it in all this infinite Variety of Visible Objects, that affects the
Eye with so refined a Pleasure, but the harmonious Disposition and Symmetry of
the Parts, which compose the whole Scene of the Universe? And, may not that
Pleasure be translated to the Ear, when it receives the proportionate Measures,
and exquisite Cadencies of Sounds? Certainly, Music is no other, than Beauty
to the Ear, as Beauty is Music to the Eye.

But our Friend Egry, needs not these Encouragements: He understands the Way to
make himself Happy, and has Wisdom enough to put it in Practice.

The Grand Signior's Fury is pacified. Egry Lives. He has Houses and Gardens;
Gardens replenished with all Manner of Fruits and Flowers to gratify his Taste
and Smell. He is Master of much Treasure in Silver and Gold, and of many
Slaves. If all these cannot contribute to his Felicity, he is Master of
Himself, which is Essential Happiness.

Thou who succeedest him in that honorable Post, and guardest the Avenue of
the Majestic Chamber, where the Addresses and Supplications of all the Princes
of the Earth are made at the Feet of our August Emperor; watch thy Senses, and
obey thy Reason. Remember thy Predecessor's Fate, and forget not Mahmut; but,
above all Things, forget not thy Self. Adieu.

Paris, 20th. of the 6th. Moon, of the Year 1646.
LETTER III. To Dgnet Oglou.
I AM extremely surprised, and equally troubled, at the severe Punishment which
Sultan Ibrahim has inflicted on Egry Beinou. His Successor, Ismael Mouta
Faraca, sent me the first News of it, but said nothing of the Eunuch's Crime.
Neither would I request that satisfaction of a Man, who derives a new Luster,
from the Tragical Eclipse of my Friend; lest roy Love should have betrayed my
Discretion, and tempted me to utter that, which is not proper for a Slave of
the Sult^ to express. Our Thoughts are our own, whilst we keep them chained up
in our Breasts; but, if once we suffer 'em to take Air in words, they become
another Man's, who may make use of them to our Ruin. I never had Familiarity
enough with Ismael, to trust him with Reflections of this Nature. Besides, his
own Letter to me, discovered too much Freedom to be void of Design, it being
the first that ever passed between us; which, for that Reason, ought to have
been dictated in a Style more reserved. I set him a Pattern in my Answer; not
letting a Word escape my Pen, which might speak less Resignation to the Will of
our Master, than Tenderness for my Friends Suffering.

But, with thee I dare use greater Freedom: My long Experience of thy
Integrity, will justify this Boldness. Tell me, my Dgnet, was it not the
Blindness of Sultan Ibrahim's Passion, which has robbed Egry of his Sight?
Answer me without Disguize; Was it not some Caprice of Jealousy? Was it not
because the Master thought he saw too much, that the Slave sees not now at all?
If that Sense was not judged Criminal in Egry, why was ^in particular punished?
But, it is in vain to measure the Cruel Frolicks of a Sovereign Monarch by a
Rule, who makes his Will a Law.

The Christians say, the Ottoman Princes are Butchers, and the whole Empire a
Shambles; where Persons of all Degrees, are sacrificed to the Lust or Passion
of a Tyrant. I tell thee, though I approve not the licentious Tongues of these
Infidels; yet, it appears too true, That so uncontrollable a Power as the
Eastern Monarchs are invested with, prompts them to commit many Violences, for
which, Justice can make no Plea. It were to be wished, That the Practices of
the Sublime Seraglio, did not too often verify it. Suffer me to be exasperated
a little, for the Cruel Sentence executed on my Friend, the most accomplished
Person within the Walls of that Magnificent Palace. Doubtless, he owes the Loss
of his Eyes, to the Grudge of some Envious Minion, who could not brook so
dangerous a Rival in the Sultan's Favor. For, this Unfortunate Eunuch, who
charmed all Hearts, had made some Impression also on the Cruel Ibrahim's. He
often loved to hear him sing the lively Dorick Strains, to chase away his
Melancholy: For, Egry is a Second Orpheus, whose Voice, thou know, inspired
the Trees and Rocks with Passion. Besides, he has many other Gifts, which
rendered his Person and Conversation delectable to all; and taught the whole
Seraglio, new Lessons of Platonic Love.

When thou have received this, I desire thee, to give him a Visit: Thou know
his House at Galata. Embrace him in my Name, and give him a Kiss of Faithful
Friendship. Forget not also to return him my Acknowlegements, for the Diamonds
he sent me. And, cheer him with this Thought, That one Day, his Eyes shall be
renewed in Paradise, far brighter than those Glittering Jewels. Adieu.

Paris, 20th. of the 6th. Moon, of the Year 1646.
LETTER IV. To Dicheu Hussein Bassa.
IT IS not easy to guess at the Motive, which induced the Duke of Orleans, to
begin this Years Campaign in so Rigorous a Season. It was the First Moon, and
the Ground was covered with deep Snows (An ill Time, to march in an Enemies
Country.) And, when these Snows were dissolved, Floods followed. It seems as if
he were thirsty of Fame, and would acquire the Character of a Hardy Warrior:
Resolving to shun no Fatigue, which might advance the Reputation of his Arms.

The Duke of Enguien, spurred on with a glorious Emulation, soon followed with
another Army, but by a different Road. There are Four Mareschals of France,
gone with them. These Early Marches, make a great Noise. But, little of Action
could be expected, while the wary Flemmings, knowing the Passes of the Country,
and the Force of the Floods, have kept their Winter Quarters; spending that
Time at Ease, in preparing all Things Necessary for a more seasonable Campaign,
which they have now begun.

In this, the Spanish Policy deserves Commendation; who would not expose the
Health and Lives of their Soldiers to unnecessary Rigors, but waited till the
Sun had well dried up the unwholesome Damps of the Earth, and shedding his
benigner Influence through the Air, invited them forth into the Field. But,
when I thus approve the Wisdom of the Spaniard, think not, that I condemn the
sprightly Genius of the French, who seem to approach nearest the Bravery of the
Mussulman Armies.

The Action of a French Officer, was worthy of Remark; who being sent from the
Camp, with Letters to the King and Queen, arrived at the Court the 24th. Day of
the Second Moon, whilst the Ground was yet frozen hard. After he had delivered
his Message, the Chamberlain of the Royal Household, appointed him a Lodging for
that Night in the King's Palace, he being to return to Flanders the next Day.
But, he generously refused it, saying, It became not him to lie in a Bed of
Down, when his General, with the whole Army, were forced to sleep on the frozen
Earth. Therefore, causing some Straw to be brought out of the Stables, he took
his Repose thereon in the open Air. The Young King, extremely pleased with his
Gallantry, ordered him a Hundred Pieces of Gold; and recommended him to the
Duke of Orleans, as one of the bravest Men in his Army.

I swear by the Whistling of the Winds, and the Ruffling of the Leaves, that I
honor such Virtue even in an Infidel.

Paris, 20th. of the 6th. Moon, of the Year 1646.
LETTER V. To Kerker Hassan Bassa.
THY Letter is come to my Hands, with the Present of Kopha; which is so much
the more acceptable, because thou broughtest it thy self from the Valley of
Admoim, the Place of my Nativity. It is an evident Sign, that thou have not
forgot thy Countryman, in that thou condescendest to oblige him in so peculiar
a Manner. The Place where we drew our first Breath, is always dear to Mortals;
and, the Remembrance of that delicious Vale, affects Mahmut with singular
Delight. It Is true indeed, I was brought from thence, before I could
distinguish one Place from another; but, I have visited that Region since, and
have Reason to pronounce it, the most Delectable Part of Arabia. Had the
Grecian Poets seen that Paradise, they would not have so extolled the
celebrated Fields of Tempe in Thessaly. This Happy Vale, is the Elyzium of the
World, blessed with an Eternal Spring.

Thou art highly obliged to the Sultan, for the Liberty he has given thee to
visit the Place of thy Cradle, and to sojourn so long among thy Kindred. Thy
Father was famous in that Country, for hunting of Lions, and other Beasts of
Prey. I have heard some of our Tribe, praise his Valor and Dexterity, in the
Chase of those Fierce Animals. They told me, That in the Space of Two Years, he
had presented the Beglerbeg with Twenty Lions Heads, killed by his own Hand:
That he had Three Tame ones in his House, which he had taken when Whelps from a
Lioness of prodigious Bulk: That the Walls of his House were hung with the
Skins of Tigers, Panthers and Lions, the Trophies of his Indefatigable
Diligence, Skill and Courage, in Pursuit of Wild Beasts. In a Word, they said,
he was the most successful Hunter in all Arabia. If thou inheritest his
Inclinations as well as his Blood, (for, they commonly go together) thou have
had a fair Time, to range the Forests, and purge the Desert of those Ravenous
Creatures. Were it not for the Enmity of the Gnats, the East would be overrun
with these Savages. They say, this little despicable Insect, destroys more
Lions, than all the Huntsmen in Asia. For, swarming about them in the Heat of
Summer, they chiefly fasten on their Eyelids; which they sting so vehemently,
that the Lions thinking to ease themselves by scratching, often tear their own
Eyes out, and so are famished.

To understand well the different Natures of Beasts, is a Study fit for Kings.
'Twas the Glory of Solomon, to be accurate in this Knowledge: And, Alexander
the Great, had such an Esteem for it, that he bestowed on Aristotle the
Philosopher, Eight Hundred Talents, only for writing a Treatise of Animals. Our
Holy Prophet was eminent above all other Mortals, for his Familiarity with the
Brutal Generations; understanding their Qualities and Language, and often
discoursing with them. When he lived in the Desert, a Libbard continually
waited at the Door of his Cave, and did all the Offices of a kind and faithful
Servant. Such Grace is given but to a few.

But, I forget my own Opportunity, of venting my Affection to my Country and my
Friends. I forget, that I am writing to one, who is newly come from Arabia.
Would to God I could see thee, were it but for an Hour: I have a Thousand
Questions to ask about my Relations; and what Changes have happened, since I
was there.

But, I must sacrifice these Natural Fondnesses, to the Will of Destiny. I am a
double Exile: And, since it is for the Service of the Grand Signior, I am
resigned.

Adieu, Happy Minister; and, if Mahmut may be admitted sometimes to mingle with
the Train of thy better Thoughts, he shall count himself happy, wherever he
is.

Paris, 2d. of the 7th. Moon, of the Year 1646.
LETTER VI. To Hussein Bassa.
THE taking of Retimo in Candy, has filled the Nazarenes, with Apprehensions of
greater Calamities.

The First fortunate Strokes in a War, make deep Impressions on the Enemy; the
Vulgar looking on them, as the Index of their future Destiny: But, repeated
Successes, chill their Vitals, bereave 'em of Courage and Hope, leaving 'em
Nothing but Ominous Portents, and Superstitious Presages of their approaching
Ruin. So hard a Thing it is, to judge of Human Events, without being carried
into Extremes. They already give over the whole Island for lost. I wish and
believe it may prove true. Yet, at the same Time, I know the Fortune of War is
uncertain; and, another Campaign, may repair or revenge the Damage, they have
sustained in this and the former.

The Venetians lost Five Thousand Men before the Walls of that Town; among
whom, was General Cornaro, the Viceroy of the Island, slain in the first Onset;
besides what were killed by our Soldiers, when they entered with the retreating
Candiots, and sacrificed all to the Heat of Martial Passion.

But, that which appeared most Ominous to their Cause, though the present
Damage were less, was the falling out of the Sopraveditor and the Proveditor of
the Isle: Who not agreeing about the Extent of their different Commissions,
formed Two Parties; between whom there happened a furious Encounter, in which
Four Hundred were slain on both Sides.

These sinister Events, occasioned the Republic to make fresh Applications to
the Court of France; and, an Ambassador is sent from this Crown to
Constantinople, in Order to mediate a Peace. They call him Monsieur de
Varennes; a Man of a presumptuous Disposition, and who delights to attempt
difficult Things. When there could not be found a Person, willing to undertake
a Negotiation, which carries so little Probability of Succeeding; this
Gentleman, in a Bravado offered himself; telling the Queen, That he made no
Doubt, of so representing Matters to the Grand Signior, as would infallibly
produce a Peace.

It had been easy for Cardinal Mazarini (whose Counsel the Queen follows in
all Things) to have hindered this Man's Voyage. But, those who are acquainted
with the Picque that is between them, conclude, That the Cardinal consented to
his Commission, on purpose to lay a Train for his future Disgrace; as knowing,
the Boldness of his Temper, was far from being seconded with equal Wisdom and
Conduct; and, that though he was prone to undertake Great and Hazardous
Actions, yet he never had the good Fortune to accomplish any Thing of Moment.

They that know this Gentleman's Character, say, That any Example will
encourage him to rush into Labyrinths and Perils. And, where Examples are
wanting, he is Ambitious to be made one himself. He fears not to tread in the
Footsteps of such, as have miscarried in the most Desperate Enterprises; but,
promises himself Success, where a Thousand have failed. In fine, he is esteemed
the rashest Man living.

I send thee this Description of the French Ambassador, that thou may
communicate it to the Sovereign Divan. It will be no small Advantage, to know
the Temper and Qualifications of Foreign Ministers, residing at the August
Port: Especially at this Juncture, whereon the Fate of Christendom depends.
Besides, there cannot be too great Caution used, to obviate the subtle Trains
of Cardinal Mazarini, who, I fear, is contriving no kind Offices to the Ottoman
Empire.

I kiss the Hem of thy Vest, Illustrious Bassa, and bid thee Adieu.

Paris, 2d. of the 7th. Moon, of the Year 1646.
LETTER VII. To the same.
THE Captain Bassa, has the Reputation of a Good Seaman among the French. They
highly applaud his expeditious Relief of Canea, and no less commend the
Secrecy, with which he landed his Army and took the Town of Retimo. The French
are generally great Critics in Military Affairs; and are not so partial to the
Honor of the Christians, as to deny the Praises that are due, to an expert
Leader among the Mussulmans. Yet they are inconstant, and seldom retain the
same Sentiments long. Every Circulation of their Blood, begets new Friendships,
new Opinions, new Censures. In this, they seem to inherit the Vices of the
Ancient Gauls, as well as their Country.

A Roman Emperor, who made War in this Nation, has left excellent Memoirs
behind him; wherein among other Things, he describes the Nature of the Gauls,
their Dispositions, and Genial Inclinations. He that shall read his Writings,
which were penned above Sixteen Hundred Years ago, and shall converse with the
present French, will easily conclude, That the Latter are a Living Transcript
of the Former; and, that their Humors and Actions, are exactly copied from his
Words. Yet, in Nothing does the Character of the Primitive Gauls, suit more
truly to the present Inhabitants, than in their furious Onsets in a Battle, and
their equal Readiness to Flight. Their First Assault seems to speak 'em More
than Men; their Second, Less than Women; and, they seldom venture on a Third.

Will thou know then, how they obtain so many Signal Victories? It is by
Stratagems and Money. Where they cannot circumvent their Enemies, they corrupt
a Party of 'em with Bribes and Pensions. Thus they purchase their Conquests,
with a more powerful Metal than Steel. The Force of Gold, to which all Things
yield, lays Cities and Provinces, at the Feet of this Invincible Monarch.

But, I pray Heaven, so to prosper the Armies of the Empire founded on Virtue,
that this Infidel Prince, and all the Nazarenes, may experience their Gold to
be as Ineffectual as their Swords, against the Valor and Just Revenge of the
True Believers.

Paris, 2d. of the 7th. Moon, of the Year 1646.
LETTER VIII. To the Venerable Mufti, Sovereign Guide of the True Believers.
THou, who art all Goodness, the Arch-Type of Clemency and Virtue, wilt not
number me among the Importunate, for so often troubling thee with Disputes of
our Holy Law. I ask thee no Common Questions; neither am I captious, seeking
Occasions to darken what is Apparent, or invalidate the Testimony of Him who
touched the Hand of God. I revere the Holy Oracles, and the Book not dictated
on Earth. Every Chapter I read in the Alcoran, makes me bless the Angel, who
took so many Flights, to bring down the Sacred Pages from Heaven. And, my
Reverence is increased toward that Volume of Glory, when I consider, it was
not hastily composed; every Versicle, being the Product of Divine
Premeditation. Doubtless, it excells all the Writings in the World. No
Scripture, before or since, has approached to the Mysterious Elegance of those
Celestial Lines. Yet methinks, I find a great Profundity of Wisdom in the
Treatises of the Ancients.

Thou will say, My Station requires me to read Men more than Books, being not
sent hither to Contemplate, but to act for the Interest of my Master, and the
Ottoman Empire. It Is true, my Business is now to unravel the Designs of the
Infidels; but, bear with me, if I tell thee, That in Order to this, I took no
wrong Course, when in my Younger Years, I applied my self to Books, which are
but Men turned Inside out, or Metamorphos'd into Letters; against who, thus
surviving themselves, the Stroke of Death cannot prevail.

Those who have erected Statues of Gold, Silver, Brass or Marble, to the Memory
of departed Heroes, can but transmit the Effigies of their Bodies to Posterity;
which, thou know, is the Ignobler Part of Man: And herein, they come short
of the Egyptians, who have the Art of preserving the Bodies themselves
Incorruptible, for a Thousand Generations. But they who left their Writings to
Posterity, have obliged the World with an Immortal and Lively Image of their
Mind: This is properly the Man, and lives for ever; when the Body is consumed
in the Grave, and the Statue perhaps is eat up by Time, or demolished by Envy.

Pardon this Digression, Oraculous and Unerring Mouth of God, I have a great
Deal to say, and cannot comprehend it in a few Words. It has been enjoined by
our Holy Doctors, That a Mussulman should not read the Books of Profane
Infidels. But tell me, thou who art the Resolver of Doubts, Whether this
Precept is extended to all, without Exception; or, Whether a Dispensation may
not be allowed, to such as read those Books with One Eye, whilst the Other is
fixed on the Law, which balances the Mind with Truth? The Alcoran tells us,
That the Devil has inserted some Falsities in the Best Writings: But, is it not
possible for a Man, to separate the Good from the Bad? I read in the Book of
Glory, many remarkable Things concerning Alexander the Great: But, is it
unlawful also to peruse what has been writ by others, of the Life of that
Famous Warrior, and Holy Prophet? Both Grecian and Roman Historians, have
related his Adventures in Asia, his Battles with Darius the Persian Monarch,
and Porus the Indian. They praise his Continence and modest Regard to
Sysigambis and her Daughters, when they were his Captives; his Inviolable
Friendship to Ephestion, whilst living, and the affectionate Tears he shed for
him, after his Death. Yet, they condemn him of cruel Ingratitude, for
sacrificing Clitus to his Choler, and the Fumes of Wine, who was a Faithful
Friend, a Valiant Soldier, and once had saved his Life in a Battle. They cannot
pass over the Burning of Persepolis, without some Reflections on the unmanly
Softness of this Warrior; who, to please his Concubine, gave Orders, that the
Fairest and most Magnificent City in Asia, should be set on Fire. The Persians
boast, That that City was built all of Cedar; That Cyrus had wholly displanted
not only Mount Libanus, but the choicest Nurseries of that fragrant Wood,
through all Asia, to build this glorious City, in Emulation of Solomon, King of
the Jews, who was by other Princes thought to value himself too high, for
building the Temple at Jerusalem of the same Materials. They add, That
Alexander found in this City, Ninety Millions of Caracl^ in Gold; That after
the Debauch was over, and the Flames had consumed to Ashes this Phoenix of
Asia, the Conqueror wept, and commanded the Money he had found there, should be
expended in raising Another in its Room, more glorious than the Former; but,
That Thais, who had persuaded him to ruin it, was the only Obstacle to its
Re-edification. For, such was her Empire over this Monarch, That he could deny
her Nothing.

What I have said of Persepolis, is recorded by Persian Historians; Other
Writers make some Mention of it, but not so particularly. There are some also,
who mention his demolishing of Tyrus; a City so Ancient, That it is said to be
first built by one of the Grandchildren of Noah; of whom, thou know, the
Alcoran speaks often. They tax him also with Cruelty, in causing Two Thousand
of the Chief Tyrians, to be crucified, as a Sacrifice to Hercules. Thou art
best able to Judge, Whether this be agreeable to Truth; for, what Mussulman
will believe, That the Victorious Prophet, was guilty of so Barbarous an
Idolatry.

The Method he took to subdue this Impregnable City, is an Argument of his
Invincible Courage; and, that there is Nothing Impracticable, to a Mind armed
with Resolution and Perserverance.

Tyrus was situated above Half a Mile in the Sea, when the Macedonian demanded
a Surrender. The Citizens trusting to the Strength and Height of the Rock
whereon they lived (for, 'twas a perfect Island) and to their Distance from the
Shore of the Continent; bid Defiance to him, whom God had ordained to subdue
all Nations, between the Extremities of India and the Pillars of Hercules. The
Conqueror, enflamed at their Refusal of offered Peace, prepares for an
Assault. He attempted, without the Miracle of Moses, to make a Path for his
Army through the Sea. He followed the Steps of the Babylonian Monarch, who, not
Three Ages before, had joined this Proud Nest of Merchants to the Firm Land.
Twice his Industrious Soldiers raised a Caussey, above the Waves, to the very
Walls of Tyrus; and as often was their Labor defeated, by the Watchful
Tyrians. When, the Third Time he proved successful; and, in Spite of all their
Resistance by Fire and Sword, after a Siege of Six Moons, he scaled the Walls
of that Queen of Maritime Cities; and convinced the World, That no Humane Force
could put a Stop to his Conquests, whom Destiny had appointed, to chastise the
Nations of the Earth.

That Chapter in the Alcoran, which speaks of this Renowned Worthy, tells us,
That he marched so far Eastward, till he came to a Country where the Sun rises.
This Passage the Christians ridicule, saying, That the Sun rises and sets in
all Countries; and, that there is no Stated Point of East and West, in the
Fabric of the World; since the same Place which is East of one Country, is
West of another. Thus, the Despisers of our Holy Law, cavil at the Alcoran, and
say, It Is composed of Old Wives Tales; a Rude Indigested Collection of Eastern
Romances, and Superstitious Fables, calculated for the Meridian of Ignorance;
first promulg'd in the Savage and Unpolished Deserts of Arabia, and afterward
propagated by the Sword through those Countries, whose Vices had banished their
Learning, and rendered them flexible to a Religion, whose highest Pretensions
consisted, in Gratifying the Senses.

These Critics, consider not at the same Time, That they argue against the Old
and New Testament, (which is esteemed the Alcoran of the Christians) wherein
there is often Mention made, of the Rising and Going down of the Sun; of East
and West, as proper Points or Marks, from which to take the Situation of
Countries. Assuredly, in this they are captious: For, though there be no stated
Point of East or West in the Globe; yet India being the nearest Region of this
Continent, to that Part of the Horizon where the Sun daily first appears, it
has not without Reason, gained the Additional Epithet of East. And 'twas here
the Macedonian Hero sweat, because he could conquer no farther, unless he would
have begun a War with the Fish of the Sea.

There are many other Passages related of Alexander's Temperance, Moderation,
Justice, Fortitude and such like Virtues; and, something of his Vices. But, I
will not tire thee with all that is said of this Invincible Monarch, nor trace
him in all his Marches through Asia. I will not trouble thee with what they say
of his Journey into Egypt, and aspiring to be called, the Son of Jupiter
Ammon; his being poisoned at Babylon, in the Height of all his Triumphs; and
the Cantonizing his Empire, among his Chief Captains. Whatsoever in these
Histories is agreeable to the Holy Alcoran, I acquiesce to; what is repugnant
to that Summary of Truth, I reject as a Fable.

Tell me, thou Sovereign Resolver of Doubts, Whether on these Terms, I may not
read the Writings of Infidels? Books are a Relief to the Mind oppressed with
Melancholy, and especially Histories, which also bring Profit, by rightly
informing us of the Transactions of Past Ages: So that Things, which were done
Thousands of Years ago, are made present to us. Where then is the Crime, in
reading these Memoirs of the Ancients? Is it not consistent with the Faith of a
Mussulman to read these Histories, because they were penned by Heathens? Must
we reject all that the Pagans did or said? Why then are the Works of Plutarch,
had in such Veneration by the Princes of Our Law? I tell thee, I not only read
Plutarch, Livy, Tacitus, Xenophon, Polybius, with many other Historians that
were Pagans, but I improve by their Writings. Such rare Examples of Virtue,
such Illustrious Patterns of Justice, such Solid Precepts of Morality, as these
Authors abound with; cannot, in my Opinion, hurt any Man, who desires to square
his Life by the best Rules.

I read also the Poets, whose Fables and Parables, seem to me, but to veil many
excellent and profitable Maxims of Human Life.

The Story of the Birth of Typhon, his Warring with Jupiter, and his final
Overthrow; denotes the monstrous Rise of Factions in a State, and their Ruin.

The Cyclops being employed by Jupiter in making Thunderbolts, and killing
Aesculapius, for which they themselves were afterward slain by Apollo;
intimates the Use, which Sovereign Princes make of Cruel, Covetous and Unjust
Officers: Who when they have fulfilled the Pleasure of their Masters, are
abandoned by them, to the Revenge of the Oppressed Subjects. This is commonly
experienced in all Monarchies, and especially in the Mighty Empire of the
Osmans; where the Bassa's, though the Grand Signior, for the Ends of State,
connives a while at their unjust Oppression of the Mussulmans under their
Government, yet in due Time, to show his Abhorrence of their Villainies,
consigns 'em over to the Executioner. Thou know, to whom the Bow-string was
sent last; I wish his Successor may not equally merit it.

Actaeon's being devoured by his Dogs, only for seeing Diana in a Bath; might
have served as a Warning to Vseph, the Black Eunuch, who could not restrain his
Tongue, from babbling out the private Amors of Sultan Ibrahim. It was Danger
enough to know the Secret; but, to divulge it, was a sure way to incurr the
Revenge of the Prince.

Not much unlike was his Error, who though he did not report to others, yet had
the Presumption to check his Sovereign to his Face, and reproach Him with
Luxury. Had he been acquainted with the Fable of Endymion and the Moon, it
would perhaps have taught him, That it is not the Part of a Favorite, to take
Notice of his Master's stolen Pleasures, but rather to invite him sometimes
from the Toils of State, and unbend his Mind with Recreations.

There are many other profitable Remarks, hidden under the Fictions of the
Poets: which, though they may seem Mysterious at first View, yet being examined
with a little Attention, prove as easy to be understood, as the Hieroglyphics
were of old to the Egyptians, who knew no other Letters.

God, the First Intellect, who imprinted his Mind on Tablets of Marble, in
Letters of Arabic, and Writ the Decalogue with a Beam of his Glory; having
also inspired all Nations with the Knowledge of Letters, grant, That whilst I
read the Records of the Gentiles, I may not forget the Precepts of the Alcoran.

Paris, 23d. of the 7th. Moon, of the Year 1646.
LETTER IX. To Murat Bassa.
A Courier came to this City last Night, bringing News of the Taking of
Courtray by the French Army. This is a considerable Town in Flanders, and
commands a great part of the Country. The Duke of Orleans, invested it on the
Ninth of the last Moon; and on the Eighteenth, lay down before it with the
whole Army. The Spanish Generals, hastened to its Relief, and brought Thirty
Thousand Men of Six Nations, to combat with the French. But they quarreled
about Precedence of Post. High Words passed between the Duke of Lorrain and
General Lamboy. Thus, while they spent their Time in Needless Contests, the
French took the Town: And, having left a strong Garrison there, Part of the
Army, commanded by the Marshall de Grammont, is marched to join the
Hollanders, with Design to attack Antwerp; and the Rest follow the Duke of
Orleans, who, they say, intends to besiege Mardyke. This is a Sea-Town, that
has Nothing in it considerable enough to tempt a Conqueror, save the Haven,
which is of great Importance in those Seas.

We have had no Rains here these Three Moons, which makes the People fear a
Famine. Provision of all Sorts, is very Dear; and those who have great
Quantities of Corn, will not bring it to the Markets. The Fruits are all
blasted, and a Distemper rages in the City, which fills all Places with Death
and Mourning. The Cattle drop down dead in the Fields, and the Rivers are
almost dried up: Men languish and wither, as if parched up by some inward Fire.
Fearful Apparitions are seen in the Air; each Night brings forth New Prodigies.
The People lament the present, and presage greater Calamities to come. While
Mahmut perseveres unmoved; and neither molests himself nor others, about the
Inevitable Decrees of Destiny. I keep in the Path of my Duty, without turning
to the Right Hand or to the Left. I serve the Grand Signior faithfully: I pray
for his Health, and for the Welfare of the Empire. I neither give Alms to the
Infidels, nor do them any Injuries. In fine, if I cannot reap any Profit from
other Men's Virtues, I take Care their Vices shall do me no Harm.

It Is said, there will be a Procession here shortly, whereat the King, the
Queen-Regent, and the whole Court will assist barefoot, for an Example to
others. The Body of a certain Female Saint, whom they esteem the Patroness of
this City, will be taken out of the Church where it lies, and will be carried
with other Relics of Saints, through the Streets of Paris, to atone the Wrath
of Heaven, which seems to be kindled against them.

In the mean Time, I (...) Heaven to send down its Blessings on the ^oman
^pire; and preserve the True Faithful, from the Three Scourges of God.

Paris, 23d. of the 7th. Moon, of the Year 1646.
LETTER X. To the Aga of the Janissaries.
I Perceive thou have followed the Advice I formerly gave thee, to read
Histories; wherein thy Letter speaks thee very Conversant. Thou will have no
Reason to repent of a Labor, that affords so agreeable a Diversion, especially
to a Soldier and a Statesman. They open the Graves, and call forth the Dead,
without disturbing their Repose; and present to us those Heroes living, talking
and acting Great Things, whose Bodies have lain buried in Silence and Obscurity
many Ages. They introduce us into the Closets of Princes, revealing their most
Secret Counsels. They make us familiar with the Intrigues of Politicians, and
the Stratagems. of Warriors. In fine, there is Nothing Public or Private, in
the Courts or Camps of the Greatest Monarchs, to which an Historian is a
Stranger.

I applaud the Choice thou have made of Grecian Histories, and others of the
East; yet, I counsel thee, not to neglect those of the West. The Ancient Roman
Writers, are full of rare Examples; and Modern France, which emulates all Great
and Glorious Undertakings, takes equal Care to commit to Posterity, the Lives
of Illustrious Persons. I say not this, in Contempt of other Countries in
Europe. The Christians of these Parts in General, are accurate Historians. They
are universally Learned; in Regard, there is no Kingdom in Europe, where they
have not Schools and Academies, where all Languages and Sciences are taught.
The Ploughmen in the Field, speak Latin and Greek; which, thou know, are now
grown obsolete, and no where to be learned but in Books. The Mechanics are
Philosophers; and, every Man sets up for an Historian, or an Antiquary. It was
not so in former Times, when the Ecclesiastics had engrossed all Manner of
Learning to themselves, except some few of the Nobility and Gentry, who had the
Advantage of Patrimonial Libraries, and Leisure to apply themselves to Study.
For, then it was difficult to purchase Books, there being but few; and, for
those they were obliged, to the Labor of the Scribe. Hence it came to pass,
That only such as had Plenty of Money, and a strong Inclination to Knowledge,
monopoliz'd the choicest Manuscripts into their Hands, and bequeathed them as a
Legacy to their Offspring. But, since the Invention of Printing, Books are
infinitely multiplied, grown Cheap and Common. And, those Histories and
Sciences, which before were shut up in the Latin, Greek, or some of the
Oriental Languages, are now translated into the Vulgar Speech of every Nation;
whereby the lowest Sort of People who can but read, have the Privilege to
become as Knowing as their Superiors, and the Slave may vye for Learning with
his Sovereign. This makes the Nazarenes, upbraid the True Faithful with
Ignorance and Barbarism, because Printing is not suffered throughout the
Mussulman Empire. They consider not, the bad Consequences of this Art, as well
as the good: And, that the Liberty of the Press, has filled the World with
Errors and Lies. Besides, they are Strangers to the Education of the
Mussulmans, who are generally taught the Arabic and Persian Tongues from their
Childhood: In which Two Languages, how many famous Histories have been writ?
There is no Point of useful Wisdom, which is not comprised in the Writings of
the Eastern Sages. And, as for unprofitable Treatises and Pamphlets, with which
the Europeans abound, they are superfluous and burdensome, bringing a double
Loss, both to Writer and Reader; while they rob them of their Time and Money,
and commit a Rape on their Understandings. Add to this, the Fatal Effects which
this depraved Indulgence of Printing, has produced in Christendom. What
Sacrileges, Massacres, Rebellions and Impieties, have overflowed most Parts of
the West in this licentious Age? What Hatred among Christians, What Seditions
among Subjects, Diversities in Religion, Contempts of all Law both Divine,
Natural, and those of Nations? The Vices, at which former Times would have
blushed; nay, at the very naming of which, our Fathers would have started, as
at a Prodigy, are in these Day committed openly, without Shame, without
Contradiction; whilst there are Authors, who dare publicly assert the Cause of
Impiety, and patronize all Manner of Prophanations.

But thou, who have the Honor to guard the Incorruptible Seat of Justice and
Virtue, the Bright Throne of the Osman Emperors, who are the Shadows of God on
Earth; have made such a Choice of Books, as commends thy Wisdom, and the
Sincerity of thy Morals. Thou will not suffer thy Imagination to be tainted,
with those enchanting Idea's of Evil, which are drawn by the Pens of some
Elegant Writers. All that thou seek in Books, is to inform thy
Understanding, rectify thy Judgment, and inflame thy Affections with the Love
of Virtue. To this End, serve the Divine Precepts of our Holy Doctors, and
other Learned Sages; the Writings of Philosophers, and the Examples of Renowned
Heroes. From these thou gatherest Strength, to practice the Four Maternal
Virtues, and all the Good Qualities, that spring from those Roots.

Go on, and increase in the Graces and Accomplishments, which shall render thee
Worthy to be made the Subject of a Particular History; while the Old shall
recommend, and the Young shall covet, nothing more passionately, than to read
the Life of Cassim Hali, Janizar-Aga.

Mahmut salutes thee with a Kiss of Affection. Reverence thy self, and all Men
will Honor thee: So taught Pythagoras.

Paris, 17th. of the 8th. Moon, of the Year 1646.
LETTER XI. To the same.
I Had forgot to perform in my other Letter, what thou commandedst me. Yet,
knowing the Esteem thou have for Women of Virtue and rare Endowments, and with
what Pleasure thou read their Stories; I should never send any Dispatch to
thee, wherein there is not a Relation of some Heroine. I will be more diligent
hereafter, to observe the Disposition of my Superiors; and will endeavor, to
procure a Collection of the Lives and Characters of all the Famous Women, that
have been Recorded in History. In the mean while, hear what the French say, of
Christina Queen of Suedeland, of whom thou requirest a Description.

She is the only Daughter of Gustavus Adolphus, the most Victorious Prince,
that ever governed that Nation; and, one of the most Successful Warriors in
the World. As his whole Life was led in the Field, so there he received an
Honorable Death, being slain in the Battle of Lutzen: Some say, by the
Treachery of Duke Albert; who had in Appearance, deserted the Emperor, and
offered himself a Voluntier to Gustavus Adolphus. I formerly mentioned this
Duke, and that he was killed by a Suedish Lady. If the Suspicion of the Suedes
be well grounded, and that Duke Albert was really Guilty of the Murder of
Gustavus, it may be, This was the Motive which brought those Amazons into the
Field, to revenge the Death of their Prince. But, it is impossible to be
assured of the Truth, among so many different Opinions.

When the French speak of Gustavus Adolphus, they cannot restrain their Words
on this Side a Panegyric. They say, he was a Prince above all Praise. It Is
certain, his very Enemies admired his unimitable Courage, and matchless
Fortune. I have sent thee the true Effigies of his Face, wherein thou will see,
a most agreeable Mixture of Majesty and Benignity, creating Respect and Love at
the same Time in the Beholders. He was so familiar with every one, as if he had
forgot himself, as well as he was a Stranger to Pride. He was a great Student
in his Youth, and made himself Master of Latin, French, and Italian; being also
perfectly skilled, in Ancient and Modern Histories. He had a wonderful Faculty,
in discovering Impostures; a dextrous Wit in Time of Danger and Difficulty,
being Ready at Counsel, and swift in Execution; and, as cunning at a Stratagem,
as he was bold at an Onset. He was Liberal to his Officers, and to all Men of
Merit; but, a severe Punisher of Disorders in his Army. And, that which Crowned
all the rest of his Virtues, his Piety to God was singular and worthy of
Remark. The French relate a Memorable Saying of this King, when he was once in
his Camp before Werben. He had been solitary in the Cabinet of his Pavilion
some Hours together, and none of his Attendants durst interrupt Him; Till at
Length, a Favorite of his having some important Matter to tell him, came
softly to the Door, and looking in, beheld the King very devoutly on his Knees
at Prayers. Fearing to molest him in that Sacred Exercise, he was about to
withdraw his Head, when the King spied him, and bid Him come in, saying unto
him, Thou wonderest to see me in this Posture, since I have so many Thousands
of Subjects to pray for me. But, I tell thee, That no Man has more Need to pray
for Himself, than He, who being to render an Account of his Actions to None but
God, is for that Reason, more closely assaulted by the Devil, than all other
Men beside.

Gustavus was born in the Year 1594. At which Time, they say, a Comet was seen
in the Form of a Sword, with its Point directed toward Germany; which the
Astrologers of those Times, interpreted as a Presage of that King's Warlike
Genius, and of his future Conquests in the Empire. He came to the Government,
before he had seen full Seventeen Winters, and was cut off in the Eighth and
Thirtieth Year of his Age.

It is said, That a few Days before his Death, when his Soldiers received Him
with Infinite Acclamations, and all the Marks of an unusual and intemperate
Joy, he seemed to be troubled at it, saying, That he took that Excessive
Demonstration of his Soldiers Love, for an Omen, of some approaching Disaster;
And, that he was assured, God would, by taking him away, teach them, That there
is no Confidence to be reposed in any Mortal.

After the Death of Gustavus, the States of the Kingdom assembling, proclaimed
Christina Queen; And, during her Minority, committed her to the Tutelage of
Five Principal Officers of the Kingdom, who also took on them, the whole Care
of the Commonwealth,

She is perfect in Seven Languages. Well versed in Ancient and Modern
Philosophy; And, a complete Historian. In fine, she has acquired the Title, of
the Most Learned Princess of her Time.

She is of a Graceful and Majestic Aspect: Has a piercing Eye: Wears Part of
her Hair loose about her Temples, and flowing down in Curls to her Shoulders;
the Rest braided up behind, in Form of a Wreath. Thus is she represented by her
Picture, which I have seen in a Gallery of Cardinal Mazarim's Palace, who
professes a great Veneration for this Queen. Could I have purchased her
Portraicture, as I did her Father's, I would have sent it thee: But, all the
Pencils in Paris are hardly sufficient, to supply the Closets and Galleries of
the Nobles, with this Admired Figure. She is become the Idol of the French.

Many great Matches have been offered her; but, she refuses all, either for
Reasons of State, or Dislike of the Persons, or an Aversion she has for a
Married Life; or through Opposition of her Nobles, who seem to covet to be
governed by a Maiden Queen. Soon after her Father's Death, the King of Denmark
attempted to make her his Wife; but his Redress was abruptly rejected.

No better Encouragement did the King of Poland lately meet with, who Twice
solicited the same Thing for Himself, and was as often repulsed. But this,
it is thought, proceeded from some Politic Reasons; he being descended of
Sigismund, a former Abdicated King of Sueden; all whose Posterity, are for ever
excluded from enjoying the Suedish Crown, by a Law.

The English also gloried in a Virgin Queen, the last Age: Her Name was
Elizabeth; whom thou can not but have heard of. She was the Daughter of
Henry VIII. King of that Nation. She was a Princess of an extraordinary Genius,
remarkable for her Wit and Learning. 'Twas one of her Subjects, who, the first
of all Mortals, sailed round the Globe: And, by his fortunate Service, she
vanquished the reputed Invincible Armada of Spain. She governed her Kingdom
with such exquisite Conduct, as made the Greatest Potentates revere her Wisdom.
It Is to her Bounty, the United Provinces owe the Rise of their present Grandeur
and Riches; when they addressed this Potent Queen in Form of Humble Suppliants,
entitling themselves, The poor distressed States. But now, they are High and
Mighty; pushing for an Equality with Sovereign Princes,

I cannot comprize in a Letter, all that may be said of this Great Queen.
Besides, Historians vary in her Character. Those that speak most Impartially,
say, That she had Extraordinary Virtues, yet was not free from Great Vices. We
must not expect in any Mortal, a Temper exempt from the Common Malediction;
much less in that Sex, whose Natural Weakness, claims our Indulgence and
Excuse. It is admirable to see, or hear of a Female, whose Active Soul can
disingage it self from the Common Frailties of Women, and perform Things scarce
below the Power of Masculine Virtue.

If thou think my Letter too tedious, accuse thy self, for commanding me to
write of Persons, whose Uncommon Gifts and Transcendent Virtues, the most
Accurate Historians can but render in Epitome; and, the most durable Records of
Fame will injure, in not being capable to transmit them to Eternity.

We ought not to contemn the Excellencies of the Nazarenes; who, though they
are Unhappy in not knowing the Alcoran, yet they have a Law engraven on their
Hearts; which if they observe, they shall be in the Number of the Blessed.

I am no Stranger to thy Moderation and Justice; being fully satisfied, that
thou honor Virtue, even in the most prejudiced Enemy of our Holy
Profession. Let the Furioso's among the Mussulmans or Christians say their
Pleasure; thou and I, shall be conformable to our Holy Lawgiver, in believing,
That the Innocent and Good of all Religions, shall have no Reason to tremble,
at the Second Sound of the Trumpet.

Paris, 17th. of the 18th. Moon, of the Year 1646.
LETTER XII. To the Selictar Aga, or Sword Bearer to the Grand Signior.
THE Duke of Orleans, is newly returned from the Campaign in Flanders. He seems
to be either tired with the Fatigues of War, or at least, to be satisfied with
his Exploits this Summer.

After the Conquest of Courtray, of which thou have heard in the Divan; this
Prince marched directly to Bergues, which he took after a Siege of Six Days.
Then being joined by the Duke of Enguien's Forces, he lay down before Mardyke.
This Town had been in the Spaniards Possession, ever since last Winter. Now it
held out to a Miracle: but, after a Stout Resistance, was at last forced to
surrender. There were slain before it, many of the Chief Nobility of France.
The French entered it, on the Four and Twentieth of the last Moon.

The Churches here are hung with Mourning, and the Escutcheons of the Heroes,
who lost their Lives in the Bed of Honor. The Bullets, which know no
Difference between the Noble and Vulgar, seem in this Battle, to have been
directed by Art or Envy: As if the Flower of the Army, had been culled out for
Marks.

In a Letter to Murat Bassa, I gave an Account of a grievous Drought and
Mortality in these Parts. Now Heaven seems to be pacified; and, the Angel of
Death, has put up his Sword. Yet, the Scarcity of Corn and other Necessaries,
continues still; only, there is Plenty of Wine: Which the Poor, who have most
Need of it, abstain from, lest it should enrage their Appetites, already
sharpened with Hunger, whilst they have Little or Nothing to eat.

Thou will wonder at the Diet of these Miserable Wretches, whom Oppression and
Poverty has forced to feed on Frogs and other Vermin. Yet, they extol it for a
dainty Dish. Both Poor and Rich reckon it a Feast, when they can make an
Addition of a few Mushromes, which they commonly gather themselves. This is a
Vegetable, of which the Italian Proverb says, Mushromes well pickled with
Spices, may do no Harm, but can do no Good.

God, who has commanded us to separate the Clean from the Impure, and has
taught us what we may eat without Pollution, grant, That we may not either
through Necessity, or to indulge our Appetites, taste of any Thing, which has
in it the least of the Seven Maledictions.

Paris, 14th. of the 9th. Moon, of the Year 1646.
LETTER XIII. To Abubechir Hali, Merchant in Aleppo.
THOU tellest me a Tragical Story of One of thy Wives, That she is become a
Fugitive, and gone away with thy Slave Lorenzo; whom I remember to have seen at
thy House at Constantinople. Either thou were too Unkind to them both, or
gave 'em both too much Liberty: Whichsoever of these Ways thou have exceeded,
thou art in the Fault. Too great an Indulgence, either to a Wife or a Servant,
makes them presumptuous: And, too great Severity, hardens them to Despair.
However, since it is so, I advise thee to comfort thy self with this Thought,
That thou art rid of Two Evils. Had they proved Faithful, they would not have
merited that Title; but now, they are neither worthy of thy Grief, nor of thy
Revenge.

But, if thou art resolved to pursue them, ask not my Counsel, or Assistance in
this Place; where I should have as much Reason to apprehend Danger, as they.
It Is true, I know thy Slave; but, were I to meet him in the Streets of this
City, I should be very unwilling, by discovering him, to be made known my self.
Besides, thy Passion has made thee forget, That the Nazarenes would commend his
Wit, and rejoice in his Fortune; who being a Slave to one, whom they esteem an
Infidel, has now by his Wise Conduct, purchased both his Liberty and a
Beautiful Mate, with no small Treasure.

I rather advise thee, to apply thy self to Jasmir Sgire Rugial, the Little
Astrologer in Aleppo, who perhaps may tell thee some News of 'em. There is not
a Star in the Eighth Sphere, can stir without his being privy to it. And, he
pretends to behold in their Motions, whatever is done on Earth.

But, to be serious, thy Slave was an ungrateful Fellow, thus to abuse all thy
Favors. Thou had made him in a Manner, Master of all thy Riches, only
reserving thy Wives to thy self. And, if the Desire of Liberty tempted him to
escape, he ought in Justice to have sacrificed his Lust, to the Regards he owed
thee. But, every Slave is not a Joseph. Lorenzo's Villainy, puts me in Mind of
the Continence of an Italian Marquis.

This Young Lord, fell in Love with a Duchess of singular Beauty, but knew not
how to make her sensible of it. At length, Fortune favored him with an
Opportunity, beyond his Expectation. One Evening, as he returned from Hawking,
he passed through the Fields of that Duchess, bordering on the Palace. The
Duke her Husband and she, were walking together, as the Young Lord came by. The
Duke seeing his Train, and what Game they had been at, asked him some Questions
concerning their Sport; and being of an Hospitable Disposition, invited him
into his Palace to take a Collation. Nothing could be more agreeable to the
Young Lover. He accepted the Offer; and here commenced an Acquaintance, which
made Way in Time for an Assignation between the Duchess and Him. He was let
into the Gardens one Night, and so conducted privately to her Chamber, where
she lay ready in Bed to receive Him. After some Compliments, the Duchess said,
My Lord, You are obliged to my Husband for this Favor; who, as soon as you
were gone from our House, the first Time we saw you, gave you such
Commendations, as made me conceive an immediate Passion for you. Is it true,
Madam? (replied the Young Lover already half undressed) Then far be it from me,
to be so ungrateful to my Friend. With that he put on his Garments again, and
took his Leave.

But, it cannot be expected, that so much Virtue should be found in a Slave. I
would not have thee vex thy self, for what cannot be recovered. Adieu.

Paris, 14th. of the 9th. Moon, of the Year 1646.
LETTER XIV. To Solomon, his Cousin.
I Cannot approve thy Singularity, in prescribing to thy self a Rule of Life,
different from that wherein thou were Educated, and from the Laudable Manners
of all True Believers. Thou have not done well, in deserting the Public
Congregations of the Faithful, to follow the Superstitions of New Upstart
Sects: Who, whilst they profess greater Purity than others, do secretly
undermine the Credit of our Holy Lawgiver, reproach all the Mussulmans
throughout the World, and introduce Libertinism, and a Contempt of the Majesty,
which cannot behold Uncleanness.

Are they Wiser than their Fathers, who for so many Ages have obeyed the Sacred
Traditions? Or, will they pretend to correct the Messenger of God? He commanded
us, to observe the Purifications taught by the Angel: Whence do these
Innovators derive their newfounded Authority, of Dispensing with the Positive
Injunctions of Heaven? Will they enter into the Blasphemy of (...) Infidels,
and say, the Prophet was a Seducer, and that the Alcoran is but a Collection of
Fables? If they believe the Pages replenished with Truth and Reason, why do
they seek to retrench the Divine Commandments, and traverse the Law transported
from Heaven? Is it an Argument of their Piety, that they carve out to
themselves such a Religion, as suits with their Licentious Spirits? And, that
they pick and choose such Precepts, as indulge them most in a Careless Life? Is
this to be Mussulmans, that is, Resigned, when they will not obey the Sovereign
Lawgiver of Heaven and Earth, but upon their own Conditions? Cousin, I counsel
thee, to beware of these Schismatics; who, by breaking the Union of the True
Believers, secretly oppose the Eternal Unity it self, on which our Mighty
Empire is founded, and rests.

I am obliged to the Post, who waits at my Door, till I have finished my
Dispatches. Therefore, I cannot now answer thy Letter at Large: Another Time
expect a more ample Expostulation. Mean while I advise thee, to return to the
Practice from which thou art fallen: Go to the Assemblies of those, who pour
out Devout Oraisons: Keep a Clean Skin, and a Pure Heart: And, make not thy
self a Companion of Swine.

Paris, 24th. of the 10th. Moon, of the Year 1646.
LETTER XV. To Hasnadar-Bassy, Chief Treasurer to the Grand Signior.
THIS Day Paris makes a Figure like Ancient Rome, when that Mistress of the
World honored her Generals with Public Triumphs, at their Return from the
Conquered Nations. The Streets are hung with Tapestry, and strewn with
Laurels: The Shops are shut up. The Young Men and Virgins, are clothed in
their best Array. They walk up and down in Consorts, singing the Duke of
Enguien's Praise: Whilst the Old and Decrepid, sit at their Doors, to see the
Hero make his Entry, and rehearse the Memoirs of their former Years. With Tears
of Joy, they heap Blessings on the Victorious Youth, as he rides along: And,
throwing their Age and Crutches by for a while, they consecrate the Rest of the
Day to the Public Jubilee.

Would thou know the Occasion of all this Joy? It Is to welcome this Prince
Home from the Successful Toils of War. For, let his Courage and Conduct be what
it will, if he had made a fruitless Campaign, his Entertainment had been
different. But, Fortune has been propitious to him; and, the happy Event of his
Arms, crowns him with Glory.

After the Departure of the Duke of Orleans from the Camp, the Command of the
whole Army devolved on this General. Whose fiery Genius would not let him Rest,
till he had done something worthy of the Character he aimed at.

His first Attempt was, on a Place of no great Strength, called Furnes, which
he took with Ease. Then he marched to Dunkirk, one of the Strongest Towns in
Europe. There was in it at that Time, a Garrison of Five and Twenty Hundred
Foot, and Three Hundred Horse, commanded by a Nobleman of great Valor. I think
they call him the Marquis de Leide. This Governor did so many brave Things, in
Defense of this Place, as even surpassed his own Fame, and the Expectations of
others; though, both were very Great. Yet at Length, he was forced to yield to
the Courage and Fortune of the Young Duke; and that, at a Time, when the other
Spanish Generals were coming to his Relief. The Town was surrendered, on the
7th. of this Moon. And, the Duke having left the Necessary Commands to the
Mareschals his Lieutenants, is come Home to receive the Acclamations of the
People, the Honor of a Public Triumph, and the particular Caresses of the
King, and the whole Court. Amidst all this Applause and Glory, he must be
content to stand the Shock of Envy, which always endeavors to lessen the
Reputation of the Brave and Heroic.

As for Mahmut, he neither Envies nor admires the fading Honors of Mortality:
Knowing, that when a Man is on the Highest Pinnacle of Humane Glory, he stands
uneasy; nor can he descend from thence, but by a Precipice.

Paris, 24th. of the 10th. Moon, of the Year 1646.
LETTER XVI. To Ibrahim Hali Cheik, A Man of the Law.
IF it be a Sign of a Flourishing State, when Vices are suppressed; one would
presage, That Paris is in a thriving Condition. The Governor of this City, has
newly published an Edict, forbidding all Stews and Brothel-Houses under severe
Penalties; banishing all Harlots, and such as by the Toleration of the
Government, have hitherto made a Profession of Whoredom, getting a Livelihood
by Debauching the Youth of the City. This appears a great Novelty to the
French; who, in this Matter, have been permitted all along, to live in an
unbridled Licentiousness. The lewder Sort, exclaim with open Mouth against this
unseasonable Rigor (as they call it;) and those who are ashamed to appear
public Advocates for Harlots, yet privately murmur against their Superiors,
for retrenching a Liberty, without which, they say, their Lives would be
uncomfortable.

They give a very favorable Character of a Whore; calling her, A certain kind
Creature, born to mitigate the Labors, and soften the Cares of Human Life.
They plead, That such Women are Necessary Members of a Commonwealth; whilst,
with their Caresses, they restrain libidinous Youth from falling into greater
Enormities: That the State receives no small Profit from the Tribute, which is
levied on these Houses of Pleasure; and, that therefore they have been, and are
permitted in all Countries: That the Holy Father himself, tolerates an Infinite
Number of them in Rome; which nevertheless has acquired the Title, of the Holy
City: That all the Princes in Italy, have followed his Example; there being no
other way to prevent Adulteries, Incests, and the Vice which ought not to be
named: That the State regarded not the Morality or Immorality of Men's Actions,
any farther than they tended to the Public Welfare: And, in fine, that so vast
a Number of Priests, and Religious, served for no other End, but to atone by
their Sacrifices, Prayers, Alms and Fastings, for the Sins of the People.

These are the Discourses of such as patronize the Corruption of Government;
and are unwilling to be weaned from a Wickedness, established by Immemorable
Custom in the City. But, those who cherish an Esteem for Virtue, and an
incorrupt Life, applaud the Wisdom and Resolution of the Magistrate, saying,
That he deserves a Statue to be erected to his Memory, who first had the
Courage to check this Popular Evil, and introduce an Integrity of Manners.

I, who was bred in the Profession of Purity, and the Law which admits no
Pollution, cannot but acquiesce to the Sentiments of the Latter; our Holy
Lawgiver, having expressly forbidden, the Practice of Uncleanness and
Fornication with Strangers, and Women that prostitute themselves to all Lovers.
It being sufficient, that to gratify Human Passion, and to sweeten the Toils of
Life, he has indulged us the Use of Four Wives, and as many Other Females, as
we can purchase either by the Sword or Money.

Adieu, Sage Cheik; and, if I have interrupted thy more Important Studies with
so Trivial a Subject, believe, that it is for want of a proper Occasion to
signify to thee, how much thou art in my Thoughts; and, that I would not have
our Friendship die, through too long Silence.

Paris 24th. of the 10th. Moon, of the Year 1647.
LETTER XVII. To Mustapha, Bassa of Silistria.
THE Fortune of War, has ravished Asac from the Grand Signior, but has not
robbed thee of the Glory thou acquiredst Three Years ago in the Conquest of
that City; nor sullied thy present Arms, with any Marks of Disgrace, that were
of late so vigorously employed to relieve it. Had the Moscovites performed the
same Part, when thou did encircle that Nest of Pirates, with the Ottoman
Forces, as they have now done; the Cossacks would not then so tamely have
abandoned their Native Seat, and left the Characters of their Despair,
imprinted in the Ruins of their Habitations. The Protection of that Potent
Crown, has given them new Vigor; and, it is to the Valor of those Northern
Salvages, they owe the Liberty they now enjoy, to sit by their own Fires.

The Moscovites are a fierce and warlike Nation, inured to Hardships from the
Womb. The Midwives plunge the newborn Infants in Cold Water; and, if they
outlive not that Trial, the Mother thinks her Child not worth a Tear. The
Women have no partial Tendernesses for their Babes, but cherish all for the
Service of their Country. They teach 'em when Young, to roll in Snow, and Bathe
themselves in Ice dissolved to Water. They make 'em familiar with the
Extremities of Heat and Cold, Hunger, Thirst and Labor, that when they come of
Age, and can bear Arms, they may go boldly to the Wars, and bravely throw their
Lives away to serve the Public Good. In this, they seem to revive the Wisdom
of the Ancient Spartans, who gloried in Nothing so much, as in educating their
Youth hardily, and free from the Effeminate Softnesses of other Nations. They
esteemed Infancy and Youth, the Spring time of good Manners, when Virtue is in
the Blossom: If that be nip'd or blasted, the Fruit must prove abortive and
unprofitable. Therefore they took Care, to season their Early Years, with
wholesome Instructions, and Masculine Exercises.

Who, among the warlike Osmans, does not laugh at the unmanly Education of the
Persian Sophi's; who being for so many Years confined to the Company and
Discipline of Females, seem fitter to be made Overseers of a Nursery, than to
ascend a Throne?

But, thou will say, I take large Leaps, from the North of Europe, to one of
the most Southern Tracts in Asia. I was discoursing of the Moscovites, and the
Assistance they afforded the Cossacks in recovering Asac. I passed from thence
to the Manner of their Education. Permit me now, to divert thee with Something
peculiar and uncommon, in the Character of the Russian Women. I am acquainted
with a Gentleman in this City, who has traveled through all that Part of
Europe, and resided some Years at Mosco. He says, The Russian Wives think
themselves not beloved by their Husbands, unless they beat them every Day. They
take his Correction, as a Mark of his Favor and Esteem. If these silly Females
are angry or peevish, he has no other way to court 'em into a better Humor,
but by Stripes. This is the only convincing Argument of his Sovereignty over
them, the Demonstration of his Manhood, the Charm which fastens both their Love
and Obedience.

He highly applauds the absolute Resignation, which this People show to their
Great Duke; in that they pretend not to Possess their Estates and Lives, but
through his Favor, and during his Pleasure. He says, the Succession of the
Czars, or Great Dukes of Russia, was in former Times determined after this
Manner. A great Stone was placed in a large Field belonging to the City of
Mosco. When any Czar died, His Sons or the next of Kin, were conducted into
this Field, and placed all at an equal Distance from the Stone: Then, at a
certain Signal given, they all ran together toward it; and, he that first
reached it, so as to stand on the Top of it, was established in the Throne.

The Reverence which these People pay to their Prince, may in Part be ascribed
to his seldom appearing in Person to them, and then surrounded with his Boyars
or Nobles, in the most Magnificent Equipage, that can be supposed proper, to
strike a Terror and Awe into his Subjects, and cause them to Honor him, as
little less than a God. The Eyes of the Vulgar, are dazzled with so many
Splendors, of Silver, Gold, and Jewels; And, when the Great Duke makes his
solemn Appearance or Cavalcade, they are almost ready to think, That Heaven has
descended to Earth, to do them the Honor of a Visit. These are the Arts of
Russian Policy, by which such an Infinite Number of People are charmed, into an
Obedience to the Sovereign. Doubtless, the Majesty of a King, receives no small
Luster from External Ornaments; the Multitude being captivated, with whatsoever
is Gay and Glittering. Yet, our Glorious Sultans, scorn to borrow Advantage
from, or owe their Grandeur to any Thing, but their Exalted Blood, and sublime,
innate Virtues.

But, every Nation have their peculiar Customs, and distinct Reasons of State.
The Constitution of all Governments is not alike: The Model of Lacedaemonian
Policy, would suit ill with Athens.

Thou, whose Education was in the Royal Seraglio of the Osman Emperors; that
have been instructed to imitate the Be, which sucks Honey, from every Flower:
Thou that know how to make a Choice of Good Examples, and to reject the Ill;
practice the Valor of One Nation, the Prudence of Another, the Frugality of a
Third; so shall thou be consummate in Virtue, and acquit thy self a good
General.

Paris, 15th. of the 11th. Moon, of the Year 1646.
LETTER XVIII. To Solomon, Kyzlar Aga, Chief of the Black Eunuchs.
I Am just now returned to my Chamber, from the Palace of the King. As I passed
along the Streets, I saw in every Face the Signatures of a profound Sorrow,
which seems to have diffused it self over their whole Bodies; for, both the
Court and City have put on Mourning, for the Death of Henry Bourbon, late
Prince of Conde.

He was not full Sixty Years of Age, when he left this Visible World, to be
newborn in a Region utterly unknown to Mortals. The French, not without
Reason, lament the Loss of a Man, who, to speak the Least of him, buoyed up the
Domestic Interest of this Kingdom, which seemed otherwise inclining to totter.
He was the Balance, which poised the different Passions of the Court and City;
by his Prudence and Justice, calming both into a peaceable Mediocrity.

He was born some Moons after his Fathers Death, whom the most execrable Method
of Murdering, would not suffer to Spin out those Years, which Nature would have
indulged him; being snatched away by Poison.

Henry IV. so long as he remained without Issue, fixed his Eyes on this
Posthumous Young Prince, and gave him an Education suitable to one, whom Fate
had designed to be the Heir of the Crown. Yet afterward, Jealousy cooled his
Affection, when the Prince had married Charleotte, the Duke of Montmorency's
Daughter, whom Henry IV. loved to a Degree of Passion.

It is dangerous to have a Sovereign Prince, ones Rival in Love. That Match had
well-nigh ruined the Young Prince of Conde. He was forced to fly into Holland
with his Princess, and make that Province the Sanctuary of her Honor. From
thence he traveled through Germany, and returned not to France, till after the
Murder of Henry IV.

During the Minority of Lewis XIII. he Headed the Factions, affecting to become
Popular. Were it not for this Ambition, his Life had been without Blemish, and
he might have blown out Diogenes his Mid-day-Candle. But, no Man is free from
Fault. All the Difference between the Virtuous and Vicious, consists in this,
That one commits fewer Crimes than the other, and those not by Intention or
Habit, but through the Insuperable Proclivity of Nature. Every Man has his
Genial Vices, his Constitutional Errors; and, though he may appear a Saint in
all Things else, yet in these he will still be a Sinner.

He suffered Five Years Imprisonment in the Bastile, which is a Place put to
the same Use, as the Castle of the Seven Towers in Constantinople. The Princess
his Wise, was his Companion all the Time, and shared in his Misfortunes, as
well as his Prosperity.

During that tedious Confinement, he became Father of a Daughter, who was
afterward Married to the Duke of Longueville. And, when he was set at Liberty,
he begot the Duke of Enguien, now Prince of Conde, and the Prince of Conti.

The French speak well of the Departed Prince. He was of a lively Spirit,
cheerful and affable in Conversation, mixing daily Recreations with his severer
Business, regularly observing Order in all his Affairs. Yet, they say, he was
Covetous, having heaped up great Treasures, by a Parsimony which none of that
Blood had ever before practiced.

On his Deathbed, he recommended Two Things to the Practice of his Son, the
Duke of Enguien; Never to revenge a Private Injury; And, freely to hazard his
Life, for the Public Good.

I chose to transinit to thee the News of this Prince's Death, with this brief
Account of his Life, and Character of his Disposition, in Regard thou have seen
him in Germany, and I remember to have heard thee speak in his Praise.

Continue to love Mahmut, who is never forgetful to oblige his Friends. Adieu.

Paris, 15th. of the 11th. Moon, of the Year 1646.
LETTER XIX. To the Kaimacham.
THE Posts from Catalonia came in last Night, laden with ill News from the
Army, which has been forced to decamp from before Lerida, leaving the greatest
Part of their Artillery to the Spaniards. That Place, was always fatal to the
French. Yet, the Passion of the Court, vents it self on the Count d' Harcourt,
because he could not reverse the Decrees of Destiny. All his Former Meritorious
Actions, seem now to be cancelled, by this one Disgrace, though it was
unavoidable: So peevish are Princes, when their Expectations are crossed. Some
suspect him guilty of private Correspondence; Others tax him with Cowardice.
All this is, during the Heat of their Resentments: The same Persons, it may be,
will change their Censure, when they consider, that he had lain before it Seven
Moons, even till the Trenches of his Camp were filled with Snow, and that his
Soldiers died of Famine or Cold: For, the Winter began to be insupportable, and
the Country was barren of all Things necessary to sustain such an Army. I
cannot see, wherein this General deserves Reproach; unless it be a Crime to be
a Man, and to have the Command of such as are made of Flesh and Blood, as well
as he.

In Italy, the French have taken Piombino and Portolongone. This Latter, is the
most important Town in the Isle of Elbe; Yet, was not able to sustain above
Nineteen Days Siege.

They say, there is a Fountain in this Island, whose Waters flow at the
Sunrising; but, in the Evening, are dried up. The Superstitious have odd
Conceits of this Fountain, relishing of the Ancient Pagan Vanities; but, the
Learned attribute it, to Natural Causes. So, the Jews tell of a River in the
East, that stands still on the Seventh Day of the Week. This they adduce, as a
Confirmation of their. Law, which commands them to rest from Labors on the
Seventh Day; because, on that Day, God rested from forming the Creatures of the
World. They say also, That the Satyrs and other Monsters of the Desert, shun
the Light of the Sun that Day; hiding themselves in Caverns of the Earth, and
Cursing the Sabbath, because it surpised God, before he had quite finished
their Forms; for which Reason, they are Imperfect and Monstrous to this Day.

The Divine Unity, who is the Root of all Numbers, and has consecrated the
Number Seven, to many Mysterious Ends, grant, that neither thou nor I may
forget the Answers we must give, to the Seven Questions of the Porter of
Paradise.

Paris, 7th. of the 12th. Moon, of the Year 1646.
LETTER XX. To Bajazet, Bassa of Greece.
IT appears to me, by evident Symptoms, that there is some deep Design afoot in
this Court. The Grandees assemble often, and sit late. Extraordinary Couriers
are sent out, and come in, at all Hours of the Night. Strange Reports are
industriously spread about the City. Trading is at a Stand, the Banquiers
reserved, and little Money stirring; which makes the Populace murmur. They
complain of the Times, as is usual in Public Discontents: The Old discourage
and incense the Young, by making Comparisons of this Age and Reign, with the
Happy Days of Henry the Great. They fill their Ears, with Golden Stories of
former Times; and, inspiring into them a Love of the Past, they equally
introduce a Hatred of the Present Government. These are the Common Artifices of
Faction. And, though none appears yet under any distinct Name or Title, yet
it is easy to Prognosticare, from these Preludes, That are long the Masque will
be taken off, and Sedition will show her self barefaced.

The Other Day, a Follow run Crying through the Streets, God save the King, but
the Devil take the Italian. He was followed by a few, and those of the most
Contemptible. Yet, no Officer or Magistrate in this City, would cause him to be
apprehended, or attempt to suppress the Mutiny he was raising. The Citizens
smiled at his Boldness, and Money was brought him from unknown Hands: The Women
blessed Him as a Prophet, and the Virgins fell down before the Altars on his
Behalf: The Temples were crowded with Votaries, or rather with the Fautors of
this new Sedition; as if they strove to draw their Gods into the Cabal, and
would make Heaven it self abert their Tumults. His Train increased, as he
measured the Streets; till at length he was seized by the Royal Guards, the
Rabble dispersed, and all Things restored to Quiet. That Night, a Double Watch
was kept throughout the City; the Fellow was strictly examined, and put to the
Rack; yet no Confession could be extorted from him, save, That the Public Good
induced him to take this Course; That the Tyranny and Oppression which Cardinal
Mazarini exercised, were Insupportable; and, That he was ready to sacrifice his
Life for the Welfare of his Country. He is condemned to the Galleys during his
Life. And, great Endeavors are used, to find out the Authors of this Novelty.
For, he is looked on but as an Instrument, set at Work by some Malcontents of
higher Quality, and the Forerunner of some more formidable Insurrection.

Proclamations are issued out, to forbid all Discourse of State-Matters; but,
the People spare not, to whisper their Sentiments.

The Young King is taken ill, which augments the Public Jealousy: Men shake
their Heads, and look dejected, as they walk along the Streets. Some menace
Revenge with their furrowed Brows; others speak openly, That the Kingdom is
sold to Strangers. A General Consternation and Disorder has seized all, while
their Fears prompt 'em daily to expect a Change. To obviate the Mischiefs which
these Popular Passions threaten, Soldiers are drawn from diverse Parts of the
Country by Mazarini's Order, and by insensible Companies quartered up and down
Paris. Between these and the Citizens, there happen diverse Quarrels, frequent
Murders are committed; while the Night, which covers all Things with Darkness,
serves to shroud their mutual Outrages, and private Revenges. Thus, the Public
Calamities are cherished: What will be the Issue, Time will evince.

In the mean while, the Affairs of Germany and Suedeland, seem to be in a fair
Way of Composure. Diverse Treaties are on Foot, in Order to a General Peace in
Christendom. The Ambassadors and Deputies of the several Contesting Crowns,
have frequent Conferences. But, each Party insists so vehemently on
Circumstantials, that Nothing but fruitless Demurs conclude their Meetings.
France has a great Stroke in all these Affairs: And, it is grown to a Proverb,
That Cardinal Mazarini carries all the Courts of Europe in his Bosom.

The Suedes treat like Victors; and the Germans, though much enfeebl'd, yet
cannot forget the Majesty of the Imperial Scepter. The Danes have an Interest
to prosecute; and, the Poles are not without their Pretensions. National Pride
and Honor, have a great Influence on these Crowns. But, the Hollanders, like
Merchants, act according to the Rules of Profit. They stand on no Punctilio's,
but such as advance their Traffic; knowing, that Money is the Nerves of War.
In this they are to be esteemed Wise, their Commonwealth being as yet but in
her Nonage; her Strength not knit, nor she in a Capacity, to wrestle with her
Potent Neighbors.

England finds Business enough at Home, to employ both her Money, Wit and Arms.
Nor can she be at Leisure, to attend to Foreign Transactions.

Spain ever follows the Interest of the German Court; it being the Unalterable
Maxim of the House of Austria, To remain United, and aggrandize it self.

Italy has various Interests; and, Venice in particular, is in strict
Friendship with this Court.

Portugal is still upon her Guard, against the restless Spaniards: and, Don
Juan de Braganza, makes Foreign Alliances.

The Supreme Monarch of the Visible and Invisible Worlds, who sits on the
Throne of Adamant, under the Covert of the Eternal Tree, grant, That the
Distractions of these Infidel-Princes and States, may continue, till the Time
appointed by Fate shall come, wherein the Faithful Osmans shall possess the Red
Apple.

Paris, 25th. of the 1st. Moon, of the Year 1647.
LETTER XXI. To Pestelihali, his Brother.
I Thought my self forgotten by the Son of my Mother, who has suffered so many
Decads of Moons to measure out the Term of his unkind Silence, and of my
Melancholy. It Is now Three Years, since I heard from thee: But, I will not
complain, of a Fault so ingenuously expiated, though late. Thou have made me
ample Amends, in sending me such an Elaborate and Succinct History of thy
Travels: In reading of which, I know not whether my Pleasure or Prosit is
greater. Thou have so interwoven Delightful Adventures of thy own, and pleasant
Passages of others, with Curious and Solid Observations, that a Man improves
himself Insensibly; whilst the Charming Language and Miscellany, serve as a
Spur, at once to rowze and fasten his Attention, to Points of most useful
Knowledge.

The Christians are apt to despise the True Believers, as a Company of Ignorant
People, Unacquainted with the World, Unpolished both in their Understandings
and Manners, not versed in the Liberal Sciences, nor addicted to the Study of
any Thing, but Riches and Honor, and how to augment the Mussulman Empire. They
consider not at the same Time, that God has made us Rational Creatures, as well
as them; has endued us with the same Natural Faculties; and, that in all
Nations, he has Inspired some with a Thirst of Knowledge, furnishing them also
with the Abilities and Means to attain it. They consider not, that if Printing
be prohibited among us, it is to suppress the Multitude of Unprofitable Books,
with which Europe too much abounds: And, that in their Stead, we have many
Thousands of Industrious Scribes, whose whole Employment is, to translate the
most Excellent and Learned Treatises of the Ancients. And, that consequently, a
studious Mohammedan cannot be destitute of such Books, as may instruct him in
True Philosophy, sound Morals, and the History of the Most Memorable
Transactions in the World. Assuredly, our Arabia may boast of her Avicen's,
Mesue's, Averroe's, Hali's and Albumazar's; and, that she has brought forth
many others, who need not in any Point of Human or Divine Learning, yield the
Palm to the most Eminent Doctors, Philosophers, Orators and Poets among the
Christians.

Add to this, the equal Benefit some of our Belief reap, by Traveling into
Foreign Countries, which crowns all their Studies with Experimental Knowledge
and Wisdom: Rendering them as familiar, with the different Natures of Men, and
the various Constitutions of Government, as before they were with Books.

This appears evident in thy Letter, which is replenished with so many solid
Remarks and sage Comments, on the Laws and Customs of the Regions through which
thou have passed, their Religions, Strength and Riches, and whatsoever else was
worthy a Traveller's Notice; That, were this Narrative published in
Christendom, the Nazarenes would forbear to speak so contemptibly of the True
Believers.

But, they flatter themselves with a false Notion, That the Ottomans never
travel beyond the Limits of their own Empire, except the Public Chiauses, who
are sent by the Grand Signior. They are ignorant, that the August Port
maintains Private Agents in all Nations; and, that there is hardly any Prince's
Court in Christendom, without a Mussulman in it one Time or other. It Is true,
we appear not in the Garb peculiar to the East. Our Mission, requires a
Conformity to the Fashions of the People where we Reside. But, we still retain
the Interior Vestment of Mohammedan Purity; being in a double Sense
Circumcised. Thus we become Masters of the Christians Secrets, whilst they
account us Stupid, Ignorant, and Men void of Common Sense.

Besides, had we not this Advantage, in these Western Parts; yet, the Universal
Privilege of Traveling and maintaining free Commerce over all the East, must
needs afford great Opportunities of Accomplishment, to some among the Caravans
of so many Thousands, as visit Persia, India, China, Tartary, and all Places
where the Faith of the Missioner of God is professed.

I am extremely pleased with thy fortunate Escapes from Robbers on the Road,
whose Malice rarely extends farther, than to deprive a Man of those Outward
Goods, which, if he be wise, he will not call his Own. Much more am I
delighted, with thy Deliverance from those Female Thieves, who steal from Men
their Hearts and Reason; which last, is our Noblest, and only proper
Inheritance. All Persia and the Indies, abound with Courtezans; and, he had
need of Osman's Chastity, who would withstand so many and strong Temptations.

Thou need not wonder at the Effeminacy of the Present Mogul, who suffers
himself and his State, to be governed by Women. That Subtle and Aspiring Sex,
have always sought to undermine or overreach our Race. They keep behind the
Scenes, yet act their Parts, in all the Tragedies and Revolutions of the World.
The Father of the present Indian King, made an Absolute Resignation of his
Sovereignty to his Queen, for Four and Twenty Hours. This Prince, by a strange
Affectation, called himself, King of the World. His Wife was the Daughter of an
Arabian Captain, who had served him in the Wars: But, having forfeited his Head
by some Notorious Treason, his Daughter went and threw her self at the Mogul's
Feet to beg his Life. He fell passionately in Love with her, (for, she had not
her Equal for Beauty in all the East) granted her Petition, and married her.
Afterward, she got such an Empire over him, that he would do Nothing without
her Advice and Consent. At her Instigation, he made War or Peace: And, to
please her Cruel Humor, he put out the Eyes of his Eldest Son. But, not
satisfied with these Discoveries of his Love, and resolving to make herself
Famous by some extraordinary Action, she never ceased soliciting the King,
with all the Arts of Female Policy, till she had prevailed on him, to surrender
up his Authority to her for the Space of a Day. In which Time (having prepared
all Things beforehand ready for her Purpose) she caused Two Millions of Roupies
in Silver and Gold to be coined, and stamped with the Twelve Signs of the
Zodiac; contrary to the Fundamental Laws of the Empire, the Express
Prohibition of our Holy Prophet, and the Universal Practice of the Mussulman's
throughout the World, who admit not the Representations of any Creatures that
have Life. This Relation I had from my Uncle Vseph, who resided in the Indian
Court Eleven Years. He added moreover, That during this short Female Reign, she
cut off the Heads of Seven Grandees, the most zealous for the Mussulman Faith
among all the Indian Princes, and established as many Idolaters in their
Places: And, that if her Orders had been fully executed, she had quite changed
the Government, Consecrated the most beautiful Mosquees to the Service of
Idols, Exterminated the True Faithful, and Restored the Ancient Abominations of
the Infidels. Which thou will not think Impracticable, when thou considerest,
That the Number of the Uncircumcised in the Indies, far exceeds that of the
Mussulman's; there being Ten Thousand of those, to a Hundred of such as profess
the Unity of the Divine Nature. But however, there was Loyalty found even among
those Pagans; and, they would not fuffer a Blind Zeal for the Worship of their
Gods, to supplant the Duty they owed their King.

The Description thou have made of Candahar, and the Method thou have projected
to take that Impregnable City, discover at once thy Conduct and Diligence, in
procuring Liberty to survey so narrowly, the most Important Place of the
Indies; and thy Skill in Fortifications, with the Quickness of thy Invention,
which has suggested to thee, that which all the Engineers of Asia have never so
much as dreamt of. This is the right Use of Traveling, when a Man returns from
Foreign Nations, cultivated with Experimental Knowledge, and stocked with
Improvements, that may render him serviceable to his Country.

Thou condemnest the Injustice and Avarice of the Indian Mogul's; who, as soon
as any of the Omrahs, or Great Men die, cause all his Estate and Goods to be
seized, to their own proper Use. Whereby it comes to pass, that the Widow and
Children of the Deceased, are reduced to the lowest Condition of Poverty, being
many Times forced to beg for a Subsistence. It Is true, this is an Oppression
not to be justified, especially in those who profess to Believe in One God,
Creator of All Things, the Incorrupt Judge of the Universe. But, what think
thou then of our Sultans, who not having Patience to wait, till a Natural Death
shall make them Heirs to the Wealth of a Bassa, generally secure their Title,
and hasten their Possession by a Bow-string? These are Royal Violences: Though
the Resignation of Subjects, must not tax them with any Crime, who are
Accountable to none but God.

It was, however, a notable Piece of Raillery, with which the Widow of a Rich
Merchant, reproved this Unreasonable Custom in the present Mogul. Her Husband
was an Idolater, who had heaped together an Infinite Treasure by Trading and
Usury; and, when he died, left her Worth Two Hundred Thousand Roupies. Her Son,
some Years after coming of Age, demanded of her a Stock to set up with as a
Merchant. Which she, either out of Avarice, or for other Ends, refused him;
furnishing him only with such small Sums, as served to nourish his Discontent,
and tempt him to a lewd careless Life. But at length, not being able to prevail
on his Mother, to part with so much as would answer his Expectations, he
complained to the Mogul, disclosing also what Estate his Father had left. The
Mogul being informed of so much Riches, sent for the Young Man's Mother, and
commanded her, to send him Half her Money; ordering, that the other Half, should
be divided between her Self and her Son. The Widow not being at all surprised,
or cast down at this unjust Proposal, made the Mogul this short Reply: O King,
may the Gods make thee Happy. My Son has some Reason to require his Share of
his Father's Estate, having his Blood running in his Veins; but, I desire to
know, what Relation Thou art to my Husband or Me, that Thou claimest a Share in
his Inheritance. The Prince abashed at so smart and bold an Address, commanded
her to give Half her Estate to her Son, and so dismissed her.

I have heard some of our Chiauses praise the Magnisicence of the Mogul's
Court, the Infinite Number of his Attendants: But, above all, they extol the
Inimitable Grandeur of his Throne, which is adorned with so many Topazes,
Rubies, Emeraulds, Pearls and Diamonds, as amount to Thirty Millions of
Roupies. But, were it not much better, if in stead of all this Needless Glory,
he could boast, That his Empire is founded in the Hearts of his Subjects? He
does not consider, That such prodigious Heaps of envied Treasure, are but so
many Glittering Snares, Golden Manacles, which serve for no other Use, but to
chain him up from that Freedom, and those more Innocent Delights, that the
Meanest of his Subjects enjoy.

Thou have, I perceive, discoursed with the Indian Bramins: Do not thou
discover, even in these Idolaters, a Contempt of Riches? What mean Thoughts
have they, of the Splendour and Gayeties of the Court? What a low Esteem, of the
Long and Proud Series of Titles, with which the Moguls endeavor to exalt
themselves? Whilst they are called, the Lights of the World, and Companions of
the Sun; these poor Philosophers know, That in a Little Time, they shall be
laid in Darkness, and have no better Society than that of Worms. What signifies
their Pedigree; or, that the present Mogul, is but the Tenth Descendent from
the Mighty Temurlen, who made all Asia tremble, if he has lost the Virtue of
his Glorious Ancestor? It Is that alone, makes all Men truly Noble.

Thou tellest me, That the Empire of the Mogul, affords him more Revenues, than
the Dominions of any Two the most Potent Monarchs on Earth. I have heard as
much from Others; which convinces me, That thou have informed thy self rightly
of the Present State of the Indies. But do thou therefore esteem this Monarch
the Richer? Consider the vast Extent of his Dominions, which are said to
contain more than Six Hundred Leagues in Length, and thou will find, that to
maintain so great a Tract of Ground, both against his Foreign and Domestic
Enemies, he is obliged to keep in Constant Pay, some Millions of his Subjects
and Strangers: For, he is in the Midst of Enemies, even amongst his own
Subjects. There are above an Hundred Sovereigns in his Empire, who perpetually
by Turns molest his Government, refusing to pay Tribute, and raising Armies
against him: Whereby it comes to pass, That he is at an Infinite Expense to
defend himself, and carry on those Endless Wars. Thou thy self having observed,
That once in Two Moons, there is an Indispensible Necessity of paying these
prodigious Armies: Not a Soldier throughout his Empire, having any Thing to
live on, save the Wages he receives of the King.

Consider also, that this Monarch, always keeps some Thousands of the finest
Horses in the World, near his Person, such as cost him Thousands of Roupies
apiece: Besides a Thousand Elephants, with an Incredible Number of Mules,
Camels, and other Beasts of Burden, to carry his Wives, his Goods and
Provisions when he takes the Field: That whole Cities, even as Large as
Constantinople, are obliged to follow the Kings Camp for Subsistence, their
Livelihood altogether depending on the Army. Add to this, the Immense Charges
of his Seraglio, his Castles and Seaport Towns, with all the other Necessary
Expenses of the State; and thou will conclude, That when this Potentate comes
to cast up his Accounts, he will find himself a Poor Man.

But, I shall cloy thee with a Rehearsal of such Things, as thou can not be a
Stranger to.

Only tell me, Whether one of the Raias, or Princes subject to the Mogul, be
the real Descendent of Porus, the Ancient King of India, in the time of
Alexander the Great? I have been told by several Travelers, that there is such
an One, that his Name is Rana, and that an Hundred of the Idolatrous Princes,
pay Homage to him, as to their Natural Sovereign.

Thou confirmest the Truth, of what has been so often reported in these Parts,
That the Prince of Java has Six Fingers on each Hand, and as many Toes on his
Feet.

But, that seems very strange, which thou relatest, of a certain Language among
the Indians, which is not Vulgarly spoken; but, that all their Books of
Theology, the Pandects of their Laws, the Records of their Nation, and the
Treatises of Humane Arts and Sciences are written in it. And, that this
Language, is taught in their Schools, Colleges and Academies, even as Latin is
among the Christians. I cannot enough admire at this: For, where and when was
this Language spoken? How came it to be disused? There seems to be a Mystery in
it, that none of their Brachmans can give any other Account of this, save, That
it is the Language, wherein God gave to the First Creature he made, the Four
Books of the Law; which, according to their Chronology, was above Thirty
Millions of Years ago. I tell thee, my Dear Brother, this News has started some
odd Notions in my Mind: For, when I consider, that this Language, as thou
say, has nothing in it Common with the Indian that is now spoken, nor with
any other Language of Asia, or of the World; and yet, that it is a Copious and
Regular Language, learned by Grammar, like the other Maternal Languages; and,
that in this Obsolete Language, Books are written, wherein it is asserted, That
the World is so many Millions of Years old; I could almost turn Pythagorean,
and believe the World to be within a Minute of Eternal. And, where would be the
Absurdity? Since God had equally the same Infinite Power, Wisdom and Goodness
from all Eternity, as he had Five or Six Thousand Years ago. What should hinder
him then from exerting these Divine Attributes sooner? What should retard him,
from drawing forth this Glorious Fabric earlier, from the Womb of Nothing?
Suffer thy Imagination to start backwards as far thou can, even to Millions
of Ages, and yet thou can not conceive a Time, wherein this Fair Unmeasurable
Expanse, was not stretched out. As if Nature her self had engraven on our
Intellects, this Record of the World's Untraceable Antiquity; in that our
strongest, swiftest Thoughts, are far too weak and slow, to follow Time back to
its Endless Origin.

The Revolution in China, surpasses the Common Changes in Kingdoms and Empires.
There is Something excessively Tragical, in the Catastrophe of that Royal House.

Brother, in beholding that, thou have seen Humane Nature in a Trance: And,
thou art so thy self, if, after this, thou can be fond of any Thing on Earth.
Traveller, adieu.

Paris, 25th. of the 1st. Moon, of the Year 1647.
LETTER XXII. To Afis Bassa.
SEveral Dispatches have been lately sent between this Court and that of
Sucdeland; containing rather Matter of Compliment, than any Thing of Great
Importance. Queen Christina has been very Ill, which has occasioned Letters of
Condoleance from the Queen-Regent of France.

Those which come from that Part say, That General Torstenson is made a Count,
and the Dignity entailed to his Posterity, in Recompense of his Eminent
Services to the Suedish Crown.

These Letters add, That there have passed some high Words, between Monsieur
Chanut, and the Sucdish Secretary of State. And, that the latter, in going out
of the Chamber where they discoursed, laid his Hand upon his Sword, with these
Words; Monsieur Chanut, Were is not for the Fence which the Law of Nations has
raised about your Person, I would answer you in another Language. To which
Monsieur Chanut replied, That he wore a Sword to defend himself and his Private
Honor, as well as any Suede in the Kingdom.

The Occasion of this Quarrel was, the great Resort of Roman Catholic
Strangers to Monsieur Chanut's Chapel, which gave disgust to the Suedes, who
allow not the Exercise of the Roman Religion within their Territories. They
castrate all the Priests of that Communion, whom they find; and prosecute the
Laity with rigorous Penalties. But, Monsieur Chanut pleaded the Law of Nations:
And, when the Secretary told him, That the Queen permitted him and his Family
the Liberty of their Religion, but desired him not to admit any other Persons
of what Nations soever; This Minister replied, That he could not receive as a
Favor or Permission from her Majesty, the Liberty of Exercising his Religion;
since, he held it only of his Master, the King of France, who had sent him
thither, and, that he would not shut the Door of his Chapel, against any that
would come in: That their Law, which according to their own Calcule, was made
above Two Thousand Years after the Foundation of their Estate, could not
abrogate the Law of Nations, which is Eternal: That this Perpetual Law, gave
particular Privileges to certain Persons, and especially to the Ministers of
Foreign Princes: That their New Law, such as it was, being only made to
maintain the Public Worship, respected not what was done in the House of a
Foreign Minister, by a Special Privilege; it being of no Consequence to the
State, whether such Foreigners served God or not, or whether they worshipped
Him in a Right or Wrong Way: That no Suede came to his Chapel, but only some
French who were Sojourners in the Land: That they did not use the Suedish
Ambassadors so in France, who admitted whom they pleased into their Chapels.
That the House where he now dwelt, was the House of the King of France, and
that therefore, he could not by Consequence refuse any Catholics an Entrance
into it, especially such as were born Subjects of his Master: And, in Fine,
That it was very Rude, to oblige him to be the Executioner of this severe Law,
in requiring him to shut his Doors upon his Countrymen, against the Common Laws
of Hospitality, the Honor of a Public Minister, and the Pleasure of the King
his Sovereign.

To this the Secretary made something too tart a Reply. Whereupon, Words
increasing between them, and the French Ambassador being resolute to assert his
Privilege, the Secretary broke out into a Passion, as I have before mentioned;
laying his Hand upon his Sword, as he was leaving the Room.

The Suedes, are Naturally a rugged, surly People, as are all the Northern
Europeans. They are Strangers to Civility, and the Gentile Address of the
French. Yet, the Queen, when she heard of this Passage, was angry with her
Minister, and excused his Rudeness to Monsieur Chanut; telling him, That the
Secretary was a Faithful Servant, but had been educated among the Bears of the
Forest.

This puts me in Mind of a Story, which the French tell of another Ambassador,
whom Lewis XIII. sent to the Court of Spain. The Spaniards are of a haughty
Temper, expecting more than ordinary Submissions, from those who approach the
King's Presence. This Ambassador, on the same Ground, was required to do some
Homage, which would not consist with the Instructions of his Master; and
therefore, he refused to comply. The King of Spain, thinking to put him out of
Countenance, said aloud, What! has the King of France, no other Men in his
Court, that he sends to me such a Fool as this? To which the Ambassador
replied, My Master has many Wiser Men than my self about him; but, to such a
King, such an Ambassador.

Thou will not perhaps approve such Raillery as this to Crowned Heads, who
ought to be treated with Reverence and Gravity. Yet, I believe, thou will
condemn the Cruelty of a Duke of Moscovy, who cause the Hat of a French
Ambassador to be nailed to his Head, for sitting covered before him. This is
contrary to the Genius of the East, who abhor to see a Man bareheaded.

But, every Nation has its Mode: And I, according to the Fashion of my Country,
kiss the Border of thy Vest, in Token of my Submission and Respect.

Paris, 7th. of the 2d. Moon, of the Year 1647.
LETTER XXIII. To the Mufti, most Venerable, and Worthy of all Honor.
THE Critics, who spend their Time, and manifest their Wit, in descanting on
the Court and the Grandees, find perpetual Matter of Discourse concerning
Cardinal Mazarini. His daily Actions, furnish them with New Themes; and
sometimes, they rehearse the Old. They compare him with his Predecessor
Richlieu, and with Cardinal Ximenes, a Spanish Minister. They term these Three,
the Trinity of Christian Statesmen; Thus distinguishing their Personal
Characters: Richlieu, they say, was Crafty, Covetous, and Revengeful; Ximenes
was Politic, Severe, and Valiant; Mazarini is Wise, Merciful and Liberal.

The First made good his Character, they say, in heaping up such Prodigious
Treasures; in raising all those of his Family or Dependence, to the Highest
Honors; in occasioning the Voluntary Banishment of the Queen Mother; in
ruining whomsoever he supected; and finally, in making himself so much the
Master of all Secrets, That the King, however disgusted and averse from him,
yet could neither sit safe on his Throne without him when Living, nor venture
the Management of the Public to any but his Creatures when Dead. Thus speak
they of that Great Minister.

As to Cardinal Ximenes, they say he discovered the Qualities which they
ascribe to him, in the Method he took to raise himself to that envied
Greatness; which was, by seeming to shun the Honors at which he secretly
aimed. For, being a Devoted Dervise, or Religious Friar, he appeared to be the
most Mortified Man of the whole Order: Which being taken Notice of, he was made
Provincial; from which Dignity, he made but one Step more to the Purple: And,
growing Eminent for his Abilities, he was made the First Minister in the Court
of Spain.

He levied Sixteen Thousand Men at his own Cost, invaded Barbary, stormed their
strongest Cities, and reduced the whole Kingdom of Tripoli and Algiers to his
Master's Obedience.

Whilst he was at the Head of his Army, one Day there happened a Mutiny among
his Soldiers. A certain Fellow, running up and down between the Ranks, and
exciting them to choose a New General, saying, It was a Shame to serve a
poor-spirited Friar: The Cardinal perceiving this, stepped to the Fellow, and,
with one Blow, severed his Head from his Body. This struck such a Terror into
all, that from that Time, there was not the least Tumult or Disorder in his
Army.

They say, he was in the End poisoned by eating of a Fish, of which a Friend of
his received Intimation on the Road, as he was riding to the Place where the
Cardinal was at Dinner. But, he came too late, to prevent the Effects of the
Poison: For, though the Cardinal was but just risen from the Table, yet he
began to void Blood by his Ears, and the Extremities of his Fingers; and, in a
few Days, drew his last Breath. He was Tall, and well Limbed; His Two Foreteeth
of the Upper Jaw, grew so far out of his Mouth, that he was called, The
Ecclesiastic Elephant. The Sutures of his Skull, were so closely indented,
that there was no more Room for Transpiration of the Grosser Vapors, than
through the most Solid Part of the Bone. On this Account, he was ever troubled
with the Headache; contrary to Cardinal Richlieu, who never felt any Pain in
that Part, because he had two little Holes in his Crown, through which the
Fumes exhaled.

These are the Remarks, which are made on Cardinal Ximenes. As to Mazarini,
they say he surpasses both these Ministers, in the exquisite Moderation of his
Temper: And, comes short of neither, in the Contrivance or Success of his
Affairs; being solid in his Counsels, secret and swift in their Execution. He
had this also peculiar in his Conduct, That none are more sure of his Favor,
than those who have done him Injuries. He is Magnifick in his Expenses;
building Palaces, that may vye with the most Celebrated Structures of the
Ancient Romans: A curious Collector of Choice Paintings, and Sculptures;
furnishing his Houses, with Utensils of Cedar, Ebony' Silver, Gold and other
Ornaments befitting the Palace of a King: Liberal beyond the Expectation of his
Friends and Servants; yet, not to Profuseness. He has a wonderful Sagacity in
discovering Cheats and Impostors; and, no less Dexterity, in discerning Men of
Merit, though never so much obscured by Misfortune.

Not long ago, he caught a Gentleman in a Crime, which exposed him to the
Laughter and Contempt of the whole Court, but not to the Cardinal's Hatred. He
had been recommended to this Minister, by a Lady of the Court, for whom he had
a great Esteem. On which Account, he had free Access to the Cardinal's
Presence, and would always mix with his Retinue.

But, his Curious Patron, had observed something in his Carriage, which gave
him Ground of Mistrust. For, he would always place himself, as near as he
could, to a certain Table in the Chamber, where the Cardinal gives Audience.
There is a Drawer under this Table, which commonly stands half open, it being
the Place where all Petitioners throw in their Bribes or Presents; It not being
seemly for a Prince of the Church, to take Money himself. The Cardinal observed,
that this Spark always had his Eye glancing on that Drawer, as if he coveted
what was there contained. However, he took no Notice, but gave him all the
Opportunities imaginable to do his Pleasure; yet, still one Accident or other,
hindered the Gentleman from executing his Design; which was, to borrow some of
the Gold that lay in that Drawer. At length it happened, that the Cardinal
having appointed some Curious Pageants to be made in Honor of the King's
Birthday, he with several of the Courtiers, stood looking out of the Windows,
to see these Triuphant Shows pass by. The Gentleman taking this Opportunity,
whilst he thought all Eyes were intent on the Gayeties without, slips to the
Table, and takes out of the Drawer a Bag of Gold, putting it up in his Pocket,
and retiring to the Window again. He imagined, that no Body had seen him, and
therefore hugged himself in the Thoughts of his Booty. When the Show was over,
and the Company withdrew from the Windows; after a while, they all took their
Leave, and departed: And, among the Rest, this Gentleman Thief was going out.
But the Cardinal desired him to tarry, in that he had something to say to him.
The Gentleman, stung with the guilt of what he had done, fell a trembling, and
was ready to drop down at the Cardinal's Feet. But, he bid him be of good
Comfort, saying thus to him; My Friend, what thou have done, is not hid from
me. If thou have not Gold enough, I will double thy Sum. Therewith, he gave him
another Bag of equal Value; saying withal, Go thy Way, and see my Face no
more. I pardon, but canont trust thee.

Would thou know, by what Means the Cardinal discovered this Theft? He always
wears on his Finger a Ring, in which is set a Jewel of Inestimable Value; it
being a Natural Mirror, and discovering all Things that are done in the Room,
though behind a Man's Back. 'Twas on this Stone the Cardinal cast his Eye, when
the Gentleman thought he was looking out of the Window. Therein he beheld him
go to the Table, take out the Money, and put it in his Pocket. Thou see how
curious this Minister is, to stock himself with useful Rarities.

May that Great Chancellor of Heaven, the Angel who beholds in the Divine
Essence, as in a Mirror, whatsoever is done on Earth, and records all Human
Actions in the Book of Judgment, never discern any Thing in Mahmut, which may
render him worthy to be excluded the Presence of God.

Paris, 12th. of the 2d. Moon, of the Year 1647.
LETTER XXIV. To Danecmar Kesrou, Cadilesquer of Romania.
THOU that art Principal among the Judges of High Dignity, the Illustrious
Ornament of Three Empires, the strong Support of Equity, who preservest Reason,
and correctest Vice; I congratulate thy deserved Honor: And, in doing so, I
wish Increase of Joy to all the Faithful Osmans.

The Knowledge which thou have acquired in the Law of Nations, and in the most
perfect Sanctions of our August Monarchy, has made thee famous through the
Seven Precincts of the Earth; and has vested thee, with the Robe of Sublime
Honor, the Gift of the Lieutenant of God.

I made Choice of this Occasion, at once to perform my Duty, and to acquaint
thee with a National Villainy; such a Violation of the Public Faith of a
Kingdom, as it will be difficult to Parallel.

The Civil Wars of England, are known throughout the World: And, thou art no
Stranger to the Particular Intelligences I have sent to the Sublime Port,
concerning that Nation.

Since that Time, the Rebels have by Degrees gained Ground of their Unhappy
King, chasing him from One Place to Another: Till at Length, finding, that
neither by Arms nor Treaties, he could reduce them to any Terms of
Reconciliation; and, being Besieged in one of his Cities, which was not in a
Condition to hold out long, this Unfortunate Monarch, was forced to disguise
himself, and escape by Night; wandering through Unfrequented Ways, and enduring
much Hardship. He at length threw himself upon the Faith of the Scots; who had
solemnly engaged themselves upon Oath, to defend him against all his Enemies
whatsoever.

The Scottish Army was then in England, being hired to assist the Rebels.
Whence some take Occasion, to accuse this Prince of Rashness, and too much
Credulity, in seeking Protection from those, who first began the Rebellion; and
who had stained the Records of Scotland, with the Blood of many of their Kings.
But, Innocence is void of Suspicion; and therefore, because his own Intentions
were sincere, he knew not how to be Jealous of others.

However, the Scots at First, seemed to act the Parts of Loyal Men. And, when
they were threatened by the English Rebels, and their Pay was stopped, with
Declarations also issued out against their Proceedings; they continued to
assert the Justice of their Deportment, in receiving and defending their
Injured King, who had fled to them for Succor.

They detained him thus, from the 4th. of the 5th. Moon, of the Year 1646. to
the 30th. Day of the 1st. Moon, of this present Year. At which time, having
agreed with the English Parliament, for the Sum of 400000 Sequins, as the Price
of their Sovereign, they delivered him up to the English Commissioners, deputed
by the Rebels for that Purpose.

The French Ambassador, was at that time in the Scotch Army: Who having been a
a Witness of their Detestable Perjury, took his leave: And being attended with
a Guard of Light Horse to the Seaport, at parting he pulled out a Piece of
English Money, valued at Half a Crown; And asking the Captain of the Guards,
into how many Pieces of Coined Silver, that Half Crown might be divided, he
answered, Into Thirty. For so much, replied the Ambassador, did Judas betray
his Master.

Thou will better comprehend the Force of this Repartee, when thou considerest,
that according to the Christians Belief, this Judas was a Slave of Jesus, the
Son of Mary; and, that for Thirty Pieces of Silver, he betrayed that Prophet to
the Jews.

But, these Infidels have found out Ways, to elude all Engagements and
Promises. They couch their Oaths, in Words more Ambiguous, than the Oracles of
Delphos. As if they thought, not only to circumvent Men by their Equivocations;
but also, to deceive Him who formed the Tongue and the Ear; even God, who is
Perfect in Knowledge.

Such a Story I have read of one Hatto, a German Bishop, whose Perjury is
recorded. This Prelate, had a Cousin who was accused of Treason against the
Emperor. On which Account, he was closely besieged by the Imperial Forces, in a
Castle seated on the Top of an Impregnable Rock. So that the Emperor,
despairing to take him by Force, had withdrawn his Army; when this Bishop came
to him, and for a Sum of Money, promised to betray his Kinsman into the
Emperor's Hands.

The Bargain being concluded, the Bishop went to visit his Cousin at the
Castle, persuading him to go and Humble himself to the Emperor, and he would
engage to procure his Pardon: Binding himself with a Solemn Oath, That if he
would rely on him, as he carried him safe out of the Castle, so he would bring
him back alive and safe again.

His Kinsman deluded with these fair Pretenses, and secured by the Sanction of
an Oath, trusts himself to the Conduct and Fidelity of the Prelate.

When they had rode about Half a League from the Castle, the Bishop pretending
he had forgot some Papers of Moment, which he had left behind him in his
Chamber, they returned back to the Castle: And, when they had found the Papers,
they set forward again toward the Emperor's Camp. Being arrived there, the
Impious Wretch delivered his Kinsman to the Emperor, who Condemned him to Die.
He, sending for the Bishop, reproaches him with the Violation of his Oath. But,
the Perfidious Bishop, sought to acquit himself, by saying, He had performed
his Promise, in carrying him back safe to the Castle, when he returned to seek
his Papers. Thus, was his Kinsman betrayed by a Quibble, and lost his Head. The
Bishop acquiring, for that Impious Deed, the Odious Title, of Hatto the
Traitor. And, the Germans report, That he was afterward carried away by
Devils, and thrown alive into the Hollow of Mount Aetna: A Voice being heard at
the same Instant in the Air, saying, This is the Reward of Perjury.

The Nazarenes believe this Flaming Mountain, to be One of the Mouths of Hell:
The same Opinion they have, of Strombolo and Vesuvius. I am not curious, to pry
into the Truth of so Costly a Secret; but leave the Experiment to the Forsworn,
Treacherous Scots, who by this Barbarous Action, deserve to follow the Fate of
Hatto.

Much greater was the Integrity and Virtue of the Ancient Romans, whom these
Infidels Number among the Damned. They esteemed Nothing more Sacred, than the
Public Faith; building Temples to its Honor, and stamping their Money, with
the Figure of Two Hands joined together; having this Motto, THE FAITH OF THE
ROMANS. But, the Scots show themselves to be of Lysander's Mind, who used to
say, Children must be circumvented with Good Words, and Men with Oaths.

This Monarch is now led in Triumph like a Captive by his Rebellious Subjects,
who have confined him to one of his Country Palaces: Suffering none of his
Friends, or Faithful Servants, to come near him; but in all Things
endeavoring, to render his Restraint Insupportable.

Thou who art accurate in Interpreting the Laws of Justice, wilt condemn these
Infidels of Horrid Treason; yet can not acquit the Mussulmans, who have often
Deposed our most August Emperors.

I divide my Intelligence, among the Ministers of the Sublime Port, and the
other Grandees of the State; praying God, to guard the Sultan from Secret
Machinations, and open Enemies; and to grant, That an Excess of Good Nature,
may not betray him to such Misfortunes, as have befallen this Imprisoned
Monarch.

Paris, 21st. of the 3d. Moon, of the Year 1647.
LETTER XXV. To Ragel Hamet, Antiquary to the Sultan.
THIS City is pestered, with an Innumerable Multitude of Bats, and a Kind of
Serpents, which they call Lizards or Newts. They breed in the Walls of their
Houses, and molest the Inhabitants Night and Day, swarming more than ordinary
every Ninth Year.

The Parisians give an odd Reason for this Plague. They say, That in former
Ages, a certain Magician had undertaken to free this City, from all Venomous
Creatures; and, that accordingly, he had made several Images of those Animals,
annexing to them Enchantments, and hiding them in obscure Places under the
Earth; promising also, that so long as those Images remained untouched, Paris
should not be molested with any Hurtful Thing. This succeeded according to his
Words; till, at a certain time, as they were digging up the Foundations of an
Old Temple, the Workmen found several Brazen Images; some representing a Bat,
some a Lizard. They making small Account of these Magical Relics, sold them
to the next Brazier for a piece of Money: Who, being ignorant also of the
hidden Force of these Images, melted them down for his own Use. And, ever since
that time, the City has been overrun with Bats and Lizards.

I relate this to thee, in regard I have often heard thee speak of the Ancient
Statues, that were in the Atmidan at Constantinople, and in other Parts of the
City; particularly of that Pillar, which had Three Brazen Serpents winding
about it; which, when Mahomet the Great beheld, the Conqueror struck One of
them with a Battle-Axe, and smote off the Lower Jaw. Upon which, a Multitude of
Serpents infested the City; but, were soon exterminated, in Regard the Sultan,
being warned by the Citizens, forbore to do any farther Injury to those Images,
which were the Guardians of the City.

The Annals of the Mussulman Empire, make Mention of these Statues, as also of
a Horse of Brass, and a Bull of the same Metal: The One erected as a Charm
against the Pestilence; the Other, as an Oraculous Sign, that the Enemies of
the Grecian Monarchy, should in that Place be repulsed, and driven out of the
City. Yet, it proved otherwise: For, the Victorious Mussulmans, against whom
the Enchantments of the Infidels could not prevail, entered the Marketplace,
where this Image stood, and drove from thence the timorous Grecians; cutting in
Pieces all that made Resistance, and rendering themselves Lords of
Constantinople, at that Time the Richest City in the World.

The Romans were extremely addicted to these Superstitious Vanities: Believing,
the Safety of their City and Empire, consisted in the Preservation of the
Palladium, and Image which they thought fell down from Jupiter, and was
transported from Troy to Italy by Aeneas; being afterward reposited in the
Temple of Vesta, but burnt in that dreadful Conflagration, which happened in
the Reign of Nero.

They had in no less Veneration, the Buckler, which they were taught, dropped
down from Heaven, into the Hands of Numa Pompilius; whereon, the Fate of Rome
was engraven, in Characters which none could read. Fearing lest this Sacred
Shield might be stolen, they caused Eleven others of the same Figure to be made,
and all to be hung up together in the Temple of Mars.

And, to the End the Guardian Genius of the City, should not be enticed from
them by the Enchantments of their Enemies, the True Name of the City of Rome
was kept Secret, even from its own Inhabitants: Insomuch, that Valerius Soranus
was put to Death, for publishing it to one of his Friends. Many have guessed at
this hidden Name; Some saying, it was Valencia; Others, that it was Velia; a
Third Sort, call it Anthusa. But, there is no Certainty in their Conjectures.
For, the Pagans were above all Things careful, to conceal the Names of their
Cities and Patron-Gods: knowing, that those Spirits would not forsake them,
till they were called forth by their Proper Names.

They used also, to chain the Images of their Gods to the Altars, lest they
should depart from them by Stealth. Thus the Tyrians, when Alexander besieged
their City, and they understood from the Priests, that Apollo, the Guardian of
Tire, was displeased with 'em, they fastened his Image with strong Fetters of
Iron. So dealt the Spartans, with the Image of Mars. And, this was the Common
Practice, among those Idolatrous Nations.

As for Us, who have received the Law Clear and Intelligible, and believe in
the Unity of the Divine Essence; We use no Charms our Selves, neither do we
fear the Magic of the Uncircumcised. All our Confidence is in God, and the
Protection of his Prophet: We go boldly to the Wars, whilst we fight in
Defense, neither of Statues nor Fictitious Relics, but of the Volume
replenished with Truth and Light, the Book brought down from Heaven by an Angel.

Paris, 17th. of the 4th. Moon, of the Year 1647.
LETTER XXVI. To the Vizir Azem.
I Am now returned from Orleans, whither I went in Obedience to thy
Appointments: And, not without Abundance of Pleasure to my self; it being the
Time of Year, when all Things conspire to make a Traveller pass his Time away
with Delight.

Yet, my Return was Melancholy, in Regard I could not accomplish what I aimed
at, nor be in a Capacity to render thee that Satisfaction thou requirest,
either in buying the Jewels, or in establishing any Correspondence. Those who
informed thee of the Germans inhabiting that City, were mistaken in their
Character, they being only a Society or Corporation of Students, and no ways
concerned in Traffic or Merchandise.

They told thee right in saying, There are a great Number of Strangers in
Orleans: I think the Imperial City which commands the World, cannot boast a
greater Diversity of Languages, than are spoken daily in the Streets and Houses
of Orleans. There are some, almost of all Nations, residing in that City.

Would thou know the real Occasion of this mighty Conflux of Foreigners. It
is, that they may study that which the Nazarenes call the Civil Law, which is
there professed as in an Academy, erected for that Purpose by Philip the Fair,
one of the Kings of France.

If thou know not the Meaning of the Civil Law, It is a Collection of the
Ancient Roman Laws, drawn from above Two Thousand Books of their Scribes, by
the Command of the Emperor Justinian, for a Standard of Equity in those
Corrupt Times, in that Universal Relaxation and Decline of Good Government.

This is the Attractive, which draws so many Strangers, from all Parts of
Europe, to that pleasant City: Where, besides the Opportunity of improving
themselves in the most Honorable Profession among the Nazarenes, next to that
of the Priesthood; they enjoy a pure and serene Heaven, a fruitful and
delicious Part of the Earth, and the Company of the most obliging and courteous
People in all France.

It Is for this Reason, the Germans, among other Nations, flock to Orleans; and,
through the Favor of the French Kings, have obtained a Privilege beyond other
Nations; that is, to Incorporate themselves into a Society of Students. Neither
is there any such Thing as Merchandise, known among them.

If I have not answered thy Expectation, Supreme Prince of the Bassa's, blame
not Mahmut, but accuse the Germans of Orleans, for not exchanging their Studies
for Traffic; or rather, blame those who presumed to tell thee this far-fetched
Fable. In finishing this Letter, I bow my Head to the Floor of my Chamber; and
kiss the Paper, which shall have the Honor to be touched by thy Illustrious
Hands.

Paris, 1st. of the 6th. Moon, of the Year 1647.
LETTER XXVII. To the Aga of the Janissaries.
THOU have heard of the Assyrian, Scythian, and Roman Heroines. These were all
Valiant Leaders of Armies, Women of Honor and Renown. Now I will inform thee
of a Female, which France has brought upon the Stage of War.

According to the Orders which I received from the Vizir Azem, I took a Journey
to Orleans last Moon: Where, on the Third Day after my Arrival, beholding a
Solemn Procession in the Streets of that Populous City, attended with some
uncommon Ceremonies and Rejoycings, my Curiosity prompted me to enquire the
Occasion of it. Thou may imagine, I did not apply my self for Information to
the Multitude, who take up Things on the Common Credit of Fame, which does not
always deliver the Truth. I addressed my self to those, that were acquainted
with the Records of the Town; who told me, That this Solemnity was yearly
observed, on the Eighth Day of the Fifth Moon, in Memory of their Deliverance
from the English, who besieged this City, and were beaten from before it by
Joan d' Arc, a Maid of Lorrain, in the Reign of Charles I. This Virago, seemed
to be the Tutelar Angel of France: For, to her Valor and Conduct, that Monarch
owed the Recovery of his Kingdom, almost lost to the King of England; this
being the last Place of Importance, which had not received English Garrisons.
After she had raised the Siege, she pursued the Enemy, gave them several
Battles, defeated them, took their Generals Captive, reduc^d all the Cities to
their former Obedience, and never sheathed her Sword, till she saw her Master
solemnly crowned at Rhemes. Yet, at length, she herself was made a Prisoner by
the English, and was publicly burnt for a Witch at Rouen.

The Inhabitants of Orleans, have erected Brazen Statues in her Honor: They
celebrate her Praises, and esteem her, a Woman Divinely Inspired, to save her
Country. Yet, the more Intelligent Sort say, That she was neither Witch nor
Prophetess, but only a Maid of good Wit and Courage, whom some of the Princes
of the Blood Royal, had instructed to act the Part of a Missionary from Heaven;
That so by pretending Visions and Revelations, she might raise the Courage of
the French, now almost dispirited by their many Losses; and, whom Nothing less
than a Miracle could persuade to abide the Field against the Victorious
English. This is certain, that she distinguished the King, though disguised
like a Peasant, and in a Crowd of People: She went boldly up to him, and
saluted him by his Title, to the Astonishment of those that stood by. She sent
a Messenger to bring her a Sword of Antique Workmanship, that lay hid in a Tomb
in one their famous Mosques (for, the Nazarenes of the West, bury their Dead in
their Temples.) This Action extremely enhanced her Reputation; in Regard, none
knew of this Sword but the King himself. She was therefore looked upon, as an
Extraordinary Person; and, the People could hardly be restrained, from paying
her Divine Honors.

When they were Encamped on a certain Plain of a vast Extent, where there was
no Water to be found, so that the Army was ready to perish through Thirst; the
King came to the Tent of this Prophetess, to consult her as an Oracle in the
General Distress. She bid Him be of good Courage, and follow her. They went out
together to the Door of her Tent, where at a little Distance there grew a Knot
of Flowers. The Admirable Maid, struck her Spear into the Ground amidst the
Flowers, and incontinently there sprung forth a Fountain of Water, to which the
whole Army repaired to allay their Thirst. They say, the Place is shown to this
Day, with an Image of this Maid standing in an Oratory close by it; a Place of
Refreshment and Devotion for Travelers, that pass over those barren Plains.

However, whether it were Artifice, or that she was endued with some
Supernatural Gift; it had a mavelous Influence on the Soldiers, who began to
reassume Courage, and feared nothing under the Conduct of such a General.

'Twas Revenge, without Doubt, rather than Justice, that extorted that Cruel
Sentence from the English, which put a Period to the Heroic Actions of this
Illustrious Maid, whose Fame will live for ever.

It is recorded, That whilst she was bound fast to the Stake with strong Cords,
they would have kindled the Fire upon her before she had spoke to the
Spectators; but, that she suddenly became loosned, and snatching a Lance from
one of the Soldiers, she drove the Guards before her: Then returning of her own
Accord to the Stake, she made her last Dying Speech, foretelling many Things to
come, which afterward proved true. And having made an End of speaking, she bid
the Executioner set Fire to the Wood. Which he did accordingly, and she was
burnt to Ashes.

Certainly, every Nation may boast of some Female Warrior, that at one Time or
other, has done remarkable Service to her Country. And, thou art not a Stranger
to the History of the Amazons, who excluded Men from their Society, yet became
formidable to all the Regions round about them.

Adieu, Brave Commander of the Mussulman Forces; and, let the Memory of these
Valiant Females, inspire thee with fresh Ardours, when the Ottoman Empire is in
Danger.

Paris, 1st. of the 6th. Moon, of the Year 1647.
LETTER XXVIII. To Dgnet Oglou.
THou art the Man that must participate in all my Adventures. And, I should be
a Churl, in not letting thee share with me, the Pleasure I found in a late
Journey to Orleans, one of the Presidiary Towns of France. It was by the Order
of the Vizir Azem, I undertook that Journey. Some body had informed Him, That
this Town was full of Merchant-Travellers of several Nations, but especially of
Germany, who brought the choicest Jewels of the East, to vend in this Place at
ordinary Rates. That Minister gave me Commands, to buy certain Stones; with
Instructions to treat of another Affair, which it is not necessary for thee to
know. I accordingly set out from Paris, the Third Day of the 5th. Moon; and,
Fliachim the Jew (of whom thou have heard) bore me Company.

I need not describe to thee, the Country through which we passed: It exactly
resembles the Plains of St. Isidore, not far from Palermo in Sicily. Thou and
I, have Reason to remember that Place of our Captivity, carrying the Marks of
our Master's Cruel Anger yet in our Bodies. Those Plains, thou know, afford
a very agreeable Prospect; especially at this Time of the Year, when the
Verdure of the Trees, mixed with the Brightness of the Cornfieldsd, and the
parti colored Meadows, tempt the Eye into a Controversy of Pleasure; a Man
neither knowing well how to take it off, nor yet where to fix it, in such an
Orderly Confusion and Medley of Charming Objects.

Such is the Province between Paris and Orleans; which has this Advantage of
those Sicilian Plains, That here all the Way one rides, Innumerable Magnificent
and Beautiful Palaces appear, shooting up their glittering Turrets above the
lofty Groves, which environ those Seats of Pleasure. Indeed, this is one of the
purest Airs, and the most fertile Soil in all the Kingdom; which invites the
Nobles and Gentry, to reside here during the Summer, and occasions much
Traveling on his Road.

About Midday, we came to a Town called Chastres, where we alighted to refresh
our selves. Travelers in these Western Parts, are better accommodated with
Provisions, than they can be in Asia, where they must carry their own Beds with
them, and dress their own Victuals, or lie on the naked Floor fasting. This
makes the Nazarenes, call the East Inhospitable. They consider not at the same
Time, that it is the Niceness and Delicacy of the Mahometans, which occasions
this Custom. For, the Eastern People, are fearful of defiling themselves, by
eating Meat prepared by other Hands than their own, or those of their Servants:
As also, to lie on a Bed, common to all Passengers.

But, these Infidels are like the Swine, to whom all Meat is Welcome, and every
Ditch an Acceptable Bed. Here are Inns all along the Roads, whereinto when you
enter, the Host provides you both Bed and all other Necessaries. A Man must
venture to sleep on the same Pillow, where perhaps a Leper has lain the Night
before, or some Person Infected with a worse Disease. The Host examines none,
but harbors all alike, provided they have Money to pay him. And as for
Victuals, it is the Custom for all Travelers, to eat together at one Common
Table, where several Dishes of Meat are served up, and every Man is free to eat
what and how much he pleases, paying a stated Price for his Dinner.

Thus, no sooner were we come into our Inn at Chastres, but the Host saluting
us after the Manner of the Country, invited us to sit down at the Ordinary,
(for so they call their Public Dinner in an Inn.) We were not so scrupulous as
to refuse his Offer, but followed him into the Chamber, where the Dinner was
prepared. There were many Guests at the Table, and all busy in feeding
themselves. We took such Seats as we found vacant, and without much Ceremony
fell to eating. The Jew trusted to the Indulgence of Moses, and I to that of
Mahomet, for eating with the Uncircumcised, whose Meat is seldom free from the
Pollutions of Blood. We knew, that neither God nor his Prophets, required us to
starve.

There was Plenty of Wine, and that so delicious, as would have tempted an
Hogia to taste it, without the Mufti's Dispensation. To avoid Singularity, I
made a Show of eating, as the Rest; but, the greatest Part of my Repast,
consisted in Bread and some Fruits, with that exhilarating Juice of the Grape.

The honest Jew swore, 'twas a Banquet prepared by Cupid, to render him the
most Miserable of all Men. For, just in the Midst of our Mirth, came in a
French Gentleman with a Lady in his Hand, who placed themselves at the Table
exactly opposite to us. I perceived evident Symptoms of some Disorder in
Eliachim, who seemed to read his Fate, in that fair Creatures Face; yet had not
Power to check his Wandering Eyes, or guard 'em from Inevitable Wounds. He Would
almost acted over the Story of the Egyptian Wives, whom Joseph's Mistress had
invited to behold his Beauty: they cut their Fingers for their Meat, whilst
gazing on the Charming Youth: So, poor Eliachim was all Confusion, turned to a
Statue, whilst he looked on this enchanting Gorgon. He had forgot to eat or
drink, till I began to rowze him from his Dream. I told him softly in the Ear,
This Lady was but the Younger Sister of Ixion's Mistress. This brought him to
his Sense again, but could not restore his Peace. Prudence taught him, to
dissemble the violent Emotion of his Soul, and not to expose himself in such a
Company; but, Nothing could expel the Fatal Poison from his Breast.

When we had sufficiently reposed our selves, we bid adieu to the Inn; all
joining Company, and setting forward to Orleans. On the Road, both Eliachim and
I, had many Opportunities of conversing with this Young Lady; such Familiarity
with Women, being allowed in France. We found her Wit surprising as her Beauty;
and, her Mien and Conduct, such as gave Advantage to them both. In a Word,
Eliachim was lost amidst so many Perfections.

When we came to our Inn at Night, and were in our Chamber together, he vented
his Passion in these Words. Mahmut, I Have passed these Years hitherto, without
any other Sentiments of Love, save those which in General I owe to all our
Race, and some more particular Regards of Friendship and Duty. But, since I saw
this lovely Creature, methinks my Friends, and all that ought to be beloved on
Earth, is now contracted into her. It Is not her Snowy Skin or Matchless
Features, are of Force to move me; though they are such, thy self being Judge,
as would have soiled Apelles Art to imitate: but, it is a Luster which I cannot
express! Surely, 'twas Lightning darted from her Eyes, those fair Avenues of
her brighter Soul! The subtle Flame, glanced through my Breast, and in a Moment
scorched my Reason up! The lovely Basilisk, shot Deaths at every Look: Thou
saw how I sat as one transformed; so lifeless and without motion was I,
whilst gazing on my Ruin! And, to this Hour, a Fatal Numbness spreads though
all my Veins, as if I^d touched some dire Torpedo.

Thus went he raving on, till I interrupted him with Laughter and Raillery,
endeavoring to cure him of this Lovesick Humor, by ridiculing it. I told him
my own Experience of this Foolish Passion, rehearsed my former Adventures with
Daria, and how at length I got the Victory of this vain Fondness, by Absence,
and the Exercise of my Reason. But, all that I could say, made no Impression on
the stupid Lover. He grew but worse, and so I left him to seek Repose from
Sleep.

We came not to Orleans till the next Day, where we tarried not long, having no
other Business, as it happened, but to see the Rarities of the Town, and inform
our selves of those Things, it is convenient for Travelers to know. After
which, we returned to Paris; I, with the same Sentiments I had at my first
setting out from thence; but, it seems, the World was Metamorphosed in poor
Eliachim's Opinion: To him the Trees had now lost all their Greenness; the
Flowers, and Grass, and Corn looked withered; the Birds sung mournful Notes;
the Winds blew hoarse unwelcome Sounds; and, every Thing in Nature, seemed to
him to droop, because Falante was not there (so was the Fair one called,) as
Eliachim had learned of her, when we parted from Orleans.

In this melancholy Condition, the poor Brainsick Jew has continued ever
since. When his Cure will commence, I know not.

If thou yet retainest thy Native Liberty, and have not sacrificed it to
Unhappy Love, learn by his Misfortune to watch thy Senses, which are the First
Traitors to the Soul. Adieu.

Paris, 1st. of the 6th. Moon, of the Year 1647.
LETTER XXIX. To the Captain Bassa.
THou that have had thy Education in Arsenals, and have led the Rest of thy
Life in Ships of War, wilt be best able to Judge of the Proposal, which a
certain bold Sea-Captain made to Cardinal Mazarini not long ago.

It being the General Discourse of this City, with what Insult and Defiance
Admiral Morosini, with about Thirty Men of War, entered the Hellespont, and
braved the Dardanels; This Officer told the Cardinal, That if he would furnish
him with half that Number of Ships, he would engage to drive the Sultan out of
his Seraglio, lay that Palace in the Dust, and beat down the Towers of all the
Mosquees in Constantinople, or lose his Life in the Attempt. To which the
Cardinal replied. Monsieur, I believe it is possible, if you could finish your
Work, before they would board your Men of War, with a Hundred Galleys and
Saicks full of Armed Men.

It is said, that Cardinal Richlieu, had such a Project once; which made him
propose the building of Prodigious High Ships, whose Outsides should be stuck
all over with sharp Spikes, that should render it Impossible for Galleys to
board them.

By this thou may know, that such an Attempt is not thought Impracticable by
the Christians. I wish it be not put in Effectual Execution by them, when the
Port may least dream of it.

Christina, Queen of Suedeland, has caused a most Magnificent Vessel to be
built, with Design to present it to Cardinal Mazarini. The Inner Work of the
Cabin, is of Cedar, curiously overlaid with Flowers and other Imagery of Gold.
The Extremity of the Stern, adorned with Windows, Statues and Galleries; the
Wooden Work, all overlaid with the same Metal. The Roof of the Cabin, presents
the Story of Jason's Expedition to get the Golden Fleece, painted by the best
Masters in Suedeland. All the Furniture, speaks the Royal Bounty of her that
gives it. The Cannon, are of the purest Brass. The Rest of the Tackle, such as
are fittest to weather the Winds and Waves; from which, neither this Queen's
Sovereignty in Suedeland, nor the Cardinal's Grandeur in France, could exempt
either of them, were they exposed to Sea.

There are those who whisper on this Occasion, That the Queen of Suedeland, has
some Inclinations to the Roman Catholic Religion; That she has had several
Conferences with Monsieur Chanut, on that Subject, as also with his Priests;
That her Resident in Portugal, has openly embraced that Faith, not without the
Queen's private Consent and Approbacion. It is not Material to us, what
Religion the Infidels profess, whilst they assert Doctrines repugnant to the
Divine Unity, and the Truth of the Sent of God. I behold, at this Time, an
evident Sign of his Unity in the Heavens; it is the New Moon, just rising from
the Lower Hemisphere. At the Sight of this Planet, the Messenger of God has
commanded me to fall on my Face, and adore the Eternal.

Wherefore praying, that her Influences may prove propitious to thee, whilst
thou art on the Ocean, I bid thee adieu.

Paris, 23d. of the 6th. Moon, of the Year 1647.
The End of the Second Book.
LETTERS Writ by A SPY at PARIS.
VOL. III. BOOK III.
LETTER I. To Bedredin, Superior of the Convent of Dervises, at Cogni in
Natolia.
NOT more welcome are the Rich Perfumes of Arabia, to a Soul almost expiring
through Grief and Melancholy, than is thy Letter to Mahmut, wherein is
contained, the Certificate of thy being yet on this Side the State of
Invisibles. Methinks, all Nature flourishes, while thou art alive. And, I feel
a Spirit within me, prompts me to presage, That thy Death, like the Fall of
Leaves in Autumn, will prove the Harbinger of the World's Last Winter. Whilst
thou live, thy Prayers and Merits, support the drooping Elements: Which are
now almost ready to fall, into their Primitive Chaos and Inactivity. The Angel
of the Trumpet, in Contemplation of thy Virtue, delays to found the Grand
Tremendous Blast; which, at an Instant, shall puff out the Light of Sun, Moon
and Stars, and blow the Breath out of the Nostrils of all the Living
Generations. That Day, shall be a Day of Darkness, Horror and Silence, till the
Hour of Transmigration comes: When, at the Second Blast, the Firmament shall
rent asunder, like the Opening of Curtains; this Old World shall fly away, like
a Shadow, to the Right Hand and to the Left. Then shall Naked Souls hang
hovering in the Empty Space, 'twixt Paradise and Hell. The Throne shall be
placed, Judgment shall be given: And, to wind up the Mysteries of Fate, A New
and Immortal World, shall at a Moment spring forth from the Womb of Eternity,
and possess the Place of the Former.

I write not this to Instruct thee, Venerable Bedredin, who art a Mine of
Knowledge; but, to satisfy thee, That though I live amongst Infidels, yet I
conserve Inviolate the Faith of my Fathers, believing the Book brought down
from the Eternal Archives. Thou fear, that I shall turn Christian, being
accused by Some, of Levity in my Opinions; by Others, of Profaneness and
Atheism; by All, of discovering too favorable an Inclination to the Nazarenes.

Suffer me, O Holy President of the Servants of God, to purge my self from
these false Imputations, the Product of Envy and Malice. Permit me to lay at
thy Sacred Feet, a Modest Apology for my Faith.

Let not that Description of the Christians Messiah, which I sent thee in my
last Letter, create in thee an Opinion to my Disadvantage; nor prevail on thee
to think, I can ever swerve from the profound Attach I owe to the Sent of God.
I Honor Jesus, the Son of Mary; and so I do all his Brethren, the Prophets in
Paradise: This I am taught in the Alcoran. Where is then my Crime? If I give
Virtue its due Praise, even in the Infidels, am I therefore a Nazarene? If I
speak with Reverence and Modesty of Christian Princes, am not I therefore a
Mussulman? Or, does the Book of Glory teach us Arrogance? Surely, my Traducers
will blush, when they shall consider, That Our August Emperors themselves (who
are Sovereigns of All the Kings on Earth) when they vouchsafe to write to
Christian Princes, they dictate their Letters in a Style, full of Affection and
Regard. They give them Magnificent Titles at the Beginning; and, at the
Conclusion, they wish them Increase of Felicity, both Here and in Paradise.
And, would it become a Slave, to treat Crowned Heads with less Respect, than
does the Master of the Universe? If I have contracted Friendship with some of
the Christian Dervises, it was to serve the Ends of the Sublime Port, and
perform the Rites of Gratitude. I thought it no Crime, to receive a Kindness
from any Man, or to return it, without examining his Religion. But, perhaps
they suspect the Intimacies I had with Cardinal Richlieu, and still have with
his Successor Mazarini. Rest assured, O Holy Dervise, That my Access to these
Princes of the Roman Church, is so far from being Criminal, that without it I
never had been capable of penetrating into the Counsels of the Infidels, nor of
doing any effectual Service to the Grand Signior. The Countenance which my
Familiarity with these Two Great Ministers affords me, has all along
facilitated my Designs. And, whilst, under their Umbrage, I am taken for a
Zealous Christian, I secretly lay a Foundation, whereon, in due Time, shall be
built, even in the Heart of Christendom, Triumphal Arches, for the Victorious
Mussulmans. It Is strange, methinks, that after all this, I should be suspected!
That notwithstanding, I have patiently endured Nine Years Confinement, to an
Obscure and Private Life; a Melancholy Banishment, to a Strange Country; yea,
to a City, for which I have a Natural Aversion; a City the most Unclean, Noisy
and Vain in the whole Earth; to be shut up, for the Sake of avoiding Discovery,
in a Chamber so Narrow, that Suspicion it self, nay, even Thought, the Mother
of that Little Passion, would sweat and be stifled, when once Circumscribed
within these Walls; and after all this, to be made a Prisoner of State, on
Jealousy of being a Mohammedan: To abide that Punishment so many Moons, unmoved,
uncorrupted, and at length to be released, to the Advantage of the Ottoman
Interest; and yet, to be traduced at Home, for a Traitor to God, his Prophet,
and my Sovereign, has surely something in it of Inconsistent.

What is then my Crime? Or, why am I thus aspersed? Let my Slanderers hereafter
be silent. Unless they will lay it to my Charge, That in some of my Letters, I
have discovered a Mind free from Superstition; That I put a high Value on
Reason, and have no low Esteem, for some of the Ancient Philosophers; That I
endeavor to guard my Sense, and will not suffer it to be muzzled with the
Impositions of Ignorance and Prejudice; That I do not think it a Necessary
Qualification of a Mussulman, to pursue with Inexorable Hatred, all Men that
differ from me in Opinion. In fine, That in all my Conversation, I strive to
comport my self, as One who asserts the Unity of the Divine Essence, the
Plurality of his Prophets, the Determinate Number of the Elect; and, who is
resolved and prepared, rather to die a Thousand Deaths, than voluntarily to
commit any Impiety against these Principles, or the Interest of the Grand
Signior, who has a Right to command all Mankind. If these be Crimes, I must own
my self Culpable: If not, let my Accusers lay their Hand upon their Mouth. And
continue thou, Sage Doctor of our Holy Law, to instruct me with thy Counsels,
to assist me with thy Prayers, and to protect me with thy Friendship. Then
shall Mahmut persevere a True Believer, a Faithful Slave to the Osman Emperor,
and a Devout Admirer of thy Longevity and Virtue.

I should fear, this might be the last Letter I should have the Honor to send
thee, were I not convinced by some near Examples, That Old Age was not
restrained to the Times before the Flood. Though thou have far outpass'd the
ordinary Years of Men, yet there is at this Time, not far from Paris, a Man who
has near doubled thy Age. He is an Hermit, living on a Hill, where all Things
necessary for Human Sustenance seem to be wanting. The Walls of his House are
built of Mud, with his own Hands (a weak Defense against Wind and Rains.) His
Bed is composed of Leaves of Trees. A Stone serves him for his Pillow. His Diet
consists of such Herbs and Fruits, as that Mountain affords him. A neighboring
Well, allays his Thirst. He has dwelt in this Place, and in this Manner, Eighty
Three Years, after he had Traveled most Parts of Europe and Asia. Ask him by
what Means he preserved his Life so long, he answers, By living free from Care,
and by being Indifferent to all Things. He foretells Things to come with
mavelous Success, as has been often observed. Which makes the People esteem
him a Prophet.

The French tell me of another, who lived longer than he, being Three Hundred
Sixty and One Years Old when he died. He was called, John of the Times, in
Regard he lived from the Reign of Charles the Great, to that of the Emperor
Conrade. And, being asked, What Diet he used, his Answer was, Honey within, and
Oil without.

This comforts me with the Hopes of seeing thee on Earth, though many Years
hence: Since, no Man can exceed thee in Abstinence, Sobriety, and the Calmness
of thy Mind.

The Great Author of Life so grant, That if I may not enjoy this Felicity Here,
yet I may not, by any enormous Crimes, merit to be excluded thy Society in
Paradise.

Paris, 11th. of the 7th. Moon, of the Year 1647.
LETTER II. To Murat Bassa.
THE French are puffed up, with the late Defeat they gave the Spanish Fleet in
Sight of Naples. Their Joy would know no Bounds, were it not curbed by the Loss
of the Duke of Breze, who was slain by a Cannon Bullet in this Naval Combat.

The Young Prince of Conde, has been also forced to withdraw his Army from
before Lerida; that Place, being ever Fatal to the French. This has lessened
the* Disgrace, which the Count of Harcourt received last Campaign, in not being
able to carry that Town, after Six Moons Siege.

But, the News from the Levant, has elated all the Franks beyond Measure: Yet,
I hope the Relations that are scattered abroad on that Subject, are rather an
Effect of their Wishes, than of any real Success against the Invincible Osmans.

It is reported, That there have been Two Sea Fights, between our Fleets and
the Venetians; that in the Former, we lost Two Thousand Men, Seven Galleys and
a Bassa; that in the Latter, the Venetians took Forty Galleys, Six Caramusals,
and Fifty Saiques, laden with Men and Ammunition for the Relief of our Army in
Candy.

The Honor of this last Victory, is ascribed to the Valor and Conduct of
Bernard Morosini, and General Grimani; Bernard succeeding his Brother Thomas
Morosini, who was killed, as they say, it the First Battle.

The Christians every where express great Joy for these Victories. The open
Streets are filled with Tables, covered with all Manner of Dainties, at the
Public Cost: They feast and revel Night and Day. The Bells ring continually,
and Bonefires are made, to celebrate the Triumph of the Nazarenes. They presage
to themseves, the Conquest of the Ottoman Empire, and Eternal Victories.

From Dalmatia, the Posts bring daily News of our Losses and Disgraces. It is
known here, That the Castles of Xemonido, Novigrade, Nadin, Carin, and all the
Places of Strength which we had in our Possession, except Clissa, are taken by
the Venetians.

They laugh at our Siege of Sebenigo, where we lost Two Thousand Men, and at
Length were forced to leave our Camp to the Christians; our General being
frighted away by a few Women.

It seems Strange and Ominous to me, that those Arms, which have formerly
crushed the Greatest Monarchies to Pieces, and have changed the Face of the
whole Earth, should now be foiled by a few Desperado's! I dare be thus far a
Prophet, That either the Soldiers are disgusted, which will produce a
Revolution; or, the Mighty Empire of the Osmans, is in its Decline; which God
avert.

The Christians (who are not ignorant of our Affairs, nor of the very Secrets
of the Seraglio) by an Odd Kind of Charity, pray for the Long Life of Sultan
Ibrahim. For, they say, our Armies must needs miscarry during his Reign; most
of the Officers, being offended at his Licentious Life, and Cruel Actions.
Besides, they tax him with Profuseness, in that he has not spared the Private
Treasury of Gold, which, by the Frugality of his Predecessors, had been heaped
together; and, which it was not counted lawful for them to touch, unless in the
utmost Peril of the Empire. They say, that by the Additions which Sultan Amurat
had made, this Treasure was augmented to above Thirty Millions of Sequins: But,
that our present Emperor, has squandred most of it away, on his Pleasure. They
compare him to Heliogabalus, the most Effeminate Prince that ever Reigned:
Praising at the same Time, the Magnanimity and Valor of Sultan Amurat; who,
they say, was the Stoutest Man on Earth. They highly applaud his Bravery at the
Siege of Babylon, when he accepted the Challenge of the Persian Soldier; and
entering into a single Combat with the Unhappy Redhead, at one Blow, with his
Sabre, cleft him (though in Armor) to the Middle. In Memorial whereof, thou
know, that Armor hangs to this Day in the Hazoda. In fine, they extol his
Justice: Whereof he gave a remarkable Instance, in punishing a certain Hogia,
who had cheated a Pilgrim of his Jewels. Thou remembrest that Passage. And, the
Stone-Mortar, wherein that Miserable Wretch was pounded alive by his Own
Sentence, is yet to be seen at the Gate of the Divan, a Monument of his
Villainy, and the Sultan's Justice.

These Things are not unknown in the West: For, the Nazarenes have their
Intelligencers, in the Imperial City. Hence they derive Occasions, to Censure
or Praise the Actions of our August Emperors, who are Companions of the Sun,
and Brothers of the Stars.

What I have said, I trust to thy Integrity, whereof I have had Experience.
Those who degenerate from that Virtue, may their Souls find no more Rest in the
Other World, than a Frenchman's Hat has in This, which is always in Motion.
Adieu.

Paris, 15th. of the 8th. Moon, of the Year 1647.
LETTER III. To Mahomet Techli, Bassa of Bosna, at his Camp in Dalmatia.
THOU art a fit Man to lead the Mussulman Armies, who durst not hold up thy
Head against a few Women? Perhaps thy Mother's Milk hangs yet on thy Chin; thou
art not weaned from the Discipline of the Nursery. Was the Strong Fortress of
Sebenico, of so small a Price, that thou should basely decamp from before it,
because a few Females appeared on the Walls? Is this the Way to aggrandize thy
Master? What will the Christians say to this Cowardice? Nay, what do they not
say already? The News of that Siege, had reached all Parts of Europe; the
Nazarenes were big with Expectation of the Event. Now they know it, they laugh
both at thee, and at all the Mussulmans. Thou have brought a Disgrace on the
most Exalted Empire in the World.

What, if thou did lose Two Thousand Men before the Walls of that Fort? Is
that a sufficient Justification of thy raising the Siege? Our Glorious Sultans
do not use to win Cities and Castles without Blood; neither do they spare to
sacrifice the best Part of their Army, to the Honor of their Arms; whilst our
Indefatigable Soldiers, have mounted on Heaps of Slaughtered Spahi's, and
scaled the Battlements of their Enemies. Whereas thou, were afraid of a few
Stones, that the Women hurled on thy Men from the Walls! Thou art more
effeminate than Sardanapalus! It were fitter for thee, to handle the Distaff,
and Spin for thy Bread, than to draw a Sword in the Field of Honor. It is a
wonder thy own Soldiers do not abandon thee, being ashamed to serve under so
Weak a Commander.

I counsel thee, speedily to recover thy lost Reputation, by some notable
Service. Let not Perils affright thee; but remember, that true Fortitude
surmounts all Difficulties; and, that thou can not pass into the Temple of
Honor, but through that of Virtue. It is not my Part to project for thee: The
whole Country is before thee: Thou know, or at least ought to know, the
Motions and Strength of thy Enemies. Do something speedily, that shall speak
thee Wise and Valiant. Thou had better lose thy Life so, than by a Bow-string.

Take this Advice, as a Mark of my Friendship; for, Mahmut uses not so frankly
to reprove those, whom he esteems his Enemies. Adieu.

Paris, 15th. of the 8th. Moon, of the Year 1647.
LETTER IV. To Achmet Bassa.
NOT long ago, arrived here a Courier from Suedeland, bringing Letters from
Queen Christina, and Monsieur Chanut, the French Resident at Stockholme.

Among other Matters, they give an Account, That on the Twenty Seventh Day of
the Seventh Moon, that Great Princess had like to have been stabbed, in the
Midst of her Guards, surrounded with her Courtiers, before the Altar of her
God; at an Hour, when all the Subjects of that Kingdom, were on their Knees, to
render Heaven Propitious to Her and the Public.

That Day, there was a Fast proclaimed through all Suedeland; and, he was
esteemed no Good Subject, who did not repair to the Public Solemnities. The
Queen, to give an Example, went at the Third Hour of the Day to the Mosque of
her Palace, attended by the Great Officers of State, and a Numerous Train of
the Nobility. When the Preacher (as is the Custom) had made an End of speaking,
all that were present fell on their Knees, to perform the appointed Devotions.
But, it being the Fashion of the Nazarenes, to utter some secret preparative
Oraisons; the Men covered their Faces with their Hats, to be more recollected.

While all Eyes were thus veiled, a certain Fellow snatching the Opportunity,
steps from his Place; and, without making any great Noise, by large Strides,
advances unseen to the Rails which enclose the Pavement, next to the Altar,
where the Queen was on her Knees. But, in leaping over, he was perceived by a
certain Nobleman; who, immediately cried out to the Guards, to stop the
Assassin. They crossed their Partisans; but the Villain, hurled them one
against another with so great Violence, that while they were striving to
recover their entangled Weapons, he got quite through them. At which time, the
Queen also raising her self up at the Noise, pushed the Captain of her Guards,
who kneeled beside her. He starting from his Place, leaped between the Queen
and the Murderer, who was now within Two Paces of her. He seizes the Wretch;
and, upon immediate Search, they found Two long sharp-pointed Knives about him,
without Sheaths; One in his Bosom, the Other in his Pocket. The Prison being in
the Castle or Palace of the Queen, under her very Apartment, she was not
willing he should be carried thither; but ordered him, to be reconducted to his
own Chamber, which was in the College of Stockholme; he being an Ecclesiastic
of the said College: Commanding also, a good Guard to be set over him; which
was performed accordingly.

As soon as the Wretch saw himself in his Chamber, he said aloud, That when he
went out in the Morning, he little thought of ever-returning again; having
undertaken an Action, in doing of which, he expected to lose his Life.

They used all Diligence imaginable, in discovering the Authors of this
intended Murder; but, could learn Nothing more, than that this Fellow was a
Lunatic, whom at Certain Seasons, an Unaccountable Fury spurred on to many
Extravagancies.

Yet some suspect, that he was hired by the Lutheran Clergy to give this
Execrable Blow; who were apprehensive, that the Queen harkening too much to the
Insinuations of her Tutor, who was a Calvinist, would Innovate the Established
Religion of the Country.

If this be a well grounded Suspicion, it follows at the best, that Religion,
which ought to correct the Morals of Men, and have an Influence in restraining
their Exorbitant Passions, is become the Corrupter of their Manners, and the
Fomenter of the most Enormous Crimes. But, this is common among the Christians,
who being divided into Innumerable Parties, distinguished by as many Several
Names; yet each Sect is so sure that their Way is the only Right Path to
Salvation, that they spare for neither Murders, Sacrileges, nor Treasons, to
proselyte the Rest to their Opinion; being unwilling, that any should live, who
are not of the same Mind with them.

The King of France and the Queen-Regent, received the News of Queen
Christina's Delivery from this Designed Blow, with much Joy; the Interests of
both Crowns, being at this Time closely intermingled.

I can inform thee of Nothing more Remarkable at present, save, That certain
Letters are intercepted, which the Duke of Bavaria had written to the Duke of
Wirtemberg, and the Elector of Cologne: The Contents of which discover, that
the Duke of Bavaria, is not far from a Reconciliation with the Emperor; and,
that in the mean time, he only waits the Event of Things, to direct him in the
Choice of his Party.

God confirm thee in thy Integrity, that thou may never waver or swerve, from
the Service and Duty thou owe the Grand Signior.

Paris, 28th. of the 9th. Moon, of the Year 1647.
LETTER V. To Cara Hali, a Physician at Constantinople.
THOU have heaped many Favors on me; yet I have never had an Opportunity, of
making the least Acknowledgment. Accept now a Small Present from Mahmut's
Hands, who being not Master of Wealth, can make no Great Ones. I send thee
neither Silver, Gold, nor Jewels, which the Insatiable Avarice of Mortals, has
violently torn from the Bowels of their Common Mother. Neither shall thou
receive from me, any of the more familiar Products of the Earth, such as grow
on her Surface. Expect no choice Fruits, or Wine, or Oil; nor any thing framed
by the Art of Man, whether for Delight, or Use. What I send thee, is the Dew of
Heaven, a certain Quintessence of the Elements, an Aetherial Spirit, first
condensed into a Vapor, then into a more liquid Substance, and afterward
congealed into a Gum. It is the celebrated Manna of Calabria.

Adonai the Jew, sent it to me out of Italy, as a Rarity. I knew not whom so
properly to oblige with this Present, as the Studious of Natural Things, Haly
the Sage Physician, and my Friend.

The Philosopher Averroes, our Countryman, has written much of this excellent
Substance. He calls it, the Food of the Airy Angels. And says, the Young Ravens
crying in their Nests, are nourished by this Heavenly Diet, when the Old Ones
forsake them: And, that the Chamelions, seek no other Repast during their
Lives, but the Invisible Manna that every where floats in the Morning Air. He
holds it possible, That a Man, after he has passed his Great Climacter, may
live without any other Sustenance, save what he receives from this Heavenly
Distillation; that he may thus prolong his Life, for the Space of Seven Years,
which will complete the appointed Age of Mortals. Many of the sublimely
instructed among the Arabians, are of the same Opinion; so are not a few of the
Hebrew Rabbi's: But, the Christians, who are Gluttons, laugh at this Doctrine,
as Ridiculous and Impracticable: Forgetting at the same time, what they read in
their Bible (which they pretend is the Rule of their Faith) that the Israelites
had Nothing else to feed on, for a considerable time, in the Desert, when they
were almost Eight Hundred Thousand Souls, and the Greatest Part of them in
their full Strength, Men of Arms, and inured to the Toils of War.

Certainly, it were a desirable Thing, that this Divine Largess, were
distributed to all the Regions on Earth. But, God sends his Blessings to whom,
and when he pleases. It Is he that directs the Clouds, when they move through
the Air, and rest not till they arrive at barren and dry Places, where they
pour forth their Water to refesh the Earth, and render it fruitful. God! There
is but One God, Lord of the Worlds! These are Signs of his Unity to True
Believers, but the Incredulous have hardened their Hearts.

It is recorded, That in former Times, the Ground whereon this Manna descended,
belonged to a certain Nobleman of the Country; who, covetous of the Unusual
Blessing, undertook to enclose all that Land with a high Wall, to the End that
so rare a Gift, might not be made Common to every one. But, as soon as the
Workmen had begun to lay the Foundations of this Enclosure, the Manna ceased to
fall, and so continued, as long as they proceeded in that Envious work. Which,
when the Lord of the Ground was made sensible of, he commanded the Workmen to
desist: Saying withal, The Almighty gives, and the Almighty takes away.
Henceforward, I will not seek to restrain the Free Gift of Heaven. Upon which,
the Manna descended daily as before, and so has continued to do ever since.
Doubtless, this is a Sign of God's Omnipotence.

If thou will permit me to play the Philosopher, I will tell thee my Opinion,
why this Manna is seen rather in the Kingdom of Naples, than in any other
Region of the Earth.

It is well known, that the Earth of this Country, abounds with Veins of
Sulphur, which are diffused up and down through all Parts, and heat the Soil to
an Extraordinary Degree. Hence it follows, that the Lower Region of the Air in
this Country, must needs acquire a greater Degree of Heat and Dryness also,
being perpetually rarefied by the Fiery Atoms, which every where transpire
through the Pores of the Earth, as from a Furnace.

This being so, it is not hard to conceive, that the Vapors which are exhaled
by the Sun into the Upper Region, in the Heat of a Summers Day, and there
become Impregnated by the Aetherial Spirit, (which remains pure and unclothed
in those serener Tracts, and consequently, is apt to Incorporate with any
proper Vehicle) Naturally descend again in the Cool of the Night; but, not
meeting with a Congenious Body of Vapors, in the Lower Region, that Air being
over-purify'd, and grown defecate, through the too near Neighborhood of the
Burning Soil, so that they cannot diffuse themselves through the Air for want
of a fit Medium, they consisting of Homogeneous Parts, and following the
Natural Position of the Element, and the Laws of Gravity; contract themselves
into little Globular Forms the lower they descend, thus settling on the Leaves
of Trees, on the Grass and Herbs, on Stones and any Part of the Earth,
appearing like Grains of Transparent Gum.

Hence also I conceive, That the same Manna (which is Nothing else, but an
Aetherial Spirit, embodied in light and dulcid Vapors) abounds in the Air of
most Countries, but remains invisible, rarely so far condensed, as to settle in
a gross Body on the Ground, because the Air of those Regions, is not so
rarified as is that of Calabria, having no such Subterranean Fires to drink the
Vapors up; but being moist and thick, the descending Manna, instead of
contracting it self into Globular Bodies, and through its Weight sinking to the
Earth, dilates it self, and incorporates with the floating Vapors: Just as if
you pour drops of Water, into a Vessel full of the same Element, those Drops do
not sink to the Bottom, but finding an Homogeneous Body, they mix with it, and
are dispersed every way; whereas, if there be nothing in the way to stop them,
they immediately fall to the Ground.

But, I shall tire thee with my Philosophy, forgetting that I speak to a Man
consummate in all Sciences. Adonai relates many remarkable Passages of this
Country, too tedious for a Letter. I will only tell thee in short, That the
Kingdom of Naples, is esteemed one of the most Delectable Regions on Earth, the
Trees flourishing Twice a Year, and the Soil abounding to Prodigality with
Corn, Wine, Oil and Fruits, and all Things necessary for the Life of Man. Yet,
the Inhabitants, have this Proverb common among them; The Kingdom of Naples is
a Paradise of Delights, but it is inhabited with Devils. So corrupted are the
Manners of the People.

Adieu, Dear Haly, and think not Mahmut tedious in his Letters, who has no
other Way at this Distance, to converse with his Friends.

Paris, 19th. of the 10th. Moon, of the Year 1647.
LETTER VI. To Kerker Hassan, Bassa.
WHEN this Dispatch shall come to thy Hands, be assured, that Mahmut thy
Countryman, and Slave to the Slaves of the Grand Signior, wishes thee
multiplicity of Happiness. I have many Reasons to honor thee, besides the
Natural Affection, which is or ought to be, between those who were born in the
same Region. The many Favors thou have done me, have far exceeded the
Obligation, which arises from the Vicinity of our Birth: Though, that was so
near, that a strong Man, would have measured the Distance, with one Flight of
an Arrow.

The Present of Kopha, for which I returned thee Thanks in my last, has wrought
wonderful Effects on me, being a perfect Cure of the Melancholy, to which I was
before subject. It has freed me from many Distempers; and, I owe the present
Ease and Cheerfulness I enjoy, to this Generous Gift.

Methinks, while I am drinking this excellent Liquor, I am at Constantinople,
conversing with my Friends. It revives in me the Genius of Asia; and so
advantageously transforms the Idea's of things which I see, that the Crosses on
the Tops of the Christian Temples, appear to me as Half-Moons; And, my
Imagination presents to me, Turbants instead of Hats, as Men walk along the
Streets of Paris.

Doubtless, great is the Force of what we eat or drink, which has occasioned
all Wise Lawgivers, among other Sanctions, to prescribe certain Rules of Diet:
And, the Care of our Holy Prophet, has been exquisite in this Point, his
Prohibitions, extending to all Unclean Meats and Drinks; since, they deprave
the Constitutions of Men, and incline them to Vice. But, by his own Example, he
recommended to us the Use of this Admirable Berry; Imposing a new Name on the
Tree that bears it, when he called it, the Tree of Purification. Hence it is,
that all the Mussulmans affect to partake of the Sanctified Benefit; it being
the Universal Beverage, of the Osman Empire. Were the Virtues of it known in
these Western Parts, it would match, if not supplant the Credit of their Wines:
since it equally refreshes the Spirits, without Intoxicating the Brain.

I know not whether thou have seen Pestelihali my Brother, since thy Return
from Arabia: Or, whether thou have heard the News he brought with him out of
the East. He has surveyed the Indies, Tartary, China, Tunquin, Persia, and
other Regions, whose Names are hardly known in some Parts of the Ottoman
Empire. Indeed, we have formerly had but an odd Idea of those Remote Countries:
But, especially China, has been hid from the greatest Part of the Earth.

In my earlier Years, I have heard Men of Gravity, who would be taken for
Knowing Persons, say, That China was but a Tributary Province of the Tartars, a
Contemptible Corner of Asia, and so barren, as it could hardly afford
Sustenance for its Inhabitants; which is a Sign, it is well Peopled. Assuredly,
our Fathers were Ignorant of this Country; which, after the Perpetual Monarchy
of the Osmans, may be esteemed the Second Empire on Earth.

My Brother says, it contains Sixteen Provinces, each as large as a Kingdom:
And, that all together, they fill up a Tract of Ground as big as Europe; which,
thou know, is one of the Four Quarters of the World: And, that this vast
Dominion, contains above a Hundred Millions of Inhabitants.

The Emperor who Reigned, when Pestelihali was there, was called Zunchin: A
young Prince, not above Thirty Years of Age; in whose Veins, ran the Blood of
Sixteen Emperors, his Progenitors.

In the Year 1640. Two great Officers in his Army, having drawn to their Party
an Innumerable Company of the Soldiers, and being encouraged by some Grandees
at the Court, made a Revolt. The Names of these Rebels, were Lycungz and
Changien. They soon became Masters of Five Provinces: But, quarrelling about
their Shares, Lycungz caused his Associate to be poisoned; and taking on
himself the sole Command of the Rebels, was proclaimed by them, Emperor of
China. After which, he marched directly with his whole Forces against Pequin, a
City where the Emperor kept his Court: Knowing, that the Conquest of this
Place, would secure to him, all the remaining Provinces of the Empire.

The Chinese are reputed a most Ingenious People, excelling in all Manner of
Mechanic Inventions; and the boldest Architects in the World. They build
Bridges from one Mountain to another, to shorten the Travelers Journey over
the Plain between them; and, raise Towers almost up to the Clouds. Some of
their Cities, are said to be near Thirty Leagues in Compass, having Double
Walls and Ditches. And, my Brother says, the City Pequin, wants not much of
this Extent: And, that the Palace of the Emperor, is near a League in Circuit,
environed by Three Walls, and as many Moats; besides Bulwarks, and other
Fortifications. He adds, That this Mighty City and Palace, is guarded by an
Hundred Thousand Soldiers.

This Impregnable Place, the Rebels took by Stratagem, which was able to have
resisted all the Force of Asia. Lycungz held a private Correspondence, with
several Grandees within the Town and Palace. By whose Connivence, he sent great
Numbers of the Stoutest Men in his Army, disguized in the Habit of Merchants;
who lodging themselves in diverse Quarters of the City, on a Day appointed,
suddenly appeared in Arms; and surprising the Guards who defended the Gates,
slew them all, and opened the Gates to the Rebels.

Who can express the Confusion and Slaughter, that filled all Parts of the City
with Mourning and Blood? The Barbarous Conqueror, sacrificed all the Loyal and
the Brave, to his Unpardonable Ambition; disarmed those who escaped the first
Massacre; and having made himself Absolute Master of the City, lays a close
Siege to the Imperial Palace.

The Emperor now finding that he was betrayed, and that it was too late to
defend himself from the Cruel Persecution and Insult of the Traitors; takes
Advantage of the short Resistance, which some of his Faithful Servants made, to
consult his own Honor, with that of the Empress and his Daughter. He had above
Three Thousand Wives, for whom he could not provide in that Flood of
Calamities. All his Care being employed, to prevent the last Triumph of his
Enemies, in not suffering the Royal Blood, to be shed by the profane Hands of
those Villains. He entered into the Gardens of the Palace, accompanied only by
his Empress and Daughter, with Three Faithful Eunuchs. The Young Princess, (who
was a Lady Educated in all the Chinese Learning) seeing the great Affliction of
her Royal Parents, the Inevitable Ruin of their Family, and the Universal
Desolation; fell on her Knees, and spoke to her Father, as follows: My Lord,
SInce it is the Will of the Immortal Gods, thus to extinguish the Luster and
Majesty of our Sublime Race, let their Decrees be fulfilled. But, let not me be
a Spectator of my Parents Fall, or survive a Tragedy, at which the Earth it
self must tremble. Have this Compassion on my tender Years, and let these Eyes
be closed, before Death seal up Yours, from which Mine borrowed all their
Light. Think not, because I am Young, I fear to die: I long to see our Kindred
Gods, and represent the Fate of China, so as to provoke their speedy Vengeance.
Surely, our Deifi'd Ancestors, at my Complaint, would gather all the Thunder in
the Heavens, and shower it down upon these Perjured and Ungrateful Traitors. Or
else, they would play the Chemists, and extract the most Envenomed Influence of the
Stars, and dart the Heavenly Poison on the Rebels, as they lie before these
Sacred Walls, and thus would put a Period to their Cursed Treason. Make no
Delay, My Royal Father, but, try the Experiment; release me from these Chains,
which hinder my Escape to Paradise: And, let me be the Herald of such News, as
never before surpised the Blessed Above.




The Emperor moved with this Passionate Address of his Daughter, drew a Dagger
from his Girdle, and therewith stabbed her to the Heart. And then, struck with
Remorse at so Unnatural a Deed, covered his Face with a Veil of Silk. Thus
acting Agamemnon's Part, when, to fulfill the Oracle, he Sacrificed his Daughter
Iphigenia.

After this, the Empress overwhelmed with so many Sorrows, retired into a
Grove, and Hanged her self with a Silken Cord on a Tree. The Emperor seeing
this Mournful Spectacle, was resolved no longer to delay his own Death.
Wherefore, following her Example, he dispatched himself likewise by a String.
But, he first bit a Vein; and, with his Blood, writ the following Words:

What is there now desirable on Earth, after I am thus betrayed by my own
Subjects? I accuse not the Inferior People: They are Innocent? It Is to the
Mandarins, I owe my sudden Fall, with the Ruin of this Mighty Empire. Behold
in me, the Royal Line extinct. I am the Last of Sixteen Emperors. I, that was
Lord of so many Spacious Regions, Guardian of the Bedchamber of the Sun, sole
Monarch of the Orient, Lieutenant to the Gods of the Mines, Possessor of
Infinite Treasures, at whose Name a Hundred Millions of my Subjects touched the
Ground with their Foreheads; am now ready to be trampled under Foot, by the
Basest of my Slaves. But, I will prevent my own Disgrace, and carry this
Majestic Soul Inviolate, to my renowned Fathers: Whose Vengeance joined with
that of all the Gods, shall fall on the Perfidious Mandarins, who have betrayed
both Me and this Exalted State to Ruin. A Narrative of these Mournful
Passages, was Printed in the Chinese Language; supposed to be done, by the
Order of the Emperor's Attendants, who followed him into the Garden, and were
Witnesses of what was said and done. A Copy of which, my Brother procured to be
translated into Arabic, by a Merchant of our Nation, who understood the
Chinese Language, and resided in Pequin.

In fine, my Brother says, That when he departed from China, he left the Tyrant
Lycungz in Possession of the Emperor's Palace; where he found a Hundred
Millions of Ingots in Gold and Silver, besides an Inestimable Treasury of
Pearls and Precious Stones. All which Wealth, had been heaped together, by the
Frugality of the Chinese Emperors.

By this thou may take an Estimate, of the Grandeur and Strength of this
Formidable Monarchy, of which we have had such Contemptible Notions. Neither
shall thou have Occasion, to be surprised at the Monstrous Rise and Fortune of
this Rebel, who in so short a Time, was lifted to the Height of Humane
Sovereignty; when thou considerest, that all Things are subject to Vicissitude
and Change.

That God, who establishes whom he pleases on the Thrones of the Earth, and at
the Determined Period of Empires, deposes such as trust in their Strength and
Riches; defend our Sovereign from Treasons, and from the Arrows that fly in
Obscurity.

Paris, 13th. of the 11th. Moon, of the Year 1647.
LETTER VII. To Darnish Mehemet, Bassa.
WHAT Obligation have I, to be concerned for the Infidels? Or, what Interest in
the Uncircumcised? Yet, Nature has tied all our Race, in some Common Bonds of
Affection; and Humanity teaches us, to rejoice at the Deliverance of the
Oppressed.

The Kingdom of Naples, has long groaned under the Yoke of Spanish Tyranny. The
Labor of the People, sufficed not to pay the Unreasonable Taxes, that were
Imposed on them. They sweat Blood, to become yet more Miserable; whilst their
Cruel Masters, having fleeced 'em to Nakedness, would take Advantage of their
Poverty, to rivet their Chains yet deeper, and render their Servitude past
Redemption.

The People were sensible of their Calamity, yet knew not how to shake off the
Yoke. It had galled 'em to the Nerves and Sinews; their Strength was gone.
Despair of Redress, had rendered 'em supine; and took from 'em, the very Power
of meditating their Recovery. But Heaven, which protects the Oppressed, has
raised up a Youth from among the Meanest of the People, to assert the Public
Liberty. A Fisherman, who has not seen Four and Twenty Winters, has undertaken
to restore the Ancient Privileges of the Neapolitans. Who can penetrate into
the Methods of Eternal Destiny, which makes Use of so Contemptible Instruments,
to check the Power of the Greatest Monarchs?

This bold Youth, inspired with a Zeal for the Public, ran one Day into the
Streets, crying with a loud Voice, Long live the King of Spain, but let the
Corrupt Officers perish. He had no other Weapon, save a Reed in his Hand; but
was soon followed, by a Multitude of Boys and Young Men, with Clubs and Staves,
who went along the Streets of that Populous City, repeating the Cry after him,
Long live the King of Spain, but let the Corrupt Officers perish. At first, the
Citizens laughed at the Infant Tumult; but, in less than Two Hours, this
Fisherman (whose Name was Masanello) had enrolled above Two Thousand Boys.

The next Day his Numbers increased, by the Accession of all Sorts of lewd and
idle Persons, Malcontents, Debtors, and such as were desirous of Novelty. Nay,
some of the better Sort of Citizens, shut up their Shops, took Arms, and
mingled with the Popular Insurrection: So that, ere Midday, there were above
Ten Thousand Men and Boys, marching along the Streets, and burning the
Custom-Houses, with all their Books of Accounts, throughout the City.

When Masanello beheld himself at the Head of so vast a Multitude, he thought
it time to declare the Reason of his raising this Tumult. Wherefore, getting on
an Eminent Place in one of the Markets, he speaks to his Followers to this
Effect:

Rejoice, O ye Faithful People, and send up Acclamations to the God of Heaven,
who has this Day put it into your Hearts and Hands, to be your own Redeemers.
As for me, my Spirit burned within me, to see the Public Oppression; and, I
set no Value on my Life, when I first began this Glorious Enterprise. One of
the Princes threatened me with the Galleys, if I persisted; but, here are
Thousands my Witnesses, That in stead of fearing him, I smote him on the
Breast, and sent him away joyful, that he escaped with his Life. O ye Faithful
People, trust not the Princes or Nobles: They are the Men who Oppress you, and
would enslave you. Trust in your Arms, and the Justice of your Cause. God has
brought you together; let Nothing separate you, till you have freed your
Country, your selves, your Wives and Children, from perpetual Servitude. Choose
you a Leader, a Man of Courage and Resolution, who is willing to sacrifice his
Life for the Common Good. As for me, I have hitherto lived a Fisherman, and so
I intend to die. The People, exceedingly moved with this Speech, chose him with
one Accord for their Leader; Crying out with loud Acclamations, Long live
Masanello, the Patron of the Neapolitan Liberties.

The first Thing he did, after he was confirmed in this Authority, was, to set
open the Prisons, and list the Prisoners under the Banner of the People. Then
he divided this confused Army, into Regiments and Companies; and sent forth a
Proclamation throughout Naples, commanding all to take Arms, on Pain of having
their Houses burnt. So that in a little time, he had above Fifty Thousand Armed
Men at his Heels.

Thus accompanied, he marches directly toward the Viceroy's Palace, vested in
Cloth of Silver, with a Naked Sword in his Hand. He was accompanied by a
Cardinal, who undertook to be a Mediator, between the Viceroy and the People.
His Presence restrained the Multitude, within some Bounds of Moderation; for,
they Reverenced him, as the Father of the City. Yet, they burnt above Sixty
Palaces of the Nobles to the Ground, with all their Furniture and Goods; and,
it was present Death for any one, to rescue or purloin any Thing from the
Flames: So rigorously Just was this New Lawgiver, this Moses of the
Neapolitans. It was in Vain for the Viceroy, to oppose Force against so
Formidable an Insurrection. He entertained the Young Fisherman, with Ceremonies
due to a Prince: And, having concluded a Truce, gave him the Title, of Chief
Tribune of the Faithful People. This increased the Veneration, the Citizens had
already conceived for Masanello: So that in a Day or Two more, he saw himself
at the Head, of a Hundred and Fifty Thousand Armed Men. He gave out all Orders
for the Republic; published new Edicts; and, all Commissions, were issued in
his Name. He procured the Gabels to be for ever abolished; restored the People
to their Ancient Liberty: And, in Fine, was Murdered by his own' Followers.

Let me not seem an Advocate for Sedition, when I tell thee, there was
something Brave and Heroic in the Actions of this Youth. So strange a
Revolution, in so short a time, has scarce been heard of in the World. For a
Beardless Slave, to raise himself in Six Days, to as Absolute and
Uncontrollable a Sovereignty, as the Greatest Monarch on Earth enjoys; to be
obeyed by an Infinite Number of People, without the least Hesitation or Demurr,
were it for Life or Death; and all this, without any Motive of Ambition or
Interest, but only to assert the Public Liberty; Is a convincing Argument of
his Virtue, and shows, That Heaven approved his Enterprise. But then again, for
him to lose all this Power in Four Days more, to be Murd'red in Cold Blood by
his own Party, by the People whose Cause he had so successfully vindicated;
this shows, the Instability of Human Affairs, and, that there is Nothing
Permanent on this Side the Moon.

I pray God, to inspire the Ministers of the Sublime Port, to take such
Measures, as may preserve the Mussulman Peace. Adieu.

Paris, 13th. of the 11th. Moon, of the Year 1647.
LETTER VIII. To Solomon, his Cousin, at Constantinople.
WHEN I closed up my Last, the Hour of the Post was near expired; and the
Messenger who carries my Letters to him, hastened my Dispatch, preventing what I
had farther to say to thee.

I am solicitous for thy Welfare, both as thou art a Mussulman, and so near a
Relation. Do not forfeit those Titles, by degenerating from thy Kindred, and
from all the Illuminated of God. Truth is comprised in a little Room; but,
Error is Infinite. Thou make a wrong Inference, from the Moderation and
Charity of the True Believers, when thou concludest, That because they believe,
it shall go well with all Honest Men, let their Opinions and Ceremonies be what
they will; therefore thou shall be safe, in retrenching the Endless and
Burdensome Washings (as thou termest them) of the Mussulmans, so long as thou
leadest a Good Moral Life.

Art thou such a Friend to Idleness and Impurity, that thou will by a most
pitiful Sophistry, cheat thy self of Salvation, rather than take the Pains to
wash thy self after the Manner, and at the Times appointed by the Prophet of
God, and practiced by our Fathers, and all the Faithful throughout the World?
If it be allowed, that such as either out of Ignorance, or hindered by some
other Invincible Cause, do not embrace our Holy Law, are not Circumcised, and
repair not to the Assemblies of the Faithful, shall nevertheless enter into
Paradise, provided they obey the Law of Nature Imprinted on their Hearts; does
it follow therefore, that one who has been bred up in the Undefiled Faith, who
has been Circumcised, and lifting up his Right Hand to Heaven, has pronounced
the Seven Mysterious Words, which cannot be repealed; does it follow, I say,
that such an one, shall be regarded by God or his Prophet, any otherwise than
as a Heretic or an Infidel, if he live not up exactly to the Graces that have
been given him? No, assure thy self, if thou art in the Number of these, thou
art an Apostate; thy Virtues are Vices, and all thy Good Works are an
Abomination.

Remember the Piety and Magnanimous Zeal of Assan Hali, thy Grandfather; who,
when he was taken Prisoner by the Cossacks, was entertained with extreme Rigor
and Severity. Nevertheless, a certain Jew in the City, who knew him, brought
him every Day, by Permission of the Keeper, as much Water as would suffice to
wash him, and to quench his Thirst. But, one Day, as he went with his
accustomed Load, and was entering the Gate of the Prison; the Keeper, either out
of Malice or Wantonness, spilt most of the Water on the Ground, forbidding the
Jew at the same time, to bring any more that Day.

The honest Hebrew, went in with the Remainder of the Water, and delivered it
to the Prisoner; who, presently prepared to wash himself, after the accustomed
Manner of the Mussulmans. The Jew seeing that, told him, There was not Water
enough to quench his Thirst. And therewith, related to him what the Keeper had
done. I see there is but a Little (replied the Virtuous Old Man) but, he that
Drinks, or Eats, before he has Washed himself, is guilty of defiling his Soul,
and is not worthy to be numbered among the True Believers. Therefore, it is
better for me to die for Thirst, than violate the Law brought down from Heaven,
and transgress the Traditions of my Fathers. Having said this, he Washed
himself, being Resigned to Providence.

Cousin, deceive not thy self with vain Opinions, nor suffer Hypocrites to
seduce thee. Imitate the Adder, and shut thy Ears against the Crafty
Insinuations of Heretics. It is reported of this little Serpent, That by
Natural Instinct, being sensible when a Magician is about to utter Words which
being heard will ensnare it, lays one Ear close to the Ground, and with its
Tail stops the other, to the End the Enchantment may have no Effect.

Admit not any Man to thy Conversation, who shall attempt to warp thee from the
Simplicity of the Faith and Obedience, which thou owe to the Apostle of God.
Without Water, there is no Purity on this Side the Grave. That Element, has a
Force in it, of which thou art not aware. It Is the Third, in the Rank of Living
Principles. It Is the Tabernacle of the Winds; The Seraglio of the Generative
Spirit; The Stage of Wonders. In fine, it is the Purifier of every Thing that
has Breath.

Thou know, that to serve the Necessities of the Prophet and his Army,
Understanding and Speech was given to a Fountain in Arabia; which having
promised to follow him to the Place of his Repose, made a Channel through the
Desert, and kept Pace with the Troops of the Faithful, till they came to Medina
Talnabi: That so, the Submissive to the Will of Heaven, might not want that
Element, without which, Life it self would be a Burden and a Curse.

And yet, thou speak contemptibly of Water, as a very Indifferent Thing,
whether we use it or not, any other ways than to quench our Thirst. Thus,
making no Difference, between the many Advantages we reap from that Element,
and that Common Use, to which the Beasts put it. In how many Places of the
Alcoran, does the Holy Prophet record the Mercy of God, in giving us Water that
is Fresh and not Salt? How does he celebrate his Wisdom and Goodness, for
directing the Clouds to barren and dry Places? Thou can not be Ignorant, that
it is one of the Encomiums of Paradise, that there are Gardens wherein flow
many Rivers. And after all this, will thou despise so Holy and Blessed a Gift,
without which, Earth and Heaven, Men and Angels, could not be completely happy?

Go learn then of the Indian Idolaters, who have never heard of the Book of
Glory: Go learn of these Barbarians, to prize this Sanctified Creature. They
travel many Hundreds of Leagues, to bathe themselves in the Waters of Ganges.
With those Incorruptible and All-purging Streams, the Brachmans fill certain
Vessels, and transport the Invaluable Liquor, to the Utmost Parts of that Wide
Empire. They travel on Foot, sometimes Two Thousand Miles together, each Man
with his Load of that precious Water, to supply the Wants of those, who live so
remote from the River. So that a Bottle of it, is many times sold to the
Princes and Nobles, for Two Hundred Sequins, or Eight Hundred Roupies: And yet,
for all this, those very Princes, would not die with a safe Conscience, had
they not at least once in their Lives made a Pilgrimage, to this Renowned
River, and bathed themselves in the Waves which blot out Sins.

O Cousin, let the Example of these Infidels, make thee blush at thy Impiety,
and excite thee, to a diligent and indispensible Practice of Cleanness. So
shall thou have a Sound Mind, in a Healthy Body. And, the Angel of thy
Nativity, will not shun thy Person. Adieu.

Paris, 7th. of the 12th. Moon, of the Year 1647.
LETTER IX. To the Kaimacham.
THE Defeat of the Venetians and Morlacks in Bosna, has reached these Parts.
That News, is not unwelcom to Mahmut. But, I could wish, our General had used
his Victory with more Moderation. The Christians term him Barbarian, Salvage,
Devil Incarnate; and, load him with Execrations. For, having taken Prisoner the
Captain of the Morlacks, he caused him to be flead alive, and afterward to be
Impaled. This Captain, was an Ecclesiastic: They call him, Stephano Sorich;
and, in Honor of his Zeal and Fidelity, they entitle him, the Good Priest.
They applaud his Magnanimity and Courage in Battle; and, no less do they extol
his Constancy, during the Torments of so Cruel and Ignominious a Death. But, I
tremble to think of the Blasphemies and Curses, they utter against our Holy
Prophet, and all the Mussulmans! For, this Cruel Execution, has scandalized the
Nazarenes, and embittered 'em even to Fury. Their Revenge is implacable: They
would go to Hell themselves, provided the True Faithful might be Damned for
Company!

What will our Divine Lawgiver say? Or, what Apology will our General make,
when the Sent of God shall charge him, with driving so many Thousand Souls,
into an Irreconcilable Hatred of the Undefiled Faith? For, they look not on
this, as the Action of a Private Man, but of one who represents the Person of
our August Sovereign, the Great Protector of the Law brought down from Heaven.
They suppose him, to be honored with the particular Instructions of his
Master. And therefore, they say, the Sultan has authorized this Unheard Of
Cruelty; and, that our Religion countenances Tyranny, and the most Nefandous
Methods, of shedding Innocent Blood.

I am no Advocate for Infidels; yet, suffer me to vindicate Nature, which is
the Common Parent of us all. Suffer me to be Solicitous, for the Honor of our
Holy Profession, which is blemished by this Inhumane Murder. What Offense had
this Unhappy Captain given, that deserved so dire a Punishment? Was it, because
he fought valiantly, and performed Wonders in Defense of his Country? This is
Nothing, but what becomes every Honest Man to do. And, had our General been
truly Brave, he would have entertained his Prisoner, with a Respect due to his
Merit.

Who was a more Inveterate Enemy of the Mussulmans, than the Renowned
Ischenderbeg, Prince of Albania? Who more Valiant or Successful, against the
Ottoman Armies? It is Recorded of him, That he never shunned a Battle, never
fled from his Enemies, never shrunk from Perils, nor was ever wounded but once,
in all his Life. And yet, he sustained a Continual War, from Two Successive
Osman Emperors; defeated Seven Vizirs, with their Forces; took all their
Ammunition and Baggage; and, in several Combats, slew with his own Hands, above
Two Thousand Mahometans.

Our Fathers did not basely revenge themselves for all this, but cherished a
Veneration for this Heroic Enemy, and honored the very Dust of such an
extraordinary Person. For, after his Death, having conquered Albania, they
sought out his Tomb; where they performed their Devotions, as at the Sepulcher
of a Prophet. They opened the Dormitory of the Desunct Warrior; and, with
Religious Solemnity, took up his Bones, sharing the Honored Relics among
them; and, wrapping them up in Silk, wore them continually at their Breasts,
esteeming them as Sacred Amulets against Misfortune.

Surely, our General would blush, at an Example of so great Virtue. But,
perhaps he was incensed, because his Captive was a Priest: Mistaken Zeal, might
prompt him to this horrid Butchery. Thou, who art Justice it self, wilt not
approve his Bloody Passion, when thou considerest, That the Priests of Jesus,
are Men, as well as others; and, if they live in Error, the Fault is in their
Education. However, many of them, are Humble, Chaste, Sober, and Lovers of
Virtue. If there be others, whose Corrupt Lives have contradicted this
Character, let the Crime and the Punishment, rest on their Heads. It is not
Reasonable, that the Innocent should suffer, for the Faults of the Guilty. The
Captain of the Morlacks, had the Reputation, of a Devout and Just Man, and a
Stout Champion for his Country. Had he been taken for a Spy, or an Assassin,
the Law of Arms would have adjudg'd him to Death. Yet, such was the Clemency of
Porsenna, King of the Hetrurians, that when Mutius Scaevola, a Valiant Roman,
came into his Camp, with Design to Murder him, but by Mistake stabbed one of
the Captains, thinking it had been Porsenna; and, to revenge that Miscarriage
on himself, thrust his Hand into the Fire, till the Flesh was consumed to the
Bones; the King astonished at his Undaunted Spirit, sent him away in Peace,
raised the Siege of Rome, and entered into a strict Friendship with that Nation.
Such Honor he bore, to the Fortitude of his Enemy, and designed-Murderer. But,
the Captain of the Morlacks, was not taken under these Circumstances: He lost
his Liberty in the Heat of Battle, bravely combating at the Head of his Army.

Would thou know the Grounds then of our General's Cruelty? It was purely for
the Sake of a Jest. There went a Report, That when this Priest was born, his
Body was all over raw; so that the Physicians, were forced by Art, to supply
him with a Skin. Our Cruel General, to sport himself in the Poor Man's Misery,
commanded him to be flayed alive; uttering at the same Time, this Inhumane
Sarcasm; There was no Reason, that he should carry a Skin out of the World, who
brought none in. This is attested by Two Gentlemen, who were made Prisoners
with their Captain, heard these Words, saw him Executed, and afterward made
their Escape.

The Nazarenes vow, to Revenge this Unparalleled Cruelty, on all the Mussulmans
that fall into their Hands, if this Butcher (as they term him) be suffered to
go Unpunished. I tell thee, such Barbarous Actions, draw down the Vengeance of
Heaven, on those that commit them and, excite the very Beasts of the Earth to
make War, and rid the World of such Monsters.

Thou know, what use to make of this Intelligence. I will not pretend to
Instruct the Second Minister in the Ottoman Empire.

Paris, 7th. of the 12th. Moon, of the Year 1647.
LETTER X. To the Mufti.
IF there be any Truth in what the Astrologers tell us, That the Stars have
Influence on the Governments of the Earth; one would think, that Spain lies
under some Malignant Aspect.

The Fortune of that Kingdom, has for a long time run Retrograde. They have had
nothing but Losses by Sea and Land. The Revolution in Portugal, the Revolt of
Catalonia and Roussillon, the Loss of Ormus in Persia, and the Defection of
Goa, with other Rich Towns of Traffic in the Indies, came one upon the Back of
another.

Since which, there have been many Towns and Castles taken from the Spaniards
in Flanders. The French made an Insurrection in Palermo, breaking open the
Prisons, and releasing the Prisoners: And grew to such a Head, that the
Viceroy, fearing they would revenge the Tragedy of the Sicilian Vespers; to
pacify the Multitude, was forced to repeal the Edicts for Taxes, and disannul
them for ever, and to pass an Act of General Indemnity, both to the Rabble and
to the Prisoners whom they had freed.

This Tumultuous Spirit, passed from thence to the Kingdom of Naples; and
there, like an Infection, soon spread it self through all Parts, both of City
and Country: Two Hundred Thousand Men took up Arms, to vindicate the Privileges
of the Neapolitans, under the Conduct of a Poor Young Fisherman. I have already
transmitted to the Sublime Port, a Relation of this Formidable Sedition:
Wherein, it may be thought, I have discovered too much Tenderness to the
Infidels, and seemed to Favor the Violences of a Faction. But, I hope, thou will acquit me, when thou considerest, that these Governments of the Nazarenes,
are not to be compared to the Sacred Osman Empire, which is established by a
Divine Right: It having been determined by the Angel, That he who should
possess the Glorious Dormitory of the Sent of God, should be Entitled, The
Sovereign of all the Kings on Earth. Therefore, it would be a Crime of the
Highest Nature, to raise a Tumult or Sedition, within the Territories of our
August Emperor, whose Dominion is confirmed to him for ever, by a Patent from
Heaven. But, the Case of the Nazarene Princes is different; who being professed
Enemies to the Messenger of God, have no other Right to any Thing, but what
their Swords purchase. And therefore, when they prey upon others, and by Rapine
and Spoil augment their Riches, it is no Wonder, if the Great Avenger of
Crimes, stirs up some undaunted Spirits, to free their Country from Slavery and
Ruin.

Those who are curious, have remarked many Observable Circumstances in this
Revolution at Naples; as, that it was foretold by an Astrologer, a considerable
Time before it happened, who pointed out the very Year wherein it should come
to pass. The Extraordinary Eruptions also of Mount Vesuvius some Years ago,
were esteemed as Presages of some approaching Troubles in the State: For, it
rained Ashes on the City of Naples. I spoke of this Mountain, in one of my
former Letters.

It Is reported also, That about the same Hour, wherein Masanello, the
Ringleader of the Seditious was Murd'red, there was seen a Man hovering in the
Air, over the Principal Temple of Naples, with a Sword in his Hand, which he
was putting up in his Scabberd: And, that a Voice was at the same time heard
from on High, to utter these Words, His Labor is finished, give him Rest.

This is certain, that whilst he was at the Head of an Hundred Thousand Men,
Seven Assassines were hired by some of the Princes to shoot him; yet, none of
the Bullets could penetrate his Body, though Unarmed, and only covered with his
Fishing Rags: And, it was evident, that these Bullets smote him in diverse
Places; his Garments being marked with them, and he staggered with the Force of
the Blows.

These are Extraordinary Occurrences, and would tempt one to believe, That this
Young Fisherman was the Instrument of Providence, and that Heaven protected
both Him and his Cause.

It Is true indeed, it seemed at last, as if he were abandoned by that Divine
Power, which had carried him through so Important an Enterprise, in that he was
Slain by his own Soldiers. But, then it must be remembered, that this was not
done, till his Work was finished, and he went beyond his Commission. Want of
Sleep, the Multitude of Affairs, and much Wine, had impaired his Reason, and
rendered him Frantic; so that, his Actions were Insupportable, and his own
Admirers grew weary of him. After his Death, his Head was cut off, and carried
up and down the Streets on a Lance; and his Body was dragged through the
Kennels. Yet, the very next Day, the Multitude, to show their own Fickleness,
took the Dead Body out of a Ditch, where they had laid it all Night: They
Washed and Embalmed it; and, having joined the Head to it, carried it with
great Pomp and Solemnity to the Principal Temple of Naples, attended with Drums
and Trumpets, and above a Thousand Priests, with Torches in their Hands. A
Crown of Gold was put on his Head, and a Scepter in his Hand.

Thus the Neapolitans honored that Beardless Youth, who in 'Ten Days time, had
caused such a Revolution, as is scarce to be paralelled. For, he was an
Absolute Monarch, in Effect, during that time. And of him it may be said, as it
was once of an Emperor, That during his whole Reign, there was neither Spring,
nor Autumn, nor Winter: For, his Royalty begun and ended, in the Seventh Moon.

By Letters from Nathan Ben Saddi, at Vienna, I perceive he is molested with
Scruples about his Religion, being desirous to build upon the surest
Foundation. I sent him the best Advice I could, without making my self a
Hypocrite; which, thou know, is more offensive to God, than an Open Sinner.
I drew up an Abstract of the Mussulman Records; and presented him with the
Faithful Genealogy, from Ismael, the Son of the Patriaroh Ibrahim, down to our
Holy Prophet. This I did, to rectify an Old Inherent Error of the Jews, who
boast, That only the Sons of Isaac were True Believers. I endeavored not to
proselyte him, by Sophistry and Artifice; but referred him, for better
Satisfaction, to the Writings of the Ancients. I promised to furnish him with
Books of our Law, and the Comments of our Holy Doctors. This is impossible for
me to perform, whilst I am in this Place; unless thou, who art a Guide of those
who seek the Truth, vouchsafest to second my Zeal. I address to thee, Sovereign
Prelate of the Faithful, in Behalf of a Descendent from the Younger Brother of
Ismael; in Behalf of one Circumcised, but not in the Right Way. Favor him with
thy Divine Instructions, and supply him with Treatises of Light and Reason. A
seasonable Application, may bring this Hebrew, into the Number of the
Mussulmans; for he is already disgusted at the Synagogue.

But, if I have presumed too far, in endeavoring to snatch a Soul from the
Paws of Tagot, correct me in thy Wisdom; for, I am but as an Infant before thee.

Paris, 15th. of the 1st. Moon, of the Year 1648.
LETTER XI.
The Beginning of this Letter is wanting in the Italian Translation, the
Original Paper being torn.
-- All Men's Hearts are filled with Joy for this prosperous News, whilst I
mourn for the Dishonor of Our Arms. Nothing but sad Tidings grate my Ears from
those Parts, and more melancholy Presages possess my Soul. Methinks, I see
thick Clouds gathering over the Imperial City: My Sleep is disturbed with
fearful Visions. I start in my Bed, and waking lay my Hand on my Sword, as if
some Danger were at Hand. I dream of Tumults and Disorders, neighing of Horses,
and clashing of Arms in the Streets of Constantinople. I pray God avert the
Omen.

It is reported here, That Ali, the Sangiac-Bey of Lippa, is taken Prisoner,
and that his Son was tormented to Death before his Face, in a Manner peculiar
to the Invention of the most Barbarous Tyrants: For, they caused sharp Thorns,
to be thrust between his Nails and his Flesh; which creates an intolerable
Anguish. They laid him on a Bed of Iron-Spikes, and poured Melted Lead, Drop by
Drop, on all Parts of his Flesh. Then they made a small Fire, and roasted him
slowly to Death. If he chanced to groan, or make the least Complaint, in the
Midst of those grievous Tortures, they bid him remember the Good Priest Sorich,
who set him an Example of Constancy and Courage; in that he never shed a Tear,
or so much as sighed, when he was Flayed alive.

Thou see, that Revenge is sweet, even to those, who having received no
Injury in their own Persons, yet are touched to the Quick, with the Violence
that is done to another. This will appear in the Humor of the Italians, who
prosecute their Enemies, with irreconcilable Hatred and Malice; whole Families
being often engaged, in executing the Resentments of Two single Persons, who
first began the Quarrel: But, much more forcible is this Passion in those, who
have been notoriously hurt themselves. And, the Revenge of a certain Captain
was Extravagant; who being informed, that his General had Debauched his Wife,
took an Opportunity to single him out from all other Company, pretending to
walk in the Fields. When he had him there alone, he clapped a Pistol to his
Breast, threatening to kill him forthwith, if he moved Hand or Foot. Then he
upbraided him with what he had done, in such Language, as convinced the
General, his Life was in extreme Danger. Wherefore, he humbled himself, and
confessed his Crime; begging of the Captain, to spare his Life, and he would
prefer him forthwith, to the best Office in the Army next his own. But, the
furious Italian, would not sell his Honor so Cheap. He forced him to deny God,
and utter many Blasphemies, in Hopes of Saving his Life: And, when he had thus
done, the Captain said, Now my Revenge is complete, since I shall send thee
Body and Soul to the Devil. With that he pistoll'd him.

But, leaving these Infidels to their Diabolical Passions, I am concerned at
the Captivity of thy Brother; if it be true, which is related here, That he was
taken in his Return from Canea to Constantinople. It will cost the Bassa of
Algiers a Thousand Crowns to ransom him.

Adieu, Renarba. And, if thou art desirous to raise thy Self, take that Method
which I have now proposed to thee. God be propitious to thy Endeavors.

Paris, 4th. of the 2d. Moon, of the Year 1648.
LETTER XII. To the Venerable Mufti.
Thou will say, the Neapolitans are a restless People, when thou shall know,
That there have been no less than Forty General Insurrections in this Kingdom,
since its first Separation from the Grecian Empire, whereof it was formerly a
Member; and, that in the Space of Two Years, they have had Five Kings, all of
different Nations.

One would have thought, That after the Death of Masanello, the Ringleader of
the late Innovation, the Popular Heats would have slackened, and the People
returned to their Duty; but, the passionate Desire of Liberty, caused them to
continue in Arms, till the Confirmation of their Privileges, should come from
the King of Spain.

In the mean Time, Don John of Austria, who lay before the City with a Fleet of
Fifty Gallions, played upon them incessantly with his Cannon by Sea; and, the
Castles battered them by Land.

Cardinal Mazarini, who has the earliest Intelligence of Foreign Transactions,
has had a Principal Hand in fomenting this Flame. For, as soon as the News of
Masanello's Death arrived here, he dispatched away Couriers to Rome, with
Instructions to the French Ambassador at that Court, requiring him, to use all
possible Means, to cherish the Tumults in Naples, and not neglect so fair an
Opportunity, of reducing that Kingdom under the Protection of France.

It will not appear strange, That this great Genius, should aim at the Conquest
of Naples, when we consider, That this Kingdom abounds in all Manner of Riches,
to which its fortunate Situation contributes not a Little: For, it lies in the
most Temperate Part of the World. And, the Inhabitants, are not Second to any
People of Europe, in Martial Courage and Bravery. This is a Bait, which tempts
the Cardinal; who is not ignorant, how valiantly the Ancestors of the present
Neapolitans, behaved themselves in the Wars of Caesar and Pompey, and those
between the Romans and Carthaginians. Nor are they less Celebrated, for the
stout Resistance they made against the Huns, Goths and Vandals. So that, this
Kingdom, were it once brought under the French Dominion, would prove a Nursery,
from whence this Monarch might draw many Thousands of excellent Soldiers, to
serve him in his Wars.

Besides, it would be more commodious for him, to make Incursions from hence
into the Pope's Territories, if there should arise any Difference between the
Two Courts; as there often do, about the Rights of the Gallican Church, the
Franchises of the Ambassadors of this Crown in Rome, and other Privileges to
which they pretend.

Therefore the French Ambassador, according to the Instructions of Mazarini,
sent Commissioners to treat privately with the People of Naples, offering them
Two Millions of Crowns, Twenty Gallions, with Eight and Fifty Galleys, and
other Vessels. They accepted the Proposal, being weary of the Spanish
Government, and desirous of Novelty, Encouraged also by what those
Commissioners represented to them, concerning the Success of the English, who
by standing on their Guard, and using that Power which God and Nature had given
them, for the Defense of their Lives and Liberties, were now in a Manner become
a Free People, having Abolished the Monarchy, and set up a Commonwealth: And
this, they told them, was also done by Cardinal Mazarini's Counsels and
Assistance. Now, all the Cry in Naples was, Let France and the People of
England flourish, and let the Faithful Neapolitans, assert their own Liberty.
So blind were these People, as not to consider. That in putting themselves
under the Protection of the French, they did but exchange One Bondage for
Another; it being impossible, for any foreign Prince, to keep this Kingdom, and
pay all his Officers Civil and Military, together with those under their
Commands, with much less Charge than the Revenues amount to. And, the French
are as good at inventing new Taxes, as any Court in Europe.

However, the Neapolitans were enchanted with the Thoughts of so much Gold, and
other Assistance offered by the French Commissioners; and sweetened, with their
fair Words, and glorious Promises. So that they immediately sent Deputies, to
entreat the Duke of Guize, who was then at Rome, to come and protect them, in
taking on him the Chief Command of their Arms.

This Prince, thinking it a Generous Action to relieve the Oppressed: And, that
at the same Time, he should do a considerable Service to the King of France, in
rendering him Master of this Noble and Opulent Kingdom; went to Naples. Where,
at first, he was received with Infinite Applause; was made their General; took
an Oath of Fidelity to the People; did many Notable Services; but was, in the
End, betrayed, and sent Prisoner to Spain.

If the Generosity and brave Resolution of this Prince, has acquired
Commendation from some, in attempting to rescue these People from the Tyranny
of their Governors: Yet, his Conduct is called in Question by others, who say,
He discovered but little Prudence in trusting himself to the Neapolitans, who
had already sacrificed Two of their Generals. (For, after the Death of
Masanello, they chose another Captain, whom they called the Prince of Massa:
This Prince falling under their Suspicion, was beheaded by the Inconstant
People.)

It Is certain, that there is little Confidence to be put in the Multitude,
whose Passions Ebb and Flow, and are more Tempestuous than the Sea. Yet, a
Brave and Generous Mind, will shun no Dangers, to serve his Prince and his
Country; for whom, it is a Glorious Martyrdom to die. There is no great
Undertaking without Hazards, and, he that is afraid to venture his Liberty and
Life, in a Good Cause, is not worthy to bear Arms. Had the Duke of Guize
succeeded, his Conquest of Naples had made him Viceroy of one of the largest
Kingdoms in Europe. It is said to be Five Hundred Leagues in Circuit,
containing Twelve ample Provinces, Twenty Archbishopricks, Bishoprics One
Hundred Twenty Seven: Thirty Castles: Barons One Thousand Four Hundred. Earls
Fifty Three. Forty Marquises. Thirty Four Dukes, and Twenty Princes. The
Inhabitants of this Kingdom, are said to be above Two Millions. The ordinary
Revenues of the King, amount to Three Millions of Crowns yearly, besides the
Voluntary Donatives, which have been given by the Subjects of this State to
their Kings, within the Space of Forty Years, amounting to Twenty Eight
Millions, and Six Hundred Thousand Ducats. This Kingdom, is watered by a
Hundred and Fifty Rivers, besides Ten Lakes stored with all Manner of Fish;
among which, is one called Averno, over which if any Birds fly, they
immediately drop down dead. The Ancient Pagans, had strange Opinions of this
Lake; it being the Place, where they used to Sacrifice Men to the Infernal
Gods. And, hard by, is the Cave of one of the Sybills.

There are Thirty high Mountains in this Country, of which Adonai relates many
strange and delightful Passages, (for, it is from him I received this Account of
the Kingdom.) I will not trouble thee, with a Repetition of all that this Jew
tells me; only one Thing is worthy Remark.

He says, That the Bodies of the Three Young Hebrews, who were put into the
burning Oven by the Babylonian Monarch, because they would not adore his Idols,
are preserved in a Mosque on one of these Mountains. And, that on the said
Hill, no Eggs, Flesh or Milk, will endure an Hour without Putrefaction, but
presently breed an Infinite Number of Worms. He speaks in the Praise of these
Mountains, which are clothed with Vineyards, Gardens and Woods on the Top and
Sides; and in their Bottoms, have very Rich Mines of Gold, Silver, Copper,
Iron, Crystal, Alabaster, Adamant. In fine, Adonai, who has traveled over all
this Kingdom, calls it, The fertilest Region of all Italy, which is esteemed,
the Paradise of Europe.

Do thou not think now, Venerable Guide of the Elect, that the Duke of Guize
had Reason to prefer the Honor of conquering so Renowned a Kingdom, to the
Safety of his Person? or will thou not rather conclude, That the Reduction of
this Happy State, would be an Expedition worthy of the Ottoman Arms? It is
certain, That the Riches and Plenty of this Region, have tempted more Nations
to invade it, than any other Kingdom on Earth: It having been the Prize, at
which no less than Five and Twenty several Nations have aimed.

Cardinal Mazarini, is much troubled at the Duke of Guize's Captivity, and has
offered great Sums of Money for his Ransom; but, the King of Spain rejects all
Proposals of that Nature. So that it is thought, the Cardinal will contrive some
Way for the Duke's Escape, either by bribing his Keepers, or by some secret
Stratagem.

I am not much concerned for the Infidels; but, it would be no small Joy to
hear, that some Care were taken, for the Redemption of Mahomet Celebee, who,
thou know, has not deserved ill of the Sublime Port. Adieu, Holy Patriarch,
and forget not Mahmut in thy Addresses to Heaven.

Paris, 27th. of the 3d. Moon, of the Year 1648.
LETTER XIII. To Abdel Melec Muli Omar, Superintendent of the College of
Sciences at Fez.
THOU, to whom the Issues of Paradise are Revealed, and the Road of the Angels
when they come down and go up through the Seven Heavens! Thou, that can
marshal the Host of the Stars, and understandest the Discipline of the Armies
living and strong, the Orders of the Potentates encamped in the Fields of
Light, the Domestic Guards of the Throne Blessed for Ever; Tell me the Age of
the World, and declare the Beginning of Time. Resolve me, Whether this Mighty
Fabric be but of Yesterday, that is, of Five or Six Thousand Years standing,
as the Jews and Christians say; or, whether the Years of its Duration, be not
past a Calcule.

The Visions of thy Progenitor, the Lieutenant to the Sent of God, are extant
in the Arabic Tongue. In them it is written, My Soul on a sudden, became as
though it had Wings; a Spirit entered me, and a subtle Wind lifted me up to the
Top of Mount Uriel, where I beheld Mavelous Things. I looked behind me, and
saw the Ages that were past; and lo, they were without Number, or Beginning. I
beheld the Four Seasons of the Year, ever returning at their accustomed Time,
and the Sun forsook not his Course, for a Thousand Thousand Generations. I
counted a Million of Ages, and yet there appeared not an Hour, wherein Darkness
had possessed the Abyss of Matter, or wherein the Endless Firmament was not
Illuminated by the Moon and Stars. Whilst I considered these Things, a Liquor
was given me to drink by an Unknown Hand, it was of the Color of Amber: When I
had tasted it, I felt a mavelous Force in my Body, and my Eyes were more
piercing than an Eagles. Another Wind, more powerful than the former, blew out
of a Cloud, and carried me up to an exceeding High Place, for above the tallest
Mountains; There I trod in the soft Air, as on a Pavement of Marble. I was
ravished at these Things; and the Exaltation of my State, made me forget my
Mortality. I beheld the Earth at a vast Distance under my Feet, as one that did
not belong to it; it looked like a shining Globe, not much unlike the Moon, but
far bigger. All the Living Generations, which had successively Inhabited the
Earth from its Nativity, passed by me; and they appeared in various Forms.
First came a Race of Centaurs, then of Satyrs, next of Angels, and last of Men.
While I marvelled at these Things, a Voice reached my Ears, as from behind me,
saying, These are the Four Ages of the World, and the Four Species of Beings,
to whom I gave the Possession of the Earth; but, for the Impiety of the Three
former, I have exterminated them. And, when Men shall have completed the
Measure of their Sins, I will cause the Trumpet to sound, and all Things shall
retire into the Cave of Silence and Darkness. Having heard this, I found my
self in a moment on the Earth, which I had before seen afar off; then I knew
that I had been in a Trance, etc.

I do not rehearse this Vision, to reach thee any new Thing, Venerable
President of the Southern Sages (for, I know, the Archives of thy College, are
replenished with all Manner of excellent Treatises, and that thou art no
Stranger, to the Writings of the Prophets) but, to crave thy Interpretation of
so great a Mystery, and to reason with thee about the World's Duration. My
Satisfaction would be small, in contemplating the various Beauties of the
Universe, the Qualities of the Elements, the Natures of Living Things, the
Virtues of Plants and Minerals, with the Force of the Heavenly Bodies, were I
assured, That these Things were not always so. That Thought, would damp my
greatest Enjoyments, if I were convinced, That so many Splendors, Riches and
Pleasures, as this Visible Frame affords, were not disclosed for Millions of
Ages, but lay hid in the Bosom of Eternity. Methinks, it is too low an Opinion
of the Omnipotent Goodness, and looks, as if the Authors of it, suspected God
of Envy: Who, when he might have made Infinite Myriads of Creatures happy, in
these Visible Emanations of his Divinity, without either Beginning or Ending of
Time; yet, according to their Doctrine, contented himself, to let only a
Determinate Number taste of his Munificence, for a few Centuries of Years. This
is not suitable, to the Character of that Infinite Being, the Eternal Source of
all Perfections.

What then is meant by those Four Ages, and the Four Species of Beings, which
were showed to the Exalted of God in that Holy Vision? Tell me, Great Light of
Asrick, Is it repugnant to Reason or Faith, to believe, That the Earth has been
Inhabited from Eternity; since our Holy Doctors teach us, That it was peopled
long before the Creation of Adam? No Mussulman, that has ever gone the Sacred
Pilgrimage, but has visited Mount Araffa, where Adam first saw Eve his Wife.
There he has been instructed, in the History of that First Father of Mankind;
and how that before his Time, the Earth was Inhabited by Angels, who being
commanded to adore Adam, refused it, and were turned to Devils, being expelled
from the Earth. Thou know moreover, that it is in the Sacred Traditions,
That God gave to Adam a Wife whose Name was Alileth; but, that she being of the
Race of these Devils, refused to obey Adam: Whence it came to pass, That they
lived in continual Quarrels and Enmity, for the Space of Five Hundred Years;
till at length, Alileth flew up into the Air, and abandoned her Husband. Of
which, when Adam complained to God, he sent Three Mighty Angels in Pursuit of
her, commanding them to tell her, That if she would return to her Husband, it
should go well with her; but if she would not, a Hundred of her Children should
die every Day. The Angels followed her, and overtook her on the Red Sea, where
they threatened to drown her, unless she would return to her Husband. But she
made Excuses, and told them, She was created to destroy Young Children. Then
the Angels laid Hands on her: When she, to pacify them, swore by the Bottom of
Hell, That whenever the Names of them Three, should be written on any
Schedule, that she should have no Power to hurt the Infants, they dismissed
her. After this, God compassionating Adam's Solitude, gave him another Wife
called Eve.

This Tradition, confirms the Vision of the Prophet; and, we need not doubt,
That the Earth was Inhabited before Adam's Time. And, if that be granted, why
might it not be Peopled for Millions of Ages, as well as for the smallest Term,
that Ignorance or Error may assign to its Duration?

I have discoursed with several of the Jewish Rabbi's, and Christian Doctors on
this Subject, Men of abstruse Learning, and sublime Thoughts: Yet, I can find
but a few, who are emancipated from the Prejudices of a Superstitious
Education. They have been from their Infancy, prepossessed with a false Notion
of the Works of God; believing them to be Finite, both in Extent of Space and
Time. They circumscribe this Visible World, within, I know not what Flaming
Circle; and believe the First Matter it self, to be but Five Days Older than
Adam, taking each of those Days, for the Space of Four and Twenty Hours,
wherein the Sun finishes his Diurnal Circuit through the Heavens. They consider
not, That according to their own Bible, there was Light and Darkness, and
consequently Day and Night, before the Sun was Created. But, how long those
Days and Nights were, is not determined by Moses. Yet in another Part of their
Bible, it is said, That a Day with God, is a Thousand Years, and a Thousand
Years, is a Day. So that, according to this Interpretation, Adam was not
Created, till above Five Thousand Years after the Beginning of the World. Yet,
when I bring this Positive Place of their Own Scripture, against the Nazarene
Sages, they shuffle it off with empty Evasions; and, rather than believe the
Indesinite Antiquity of the World, they contradict their own Sense and Reason,
invalidate the Testimony of a Prophet, deny their Faith, and appear Unmasked
Insidels.

Both they and the Jews, have corrupted the Truth with many Errors; and, we
must seek farther, for the Original Science of Nature. The Illuminated of God,
have always taught, That the Earth was Inhabited long before the Appearance of
Adam. And, all the Eastern Sages, believe a Series of Generations, to have
dwelt on this Globe, for Indeterminate Ages.

I have a Brother lately come from the Indies: He relates strange Things of
certain Books, which are only in the Hands of the Brachmans. They are written
in a Language, which none understand but these Priests; yet a Language as
Copious as any other, and taught in their Colleges by Rule. These Books contain
a History of the World, which, they say, is above Thirty Millions of Years Old.
They divide the Term of its Duration, into Four Ages; Three of which they say
are already past, and a good Part of the Fourth. Now I would fain know, who
wrote these Books; and, at what Time, and where this Language was spoken? They
call it, the Holy Language; saying, that it was the First spoken on Earth. It
is strange, That no History should mention so Divine a Speech. We have the
Chronology of the Latin and Greek; and can give an Account, when and where they
were spoken, though they are now grown Obsolete, and no otherways to be
learned, but in the Schools and Academies. This argues, the Antiquity of the
Bramins Language and Books, in Regard, they fall not within any other Record
save their own, which says, they are as Old as the World. For, if this
Assertion were false, the Imposture would have been discovered as soon as
broached, and the Learned Sages of the East, would quickly have disproved so
manifest a Lie. There seems to me something Extraordinary, in this Pretension
of these Indian Philosophers, and I would gladly be convinced of the Truth.
Methinks, it is an Illustrious Idea of the Divine Perfections, when one
conceives all this Vast and Endless Concatenation of Beings, to flow from the
Eternal Nature, as Rays from the Sun: And, that they can no more be separated
from it, than those Beams can from that Visible Fountain of Light. It will not
be difficult then, to Interpret the History of Moses, by this Register of the
Bramins, and reconcile the Six Days of the one, with the Four Ages of the
other; since, a Day in the Divine Sense, may amount to Millions of Years, as
well as to a Thousand. And, it will be more congruous and agreeable, to
believe, that after the Birth of the First Matter, there elapsed Many Ages,
before it was wrought into such an Infinite Variety of Appearances, as we now
behold; and, that the Five Days, which Moses computes, before the Production of
Adam, might be some Millions of Years: In which Time, the Divine Architect
gradually drew from the Abyss of Matter, the Sun, Moon, Stars, Plants and
Animals; which may serve also to Illustrate, the Vision of thy Holy Ancestor,
with which I begun this Discourse.

Adieu, Sublime Intelligence of the Torrid Zone, and favor Mahmut with a
Transcript of thy Thoughts concerning these Things. But, if thy Silence shall
condemn my Presumption and Importunity, I will wait for thy Answer, till the
Platonic Year, when, according to the Doctrine of that Philosopher, we shall
all be alive again.

Paris, 19th. of the 4th. Moon, of the Year 1648.
LETTER XIV. To the Mufti.
IN a former Dispatch to thy Sanctity, I have acquainted thee with the
Insurrections in Palermo, mentioning the Fear of the Viceroy, lest the French
in that Island, should then take their Opportunity, to revenge the Proverbial
Cruelty of the Sicilian Vespers. If thou art unacquainted with that Tragedy, I
will inform thee in Brief.

About Three Hundred and Threescore Years ago, there Reigned in Sicily, one of
the Royal Blood of France; they call him, Charles of Anjou. He had French
Garrisons in all the Cities of that Kingdom: But, these Soldiers committed so
many Insolences, as rendered 'em Odious and Insupportable to the Natives, who
therefore resolved to exterminate them.

The French are very Licentious in their Conquests; neither sparing Men in
their Anger, nor Women in their Lust. They make no Difference, between the
Noble and the Vulgar; but sacrifice all the Regards of Honor and Civility, to
their Impetuous Appetites.

They were guilty of innumerable Rapes and Violences in Sicily, among the
Meaner People; and sometimes, extended their Rudeness, to Persons of the Best
Quality. It was common for them, to affront both Virgins and Matrons as they
went along the Streets, by thrusting their Hands under their Garments, on
Pretense of searching for hidden Arms. Among the Rest, the Wife of a certain
Lord in Palermo, going to pay her Devotions at the Temple, was seized by the
Command of the Captain of the Guards, and stripped Naked before all the
Soldiers, in Order to discover certain Treasonable Papers, which they suspected
she carried about her. But finding none, she upbraided the Captain with
Inhumanity, in offering so gross an Affront, to a Lady of her Rank. He seeming
to be sorry for the Indignity she had received, begged her Pardon; and retiring
with his Soldiers out of the Room where she was, left her to put on her
Apparel. In the mean while, he was enflamed with a furious Passion for this
Lady, (she being very Beautiful;) and having sent the Soldiers away, he
returned to the Room where she was. He addressed her with much Courtship; but,
finding that Ineffectual, he Forced her.

When this was made known to her Husband, he burned with Desire of Revenge. And
stirring up all the Sicilian Nobles and People, it was privately agreed between
them, that on a certain Festival, when the Bells should toll to Even-Song, all
the Sicilians should take Arms, and Massacre the French throughout the Island.
This Plot was carried so secretly, that before the French could get the least
Intimation of it, they were all murd'red, on the Day appointed.

I forgot to acquaint thee in my last, with a Villainy, which was discovered in
the late Tumults of Naples. As they were marching up and Down the Streets,
burning the Custom-Houses, and the Habitations of those who had been concerned
in gathering the Taxes, they entered the House of a certain Notary or Public
Scribe of that City, who had been represented to them, as a Promoter of those
Unreasonable Impositions. They seized on the Man, and began to carry his Goods
out into the Streets, in Order to be burnt. But, as they were rummaging in an
Apartment which was toward the Gardens, they heard a great Shrieking, as of
Women affrighted: And, perceiving the Voice to proceed from within a Wall in
the Room where they were, they searched about for a Door to enter into that
Place; but finding none, they broke through the Wall, where they found Two
Women, with their Hair hanging down to their Ancles, and their Nails grown like
the Talons of an Eagle. Enquiring of them how long they had been there, and on
what Occasion, the Eldest of the Women made this Answer; The Master of this
House, is my own Brother, who when my Father died, was entrusted by him, to pay
me Six Hundred Ducats, which he bequeathed me as a Legacy, for my Maintenance,
my Husband being dead: But my Brother, instead of doing me this Justice,
Immured both me and my Daughter, whom you see here, between these Walls, where
we have lived these Seventeen Years, being allowed, by this cruel Man, no other
Food but Bread and Water.

The People Incensed above Measure, at so barbarous a Cruelty, hanged up the
Notary, and gave all his Estate, to this Widow and her Daughter. An Exemplary
Piece of Justice, performed by Mutineers, which could not have been done by the
Law, the Crime not reaching his Life; though, in the Sense of all Men, he
merited Death. This is another Argument, that Destiny had a Hand in this
Insurrection; and, that Masanello the Fisherman, was the Executioner of God.

I obey thee, Sovereign Prelate, with an Vnconditional Devotion, and revere the
Idea of thy Sanctity: Vouchsafe to pray for Mahmut, that whilst he condemns the
Barbarous Cruelties of the Nazarenes, he may not render himself Inexcusable, by
doing any Injustice himself.

Paris, 22d. of the 5th. Moon, of the Year 1648.
LETTER XV. To the Kaimacham.
THE Arabian Proverb says, There is more Danger to be feared from one of the
Coreis, than from a Thousand Bobeck's. Thou know, both these were Noble
Families in Mecca, and Sworn Enemies of the Messenger of God: But, the Latter,
as their Name imports, were too open in their Counsels, to do any considerable
Execution against the Holy One: Whereas the Former, were always reserved, and
laying of Secret Trains.

Such is Cardinal Mazarini, the Hidden Enemy of the Ottoman Empire. There seems
to be an Ambition in this Great Genius, equal to that of his Predecessor
Richlieu, who would be esteemed the most Eminent among Men. Nothing will
satisfy this Minister, less than a Subversion of all the Monarchies on Earth,
which appear Obstacles of that Grandeur, to which he Designs to raise his
Master. Yet, he attempts not this by Open Force, knowing, that is
impracticable: but, acts in the Dark, striving to undermine those States by
Intrigue, which he cannot subdue by Arms. He has his Agents in all the Courts
of Christendom; and, thou need not startle, if I tell thee, there is Ground
to suspect, he is not without his Creatures at the Sublime Port. All Europe is
sensible, that the Late Revolutions in Portugal and Catalonia, the
Insurrections in Sicily and Naples, and the Rebellion of the English, Scots and
Irish, are, in Part, owing to the Policies of this Minister: And, I can tell
thee more on that Subject, than is known to every one.

Osmin the Dwarf, who still retains his good Inclinations to the Sublime Port,
finds an insuspected Access to all the Grandees, to whom the Smallness of his
Bulk and Stature, affords no small Divertisement. Besides, they delight to pose
him with Problems, in Regard, there is always something so lucky, besides the
Wit in his Answers, as either creates Admiration or Laughter. But, their Mirth
would quickly be changed into other Passions, were they sensible, that their
Little Buffoon, is no other than a Spy upon them. For, Osmin having so many.
Opportunities, lurks in Corners like a Spider, undiscovered, and unthought-of:
He Creeps into their Bedchambers and Cabinets, where he becomes privy to their
greatest Secrets. If they should catch him in any of his Concealments, behind
the Hangings, or under a Bed, 'twould only pass for a Frolic to give 'em
Diversion; and, he never wants for a Repartee or a Jest, to bring himself off.

I have taught him a Cipher, which he makes Use of, to transcribe any Letters,
or other Papers of Moment; with Characters for Speedy Writing, which comprehend
whole Sentences in a Dash or Two of the Pen.

It Is but lately, we have pitched on this Method; and, the first Attempt Osmin
made, was in Cardinal Mazarini's Closet: Into which he slipped under the Skirt of
a Nobleman's Cloak, who just then went in to speak with the Cardinal. This
active Dwarf, taking Advantage of the Nobleman's Approach to the Table,
dexterously crept under the Carpets which covered it, reaching down to the
Floor, where he lay unseen, till the Cardinal was gone, and the Closet locked
up.

During the Time of their Conference, which was not very long, Osmin heard the
Cardinal speak these Words to the Lord: One of the Slaves of that Bassa, said
he, is an Italian, whom I formerly entertained in my Service, and one in whom I
confide: He was taken by the Turks at Sea; and, as soon as he was sold to this
Grandee, he acquainted me in a Letter, with his Condition, imploring my
Assistance toward his Ransom. I promised to Redeem him, on the Conditions I
have told you; and since that, he has not failed to perform them; his Master
having accepted the Pistols, and entered into the Association: So that I hope
in a little Time, to see that proud Tyrannical Race exterminated, the Tartars
excluded from Succession, and the Empire divided by the Sword of Strangers.
Ragotski is the only Obstacle; That Prince is wavering, and we cannot trust
him. The Bassa of Aleppo, with those of Sidon, Damascus and Babylon, are ready
to cover the Fields of Asia with their Armies. If Things were as secure on the
Side of Europe, the Blow should soon be given.

There passed some other Discourse between them, which Osmin could not
distinguish, in Regard, they removed to the Window, and spoke low. But, this
was enough to rowze his Curiosity, and put him on a farther Inquisition.

As soon as the Room was void, by their Absence, he came forth from his
Retirement, and fell to examining the Papers, which lay on the Table, hoping to
discover more of this Plot; but, he was disappointed, and only met with a few
Letters from his Agents in England. Wherein, among other Matters, they gave the
Cardinal an Account, That they had hunted the Lion into the Toils, past all
Hopes of an Escape. By which, I suppose, they meant the English King, whom the
Rebels have confined to a certain Castle in their Possession. Osmin transcribed
some of these Letters, and brought them to me: A Copy of one of them, I here
send thee enclosed. 'Twas written from the Council of the Irish Rebels. By
which thou may see, what a Share the Cardinal has, in abetting these
Traitors. Else, how could they Demand of him, The Performance of the
Queen-Regent' s Promise, to assist them with Money and Men?

There is one also Dated this present Year, and Subscribed by Monsieur
Bellieure, the French Ambassador in England. But, Osmin had not time to
transcribe that, being prevented by the Cardinal's Return; which made the Dwarf
snatch up his Tools, and abscond under the Table. Yet, he remembered some of
the Contents of that Letter, and told them me at his next Visit: The Ambassador
in that Letter, informs the Cardinal, of a certain German Prophet, who
foretold, That there should be a great Revolution in the Government of England;
and, that One of the Mightiest of all the Eastern Princes, should be Deposed
this Year, and Murdered by his Subjects (I pray Heaven, avert the Omen from the
Seraglio.) He acquaints this Minister also, That he had succeeded in his
Negotiation with the Officers of the Rebels Army. There were other obscure
Passages in the Letter, which Osmin has forgot. But, these are sufficient to
demonstrate, how busy the Cardinal is, and what a Hand he has in Foreign
Affairs.

Another Opportunity, I hope, will bring to Light, more of this Minister's
Secrets. Adieu.

Paris, 4th. of the 6th. Moon, of the Year 1648.
LETTER XV. To Pestelihali, his Brother.
THE oftener I peruse the Journal of thy Travels, the more I am delighted with
it. For, it is evident, That the Countries through which thou have passed, have
been as so many Schools of Wisdom to thee; Wherein thou have learned, even from
Men's Vices, the Way to Perfection; much more from their Virtues. Thou have
found, that though Men's Natural Dispositions differ, as do the Climates, which
afford them Breath; yet, they all agree in Common Frailties. There are also
Vices peculiar to certain Countries; 'twere to be wished, they could be matched
with as many National Virtues. But, Human Nature is a Rank Soil, more fertile
in Weeds, than wholesome Products. Yet, there are Gardens as well as Deserts:
And, thou have observed some Persons, Illustrious for their Goodness, and the
Noble Endowments of their Minds.

I am extremely pleased with that rare Example of Generosity, which thou
relatest of an Indian Merchant; who, not content to give Alms to all that asked
him, or whom he knew to be Poor, sought daily Occasions to exercise his
Charity, hunted out the Indigent and Unfortunate: And, wherever he discovered
the Lineaments of Poverty in a Man's Face, or traced the Footsteps of it in his
Behavior, he could not rest till he had relieved his Wants, and made him
Happy, to his very Wishes. I tell thee, Poverty is a Hell upon Earth; and, he
that has this Curse, anticipates the Torments of the Damned. It eclipses the
brightest Virtues, and is the very Sepulcher of brave Designs; depriving a Man
of the Means to accomplish, what Nature has fitted him for, and stifling the
Noblest Thoughts in their Embryo. How many Illustrious Souls may be said, to
have been Dead among the Living, or buried alive in the Obscurity of their
Condition, whose Perfections have rendered 'em, the Darlings of Providence, and
Companions of Angels; yet the insuperable Penury of all Things, has ranked them
among the Castaways of the Earth, in the Eyes of Men? To such as these, our
Divine Lawgiver commands us to extend our Charity, giving us certain Characters
and Marks, by which we may distinguish them from the Crowd of the Unfortunate.
And, I like the Indian's Bounty the better, in that he so exactly seems to
comply with this Precept of the Alcoran, generously preventing the Requests of
the Indigent, and by an Excess of Benignity, courting them to except of Relief.
In this he also verifies the Arabian Proverb, which says, He gives Double, who
gives unasked.

Thou commendest the Industry of the Chinese, the Advances they have made in
Arts and Sciences, which, thou concludest, is to be attributed to the Force of
their Laws, which oblige the Son to follow his Father's Trade, throughout all
Generations. In this I must dissent; for, it seems rather a Curb than a Spur to
Ingenuity, to be confined to Employments, for which a Man may have an Aversion.
The Son not seldom aborring those Things, wherein his Parents took Delight. Or,
if not so, yet he may be cast in a Finer Mold, have a more subtle Invention;
and consequently, be capable of making greater Improvements, in any Trade of
his own Choice: Since, Delight sets an Edge on the Mind, gives Vigor to the
Body, and adds Wings to Business. Besides, I do not think this to be so much
thy own Remark, as the Insinuation of some of that Country, who are the most
Conceited People in the World; ever extolling their own Policy, Laws and
Government; and imposing them as a Pattern, to all other Nations.

One Thing I grant, they boast of with a great Deal of Truth, that is, their
Antiquity and unmixed Race. Though, since the Conquest the Tartars have made of
that Country, they are like to undergo the Fate of other Nations, and Corrupt
their Genealogies with the Blood of Strangers.

Thou came away before that Conquest was begun, or perhaps, before 'twas
talked of. And, I can give thee, but a very Imperfect Account of it. All the
Intelligence we have from that Kingdom of late, comes in Fragments: For, the
Ships which bring this shattered News, left China in an Uproar and Confusion.
Only they assure us, That the Tartars had passed the Celebrated Wall, which
divides them from China; that they entered and subdued the Northern Provinces,
with an Army of Six Hundred Thousand Men; that very little Resistance was made
against them, not even in Pequin it self, the Capital Seat of the Chinese
Empire, which the Usurper Lycungz had abandoned to the Conquerors, carrying
away with him, all the Inestimable Treasures of the Palace, and retiring into
one of the remote Provinces, was never heard of afterward. Whence it was
judged, That some of his own Party had murdered him; partly, for the Sake of
his prodigious Wealth, which they shared among them; and partly, to revenge his
Treason against the Emperor, and the Innumerable Calamities he had brought upon
his Country.

Before these Merchants came away, the Cham of Tartary was proclaimed in
Pequin, and Crowned Emperor of China. They say, He was not above Thirteen Years
Old at that Time; which was, in the 12th. Moon, of the Year 1644. And, that
having sent for the Chief Nobility of Tartary to Pequin, he made Preparations,
to pursue his Conquests.

This is the best Account we yet have, of the Affairs of that Empire. By which
thou will easily be induced to be of my Opinion, That the Blood of the
Chinese, will in Time be mixed with that of Strangers.

We must not seek for the Originals of any People, in the Country where they
dwell. The most Renowned Kingdoms and Empires in the World, had their first
Foundations laid by Vagabonds and Fugitives. Thou art not ignorant, how vast an
Extent, the Ancient Roman Empire had through Asia, Africa and Europe. Yet, that
City which was called the Mistress of Nations, the Governess of the Whole
Earth, was first built by a handful of Banditi, People who lived by Pillage and
Robbery, the Outlaws and Scum of Italy, assembled together from diverse Parts,
under the Conduct of Romulus and Rhemus. Neither had that City, proved any
better than a Sepulcher to them and their Designs, had they not by a witty
Stratagem, over-reached the Sabine Women, and so secured to themselves a
Posterity, who should not only defend but enlarge the Dominions of their
Fathers. Yet, these People of so Obscure and Confused an Original, afterward
boasted of the Antiquity and Noble Descent of their Families. No Name more
Venerable in succeeding Ages, than that of a Roman.

To look no farther than the great and formidable Empire of the Osmans, we
shall find it took its first Rise from Colonies of Transplanted Scythians; so
that he who would have the Genealogy of a Turk, must not look in the Registers
of Greece, where they now live, but must carry his Search beyond the Mountain
Caucasus, examine the Border of Palus Maeotis, or hunt his Pedigree ous in
Chersonesus. What Revolutions have not happened in Asia and Africa, since the
Assumption of the Messenger of God into Paradise? Where shall we now find any
Remains of the Ancient Saracens, or Mamalukes? The Mighty Empire of the
Ottomans has swallowed up all. Thus, one Nation expells another; and, there is
so general a Mixture of Foreign Blood, made by the Conversion of innumerable
different Nations to the Mussulman Faith, that it is hard to know, Whether our
Ancestors were Scythians or Persians, Jews or Grecians; Whether they were of
the Mountains or the Valleys, of the Forests or the Plains.

In this I will except my Countrymen, the Arabians, and those who seem to
approach nearest them in Manner of Life, the Tartars; the one dwelling in
Tents, the other in Wagons; both in a moving Posture; both Happy in this, That
they are not confined to the Rigors of a Cold Winter, nor the Scorching Heats
of the Summer; but, change their Soil and Climate, as the Season of the Year
varies: Thus ever securing to themselves in all Places, either a blooming
flowery Spring, or a moderate and fruitful Autumn. These were never subdued,
nor expelled those Regions wherein they take Delight, neither would they ever
mix with Strangers. But, the Chinese would excel all the World in the Purity
of their Vnmix'd Blood, were it not for the late Incursions of their Potent and
Victorious Neighbors.

The French say, That these People had the Use of Guns and Printing, many
Hundreds of Years before they were found out in Europe. But, the Germans claim
the Honor of these Inventions to themselves.

Thou confirmest the Opinion of the Former, in telling me, thou have seen some
of the Cannon belonging to the City of Pequin, on which was engraven, in
Chinese Characters, a Register of their Age, which was above Two Thousand Years.

I had a great Deal more to say, Dear Pesteli, but the Post calls on me to
hasten. Besides, an extreme Dullness and Languishing of my Spirits, with which
I have been persecuted, ever since this Moon first showed her Crescent: Now she
is in the Wane, and so I hope is my Malady. The Influence this Planet seems to
have on me, may make thee conclude me a Lunatic: We are all so, in one Degree
or other. There are not more apparent Symptoms, That the Flux and Reflux of the
Sea, owes its Original to the Neighborhood and Motion of that Planet, than
that our Constitutions vary, according to its Monthly Appearances.

He that Created the Moon, and the Constellations, not without Respect to
Mankind, give us Wisdom which shall entitle us to a Dommion over the Stars.

Paris, 14th. of the 8th. Moon, of the Years 1648.
LETTER XVII. To the Aga of the Janissaries.
THE Duke of Chastillon, arrived here Six Days ago from the Army in Flanders,
bringing News of a Signal Victory, obtained by the Young Prince of Conde, on
the Plains of Lens. This Battle was fought, on the 20th. of the last Moon, the
French having entirely routed the Spaniards, killed Three Thousand of them on
the Spot, taken Six Thousand Prisoners, with all their Artillery and Baggage.
And, to crown the Day, they have taken Lens also.

But, though Fortune thus favors their Arms Abroad, she has mixed Poison with
their Counsels at Home. All Things here seem to portend a Civil War. The
Parliament thwart the Proceedings of the Court, taking on them, the Power of
the Ancient Spartan Ephori: They will be Comptrollers of the Regal Authority,
suppressing the King's Edicts, calling his Expenses to Account; and, pretending
to reform the Court, they play the Paedagogues with their Sovereign. On the
other Side, Cardinal Mazarini, the Duke of Orleans, and other Grandees, do
their utmost Endeavors, to dissolve the Meetings of this Senate. They persuade
the Young King, that it is but a Precarious Reign, where the Sovereign must be
curbed by his Subjects. Thus they instill into his tender Years, those Maxims
by which they would have him Rule, when he comes of Age.

There is a Man in the Parliament, whom they call Monsieur Brussels, one of
their Great Counselors, a bitter Enemy of Cardinal Mazarini, and therefore
cried up by the People, for a Patriot: He is of a furious Temper, and mean
Abilities; yet his noisy Zeal for the Public Liberty, has fastened to him the
Vulgar: He is become the Ringleader of the Seditious.

This Man was seized, as he returned from the Chief Temple, where Te Deum was
sung Yesterday, for the late Victory in Flanders. And, some are of Opinion,
that 'twas this happy News, which emboldned the Court, to snatch from the
People their Darling, their Idol, the Man from whose Courage, they expect a
Redress of all their Grievances. Indeed, one may say, it would seem safer for a
Traveller in the Deserts of Arabia, to tear from a Lioness her Young One. For,
the Heads of the Faction, waited but for such an Opportunity, to set all in a
Flame. And, the ill Success of the Court in this Action, shows, That it is
dangerous to provoke the Multitude. For, presently we were all in Confusion,
the Burgesses in Arms, the Shops shut up, the Streets Chained, and all the
Avenues of the Palace barricado'd. The Rabble marched up and down the Streets,
threatening Destruction to Cardinal Mazarini, and all his Party. The Parliament
were forced to become the Messengers of the People, to carry their Petitions,
or rather their Commands to the Court; being threatened also, if they failed of
Success. For, they protested Unanimously, that they would not lay down their
Arms, till the Imprisoned Counselor was Released.

The Queen appeared at first Inexorable and sent these Senators away with
Denial and, Scoffs; wishing them Joy of their New Honor, in being made the
Porters of the Rabble. And, the Young Monarch, incensed to see his Native
Royalty, thus Profaned by his Subjects, bent his Brows; and casting a Look,
divided betwixt Majesty and Disdain, on the Senators, uttered these Words:
Sirs, Shall it always be a Custom, thus to molest the Minority of your Kings?
Or, do you think Our tender Years, incapable of the Common Sense of other
Mortals, that you presume thus Insolently to invade our Right? Accuse not the
Multitude, nor make them an Vmbrage to your Sedition. I know the Authors of
these Tumults; and shall find a Time, to make 'em feel the Weight of my
Displeasure. Think not that I wear this Sword, only for Ornament, [laying his
Hand fiercely on the Hilt] or, that the Blood of my Renowned Ancestors, is
grown degenerate, or turned to Lees within my Veins. Go tell your Factious
Comrades, There sits this Day upon the Throne of France a King, who, though
he is Young, yet has a Spirit and Memory, which will outlast his Pupillage. With
that, he commanded them out of his Sight.

Yet, notwithstanding this, the People threatened, to bring their Darling away
by Force, if he were not Released in Two Hours.

There were above a Hundred Thousand of them in Arms, and it might have proved
a dangerous Insurrection. But, the Queen, at the Second return of the Senators,
harkening to the Advice of Mazarini, and the Duke of Orleans, and remembering
the late dreadful Effects of Masanello's Tumult in Naples, released the
Prisoner; who was conducted Home last Night in Triumph, by an Infinite Crowd of
People, who filled the Air with Shouts and Acclamations.

It is discoursed here, That the Prince of Conde will speedily return to Paris.
From whom, both the Court, and the Faction, promise themselves new Grounds of
Triumph.

During these Commotions, Mahmut fails not to act his Part, being at no small
Expense, to maintain a certain Number of Strangers, whose whole Dependence is
on me. These I instruct, to mix themselves with the Rabble, to insinuate into
them hateful Notions, of Cardinal Mazarini, and the Court. They buz up and down
the City, like Flies in this hot Season, and sting the Multitude to Fury, with
their Stories. I spare no Cost, to procure the Cardinal's Ruin. That
pernicious Wit comes not short of his Predecessor Richlieu, being as active in
embroyling Foreign States; witness, the Revolutions of Portugal, Catalonia,
England and Naples; (in all which, he had a principal Hand) and is ever
projecting, how to aggrandize his Master. And, the Universal Success of the
French Arms in Germany, Flanders, Italy and Spain, has left him Nothing worth a
Thought, but the Destruction of the Osman Empire.

Eliachim brings me News every Hour, how my Mirmidons succeed; for, he acts
abroad in the Streets, while I keep my Chamber, during the Tumults; being of
Demosthenes's Mind, who, when the Athenians were in an Uproar, took Sanctuary
in the Temple of Pallas, and prostrating himself before the Altar of the
Goddess, uttered these Words, O Pallas, I fly to thee for Protection; defend me
from Ignorance, Envy, and Inconstancy; for, I love not the Society of the Owl,
the Dragon, and the People.

Yet, whether in my Chamber or Abroad, be assured, Illustrious Prefect, of the
Imperial City, that Mahmut divides his Time between the Vows he makes, and the
Services he does for the Grand Signior.

Paris, 3d. of the 9th. Moon, of the Year 1648.
LETTER XVIII. To Achmet Beig.
THIS Court is now in Mourning, for the Death of Vladislaus, late King of
Poland: Whilst the Politicians, are canvasing the next Election. Those who Side
with the House of Austria, favor the Succession of Prince Charles. But the
French, are for Casimir, their former Prisoner.

The Duke of Bavaria, is also dead. They say, he died of Grief, to see his
Country exposed to the Insults of a Victorious Enemy: For, all his Forces were
entirely defeated.

The Prince of Conde, has taken Ipre in Flanders; and, the Archduke of
Austria, has rendered himself Master of Courtray, without drawing a Sword, or
firing a Gun: The Marshall de Rantzan, has made an unhappy Attempt, to
surprise Ostend, a Sea-Town in Flanders. For, carrying his Forces by Water, as
soon as he had Landed his Men, a Tempest rose, and drove all his Ships out to
Sea: So that, being encompassed by a numerous Army of his Enemies, and having
no Way to escape, he and all his Troops were made Prisoners.

From the Sea we have Advice, that there has been a Combat, between the Duke of
Richlieu, Commander of the Naval Forces sent to assist the Neapolitan
Revolters, and Don John of Austria, Admiral of the Spanish Fleet on that Coast.
But the Issue of the Battle, is not yet known: Though most People, guess the
Victory to be on the French Side, in Regard Cardinal Mazarini had, by the
Advice of an Indian Ship-wright, caused all the French Ships to be plastered
over with Allom, so that no Fireships can hurt them. The Spaniards make great
Use of these Fireships, in all their Sea Fights; having learned to their Cost,
from the English, what Damage these Vessels do, when they formerly lost their
whole Armada, which they before termed Invincible, and with which they sailed
to Conquer that Island.

From Catalonia the Posts bring News, which pleases the Wives and Friends of
the Soldiers in those Parts: For, the Marshall de Schomberg, has cut in Pieces
the Spanish Army, taken Tortosa by Assault, where the Soldiers found a Booty of
above Fifteen Hundred Thousand Livres.

A Courier is come from Suedeland, who brings an Account of a late Formidable
Conspiracy in Russia, against the Life of the Czar. The greatest Part of the
Moscovite Grandees, were concerned in this Plot; designing to Change the Form
of Government, and divide that Mighty Empire into several Principalities,
whereof every one of the Conspirators should have a Share. And, that they
should be all Subject to One Chief, who should be elected by the Rest, after
the Manner of Germany. To this Purpose, they had made a Private Treaty with the
Tartars. Morosoph, the Prime Minister of State, and the Chancellor Nazari, were
of the Conspiracy. Perhaps, thou will lament the Fate of the Latter, having
received extraordinary Civilities from him, when thou were at that Court.

Banaanoph, Son of the Patriarch of Mosco, revealed the Plot, with the Names of
the Conspirators to the Grand Duke: Who sent for them next Day to his Palace,
under diverse Pretenses; where he commanded them all to be Killed, and their
Bodies to be thrown to the Dogs in the Streets of that City.

The French report strange Things of Sultan Ibrahim: I wish all go well at the
Sublime Port. If thou have the same Desires, reveal them to none but thy
Friend. For, at some Times, a Man's best Thoughts will be interpreted for
Treason. Adieu.

Paris, 15th. of the 10th. Moon, of the Year 1648.
LETTER XIX. To the Mufti.
THY Venerable Letters are come safe to my Hands, bringing Light and
Consolation to the Faithful Exile. With profoundest Reverence, I kissed and
unfolded the Papers, which contain the Sacred Instructions of the Vicar of God.
I blessed my self, when I read the Charge of Royal Enormities, the exorbitant
Passions of a Mussulman Emperor, and the Profanation of the Throne founded on
Justice. Thou have prevented the Qualms of a too scrupulous Loyalty, by
assuring me, That it is a Fundamental Maxim, of our Law, That all Men in the
World, without Respect of Birth or Quality, are obliged to appear before the
Justice of God: And, That he who obeys not the Law, is no Mussulman: And, If
the Emperor himself be in this Number, he ought to be Deposed forthwith.

This has abundantly satisfied my Conscience, coming from the Hands of him,
from whose Sentence, there can be no Appeal on Earth. I shall therefore readily
obey thy Orders; and, without Demurr, put in Execution what thou have commanded
me.

Who can blame the Just Indignation of Sultan Morat's Widow, who in Defense of
her Chastity, threatened to sheath her Poniard in the Breast of her Sovereign?
But, incomparably more Eminent, was thy Daughters Virtue, who not being able to
resist the Force of the Mighty Ravisher, after she was polluted, would like
another Lucretia, have stabbed her self, had she not been prevented by the
Sultan. How has he sullied the Glory of the Osman Race, by these Effeminate
Vices? What an Indignity has he committed, against our Holy Law? Against the
Principal Patriarch of the Elect? Much more noble, was the Continence of the
African Scipio, who, when at the Conquest of New Carthage, a Virgin of
admirable Beauty, was chosen from among the Captives and presented to him,
would by no Means defile her, but restored her again without Blemish to her
Parents, saying withal to those that stood near him, Were I a Private Man, I
would gratify my Passion, by the Enjoyment of this lovely Maid; but, it becomes
not the Leader of an Army, to give so bad an Example; nor a Conqueror, to
yield his Heart to the Charms of his Captive.

But it seems, that Sultan Ibrahim was rather Ambitious of the Character of
Augustus the Roman Emperor, of whom it is said, That he never spared any Woman
in his Lust: but, if he cast his Eye on a Beautiful Lady, though her Husband
were of the First Quality in the Empire, he would immediately send his
Officers, to bring her to him by fair Means or by Force.

The Philosopher Athenodorus, who was very intimate with this Monarch, took a
pretty Method to reform this Vice in his Master. For, when the Emperor one Day
had sent a close Sedan or Chair, for a certain Noble-Woman, of the House of the
Camilli; the Philosopher fearing some Disaster might ensue, (for, that Family
was very Popular, and highly respected in Rome,) he goes before to the Ladies
Palace, and acquainting her with it, she complains to her Husband, of the
Indignity was offered her. He boiling with Anger, threatened to stabb the
Messengers of the Emperor, when they came. But, the prudent Philosopher
appeased them both, and only desired a Suit of the Ladies Apparel; which was
granted him. He soon put it on, and hiding his Sword under his Robes, entered
the Sedan, personating the Lady. The Messengers, who knew no other, carried him
away to the Emperor. He heightened with Desire, made have to open the Sedan
himself. When Athenodorus suddenly drawing his Sword, leaped forth upon him,
saying, Thus might Thou have been Murdered: Will thou never quit the Vice,
which is attended with so much Danger? Jealousy and Revenge might have
substituted an Assassin thus disguised in my Room: But, I took Care of thy
Life. Henceforth take Warning. The Emperor pleased with the Philosopher's
Stratagem, gave him Ten Talents of Gold, thanking him for this seasonable
Correction: And, from that Time, began to refrain Unlawful Pleasures, applying
himself to a Virtuous Life.

Thou see, Holy Prelate, that by perusing the Histories of the Ancients, a
Man may furnish himself with useful Examples, and proper Observations. I always
keep by me Plutarch's Works, and those of Livy, a Roman Historian; as also
Tacitus, who has left the Annals of that Formidable Empire to Posterity. It
were a desirable Thing, That the Mussulman Scribes were employed, in
Translating such Records as these, into the Arabic or Turkish Languages: That
so the True Faithful, who are Destined by God to Conquer the World, may not be
ignorant of the Memorable Transactions of Former Ages. Some of our Sultans have
been curious, to have Plutarch's Writings rendered in the Familiar Speech of
the Ottomans. There are other Memoirs, not less worth the Labor. If it shall
enter into thy Heart, to encourage so profitable a Work, the whole Empire of
the Resigned to God, will be indebted to thee. But, who am I, that presume to
direct the Great Father of the Faithful? Thou art enlight'ned with all
Knowledge and Wisdom! Peradventure, thou have Reasons to divert thee from such
an Enterprise, which I cannot comprehend. Therefore, I cover my Mouth with
Dust, and acquiesce.

As to the late Revolution, I am not to dispute the Will of my Superiors.
However, I receive the News of that Tragedy with less Discontent, in Regard,
Thou thy self, who are the Oracle of the Mussulmans, have thought fit to Depose
Sultan Ibrahim: Using herein, the Advice and Consent of his own Mother, and of
Mahomet Bassa, with that of the Janisar Aga; who, next to thy self, are Two the
most Knowing Sages in the Empire.

What remains, but that I shall pray for the long Life of Sultan Mahomet?
Desiring also, that Heaven may so direct his Counsels, That he may never do any
Thing, to merit the Fate of his Unhappy Father.

Paris, 13th. of the 11th. Moon, of the Year 1648.
LETTER XX. To Chiurgi Muhammel, Bassa.
AT length, the Deputies of the Nazarene Princes at Munster, have concluded a
Peace. They have been these Six Years, debating about Trifles and Punctilio's,
as is the Manner of the Christians, even in the most Important Affairs. This
Treaty was Signed, the 24th. of the last Moon; when all farther Hostilities
ceased on all Sides, except on the Parts of France and Spain, whose Quarrel
could by no Means be adjusted, in this General Agreement of Christendom.

Thou have by this Time, heard of the late Tumults and Emotions in this City;
the Disaffection between the Court and Parliament, with the Short Siege of
Paris. Now Things seem to be composed, and in a Calm. But, it may only prove a
Truce, while both Parties take Breath, to rush upon each other with the greater
Violence. The City is unmeasurably Rich and Populous, and can Arm an Hundred
Thousand Men at an Hours Warning. The Parliament abets their Quarrel. This
encourages them to vye with the Court. The Merchants live like Petty Kings:
Abundance of Gold, fills them with Pride and Ambition. Whilst the Court, in the
mean Time, are Close and Reserved, projecting how to destroy the Faction, and
assert the Regal Authority. The Queen-Regent, is Resolute and Severe; yet
suffers her self to be Mollify'd, with the Milder Counsels of Cardinal
Mazarini, and the Duke of Orleans.

In the Beginning of this Reign, I gave an Account to the Ministers of the
Port, of the Duke of Beaufort's Imprisonment in the Castle of the Wood of
Vinciennes, which is one of the King's Palaces. This Prince, is now escaped
from his Confinement, and come into the City. The Factious cry him up for a
Patriot, and are resolved to protect him, with their Lives and Fortunes.

If thou yet retainest thy Health and Vigor, thou art Happy. As for me, I feel
continual Decays: Yet am not troubled; perceiving at the same Time, that I
approach nearer to Immortality. Wherefore, I neither seek Restoratives, nor
consult the Physician; but suffering my self to dissolve Gradually, I die with
Pleasure, Pluming and preparing my self daily, as one ready to take Wing for a
more Happy Region.

Paris, 24th. of the 12th. Moon, of the Year 1648.
LETTER XXI. To Dgnet Oglou.
I Am not surpised at the News of Sultan Ibrahim's being Deposed and
Strangled: It Is but what I have for a long Time feared: These restless
Janissaries, will ruin the Ottoman Empire. Neither am I startled to hear, that
his Mother was accessory to his Fall; having a Double Motive, Ambition and
Revenge, to induce her Consent. She always affected to Rule; and therefore,
could not brook the Sultan's resolute Management of Affairs, without following
her Advice. Besides, she could not easily forget her Disgrace and Confinement,
on the Account of the Armenian Ladies Death.

But, I am astonished and vexed to hear, That the Mufti should be concerned in
so Black a Tragedy. How shall we have the Confidence hereafter, to reproach the
Christians, with their frequent Treasons and Murdering of their Kings; since it
will be easy for them to retort, That the Supreme Patriarch of Our Law, has
entered into the Secret of Rebels, Conspired the Death of his Sovereign, and
caused him to be Deposed and Strangled?

As for the Aga of the Janissaries, I suppose him rather over-awed into the
Conspiracy, by the Forcible Reasons and Elegant Parole of the Mufti, than any
ways Voluntarily engaging himself in Crimes, to which he seems to have no
Inclination. Besides, he could not refuse to make one in the Party, after it
had once been proposed to him; unless he were resolved, to be the First Victim
of their Jealousy, and be Murdered himself, to prevent the Discovery of the
Rest. Yet, his Duty and Honor, ought to have superseded all other
Considerations: And, he should have chosen to Die in his Allegiance, rather
than to live stained with so foul a Crime.

However it be, I cannot approve their Treason. For, whatever the Vices of the
Sultan were, they had no Right to punish him. He was accountable to None but
God: And, they invaded the Prerogative of Heaven, in Dethroning Him, whom the
Divine Providence, had invested with the Imperial Diadem.

Much less can I approve their Impiety, in Defaming him now he is dead. Neither
can I in Conscience comply with the Injunctions of the Mufti, who has commanded
me in a Letter, to spread an Ill Character of Sultan Ibrahim among the
Christians, that so his own Proceedings may appear Just. It Is true, I owe Much
to the Authority of this Sovereign Guide of True Believers; yet I must not, to
pay this Debt, turn Bankrupt of my Reason: I owe Something to my Self, and to
the Distinguishing Character of a Man. I promised him indeed to obey his
Commands in this Point: But, he that has given me a Dispensation for all the
Lies and Perjuries I shall be guilty of in Paris; will, I hope, pardon me, if I
turn my Own Confessor, and Absolve my self, for not performing my Word to him
in this Point.

I am not often guilty of Aspersing the Living, but I abhor to Injure the Dead:
Lest I should incurr the Fate of him, who being at Enmity with a Famous
Wrastler, pursued him with Malice and Revenge even in his Grave. For, envying
the Honor that was due to this Wrastler's Memory, in that his Statue was set
up in a Public Place, he went privately one Night, with Design to throw the
Statue down, But, after he had spightfully Disfigured it in several Parts with
a Hammer, and was busy in working its Overthrow; the Image, on a sudden, fell
on him, and crushed him to Death. As if the Spirit of him, whom it represented,
had given it this Fall, to revenge the Malice of his Adversary.

Certainly, the Ancients were not ignorant what they said, when, among other
Sage Counsels, they advised Mortals, Not to speak Ill of the Dead, but to
esteem them Sacred, who are gone into the Immortal State. And, Plato's Ring had
this Motto on it, It is easier to provoke the Dead, than to pacify them, when
once provoked. Intimating thereby, That the Souls of the Departed, are sensible
of the Injuries that are done them by the Living.

Therefore I will shun Detraction, especially of the Dead. And, if I cannot say
much in Praise of Sultan Ibrahim's Virtues, let his Vices be buried with him in
Eternal Oblivion.

I run no Hazards in Writing thus frankly to thee, being assured of thy
Fidelity. Besides, Death (which is the worst Punishment can be inflicted on me,
for what I have said, should it be known) would not be bitter, when given by a
Friend. Dear Gnet, Adieu.

Paris, 20th. of the 1st. Moon, of the Year 1649.
LETTER XXII. To Danecmar Kesrou, Kadilesquer of Romania.
WHEN I informed thee, how the Scots had Sold their King to the English Rebels,
it was easy to presage the Consequence, without a Revelation. When Sovereign
Monarchs become the Merchandise of Factions, they commonly pay the Price with
their own Blood. And, there are few Examples, of Princes that have been
Imprisoned by their Subjects, and yet have escaped a Violent Death. For, those
who have once advanced so far in their Treason, as to seize the Person of their
Sovereign, can never retire with Safety to themselves; or, at least, their Own
Guilt makes them think so. The Consciousness of what they have already done,
prompts them to proceed in their Wickedness: And, their Despair of saving their
own Lives, makes them conclude it Necessary to take away his, whose Violated
Majesty, they fear, will never pardon so Impudent an Essay of Treason.

But, the Method which the English have taken to Murder their King, has not a
Precedent in History. These Infidels, have outstrip'd all Former Traitors, in
the Contrivance and Execution of their Regicide: They have even surpassed
Themselves, and their own First Designs.

It has been usual for Traitors, to take away the Life of a Deposed Monarch
Privately, by Poison or Assassin, either in Respect to his Royal Blood, or to
avoid the Possibility of a Rescue, from any of his Loyal Friends and Subjects.
But, these Barbarians, were resolved Publicly to insult on Majesty, to brave
the whole World in the Execution of their Villainy, and make a Pompous
Conclusion of their Treasons. For, they Erected a New Divan or Court of
Judicature, composed of the most Infamous Traitors: There they formally Tried
their Sovereign, by a Law of their own making; Condemned him as a Tyrant and a
Traitor: And finally, caused his Head to be chopped off with an Axe, by an
Executioner, before the Gates of his own Palace, in the Sight of Thousands of
his Subjects; that so they might appear, not so much to Kill their King, as to
Destroy the Monarchy it self, and Triumph in its Ruin.

Have thou, O Venerable Judge of the Faithful, ever Read or Heard of such a
Daring Treason? All Europe startles at the Monstrous Fact. And, Cardinal
Mazarini himself, who carried on that Private Web of Factious Designs in
England, whose First Threads his Predecessor Richlieu had spun; yet expressed an
Horror, at the News of this Tragedy. And, I look not on this, to be an Artifice
of Policy in him to blind the World; but, a real Discovery of his Sentiments:
For, he is too generous, to approve so Barbarous a Proceeding, against a
Sovereign Monarch, though his Enemy.

The Other Day he was heard to say, That in Revenge of the King 's Murder, he
would embarass the Counsels of the English Rebels, more than he had done those
of their Sovereign.

This was not spoken so secretly, but Mahmut had Intelligence of it within an
Hour: For, I have more Ears in Paris, than those in my Head, to hearken after
the Intrigues of this Minister: And, it will be difficult for him hereafter, to
speak, write or act any Thing; no, not even in his Private Closet, which will
not be disclosed to me.

Yet, though I thus watch his Motions as an Enemy, and do my utmost, to render
his Designs against the Ottoman Port, Ineffectual; I cannot in my Heart condemn
this Minister, who all the while, acts but the Part of a Faithful Servant and
an Able Statesman, in striving to aggrandize his Master.

His supporting also the Factions in England, and nourishing the Discontents of
that Giddy-Headed People, were but the Result of his Zeal for his Country, and
for the Church whereof he is One of the Principal Pillars: It being Evident
from his Grief at that King's Murder, That he bore no Malice against him, but
only sought to humble him into Terms of Compliance with France.

When I say this, I suppose the Cardinal's Sorrow on that Account, to be free
from Fiction: But who knows, when the Actions, of Statesmen are Undisguiz'd,
and when not? For, I am well assured, That whilst his Agents were busy in
Embroyling that Nation, he promised the Exiled English Queen, to assist her
Husband with Men and Money, against those very Rebels, with whom he held a
Private Correspondence, and to whom his Coffers were really open.

Most of the European Statesmen, are corrupted with the Maxims of a certain
Famous Writer, whom they call Matchiavel. This State-Casuist has taught them,
to boggle at no Crimes, which may advance the Ends they aim at; Every Thing, in
his Opinion, being Honest, that is Successful. Thus, Policy among the
Nazarenes, is Degenerated into Sordid Craft: And, that which was once
deservedly esteemed a Virtue, necessary to the Governments of the World, is now
turned into a Vice; of which the very Outlaws, Free-Booters and Pirates, are
ashamed.

God, who suffered the Earth to be Inhabited by Angels, for an Infinite Number
of Ages before he Created Adam, and then Expelling them Hence for their
Wickedness, and turning them to Devils, gave this Globe for a Dewlling Place to
Men; grant, that the Enormous Crimes of Mortals, may not provoke Him to
Exterminate our Human Race, and Restore the Devils to their Ancient Habitation.

Paris, 12th. of the 2d. Moon, of the Year 1649.
The End of the Third Volume.

