A Comparison between A Sincere Penitent, and a Just Person; IN A SERMON
Preached before the QUEEN, At Whitehall, March 8 1692/3.

By THO. MANNINGHAM, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to Their MAJESTY'S.

Published by Her Majesty's special Command.

LONDON, Printed for W. Crook, at the Green Dragon without Temple-Barr; and S.
Smith, at the Princes-Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard. MDCXCIII.

Dr. MANNINGHAM 's COMPARISON BETWEEN A Sincere Penitent, and a Just Person.

St. LUKE, Chap. XV. Verse. 7. I say unto you, That likewise Joy shall be in
Heaven over one Sinner that Repents, more than over ninety and nine just
Persons which need no Repentance.
THis being the most solemn Time of the Year, wherein the Doctrine of
Repentance ought to be more abundantly preached, and more frequently
inculcated, and wherein all the variety of Motives and Arguments is to be made
use of, to bring Men to a serious Consideration of their Ways and Lives, to a
just Abhorrence of their Sins, and to a spiritual Recovery of Themselves; I
shall endeavor at present to explain this Portion of Scripture, and to enlarge
on its Particulars in such a manner, as may give encouragement to the greatest
of Sinners to repent, and yet secure the Dignity and Preference of those just
and virtuous Persons, who need no such extraordinary Repentance: That the most
Vicious and Extravagant may be invited to turn to God, and the Devout and
Humble to go on more cheerfully in their progress to Perfection: That
Conversion and Repentance may be duly magnified, and yet without any Derogation
from the greater Excellency of an habitual Innocence, of an early and constant
course in Piety. And in order to this, I shall proceed in this following method:

I. I shall consider what is meant by those Just Persons who need no
Repentance. II. How we are to understand that Joy in Heaven over one Sinner
that repents, etc. III. I shall make some comparison between a True Penitent
and a Just Person; and show on which side the Advantage lies.
I. What is meant by those Just Persons who need no Repentance.

In the beginning of this Chapter, it is said, That the Publicans and Sinners
drew near to hear our Savior; and that the Pharisees and Scribes murmured,
saying, This Man receives Sinners, and eats with them: And upon this account
some are of Opinion, that the three following Parables were spoken with a
particular reflection on those conceited and presumptuous Persons, who thought
none were Just and Holy, or had any Title to Heaven but themselves; and who
placed a main part of their Sanctimoniousness in a separation from others, and
in despising of poor Publicans and Sinners. But though the Pride and Hypocrisy
of those Persons were most vile and abominable, and fully merited all the
Severity of our Savior's Reproofs; and though he took many occasions of
discovering to the People the Falseness, Covetousness, Censoriousness, and
Malice, of that pretending Sect; yet he does not seem in these Parables to have
reflected on Them: For here the principal Design of our Savior was, to set
forth the Goodness of GOD, and his readiness to forgive the greatest Sinners,
upon their timely and sincere Repentance; and to declare the Pleasure which His
Heavenly Father took in the Conversion of Men, though they had been very
extravagantly sinful. But now what sort of Expression had it been of God's
Delight in true Penitents, if this had been the proper signification of the
Text, That there was Joy in Heaven over one Sinner that repented, more than
over ninety and nine hypocritical Pharisees, who were so proud as to think they
needed no Repentance? To be sure, this could not be the sense intended by our
Savior; because the design of the Parables which he then delivered, was to
magnify the Graciousness and Mercy of God toward hearty Penitents; but
nothing surely could be a more improper way of doing that, than by preferring
of them barely before the worst of Hyprocrites.

As to the number of Ninety nine Just Persons, that runs upon a supposition;
that should we conceive so many Just Persons, who lived sober and regular
Lives, and that but one in an hundred should prove Extravagant; the reducing of
that one would be the cause of more Joy, than the continuance of Ninety nine in
their wonted Obedience and Duty. But though the number of Ninety nine Just
Persons in an Hundred, be a Supposition, yet it may be further inquired,
Whether there be any Persons so Just as to need no Repentance? And to this it
may be answered, 1st. That there is a Spirit of Delusion gone into the World,
whereby some are filled with such presumptuous Conceits of themselves, that
they dare pretend to an absolute unsinning Perfection: And this makes them
despise the solemn Confessions of Sin, and the Sacraments of the Church; and is
so dangerous a piece of spiritual Pride, that it delivers Men up to blasphemous
Opinions, and such distractions of Mind that look very like unto real
Possessions. When the Devil cannot prevail with some to run into the Disorders
of a sensual Life, then he endeavors to raise them up into his own Nature: If
they cannot be prevailed upon to be grossly sinful, then he persuades them that
they have no Sin at all; that they are wholly pure and perfect, and stand in no
need of those Cleansings and Expiations, which others look upon as necessary
and constant Duties: That Confession, Humiliation, Repentance, and applying to
the Sacrifice of Christ, are but mean Ordinances and Beggarly Elements, fit
only to constitute the Religion of great Sinners: And that they are already
advanced to such a near conformity with God, that they want none of those helps
and supplies which are suited only to an imperfect State.

This may look like a strange Description to those who are not acquainted with
the Wiles and Depths of Satan, and with that Mystery of Ungodliness which works
in the Children of Pride: But it is a sad Truth, that there have been many, who
have been wrought up into Spiritual Phrenzies, by entertaining unusual
confidences of their own perfection; by neglecting the humble way of Walking
with God in constant Piety and Fear; in a mean opinion of their own good
Actions; in the Prayers and Praises of the Church, and under the wise and sober
Conduct of those who are appointed by God to watch over the Souls of Men. It is
a Melancholy reflection to think how many of those poor Creatures who talk of
nothing but Spirit, and Light, and Communion with God, are at the same time in
the very Gall of Bitterness, and in the height of Spiritual Pride! Now such as
these are so far from needing no Repentance, that they want it as much as the
most Debauched and Profligate Sinner; and nothing is more proper for such, than
to spend the whole remainder of their days in mourning and debasing of
themselves, and in using the best methods of cleansing themselves from the
abominable pollutions of Pride, and from the filthiness of the Spirit.

2. There are others, who though they do not rise unto that degree of Spiritual
Pride, as those I now mentioned; yet because they are not observed to run into
the notorious Riots and Excesses of the Age, are inclined to think, That the
Doctrine of Repentance does but little concern them. They are not so open and
public in their Sins as others; the noise of their Sinful Actions does not
furnish the Discourse of People, and the Scene of their Vices lies more inward
and retired; but yet all the while their Hearts may be full of Covetousness,
Vainglory, and bitter Zeal; they may never yet have had any spiritual Change
and Renovation within them; and they may be very remote from true Godliness,
and a sincere love of Virtue: And if there be such as these, they stand in as
much need of Repentance as any of the Prodigal and Licentious part of Mankind.
But then,

3ly. There are some such just Persons as need no such Repentance as the
Prodigal Son is represented to have made: They do not need a whole change of
their Hearts and Lives, because they are such as through a good Education, and an
early Piety, have been kept under the Grace and Providence of God, from
breaking out into any Notorious Sins, and from living in any Habitual
filthiness either of Flesh or Spirit. But yet even these stand in need of such
a Repentance, as ought to run parallel with all their Virtuous Actions to the
end of their Days; which is to accompany them in their highest Seize, and
to send them humbly to the Blood of Christ, for the expiating the Defects of
their most perfect Lives. When we talk of Innocent and Just Persons, we always
mean in a comparative way of speaking, as they excel the generality of
Mankind, and are more Constant and Zealous in Holy Duties, than others. When we
speak of Perfection, we take that word in an Evangelical sense, not according
to the rigor and absoluteness of the Term; but in such a qualified meaning, as
is consistent with Surprises and Infirmities: We mean such a perfection as
includes many defects in it, but yet is still carrying us on to farther degrees
of Holiness: That leaves us continual matter for our Humiliation, and for our
farther endeavors after Righteousness; but does not suffer any Sin to Reign
and have Dominion over us.

Now there were some in our Savior's time, even in that most degenerate State
of Judaism, who were so just and perfect, as to need no such Repentance as John
the Baptist preached to the Pharisees and Sadducees, and our Savior himself to
the Publicans and Sinners: There were some true Israelites, who had lived
without Guile, and had kept a good Conscience both toward God and Man: And as
to such, it was sufficient that they received Christ as the Messiah, whom the
Prophets had foretold, without condemning themselves for their former opinions,
or for their former Lives; they being already Believers and Virtuous, according
to the light, and knowledge, and means they were under, were only to be
instructed farther in the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, to be more
confirmed in the Comfortable Doctrine of the forgiveness of Sins, and to be
improved and raised unto more perfection, to higher Instances of Duty, and
greater degrees of Love: But they had no need of those astonishing Sermons, and
those terrible denunciations of present Wrath and Destruction, which were to
awake the Grosser Sinners; nor were they obliged to enter into those difficult
and bitter parts of Repentance, which were designed for the Recovery of those
who were Dead in Trespasses and Sins.

So likewise under the settled profession of the Gospel, there are those, who by
the preventing Grace of God, have been preserved from the Corruptions of the
World; and by the means of a pious Education, and a governable Temper, have
maintained an even and constant course of Piety: Now it cannot be supposed that
such Persons as these, need any such Repentance as signifies a Total Change of
their Hearts and Manners: The Holy Spirit has already wrought that change which
was necessary for them in an insensible way, and by such undiscernible degrees,
that they cannot assign the particular time of their Conversion. The Baptismal
Efficacy unfolded itself into sanctification, and holiness as they were capable
and fit, and their Christianity and Reason improved together.

But still there is a Repentance for such as these to be employed in, while
they sojourn in this World; for though they avoid all known and willful Sins, and
discharge their duties in such a manner, that their Consciences cannot accuse
them of any gross neglect, or of any Insincerity of Heart; yet evil Thoughts,
irregular Desires, disorderly Passions upon sudden Provocations, and an
omission of the due execution of good Purposes, and of the improvement of good
Affections, are breaches of God's Holy Law, and need his Pardon: They must be
resisted and watched against; and they must be cleans'd by such a Repentance,
as makes Men truly sorrowful for such impure Adherencies, though perhaps they
shall never be perfectly free from them; by such a Repentance, as makes them
groan and mourn under them as burdensome Infirmitites, and ready to comply with
the best methods of removing them in some measure and degree; for though we
cannot be perfectly Holy in this Life, yet we don't know to what a height of
Piety we may arrive, unless we try and contend after it; and though we miss of
some of those degrees of Perfection which we labored to attain, yet we shall
find such Advantages in our spiritual Life, by our hearty Endeavors to be quit
of all Infirmities, that we shall be more confirmed in Goodness, perceive our
Hearts and Affections more and more purified, and we shall be prepared for a
higher state of Glory.

Thus we see that there is a Repentance for the most Just and Righteous Persons
continually to be exercised in; but then this Repentance is not so much a
separate Duty, or an entrance upon Religion, as a continuance in it, or a
walking humbly with God: It Is not a passing from a course of Sin, to an habit
of Righteousness, but a proficiency in Holiness under a fear of God, and a
mournful sense of our Infirmities and Defects: And though this be continually
carried on in some degree all the time of our Lives, yet it must be increased
as solemn Occasions shall require. And though the Repentance of great Sinners may
cause more Joy in Heaven, yet I doubt not but this Repentance of the Just is of
exceeding Esteem with God and his Holy Angels. Which leads to the

Second thing to be explained, viz. How we are to understand that Joy in Heaven
over one Sinner that repents, more than over ninety and nine Just Persons
which need no Repentance. Now it is evident that this expression of Joy in
Heaven, is suited to the plain matter of the Parable; for if it be natural for
a Shepherd to rejoice more at the finding of a Sheep that had straggled away
from its Fellows, and was given over for lost, than for all the remaining Body
of the Flock, which he knew to be safe, and within the Fold: If this be a
common Observation, and agreeable to the Nature and ordinary Concerns of
Mankind, who are generally more moved with something that surprises, and is
unexpected, than with what is known and constant, though really in it self of
greater value than the other; then we have a sufficient understanding of what
our Savior means by that Expression, when we apply it to spiritual matters, in
that manner that spiritual things will admit of.

That therefore which we are to conceive by that Phrase, of Joy in Heaven over
one Sinner which repents, etc. is this: That the Conversion of a Sinner is
highly acceptable to God; and that a true Penitent is very dear to Him, and to
the ministering Angels. But whether there be such a thing as Joy in Spiritual
Natures, and how any thing like a Surprise may be consistent with those
Intelligent Beings, is no part of solid Divinity, and we may be wise and holy,
without resolving of those Intricacies.

We know that the whole Scheme of the Scriptures, is founded upon God's Pity
and Compassion to Man; and that it is God the Son who transacts all things
between the Father and us: And he having taken our Nature upon Him, in the
fullness of time; which he covenanted to do, before the foundation of the World;
I cannot see any such Impropriety in the Style and Language of the Scriptures,
as some may imagine, when they Attribute some kind of Affections to God, as He
is considered and represented to us under the Notion of the Messiah: For what
unsuitableness is there, that a God Incarnate, or a God taking Humane Nature
upon Him, should represent himself as clothed with the original and innocent
Inclinations and Affections of that Humane Nature he was pleased to assume? All
the Descriptions of God which we meet with in our Bible, are either very
Majestical, and such as are proper to imprint on our Minds an exceeding
Reverence and Awe of his Glorious Nature; or they are very Gracious and Lovely,
apt to take possession of our whole Hearts, and to call forth all our
Gratitude; we find none of the evil Passions, or such as have an immediate
repugnancy to a Good and Wise Being, ever attributed to God in the Phrase of
the Scriptures; but only such Passions as are Virtues and Perfections too, and
such as become a Just and Wise Governor, or a Prudent and Tender Father.

The generality of Mankind are hardly able to conceive the Actions of God's
Nature, any otherwise than in a very Humane way: And when they find Religious
Matters represented according to the best conceptions they have of Wisdom and
Goodness, they rest contented; and as the Integrity of their Hearts, and the
Honesty of their designs shall dispose them, they apply themselves to Practice
and Obedience. Now the Scriptures were written for the generality of Men, and
for the meanest Capacities, and in such a way of condescension as was likeliest
to work upon the Most: And they who are of finer Thoughts, and nicer Enquiries,
have other ways of satisfying themselves.

The expression therefore of Joy in Heaven over a Sinner that repents, is
designed to enlarge our Apprehensions of God's Goodness, to raise our
admiration of his Mercy, and to encourage the greatest Sinners to return to
Virtue: But if we will be asking questions about the operation of Natures that
are so far above us, and be disputing the propriety of Expressions; we shall go
near to lose the main intent of the Parable, and to forget that one thing
necessary; the salvation of our Souls.

I come therefore to the

Third thing I proposed, To make some Comparison between a True Penitent, and a
Just Person; between one Converted from a Vicious Course of Life, and a Person
constantly and habitually Good, brought up in an early Piety, and going on to
Perfection, in an even and steady progress.

Now it is certain, that both these Persons, and both these States are highly
commendable: And though the penitent Person in some respects may have the
advantage of the Just; yet the Just will have the advantage of him in more.

It is a glorious thing to be a sincere Convert, to choose Virtue with true
knowledge and deliberation; to renounce the World upon a full conviction of its
Vanity; to prefer Humiliation and Retirement before Feasting and Laughter, and
the wisdom of Religion before all the pleasures of Sin! Such a preferrence as
this, brings an exceeding honor to the Gospel, by making known to others the
greatness of its force and efficacy, and that it is most eminently the Power of
God to Salvation: For what a weight must those Motives carry with them, that
can break through the strongest habits of Vice, and cast down those evil
Imaginations that have mightily exalted themselves against the knowledge of
Christ, and have been fortified by long and repeated Custom? What a sudden
Confusion must it bring to the Kingdom of Darkness, when such a Person is
brought over to Virtue, who was acquainted with many of the Depths and
Mysteries of that Infernal Court, and who can now discover to others the Wiles
and Arts by which the Empire of Sin is upheld and promoted? What an addition
must it be to the native Honors and Reverence of an Holy Life, when he who has
experienced and made a full trial of that false Happiness which sinful
Pleasures boast of, shall confess and deplore the Delusions, Anxieties, and
Horrors of a Vicious conversation, and beg contentment from Religion? What new
love of Virtue, and greater detestation of Sin must it cause in us, when we
find one who was notorious for a profane Life, bitterly bewailing the many
scoffs and derisions which he had formerly cast upon Holy Things and Persons,
and with the deepest sense of his vile and unworthy Actions, imploring the
Absolution of the Church? What a joy must this be to the Angels in Heaven, what
a triumph to the Saints on Earth? How gladly will those Ministering Spirits be
employed to carry up to Heaven the Contrition of his Repentance, the sincerity
of his Vows, and the fervor of his Prayers? And how joyfully will they return
with the message of Pardon, Comfort and Salvation? With what Demonstrations of
friendship and gladness will such a Person be received into the Communion of
Saints here below? They will assist him in the difficulties of his new
Undertaking, abate the perplexity of his mind with seasonable Counsels, and
meekly watch over his tender and scrupulous Piety: They will never upbraid him
for his former Actions, nor despise him for what he once was; but will magnify
that Grace which over power'd the strong Holds of Sin, and only repine, That he
was not sooner Theirs.

As the return of a Sinner from a Vicious Life brings great Glory to God, and
to the Gospel of Christ; so there are some Virtues, or some peculiarities of
Holiness, in which true Penitents do often excel. There is generally an
excellent degree of Humility that accompanies all their Pious Duties, and
nothing usually is more contrary to their Tempers than Spiritual Pride. They
are seldom guilty of any Censoriousness, or despising of others, who are not
yet returned to Wisdom, and a better Mind; who are not yet so Virtuous and so
Happy as themselves. They are always sensible of what they once were, and most
zealous for the conversion of others; as knowing on what terrible Precipices
they continually walk. Besides, they oftentimes arrive to an exceeding measure
of Divine Love; that Heat, that Vehemence of Temper which once carried them
into the Excesses of Sin and Folly, being consecrated to God and Religion, is
for the future turned into the Ardors of Devotion.

If these with many more Advantages of Repentance were well weighed, there is
sufficient encouragement for the greatest Sinners to come in, to enter their
Names among the happy Penitents, and by their timely Conversion, to cause great
Joy in Heaven. But then we are likewise to consider, that the Joy which is
expressed for a Convert; is no Derogation from the just Person, who needs no
such difficult, no such bitter Repentance.

It is well indeed for thousands of us, that there are such privileges in the
Gospel for returning Prodigals; and that God has so signally declared his
readiness to forgive us upon our sincere repentance: But yet the advantage lies
on the other side, in being early engaged in the ways of Virtue. A religious
Education is certainly the greatest Blessing in this World; it is the foundation
of all others; it is that which delivers us over to the especial care of God,
and puts us into the very Road of a happy Predestination, which nothing but a
prodigious perverseness of Nature can break through. But then we must not look
upon Religious Education as a thing that can be so soon finish*d as some
imagine; if we would have it effectual, it will ask a considerable time in
perfecting; for it does not consist in saying a Catechism by rote, or in
standing a little in awe of Parents; much less in learning some unnecessary
accomplishments; but in awakening the faculties and secret powers of the Soul,
as soon as may be; in working of good habits into those powers, and making the
distinctions between Good and Evil very plain and manifest; in enabling young
Persons to form a rational choice of Virtue, and bringing them by degrees to
find a delight in Religious Duties: To be sure they must never be trusted to
their own Conduct, 'till they are arrived to some moral Wisdom, and to some
spiritual Strength, and are in some measure prepared to withstand those
Temptations of the World, which are most likely to assault them. This, some
will say, is a difficult Task, an employment much out of Fashion, and few
Parents care to have so much trouble with their Children; this I grant is too
true; but then this is the sourse of those Numbers and Swarms of the
extravagantly Vicious which darken this Age; that the Supposition of the
Parable may be reversed upon us, who have ninety nine Sinners, for one just
Person, who needs no such Repentance. Though good Education be a difficult
Undertaking, and much disused in these times of general licentiousness, yet it
is the most important Matter, that either the State, or the Church, can take
into consideration for the happiness of the Kingdom, as well as the Salvation
of Souls depends upon it. It may perhaps so happen, that after all our care,
some may get loose from the best Education, and run a wild course of folly and
madness; yet I am persuaded there are but few such; and they who do, are
commonly followed with such quick Reflections, and sharp Convictions of
Conscience, they are so haunted with the remains of their good Education, that
they find but little quietness in their Souls, 'till they return to Wisdom and
Virtue; and perhaps the first severe Affliction brings them to themselves
again: So that still the extravagance of most People is owing either to their
want of Education, or to some great defects in it: Either their first Years
were wholly neglected, and they were suffered to contract ill Habits, before
they were committed to Instruction; or they were brought up under such an
Indiscreet Strictness, and such sowreness of Principles and Opinions, as made
Religion frightful to them; whereas the love of God, and the easiness of
Virtue, are chiefly to be instilled into tender Minds, and that with all the
sweetness and endearments imaginable: or perhaps their faculties were made too
Volatile and Trivial, with modish Divertisements, and they were taught more
Vanity than Virtue in their younger Years; or else they were too soon committed
to the wide World, before they were truly formed into any settled Goodness, or
had any Virtuous dispositions improved and established in them.

O it is a Blessed thing to set out Innocently in the World, and to go on in a
constant Progress of Holiness! To have only Surprises and Infirmities to repent
of, and some few Spots contracted in common Conversation to cleanse and wash
away! And so to increase daily in Wisdom and Virtue and in Favor both with God
and Man!

Though the returning Sinner may run up to a great measure of Goodness; yet in
respect to the just Person, he will still be the hinder Wheel, and can never
overtake him, who turns upon another Axle, and set out before him in the race
of Virtue: Though the Penitent may have more heats of Zeal, and more Vehemence in
Religion, yet it is very rarely that he equals the Just in the Regularity and
Constancy of Duty: The one may sometimes more vigorously collect himself, and
perform some things in Religion with more generosity and warmth, but then he is
apt to languish again, and to cool too soon; but the other maintains his Piety
with a calm, an even, and a gradual advancement.

The Penitent may be admirably fitted to preach Repentance to others, to
declare the riches of that Mercy which he himself has found, the possibility of
overcoming evil habits which himself has laid aside, and of recovering into a
Life of Virtue after a long course in Sin: He may be admirably fitted to warn
Men of the deceitfulness of Sin, of the falseness of its promises, and of the
danger of delaying their Amendment: But then the remembrance of his former Life
will be apt to diminish his Reverence with some, and to lessen the Force and
Influence of his Counsels: But the Just may rebuke and reprove with all
Authority, and his unspotted Life will add weight and moment to his Words. He
who has forfeited that free and complete forgiveness that was dispensed in
Baptism, and after a notorious range in Sin, is brought into the Church again
at the penitential Door, will have reason to be continually working out his own
Salvation with great fear and trembling: He will have many scars remaining
after his Wounds are healed; he will hardly ever be free from some Images and
Tracts of his former Vanity: He will be often in danger of a Relapse: He will
be apt to think himself more improved than really he is; because he sensibly
finds how much he is removed from that Degenerate State in which he was; so
that a little progress in Virtue, will go near to look like perfection to such
an one, unless he more studiously compare his Life with the rules of the
Gospel, than with those vicious practices which he has forsaken: Besides all
this, an extravagant Life does seldom fail of leaving some indelible Prints
behind it, some weaknesses either of Body or of Mind, that make the Convert
less able to do any eminent service for God and Religion in the remaining part
of his Life: And upon these accounts he can hardly expect to come to that full
Peace and Comfort, and to that degree of humble Confidence and Assurance, which
is the special privilege of the Just.

Though the good Father made an extraordinary Entertainment for the returning
Prodigal; yet he told the elder Brother, that he was ever with him, and that
all he had was his: That he had command of all his Substance, and all the
Riches of his House were his.

Those Divine Vouchsafements, which are a Feast, and a surprising Joy to the
Penitent, are but the daily Provisions, but the common Experiences of the Just.

A return from a vicious Life is more moving, and causes more admiration; but a
settled course of Goodness is more valuable, and is entertained with a more
lasting Esteem.

Nothing besides Innocence is better than Repentance, and a timely Repentance
comes very near to Innocence. The penitent Person by his return, causes a Joy
in Heaven; but the Just has a great Measure of that Heaven continually within
him.

FINIS.

