Dr. MANNYNGHAM's SERMON Preached before Her Majesty, AT WHITE HALL, February
the 28th. 1693/4.

A SERMON ON THE Sincerity and Integrity of the Heart.

Preached before Her Majesty, AT WHITE HALL, February the 28th. 1693/4.

By T. MANNYNGHAM, D.D. Chaplain in Ordinary to Their Majesty's, and Rector of
St. Andrew-Holborn.

Published by Her Majesty's Special Command

LONDON: Printed for S. Smith, and B. Walford, at the Princes-Armes, in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1694.

PSALM CXXXIX. 23.24. Search me, O God, and know my Heart: Try me, and know my
Thoughts:

And see if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the way Everlasting.


THis Psalm is supposed to have been made by David, when he was under the
Persecution of Saul, when his Enemies accused him of Wicked Designs against the
Government, and laid many things to his charge, of which he knew himself to be
no ways guilty.

This put him upon the Justification of himself, and the clearing of his
Innocence betwixt God and his own Soul; which he performed in a very solemn and
deliberate manner, by appealing to the Omniscience of God, when he had with
much exactness, and a peculiar elegancy described it in the former part of this
Psalm. For here he acknowledges the Spiritual Nature of God, whereby he is
present to all the Thoughts of our Minds, to all the Desires of our Hearts, to
the most secret Designs, and hidden Counsels of the Soul: That there is no
getting out of his Presence, no concealing any thing from his Knowledge; that
there is no Night, no Darkness with respect to Him; but that all things are in
a full Light and Manifestation to his All-seeing Eye.

Now, when he had declared what just Apprehensions he had of the Divine Nature;
and how clearly he was convinced, That there was no Thought of his Mind, no
Word of his Mouth, no Inclination of his Heart, but what was perfectly known to
that Infinite Spirit, who gave him his Soul, and framed all the Parts of his
Body, who knew his down-sitting and his up-rising; who was about his Paths and
about his Bed, and was acquainted with all his ways: when he had wrought such a
full Conviction and Awe in his Soul, of the Infinite Knowledge and Presence of
the Divine Power; then he delivered himself up to the Trial and Examination of
that All-knowing Spirit; desiring, that he would search to the very bottom of
his Heart, discover all the Foundations of his Soul, and see if there were any
wicked way in him, any evil Purpose or Design, any mischievous Imagination, of
which his Enemies accused him: And if he found that he was innocent and clear,
that he would still protect and assist him under that Integrity of his Heart,
of which he was so greatly Conscious to himself; that he would lead him in that
Path of Vprightness and sincere Piety, which would be sure to bring him at
length to Everlasting Life.

Now, though this solemn Appeal to God, which David made in this Psalm, may seem
to concern his Innocence, only in respect to those particular Crimes which were
then objected against him; as that he had entered into a Confederacy against
the Crown and Life of Saul; and in pursuance of that Design, was a Favourer and
Supporter of Wicked and Bloody Men; (the Thoughts of which he utterly detested,
and declared, That he hated them with a perfect Hatred) yet we cannot conceive,
but that when David vindicated himself from those particular Accusations, he
likewise at the same time appealed to God for the General Integrity of his
Heart; for so the Acknowledgment of the Omniscience of God did require him to
do, who was acquainted with all the Designs of his Heart; and if he had
indulged himself in any Evil way whatever, he could not expect any Protection
and Assistance from God.

The particular Crimes therefore which were objected against him, were the
Occasion of his appealing to God for the General Integrity of his Heart, as far
as his own Search and Examination could reach: and if God by his severer
Scrutiny, by any further Trial of Afflictions, should discover to him any
Deceitfulness of his Heart, or any way of Wickedness which he himself had not
yet observed, he was ready to forsake it upon Conviction, and to be lead in the
Upright Path, the way Everlasting.

Search me, O God, and know my Heart; Try me, and know my Thoughts; And see if
there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the way Everlasting.

Which Words may afford us these Three Considerations, 1. What is that
Sincerity and Integrity of Heart, which God indispensably requires from all of
us. See if there be any wicked way in me. II. How we may best judge of this
Sincerity and Integrity of our Hearts, viz. by searching and examining our own
Consciences; and especially by being willing to appeal to God's Omniscience in
that Matter: Search me, O God, and know my Heart; Try me, and know my Thoughts.
III. That it is only this Sincerity and Integrity of the Heart which can
entitle us to the Protection and favorable Assistance of God. Lead me in the
way Everlasting.


1. What is that Sincerity and Integrity of Heart indispensably required from
all of us. See if there be any wicked way in me.

Now according to the Psalmist's own Expression in another place, God requires
Truth in the inward Parts; That the real Intention of our Minds should be to
please him in all things, or that our Obedience should be performed upon a True
Principle, the Authority of God, or a Conformity to his Will, which is that we
mean by Sincerity.

There are many Ends which Men may propose to themselves in the same Action or
Undertaking; but that which makes an Action Religious, is the performing of it
with a principle regard to God, and to His Commands.

A Man may be sober and temperate, because it is agreeable to his Constitution,
and conducing to his Health; because he would preserve a fair Reputation in the
World; or to keep himself in such a State of Mind and Body, as may give him the
truest Relish of sensual Pleasures, and a long Enjoyment of Temporal Ease and
Happiness: Upon such Principles as these, the more Refined Epicureans may be
very temperate and sober Persons, and look like men of great Moderation in the
Eyes of the World, and yet be high Sensualists still.

But whosoever governs his Appetites upon a true Principle of Religion, does it
upon the account of the Laws of God, and in imitation of the Example of Christ;
that by withdrawing himself from the Pleasures of this World, his Heart may be
more fixed upon Spiritual and Heavenly Enjoyments; and that he may live in a
Preparation to part with all his present Satisfactions, when the Providence of
God shall lay the Cross upon him, or when Death shall summon him to depart out
of this World.

All the outward things in Religion are capable of being Dissembled, or at
least, of being acted upon Low, and unworthy Designs: Men may give Alms out of
a Principle of Vainglory; make long Prayers, as a Preface to Injustice; Fast
and Mortify only to appear Devout; receive the Sacrament in compliance only
with Custom, and the expectation of Neighbors; They may Read the Bible out of
Curiosity, or in order to make Objections against it, or only to fill their
Memories with its Phrases, without considering the Wisdom and Holiness of those
Writings, or without making them a Rule of Faith, and a Law of Life: And many
may come to Church only to make their best Appearance, and to be Diverted,
rather than Edified by a Sermon; whereas the only solid and lasting Principle
of these and such like Duties, is a Sense of our Obligation to God, a complying
with his Authority and Will; a Design of promoting his Glory, by our hearty and
ready Obedience, and of saving our Souls in the Day of the Lord.

There are some secular Considerations, which may come in as Vnder-Motives to
our Duty; because God has been pleased to make use of them to invite us to
Virtue and Holiness: such as a good Name, or fair Reputation in the World;
Health and Plenty, and Length of Days; which are represented in the Book of
Proverbs, as the Noble Retinue, and the Lovely Attendants of true Wisdom and
Piety; such as serve to make her Amiable and Glorious in the Eyes of all
People; and therefore must be allowed to have some attracting Force in them,
and to be inducements to a good Life; but then we must take care that they be
so in a subordinate manner, that they be not the chief and principle Things for
which we are willing to serve God: for these outward Advantages are but
Accidental, or the usual Blessings of an ordinary Providence; they are not the
certain Fruits of Righteousness, or its Essential Reward: Persecutions,
Afflictions, and a calamitous State of Affairs, may hinder us of those
Ornaments of Virtue, and spoil us of those Motives to Religion; but nothing can
break our good Purposes, when they are Bottomed upon the true Principle, the
Authority and Will of God.

In quiet Times, and when the Age is in good Temper, Religion may be very
profitable even toward the bettering of our Circumstances in this World; it
may bring us to great Honor, and place us in the Favor and Esteem of most
People: It may be attended by Riches and Plenty, and the fairest Accommodations
of this Life; and all the while, none of these splendid things may in the least
abate of the sincerity of our Hearts; because we are resolved to continue in
the same design of serving God, though he should take away the Hedge that is
about us: And though his Providence should deliver us over to bitter Trials, yet
with Holy Job, we would hold fast our Integrity.

Virtue is always Virtue, and Duty is ever Duty to the sincere Christian; his
outward Condition or his Fortune may alter, but his Heart and his good
Intentions are still the same: His Eye is upon God and his Laws, upon his
Immutable Nature and Holiness; That is, his Compass to Sail by in the Voyage
of Life; and let it be never so Dark and Cloudy, he still Steers on: All other
Motives may vary and change, but the Fear and Love of God is our sure
Direction, and will establish us in the right way.

As Sincerity has respect to the Principle upon which we are to act, so the
Integrity of the Heart has respect to all the Commandments of God; it will not
consist with a Partial Obedience, it will not allow of any one Sin, though men's
Constitutions and Natures, their Business and Employments, the Examples of the
Age, and the Vicious Customs of the World, plead ever so hard for the retaining
of that one Sin: for the allowance of any one Sin, which we know to be such, is
a direct Violation of the Authority of God, and is inconsistent with a State of
Pardon and Grace.

If we be contented that there remain any way of Wickedness in us, we have not
yet truly Repented, neither can we expect that our Prayers should be heard; for
if we regard Iniquity in our Hearts, the Lord will not hear us.

What the Psalmist here calls any Wicked way, we may understand either of a
habit and course of Sin, or of any Indulgence to any one beloved Lust; or of
any secret Design and Purpose of committing any Evil whatever: If there be any
thing of this Nature permitted to remain within our Souls, we have not that
Integrity of Heart which God indispensably requires to make our Repentance
true, and our Religious Service acceptable to him.

But then we should do well to consider, That the Integrity of the Heart is to
be judged of by the Truth and Seriousness of our Resolutions and Endeavors,
both to discover what ways of Wickedness there are in us, and then to put them
from us, and to guard our selves against them for the future by an honest and
hearty Diligence. As to some Remains of Corruption, some Tendencies toward
Evil, some Strivings of the Flesh with the Spirit, some sort of Infirmities and
Slips, which are not seperable from the strictest Life, and some Defects and
Imperfections in our best Actions: These are the Misery and Burden of our
Fallen Nature, these are Matter for the Exercise of a continual Humiliation;
and notwithstanding these Infirmities, our Hearts may be right with God, when
we allow ourselves in no way of Wickedness, in no Course of Sin, in no
Indulgence of Appetites, in no Design of complying with any evil Thoughts,
Desires and Tendencies, but sincerely endeavor to suppress and weaken the
Remains of our Corruption, and to perfect Holiness in the fear of the Lord.

Thus we see what is that Sincerity and Integrity of Heart, which God
indispensably requires from all of us, to qualify us for his Pardon and Grace,
and to make us true and real Christians.

Sincerity requires that we serve God upon a Right Principle, without
Hypocrisy, and with a due Sense of his Authority and good Pleasure. Integrity
calls for our Resolution and Endeavor to obey all the Commandments of God,
without making a Reserve for any way of Wickedness whatever.

The 2d Thing I proposed, was, how we may best judge of this Sincerity and
Integrity of our Hearts, viz. by examining of our own Consciences to that
degree, as to be willing to appeal to God's Omniscience in that Matter: Search
me, O God, and know my Heart; Try me, and know my Thoughts.

The Examining and Searching of our own Hearts is a necessary and a difficult
Duty; all pretend to it, but there are few, I fear, who perform it thoroughly.

Most People will allow it to be a requisite Forerunner to the Receiving of the
Blessed Sacrament, and before the Solemn Festivals they will generally set
aside some time to consider of their ways and Lives: But do they find it an
easy matter to descend into themselves, and to search to the bottom of their
Souls? Is there not a natural Averseness in Man to behold his own Deformity, or
at least to acknowledge it to be such? Can a Man be easily brought to search
and probe his own Wounds? Will not he presently draw back his Hand, and think
he has done enough, before he has gone half way, or before he has reached to
the Bottom and Core of his Disease?

When men knock at the Door of their own Hearts, are not Self-love, and Pride,
and Security ready to step out, and to tell them all is well? If they be so
resolute as to make a further Entrance, they discover perhaps a great many
Sins; but they are so Painted and Varnished over by Pretenses and Excuses taken
from the Customs and Examples of the World, that they hardly know how to
condemn themselves for entertaining such modish and fashionable Guests. If they
chance to be somewhat more inquisitive, and to open another Scene in their
Hearts, they find perhaps a multitude of strong and confirmed Habits of Sin,
which have dwelt there a long time, and now plead Possesion: They think it
almost impossible to get out these settled and rooted Inhabitants; and now they
are come to such Strength, to such a twisted and multiplied Interest, they
think they had better be let alone, than disturbed to no purpose. If they still
go on to make a deeper Search, behold there appears a Fountain of Evil
continually bubling up into impure Desires, sensual Lusts, worldly Designs, and
vile Imaginations! then they presently conclude, That this is that which men
call Original Sin, the bed of Corruption, the brackish Fountain of Impure
Streams, which Poisons all our Nature: And as to this they think it sufficient
to acknowledge, that there is such a Noisome Dungeon in every Man's Heart, as
well as in theirs, that there is no Obligation to cleanse it, but to lament and
bewail themselves for it, is enough.

Thus we see, how some who undertake a self-examination, may be lead through
all the Apartments of Sin and Wickedness without much concern; and be imposed
upon by a train of cheats and delusions, and think there is little for them to
correct and amend, because they have not yet discovered the great cheat of all,
the Decitfulness of their own Hearts: For if they had found out that, and been
well aware of it, they would soon have confessed, that no fashionable Customs
of the World, no Growth, no strength of Habits, could be any excuse for Wilful
Sin; and that Original Corruption was no such Torrent of Evil, but that it
might be weakened and diverted; and that they were men's actual and voluntary
Sins which fed and heightened that Fountain, and made it so often overflow;
that Repentance, and Prayer, and Watchfulness, and a constancy in good Duties,
might easily keep it within its Bounds, and reduce it to that low State, that
though it might sometimes make attempts against a Life of Virtue, yet it should
seldom prevail in such Instances as could be interpreted to interrupt a Course
of Goodness.

But now if People would examine their Hearts to some purpose, they must allow
themselves a considerable time to do it in, especially those who have not
accustomed themselves to this Duty already; they must set about it with much
thoughtfulness and concern; they must make themselves very sensible of the
horrid Nature of Sin, and that there is no escaping the Wrath of God, if they
wilfully retain Iniquity in their Hearts: they must be very careful that they
be not imposed upon in this so necessary a Work, by the Wiles of Satan, by the
prevailing Vitiousness of the Age, by the Treachery and Deceitfulness of their
own Hearts: They must recall as many particular Transgressions as they can, and
work into their Minds a more earnest and ready Watchfulness against those Sins,
which their Constitutions, and their Callings, and their way of Life, and their
frequent Falls have made them most liable to: They must compare their Actions
with the Rule of God's Word, with the Vows and Engagements they have already
made with the strictness of that profession they are under, and with the
Spiritual Nature of those Rewards they are preparing themselves to receive.

And if they would be further satisfied of the Sincerity and Integrity of their
Hearts, they cannot refuse the Appealing to God's Omniscience, that they are
serious and hearty in what they are doing, that they really design to get a
full Knowledge of themselves, that they are not willing to conceal or cover any
one Sin; but that having made such Discovery of their Hearts as they are well
able to attain to, they are willing and desirous that God would try them
further, by that Word of his which is quick and powerful, and sharper than any
two edged sword, that is able to divide asunder the Soul and Spirit, the Joints
and Marrow, and is a clear discerner of the Thoughts and Intents of the Heart:
That if it may be for their further good, God would melt them down in the
Furnace of Afflictions, and then make them sensible what Dross there was
adhering to them, what mixture of Impurity, which nothing but that Fire could
have revealed.

These are Trials which cannot be proposed and desired, but by an Honest Heart;
which must needs give us a testimony and Comfortable assurance that we are
Sincere, and that it is our full purpose to serve God all our days, and in all
the Circumstances of our Lives with clear Sincerity and Integrity of Heart;
especially, if we give our selves some leisure to consider what we do when we
make this Solemn Appeal to God; and with David in this Psalm, employ our Minds
for some time on the Spiritual Nature and Omniscience of God, before we desire
to be Tried, and Proved, and Examined by it.

He confesses that it was God that made him, and that saw his Substance before
it was fashioned into the curious fabric of an Humane Body: That 'twas his
secret power that framed the wonderful structure that fitted all the
innumerable parts with due proportion and Contexture, and made it a suitable
Habitation for an Immortal Soul. He confesses how the same Spirit and power is
present to all the thoughts of his Heart, that there are no foldings, no dark
recesses, that can conceal any thing from him, that all the branchings of his
Soul, the imaginations of his Heart, the compass of his conversation are
registered in his Book, no night, no retirement that can shut out God; no
hiding from his Spirit, tho he should travel into the remotest Countries, or
remain in the uttermost parts of the Sea; nay tho he should go down into Hades,
and make his abode in the Regions of departed Souls, even there his Power and
his Hand would find him out.

And when he had with such deliberation and exactness considered and
acknowledged the Omniscience of God, and viewed it in several Lights, and
imprinted it on his Mind by variety of Expressions; then he offers his whole
Heart to be taken in pieces as an Anatomy before God; then he offers all his
Resolutions and Designs to be examined by that Spirit that searches all things.

And truly, whoever shall refuse to undergo this Trial, has reason to doubt
that there is some Hypocrisy remaining in him, some falsness of Heart, some
allowance of Sin, some way of Wickedness, that he cannot yet bring himself to
part with.

We must not think that it is the privilege only of some few Saints to appeal
to God in such a Case as this; no Man can say his Prayers without doing that
which amounts to the same thing; he cannot ask forgiveness of God without a
penitent Heart, and no one can be said to repent without a sincere endeavor to
avoid all Sin for the future, of which Resolution he knows that God is the
Judge.

The Integrity of the Heart does not oblige any one to say that he has never
sinned, or that he has no Inclinations to Evil, or that he has already obtained
a Victory over all his sensual and worldly Desires, or that he can promise to
himself never to fall into Sin again: these are not the things that are
necessarily required to make good the Iutegrity of the Heart; but if we have
seriously considered our ways, and do utterly abhor every thing that is Evil;
if our good Resolutions are fixed and our Prayers are wholly bent toward the
pleasing of God in newness of Life, then are we such true Penitents, and such
sincere Christians as God will approve of, even when he himself has searched
our Hearts, and known our Thoughts; then are we such as he will carry on to
greater perfection, as he will lead in the way Everlasting. Which is the

3d. and Last thing to be considered, viz. That it is only this Sincerity and
Integrity of the Heart that can entitle us to the favorable assistance of God,
whereby he will lead us in the way Everlasting.

Where there is not an honest Heart there can be expected no fruit of
righteousness: Sincerity is the only Soil wherein the word of God can be truly
planted, and where the Graces of the Gospel can spring and flourish.

When we see men lead unprofitable Lives under the influence of good
Instruction, under the outward Observances of Religion, and under all the real
Advantages of being very eminently virtuous, if they were not wanting to
themselves; then we may be sure that they are not sound at Heart, that all
their Religious Actions are blasted by some secret Hypocrisy, and that they
cannot prosper in Holiness by reason of some reserved Sin. There is some
gainful Injustice that they will not yet lay aside, there are some frauds and
cheats that they will not yet separate from their Employments and Callings;
there is some lurking Revenge which they have not yet accomplished, some Malice
which they desire to execute, or some Sensuality which they know not how to
renounce, and if there be any of these ways of Wickedness in many professed
Christians, no wonder that they do not thrive in Piety, and that their Souls
grow thin and meagre under the best Provisions in Religion, and the greatest
Plenty of the Gospel: There is some accursed thing, some secret consciousness
of an unrepented Guilt that spoils those Duties, which they cannot wholly
neglect, and yet from which they receive but little benefit: whilst their Souls
are in such a wretched condition, divided between God and the World, they do
every thing deceitfully and with a double Heart; instead of repenting they only
prevaricate with God; instead of confessing their Sins, they try to palliate
them; when they should search their Corruptions they only cover it; and when
they should heal their wounded Souls, they only skin them over.

That which we read in the Text, if there be any wicked way in me, the Margint
of our Bibles has it, if there be any way of Pain or Grief in me; and it is
most certain, that where there is not an Integrity of Heart, there men will
find no comfort in Religion; the Ways and Commandments of God are always
grievous to such, they walk in the Paths of Duty with a Leg that was broken and
is not well set, but has still some Splinters in it that put them to continual
Pain. They come to God with a trembling and a king Heart, and can have no
Confidence, no filial Trust and Relyance when they appear before him, there is
some root of bitterness within that spoils the relish of all their Religious
Duties. They pray, but without Faith and Devotion; they do many things in
Religion, but without a true Principle of Obedience; they sometimes receive the
Sacrament, but it is with horror, rather then gladness of Soul, with fear of
eating and drinking their own Damnation, rather then with raised Affections and
a Spiritual Appetite. Believe it, there is no Strength, no Proficiency, no
Comfort to be found in Religion, unless you can bring your Hearts to renounce
all ungodliness, and every wicked way: Unless you cleanse your selves from all
Maliciousness, Injustice, Hatred and Contentions, Sensuality and Pride, from
all Filthiness both of Flesh and Spirit.

But if upon a serious Examination we find our selves to be sincere, and that
we are willing to please God in all things, according to our Understandings,
and according to our Power; then we may promise to our selves a gracious
Acceptance of our honest and diligent Endeavors, a protection and guidance of
our Persons in our lawful Callings and Employments, and a favorable
construction of our unvoluntary Slips and Infirmities: Then God and his Holy
Angels will be ready to asist us, to preserve us from Dangers, to arm us
against Temptations, to lead us in Truth and Righteousness, in Piety and
Virtue; which is the sure, the certain, the everlasting way.

Where there is no design or purpose of Wickedness, there the Heart is prepared
for God to write all his Laws upon it, and as it increases in purity, it will
be capable of receiving his Laws in a deeper Impression and a fairer Character.
Sincerity in the lowest degree is the true Image of God on the Soul tho drawn
but in weak Colors; a proficiency in Holiness will add a further perfection to
it, and quickly give it a stronger Life: The honest Mind receives new
Illumination from the Spirit that searches it, and the Thoughts of that
Conscience must needs be more awful, where God has been more eminently present.

Goodness, and Power, and Wisdom, and Mercy, delight to encamp about all those
who are fully resolved to serve God in the Integrity of their Hearts, they have
a disposition that fits them to receive the Influences of the Spirit, whereby
they shall be mightily strengthened in the inner Man: they have a worthiness to
be admitted to the highest Mysteries of the Christian Religion, to the nearest
Communion with God in Holy Duties, where they shall find their good Resolutions
confirmed, their pious Purposes encouraged, their honest Affections raised, and
their Sincerity advanced into further degrees of Established Virtue, and whilst
they keep on in the plain Path of Duty, and an upright Conversation, they shall
be safely conducted through this Wilderness of Temptation and Misery, to the
Blessed Mansions of Everlasting Peace and Glory.

Now to God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, be all Honor and
Glory, Praise and Thanksgiving, now and for Ever more.
FINIS.

