Imprimatur.

Mart. 17. 1686. JO. BATTELEY.

A PERSUASIVE TO THE Conscientious Frequenting THE DAILY Public Prayers OF
THEChurch of England. IN A SERMON UPON 1 THESSAL. 5 Verse 17, and 18.

LONDON, Printed by A. G. for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head, in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1687.

TO HIS Esteemed Good FRIENDS, THE INHABITANTS OF THE PARISHES OF St. LAVRENCE
JEWRY, St. MARY MAGDALEN MILK-STREET, and St. CHRISTOPHER.

Gentlemen,
I Know not how better to express the sense I have of your great Kindness, in
making so free a Choice of me to those Relations, in which I now stand to you,
than by lodging this Plain Discourse in every one of your Houses. I earnestly
request, that it may be attentively read, and well considered of by all those
in your Families who can read; and may be read to such as cannot read
themselves. And if I can prevail to have it examined Impartially, without all
prejudice, and with the same Honest Design, with which it was Written, and
Preached, I may modestly hope, that it will, through God's Blessing, produce at
least some visible good Effects.

We have already (praised be God for it) daily Prayers in many Churches of this
City, which afford us great choice of Hours; at some, or other of which,
certainly most Men may, and the most Wise and Pious Men will find, or make
leisure, from their ordinary business, openly to own their Dependence upon, and
pay their Public Acknowledgments to that God, who both at first made, and has
since so Graciously Redeemed them, for himself; and who every day Maintains,
Preserves, and Blesses them. And I question not but that we should soon have
Prayers likewise every day in most, I believe in all our Churches, if the
Parishioners could be persuaded to come, and give Countenance to their
Ministers, who are now discouraged from the Attempt, by the Shameful,
Scandalous Thinnes of their Congregations on Wednesdays, and Fridays, when they
are read.

Though I confess my self to be of Opinion (and that upon some Experiment, as
well as upon good grounds of Reason) That even in those Churches where there is
the smallest Appearance at those times, there would be twice, perhaps in a
little while, Ten times as many at Prayers every day, were they once so settled,
and Men's Minds duly awakened to the Consideration of their Duty, and Interest,
as now come on Wednesdays, and Fridays. Since the better any good thing is
weighed, and understood, and the more constantly it is practiced, the more it
will gain upon us; and the nearer it comes to an Habit, the harder it will be
to forbear it.

I should not need to add, were it not to prevent (if it be possible) all
manner of Pretense to Cavil, That what is here advanced, manifestly enough
appears to be Calculated for Cities, Market Towns, or such Populous Villages,
in which both the nearness of the Church, and the Nature of Men's Employments
may conveniently afford them so valuable a Privilege, as is that of
Consecrating some part of every day, to the Honor, and Public Worship of
their Dear Lord, and Master. Nor should I otherwise here say, because I have so
often done it in the Body of this little Treatise, That I do all along press
this Duty with the Exception, or Allowance of a Just, and Good Reason. That is
of such a Reason, as a Prudent, and Pious Man, whose Mind is seasoned with that
Genuine Principle of Divine Life, the Love of God, and all the Graces of his
Holy Spirit, and influenced by a lively sense, and proportionable care of his
Chief, and Lasting concern, that of his Immortal Soul, shall deliberately judge
to be a sufficient Excuse for his Absence at that time; all the Circumstances
of his Person, and Place, and necessary, or warrantable Occasions, being fairly
accounted for.

What I affirm, and urge, is this, That the Common Prayers of our Church ought
to be every where, and at all times frequented by all those of its Members, who
can do it with that convenience, which Christian Piety, Prudence, and Charity
shall state, and agree to be such. And that it is every Man's Duty to be present
at them, so often as his occasions, and condition of Life, so determined, will
permit.

And this Truth, I think, were there no other Argument for it, may be clearly
made out by the General Laws of our Religion, such as are those which Command,
and Invite us, To seek first the Kingdom of God. To do all things to the Glory
of God. To let all things be done to edifying; That is, to the Building up, and
Advancement of the Church of Christ. To think on (in order to practice)
whatsoever things are Honest (or Venerable, and Worthy, (...)) whatsoever
things are Just, (and such certainly is the daily Public Homage of an
Intelligent Creature, to his Great Creator) whatsoever things are of good
Report. To live to the Lord, with one Mind, and one Mouth to Glorify God the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. To give Glory to God in the Church (in the
Assemblies of Christian People) by Jesus Christ throughout all Ages. To show
forth the Praises of him who has called us out of Darkness into his Mavelous
Light; as being thereby made a Royal Priesthood: Of whom, as we are such, God
now under the Gospel requires constant Service, in the Public Assemblies, as
he did the Sacrifices of the Levitical Priests. (Dr. Ham.) These General Rules,
or Maxims of Christianity, being all of them easily applicable to the Subject I
Treat of, I thought good to mention here, for the farther Instruction, and
Conviction of those whom the Prejudice of a different Education, contrary
Custom, Party, or other little Inducement, may be apt to mislead, and make
unwilling to discern, and own, what they are not willing should betrue.

But whatever the Event may be in reference to those who thus choose to stand
in their own light, I shall have, at least, the Satisfaction of having now done
what in me lay to persuade you to the Practice of a Religious Duty, which, if
undertaken upon the Principles, and performed by the Measures of true, and
Undissembled Piety, will very much tend to the Honor and Glory of God, the
Credit, Growth, and Advancement of Religion; the Establishment of our Church,
the Peace and Welfare of this Kingdom; and our own great good, both in this
Life, and in that which is to come. That it may please God so to Bless this
little Treatise, as that it may be some way instrumental to the promoting his
Glory, the general Interest of Religion, and their particular Advantage who
shall read, and duly consider it, is the earnest Prayer of,

Gentlemen, Your Obliged Faithful Friend, and Servant, John Mapletoft.

A PERSUASIVE TO THE Conscientious Frequenting THE DAILY Public Prayers OF THE
Church of England,
1 THESSAL. V. 17, and 18. Pray without ceasing. In every thing give thanks:
for this is the Will of God in Christ Jesus concerning you.


FRequent Intercourse with Heaven by the ascent, or going up of our minds to
God, in the holy flames of fervent Prayer, and devout Meditation, is
recommended to us, both by Scripture, and Reason, as the most proper, and most
effectual means of our growth in Grace, and Spiritual Proficiency. For, such
intimate, and more immediate converse with the Fountain of all Wisdom,
Goodness, and Truth, will enlighten our Understandings; must needs attract, and
unalterably fix our Wills upon the true Object of Rational Choice, the supreme
Good; will untack, and loosen our Souls from the Clod to which they grow; will
raise our thoughts above the Smoke, and Dust, the petty Cares, and low trifling
concerns of this World; it will sublime our A^ctions; enlarge and improve our
Capacities; refine our Tempers; Spiritualize our Natures; and thus every way
fit us for that nearer Approach to, and closer Union with God, that center of
our immortal Spirits, which is to be our Rest, and our Happiness, our Crown,
and our Glory in the next Life.

It must then be acknowledged, that the continued Use, and Exercise of such
Abstraction of our minds from material, and sensible things, and devout
Application of our Souls to God, in Prayer, and Thanksgiving, is a substantial
part of that Employment, and Duty, to which we are obliged, as we are
Christians; or of that Will, and good Pleasure of God, which is revealed to us
by our Blessed Lord in his Gospel. And this Consideration of the Nature and
Efficacy of Prayer, and its necessary subserviency to the great ends, and
design of our Religion, may serve (besides the consent of learned
Interpreters.) Grot. Vorst. Cornel. a Lapide) to justify the Coherence, or
mutual Relation of these Words, as I have now read them together. Pray without
ceasing, etc.

Now these Words, thus connected, do manifestly contain this Proposition; viz.
That we Christians are obliged, by the tenure of our Profession, and, as we are
such, to great Measures of our Devotion. That we are bound to have a constant,
and assiduous Commerce with our good God, in Prayer, and Thanksgiving; who has
vouchsafed to us, in the Gospel of his Son, a more express Revelation of his
Nature and his Will; of his Love and Kindness to us, in sending his Son to
redeem us, and his Holy Spirit to Instruct, Reform, and Sanctify us; and of
our Duty consequent thereupon, to walk worthy of God. 1 These. 2.10. i. e. To
act, and live in some Proportion to that Honor God has herein done us; who is
now in Christ Jesus, after a more peculiar manner, our Lord, our Master, our
Friend, and Benefactor, our Father, and our God. That since God is come down to
us, (the Word was made Flesh, and dwelt, or had his Tabernacle, among us;
appeared gloriously in our Nature) our Souls must now be always mounting up to
him, on the Wings of Prayer, and in the daily Sacrifice of Praise, and incense
of Thanksgiving. And that we Christians must habituate, and accustom our Souls
to dwell above; and to converse with the Original of our Being, the God of all
our Mercies, and all our Hopes; since it is the great business of our Religion
to dispose, and qualify us in this Life, for the Enjoyment of God in the next;
and by raising our Minds from gross, and sensible Objects, to a relish, and
taste of things Spiritual and Invisible, to Naturalize us to Heaven.

And, since these general Precepts, Pray without ceasing; In every thing give
thanks; do unquestionably import both Frequency, and Perseverance in the whole
extent and latitude of Devotion; both as to its several Parts, as also, as to
its Circumstances of Time, and Place, including all kinds, and all manners of
Address to God; whether settled, and regular; or Accidental and Occasional, in
point of time; public in Churches, or private in our Closets and Retirements;
or with our Families, in point of Place: it must be confessed, that we are
chiefly, and more especially obliged to that kind, or manner of Address, which
most fully answers the Principal Ends, and Fundamental Reasons of Prayer in
general.

Now the great end, and design of praying to God, being to do Honor to him, in
the Acknowledgment we make, that as we derive from him, so we wholly depend
upon him, for all that we are, or have, or hope for; and, to procure from God a
supply to all our own, and others wants, both in our private and public
Capacities; it evidently follows, That the commands here given, To Pray without
ceasing; and, To give thanks in every thing; or upon all Occasions, and
Opportunities, which do present themselves, must be understood, and that
principally, to lay an Obligation upon us to make Conscience of frequenting the
daily public Worship of God, where we have an opportunity of so doing, Since
this manner of Application to God, does apparently, above any other, advance
the glory of God, and promote all the valuable Interests both of our selves,
and others; whether considered personally, or collectively, as we make a
Society, or Body, either Civil, or Religious, as I shall show hereafter.

My Business shall therefore at present be to attempt the clearing up, and
making good the Doctrine laid down in these Words, taken in that most genuine
and eminent sense, which is allowed them by the most learned Interpreters, both
Ancient, and Modern, viz. That we Christians do stand obliged, both by virtue
of these, and the like Precepts, and by the reason of the thing it self,
conscienciously to frequent the daily public Prayers of the Church, where we
have opportunity; and can find, or make leisure so to do. And that therefore no
Man, or Woman ought to think it altogether an indifferent thing, (generally
speaking, and the Circumstances of particular Cases being allowed for) whether
they go to serve God with the Congregation; or stay at home, and employ
themselves in some other thing, tho lawful, yet at that time, not necessary; or
not sufficient to furnish them with such a reason as may serve to justify them
to God, and their own Conscience, directed by the measures of Christian
Prudence and Piety; of Love to God, and a due Cave of their Immortal Souls.

Now the Obligation we all have not to forsake the Assembling of our selves
together with our Christian Brethren, every day in God's House, unless we are
hindered by some good Reason, I shall, I hope, evince and make to appear from
these five following Considerations.

Firstly, From the import, and meaning of the Precepts here mentioned; and
others of the like Sense, and Signification, viz. That this is the Will of God
in Christ Jesus concerning us. Secondly, From the Consideration of the Glory
and Honor we bring to God; and the Reputation and Credit we give to Religion,
by our daily, open, and solemn Addresses to him. Thirdly, From the many, and
great Advantages we our selves shall reap from our constant Attendance on God
in this our bounden Duty, and Service. Fourthly, From the Consideration of the
good, and interest of others; which we do hereby most effectually promote
whether single Persons, or the Community of which we are Members. Fifthly, From
the general Consent, and universal Practice of the Christian Churches of all
Ages, and Places, throughout the World.
1. Then we Christians are obliged to frequent the daily public Worship of
God, out of regard to his Authority, who has enjoined us so to do, in this and
the like places of Scripture; such as are these following, Ephesians. vj 18.
Praying always [(...) at every season] with all Prayer and Supplication in the
Spirit, and watching thereunto with all Perseverance. Luke xviij. 1. Where our
Savior, speaks a Parable, to this end, that men ought always to pray, and not
to faint, (...), not to be slothful, remiss, and negligent in this great Duty,
1 Timothy 2.8. I will therefore that Men Pray every where. Which both St. Basil,
and Beza do expound of Houses, or Churches set apart for the Public Worship of
God; in which St. Paul would have Christians to Pray, and not only at the
Temple in Jerusalem. Dr. Patrick's Discourse concerning Prayer. Now, although
it must be granted, that none of these Scriptures do expressly enjoin the daily
use of Public Prayers; yet since these do more completely answer all the ends
of Prayer than any private Devotion can do, they must of necessity be
comprehended, and by parity of Reason chiefly designed in those general
commands.

Besides that, To Pray without ceasing, or continually, may be very properly
expounded of our presenting our selves before God, in his House, as often as we
are either obliged thereto by public Authority, or invited by the laudable
Custom, and Example of pious, and well-disposed Persons. For this, in a popular
and legal sense, is doing a thing indesinently, or without ceasing. (Dr.
Barrow,) when we perform it so often as we are required by Law, or Custom. Thus
the Priests are said, Heb. 9.6. to go always into the Tabernacle, accomplishing
the service of God. Always i. e. at all those solemn times which were appointed
for such Service, and the Apostles are said, Luke 24.53. after Christ's
Ascension, and their return to Jerusalem, to have been continually in the
Temple, blessing, and praising God. i. e. They went daily to the Temple at the
usual times, or hours of Prayer. Since then we are commanded, To Pray without
coasing; and to give thanks in every thing, or upon every Occasion; to pray
always, to pray every where, -- in every season, or upon every opportunity;
except a man shall be so absurd as to deny the solemn times set apart every day
for Public Devotion, to be seasons, and opportunities of Prayer; the Material
Church to be a place; and the hours of Prayer to be any part of time; (and so
to be necessarily included in the terms, always, without ceasing, continually)
he must confess, that all these Precepts of our Savior, and his Apostles, may,
and ought, by the Analogy of Faith, and Deduction of right Reason, to be
interpreted at least, as well of the Public, as of our Private Addresses to
God. And consequently. That we ought for this great Reason to be Assiduous, and
conscienciously Diligent in our daily. Public Approaches to God in his
Sanctuary; because this is a considerable part of our Duty, as wear
Christians; Or, This is the Will of God in Christ Jesus concerning us.

And the pious Wisdom of our Church having provided, that not only on all the
Lord's days, and some few others, set apart for special Reasons; but on every
day of the Week also, Morning and Evening Prayer shall be openly read, or said,
by the Gurate that Ministers in every Church or Chapel, being at home, and not
being otherwise reasonably hindered; it is hereby plainly intimated, That every
one who is not reasonably hindered, should also come to hear it read every day:
A Bell being ordered to be tolled thereunto, that the People may come to hear
God's Word, and to pray with the Minister. As he who pleases may find at the
end of the Discourse concerning the Church, in the Book of Common Prayer. These
things considered, it will not certainly become any Wise and Good Man, who
Loves his God, his Religion, his Country, or his own Soul, usually, and
customarily, or indeed at any time, to absent himself from the daily Public
Worship of God, without a very just and warrantable reason. And he who allows
himself in such plain Omissions of his Duty, upon any unjustifiable account
whatever, denies to yield Obedience to this Precept, Pray without ceasing;
since he ceases, nay he refuses to Pray, when the Providence of God, the
Direction, and Order of the Church, the Custom and Example of Devout Persons,
do strongly invite, and follicite him, by reforting to God's House, and hearing
his part in the Public Worship, to do open Honor to God, and Advantage both
to himself, and the whole Church Militant.

2. We are also obliged to frequent the Public Prayers, because we do thereby
bring Glory, and Honor to God; and give Credit, and Reputation to our
Religion; and that in much greater Degrees than we can do by any private
Addresses to him, either in our Closers, or with our Families. For though it be
true, that we may Worship God acceptably at home; and it is both our Duty and
our Advantage so to do; yet since Honor, and Glory, are properly outward
Significations of the inward value and regard we have for Persons; we do not
properly honor, and glorify God, in our private Devotions; but do then more
especially give him the honor due unto his Name, and make his Name to be
Glorious, when we Pray unto, and Praise him, before much People. For, when we
every day make our Court to him, as to the great King, and Lord of all; and
wait upon him, in his own House, we thereby give a public Testimony of the
Esteem and Reverence we have for him. We own our selves to be of his Family and
Retinue; to depend upon him, and to hold all we have as from him, by the daily
public Homage we thus pay unto him. Hereby we may also properly be said to
serve God, or to do our Duty to him in promoting his Interest, (if, I may so
speak,) by keeping up, and maintaining a lively sense of his being in the
Hearts of Men; and propagating, and advancing Conceptions of him, Worthy of his
Greatness, and transcendent Majesty; of his infinite Wisdom, Power, and
Goodness; when we thus avowedly celebrate him, as the Universal yersal Parent,
Preserver, and Governor of Mankind; who alone understands, and alone is both
able, and willing to supply the wants of all his Creatures, who invoke, and
depend upon him.

Hereby we likewise bring Credit, and Reputation to our Religion; which can
hardly be supported, without such Visible Profession. We openly declare our
selves it is Champions; and that we are not ashamed of our Blessed Lord, nor of
his Words, or the Laws of his holy Institution, in the midst of a crooked, and
perverse, a scoffing, and Atheistical Generation. We let all profane Miscreants
see, that they can no more banish the Notion of God out of the World, then they
can pluck the Sun out of the Firmament; though they may possibly wink hard
enough, neither to see the one, nor take due notice of the other: That
notwithstanding their affected Blindness, and wilful Ignorance, God has still
a very considerable party in the World; numbers of Men, who think it their
greatest Honor to be, and to be accounted his Servants, and every day
publicly own that Name, and Title; and as such, pay their daily Attendance on
their dear Lord and Master, in his own House.

3. Another Motive, or Reason obliging us to frequent the daily Prayers of our
Church, is the Consideration of the Advantages we our selves shall reap from
our so doing. Of which sort, I shall name only these Three.

First, That we hereby do spend some part of our time every day in the best and
most heavenly Employment, and consequently after the best manner that we are
capable of spending it.

Secondly, That this lays a farther Obligation upon us to lead a more strict,
and holy Life than other men do; and to be exemplary, as well in all other
Graces, as in that of Devotion.

Thirdly, That this is a certain means, if we are not wanting to our selves, of
our growth in Grace; and particularly, in those two Cardinal Graces (the Top
and Perfection, as well as the Groundwork, and Foundation of all others;) the
Love of God, and the Love of our Neighbors.

1. Then I say, That the time we spend in the Public Service of God is the
best secured, and the best bestowed of any other. This is certainly the best,
because the most Heavenly Employment; it being the continual Business of the
Angels, and the Archangels, and all the Host of Heaven, with joint Praises to
Laud, and Celebrate the Divine Majesty. So that by thus doing, we begin Heaven
here; we do already enter upon the Life, and State, and Employment of Angels;
being united to that blessed Choir, and doing as they do. And he that shall
duly acquit himself herein, will have this great satisfaction, that he has
spent at least one hour every day to the best advantage, as an Anticipation,
and fore-taste of that Life, which we hope to lead in the presence of God for
ever.

2. Another Advantage we derive from frequenting daily the Public Prayers is
this, viz. That our so doing lays a strong, and daily Obligation upon us to
live a more strict, and holy, a more divine and heavenly Life, than others do;
to be unblamable, unreprovable in all our Conversation. And he who does not
charge himself with the daily Practice and Exercise of all those Graces, for
which he prays to God, has reason to suspect himself of Hypocrisy, and
Formality in these his open Prayers. Those then who make Conscience of
Approaching God twice every day in his Public Ordinances, must also for this
very Reason, besides all others, make more Conscience of presenting him, as
with a pure Heart, so with a Circumspect, Innocent, Unspotted Life. And
certainly if such Men are not much better than others, who pretend less, they
are much worse; since they do hereby, openly profess more Zeal for God's Glory,
more Love to him, and more Care to please him; and a greater sense both of his
Goodness to them, and their Duty to him, so that if they disparage such their
Profession, by unsuitable Practice; they give just Reason to believe, they have
some other end to serve then that of Religion.

3. A Third Advantage which will acrue to us from our daily Attendance on God
in his House, is growth in Grace; and particularly in the Love of God, and of
our Neighbor; those two Eminent and Comprehensive Graces, on which hang all
the Law, and the Prophets. For the first of these, the Love of God; it is
certain, that the more often we Converse with him, the more intimately we are
acquainted with him (who being the supreme good needs only to be known, that so
he may be loved by us) the more strongly will our Souls cleave unto him: So
that if to our Private Meditation, and Prayers, we add such daily solemn
Converse with him in the Public Prayers and Thanksgivings, and hearing of his
Word, our Love to him must needs grow and increase thereby. And as to the Love
of our Neighbor; since every siding, and taking part, though but in some
inconsiderable Opinion, Interest, or Custom, Education, or Course of Life, is a
peculiar Endearment, and ground of Affection toward those of the same Opinion,
Interest, or Way; how much more prone will they be to bear an hearty good Will
and Kindness toward each other, who are daily engaged in the same common
Interest; and that of the highest Importance, viz. a joint endeavor to bring
Public Honor to their common Lord; and to forward their own Salvation; who
twist and combine their Prayers, and Praises; and converse here with one
another, as they hope to do hereafter in Heaven. Not to mention now the solemn
Intercession made twice aday for the whole Catholic Church, and the open
Declaration of our so forgiving all Men, who offend, or injure us, as we desire
and hope for Mercy, and Forgiveness at the Hands of God. Now, besides the
Efficacy of the united Prayers of a Christian Congregation, put up for
themselves and for each other (at which Christ has promised to be present in a
special manner, Matt. xviij. 20.) It is, I think, an undeniable certainty, That
he who shall both in Private, and also in Public, thus daily importune the
Throne of Grace, shall obtain a greater measure of these, and all other Graces,
than he who contents himself with his Private, Solitary Prayers only.

4. Another Consideration enforcing this Duty of our waiting upon God, in his
Sanctuary every day, is the great Benefit, and good which others may receive
from our so doing; and that, not only as particular Persons taking notice of
our regular, steady, exemplary Piety, joined with an unblemished Life; and a
truly Christian Conversation, may be won by our good Example, to the same
practice; and by the shine of our Light, by seeing our good Works, may also
themselves come in like manner to glorify our Father which is in Heaven. But
also, because Public Prayers, both as they tend to the bettering all those,
who do conscienciously frequent them, and so to the augmenting the number, and
improving the Graces of Righteous Persons, for whose sake God often spares a
wicked Place, or People; and also, in their Nature, Design, and End, are the
proper Instrument for the obtaining and continuing Public Peace, and
Tranquillity; or the Establishment, and Prosperity of a Church and State.
Whence R. Maimonides, well observes, That he who dwells in a City in which
there is a Synagogue, or House of Prayer, and does not therein Pray with the
Assembly, he is to be censured as an ill Neighbor: as one that is wanting in
his Duty to promote, by his Prayers, the good of that Community, of which he is
therefore an Unworthy Member.

And I have been credibly informed (to apply this point to our selves) That in
the Days of Queen Elizabeth, when our Church by the Blessing of God upon her
necessary and warrantable Reformation, had quite broken off the Chains, and
Fetters of the Romish Usurpation; some (perhaps most) of our Parish Churches
were as numerously thronged at the daily Prayers, as they have since been at
Sermons. And that, as our Liturgy grew afterward into neglect, by the
Indevotion and Profaneness of some; and then into Contempt, by the
Mis-perswasion, Vain Affectation of Novelty, false Pretenses to greater Purity
of Worship, and the like evil Artifices of others: So true Piety, and Loyalty,
Men's Duty to God, and their Prince, Justice and Charity, Brotherly Kindness,
and good Will to each other, began proportionably to lessen and decay: till at
length every thing of Religion, but the Name, and Pretense only, seemed to die,
and expire in a Bloody Civil War: Of which our Poor Church still wears the
Marks; and feels some of its dire Effects to this very day, in those breaches
which are yet unclosed. From whence we may rationally conclude, That as the
neglect, and dis-use of our Common Prayer was the beginning of those
Confusions, and Miseries, which ruined both our Church and State; so the most
probable means to secure our Religion, as it is now Established, and to engage
Almighty Power on our side, is, for us all to unite our selves as in the
Profession of the Evangelical, Primitive, Apostolical Faith; and in Uniform
Obedience to all the Laws of God; and in steadfast Loyalty to our Prince; and
Universal Love, and hearty good Will one toward another: So also, in the same
daily Public Worship of our great Lord. Which, together with the Articles of
our Religion is the proper, Characteristick, and Distinctive Mark of the
purest, and best constituted Church in the World, the Church of England; in
which, by the goodness of God, we do now live; and in which, by his Grace, we
hope to die.

The 5. (and last) Consideration, from which I proposed to deduce our
Obligation to the daily service of God in the Church, is the general Consent,
and Universal Practice of the Church of Christ, in all Ages, and Places, almost
in the World. The Apostles, as we read Luke 24.53. after Christ's Ascension,
were continually in the Temple, i. e. Every Morning and Evening (in which sense
the Morning and Evening Sacrifice was called the continual Burnt-Offering) at
the time of Public Prayer, Praising and Blessing God. And the Apostolical
Constitutions (which are by all allowed to be very Ancient) do enjoin the
Bishop to Admonish and Command the People to come every day, both Morning and
Evening, to the Public Prayers; and that none by absenting himself, should
maim the Church, and take away one Member from the Body of Christ. 2. Constit.
Chap. 59.

And as in all Ages, so in all Places, the Churches both of the Eastern, and
Western Communion, Greek, Armenian, Roman, Lutheran, and Calvinist; all
Christian Churches, almost do so Universally Understand, and Agree, That the
daily Public Worship of God is enjoined both by the Scriptures, and the very
Nature of a Christian Church, That there is scarce any place in which it is not
constantly, and Religiously observed, and used. For a Christian Church is in
its proper Notion, An Assembly of Men and Women met together to Worship God by
Christ; Or, A company joined together to have Fellowship with God, and one with
another in all holy Duties; of which Prayer, Thanksgiving, and Praises are the
Chief. As those who need, or Desire farther Information, or Satisfaction in
this Argument, may find largely, and convincingly handled, in a Discourse
concerning Prayer, lately published by a pious and learned Divine of our
Church, Dr. Patrick, which I wish were in all Men's Hands.

Thus have I showed the Obligation we all have as far as every Man's
Opportunities, and Circumstances will give leave, to a Conscientious Attendance
on the daily Public Worship. And that this Duty is pressed, and bound upon us;

1. By that Obedience we owe to the Will of God, revealed in the Gospel. 2. By
that Zeal we ought to have for the Honor, and Glory of God, and the Interest
of our Religion. 3. By the Advantages we may reap from our so doing, viz. The
laying out so much of our time in the best manner, and to the best Account.
Being hereby put upon great Circumspection, and Watchfulness over our selves,
that we lead unreprovable, and exemplary Lives; our own growth in all Grace;
and especially in the Love of God, and of our Neighbor. 4. By the concern we
ought to have for the good of others; the Public Prosperity, and Establishment
both of our Church and State. 5. By the Authority and Example of the Church of
Christ in all Ages, and Places.
But after all this, Men have not leisure from their secular Employments; and
serving God in their Calling, they tell us, is better than Praying. But is not
Religion our Calling too? I am sure the Scripture uses the Word, Vocation, or
Calling in that Sense, and I think in that only; and the Apostolical
Constitutions tell us, That our secular Callings, Trades, or Professions, are
our Work, by the bye only, as providing for the Necessities of this lower
Animal Life. (...). But the Worship of God is our Principal Business. (...).
Constable. 61.

If we must live Godlily, as well as Soberly, and Righteously; we must then
reckon the Public Worship of God among the Businesses of our Lives, and allow
a competent time for the Discharge of what appears to be one third part of our
Duty. I would advise even the Poorest Persons, who maintain themselves and
Families by hard Labor, to venture so much of their time with God, as the
Prayers take up every day; and I am persuaded they would find it no ill
Husbandry, God would not be in their debt at the years end. But those who have
not leisure, because they will not have it; because, not being Content with
Food and Raiment (the Wealth of a true Christian) they will be dangerously
Rich; though they do thereby fall into Temptation and a Snare, and into those
many foolish and hurtful Lusts, which often drown them, or their Posterity in
Destruction and Perdition: these ought well to consider the Nature, and
Doctrines of our Holy Religion, viz. That it teaches us not to Love the World,
nor the things of This World; to be Crucified to the World: To set our
Affections on things above, and not on things on the Earth; To lay up our
Treasure in Heaven: To provide for our selves Bags that Wax not old, To be rich
toward God, To be led by the Spirit, and to walk after the Spirit; and then
let them well weigh, whether a Religion Established on these, and the like
Maxims, may not reasonably demand at least one 24th. part of their time for the
public Honor, and Service of God, and the promoting their own great Interest,
that of their immortal Souls; and the good of the Community in which they live,
and whether their constant, or frequent Pretense to want of leisure for the
Public Worship, be not in truth a Criminal Vicious Love of the World, and too
much minding Earthly things, and, in plain English, choosing to serve Mammon,
rather than God?

Certainly if the generality of Men were as truly Wise, and as truly Pious as
they ought to be; if they understood the Interests of their Souls, of their
Religion, of their Church and Nation, as well as they do the little concern of
getting Money; they easily might, and would, so order their Affairs, that our
Churches might be every day as well filled in the Morning and Evening, as the
Exchange is at Noon. And doubtless, he who having the necessary Preparations of
an holy Christian Conversation, a Life led in all Godliness, and Honesty; (or a
serious, prevailing Resolution so to Live;) of an upright Intention, and
sincere aim at the glory of God; his own growth in Grace, and the good of
others; shall make Conscience of entering God's Courts twice every day; when he
comes to die, will find more Satisfaction in that one hour thus spent, than in
all those he spends in his Worldly concerns, and no particular will stand
fairer in the account of our time, which we must all make to God at the last
day, than the Item, So much spent every day, when we had opportunity, in the
Public Worship, and Service of God.

ERRATA.
PAge 3. l. 17. dele Our. p. 7. l. 18. dele ly in Firstly. p. 8. l. last. lege
(...). p. 11. l. 6. we are. p. 12. l. 14. lege bearing. p. 23. l. 11. put L.
before 2. p. 25. l. 21. put L. before 2. p. 28. l. 10. lege This Item.

FINIS.

