XVIII SERMONS ON THE Second Chapter of the 2d Epistle TO THE THESSALONIANS,
CONTAINING The Description, Rise, Growth, and Fall, OF ANTICHRIST. With diverse
Cautions and Arguments to establish Christians against the Apostasy of the
Church of ROME.

Very necessary for these Times.

By that late Reverend and Learned Divine THOMAS MANTON, D. D.

LONDON, Printed by I. D. for I. Robinson at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's
Churchyard; and B. Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons in Cornhil, over against the
Royal Exchange, 1679.

Reader,
Doctor Thomas Manton was not so unknown to London, nor is he so much
forgotten, as that his Name or Writings should need any of my Commendations.
But Booksellers expecting such an office, I have great reason to be willing to
serve thee, in serving the Memorial of such a Friend. What he was I need not
tell even strangers, after the Character truly given of him by his Friend and
mine, in his Funeral Sermon: How sound in Judgment, against extremes in the
Controversies of these Times; a great Lamenter of the scandalou^ and dividing
Mistakes of some Self-conceite^ Men: How earnestly desirous of the he^ling of
our present Breaches and not unacquainted wi^h the proper Means and Terms; of
which the Author of his Funeral Sermon and I had more than ordinary experience.
How hard and successful a Student he was; and how frequent and laborious a
Preacher, and how highly an^ deservedly esteemed; All this and more, is
commonly here known. The small distaste that some few had of him, I took for
part of his Honor, who would not win Reputation with any, by flattering them
in their mistakes, or unwarrantable ways. He used not to serve God with that
which cost him nothing, nor was of their mind who cannot expect or extol God's
Grace, without denying those endeavors of Man to which his necessary Grace
exciteth them: He knew that without Christ we could do nothing, and yet that by
Christ's strengthening us, we can do all things which God has made necessary
to be done by us. He was not of their mind that thought it Derogatory to the
Honor of Christ, to praise his Works in the Souls or Lives of any of his
Servants, and that it is the honor of his Grace that his justified Ones are
Graceless; and that their Judge should dishonor his own Righteousness, if he
make his Disciples more Righteous personally than Scribes and Pharisees, and
will say to them, Well done good and faithful Servant, Thou have been faithful
over a few things -- enter thou into the joy of thy Lord. He knew how to regard
the Righteousness and Intercession of Christ, with pardon of Sin, and Divine
Acceptance, instead of Legal personal Perfection, without denying either the
necessity, or assigned office of our Faith, Repentance, or Evangelical
Sincerity, in obeying Him that redeemed and justifies us: He knew the
difference between a Man's being justified from the charge of being [liable to
Damnation, as a Christless impenitent unbeliever and ungodly] and being [liable
to Damnation for mere Sin as Sin, against the Law of Innocence, which required
of us no less than Personal, Perfect, Perpetual Obedience]. He greatly lamented
the wrong which the Truth and Church underwent, from those that neither knew
such differences, nor had humility enough to suspect their judgments, nor to
forbear reviling those that had not as confused and unsound apprehensions and
expressions as themselves.

But he has finished his Course, and is gone before us, and has left here a
dark self-distracting World, and a Church of such as Christ will perfect; but
alas yet lamentably imperfect, as their Errors, Divisions, Contentions, and
Scandals have these thirteen hundred Years too publicly declared: Children of
the Light we are, while the World is in darkness; but alas, yet how dim and
clouded! with thousands it does not so much as convince them of their
Ignorance, nor makes them humbly suspicious of an Erring Judgment: So that
through the copulation of Pride and Ignorance, few cry out so loud of Error as
the Erroneous, or of Heresy as the Heretical, or of Schism as the
Schismatical: And false conceptions are so common among Men, that I think with
almost all Mankind, the number of false Apprehensions in comparison of the true
ones, is far greater than unhumbled Understandings will easily believe; and yet
while Mankind does swarm with Error, those that least know their own, cry down
even the toleration of that which alas we cannot Cure: And if a multitude of
Errors must not be tolerated, I know not the Person that must be tolerated:
And who then be they that shall be the avengers of other Men's mistakes? Christ
knew that none are so forward to reproach, and so backward to bear with the
Motes in Men's Eyes, as they that have Beams in their own.

Among such, what sort of Men on Earth has more cried down Error, Heresy,
and Schism, than the Papal Tribe, [Away with them, Exterminate them, Burn them]
has long bin their cry, their Laws and Practice; little thinking how they are
polluted with Error, Heresy, and Schism themselves. The revived attempts of
this consuming Fiery Spirit, has made those that dispose of Doctor Manton's
Papers, tak^ these against Popery, as now most seasonable: And their plainness
suited to common Capacities, may make them to many, more useful than more
Argumentative Disputations. They that would have such, may see Errors that are
unanswerable (I should say, unrefutable, for I find that Men and Women too can
answer any thing). I confess my self not thoroughly studied in these Prophetical
parts of the Scriptures, and therefore none of the fittest to commend such
W^itings, any further than they commend themselves. But I am hasting after this
my dear departed* Brother to the World of Light, where all Divine Mysteries are
unv^iled, and Life, and Light, and Love, are perfected; for which, even at the
Door, I am (though weak) a Believing, and desiring Expectant.

Rich. Baxter.
July 8. 1679.
An ADVERTISMENT.
To prevent false Copies, that may be published in Dr. Manton's Name: These are
to give Notice, that nothing is to be received as Genuine, but what shall be
Attested under the Hands of Dr. Bates, or Mr. Baxter.

SERMON I.
2 Thessalonians. 2.1, 2. Now we beseech you (Brethren) by the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and our gathering together unto him: That you be not soon shaken in
mind, or be troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter, as from
us, that the day of Christ is at hand.


THE former Chapter was spent in a Consolation against troubles, this in a
caution against Error, or to rectify their Judgments concerning the time of
Christ's second coming. In these two first Verses; we have the manner of
proposal V. 1. the matter proposed V. 2.

1. The manner of proposal is very pathetical, by way of Adjuration or
Obtestation.

2. The matter, an Error had crept in among the Thessalonians, concerning the
speedy and immediate coming of Christ to Judgment, while they were yet alive;
which error the Devil set on foot to subvert their Faith, and expose the whole
Christian Doctrine to contempt.

First, The manner of obtestation falls first under our consideration, in
which two things are mentioned. 1. The coming of Christ. 2. Their gathering
together unto him.
Obtestations are by those things which have great reverence and respect with
us, as most likely to prevail. Now these two things are mentioned,

1. As weighty, 2 Timothy 4.1. I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus
Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead, at his appearance and his
Kingdom.

2. This was the Article mistaken and perverted as to one circumstance, the
Time; but the thing is taken for granted, as an unquestionable truth, and the
support of all their hopes, 2 Thessalonians. 1.10. When he shall come to be glorified
in his Saints, and admired in all them that believe.

3. This was a famous Christian Doctrine, with which the Apostles usually
began, in planting Religion in any place, 1 Thessalonians. 5.1, 2, 3. But of the times
and the seasons ye have no reason that I write unto you, for ye your selves
know perfectly, that the day of the Lord so comes as a thief in the night, etc.

4. It was of precious account with them, 2 Timothy 4.8. Henceforth is laid up for
me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me
at that day, and not to me only, but unto them also that love his appearing. So
that the obtestation implies both the certainty of their belief, and also
their dear account of this Article of Faith; and therefore the sense is, As you
do assuredly expect him, and love, and look, and long for this day, that it may
go well with you, and Christ appear to your glory, so be not troubled.

1. Doct. That the coming of Christ to the judgment, is a truth well known,
firmly believed, and earnestly desired by all true Christians.

2. Doct. That when Christ shall come, all the Saints shall be gathered
together unto him.

1. Doct. That the coming of Christ to the judgment, is a truth well known,
firmly believed, and earnestly desired by all the Saints.

1. That it is well known, the Apostle produces the testimony of Enoch, Jude
14. Behold the Lord comes with ten thousand of his Saints; David often
mentions it as a thing delighted in by Believers; therefore in a Poetical, or
rather Prophetical strain, he calls upon the Heavens, Ear^h, Sea, and Fields,
to rejoice; before the Lord, for he comes, for h^ comes to judge the Earth;
he shall judge the World with Righteousness, and the people with his truth,
Psalm. 96.13. and again, Psalm. 98.10. He calls upon the Creatures to rejoice;
before the Lord, for he comes to judge the Earth; with Righteousness shall he
judge the World, and the people with Equity; passages which relate, not only to
the Kingdom of the Messiah, as it is exercised now in the World, but also to
his final act of judging, till which time they are not fully verifyed: Solomon
binds ^he whole duty of man upon him by his consideration, Eccles. 12.13, 14.
Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter; Fear God, and keep his
Commandments, for this is the whole duty of man; for God shall bring every
work into Judgment, with every secret thing; whether it be good, or whether it
be evil: And the Apostles, when they went abroad to Proselyte the World,
usually began with this point.

2. That this is firmly believed by all true Christians. This must needs be so;
because it is the grand inducement to all Piety and Godliness, and none ever
disbelieved it, but those, the interest of whose Lusts engaged them to question
it, 2 Pet. 3.3, 4, 5. Knowing this first, that there shall come in the last
days, scoffers, walking after their own lusts, and saying, Where is the promise
of his coming? For since the Fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they
were from the beginning of the Creation. For this they willingly are ignorant
of, etc. willingly ignorant; their interest puts them upon it, rather than
their Conscience, because this Doctrine fills them with unquiet thoughts,
that they cannot so securely follow their sinful practices, till they blot out
the fear of it, or banish the thoughts of it out of their hearts; but all that
obey the teachings of grace (take it for objective or subjective grace) they
firmly believe it, Tit. 2.11, 12, 13. For the grace of God, that brings
Salvation, has appeared to all men, teaching us that denying ungodl^ness, and
worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present
World; looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearance of the great
God, and our Savior Jesus Christ. The sound belief of it is not so much
encountered with the doubts of the mind, as the inclinations of their perverse
hearts. Now the seeming reasons of partial men are not to be heard, especially
as delivered in a scoffing, malicious way; and on the other side, Godliness and
Mortification stands upon such evident reason, as man's unquestionable duty,
that it needs not to be maintained by a lie and manifest falsehood: Certainly,
they that deny it do not so much reason against this Article of our Christian
Faith, as scoff at it; and it is to be imputed to the malignity of their
tempers, rather than the acuteness or sharpness of their reason, that they do
not believe it. Many things which they urge are a manifest token of the
contrary. As the calamities of the good, 2 Thessalonians. 1.4, 5. So that we glory in
you for your Faith and Patience in all your Persecutions and tribulations, that
you endure, which is a manifest token of the righteous Judgment of God; The
perversion of Justice, Eccles. 3.16, 17. And moreover, I saw under the Sun, the
place of Judgment, that wickedness was there, and the place of righteousness,
that iniquity was there; I said in my heart, God shall judge the righteous, and
the wicked; for there is a time there, for every purpose, and for every work;
Things must be reviewed and judged over again; A State Engine to serve Order
and Government: does the benefit of mankind need a lie to promote it? Does
carnal interest govern the World, or Virtue? If mere carnal Interest, what a
confusion would there be of all things? Then men might commit all Villainy, take
away men's lives and goods, when it is their interest, or they could do it
safely and secretly, without infringement of their interest; Servants poison
their Masters, if they could do it without discovery, and there were no sin in
it; men prey upon others, if it be in the power of their hands; and catch he
that catch can, without impunity, would be the truest Wisdom. Clear it is,
Virtue cannot be supported, without the tho^ghts of a World to come; and it is
unreasonable to imagine, that God would make a World, which cannot be governed
without falsehood and deceit.

3. That it is earnestly desired by all true Christians, that is of chief
respect here; for the Apostle conjureth them by all that is dear and sacred in
their most holy Faith; and upon this I will mainly spend the first part of this
Discourse. I shall prove it by these two choice pieces of Scripture, which
describe the Communion of the Church with Christ, or the dispensations of
Christ to the Church; the one concerns Gods internal, the other his external
Government; the Canticles and Revelations. The Book of Canticles is ended with
this desire, vote and wish, Cant. 8.14. Make haste my beloved, and be like a
young Heart or Roe upon the Mountains of Spices; the Brides last and great suit
to the Bridegroom is, make haste, as to his coming in Glory to judge the World;
not that Christ is slack, but the Churches affections are strong; they that go
a Whoring after the World, neither desire his coming, nor love his appearing;
but the Spouse would have all things hastened, that he might return; he cannot
come soon enough to set the World to rights, and complete their Happiness; it
is that only that will perfect their Consolation, and therefore would have the
blessed and longed for meeting hastened. In the other Book of the Revelations,
see how it is closed, Rev. 22.20. Christ says, Surely I come quickly; and the
Church like a quick Echo, says Even so, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly; it
takes the word out of Christ's Mouth, and presently improveth the Promise into
a Prayer, and so Christ's Voice, and the Churches Voice, are Unisons; the
Acclamation of the Saints answers to his Proclamation; Christ says, I come,
as desiring to meet with us; the Church answers, even so, come, as desiring
his Fellowship and Company: when once Faith apprehends the glorious coming of
our Lord Jesus to Judgment, Love presently desires it, as the most comfortable
thing, which we can ask of him, that is the farewell suit of the Church to
Christ; if he will grant this, all complaints, and sorrow, and sighing, will be
no more.

Now I shall give you Reasons, why this is desired by all true Christians.

1. In respect of him, who is to come. His Person, that we may see him, who is
our great Lord and Savior; all that believed any thing of Christ, desired to
see him; those that lived before his coming in the flesh, Jo^n 8.56. Your
Father Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it, and was glad; and the
same affection possesses us that live after his coming in the flesh; we know
him by hearsay, we have heard much of him, he wooeth us by a Proxy, as Eliezer
Abraham's Servant did Rebekah. Now Christians would fain see him, of whom they
have heard, and whom they loved, and in whom they have believed, 1 Pet. 1.8.
Whom having not seen, ye love, and in whom, though now you see him not, yet
believing, ye rejoice with joy ^nspeakable, and full of glory; they do not see
Christ, but they have a taste of his goodness, 1 Pet. 2.3. If so be ye have
tasted that the Lord is gracious; They have felt his comforts, and live by his
Life; all that is wanting, is but ocular Vision, that they may see him Face to
Face; therefore they long for his coming.

2. The Excellency of Christ their head, shall then be fully revealed,
therefore it is comfortable to his Saints to think of his second comeing; it is
called, the Revelation of Christ, 1 Pet. 1.13. Christ is now under a Vail,
retired within the Curtain of the Heavens; the wicked often ask, where is now
your God? and our own unbelieving hearts are apt to question the glory of his
Person, and the truth of his Promises, when his most faithful Servants are
under disgrace: Christ is a glorious King, but little of his Glory is seen in
the World; therefore they desire that he may appear in Glory, and Royalty; we
pray that his Kingdom may come.

2. The persons desiring, there is somewhat in them to move them to it.

1. The Spirit of Christ, Rev. 22.17. The Spirit in the Bride, says come; the
Holy Ghost breadeth this desire in the Church; nature says, it is good to be
here; but this is a disposition above nature; the Flesh says, Depart, but the
Spirit says, Come; the great work of the Spirit is to bring us and Christ
together, he comes from the Father and the Son, to bring us to the Father by
the Son; his business is to marry us to Christ, the promise being past, the
Spouse longs to see her beloved. It is the Spirit kindles a desire in us of
his second coming, when the Marriage that is now contracted, shall be
consummated; when the Queen shall be brought unto the King in raiment of
Needle Work, and shall enter into the Palace with him; there to abide for ever.
Well then, though guilty Sinners would have Christ stay away still, and if it
might go by Voices, the Carnal World would never give their Voice this way,
Even so, come Lord Jesus, come quickly; no, they are of the Devils mind, Why
art thou come to torment us before the time? Mat. 8.29. Thieves and
Malefactors, if they might have the liberty to choose, they would never look,
nor long for the day of Assizes; but the Spirit in the Bride is another thing,
it gives us other inclinations; the sooner Christ comes, the better; they can
never be soon enough taken up to him, nor he come to them.

2. There are Graces planted in us, Faith, Hope, and Love, to move us earnest^y
to desire his coming.

1. Faith believes Christ will be as good as his word; I will come again, if
it were not so, I would have told you, John 14.2. And if Christ says in a way
of Promise, I come, the Church says, Amen, in a way of Faith, even so, Com^.
If Christ had gone away in discontent, and with a threat in his mouth, Ye shall
never see my face more, we should altogether despair of seeing him again; but
he parted in Love, and left a Promise with us, which upholdeth the Hearts of
Believers during his absence. Would Christ deceive us, and flatter us into a
Fools Paradise? What need that? He can strike us dead in an instant, if we do
not please him, and we have hitherto found him true in all things, and will he
fail us at last?

2. Hope, which is Faiths Handmaid, it looks for that which we do believe, it
is the immediate effect of the new Creature, 1 Pet. 1.3. Begotten to a lively
hope; as soon as Grace is infused, it discovers it self by its tendency to
its end, and rest; it came from Heaven, and carries the Soul thither.

3. Love is an affection of Union, it desires to be with the party loved,
Phil. 1.23. I desire to depart, and to be with Christ; therefore its Voice is,
Come, Come, he has Communion with us in our Houses of Clay; therefore we
desire presence with him in his Palace of Glory; his Voice now is very sweet,
when he says, Come unto me ye that are weary and heavy laden, but much more
will it be so, when he says, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit a Kingdom
prepared for you, before the foundations of the World were laid: Reconciliation
with God is comfortable, but what will fruition be!

3. Look upon a Christians Privileges, Believers then find the fruit of their
interest in him, and have their reward adjudged to them, Rev. 22.12. Behold I
come quickly, and my reward is with me. Christ does not come empty handed; it
is but maintenance we have from him now, but then Wages; earnest now, but then
the full sum; It is our Pay-day, yea rather it is our Crowning day, 2 Timothy 4.8.
Henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which God the righteous
Judge will give me in that day: 1 Pet. 5.4. When the chief Shepherd shall
appear, ye shall receive a Crown of glory, which fades not away; those that
have been faithful and diligent in their duty, shall not need to seek another
Play Master; tha^ which Christ gives us in hand, is worth all the pains that we
lay out in his Service; Grace and inward Peace: but then we shall have Glory
and Honor; he will honor us in the sight of those that have opposed,
contradicted, and despised us: Our comfort is hidden, but our Glory is
sensible, and visible, and public before all the World.

Objection. But how can true Christians earnestly desire it, when so many
tremble at the thought of it for want of assurance of Gods Love?

Ans. We suppose a Christian in a right frame, and one that does prepare for
his coming: But

1. The meanest Saint has some inclination this way; it was one of the points
of the Apostolical Catechism, Heb. 6.2. The Doctrine of Resurrection from the
dead, and of eternal Judgment: and the Apostolical Catechism was for the
initiating, or en^ring of Christians into the Faith and Profession of the
Gospel, when they laid the foundation; this was one truth, which was never
omitted, the coming of Christ to Judgment; now Faith is a believing, not with
the mind only, but the heart; they were to be affected with what they did
believe, Sapida scientia, was the qualification, and not with trembling only,
for that would deter them from Christianity; but with rejoicing of hope, which
did invite them to the practice of it, Heb. 3.6. Whose house are we if we hold
fast the confidence and rejoicing of hope firm unto the end; and indeed what
other affection can become the thought of Christ's rewards which he will bring
with him?

2. Sometimes there may be a drowsiness, and indisposition in the Children of
God, when their Lamps are not kept burning; Luke 12. 37. Blessed are those
Servants, whom when the Lord comes, he shall find watching; but the wise
Virgins slumbered as well as the foolish; and so for a Season they may be
unprepared for his coming, by carelessness, or remission of their watchfulness,
and neglect of preparation, yet the Spirit and inclination this way begins
with the new birth: A Wife desires her Husbands coming home after a long
Journey, but it may be all things are not ready, and in so good order:
Sometimes all good Christians desire the coming of Christ, but sometimes they
are not so exact and accurate in their walkings, and therefore their affections
are not so lively; security breeds deadness, and God is fain to rouse us up
by sharp afflictions.

3. The Church does really and heartily desire Christ's coming, though they
tremble at some circumstances of his coming: there is a degree of bondage, that
hinders much of our confidence and boldness, 1 John 2.17, 18. Herein is our
love made perfect, that we may have boldness in the day of Iudgmen^; because as
he is, so are we in this World. There is no fear in love, but perfect love
casts out fear, because fear has torment; he has fears is not made
perfect in love; while we are imperfect, there may be some fears, how it shall
go with us in the Judgment. The day of Judgment may be considered in esse rei,
or in esse cogni^o, the success of the day it self, that we may stand before
Christ in the Judgment, or in our apprehension of it, that we may think of it
with boldness, confidence, and desire; all sincere persons shall speed well in
the Judgment; but while we are thus weak, and imperfect, we have little
confidence of our sincerity. Certainly, the more holy we are, the more we are
emboldened against Judgment to come; therefore we must every day get a
Conscience soundly established against the fears of Hell and Damnation.

4. To be of such a temper as not at all to value, and prize, and delight in
it, quenches all sense of Godliness and Religion; surely they are not touched
with any fear of God, who wish it would never come, who would be glad in their
heart to hear such news; they have the Spirit of the Devil in them, who count
his coming their burden and torment; they cannot say the Lords Prayer without a
fear to be heard; and pray thy Kingdom come, when they desire it may never be;
the thoughts of it casts a damp on their carnal rejoicing, and he that is
afraid, left his Prayers prove true, can never pray heartily; no not with a
moral sincerity.

Use. To press us to keep up a firm belief, and an earnest desire of Christ's
coming; this will make you Heavenly minded, Phil. 3.20, 21. For our
Conversation is in Heaven, where we look for the Savior the Lord Jesus Christ.
It will engage you to Fidelity in your duty; for every one of us must give an
account of himself to God, John 2.28. And now, little Children, abide in him,
that when he shall appear, we may have confidence, and not be ashamed before
him at his coming. To watchfulness as well as faithfulness, Luke 21.36. Watch
ye therefore, and pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all
these things that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of man. Yea
to diligence, that you may clear up your title and interest, Heb. 9.28. And to
them that look for him shall he appear the second time, without sin unto
Salvation: 2 Pet. 3.12. Wherefore, beloved, seeing that ye look for these
things, be diligent that ye may be found of him in peace, without spot and
blameless. Oh therefore let this be a precious truth to you, which you would
not forgo for all the World; if others tremble at the mention of it, still
carry it so that it may be your comfort and solace. In short, believe it
strongly, think of it frequently, prepare for it diligently, improve it
fruitfully to all holy Conversation and Godliness, yea to get Oil, not into
your Lamps only, but Vessels, Grace in your hearts, as well as profess your
selves to be Christians.

II. Doct. That when Christ shall come, all the Saints shall be gathered
together unto him.

For evidencing this, let me clear to you, that at the day of Judgment there
shall be,

1. A Congregation. 2. A Segregation. 3. An Aggregation.
They are all intended, but principally the last.

A Congregation; Mat. 25.32. Before him shall be gathered all Nations; And not
only all Nations, but all Persons, 2 Cor. 5.10. We must all (collective) appear
before the Iudgment-seat of Christ, that every one (distributive) may receive
according to the things done in his body, etc. All that have lived from the
beginning of the World unto that day, shall without exception of any one single
person, from the least unto the greatest, appear before the Tribunal of Christ;
no Age, no Sex, or Nation, or Dignity, or Greatness, can excuse us. In the
World some are too high to be questioned, others too low to be taken notice of,
but there all are brought forth to undergo their Trial; there is no shifting or
avoiding this day of appearance; Adam will there meet with all his Posterity at
once. Take all the distinctions of Mankind, Infants, and grown Persons; I mean
Infants who die before they are in an ordinary way capable of the Doctrine of
Life (the Scriptures are written for grown persons, the Case of Infants is more
obscure,) those of them who are born within the Church, God is their God; Genesis
17.7. I will establish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy Seed after
thee, in their generations, for an everlasting Covenant, to be a God unto thee,
and to thy Seed after thee. Good and bad is the next distinction, both forts
come to receive their Sentence; only the one come to the Judgment of
Condemnation, the other to the Judgment of Absolution, John 5.28, 29. Those
that have done good, to the resurrection of life, and those that have done
evil, to the resurrection of Condemnation; Acts 24.15. There shall be a
resurrection of the dead; both of the just and unjust. The next distinction is
men of all Callings, Apostles, Ministers, private Christians; Apostles, Paul
expected to be judged, 1 Cor. 4.4. I know nothing of my self, yet am I not
thereby justified, but he that judges me is the Lord; he speaks with respect
to the execution of the Apostolical Office: Ordinary Ministers, Heb. 13.17.
They watch for your souls, as those that must give an account: If Souls
miscarry through their negligence, they are answerable to God for it: Ordinary
Christians, Romans 14.12. Every one must give an account of himself to God. Men
of all conditions, poor or rich, weak or powerful, high and low, Rev. 20.12. I
saw the dead, small and great, stand before God; I mean those that are so
distinguished now; these distinctions do not outlive time, there all stand on
the same level; the rufling men of the World shall then be afraid, and call
upon the Mountains to cover them from the wrath of him that sits upon the
Throne, Rev. 6.16. The poor are not forgotten, they are Gods Creatures, and
must undergo his Judgment. Thus shall all people that live scattered up and
down in the World, how much soever they differ from one another in Rites,
Tongues, Customs of living, be brought together in one place.

2. There is a Segregation: Mat. 25.32, 33. He shall separate the one from the
other, as a Shepherd divides the Sheep from the Goats; and he shall set the
Sheep on his right hand, and the Goats on his left. There may be now a
confusion and mixture of the godly and the wicked, as Sheep and Goats feed in
the same pasture, and they may be all raised together according to the places
where they lived and died; but then a perfect separation: good and bad are
first gathered together, but the good are drawn into a Company by themselves,
but no pure Company, till the great Shepherd will judge between Cattle and
Cattle, Ezekiel. 34.17. He will gather his Saints together, Psalm. 50.5. Psalm. 1.5.
The ungodly shall not stand in the Judgment, nor Sinners in the Congregation of
the righteous. So Mat. 13.44. At the end of the World the Angels shall come,
and sever the wicked from among the just.

3. An Aggregation; Believers are gathered together to him for several ends.

1. To make up the number of Christ's Train and Attendants, to wait on him, Jude
14. (...), with his holy ten thousands; Zech. 14.5. And the Lord my God shall
come, and all the Saints with him; 1 These. 4.17. The dead in Christ shall rise
first, and we which are alive shall be caught up together in the Clouds with
them, to meet the Lord in the air.

2. That after Judgment we may be solemnly presented to God, by head and Poll,
we were given to Christ to be preserved unto the Glory we were designed for;
John 17.6. I have manifested thy name unto the men, which thou gave me out of
the World, thine they were, and thou gave them me; not by way of Alienation,
but Oppignoration, recompense, and charge, Christ is to give an account, John
6. 40. And this is the will of him that sent me, that every one which sees the
Son, and believes on him, may have everlasting life; and I will raise him up
at the last day. The Form of Presentation is, Heb. 2.13. Behold I, and the
Children which God has given me.

3. That in one Troop we may be brought into his Heavenly Kingdom; John 14.3.
And if I go, and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you to
my self; that where I am, there ye may be also; The whole Flock shall then
follow the great Shepherd of the Sheep, into the Everlasting Fold.

Use 1. Believe this gathering together to him; we are joined to the Church of
Gods Elect, now by Faith only, Heb. 12.22, 23. Ye are come to the general
Assembly, and Church of the firstborn, which are written in Heaven, etc.
(...), is a meeting made up of many different Persons, gathered together from
several Countries into one body, and one place, as the meeting of all sorts of
persons, from all the Corners of Greece, to see the Olympic Games, was called
the (...), People of all Countries came to behold their (...); so the mystical
state of the Church of the Gospel, is a general Assembly, because it is not
consined to one Nation, but extended to Believers of all Nations, and Ages,
they are drawn into a Body, or Heavenly Society, into one Fold, under one
Shepherd; but they never meet in an actual Assembly, until the last day, which
is the great Congregation, or Rendezvous of the Saints, so that now it is
matter of Faith.

2. See you be of the number, when some are admitted others are thrust out;
Luke 13.28. There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when ye shall see
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God, and
ye your selves thrust out; The wicked shall not stand in this Congregation. Oh
it is a blessed and a comfortable thing, when we are made Members of the
mystical body of Christ, and have hopes, that we shall be in the number of
those that shall meet together in the great Assembly, and Congregation of the
righteous; that we are trained up in the Church of Christ, which is the
Seminary of Heaven, that we are no more Strangers, and Foreigners, but Fellow
Citizens with the Saints.

3. Let us improve it many ways.

1. To comfort us against the paucity of serious walkers, and real Christians.
Alas! now they are but like two or three Berryes upon the top of the uppermost
bough; here one, and there another; in some places thinner, in others thicker,
as God has service for them; in appearance (...), A little Flock, Luc. 12.32.
But take all together, they are a general Assembly, that are redeemed out of
every Kindred, Tongue, and Nation, Rev. 5.9. Yea, Rev. 7.9. A great multitude,
which none can number, of all Kindreds, Tongues, People, and Nations; As few as
we are, and as despised as the interest of the godly is, we shall not want
Company in Heaven, we see few going to Heaven, but when we are gathered
together, we shall see that our everlasting, Companions are many.

2. To comfort us against the d^stance of Christian Friends, we are often
separated from the Society of good Christians, whom we love dearly, but we
shall be gathered together in one Congregation; The Saints are now scattered by
Providence; they live in diverse Countries, Towns, Houses, have little comfort
of one another; They live where they may be most useful; as Stars do not shine
in a Cluster, but are dispersed throughout the Heaven; and as they are the
light of the Earth, so they are the Salt of the Earth, which is sprinkled here
and there, not laid in a heap: sometimes by violence of men, persecution, and
banishment; sometimes by Death, which parts Friends, Perfectus est quem putas
mortuum, like people in a wrack, got to shore before us. Now what a comfort is
it to be united to all Gods people, which have been, are, or shall be, to the
end of the World; and to meet in one Assembly, Mat. 24.31. They shall gather
together the elect from the four winds; from one end of Heaven to another; The
Saints shall be gathered from all quarters of the Earth; though they live in
several places, several times, many we never saw in the flesh, Christ will
assemble them all, bring them in unto one place.

3. To comfort them under the degenerate and collapsed state of Christianity,
(1.) The mixture of the wicked; the good and bad are here mixed, they live
together in the same Kingdoms, Cities, Societies, Visible Church, Family, Bed,
(perhaps) but then a perfect separation, Zach. 14. Last, There shall no more be
the Canaanite in the House of the Lord of Hosts: Rev. 21.27. Nothing that
defiles shall enter there: such a difference shall there be between the State
of Gods Church in this World, and the World to come: here Tares are mingled
with Wheat, good Fish with bad in the Drag Net, it is hard by Discipline to
keep the sound from the infected. (2.) Discord; the Saints are divided in
Affection, but then perfect Harmony; they are all gathered together to Christ,
and have no signs and badges of distinction, to herd apart. (3.) It Is
Universal, with all the Saints. (4.) Perpetual, never to part more.

SERMON II.
2 Thessalonians. 2.1, 2. -- That ye be not soon shaken in mind, or be troubled,
neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter as from us, as that the day of
Christ is at hand.


WE come now to the matter of the Apostles Caution, which is in the second
Verse, That ye be not soon shaken in mind, or be troubled, neither by spirit,
nor by word, nor by letter, as from us, as that the day of Christ is at hand.
In which words take notice,

1. Of the error disproved, that the day of Christ is at hand.

2. The effect which this error might produce; trouble and unsetledness of
mind, That ye be not soon shaken in mind or troubled.

3. A removal of all the supposed Foundations of this error, or the means which
these Impostours used to entice them to embrace it; Three are mentioned,
Spirit, Word, and Letter.

1. Nor by Spirit, that is, pretense of spiritual Revelation, be not soon
shaken in mind by it.

2. Nor by word, some word of the Apostle, which they pretended to have heard,
and that is another slight of deceivers; some tradition or doctrine delivered
by the Apostle by word of mouth.

3. Nor by Letter as from us: this may be understood, (1.) Either of some
passage in the former Epistle, for the Apostle says there, 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. Then
we which are alive and remain, shall be caught up together with them in the
Clouds, to meet the Lord in the air; and because he joins himself with them,
they thought he should survive until that day, or else those warnings which the
Apostle gives them. 1 Thessalonians. 5.1, 2, 3. Of the times and season: I need not
write unto them, for your selves know perfectly that the day of the Lord comes
as a thief in the night, etc. Now these warnings they might abuse, and this is
one way by which men may be unsettled and unshaken; i.e. by false glosses and
interpretations of Scripture. (2.) Or rather the sense may be, some spurious
and counterfeit writings, which was one means of deceit used in the Primitive
Times; supposititious or Apocryphal Legends, wherein the Apostle might be said
to write something, as if Christ should come in that age wherein they lived.
Now to obviate this, the Apostle is supposed to insert that passage, Chap.
3.17. The Salutation of Paul with mine own hand, which is the token in every
Epistle: so I write.

First, From the Error disproved, observe,

Doct. That the time of Christ's coming to Judgment must be patiently expected,
not rashly defined, or determined; for this is the Error, which the Apostle
with such earnestness opposes here.

But you will say, is this such an error? Do not the holy Apostles themselves
say, in effect, the same, as the Apostle James, Chap. 5.8 The coming of the
Lord draws nigh; and the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 4.7. The end of all things is
at hand: Yea Paul himself, 1 Cor. 10.11. These are written for our admonition,
upon whom the ends of the World are come; and Romans 13.12. The night is far
spent, and the day is at hand; where by night is meant the state of Ignorance,
Sin, and Paganism before Conversion, and by the day is meant the state of our
full Regeneration and Illumination in eternal Glory; when the corrupt World
shall come to an end, and all shadows shall fly away. As if he had said, the
Mornings of the Resurrection is at hand, the night is far spent, not quite
past, and the day is at hand; the night is not thoroughly gone, nor the day
wholly come, yet he says, it is at hand. What evil was in this Opinion, that
the Apostle should with such vehemence argue and reason against it? Ans. There
is some difference in the words, for (...), signifies it draws near, (...),
it is begun already. But the sense is vastly different; for by these and such
like expressions, the Apostle only did intend that the last dispensation was
then on foot, no other change of dispensation or worship was to be expected,
till the Coming of Christ. But I shall more clearly, and distinctly show,

1. What reason the Apostle had to speak at this rate.

2. What little reason these Seducers had to pervert this Speech to countenance
their Hypothesis or supposition.

1. For the first, the Apostle had reason to say the day of the Lord was at
hand.

1. With respect of Faith; for Faith gives a kind of presence to things, Heb.
11.1. Now Faith is the subtance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things
not seen: That is, it gives a being, a kind of existence to things future, and
afar off, and sets them before the eyes of our mind, and gives us some sight of
them, as if they were already come. And therein it agrees with the light of
Prophecy; look as by the light of Prophecy, John says, Rev. 20.12. I saw the
dead, small and great, stand before God, and the Books were opened, etc. so
says does in effect see what it believes. W^^l then, Faith looking upon things
distant an^ absent, as near at hand, the Apostle had reason to use this
language to Believers, as if the Judge were at the door. Phil. 4.5. Let your
moderation be known unto all men, the Lord is at hand, not only in regard of
his present Providence, but also with respect to his second coming to Judgment;
it is as certain to Faith, as if he were already come.

2. With respect of Love, Love will not account it long to endure the hardships
of this present World, until Christ come to set all things at rights: Jacob
served seven years for Rachel, for the love he bare to her, and it seemed to
him but a little while, Genesis 2^.20. If we had any love for Christ, we should be
contented to suffer a while for his sake; The time is coming, when the wicked
shall persecute no more; when the mouth of iniquity shall be stopped, when the
desire and hope of all Believers shall be satisfied, when the Redeemers work
shall be consummated, when the Kingdom shall be delivered up to the Father,
when those that made a jest of this day, shall be fully confuted; Faith sees
the certainty of it, and love makes us hold out till the time come about.

3. The Apostle might speak so, as comparing time with Eternity, Psalm. 90.4. A
thousand years in thy sight are but as yesterday, when it is past, and as a
Watch in the night. 2 Pet. 3.8. One day is with the Lord as a thousand years,
and a thousand years as one day. The longest time to Eternity is but as a drop
lost and spilt in the Ocean; and all the tediousness of the present life, is
but like one rainy day to an Everlasting Sunshine, 2 Cor. 4.17. Our light
affliction which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding* and
eternal weight of glory; though troubles are lengthened as long as our lives
are, yet they are but a moment in respect of Eternity: we reckon by time, and
not by Eternity; and therefore these expressions may seem strange to us.

4. The Apostle speaks this to particular men, whose abode in the World is not
very long; Eternity and the Judgment is at hand, though Christ tarry long till
the Church be completed, and the Elect be gathered. 2 Pet. 3.9. The Lord is
not slack concerning his Promise, as some men count slackness. Now what is
long, and what is afar off to the whole Church, considered in several
successions of Ages; it is short to particular persons. Death soon puts an end
to their conflict, and then their Triumph ensues; And to Christ is ready to
judge at all times, though the World be not ready to be judged. The Coming of
Christ is uncertain, and hidden for this very purpose, that men in all Ages
might be quickened to faithfulness and watchfulness, and make that preparation
which is necessary. Now therefore it concerns the Messengers of God, to bind
men's duty upon them, by showing the nearness of it in all the forementioned
considerations, that they might be always ready; for so we find our Lord
himself pressing it, Luke 12.40. Be ye therefore ready, for the Son comes at
an hour, when ye think not; Mat. 24.42. Watch therefore, for ye know not what
hour your Lord comes: He may come in a moment, our duty is unquestionable, but
the time of his coming is uncertain; And to please our selves with the thoughts
of a delay, is a mighty deadening thing, and quenches our duty; yea, it is an
inticement to all evil, Mat. 24.48. The wicked Servant took liberty to beat his
fellow Servants, because of his Lords delay; we are bid to be sober and
watchful, and always to be looking for the coming of the Lord.

2. The Seducers had little reason to pervert this Speech to the countenance of
their Hypothesis, or supposition, and therefore the Apostle had very good
reason to be zealous in the confutation of this Hypothesis of the Seducers, who
maintained that Christ would come in that Age.

1. To inquire after the time, is curiosity: Acts 1.7. It is not for you to
know the times or the seasons, which the Father has put into his own power.
Those things which God has reserved to himself, for us to inquire after, is
sinful: It is a great evil to pry into our Masters Secrets, when we have so
many revealed truths to busy our minds about; we take it to be a piece of ill
manners, to pry into that which is purposely concealed; as to break up a secret
Letter, and the like: the practicing of known duties, would prevent this
curiosity; these things tend not to our profit and edification.

2. Much more was it a sin to fix the time, it was an arrogant presumption; for
of that day and hour, knows no man, no not the Angels of Heaven, but my
Father only, Mat. 24.36. The peremptory time of the day of Judgment God keeps
to himself, and it is arrogance for any to define it, and set a time, when God
is resolved to keep it secret.

3. The fixing of that time did a great deal of hurt.

1. For the present it drew away their minds from their calling, because they
expected a sudden coming of the Lord; Ill impressions either destroy or w^aken
necessary duties.

2. The least Error does gratify Satan, and the interest of his Kingdom, for
he is the Father of Lies.

3. It might shake their Faith in other things, when their credulity was
disproved by the event; the Gospel might be brought into contempt, when their
Error only was confuted; as many men who have been peremptory in fixing times,
afterward, have thrown off their Religion.

4. It showed a diseased mind, that they were sick of Questions, as the Apostle
speaks, 1 Timothy 6.4. Doting about questions and strifes of words, whereof comes
envy, etc. when they had so much wholesome food to feed upon.

5. It did but engender strife among Christians, begat wranglings and disputes
in the Church, 1 Timothy 6.4. He is proud knowing nothing, but doting [or sick]
about questions and strifes of words, whereof comes envy, strife, railing,
evil surmisings.

Use 1. Let us not fix times: many of the Ancients were too bold this way, and
we are apt to it. Lactantius peremptorily said, The World would endure but two
hundred years after his time: So, many will fix the time of the calling the
Jews, and of the destruction of Antichrist, without evident grounds and
reasons. What God has revealed is enough to bear us out in our duty and
suffering: in other things let us patiently wait; we see reason to do so, when
we consider how many men have proved false Prophets.

2. Let us not put off the time, and set it at too great a distance; distant
things, though never so great, will hardly move us; that which men put off they
do in effect put away; they put far off the evil day, they would not let it
come near their minds, to have any operation upon them. Look as the Stars,
those vast Globes of Light, by reason of the distance between us and them, do
seem but as so many spangles: so we have but a weak sight of what is set at a
great distance, and their operation on us will be but small; the closer things
are, the more they will work upon us; one that looks upon what God has
revealed of this as sure, and near, is more affected with it than others are:
therefore set your selves at the entrance of that World, where you must
everlastingly be, and watch, and be ready: they that put it off, are apt to
loyter in their work. If Christ's coming be not near at hand, certainly the time
of our departure is at hand, and it will not be long e're it come about. But
this is but Introductive to the Doctrine of Antichrist: Therefore I come to
the second thing.

Secondly, The effect that this error might produce, trouble and unsetledness
of mind; that ye be not soon shaken in mind, or troubled. In the words there is
a twofold Metaphor; the one taken from a Tempest, or Sea storm, as the word
plainly implies, that ye be not shaken in mind; and the other word is taken
from the sudden alarm of a Land Fight, which breeds trouble.

1. Doct. That Errors breed ^rouble of mind: they do not only trouble the
Churches Peace, Gal. 5.12. I would they were even cut off which trouble you;
but they hinder tranquillity of mind, Gal. 1.7. There be some that trouble you,
and would pervert the Gospel of Christ.

How do Errors hinder tranquillity of mind? Partly because it is an unsound
foundation, it can never yield solid peace; we only find rest for the Soul in a
true Religion, and there where it is purely professed: Others are left to great
doubts and uncertainties. The Lord seems to direct us in this course, when we
are upon consultation about the taking up of a Religion, Jer. 6.16. Stand in
the ways, and see, and ask for the old paths, where is the good way, and walk
therein, and ye shall find rest for your souls. Soul-rest is only found in Gods
way, and where it is most clearly professed. Partly, because whatever false
Peace is bred there, it will at last end in trouble. The Apostle compares
Seducers, Jude 13. to raging waves of the Sea, foaming out their own shame; and
we are told of the Locusts that came out of the Bottomless-pit, Rev. 9.5. That
they stung like Scorpions. Every erroneous way of Religion is comfortless; yea,
their Doctrine breeds anxiety, and vexes the Spirit; for they have no true way
of quieting the Conscience; Let us therefore detest Error, because it is so
much our interest. It is the property of truth to beget a delectation of mind,
it is sweeter than honey, and the honey comb. Verum est bonum intellectus.
Truth is the good of the understanding; now when we understand truth
satisfyingly, it breeds an incredible delight; when we have been in some
perplexities, and begin to find out a truth, Prove. 24. 13, 14. My Son, eat thou
honey, because it is good, and the honey comb, which is sweet unto thy taste: So
shall the knowledge of wisdom be, when thou have found it. Honey is no^ so
sweet to thy taste, as this is to thy understanding. When a man has found out
any truth, though it be but a natural truth, it breeds its oblectation; much
more spiritual truth, it is very pleasing to the understanding, and most of all
when spiritual. Truth is obeyed and practiced, for the understanding gives us
but a sight of it, but obedience gives a taste thereof. Our Savior says, Mat.
11.28, 29, 30. Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will
give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly
in heart. For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light. If you will but come
under Christ's blessed Yoke and Scepter, and that way of Religion he has
recommended to you, you will find an incredible Peace, Joy, and oblectation in
your mind.

2. Doct. That Christians should be so established, and have such constancy of
mind, that they should not be easily shaken and moved from the Faith.

1. Let us see how this is pressed. Sometimes it is pressed from the
encouragement of your great hope, 1 Cor. 15.58. Be steadfast, and unmovable,
always abounding in the work of the Lord; forasmuch as you know, that your
labor is not in vain in the Lord. First, He would have them steadfast and
unmovable; these two words have their special signification, the one is a
degree above the other; a man may be steadfast in a thing, though he be moved a
little in some by-matters; but now, since your Innocence will bear you out, be
not only steadfast, but immovable, which is a higher degree; but take it thus,
Be steadfast in your selves, and unmovable by the storms of Temptation from
without: a man is steadfast in himself, settled upon his own foundation; and you
are unmoved, when you are strengthened against outward assaults: Acts 20.24.
None of these things move me, neither count I my life dear unto me, so I might
finish my course with joy. A Man may be settled in the knowledge of the truth,
but he is not unmovable, except he be fortified against all Temptations, that
may draw him off from his profession: Such constancy of mind may be well
enforced, because of our great hope; thus it is pleaded for there. Then the
absolute necessity of it is urged at other times, as Col. 1.23. If ye continue
in the Faith grounded and settled, and be not moved away from the hope of the
Gospel: the same condition is required to continue, as to begin our right in
the privileges of the Gospel; there are some conditions required for the
beginning, others for the continuing of our right; now this is absolutely
required for the continuing of our right, both for present reconciliation with
God, and future Glory; it is upon this condition, if ye continue in the Faith.

2. Let us inquire what is necessary to this constancy and establishment of
mind, that we may not be soon troubled and shaken; partly, that our minds may
be enlightened to know the truth, and our hearts renewed to believe and love
the truth; for without this there can never be any constancy of mind in
Religion.

1. A clear Conviction of the Truth, or certainty of Knowledge, a rooted
assent, or well grounded persuasion, not some fluctuating opinion about it: an
half light makes us very uncertain in our course, James 1.3. A double-minded
man is unstable in all his ways; (...); First, try all things, 1 Thessalonians. 5.20.
then, hold fast that which is good. When men resolve upon Evidence* or after
due Examination, the truth sticks the closer and faster by them; but when
they take up things, hand over head, they have no firm Principles, and
therefore waver hither and thither; as Vessels without Ballast are tossed with
every wave, 2 Pet. 3.16, 17. Beware lest ye also being led away with the error
of the wicked, fall from your own stedfastness; (...), substantial grounds
within themselves; they do not stand by the knowledge of others, or the Faith
of others, and consent of others: light chaff is carried about with every wind,
(...), Ephesians. 4.14. That ye henceforth be no more Children tossed to and fro, and
carried about with every wind of Doctrine; they go through all parts of the
compass; sometimes this wind of error takes them up, sometimes that; sometimes
taking up one opinion, then changing it for another; this is the fruit of
half-Convictions.

2. The other oart of our Basis, is a resolution to adhere to the Truth; what
likelihood is there, that we should continue, who are not so much as resolved
so to do? The heart must be established by Grace, as well as the mind soundly
convinced, Heb. 13.9. Be not carried about with diverse and strange Doctrines,
for it is a good thing that the heart be established with grace; as the Apostle
speaks of a purpose not to marry, 1 Cor. 7.37. He that stands steadfast in
his own heart, etc. So here, Acts 21.13. I am ready not to be bound only, but
also to die at Jerusalem, for the name of the Lord Jesus Christ: A firm,
thorough resolution, is requisite to fortify us against all changes in
Religion; otherwise we are but as Trees without a Root; or an House without a
Foundation. Now this resolution of the Heart, is by Faith and Love; Faith, Heb.
3.12. Take heed, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief in
departing from the living God. Love, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10. They received not the love
of the truth that they might be saved, and for this cause God shall send them
strong delusions, that they shall believe a lie. We are not only rooted and
grounded in Faith, but rooted and grounded in Love, Ephesians. 3.17. That Christ may
dwell in your hearts by faith, that ye being rooted and grounded in love, etc.

3. The opposite to this is Levity and inconstancy of mind, that soon quitteth
truth without difficulty, or without much hesitancy and resistance, yields to
the temptation. The Scripture often takes notice of this sudden embracing of
Error, Gal. 1.6. I marvel that ye are so soon removed from him that called you
into the grace of Christ unto another Gospel; and in the Text, soon shaken in
mind; credulity is a lightness in believing, when we are like Reeds shaken with
every wind, Mat. 11.7. and have a faulty easiness ready to be carried away with
every Doctrine, which pretends to Truth; The simple believes every word,
Prove. 14.15. There is a readiness of mind, which is good, but it goes on
sufficient evidence; so the wisdom that is from above is gentle, and easy to be
entreated, James 3.17 and the Bereans were (...), Acts 17.11. They received the
word with all readiness of mind, and searched the Scriptures whether these
things were so or no: but a readiness of mind differs from a weakness of mind,
or a lightness in believing upon slender and insufficient grounds, they never
received the truth with thorough Efficacy, and are prone to Error.

4. The Causes of this Levity and Inconstancy of mind are these.

1. Want of solid rooting in the Truth, they receive it hand over head, as the
stony ground forthwith sprang up, Mat. 13.5. and 20. ver. Anon they receive it
with joy; they do not so soon receive the word, but they as soon quit it.

2. Want of Mortification, 2 Timothy 4.10. Demas has forsaken us; having loved
this present World: Lusts are uncertain, fear of men, favor of men, carnal
hopes will easily prevail.

3. A certain readiness of mind, which disposes men to conform, and comply
with their Company, as the Looking-Glass represents every Face that looks
on it, so they are very changeable and unstable as water, as Zedekiah, Jer.
38.5. The King is not he that can say you nay; soon turned this way and that
way.

4. Want of a thorough inclination to God, so that they are right for a while,
or in some things, yet they are not universally true to his interest, 1 Kings
2.28. Joab turned after Adonijah, though he turned not after Absalom; Hos. 7.8.
Ephraim is a Cake not turned.

5. Want of Holiness, and living up to the truths we know, 1 Timothy 3.9. Holding
the mystery of Faith in a pure Conscience. Choice Liquors are best kept in a
clean Vessel; men provoke God to desert them, and leave them to a vertiginous
Spirit.

6. Libertinism, men think they may run from one Sect of Christians to another,
as the wind of interest blows: if they were to turn to Ethnicism, Turcism, or
Judaism, they would die rather than change the^r Religion; but they think the
differences among Christians are not of such moment, as to venture any thing
upon that account. Every truth is precious, and must be owned in its Season,
and it is damnable in it self to do any thing against Conscience, and he that
gives way to a small temptation, will entertain a greater: As a Man that
hangs over a Precipice, when he lets go his hold, will sink further and
further, till he come to the bottom; therefore it is good to be faithful in a
little.

Use. Let us take heed of this evil credulity. and lightness.

1. Till Christians get a settled and sound Judgment, they never have peace
within themselves, for fears and scruples arise in the dark, and those that
live in error are full of perplexities, and have not that tranquil^ity of
Spirit, which They have, who are fully persuaded in their own mind. Romans 14.5.
Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind.

2. If hardened in error, consider, your opinions will ordinarily have an
influence upon your whole Religion, and will pervert your carriage toward God
and Men; your Prayers will smell of your opinions, and be like Balaams
Sacrifice offered to God to engage him against his own people; your Love will
be dispensed according to the interests of your Faction, 1 Cor. 1.13. Every one
of you says, I am of Paul, and I of Apollo, and I of Cephas, and I of Christ.
Is Christ divided?

3. The danger of error to others, Vice is like a duel, error a War, 2 Timothy
2.17. Their word will eat as does a Canker. All in Asia have turned from me, 2 Timothy 1.15.

4. There is danger to your selves, though the error be not damnable, 1 Cor.
3.13. You have not so full Communion with God.

Thirdly, The third thing is the means, which these Impostors used to seduce
them from the Faith; Spirit, Word, Letter; by all which, the Apostle would not
have them troubled, and shaken in mind: none of these Engines, which the
Seducers used, should draw them from the Truth. What should poor Christians do
thus assaulted? Ans. Stick to the Apostolical Doctrine. I shall observe,

Doct. That a Christian should be so persuaded in Religion, that neither
Spirit, nor Word, nor Writing, should be able to shake or unsettle his mind. I
shall show you,

1. What ways, or what means God has appointed, whereby a man may settle his
choice, as to opinions in Religion.

That the word of God will sufficiently fortify him against all these false
ways, by which Error is wont to be insinuated.

1. For the first, if a Christian would be established and guided aright in the
choice of a Religion, he must follow both the light of Nature and Scripture.

1. The light of Nature antecedently to any external Revelation, will
sufficiently convince us of the being of God, and our dependence upon him, Romans
1.19, 20. That which may be known of God is manifest in them, for God has
showed it to them; For the invisible things of him from the Creation of the
World, are clearly seen, being understood by the things which are made, even
his eternal Power and Godhead. For I must know there is a God, or else I cannot
be certain that he has given us a Rule or Revelation of his mind. We begin
with what is natural, and then go on to what is Spiritual; Nature will tell us,
that there is one God, the first cause of all things; of infinite Power,
Wisdom, and Goodness; that it is reasonable he should be served by those whom
he has made; that he will reward and punish men, as they disobey, or serve and
please him; but how God will be served, how they shall be rewarded or punished,
or how they shall escape punishment, if after a breach they are willing to
return to their duty and obedience to him; this is revealed in the word of God.

2. The written word shows us the true way of worshipping and pleasing God, and
being accepted with him, therefore it is a sufficient direction to us; there is
enough to satisfy Conscience, though not to please wanton Curiosity; As that
may quench the thirst of a sober man, that will not satisfy the lust of a
Drunkard: there we are made wise unto Salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15. Thou have known
the holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto Salvation, and Psalm
119.105. Thy word is a light unto my feet, and a lanthorn to my paths: there we
have the knowledge of many things evident by the light of nature, discovered
with more clearness and certainty: And that which could not be found out by
natural light, as Salvation by a Redeemer, or the remedy of our lapsed Estate,
which, depending on the sole will, and good pleasure of God, could not be known
till it was manifested and revealed by him: when man sat in darkness, and in
the shadow of death, it was necessary, that God should some way or other reveal
his mind to him by word of mouth, or by writing: By word of mouth, that is,
either by Oracles or extraordinary Messengers: that sufficed, while God saw fit
to reveal but a few Truths, or such as did not much burden the Memory; and men
were long lived, and the Church confined within a small compass of ground, and
not liable to so many miseries and changes, as now in the latter Ages; and then
he put it into writing, that men may not obtrude upon us their own conceits,
but we might have a Standard or Rule of Faith and Manners, Gal. 6.16. As many
as walk according to this Rule, etc.

3. The natural Truths contained in the word of God, are evident by their own
light; The supernatural Truths, though they are above natural light, yet they
are not against it, or contrary to it, and do fairly accord with those
Principles which are naturally known, and are confirmed, partly by an
antecedent Testimony, which is Prophecy; partly by an innate evidence in their
own frame and contexture; partly by a subsequent Evidence, which is valuable
Testimony, as to matter of Fact. The antecedent Testimony, John 5.39. Search
the Scriptures, for in them ye have eternal life, and they are they which
testify of me: 2 Pet. 1.19. We have a more sure word of Prophecy, to which we
do well to give heed, as to a light shining in dark places. The innate and
concomitant evidence, 2 Cor. 4 2, 3, 4. We have renounced the hidden things of
dishonesty, not walking in craftiness, nor handling the word of God
deceitfully, but by manifestation of the truth, commending our selves to every
man's Conscience in the sight of God. For if our Gospel be hid, it is hid to
them that are lost, in whom the God of this World has blinded the minds of
them which believe not, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is
the Image of God, should shine unto them. The subsequent Testimony, the
Apostles, Acts 5. 32. We are witnesses of these things, and so is also the Holy
Ghost, whom God has given to them that obey him; they were Eye and Ear
Witnesses of great Fidelity and Credit; their Religion forbids them to lie
for God, and they were accompanied with the mighty power of the Holy Ghost; not
only in giving them success in the face of the learned World, hunting out the
Devil every where; but also by Miracles, diverse Signs and Wonders: and they and
their followers endured all manner of torments and death, to witness the truth
of these things, and transmitted them to us with assurance of Gods owning th^s
Doctrine.

4. The word being thus stated, and put into a sure Record, it is intelligible
enough in all necessary matters at least; for if God should speak or write
darkly to his people, especially in necessary things, it is because he could
not, or would not speak otherwise: the former is direct Blasphemy, Exodus 4.11.
Who has made man's mouth? have not I the Lord. The latter cannot be said,
because that is contrary to his goodness, Psalm. 25.8. Good and upright is the
Lord, therefore will he teach Sinners the way. It is not to be imagined that
the great and universal King should give a Law to Mankind, and speak so darkly,
that we should have no sure direction from thence, nor be able to know his mind
in any of the Duties God has required of us; or expose us to great
difficulties and hardships in the World: And if he had not plainly expressed
his will to us, man would never leave writing, and distinguishing himself out
of his duty, surely he that will venture his All for Christ's sake, had need of
a clear warrant to bear him out; for none will hazard all that is near and dear
to him, but for weighty Reasons.

5. Besides, the Illumination of the Holy Spirit does accompany this word, and
make it effectual to us, to show us God as revealed in Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6. God
who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has s^ined into our hearts
to give us the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus
Christ: and for Heaven, Ephesians. 1.17, 18. Praying, that the God of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Father of Glory, may give unto you the Spirit of Wisdom and
Revelation, in the knowledge of him; the eyes of your understanding being
enlightened, that ye may know what is the hope of his calling, and what the
riches of the glory of his Inheritance in the Saints. He sanctifies and
heals our Souls, and prepares us for the entertainment of the Truth, that as
natural things are naturally discerned, so spiritual things are spiritually
discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14. The natural man receives not the things of the Spirit
of God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because
they are spiritually discerned.

6. There are promises of direction, made to humble and sincere minds, Psalm.
25.9. The meek shall he guide in Judgment, the meek shall he teach his way; to
the industrious, Prove. 2. 4, 5. If thou seek her as silver, and searchest
for her as for hid treasures; then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord,
and find the knowledge of God; to the godly and well-disposed, John 7.17. If
any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God,
or whether I speak of my self; so to them that pray much, James 1.5. If any man
lack wisdom, let him ask it of God, that gives to all men liberally, and
upbraideth not, and it shall be given him: They that thus sincerely endeavor
to know the will of God, will come to a sound established Judgment in the Truth.

II. A Christian, that is thus established, is fortified against Spirit, Word,
or Writing, or all Suggestion that may perplex his mind.

1. Against pretended Revelations, called here spirit.

1. Because having his mind thus settled, he may boldly defy all Revelations
pretended to the contrary: Gal. 1.8. Though we, or an Angel from Heaven, preach
any other Gospel than we have preached, let him be accursed: Any Doctrine, if
diverse or different from, or besides the written word, much more contrary to
it, a Christian may reject it, and account it Cursed Doctrine: Therefore
neither Church, nor Angel, nor Spirit, is to be heard against it.

2. Because a Christian is upon better terms, having the written word, than if
God dealt with him by way of Revelations, 2 Pet. 1.19. We have (...), a more
sure word of Prophecy; comparing it with the voice from Heaven, of which he
spoke before; not as if there could be any uncertainty in the Lords Voice,
speaking from Heaven, but because a transient Voice is more easily mistaken, or
forgotten, than an authentic standing Record, as Samuel thought Eli called
him, when it was the Lord; it is quoad nos, though God gave evidence of the
Truth of such Revelations as he made, yet we have more accommodate means. Our
Lord intimates such a thing, Luke 16.31. If they hear not Moses and the
Prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead. This
is the surest ground for Faith to rest upon, of any that ever has been, or can
be given to Sinners, subject to forgetfulness, jealousies, and mistakes.

3. Because it is not rational to expect new Revelation, now the Canon and Rule
of Faith is closed up, Heb. 2.1, 2. Therefore we ought to give the more earnest
heed to the things which we have heard, lest at any time we should let them
slip, etc. Mat. 28.20. Teaching them to observe all things, whatsoever I have
commanded you. John 17.20. Neither pray I for these alone, but for them which
shall believe on me through their word.

4. Because if any such be pretended, it must be tried by the word, Is. 8.20.
To the Law, and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to this word, it
is because they have no light in them; So 1 John 4.1. Beloved, believe not
every Spirit, but try the Spirits, whether they are of God, because many false
Prophets are gone abroad into the World.

5. Because they that despise ordinary means, and pretend to Vision,
Revelation, or Inspiration, are usually such, as are given up by God to a
vertiginous Spirit, and cast into the Dungeon of error, for the punishment of
other sins, Mic. 2.11. If a man walking in the Spirit of falsehood do lie, he
shall be the Prophet of this people. God will permit those that are both
deceivers, and deceived themselves to come amongst them for a Plague to them.
Sleidan gives sad instances of some given up to this fantastical frenzy, that
killed their own relations, on pretense of inspiration, and of others that
murdered 50000. in one day.

2. By word or unwritten Tradition; this also should not shake the mind of a
settled Christian, for this has no constat, no evidence of its certainty, and
would lay us open to the deceits of men, blinded by their own Interest and
Passions; and if such tradition could be produced, as has unquestionable
Authority, it must be tried by the Scripture, which is every where commended as
the public Standard, and true measure and rule, both of Faith and Manners.

3. Not by Epistle as from us.

1. Supposititious writings, which the Church in all Ages has exploded, and
received only those, which are unquestionably theirs, whose names they bear.

2. False Expositions, these are confuted by inspection of the Context, scope
of the Writer, comparing of obscure places, with plain and clear. Thus you see
what certainty God has provided for us guide us in the way to Eternal Life.

SERMON III.
2 Thessalonians. 2.3. Let no man deceive you by any means, for that day shall not
come, except there come a falling away first; And that man of sin be revealed
the Son of perdition.


IN these words we have these two things.

1. A Caution against the error, set a-foot at that time, concerning Christ's
sudden comeing to Judgment.

2. The confutation of it: it is disproved by two antecedents and forerunners
of his coming. 1. A general Apostasy, or a defection of the visible Church,
from the true State of Christianity. 2. The Revelation of AntiChrist, described
here by his names, and proper Titles, 1. That Man of Sin, 2. And Son of
Perdition.

1. Let us speak of the general Apostasy, that must be before Christ's coming to
Judgment. Except there come a falling away first.

Now concerning it, take these Propositions.

1. That Apostasy is any defection from him to whom we owe, and have performed
subjection: or a falling from that Lord to whom we owe fealty. I am sure in
religious matters, it imports a defection from our right and proper Lord:
Thus the Devil is an Apostate, because he abode not in his first estate* Jude
6. And the Angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own
habitation, he has reserved in everlasting Chains, etc. Abode not in the
truth, John. 8.44. Ye are of your Father the Devil, and the lusts of your
Father ye will do: He was a Murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the
Truth. That is, forsook his obedience to God, and so became the Ringleader of
all rebellious Creatures. So it is true of our first Parents: They were
Apostates, they did revolt from God, and their obedience to him: Therefore it
is said, Romans 5.19. By one man's disobedience many were made Sinners. So of
their Posterity, their Apostasy is described by turning back from following the
Lord, Zeph. 1.6. and departing from God, that is, his worship and service, Isa.
59.13. In transgressing and lying against the Lord, and departing away from our
God. Let us then be agreed of this notion of Apostasy, which is evident, that
it is a falling off from the obedience which we owe to our rightful Lord.

2. The Apostasy mentioned in the Text, was not civil. The falling away of many
Kingdoms from the Roman Empire: But an Apostasy of the visible Church, from him
who is Lord of the Church. I prove it partly from the persons to whom the
Apostle wrote, who did not intermingle themselves with State affairs, or were
not concerned in the Interests of the Roman Empire, further than that they
lived within the bounds of it. And this Apostasy must be understood as they
would conceive of Apostasy, with respect to the main cause wherein they were
concerned and engaged: which was the profession of Christianity. Partly, From
the use of the word, in the Christian Doctrine, falling away there, is
certainly falling away from the Faith, and purity of the Gospel, Luc. 18.13.
Which for a while believe, and in time of temptation fall away. And partly
because to them it was expressly foretold, that (...), Some shall fall away, or
depart from the Faith, 1 Timothy 4.1. Lastly, Because those who are most concerned
to maintain the notion of the civil Apostasy, from the Roman Empire, are most
notorious in this defection. It is true, the Roman Empire lost Asia, and the
places adjacent, by the Invasion of Eastern Nations, but it was thrust out of
Rome by the Rebellion of its Subjects, and chiefly by the influence of the Pope
there, as Histories manifest: So that this interpretation will not help them a
jot, but hurt them not a little. So that here is a defection from our proper
Lord, and a spiritual defection, not a civil.

3. The proper Lord of the Christian Church, is Jesus Christ, who has
purchased it with his blood, and died, and rose again, and revived, that he
might be Lord of dead and living, Romans 14.9. and again Ephesians. 5.23. Christ is the
head of the Church, and the Savior of the body. He that saves, and recovereth
the Church, out of the general Apostasy of Mankind; and restores them to their
due obedience, and proper happiness, He only is fit to be head of the Church;
and this only is Christ; we expect no opposition here.

4. The Apostasy from the Lord will be determined, chiefly by these two things.
By undermining his Authority, or destroying the interests of his Kingdom; by
these two we may understand the falling away, which is to come first.

1. By undermining his Authority. Certainly his Authority is undermined, when
others presume to usurp his place without his leave. Therefore to super-induce
an universal head of the visible Church, which Christ never appointed, is
manifestly to usurp his Authority, though the party so intruding, should
pretend to hold his Sovereignty from Christ, and under him: yet this is treason
against Christ, for here is an authority set up without, and therefore against
his consent. Put the Case in a temporal Kingdom, and the thing will be clear.
And thus the Pope is an usurping head, of a Rebellion against Christ. Where did
Christ institute him to take this Office? Tu es Petrus, is such a stale
pretense, so often baffled and defeated, and pretended upon so small grounds,
as that Christ hereby conveyed singular authority to Peter, above the rest of
the Disciples: That from Peter it descends to his Successors, and to those of
Rome (if ever he were at Rome) and not those of Antioch; that it is endless to
pursue the absurdities of this impertinent allegation. The argument holds the
more strongly, when the Pope condemns all the Churches, that will not be his
Subjects; how holy, good, and obedient to the Laws of Christ soever they be.
Surely if any thing, this is an Apostasy, or a revolt from our rightful Lord,
and to consent to this Rebellion, and Usurpation, is to be drawn into a
Conspiracy against Christ, and to submit to the head of the most pernicious
Schism, that did ever rend the Church of Christ; and to betray the Liberty of
the People of our Lord, to a Tyrannical Usurpation.

2. Or corrupting and destroying the interests of his Kingdom; certainly,
wherever there is a degeneration from the purity and simplicity of the Gospel,
the interests of Christ's Kingdom are destroyed. I fear (says the Apostle) 1
Cor. 11.3. lest by any means as the Serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty,
so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ. The
ancient, pure, Apostolic Christianity does only preserve the Interests of
Christ's Kingdom in the World; there is no way of safety but by keeping there;
for since Godliness is a mystery, and we shall see afterward, the iniquity
that is contrary, is a mystery also, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7. The mystery of iniquity does
already work, We need to be exactly careful to keep close to the doctrine,
worship, and Discipline of the first Gospel Church; for if these had remained
pure, Antichrist had never risen. Christ's Institutions would have preserved his
Interests in the World. But as these were corrupted, the Apostasy prevailed.
When the Faith of the Gospel was turned into dead opinions, and curious
questions, if not direct errors; and the worship of the Gospel was corrupted,
by giving divine honor to Saints and Angels, and turned into a theatrical
Pomp, and the Pageantry of empty Ceremonies, which eclipse the Majesty and
splendor of it; and the Discipline of the Church into a temporal domination,
and all is carried in the World by sides and interests, that Christianity
looks like another thing, a design Calculated for the present World, rather
than a serious preparation for the World to come; Then certainly, there is an
Apostasy, and a defection from Christ; however the corrupt manners of the
Church be varnished over with the name of Christianity. There is a degeneration
questionless, and that is Apostasy, in a Mystery, such as this is, though not
an open revolt from the Christ.

But to make this more evident to you, let us consider what the Kingdom of
Christ is* The Gospel Kingdom, is a Kingdom of Light, Life and Love. Opposite
to Light, is ignorance and error; to Life a Religion that consists of shows,
dead rites, and empty Ceremonies; to Love, uncharitableness, malice, and
especially hatred of the power of Godliness: now where these prevail eminently,
there is an opposite Kingdom set up to the Kingdom of Christ; certainly, a
falling off from his Kingdom. That is to say, where in opposition to Light,
error is taught, and ignorance is counted the Mother of Devotion, and people
are restrained from the means of Knowledge; as if the height of Christian Faith
and Obedience, did consist in an implicit believing what the Church believes:
and where instead of Life, men place their whole Religion on superficial Rites,
and Ceremonies, and some trifling acts of seeming Devotion, and exterior
Mortifications: and instead of love to God and Souls, all things are sacrificed
to private Ambition; and forcing Consciences with the highest penalties and
persecutions, to submit to their corruptions, There is a manifest subversion of
the interest of Christ's Kingdom. In short, Gods witnesses were slain in that
City, which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, and our Lord was crucified,
Rev. 11.8. That City which answers to Sodom for impurity, to Egypt for
Idolatry, and to Jerusalem for persecution of the Saints; there may you find
the great Apostasy.

5. This Apostasy from our Lords Authority, and the interests of his Kingdom,
is some notable and discernable Apostasy, and the Head and Patron thereof is
Antichrist; The defection is not of one, or a few, or many in diverse Churches:
there have always been back-sliders from the Faith, 1 John 2.19. They went out
from us, but they were not of us: and the Spirit of Antichrist wrought in the
Apo^tles days, 1 John 2.18. As you have heard that Antichrist shall come, even
now there are many Antichrists: and again, 1 Ioh. 4.3. we are told of the
Spirit of Antichrist, and this is that spirit of Antichrist whereof you have
heard that it should come, and even now already is it in the World. Then
described to be afterward, Verse 5. a Worldly Spirit. They are of the World,
and speak of the World, and the World hears them: Though they profess
Christianity, Carnal, Worldly Hypocrites, which never Conquered the fleshly
mind, and interest, have the Spirit of Antichrist: These obscure the light, and
obstruct the life and love of the Gospel, They that wholly affect a life of
pomp and ease in the Church. Now this has always been in all Ages: The false
Christians forget, their hopes are built upon a Crucified Christ, and are to be
derived to them from a Glorified Christ in the other World. Crucified in this
World, and Glorified in the next, which indeed are the two considerations, that
keep Christianity pure and lively: That all was purchased by a Crucified
Christ, and all is dispensed by a Glorified Christ; and I wish you would oftener
think of it. But the great Apostasy is eminently found in some external visible
Church, where these corruptions are generally received and defended. For the
head of that Church is Antichrist: where Doctrine is corrupted, and the worship
mingled with Idolatry, and the Government an Usurpation, and bent against the
Holy Seed, that desire to worship God in Spirit and in Truth; there is this
manifest revolt from, and a Rebellion against God and Christ, though they push
with the Horns of the Lamb.

That the Papists are a corrupt Sect of Christians, is beyond dispute, to any
that will try their Religion by the Scriptures; and that they are far more
corrupt than the Protestants (...) Reformed Churches, will also soon appear by
the comparison, or a view of both Churches. But whether they are so corrupt, as
to become the Seat of Antichrist, is the matter under debate. Therefore let any
one conside^, where the eminent Apostasy is to be found. Who are they that
invade Christ's Authority, by setting up an Universal Head over all C^ristians?
Who are they that establish the Doctrine of Demons, or revive the worship of a
middle sort of Powers, between God and mortal men? 1 Timothy 4.1. who through
Hypocrisy ^nvent so many lies to maintain it, and when Christians should keep
themselves from Idols, 1 Ioh. 5.21. yet in defiance of this, worship Angels,
and other Creatures, Col. 2.18. Let n^ man beguile you of your reward, in a
voluntary humility, and worshipping of Angels, etc. and erect the Images of
Saints, commanding and compelling men to adore them, and pray to them; who are
they that are not contented with the one only Mediator? 1 Timothy 2.5. For there
is one God, and one Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus. 1 Cor.
8.5. For though there be that are called Gods, whether in Heaven, or in Earth
(as there be Gods many, and Lords many.) But to us there is but one God, the
Father, of whom are all things, and we in him, and one Lord Jesus Christ, by
whom are all things, and we by him; but set up other Medi^tours of
Intercession? Who are they that plead for Indulgences? and the supererogatory
sa^^sfactio^^ of the Saints, as gathered into the Treasure of the Church, and
so profitable for the remission of sins? and condemn them who think the
contrary? Who are they that keep Beli^vers from reading the Scriptures, when
they are so expressly injoined to do it, Joh. 5.39. and Psalm. 1.2. But his
delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law does he meditate day and
night: That deny one part of the Lor^s Supper to his Disciples, notwithstanding
his Institution to the contrary? 1 Cor. 11.25, 26. After the same manner also
he took the Cup, when he had supped, saying, This Cup is the New Testament in
my blood: This do ye, as often as ye drink it, in remembrance of me: for as often
as ye eat this bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show forth the Lords death till
he come. It were endless to instance in all, I shall speak more of it in the
following Verses.

6. This Apostasy is not only forbidden, but foretold as a thing that would
certainly come to pass. This consideration is necessary for diverse reasons.

1. Because the Papists ask how this can be consistent with Christ's care of his
Church, that there should be an Universal Apostasy, and decay of Christian
Religion? who has promised, The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it.
Answ. That promise is made chiefly to the invisible Church, or community of the
Elect, not to all the visible Societies of the Christians, against whom the
Devil can and has prevailed, and does daily, to the destruction of many Souls.
And we say not that the whol^ visible Church did apostatize, though all are
faulty.

2. Because some require the time when this Apostasy began to be particularly
assigned, and noted to them, and by what persons these corruptions were first
introduced, or else deny that any such thing has been. But the Case is clear:
it began to work betimes, only it wrought in a mystery: but cannot we prove a
man to be old, unless we prove the first moment when his gray Hairs began to
appear, or his natural force to be abated? Who can tell every step of the
progress of the cor^uption of the Jewish Church, and why should the like be
required of the Christian? This Dunghill of corruption was not raised in one
Age: and suppose that in tract of time Authors be forgotten, matters of Faith
are not to be contradicted because of the defect of Hi^tory, and yet Histories
are not altogether wanting in the Case, only in things that came in by degrees,
they are not necessary. In the introducing of the general Apostasy, some erred
in the simplicity of their hearts, as the people followed Absalom, 2 Samuel
15.11. But shall we deny a thing to be done, because we cannot speak the
particular moments of time, and circumstances of them when, and how it was
done? Shall we say the pointer in the Dial passes not, because we do not see
its motion? Might not the Priests judge of a Leprosy, though they knew not how
it was contracted? Iniquity mystical did by degrees prevail.

3. Because some think if we should grant such an Apostasy, it would interrupt
the whole course of visible Christianity, and so deprive the World of a
Ministry and Ordinances, till Christ send some new Nuncio's from Heaven, or by
miracle at least authorize a new Ministry, that may be owned by the World, and
received by his people. A vain conceit! for though this Apostasy is foretold,
that it should come to pass, yet it is also foretold, that Christ will be with
the Apostles, and their Successors, to the end of the World, Math. 28.20. and
prayed for all them that should believe in him through their word, Ioh. 17.20.
and though the Church was corrupted by degrees, yet all this while it ceased
not to be a Church, nor the Officers thereof to be Christ's Ministers: when the
Ten Tribes fell away, yet God ti^l their dissolution continued the Spirit of
Prophecy amongst them; and in the Christian Church a Ministry, though many had
their calling from such who consented to the encroachments of Antichrist. God
had not so wholly cast off his people, but that there was a Ministry and
Ordinances; their Ministry was a true Ministry, and the Baptism a true Baptism,
to be owned in foro externo: for these things remain whilst any thing of
Christianity remains. In a body mangled with wounds, or all over grown with
sores, there is a life remaining; and so some Functions and Offices of Life.
God called Idolatrous Israel his people, and was not angry with them for
circumcising their Children, but for offering them to Moloch, Ezekiel. 16.20, 21.
But of this in the next Verse, where Antichrist is said to sit in the Church of
God.

2. The Revelation of Antichrist. And that man of sin shall be revealed, the
Son of perdition; where two things are notable. 1. His rise and appearing. 2.
The names and titles given to him.

1. His rise and appearing, expressed in the word [revealed] that is, that
great and chief Antichrist, upon that Apostasy or falling away, shall be extant
and show himself to the World. A thing is said to be revealed two ways; Either
when it is in being, or when it is discovered; both ways are proper here. He
shall publicly appear, exercising a Tyranny in the World, or cast off his
Vail, and show himself in his Colors: God by his Providence permits him to
be, and by the doctrine of the Gospel discovers his impostures to all those
who have no mind to be deceived.

2. The names or titles given to him, they are two. 1. The man of sin, wherein
he is compared and likened to Antiochus. 2. The Son of Perdition; wherein he is
compared and likened to Judas.

For the first, The Jews called Antiochus, The man of sin, 1 Macch. 2.48. They
gave not the power to the Sinner; in the Greek, (...), They gave not the Horn
to the Sinner; The Syriac Version has it, They suffered not the Horn of the
Sinner to be lifted up: and Verse 62. Fear not the words of the man of sin,
(...), From the words of the man the Sinner be not afraid, Now why did they
call Antiochus the man of sin? Because he sought to alter the Religion of the
People, and by cruelty to introduce a change of Worship and Idolatry, and such
Laws as he would set up: now according to this pattern, Antichrist is a man of
sin; that is, either a man given up to all sin eminently, a Sinner addicted
unto sin, and a Ringleader of others unto sin, either by fraud and violence,
or as he gives encouragements and encitements to sin; or as a special kind of
Sinner, an Usurper and Invader of the Empire of the Son of God. So was
Antiochus. So was Antichrist. Now how much open sin is practiced, allowed, and
maintained in the Papacy, I list not now to rake into, their own stories speak
enough. The Sodomy, Blasphemy, Incest, Adulteries, Sorceries, Murders,
Treasons, Parricides, which they have authorized and countenanced, Histories
witness, that hardly has the World yielded a more abominable sort of men, than
have sat in that Chair of pestilence. This I am sure of, that a man can sin no
where at so cheap a rate as in Popery, where what by dividing their sins into
mortal and venial, and these expiated by a little penance, accompanied with a
single Attrition, and bare grief and trouble, because of the punishment; what
by Faculties, Pardons, Licenses, Dispensations, Indulgences, sin is
distinguished out of the Conscience.

But because he is called the man of sin, here it comes fitly to be inquired,
whether Antichrist be an individual person? for that man of sin would seem to
be some single person; No, he is put for a Society and succession of men, that
make up the head of the Apostate State. As one Lion figured the whole Kingdom
of the Babylonians, and one Bear the Kingdom of the Medes and Persians, and one
Leopard the Kingdom of the Graecians, Dan. 7. and there the fourth Beast is the
fourth Kingdom: So one person that succession of men, that head the Revolters
from Christ. So Dan. 8. a Goat figured a succession of Kings: So the Assyrian,
Isa. 10.5. several Kings in that Empire: So Isa. 14.9. The King of Babylon,
meaning not one but many. So this man of sin does not note a single man, a but
succession of men, a body politic or corporate, under one opposite head to the
Kingdom of Christ: So the man of God is put for all faithful Ministers, 2 Timothy
3.17. So, Honor the King: 1 Pet. 2.17. Series Regum. So (...), Heb. 9.25. The
High Priest every year enters into the holy place; meaning not one, but the
succession of the order; and in reason it must needs be so here. Because
Antichrist from his beginning to his end, from his rise and Revelation, till
his ruin and destruction, will take up such a long tract of time, as cannot
fall within the Age of any one man; even from the time of the Apostles, till
the end of the World. Antichrist is the Head of the Apostasy: for here the
Apostasy, and the Revelation of the man of sin, are conjunct; now the
mysterious Apostasy could not be perfected in a short time.

2. The Son of Perdition: wherein he is likened to Judas, Joh. 17.12. None of
them is lost but the Son of Perdition. Him he resembles in Covetousness,
Treachery, and final destruction. The Term may be explained, either passively,
or actively. 1. Passively, As one condemned to everlasting destruction. As the
Son of Death, is one condemned to die, 2 Samuel 12.5. He shall be a Son of death;
we translate it, He shall surely die: So Children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. So here,
Son of Perdition. 2. Actively, Bringing destruction upon himself and others.
One that shall destroy others: and so he is called Abaddon, and Apolly^n, Rev.
9.11. and is opposite to Christ who is the Author of Salvation, Heb. 5.9. but
Antichrist of destruction: And let us see the parallel between him and Judas:
for the person is a Type, as well as the name has a sig^ificancy: Antichrist
then is like Judas, in Profession a Disciple of Christ; in Office, a Governor
of the Church; but in practice a Traitor: As they said of the blind man, John
9.9. Some said, this is he, others, he is very like him: The Pope boasts,
that his Seat is Apostolical, his Chair is Peter's Chair, and that he is the
Successor of the Apostle: Grant it, but there is an error of the person, not
of Peter but of Judas. Let us see the Parallel. 1. Judas was not a stranger,
but a pretended Friend and Apostle, Acts 1.17. He was numbered with us, and
obtained part of his Ministry. Turks and Infidels are Enemies to Christ, but
Antichrist seeks to undermine him, under a pretense of Friendship: (...), is
one in show for, and in effect against Christ: and the Beast in the Revelation
is said to push with the horns of the Lamb, Rev. 13.11. If he were a professed
Enemy, what mystery were there in it? but mystery was written upon the Woman's
forehead, Rev. 17.5. and here ver. 7. The mystery of iniquity. It is wisdom to
discern the false Prophet, Rev. 13.18. but there needs no great wisdom to
discover an open and professed Adversary.

2. He sold Christ for a small matter. Omniae Ro^ae venalia, Pardons,
Indulgences, freedom from Purgatory, all to be bought with money, and it is
small matter, considering the things put to sale; The pardon of sins; the Souls
of men redeemed with Christ's precious blood. The Antichristian State makes a
Market of Religion: Truth is made to yield to interest and profit.

3. Judas betrayed Christ with a Kiss, under a pretense of honoring him, Luke
22.48. Jesus said unto him, Judas, betrayest thou the Son of man with a Kiss?
Antichri^t is a true Adversary of Christ, though he pretend to adore him, as
those that muthered the present Prophets, would by all means beautify the Tombs
of the Prophets deceased, and bear a respect to their memories. Matthew. 23.30.
He pretends to be his Servant, yea a Servant of Servants, but is really his
Enemy. The Apostle tells us of some, that were Enemies to the Cross of
Christ, Phil. 3.18. Who to appearance such friends to the Cross, as the rabble
of nominal Christians? but they are opposers of his spiritual Kingdom, virtue,
and power of the Cross: You have Crucifixes every where, Painted, Carved,
Gilded: they are ready to worship the Cross with a holy Worship: they set it in
their Temples, Altars, wear it in their bosoms, and where ever they meet it,
show it reverence; adorn it with Gold, Silver, and precious Stones; their Popes
and Prelates have it carried before them, and are not these friends of the
Cross? No, they live a Worldly, sensual life, and all their Religion tends
thereunto: therefore Enemies of the Cross of Christ, because they mind earthly
things. This is right Antichrist-like, to betray Christ under a color of
Adoration.

4. Judas was a guide to them that came to take Christ; and one main work of
Antichrist is, to be a Ringleader in persecuting for Religion. Christ is in
Heaven, death has no more power over him: his natural body is above abuse, but
his mystical body still suffers: Acts 9.6. Why persecutest ^hou me?
Antichrist is the head of the persecuting State, others are his Emissaries and
Agents, to take Christ in his members. It is a politic Religion, that must be
carried on with Worldly Artifices, with power and Cruelty.

Lastly, The Covetousness of Judas is set forth. He was a thief, and one that
carried the bag, Joh. 12.6. England to its bitter cost knows the poling
exactions of the Papacy: All its dealing with us was to fill the Bag, out of
this Puteus inexhaustus. Now all these things should open our Eyes; we may
behold the Man of Sin, the Son of Perdition; one egg is not more like to
another, than Judas and Antichrist.

1. Use is to persuade us to a detestation of what is Antichristian. And to
that end, let us mark the progress of the Text. 1. The Apostasy made was for
Antichrist. 2. Antichrist rising upon the Apostasy, becomes a man of Sin. And
3. The Man of Sin is also the Son of Perdition.

1. Let me begin first with the falling away. There is a twofold falling away,
either from the power and practice of Godliness, or from a true Religion to a
false, particularly to Popery. 1. I begin with the falling away from the power
and practice of Godliness, though the profession be not changed; and the rather
partly, because this disposes to the entertainment of error. When a people
that are carried with great fervor and vigor of zeal for a while, lose their
affections to good, and return to a worldly sensual life, then the bias of
their hearts does easily prevail against the light of their understandings: And
so unsanctified men may the sooner be drawn to Apostasy; they never felt the
quickening virtue of Faith, and were never wrought by it to the true love of
God, or an holy and heavenly mind and life: And partly also, because if a
lively Christianity had been kept up, Antichrist had never risen in the World:
And it is the way to keep him 'out still. When the Servants slept, the Enemy
sowed Tares, Matthew. 13. A sleepy Religion, and corruption of manners, made way
for corruption of doctrine, worship, and order: It was with the Church
according to the Spouses complaint; I sleep but my heart waketh, Cant. 5.2.
Some care there was, but much drowsiness and deadness in Religion, and that
produced the great Apostasy. Partly too, because there is such a compliance
between the nature of Antichristianism, and the temper of a carnal heart: For
superstition and profaneness, grow both upon the same Root: A lothness to
displease the flesh; the sensual nature of man is such, that it is loath to be
crossed, and that breeds profaneness: For wherefore do men ingulf themselves
in all manner of sensualities, but because they are loath to deny their natural
appetites and desires, and row against the stream of flesh and blood: but will
walk in the way of their own heart, and in the sight of their own eyes, Eccles.
11.9. Again, if nature be to be crossed, it is only a little: It shall only be
in some external actions, and ob^ervances, and dead rudiments, which never kill
our lusts, nor promote the divine life: And this pleasing superstition shall
make up a Religion, which is a fit pillow for a carnal heart to sleep upon.
Popery is the easiest Religi^n for the flesh that can be found out; for it
never biteth nor disturbeth their lusts. The duties of it, are like the
Pharisees fasting, which our Lord compares to old Wine, Matthew, 9.17. Fit for
old dried skin Bottles. Well, take heed, of falling away from a lively
Godliness: no man enters seriously upon Religion, but with some tasting or
rejoicing, Heb. 6. now as this decays we fall off. The Heavenly life is
obstructed, if not choked and quite lost. Now to prevent this observe two
things. 1. Your coldness in duties. 2. Your boldness in sinning.

1. Coldness in duties, when the will and affections grow more remiss, and the
worship of God which keeps up the remembrance of him, is either omitted, or
performed perfunctorily, and in a careless and stupid manner, Jer. 2.32. My
people have forgotten me days without number. Job 27.10. Will he always call
upon God, will he delight himself in the Almighty? God charge Israel with
growing weary of him, and it began in not calling upon him, Isa. 43.22. Now
when you seldom think or speak of God, and do not keep up a delightful
Communion with him, there is a falling away.

2. Boldness sinning, when men lose their tenderness and strictness, and the
awe of God is lessened in their hearts; and they do not only sin freely in
thought, but freely in act, have not that hatred of sin, and watchfulness that
formerly, but more abandon themselves to a carnal life. You are falling off
from God a-pace, 2 Pet. 2.20. For if after they have escaped the pollutions of
the World, through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are
again entangled therein, and overcome; the latter end is worse with them than
the beginning: At first the heart checked you for sin, but you did not kindly
come off, were not troubled about it, hoped God would pardon it; and then you
are bold to venture again, and so by ^egrees are entangled in the sensual and
worldly life. Now consider the causes of it: 1. Want of Faith in God, Heb.
3.12. Take heed Brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of
unbelief, in departing from the living God. You have not a sound belief of his
being and presence. 2. Want of love to God, Rev. 2.4, 5. Nevertheless I have
(somewhat) against thee, because thou have left thy first love: Remember
therefore from whence thou art f^ln, and repen^; and do thy first works, or
else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy Candlestick out of its
place, except thou repent. Your hearts decline from that love you had to him,
and his ways; and then your work is intermitted. 3. Want of a due sense of the
World to come, Heb. 10.39. But we are not of them who draw back to perdition,
but of them that believe, to the saving of the Soul. 4. The love of the present
World, 2 Timothy 4.10. For Demas has forsaken me, having loved this present
World. The more that is valued, the more your hearts are taken off from things
to come, and the care about them; you have too great a liking, either to the
profits of the World, 1 Timothy 6.10. The love of money is the root of all evil;
which while some have coveted after, they have erred from the Faith; or else
the pleasures of the World, 2 Timothy 3.4. Lovers of pleasure more than lovers of
God. As the inclination of the heart grows stronger to sensual pleasures,
your thoughts of God are less serious and pleasing to you. Now look to these
things, left you grow quite weary of God, and the holy life, which once you had
an affection unto.

2. From a true Religion to a false: which may be done two ways. 1. Out of
corruption of mind. 2. Out of vile affection.

1. Out of weakness of mind, as those do that were never well grounded in the
truth, Ephesians. 4.14. That we henceforth be no more Children, tossed to and fro,
and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the slight of men, (and)
cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive, 2 Pet. 3.16. In which
are some things hard to be understood, which they that are unlearned, and
unstable, wrest, as they do also the other Scriptures, unto their own
destruction. Therefore we need to be established: but the forsaking of a truth
we were bred in, usually comes from some falseness of Heart: Some errors are
so contrary to the new nature, that they discern them by the unction, Joh 2.20.
But ye have an unction from the holy one, and ye know all things.

2. Out of vile affection, when they forsake the truth, for the advantages of a
fleshy Worldly life, some places to be gotten by it, etc. and as the Whore of
Babylon has a Golden Cup, Riches, and Preferments, wherewith it inviteth its
Proselytes; now these are worse than the former, for they sell the birthright,
Heb. 12.16. Lest there be any fornicator or profane person, as Esau, who for
one morsel of meat sold his birthright: Oh! Christians take beed to your
selves. Apostasy brought Antichrist into the Church: Let it not jure
postliminio, bring him back again into the Land, or into your hearts.

2. The next step is the man of sin: As the first Apostasy of Adam and Eve
brought sin into the World so this great Apostasy brought in a deluge of sin
into the Church, and defiled the Holy Society, which Christ had gathered out of
the World. Idolatry is often called Adultery, or Fornication; spiritual
uncleanness disposes to bodily, and bodily to spiritual: Usually a corrupt
state of Religion, and corrupt manners, go together: otherwise the dance and
the fiddle would not suit. The World cannot lie quiet in a course of sin, if
there be not some Libertine, Athe^stical Doctrine, and carnal worship to
coun^enance it, Rev. 11.10. And they that dwell upon the earth, shall rejoice
over them, and make merry, and shall send gifts one to another: because these
two Prophets tormented them that dwelt on the Earth.

3. The man of sin is also the Son of Perdition. 1. Actively: False Religions
strangely efferate the mind: Jude 11. These go in the way of Cain, and Hosea
5.2. Revolters are profound to make slaughters: men think no cruelty nor
dishonesty unlawful, which serves to promote the interests of their Sect, and
lose all Charity to those that are not of their way. 2. Passively, shall be
destroyed. Sometimes grievious Judgments come in this World, for the
corruptions of Religion; but in the World to come, dreadful is the end of
Apostates. 2 Pet. 2.20, 21. For if after they have escaped the pollutions of
the world, through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are
again in^angled therein, and overcome: The latter end is worse with them than
the beginning; for it had better for them not to have known the way of
righteousness, than after they had known it, to turn from the Holy
Commandment, delivered unto them.

SERMON IV.
2 Thessalonians. 2.4. Who opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God,
or is worshipped: So that he as God sits in the Temple of God showing
himself that he is God.


IN this matter of Antichrist, we have made this progress. First, that he arose
upon and by a falling away, from the ancient pure state of Christianity.
Secondly, That the Holy Ghost points him out by his names and Titles, which are
two, the man of Sin, wherein he is resembled to Antiochus, and the Son of
Perdition, wherein he is resembled to Judas. As Antiochus he is one, that by
force and power should change the Laws and Ordinances, and compel men to his
abominations. As Judas he should betray Christ by a Kiss, for Worldly gain, and
be one that is in pretense an Apostle, but indeed a real Adversary to Christ.
Now after the Apostle had pointed at him, by his names and Titles, he
describes him by his practices, wherein his names and titles are verified; for
here he proves, that he should be as Antiochus, by his exalting himself above
all that is called God, which is said of Antiochus, Dan. 11.36. And the King
shall do according to his will, and he shall exalt and magnify himself above
every God, and shall speak mavelous things against the God of gods. And as
Judas, one sitting in the Temple of God, that is, he sits there as
exercising a public Ecclesiastical Office; yea, challenging the highest Seat
in it. He sits there Potestate Regiminis, by the power of his Government; he
does Chathedratica potestat^ praesidere (Estius.) His sitting there as chief,
shows him as Judas; his sitting here as God, and exalting himself above all
that is called God, shows him Antiochus.

But to handle the words more closely, Antichrist is here set forth,

1. As opposite to Christ: (...), one set to the contrary, that is, in respect
of Pride chiefly. Christ was the pattern of humility, Antichrist is the King of
Pride: Christ would not so much as assume to himself an Authority to divide the
Inheritance between two Brethren, Luke 12.14. Man, who made me a Judge, or a
Divider over you? but Antichrist will depose Kings, and dispose of Kingdoms.

2. The instances of his Pride. 1. In exalting himself above all human power,
who exalts himself above all that is called God, or is worshipped: 2. An
usurpation of divine honor; he as God, sits in the Temple of God, showing
himself that he is God.

Let us open these things more particularly.

1. He is represented in the term (...), as one diametrically opposite to
Christ, and contrary to him, who is the true Head, and Lord of the Church, Acts
10.36. He is Lord over all; but Antichrist opposes himself, that is, shows
himself in a quite contrary appearance. That which is most remarkable in
Christ, and should be in all his followers, is humility. He expressed a
wonderful contempt of the riches and greatness of the World, and all the honor
which is of man; taking the form of a Servant, and making himself of no
reputation, and living a mean inferior life. He came not to be ministered unto,
but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many, Matthew. 20.28. He kept
no state, nor affected pomp of Attendants, though he were Lord of all, yet he
became poor to make us rich, 2 Cor. 8.9. But it may be this was proper to him,
does he expect it from his Servants and Officers, in the Church? Yes, this is
the grace which he has recommended to all his Followers: Matthew. 11.29. Learn
of me, for I am meek and lowly. But especially to the Ministers of the Gospel:
our Lord foresaw what spirit would work in them, and therefore he forewarned
them of Pride and Lordliness, Matthew. 20.25, 26. Ye know that the Princes of the
earth do exercise dominion over them, and they that are great exercise
Authority upon them: but it shall not be so among you, but whosoever will be
great among you, let him be your Minister. Among Christ's Servants, he that is
chief, must be chief in service; even as a servant unto all, Luke 22.26. He
that is chief^, as he that does serve. Domination, Greatness, Principality and
Power, is allowed in the Civil State, for there it is necessary; yet it is
excluded the Church. This affecting pre-eminence and chiefness is the bane of
the Church. It is taxed as a great sin in Diotrephes, 3 Ioh. 9. Be it either
over their fellow Laborers, or the people of the Lord. You see how tender the
Apostles were in this point; ever^ where they disclaim this affectation of
Lordship, 2 Cor. 1.24. Not that we are Lords of your Faith, but helpers of you^
joy. And Peter recommendeth it to his Fellow Elders, 1 Pet. 5.3. Neither as
being Lords over Gods Heritage, but being examples to the flock. And if the
Apostles would not assume Lordship, who may? It is true, there is a Government
in the Church, and the people are to obey their Guides, Heb. 13.17. And to have
them highly in honor, for their works sake, 1 Thessa. 5.13. but yet the
Pastors of the Church should govern by Light and Love, not by pomp and force,
and not be known by such pomp and Authority as begets fear. Well now, let us
see the opposite state. If humility and meekness be in the very Essence of
Christianity, and woven throughout the whole frame of it, then it is
Antichristian to be Lordly, and proud, especially in them who pretend to be
Successors of Christ, and his Apostles. Now in the Pope and his Adherents, you
will see the ^ost odious pride set forth, that ever the World was conscious
unto, without any Cloak and shame. And all their business is to get power: what
designs they have for preferment in the World, how studiously they have, and do
prosecute it, they blush not to own openly, before Angels or Men. This worldly
Ambition to rise higher and higher, is their design and Trade of Life. As the
Bishop of Rome, at first from the chief Pastor of that City, affected to be an
Archbishop over the Suburbian Towns and Cities: then a Patriarch over many
Cities, and because two opposed him in Italy a long time, Ravenna and Milane,
he gets power over them, and then he must be Oecumenial Bishop over all the
World. But Constantinople resists for a long time, yea, arrogate^h within the
Empire the same Titles. Who more earnest against it, than Gregory whom they
call the Great, and more forward to charge the assuming of this Title as
Antichristian? But then, when once they began by powerful means, and many
indirect courses, to be owned as universal Bishop: then enlarging their bo^nds,
not only over the Ecclesiastical Power, but Civil, and all Kings and Princes
must stoop to them, as well as Bishops. So that here was the progress and
gradation, first from the Chief Presbyter, a Bishop over many Presbyters in the
same City; then a Metropolitan over many Bishops, in one Province; then a
Patriarch over many Provinces, in one Diocese (for i^ the Roman Division there
were seven Provinces in one Diocese) then Universal Bishop in the whole World,
then the only Shepherd and Bishop, and others but his Substitutes; pretty steps
of ambitious incroaching! But yet exalting himself further, challenging all
power in Heaven and Earth. And the like is practiced by his followers (at this
day in the Church of Rome) from private Priests, they grow up into some
Prelature, as Archdeacons, Deans, then a Bishopric, then a better or richer;
then Archbishops, Cardinals, then Pope. And the Devil is grown so impudent by
the help of these Churchmen, as that it is counted a great piece of spiritual
wisdom, publicly owned in the World, to be able by these steps to get higher
and higher, and Lord it over God^ Heritage; as if ambitious affectation were
the honor of Christianity, and Gospel humility would expose the Church to
scorn; and pomp and grandeur were a greater Ornament to Religion than Gra^e:
when in the mean time they have nothing to prove them to be true Pastors of the
Church, but Judas his Kiss, a little owning of Christ to countenance their
Ambition.

Secondly, the particular instances, wherein the pride of Antichrist is set
forth, are two. 1. His exalting himself above all humane Powers: He opposes
and exalts himself above all that is called God, or is worshipped. Here the
object is set forth by two terms. 1. All that is called God. 2. Or worshipped.
They both belong to the same thing.

1. That which is called God, that is Magistrates, Princes, and Kings, Psalm.
81.1. He judges among the Gods, and verse the sixth, I have said ye are Gods,
all of you are Children of the most high: and Joh: 10.34, 35. It is written in
your Law, I said ye are Gods. If he call them Gods, unto whom the word of God
came, and the Scripture cannot be broken, etc. God has clothed Magistrates
with his own honor, so far, that he has put his name upon them: and their
eminency is a part of his Image, as it lies in Superiority, Dominion, and
Power. Though Magistrates be but like their Brethren, as to their common
nature, yet in respect of their Office, they have the glorious Title of [ Gods]
conferred upon them, as being his Vicegerents, and bearing his person in
Government, they are honored with his name. So that without impeachment of
Blasphemy, those that excel in the Civil power may be called Gods. Now over
these Antichrist exalts himself, that is, above all Kings and Potentates.

Secondly, The other notion is, (...), we render it, or is worshipped, the
Greek word is, whatever is held in the highest degree of reverence, whatever is
August, or Illustrious, as the Emperors of Rome were called (...), Acts 25.21.
Paul appealed to be referred to the hearing of Augustus; it is (...), not
Augustus Caesar, who was then dead, but his successor. Well then, here is the
Character of Antichrist: That he exalts himself above all Civil Authority,
Auth^^^ed and permitted of God, not only above ordinary Magistrates, but Kings
and Emperors. Now we find in History no less than twenty Kings and Emperors,
trampled under foot by the Pope of Rome, some of whom he had excommunicated,
and deposed from their Kingdoms, and their people dispensed withal, in denial
of their subjection to them; others brought to cruel shameful Deaths, and their
Kingdoms miserably rent and torn, to the destruction of Millions of men, by
their means. He that has any knowledge of the Histories in Christendom, cannot
but know these things; how he treads on their necks, kicketh off their Crowns
with his Feet, and has brought them to the vilest submissions. And if Kings
and Emperors have received more spirit and courage, and the Popes of Rome
learned more modesty now adays, thanks is due to the light of the Gospel, which
has shined so far, and to such a degree, as to the consuming of Antichrist,
though not to his utter destruction.

Secondly, The next instance of his pride, is his usurpation of divine honor,
expressed in two clauses. 1. The one shows the usurpation it self, That he as
God, sits in the Temple of God. 2. The other, the degree of it, showing
himself as God. Both must be explained and vindicated.

1. For t^^ usurpation it self, he sits as God in the Temple of God. By the
Temple of God, is meant the Church, 1 Cor. 3.16, 17. Know ye not, that ye are
the Temple of God, and the spirit of God dwells in you: if any man defile the
Temple of God, him shall God destroy; for the Temple of God is holy, which
Temple ye are. So 2 Cor. 6.16. What agreement has the Temple of God with
Idols? for ye are the Temple of the living God. The external visible Church
which professes the Faith of Christ, and bears his name. So that the place
wherein Antichrist shall arise, is the visible Christian Church: not Rome
Ethnic, but Christian.

But is then the Church of Rome, the Church of Christ? Answ. It was one part of
it before it was perverted; it usurpeth still that name, it retains some
relic of a Church mangled as it is: (says Calvin in his Epistles) I think I
have given some strong reasons, that it yet retains some show of a Church.
Now in this Temple of God he sits as an Officer and Bishop there, as I
before explained it: And whereas other Princes are said to Reign so many years,
the Pope is said to sit so long. It Is his Seeds, his Cathedral or Seat. And
again, here he is said to sit as God, that is, as God Incarnate: for Christ is
the true and proper Lord of the Church. None should Reign there but he. And the
name of this Man of sin is not Antitheos, but (...), not one that directly
invadeth the properties of the supreme God, but of God Incarnate, or Christ as
Mediator: he sits negatively, not as a Minister, but positively as supreme
Lord upon Earth, whom all must adore and worship; and Kings and Princes kiss
his feet. In short, he usurpeth the Authority due to Christ. Now I shall prove
that by a double argument.

1. By usurping the Titles due to Christ. For he that will make bold with
names, will make bold with things: as to be, Sponsus Ecclesiae; the Husband of
the Church. As Innocent called the Church Sponsam suam, his Spouse. Caput
Ecclesiae, the head of the Church, which is proper to the Savior of the body.
Supreme, visible, and universal head, which only Christ is, who has promised
to be with her to the end of the World, and will be visible to those who do at
length approach his Court in Heaven, where his Seat is. To be chief Pastor:
Christ's own Title, And when the chief Shepherd shall appear, 1 Pet. 4.5. To be
Pontifex Maximus, The greatest High Priest. Whereas Christ alone is called the
High priest of our profession, Heb. 3.1. and the great High Priest over the
House of God, Heb. 4.14. So his Vicar General upon Earth, whereas the ancient
Church attributed this to the Holy Ghost, calling it Vicariam vim spiritus
sancti, he supplies his room and absence. Now Titles including Power, certainly
they are not to be usurped without Warrant. Therefore to call the Pope the
chief and only Shepherd, and the like; It is to usurp His Authority to whom
these things originally belong.

Secondly, He does usurp the thing employed by the Titles; the Authority over
the Church which is only due to God Incarnate. Supreme Authority may be
considered, either as to the claim, right, property, and pre-eminence, which
belong to it, or to the exercise.

1. The claim and right pretended. He sits as God in the Temple of God, that
is, by virtue of his office there, claims the same power that Christ had,
which is fourfold

1. An unlimited power, over all things, both in Heaven and Earth. This was
given to Christ, Matthew. 28.18. and the Pope, as his Vicar challenges it. But
where is the Plea and ground of the claim? For one to set up himself as a
Vice-God, without Warrant, is Rebellion against Christ. To set himself in his
Throne without his leave; surely none is fit to have this Authority, that has
not his power to back and to administer and govern all things for the Churches
good, which power God would trust in the hands of no Creature.

2. An Universal Headship and Supremacy, over all the Churches of Christ. Now
this supreme power over all Christians, is the right of God Incarnate, and
whosoever challenges it, sits as God in the Temple of God: and it is very
derogatory to the comfort of the faithful, that they should in all things
depend upon one man as their supreme Pastor, or else be excluded from the hope
of Salvation: Certainly this power as to matter of fact, is impossible to be
managed by any man, considering the vast extent of the World, and the variety
of Governments, and different Interests, under which the people of God find
shelter, and protection; and the multitude and diversity of those things which
are comprised in such a Government; And as to matter of right, it i^
^acrilegious. For Christ never instituted a^^ such Universal Vicar and Bishop.
It is a dignity too high for any Creature: none is fit to be Universal Head of
the Church, but one that is God as well as Man.

3. Absolute Authority, so as to be above control. When a mortal man should
pretend to be so absolute as to give no account of his actions, that it shall
not be lawful to be said to him, what do thou? and all his Decrees must be
received without Examination or Complaint, this is such a Sovereignty as
belongs to none but God, Job. 9.12. Behold he takes away, who will hinder him?
who can say unto him what do thou? Now this is in their Canon law, that the
Pope is to be judged by no man, that though he should lead Millions of Souls
into Hell, none can say, Domine cur ita facis?

4. Infallibility and freedom from error, which is the property of God: he
neither is deceived, nor can deceived. Let God be true and every man a Liar.
Now that corrupt and fallible man should arrogate this to himself, such an
unerring in judgment, is to usurp divine honor, in matter of right, and in
matter of fact. For the Pope to arrogate this, is as great a contradiction to
all sense and reason, as if a man sick of the Plague, or any other mortal
Disease, should say, that he was immortal, and in that part wherein the Disease
was seated.

2. As to the exercise, there are two acts of supreme Authority.

1. Legislation 2. Judgment
1. Legislation: It is the peculiar and incommunicable property of Christ, to
be Lord and Lawgiver to the Church, Isa. 33.22. The Lord is our Judge, The Lord
is our Lawgiver; the Lord is our King, he will save us. God alone has such
interest in his people, as to prescribe supreme or universal Laws to them, and
we are his Subjects, Jam. 4.12. There is one Lawgiver who is able to save and
to destroy. Now whosoever will make Laws, that shall immediately bind the
Conscience, they invade Christ's Sovereignty. This is spiritual Tyranny, and the
worst sort of Tyranny, to arrogate a power over the subjects of Christ, and
their Consciences, as Lord of their faith. He that takes upon him to rescind
and make void his Institutions and Ordinances, and set his own in their place,
and give that reverence and honor to them which only belongs to the
Ordinances of Christ, He is Antichrist, whatever he be.

2. As to Judgment. It is an exercising an Authority no less than Divine. So to
take upon him to absolve man from his duty to God, or the penalty which sin
has made his due. The one is done by Dispensations, the other by Indulgences.
And therefore whoever by Dispensations, antiquates and dispenses with the Laws
of God, himself is thus guilty: As dispensing with marrying the Brothers Wife.
Nay, one of the Popes dispensed with one that took his own Sister to Wife. I do
not allege this so much for the particula^ facts, but to show the power which
they challenged to be inherent in themselves. Bellarmine, says Christ, has
given Peter and his Successors, a power faciendi peccatum non peccatum, to make
a sin, to be no sin; and again, If the Pope should err in forbidding Virtues,
and commanding Vices: the Church were bound to believe Vices to be good, and
Virtues to be evil; which certainly, is to set man in the place of God. 2. As
to Indulgences, as to pretend to give Pardons for sin for so many years; a
thing that God himself never did; to pardon the sin before it was committed;
that is, to give a license to sin. So for the highest crimes to absolve men,
upon a little attrition, or trouble about the sin, to do all this and more than
this, as of right, is to sit in the Church of God as God.

2. And showing himself that he is God, that is meant, not of what he
professes in words, but what he does in deed. It is not said, that he says he
is God, but (...), he shows himself, or sets forth himself as God: the reason
of the thing shows it. 1. Antichrist gets power by seduction, or the
deceiveableness of unrighteousness, therefore does not openly call himself the
true and only God. He is represented as a false Prophet, that speaks lies in
Hypocrisy. If one would openly and plainly profess himself to be God, he might
be a frantic Usurper, but could not be a cunning Seducer, and few would be so
stupid and senseless as to be led by him. 2. Antichrist whoever he be, is to be
a Christian by profession, and to have a high and great charge among the
visible Professors of Christianity. He is a secret Adversary, that grows upon
the Apostasy, or degeneration of the Christian State. Now such pretend
observance, and obedience to Christ, and therefore he would not openly declare
himself to be God; and he sits in the Temple and Church of God as before.
And it is a mystery; All which imply crafty conveyance, and that he does not
openly assume the Godhead, but slily and secretly; which does not mend the
matter; for the insinuating, devouring, unsuspected Enemy, is the most
perilous and pernicious: as Ioab to Amasa, and Judas to Christ. 3. Antichrist
is plainly a man; now for a man to disanul all Religion and set up himself
directly as God, is improbable. Nero, Nebuchadnezzar, Simon Magus would be
adored as Gods, they did not deny other Gods, nor a greater God above them.
Therefore it is the arrogance of works is intended: If Antichrist will show
himself as God, certainly he will sweeten his Blasphemy with some Hypocrisy, as
that he is the Vicar and Vicegerent of God. 4. His showing himself as God, is
either accepting, or doing such things, which if they did rightly belong to
him, they would show that he is God. Two persons I find in Scripture charged
for usurping divine honors: The one Herod Agrippa, who was smitten by an Angel
for not giving God the glory when the people cried, the voice of God and not of
man, Acts 12.22. his fault was, accepting what was ascribed by others. The
other is the Prince of Tire, Ezech. 18.2. Because thy heart is lifted up, and
thou have said, I am God, I sit in the seat of God, in the midst of the sea^,
yet thou art a man, and not God, though thon set thy heart as the heart of God.
His fault was taking upon him as if he were God, to accept divine honors, to
do those things which would make him equalize himself to our Lord Christ
Blessed for ever; so does he show himself that he is God. 1. His accepting
Antichrists Disciples, who call him our Lord God the Pope. Supremum numen in
Terris, a certain Deity upon Earth. That the Pope has the same Consistory with
God, and the same Tribunal with Christ: That he is Lord of Heaven and Earth:
That from him there are no appeals to be made, no not to God himself. That the
Pope may do all that God does, that he is the Husband of the Church, and the
foundation of Faith. In the Council of Lateran, Sess. 4. Alter Deus in Terra;
that the words of the Pope in Cathedra, are for certainty of truth, equal to
the Scriptures; that he can change the form of Sacraments delivered by Christ,
or Decree contrary to Scripture. If any do object, that these were the
applauses of his Flatterers and claw-backs; it is true they were so uttered;
but those flatteries of the Canonists and Jesuits, do come to be received
Doctrines among them: And whereas diverse Popes have directed special
Commissions for perusal of the works of the learned, with authority to expunge
and purge out whatsoever is not Orthodoxal, many better things have come under
censure, but these things stand still, as being very pleasing to his Holinesses
humility, and so not to be altered. Besides many of these things have been
spoken to his face without rebuke. Conc. Latt. Sess. 2. He is called the High
Priest and King that is to be adored by all, and most like unto God. Sess. 9.
It is said, the Aspect of thy Divine Majesty dazleth our Eyes, and applies to
him that of the 72. Psalm, All the Kings of the Earth shall worship him, and
all Nations shall serve him. Now to accept and approve of these flatterers, is
to show himself that he is God. 2. By doing such things as if he were God, not
by the usurpation of the formal name, as arrogating to himself such things as
belong to God, his right and property, to take upon himself to be Lord of
Consciences, to command what Faith is to be believed, suppressing the true
doctrine of Christ, and setting up his own Inventions, dispensing with Gods
Laws, taking upon him to pardon sins. One Article for which Luther was
condemned is this, That it is not in the power of the Church, or Pope, to make
new Articles of Faith: another, That the best penitence of all is the new life.
Qui facit Deos Divosque Deo major est. The Pope does Canonize Saints, and his
Decrees must be received as Oracles, etc.

The Use, is to give us a clear discovery where to find Antichrist: every
tittle of this is fulfilled in the Bishop of Rome, that we need no longer be in
doubt, and say, Is this he that should come, or shall we look for another? Who
is the (...), but he that opposes himself, to that humble state and frame
wherein Christ left the Church, and will be Prince of all Pastors, and swear
them to his obedience, and has made such troubles in the World to make himself
acknowledged for Head and Chief? Who is he that exalts himself above all that
is called God, and is August in The World? but he that takes upon him to
deprive and depose Emperors, Kings and Princes, by his Excommunications,
Suspensions, Interdictions, and Decrees, discharging Subjects of their
Allegiance and Oaths; and giving away their Kingdoms: that does Crown and
Uncrown Emperors with his feet, and tread upon them as one would do upon a
Viper? Who is he that sits as God, in the Temple of God, that is, affects
the honor due to our Lord Jesus Christ? but he that does thus imperiously
aspire [ subesse Romano Pontifici definimus esse de necessitate salutis] that
takes upon him a power to make a new Creed, and that we are bound to obey him;
that says he can change the things which God has commanded in his word, and
dispense with them, and so by his Decrees make the Commandment of God of none
effect; and to forgive sins, not only already committed, but to be committed;
which God himself never would do; that lords it over Consciences, enslaving the
World to his Usurpations: In short, that will be obeyed in those things which
God has forbidden; and take upon himself an Office, which no humane Creature
is capable of. Who is he that shows himself that he is God, but he that
suffers himself to be decked with the spoils of Gods own Attributes; to be
Optimum Maximum, the best and chiefest, our Lord God the Pope, a visible Deity,
and will be adored by all the Potentates of the Earth, with such veneration, as
greater could not be given to Christ himself if he were corporally present, and
will have all the World to submit to his Decrees, as being infallible: that
challenges a power over Angels, Purgatory, and Hell? These things are as clear
as daylight, and ought to be regarded by us, partly that we may bless God, who
has freed us from this Tyranny, and have a liberty of judging of truth and
falsehood, out of his holy and blessed word: Partly, that we may stand fast in
this Liberty. Those that were never Pope-bitten, know not the mischiefs that
attend this spiritual Tyranny, and God grant that we never more know it to our
bitter cost. Therefore as Samuel dealt with the Israelites when they would cast
off the Theocracy, or Gods Government, under which they had been well and
safely governed, unless they forfeited the protection by their own sin, that
they might be like all the Nations round about them, 1 Samuel 8.20. Samuel
tells them, what would be the manner of the King, that should reign over
them, 1 Samuel 8.11, 12, 13. And he said, this shall be the manner of the King
that shall reign over you, he will take your Sons, and appoint them for
himself, for his Chariots, and to be his Horsemen; and some shall run before
his Chariots, and he will appoint him Captains over thousands, and Captains
over fifties, and will set them to ear his ground, and to reap his Harvest, and
to make his instruments of War, and instruments of his Chariots; and he will
take your Daughters to be Confectionaries, and to be Cooks, and to be Bakers:
And he will take your Fields, and your Vineyards, and your Olive-Yards, even
the best of them, and give them to his Servants, etc. So if such a wanton
humor should possess us, that we must have the Religion of the Nations round
about us, consider whom you receive spiritually to reign over you. The King of
Pride, who opposes, and exalts himself above all that is called God, or is
worshipped, etc. one that will not only devour your substance, but lord it over
your Consciences, and put out the eye of your reason, that you may the better
swallow his damnable errors, pestilent. Superstitions and Idolatries, and bold
usurpation on the Authority of Christ, or else burn your Bodies with temporal
fire, and cast out your name as one to be condemned to that which is eternal.
It is easy to open the Flood-gate, but when that is done, it is not so easy to
call back the Waters: and when you come to discern the difference between the
blessed Yoke of Christ, and the Iron Yoke of Antichrist, it will be too late
for a remedy to repent of your error.

The second Use is, to show us how things should be carried in the true and
reformed Christianity.

1. With such meekness, modesty, and mortification, that our Religion may be
known to be established by a Crucified Lord, whose doctrine and example do
visibly and eminently hold forth the contempt of the World. The pride and
ambition of the Pastors of the Church, has been the cause of all the evil in
it; therefore nothing so unsuitable to the Gospel, as a domineering spirit; we
that are to preach Heavenly mindedness, and self-denial, should not affect the
greatness of the World, lest our lives contradict our doctrine.

2. How eminent and exemplary we should be in our obedience to Magistrates. For
this is to be opposite to the Antichristian Estate. God is very tender of the
honor of Civil Powers and Authorities, and will have every soul to be subject
to them, Romans 13.1. Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers, for there
is no power but of God, the powers that be, are ordained of God; and again, 1
Pet. 2.13. Submit to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be
to the King as Supreme, or to Governors, as them that are sent by him. Great
respect and submission is due to them for Gods sake, and that we may commend
Religion to the profane World, and live down the reproaches of the Gospel. They
were branded as wicked men, that were not afraid to speak evil of Dignities,
that despise Governments in their own hearts, or weaken the esteem of it in the
hearts of others by their speeches, 2 Pet. 2.10. But chiefly them that walk
after the flesh, in the lust of uncleanness, and despise Government;
presumptuous are they, self-willed, they are not afraid to speak evil of
dignities.

3. What a wickedness it is to usurp divine honors. We do so when we take that
praise and admiration to our selves, which is only due to God, Acts 3.12. And
when Peter saw it, he answered unto the people. Ye men of Israel why marvel ye
at this, or why look ye so earnestly on us, as though by our power or holiness
we had made this man to walk? The God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Jacob,
the God of our Fathers, has glorified his Son Jesus, etc. and his name,
through faith in his name, has made this man strong whom ye see and know. Yea,
the faith which is by him has given him this perfect soundness in the presence
of you all.

SERMON V.
2 Thessalonians. 2.5, 6, 7. Remember ye not, that while I was with you, I told you
these things.

And now ye know what withholdeth, that he might be revealed in his time.

For the mystery of iniquity does already work; only he who now lets will
let, till he be taken out of the way.


IN these words is,

1. A Digression, calling them to remembrance of what he delivered by word of
mouth.

2. A Progress, in the further description of Antichrist. He had hitherto been
described 1. By his Names and Titles. 2. His nature and properties; now 3. By
the time of his appearing; where
take notice of three things.

1. That Antichrist was not then revealed; because there was an Impediment
hin^ering his Revelation.

2. That though he was not then revealed, yet that mystery of iniquity did
begin to work, but secretly.

3. That when that impediment shall be removed, then Antichrist shall be
revealed.

First, I begin with his putting them in mind of what he had told them before
by word of mouth, Remember ye not that when I was yet with you I told you these
things. This shows the certainty and usefulness of this Doctrine; for though
the event were not to be accomplished in their days, yet he taught them before
when present, and now repeateth it again when absent; he preached it in
private, and now writes it for public good, and labors to confirm the
truth of it, and fasten it upon their memories.

Observe then, that the Doctrine of Antichrist is a profitable Doctrine, and a
point very necessary to be preached, and known.

1. It is a point very necessary, to admonish and warn the faithful, that they
be not circumvented with these delusions, and be found in the opposite state to
Christ Jesus, and the interests of his Kingdom. God has blown his Trumpet,
Rev. 18.5. Come out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and
that ye receive not of her Plagues: God calls his people out of spiritual
Babylon, it is dangerous and unsafe being there; if we would escape Babylons
punishments, we must escape her sins, not live in that Communion and Society,
where there are such Temptations to Idolatry, and other detestable enormities.
It is disputable, whether the errors of Popery be damnable? or there be any
possibility of Salvation in that Religion? some deny all possibility; others
abating from the rigou^ of that opinion, assert a very great difficulty, 1 Cor.
3.13. Saved as by fire; if so much Christianity left as to save them, it is
with much ado: But the question is not about our benefit, but our duty; not
whether possibly we may be saved, but what is the way the Lord will have us to
walk in; and if there were possibility, or probability of Salvation in the way,
in the general, yet there is very little or none for them that live in a known
sin, and especially in a sin of such a dangerous nature, as abetting an
opposite faction to Christ, such as is that of Antichrist.

2. It is necessary to fortify and forewarn the people of God against a double
Temptation. (1.) Against Scandal. (2.) Against Persecutions.

1. Against Scandal; it is a dangerous temptation to Atheism, to see
Christianity so corrupted, and debauched by a vile submission to serve Worldly
ends, and turned into the Pageantry of empty and ridiculous Ceremonies, which
beget scorn and contempt of it in the minds of all considering Beholders; and
therefore there are more Atheists in Rome and Italy, than in other Countries:
supernatural things, disguised with a vain pomp, lose their reverence, and do
not alarm the Conscience, but harden the heart in a settled Atheism, and
contempt of Christ: Now it is a mighty stay to the heart, to see that this
Degeneration was foreseen and foretold, John 16.1. These things have I spoken
to you, that you should not be offended. Mat. 18.7. Woe unto the World because
of offenses, for it must needs be that offenses come, but woe to that man by
whom the offense comes.

2. Against Persecutions; for the man of sin is also a Son of Perdition, a
destroyer of the Saints, and makes havoc of the people of God; now it is
grievous when Christians suffer by Christians, and we may have many doubtings
and misgivings about our cause; But when Antichrist is clearly discovered, we
submit the more cheerfully to suffer the hardest things under his Tyranny; for
suffering under Antichristian Persecution, is Martyrdom and suffering for
Christ, as much as suffering under Pagan Persecution, Rev. 14.13. And I heard a
voice from Heaven, saying unto me, write Blessed are the dead which die in the
Lord, from henceforth, etc. not only the Primitive Martyrs, who were put to
death by Heathens, but those that are condemned by Christians, and burnt for
Heretics, those are Martyrs also.

3. That we may the better understand true Christianity; (...), opposites
illustrate each other; the two opposite States are Christianity, and
Antichristianity; the one is a mystery of Godliness, 1 Timothy 3.16. the other a
mystery of Iniquity; the design of the mystery of Godliness is to recover men
from the Devil, the World, and the Flesh unto God; the other to seduce men from
God to the Devil, the World, and the Flesh again; and that by corrupting the
former mystery, or the most excellent Institution, that ever the World was
acquainted with, for the ennobling and refining man's nature: so that Christ's
Religion is turned against himself, to lull men's Consciences asleep, whilst
they gratify the lusts of the Eyes, the lusts of the Flesh, or live in Pride of
Life; the Devil is gratified by all sin, but especially he is (...), as
Synesius calls him, one that delights in Idols, as knowing this is the best
way to make men brutish, or to live in an oblivion or neglect of God; for an
Idol is a teacher of lies, Habak. 2.18. does imprint upon the mind carnal and
false conceptions of a Deity.

4. To confirm us in the truth of the Christian Faith, when we see the
Prophecies of it expressly fulfilled; for that is the Lords direction to know a
true Prophet; Deuteronomy 18.22. If the thing come to pass, and the event does
punctually answer the Prediction; but when Prophet speaks in the name of the
Lord, and the thing follow not, nor come to pass. that is the thing which the
Lord has not spoken. Now the Apostles did not only teach the Church the
Doctrine of Christianity, but by a Prophetic Spirit, and Divine Revelation,
foretold things to come, and among these the great thing which is to happen,
and come to pass before Christ's second coming, is Antichrist, or the appearing
of the man of sin. Therefore that we may not doubt of what is past, nor suspect
what is further to come, it is good to study these Prophecies, and know, they
are to be fulfilled in their time, that we may say, that God has kept touch
with the World hitherto in all the Predictions of the word, will not fail at
last.

Use (1.) To reprove them, that think this is a curious point not to be
searched into; why then did God reveal it, and that so often by St Paul, by St
John, in so many Prophetical Representations of it? surely it is not curiosity
to search into things revealed, but to intrude our selves into things hidden,
and which God has put under a vail of Secresy: It is true, men must know their
measure, and not attempt to run before they can go, and venture upon obscure
points, before well versed in plain; and it is true in more abstruse points,
men must not rashly define; but soberly and modestly to enquire, and compare
Predictions with plain Events, this is no way culpable.

To reprove those, that are so impatient of giving a little attendance to such
Doctrines for a while, and think at least matter more profitable should be
insisted on; they are persuaded enough already. It is well if it be so; but
those that stand, should take heed lest they fall; and presumptuous confidence
soonest gives out, and forsakes Christ. I would but propound this Argument to
them, If it were profitable for them that were to go out of the body long
before Antichrist was revealed, to be taught these things again and again, and
they be charged to keep these things in remembrance; certainly it is more
profitable for others, that live at the time when these things are in being,
and the temptation is at the next door, ready to break in upon them; surely it
is profitable to discover Antichrist, to reduce those that are gone astray,
much more to prevent a revolt, that we may not return to this bondage after a
deliverance from it.

Secondly, I come to consider the time of his Appearing, and there to observe
three things.

That Antichrist was not then revealed, because there was an impediment
hindering his Revelation, and now ye know what withholdeth, that he might be
revealed in his time, that is, what keeps him back for the present, until the
time that God had prefixed. The Apostle does not expressly mention what this
(...), or impeachment was, either because he thought it enough to appeal to
their memory and knowledge; now ye know what withholdeth: there was no need of
repeating that, which was formerly mentioned, they sufficiently knew: or
partly, because he would not give the heathen an occasion of raising a
persecution against the Christians, if they should come to understand, that one
professing himself a Christian, should erect a Throne for himself at Rome, and
that the Empire should be taken away to make way for him. The Romans were very
jealous, (...), because they talked of these innocent notions, the Kingdom of
Christ, and the Kingdom of Heaven, they were apt to accense them laesae
Majestatis, as if they would with open force and violence attack, or assault
the Empire: therefore the Apostle had spoken that, which he thought not fit to
write in an Empire: or lastly, he leaves it in this obscurity, because all
Prophecies were but darkly uttered, that their accomplishment be not hindered;
since it is the will of God, that such events shall fall out in the World, and
out of Indulgences to his people, he is pleased to foretell this: It is not
meet, that the Prediction should either be too clear, or too dark; if too
clear, the event would not follow, nor Gods Government of the World be carried
in such a way, as might suit with the liberty of mankind; if too dark, the
comfort and caution of Gods people would not be sufficiently provided for.

But what was this Impediment? The Ancients generally determined it to be the
Roman Empire; for so Tertullian, The Empire of Rome, which was to be divided
into ten Kingdoms; and reason shows it, because the Man of sin could not rise
to his Greatness as long as the Roman Empire s^ood; why? because he that was to
exalt himself above all that is called God, and above all that is August, could
not bring his designs to pass, as long as the Roman Empire retained its
Majesty; but when once that was eclipsed and removed, then he was to be
revealed is his time; all things have their time, and so the man of sin. Well
then, it was the Roman Empire that stays the manifestation of Antichrist, he
being to build his Tyranny on the ruins and wrack thereof; and therefore the
Primitive Christians prayed, pro mora finis, that it would please God to defer
the fall of this Empire, fearing worse things upon the dissolution thereof.

Now this impediment shows both the Time and Place of Antichrist; and Time
and Place, next to the nature and state of things, are the best circumstances
to discover him. (1.) The Place, Antichrists Seat and Throne was to be there,
where the Seat of the Roman Empire was; and St John tells us, it was situated
on the City that had seven Hills, Rev. 17.9. The seven heads are seven
Mountains, on which the Woman sits; and that is Rome, which is famously
taken notice of to be seated on seven Hills or Mountains. Now Antichrist had
not room as long as the seat was filled with the Roman Emperor, for this seat
could not be filled with two Imperial Powers at once, especially with such a
Tyrannical Power, as that of Antichrist is, exalting it self, not only above
Kings and Kingdoms, but (...), the August State of the Emperors themselves;
there was no exalting this Chair, till there was a removal of the Throne; while
the Roman Emperor possessed Rome, the Seat was full, and till it was void, it
could not be the Seat of Antichrist.

(2.) The next circumstance is the Time, when the impediment is taken away,
when the Roman Empire is so weakened and removed from Rome, that this Power may
grow up, and that was when the Roman Empire was divided into ten Kingdoms, as
Tertullian says, and is agreeable enough with the Prophecy of St John, Rev.
17.12. And the ten horns which thou saw, are ten Kings, which have not
received their Kingdoms as yet, but receive power as Kings one hour with the
Beast; that is, near that time when the Roman Empire was broken and divided,
which began near 600. years after Christ's Birth.

II. The next Observation is, that though he was not revealed in the Apostles
days, yet the mystery of Iniquity did begin to work, but secretly; for it is
said, v. 7. beginning, The mystery of iniquity does already work. This is given
as a reason why it would break out sooner, but it was kept back, there ^as
something a brewing, that would make way for Antichrist; some disposition of
the matter, some propensity thereunto, something begun, which would afterward
show it self more eminently in the great Antichrist.

Here two things must be explained.

1. What is the Mystery of Iniquity? 2. How it began to work in the Apostles
days?
1. What is the mystery of Iniquity? I answer, the design of usurping Christ's
Kingdom, and his Dignities and Prerogatives over the Church, to countenance the
Kingdom of Sin and Darkness, under the mask of Piety and Religion: surely it is
something quite contrary to the Gospel, which is the mystery of Godliness, 1 Timothy 3.16. So that this mystery is such a course and State design, as does
frustrate the true end and purpose of the Gospe^, and yet carried on under a
pretense of advancing and promoting it. So that to state it we must consider,
1. The mystery of Godliness. 2. The mystery of Ungodliness or Iniquity.


1. The mystery of Godliness is known, by the ends of God by the Gospel; and
the way he took to promote those ends.

1. The end of the Gospel is to recover man out of a carnal ungodly state; into
a state of holiness and reconciliation with a God; the Terminus a quo; men are
carnal, ungodly. (1.) Carnal, when man fell from God, he fell to himself, self
interposed as the next Heir, and that self was not the Soul, but the Flesh;
many wrong their Souls, but no man ever yet hated his own Flesh, and therefore
men would rule themselves, and please themselves according to their fleshly
appetite and fancy, John 3.6. That which is born of the flesh, is ^lesh, and
therefore love the Pleasures, Honors, and Profits of the World, as the
necessary provision to satisfy the desires of the Flesh; And whosoever live
thus, they live in a carnal state, as all do, till grace renew them, Romans 8.5.
but this carnal estate does bre^k forth, and bewray it self in various ways of
sinning, Titus 3.3. For we our selves also were sometimes foolish, disobedient,
deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy,
hateful, and hating one another. All are not Fornicators, Drunkards,
Persecutors, nor live in the same way of sinnng, but all are turned from God to
the World, and have a carnal mind, which is emnity to God, Romans 8. 7. (2.) The
next word is ungodly, men thus constituted, live either in a denial of God,
Psalm 14.1. The fool has said in his heart, there is no God; or a neglect of
God, Ephesians. 2.12. Without God in the world; without any acknowledgment or
worship of him, Psalm 9.17. The wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all the
Nations that forget God; or if not deprived of all sense of a Deity, they
worship false Gods, as those, Acts 14.12, 13. the men of Lycaonia, that called
Barnabas, Jupiter, and Paul, Mercurius, because he was the chief Speaker, and
would have sacrificed to them; and the Apostle says to the Galatians, Gal. 4.
8. When ye knew not God, ye did service to them, which by nature are no Gods;
they worshipped plurality of false Gods: And though the wise men of the
Gentiles had some confused knowledge of the true God, Romans 1.19, 20, 21. yet
they glorified him not as God, but committed Idolatry by setting up a false
medium of worship, an Idol, which begot a brutish Conception of God in their
mind: so that a false Religion is so far from showing a remedy of corrupt
nature, that it is a great part of the Disease it self. 2. The Terminus ad
quem, into a state of Holiness and Reconciliation with God, in whom alone man
can be happy. [1.] For Holiness and Obedience to God; the great design of the
Christian Religion, is to bring us back to God again; (1.) As we are carnal, by
the denial of fleshly and worldly lusts, Tit. 2.12. The Grace of God that
brings salvation, has appeared to all men, teaching us; that denying
ungodliness and worldly lusts, etc. 1 Pet. 2.11. Dearly beloved, I beseech you
as Strangers and Pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts, that war against the
soul; and Gal. 5.24. They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh, with the
affections and lusts. (2.) As we are Ungodly, to bring us to the Knowledge,
Love, Worship, and Obedience of the true God, Acts 14.15. We pray you, that ye
should turn from these vanities, to the living God, that has made Heaven and
Earth, and the Sea, and all things therein; and to seek after the Lord, from
whom we have life, breath, and all things Acts 17.25, 26, 28.1 These. 1.9. How
ye turned from Idols to serve the living and true God. [2.] Reconciliation with
God, that we might have commerce with him, for the present, and live for ever
with him hereafter, 2 Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ, reconciling the World unto
himself, not imputing their Trespasses unto them, and has committed unto us
the word of reconciliation: 1 Pet. 1.18. Ye are not redeemed with corruptible
things, as silver and gold, from your vain conversations, etc. Heb. 7.25. He is
able to save unto the uttermost all that come unto God through him; That
whereas before they were alienated from the life of God, they might live in his
love, and in the expectation of being admitted into his blessed presence, that
they may see him as he is, and be like him, 1 John. 3.2.

2. The way it took to obtain these ends, how God may be satisfied, man renewed
and changed, God pacified by the Sacrifice, Merit, and Intercession of Christ
Jesus, who came in our flesh and nature, not only to acquaint us with the Will
of God, and the unseen things of another World, but to suffer an accursed death
for our sins: therefore the mystery of Godliness is chiefly seen in God
manifested in our flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16. and man must be renewed and changed; for
our misery shows what is needful to our remedy and recovery, that we be not
only pardoned, but sanctified, if ever we will be saved and glorified: for till
men have new and holy hearts, they can never see God, Hob. 12.14 Without
holiness it is impossible to see God: Mat. 5.8. Blessed are the pure in heart,
for they shall see God; etc. nor for the present love him and delight in him,
nor take him for their chief happiness. As none but Christ can satisfy
Justice, and reconcile such a Rebel to God; so none but Christ's Spirit can
sanctify and renew our Souls, that we may live in obedience to him, 1 Cor.
6.11. Such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye
are justified, in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God.
This is the Mystery of Godliness.

2. Now for the mystery of ungodliness or iniquity, that is a quite opposite
state, but carried on plausibly, and with seeming respect to the mystery which
it opposes; To know it take these considerations.

1. Where the ^^rnal life is had in request and honor, there certainly is the
mystery of Iniquity to be found, whatever pretenses be put upon it: Now the
carnal life is there had in request and honor. (1.) Where all is referred to
Worldly gain and profit, and the whole frame of the Religion tends that way:
for certainly they are Enemies to the Cross of Christ, whose God is their
belly, and who mind earthly things, Phil. 3.19. Now Pardons, Indulgences,
Purgatory, Shrines of Saints, what do they all tend unto but to make a
merchandise of Religion? It was an old byword, Omnia Romae venalia, all things
may be bought at Rome, even Heaven, and God himself, etc. And these things are
used, not only to open the peoples mouths in Prayer, but their hands in
Oblations, and Offerings. The Complexion of their Religion is but a gainful
Trade. But the Papal exactions and traffickings have been so much, and so
loudly insisted upon, and the evil runs out into so many branches, that I
shall forbear. (2.) Where temporal greatness is looked upon as the main prop of
their Religion: The Kings Daughter is glorious within, rich in Gifts and
Graces, Psalm. 45.13. and Psalm 93.5. Holiness becomes thy house, O Lord, for
ever. But the false Church is known by pomp and external splendour. It is easy
to discern the true Ministers of Christ from the false; the true are known by
being much in ^^ours, much in afflictions, 2 Cor. 6.4, 5, 6. In all things
approving our selves the Ministers of God, in much patience, afflictions,
necessities, distresses* in labors, and watchings, and fastings; by pureness,
by knowledge, by long-suffering, by kindness, by the Holy Ghost, by love
unfeigned, etc. whereas the false Ministers are known by the life of pomp and
ease; the rule is plain, Because self-denial is one of the great lessons of
Christianity, and self-seeking the bane of it; therefore where men professedly
seek the g^eatness of the World, they serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but
their own Bellies.

2. Where men are turned from God to Idols, though it be not the Demons of the
Gentiles, but Saints, as Mediators of Intercession; there Godliness is
destroyed, and the mystery of iniquity set up: For the great drift of the
Christian Religion is to bring us to God, through Christ; so the great Whore
(which imports a breach of the fundamental Article of the Convenant, Thou shall
have no other Gods but me) it is said, Rev. 17.5. Upon her Forehead was a name
written, Mystery, Babylon, the Mother of Fornications, and abominations upon
Earth, debaucheth Nations with her Idolatry, and so seduceth from God to the
worship of the Creatures, that the great intent of the Gospel is lost.

3. Wherever power is usurped in Christ's name, and carried on under the
pretense of his Authority, to the oppressing of Christ's sincere Worshippers,
who hate the carnal life, and would by all means keep themselves from Idols, or
bowing and worshipping before Images, but excel in unquestionable duties, there
is the mystery of Iniquity: for the Beast, that has a mouth like a Dragon,
pusheth with the Horns of a Lamb, Rev. 13.11. The violence and persecution
against the sincere pure worshippers of Christ, is nothing else, but the
mystery of Iniquity, the enmity of the carnal seed against the holy Seed, or
the Seed of the Serpent, against the Seed of the Woman disguised.

4. Where there is a lessening of the merits of Christ, and his satisfaction,
as if it were not sufficient for the expiation of sin, without penal
satisfactions of our own; there is the mystery of Iniquity: for by one offering
he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified, Heb. 10.14.

5. Where the new nature is little thought of, and all Religion is made to
consist in some external Rites and Adorations, or indifferences, there the
reducing of man to God is much hindered, and Christianity is adulterated, and
the Religion that designedly countenanceth these things, is but the mystery of
Iniquity. To worship God as the Papists do, with Images, Agnus Dei's
Crucifixes* Crossings, Spittle, Oil, Candles, Holy Water, kissing the Pax,
dropping Beads, praying to the Virgin Mary, and other Saints, repeating over
the name Jesus five times in a breath, repeating such and such Sentences so
often, praying to God in an unknown Tongue, and saying to him, they know not
what; adoring the consecrated bread as no bread, but the very flesh of Christ
himself; fasting by feasting upon fish instead of flesh; choosing a tutelary
Saint, whose name they will invocate; offering Sacrifices for quick and dead,
praying for Souls in Purgatory, purchasing Indulgences for their deliverance,
carrying the Bones and other Relics of Saints, going in Pilgrimage to Shrines
or Images, or offering before them; with a multitude more of such trashy
devotions, whereby they greatly dishonor God and obstruct the motions of the
Heavenly Life, yea, quite kill it: For instead of the power and life of grace,
there are introduced beggarly Rudiments, or ritual observances in indifferent
things, and vain traditions by which Christian liberty is restrained, and these
pressed with as much severity as unquestionable duties, established by Gods
known law, for the renewing and reforming Mankind. We are to stand fast in the
liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, and not to be entangled again with
the yoke of bondage, Gal. 5.1. Col. 2.16. Let no man judge you in meat, or
drink, or in respect of an holy day, or of the new Moons, or of a Sabbath day;
These things are left to arbitrament, to abstain or use them for edification.
That Physician may be born with, who does only burden the sick with some
needless prescriptions, if faithful in other things; but if he should tire out
the Patient with Prescriptions, which are not only altogether needless but
troublesome, costly and nauseous, and does extinguish and choke true Religion
by thousands of things indifferent, making our bondage worse than the Jews,
this is the mystery of Iniquity, to cheat us of the power of Godliness, by the
show of it, burdening of men with unnecessary observances.

2. How did this work in the Apostles time? Something there was then which did
give an advantage to Antichrist, and laid the foundation of his Kingdom, and
did dispose men's minds to an Apostasy from pure Christianity; as (1.) Partly,
the Idolizing of Pastors by an excess of Reverence, such as was prejudicial to
the Interests of the Gospel, setting them up as heads of Factions, 1 Cor. 1.12.
Now this I say, that every one of you says, I am of Paul, and I am of Apollos,
and I of Cephas: 1 Cor. 3.22. Glory not in men, whether Paul, or Apollos, or
Cephas, etc. This in time bred Tyranny and Slavery in the Church.

2. The Ambition of the Pastors themselves, and the spirit of contention for
rule and precedence, Acts 20.29, 30. There shall arise among you ravening
Wolves, speaking perverse things, to draw Disciples after them; and within a
little time began to affect not only a primacy of Order, but of Jurisdiction,
and Authority; so that then Antichrist did not exist in his proper person, but
in Spirit and Predecessors.

3. The errors then set afoot, corrupted the simplicity of the Gospel; 1 John
2.18. Now there are many Antichrists, 1 John 4.3. Every Spirit that confesses
not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God, and this is the
Spirit of Antichrist, whereof ye have heard it should come, and even now
already is it in the World: The Spirit of Antichrist is even now in the World;
there was a Spirit then working in the Church to introduce this mystery of
Iniquity, only the Seat was not empty, but filled by another; the Seeds of this
mystery were sown in ambition, avarice, haughtiness of teachers, and their
carnal and corrupt Doctrines.

4. Some kept their Jewish, others their Gentile Customs, so that Christian
Religion was secretly tainted and mingled with the Seeds of Heathenism and
Judaism, which afterward produced the great Apostasy. Paul in all his
Epistles complains of the Judaizing Brethren, and seeks to reduce them to the
simplicity of the Gospel; In the Corinthians he complains of their resort to
Idol Temples, their Communion in Idol worship, 1 Cor. 10.14. Wherefore, my
dearly beloved, flee from Idolatry, and v. 20. But I say, that the things which
the Gentiles sacrifice they sacrifice to Devils, and not to God, and I would
not that ye should have fellowship with Devils, and 2 Cor. 6.16. The worship of
Angels, Interdiction of certain meats, then will worship, and shows of
humility, Col. 2.16. Let no man judge you in meat and drink, or in respect of
an holy day, or of the new Moon, or of the Sabbath days: and v. 18. Let no man
beguile you of your reward in a voluntary humility,: and worshipping of Angels,
intruding into those things which he has not seen, vainly puffed up with his
fleshly mind: and v. 22, 23. Why are ye subject to Ordinances, after the
Commandments and Doctrines of men? which things have indeed a show of wisdom in
will worship, and humility, and neglecting of the body. Contempt of Magistracy,
2 Pet. 2.10. But chiefly them that walk after the flesh, in the lust of
uncleanness, and despise Government; presumptuous are they, self-willed, and
are not afraid to speak evil of Dignities. Thus you see how it began to work,
and that the Devil from the beginning had sown these tares.

But was it then in the Apostles time that the mystery of Iniquity did begin to
work? then

1. We see what need we have to withstand the beginnings, and not give way to a
further encroachment on the Church of God: and

2. That the word of God should dwell richly in us, for we have to deal with
mystical Iniquity.

III. Proposition. That when that impediment shall be removed, then Antichrist
shall be revealed; only he that now lets will let, till he be taken out of
the way: where observe,

1. It was before, (...), that which lets, now it is (...), he that lets,
the Empire, and the Emperor; and mark, a long succession of Empires is called
(...), why not then a long succession of Popes, the Man of Sin, the Son of
Perdition?

2. He that now lets will let. Antichrist was but in fieri, and that
secretly* and in a mystery; there was desire of rule, some superstitious and
false Doctrines, some mixture of humane inventions, borrowed both from Jewish
and Heathenish Rites* mingled with the worship of God, some secret rising of
Antichristian Dominion, some playing at lesser Game, as Victor took upon him to
excommunicate the Eastern Churches for the matter of Easter, but before this
obstacle was removed he could not fully appear, and invade the Empire of God
and Men, till the Emperor was removed out of that City: while the Heathen
Emperors prevailed, there was no place for Church-mens Ambition, their times
were times of Persecution, and it is not Persecution, but Peace and Plenty,
that breeds corruption in the Churches.

3. He that is the Emperor, must be taken out of the way, that is, either by
the removal of his Person and Throne from the City of Rome, or till the Roman
Empire be ruined, as it was in the East by the Turk, in the West by the
Incursions of many barbarous Nations, parting it into ten Kingdoms, and then by
the Translation of the Empire to Charles the Great.

Well then note three things for the time of Antichrist.

1. Before the obstacle was removed he could not appear. 2. When this obstacle
was removed* presently he appeared. 3. The degrees of the falling of the one
are the degrees of the exaltation and establishment of the other, for
Antichrist did grow up upon it.
But they say, the Roman Empire is not quite fallen, there being a Roman
Emperor still. But (1.) The present Empire is but inane nomen, or umbra
Imperii; a mere name, or shadow of the Empire. (2.) He that then let in St
Paul's time, was the su^cession of the Roman Emperors, but this is the German
Empire; now if the Roman Empire were the only impediment (the Apostle uses the
word (...)) therefore as soon as that should be removed, Antichrist would
infallibly be revealed. (3.) Though this Empire be not abolished, but removed
out of Rome, it is enough to make good Paul's Prophecy, Dixit Apostolus,
Imperium esse de medio tollendum, non prorsus delendum: Whitaker. Well then,
since the Seat is left void, either the Prophecy is not accomplished at the
time, or else the Pope is Antichrist; for the Nations are long since fallen
away from the Roman Empire, and the Emperor has no power nor Authority at
Rome.

Use. To give a new note to discover and desery the man of sin; certainly
Antichrist is already revealed, and we may find him somewhere. I prove it by
two Argument^. (1.) The mystery began to work in the Apostles days, therefore
surely it is completed by this time, and not reserved to a short space of time
a little before Christ's coming to Judgment. (2.) This spiritual usurped Power
was to break forth upon the fall of the Empire, accordingly so it did, though
it grew to its monstrous excess and height by degrees, as to Ecclesiastical
Dominion in Boniface the Third, who obtains from Phocas the Title of
Universal Bishop, whereas Gregory the Great calls John of Constantinople, the
forerunner of Antichrist, for arrogating the same title as to Kings and
Princes.

SERMON VI.
2 Thessalonians. 2.8.
And then shall that wicked be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the
breath of his mouth, and destroy with the brightness of his coming.

THese words contain both the rise and ruin of Antichrist* his Revelation, and
Destruction.

1. As to his Revelation; there are two things. 1. The Title given to
Antichrist, (...), the wicked. 2. His appearing in the World, upon the taking
away the impediment, shall be revealed.
2. As to his ruin, three things are observable. 1. The progress of his
destruction, which is here considered as begun, or as consummated.

1. A diminishing of Antichristianism, whom the Lord shall consume. 2. The
finishing thereof, in the word, destroy.

2. The Author, the Lord.

3. The means.

1. Gods word, called his breath, or the spirit of his mouth. 2. The brightness
of his coming, namely when he shall come to judge the World in the Glory of the
Father.
First, Of the rising of Antichrist, and then shall that wicked be revealed.

1. The Title given to Antichrist, (...), that lawless one, or Son of Belial:
it is the property of Antichrist to boast himself to be above all laws, and to
be judged by no power upon earth; for therein he resembles A^tiochus, of whom
it is said, he shall do according to his own will, Dan. 11.36. Now if this b^
one of his Characters, it will not be hard to find him out: for who is that
infallible Judge, that takes upon him to decide all Controversies, and judges
all things, and is judged of no man? and whosoever does but mutter against his
D^crees and delusions; if a private person, he is to be destroyed with Fire and
Sword; if a Prince, to be excommunicated, deposed, and his Subjects freed from
all Allegiance to him? Who is he, that takes upon him with Faculties,
Licenses, and Pardons, to dispense with the Law of God, and to allow open and
notorious sins? Who is he that by his own Writers is said to be solutus omni
lege humana, freed from all humane law ( Hostiensis) nec ullo jure humano
ligari potest, that has a Paramount Authority to all Laws, that he cannot be
bound by them, whether they concern Parricide, the murder of Princes; or
Perjury, the obligation of Oaths; or Matrimony, the bond of conjugal Relations?
but one expressly says, that he is supra jus, contra jus, extra jus, above Law,
against Law, and without Law; a plain description of the lawless one in the
Text: And another, not without some spice of Blasphemy, apud Deum and Papam
sufficit pro ratione voluntas, God and the Pope have their Will for a Law.
Lastly, Who is he that has brought into the Church the great impiety of
worshipping of God by Images, and the worship of the Saints and Angels, with a
worship which is only due to God? which is the great (...), the lawlessness,
which the pure Christian Rule condemns, and brandeth for such: if there be
not such a power extant in the Christian World, then I confess we are yet to
seek for Antichrist; but if there be, none so wilfully blind as they that
cannot see Wood for Trees, and know not where to fix this Character.

2. His Revelation, then shall that wicked be revealed: the word revealed
notes two things.

1. His appearance in the World. 2. Gods discovery of him.
1. Then he shall be revealed bears this sense, he shall be in the World, and
begin to lift up his head as soon as the Roman Emperor and Empire shall be
removed; this lawless one shall begin to discover himself, and set up his
Kingdom.

Now to understand this, consider this.

1. The most learned Interpreters, both ancient and modern, agree in this, that
the impediment was the Roman Empire, as we showed before, and therefore as the
Roman Empire and Emperor was removed out of the way, Antichrist was to be
revealed, or the Predictions of the Scripture are false.

2. Things of great moment cannot be removed, nor established in a minute. The
removing of the Roman Empire was not all at once, nor the rising of the
Pontificate, but by degrees the seat began to be made void, when Constantine
began to remove the Imperial Throne to Byzantium; though the Majesty of the
Empire continued still at Rome, yet this was a step to the removing of the
impediment, for by that means the Popes grew in greatness: but as the Emperors
Authority was lessened, so grew that of the Popes, who still incroached to
themselves more and more Power, and that to promote the Apostasy and
Derogation from the pure Christian Religion: But as soon as he arose, he came
not to the height of his power, either Eccle^iastical or Temporal, nor shall he
presently decay.

3. To state the progress of A^tichristian Tyranny, is not for a Sermon, it
fills whole Books; but thus in short. About the year 600. or in that Century,
their Ecclesiastical Power began to be raised, when the majesty of the Empire
was low and weak in Italy, and therefore then was Antichrist advanced a good
step: when John of Constantinople had usurped the Title of Universal Bishop,
Gregory the great says, Rex superbiae prope adest, the King of Pride is near;
and sacerdotum exercitus ei praeparatur, an Army of Priests is prepared to
serve him as their General, this he, ( fidenter dico, I speak confidently:) and
within six years or thereabouts, Phocas conferred on Pope Boniface the same
Title, to ingratiate himself with the people of that part of the Empire, after
the murder of his Lord and Master; and then many supersti^ions were gotten into
the Church, as about the year 688. the Pope obtained of the Emperor the
Pantheon, or Temple of All-Devils, and Consecrated the same to the Virgin Mary,
and All Saints: the temporal Monarchy was long in hatching, but yet the
beginning of this mystery soon bewrayed it self. In the beginning of the
seventh Century, Constantine the Pope would have his foot kissed, like another
Dioclesian, and in defense of Image worship he openly ^esisted Phillipicus the
Emperor of Greece, and encouraged Iustine and Anastasius, Tyrants and
Murderers, who submitted themselves to him with Adoration: Rebellion and
Idolatry have been ever continued since. In the year 720. or thereabouts,
Gregory the second and Third, continued the same Idolatry and Rebellion; And
caused all Italy to withdraw their obedience from the Emperor Leo, because he
had commanded all Images to be broken and burnt, and for the same cause
Excommunicated him, and took to himself the Coctian Alps as the gift of the
Lombards. In the same Century 749. Zachary incourageth and assisteth Pipin, to
depose his Master Childerick, King of France, and to take upon him that
Kingdom. Afterward Adrian took upon him to translate the Empire of the Greeks
to the Latins; and ever since deposed Emperors, and made broils in Kingdoms.

2. Gods discovery of him to the World; that is, when Antichrist was not only
extant, but impleaded as such; and this also was by degrees, God raising up in
every Age, witnesses against the Tyranny, and Usurpations, that Rome, as the
Place, and the Pope, the Person, as considered in his succession, claiming the
same power. 500 years before Luther, Peter Bruis begun, and Henry his Scholar
succeeded him, and both of them succeeded by the Waldenses and Albigenses, then
Wickliff, the Bohemians, who have all pleaded and proved that the Pope was the
very Antichrist; then S^vanorella in Italy, preached this boldly. In the
fifteenth Centurty, about 1500. there were some remainder of the Albigenses
about the Alps, some few Relics of the Hussites and Calixtines in Bohemia,
so few, and so ignorant, that they had neither learning nor ability to oppose
this potent Tyranny. Then God raised up Luther, and many other Worthies to
assault the Idolatry, Tyranny, and Errors of the Church of Rome; and it is
reported in History, that the Angel on the top of the Tower St Angelo, was
beaten down by a Thunderbolt; and in the very Day, and in the Church, where
Pope Leo the Tenth at Rome had Created 31. Cardinals, a sudden Tempest dashed
the Keys out of the hands of the Image of St Peter, showing God would begin to
take away their Power.

Use. If God has revealed Antichrist, let no man shut his Eyes, but let him be
shunned, forsaken, and abhorred; when Christ was to come into the World, it was
a day of rumors; some sent to John Baptist, whether he were the Christ, others
cried up false Christ and Impostours, but the people were alarmed with a
general expectation: so when Antichrist was to be revealed, it was a day of
rumors, just about the time there was a great expectation, some pitched it
here, some there, until the Pit was discovered to the Church, and the snare
laid open; and now to run wilfully into these errors, how damnable is it? If
Papists cleave to him, let not Protestants fall to him; to continue Papists is
dangerous, for they favor Antichrist, and serve Antichrist; but to turn
Papists is more dangerous, for this is a downright revolt from Christ to
Antichrist: and how God may in mercy dispense with errors, imbibed in our
Education, we know not, but to turn our back on the truth, wherein we have been
educated and instructed, makes it more dangerous to our Salvation.

Secondly, We now come to the more comfortable part, his ruin; where note,

I. In the general, that the Apostle, as soon as he had showed his rise, he
presently foretells his ruin, to support the hearts of the ^aithful, though
he has yet more things to speak concerning his discovery, v. 9. I cannot let
this pass without an Observation.

Doct. That a spiritual eye can discern the ruin of wicked instruments, even in
their rise and Reign. Job 5.3. I have seen the foolish taking root, and
presently I c^rsed his habitation: by the [foolish] is mean^ the wicked, by
their [taking root] their seeking to fix and settle themselves in their Worldly
prosperity; I [ presently] that is, without any great deliberation, which in
this matter needs not, [cursed] their habitation, not as desiring, but as
forseeing and foretelling. I pronounced them accursed, or to be in a cursed
condition; when carnal men seek to root and establish themselves upon Earth to
a spiritual eye, their best estate is miserable and detestable; when we see
their rise, we may foretell their fall.

Reasons.

1. Their Faith occasion such a reflection, which is the evidence of things not
seen, Heb. 11.1. they looked not at things, as at present they seem to
short-sighted men, or as they relish to the flesh; but as they appear, and will
be judged of at last, their ruin is as present before them, as their rise;
present time is quickly past; but now without Faith this cannot be, 2 Pet. 1.9.
He that lacks these things is blind and cannot see afar off, (...), but are
dazzled with present splendour, and so mis^arry.

2. This Faith is necessary. (1.) Partly to prevent scandal at the prosperity
of an ungodly party, who obey not the Gospel, but corrupt and pervert it to
their Worldly ends. D^vids steps were even gone, when he saw the prosperity of
the wicked, till he went into the Sanctuary, and understood their end, Psalm.
73.17. that settled his heart to consider, what end these men were appointed
unto, how prosperous soever they seem to be for the present, yet the end must
put the difference, there they see the wicked in the height of their
prosperity, as ready to be cut down and withered. (2.) To prevent Apostasy,
they choose the better part, that choose the Holiness and Patience of the Saints,
2 Cor. 4.18. While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things
which are not seen; for the things which are seen are temporal, but the things
which are not seen are eternal: but things present carry away our hearts,
because we have so dim and doubtful a sight of things to come; whereas if we
did look upon them as sure and near, they would fortify us against
Temptations, Prove. 3.31, 32. Envy thou not the Oppressor, and choose none of his
ways; For the froward is abomination to the Lord, but his secret is with the
righteous.

II. More particularly the ruin of Antichrist is set forth,

(1.) Partly by the manner of his fall; it is represented both as begun and
finished; he shall be consumed, he shall be destroyed; the one notes a
lingering delay, the other an utter Perdition; that he shall be finally rooted
out.

First consumed, to consume is to waste and melt away by little and little.

Doct. Antichrist is not presently to be destroyed, but to waste away by a
lingering Consumption; as his rising was by little and little, so is his fall,
he loses his Authority in Christendom by degrees.

Now the Reasons may be these.

1. God has a Ministry and use for him, and the abetters of his Kingdom, as he
has an use for the Devil himself, therefore permits him some limited power,
but yet he holds him in the Chains of his invicible Providence; so has he a
use for the Devils eldest Son, for Antichrist, and Antichristian Adversaries,
which if their power were wholly gone could not be performed, as

1. To scourge his people for their sins, as their contempt of the Gospel, and
wantonness under the several privileges, which they enjoy by it: God will not
want a rod to scourge his disobedient Children, as Isa. 10.5 he calls the
Assyrian the rod of his Ange^, the Instrument that he makes use off to punish
those with whom he is angry; and again, the staff of his Indignation, the Staff
is an heavier and sorer instrument of correction than a Rod: what the Assyrian
was to the Jews, that Antichrist is to professing Christians; God uses him,
till he has sufficiently chastised his Children, and then he will cast this
Rod into the Fire; Heathens and Turks are at a distance from us, our miseries
will come from Antichristianism, who are nearer at hand to execute the Lords
vengeance when we grow wanton.

2. To try his people, for he expects a tried obedience, what Christianity we
will accept and choose, that calculated for this World, or that which is
calculated for the next. Antichristianism in all the branches of it is a sort
of Religion suited to Worldly interests, 1 John 4.5. They are of the World,
therefore speak they of the World, and the World hears them: but true
Christianity for the Kingdom of Heaven, 1 Cor. 2.12. Now we have received, not
the spirit of the World, but the spirit which is of God, therefore God will try
who are the formal and pretended Christians, that serve their own bellies, and
the sincere Christians who look to an unseen World, and are willing to hazard
their own interests out of their fidelity to Christ; Therefore when the Saints
under the Altar groaned, Rev. 6.10. How long Lord, holy and true, do thou not
avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth; the Answer given was, v. 11.
That they should rest for a season until their fellow servants, and also their
brethen, that should be killed, as they were, should be fulfilled: in every Age
God will have his Witnesses, who by their Faith and Patience, and not loving
their lives to the Death, should promote the Lambs Kingdom, before they receive
their Crown; and therefore, though Antichrist be consumed more and more, yet he
has so many abettors of his Kingdom left as may try Faith and Patience of the
Saints.

3. To Cure our Divisions, Nazianzen called the Enemies (...), the common
reconcilers; the Dog is let loose to make the Sheep flock together; we are
hardened in our strifes against each other, till a common danger unite us. It
is noted, that when there was a strife between the Herdsmen of Abraham's Cattle,
and Lots Cattle, the Canaanite and Perizzite were yet in the Land, Genesis 13.7.
God will unite those in common sufferings, whose stubborn humors will not
suffer them to meet upon other terms.

4. To keep up a remembrance of his mercies, Psalm. 59.11. Slay them not, lest
my people forget, scatter them by thy power, and bring them down, O Lord, our
shield. ^od makes us sensible of the care he has over us, not by the utter
destruction of the Enemies of his People, but by lingering Judgments on them,
which affect us more than if they were cut off suddenly.

2. Many other reasons may be given, because it serves the beauty and harmony
of his Providence, to cut them off in their time, and by such means, as he has
appointed, and in such a way, as shall most conduce unto his Glory. But I pass
them by; we must tarry his leisure, and not question his truth and care over
us, and be content, that our Faith and Patience be exercised. If God should
bring a sudden destruction upon a Power and Tyranny, so supported by the
combined interests of the World, we were not able to bear it. Thorns serve for
a fence to a Garden of Roses; God would not destroy the Canaanites at once,
lest the beasts of the field should increase upon them, Deuteronomy. 7.22. nor all
abettors of Antichristianism, lest his people should lie open to such evils as
they cannot bear.

1. Observe this Consumption, how it is accomplished, if we find Antichrist
risen, discovered, and consumed, why should we be in doubt any longer? The pomp
and height was much about 1500. years after Christ, what a Consumption has
happened since, by the reviving Religion and Learning, the Christian World
should with thankfulness take notice of, by the falling of Germany, England,
France, and Hungary in a great part, together with Denmark, Sweden, Poland, and
other Countries; and by what means has this been, but by the spirit of his
mouth? It is profitable to know Antichrist by his rise and description, but it
is comfortable to know him by his discovery and Consumption, and Gods blessing
such unlikely means at the beginning, so such a wonderful effect. When Luther
first appeared, the Bishop of Strasburgh told him, Abi in coelum, mi frater,
and dic, miserere nostri. But God has done great things for us too, when he
first turned the captivity of his Churches, we were like unto those that dream.

2. Caution, Antichrist is consumed, but he is not yet dead; what strength he
may recover before his last destruction, God knows. Popery, after it was cast
out, has re-entered Bohemia and Austria, and the Emperors Hereditary
Countries, and what havoc has been made of the Evangelical Churches, the Book
of Caraffa, the Bishop and Legate of the Pope, called Germania sacra restaurata,
shows, wherein many notable things concerning their Artifices, to replant
Popery, are set down. As to England, some hope his Consumption is not
desperate, and many fear, that Popery may recover again, unless God in mercy
prevent it: we know not what is in the Womb of Providence, or how far the
Prerogative of Free Grace may interpose in our behalf, whether England shall be
made a Theater of mercy once more, or the feat of Idolatry and superstition and
Blood: But though we do not know what God has determined, yet we may soon know
what England has deserved; And that is enough to quicken us to watchfulness
and Prayer, and expectation, and serious preparation for the day of evil: and
by these things, if it comes to pass, it will do us no harm.

1. When God has laid in great store of comforts against sufferings, usually
there is a time of expense to lay them out again. Christ warned his hearers to
make use of the light, because of the darkness coming upon them, John 12.35,
36. You never knew the Gospel powerfully preached, but Trials came; Heb. 10.32,
34. For ye had compassion of me in my bonds, and took joyfully the spoiling of
your goods, knowing in your selves, that you have in heaven a better, and an
enduring substance. Castles are first victualled, then besieged; the ministry
is consolatory mostly.

2. When men can neither bear our vices, not their proper remedies; Ezekiel.
24.13. In thy filthiness is lewdness, because I have purged thee, and thou wast
not purged, thou shall not be purged from thy filthiness any more, till I have
caused my fury to rest upon thee: Hosea 7. 1. When I would have healed Israel,
then the iniquity of Ephraim was discovered, and the wickedness of Samaria, for
they commit falsehood, etc.

3. When there are great differences amongst Gods own people, the end is
bitter; we warp in the Sunshine, will not know the way of Peace. Eusebius says
before Dioclesians Persecution, (...), the Church was torn with intestine
broils, Pastors against Pastors, and People against People: Ease begets Pride
and Wantonness, and that makes way for Contention.

4. When Profaneness increases, and men do not walk becoming the Gospel, God
takes the Gospel from them. The Apostasy from the power and purity of
Religion first made way for Antichrist, and is most likely to let him in again.

5. When a people are prepared for such impressions, there is a party formed,
partly by opinions, that symbolize with Popery; partly by doting on the pomp
and outside of Religion, and neglecting the life and power of it; and partly,
when indifferent and Atheistical conceits do dispose their minds no more to one
Religion than other, usually then is a Nation fitted for such a change.

Now what shall we do?

1. Watch and pray; a people well awaked will not change their Religion, ^he
envious man sowed tares, while the servants s^ept^ Mat. 13.25. Be instant with
God in Prayer, as all good Christians should be, when the Church is in danger:
as David, Psalm. 59.13. Consume them in wrath, consume them, that they may not
be, that they may know that God rules in Jacob, unto the ends of the earth.
Selah. The Consumption is at hand, Luke 21.36. Watch ye therefore, and pray
always, that ye may be counted worthy to escape all these things that shall
come to pass.

2. Reform and repent: Rev. 2.5. Repent, or I will remove the Candlestick out
of his place; our disorders must be bewailed and redressed; there are two
stumbling blocks, the Idolatry of the Romish Synagogue, and the evil manners of
the reformed Churches.

3. Be fortified and established,

1. By knowledge; if we have not (...), a stedfastness of our own, we shall
fall, 2 Pet. 3.17. in a time of long Peace, Arms hang up a rusting; and ^o we
are not prepared to resist temptations.

2. By Grace; it is good the heart should be established by Grace, Heb. 13.9.
the new nature will caution men against many Popish errors, 1 John 2.20. Ye
have an unction from the holy one, and ye know all things; A Child of God has
something in his bosom, that will not permit him to hearken to Popery; the very
life in us is opposite to this dead show and mummery of trashy Devotions.

Now I come to the Author, with the means of Consuming. The Lord shall consume
him with the Spirit of his mouth. The Lord, that is the Lord Christ. But what
is meant by the Spirit of his mouth, or the breath of his mouth, as some render
it? Two things may be meant hereby, either his Providential Word, or his
Gospel, accompanied by his Spirit.

1. His Providential Word, that is, when Christ faith, Let it be done, it shall
be done. Isa. 11.4. He shall smite the Earth with the Rod of his mouth, and
with the breath of his lips he shall slay the wicked; those that are called
wicked, they are also called the Earth, because they are earthly minded, and
have their portion here, and possess much on earth, and have great power, by
the advantage of which they oppress his People: Now to execute Judgment upon
them, Christ needs no more than the Rod of his mouth, that powerful Word,
whereby he created all things, Ps. 33.6. By the words of the Lord were the
Heavens made, and all the host of them by the breath of his mouth; Upholdeth
all things, Heb. 1.3. Upholding all things by the word of his Power; And brings
all things to nothing again, John 18.6. As soon as he had said to them, I am
he, they went backward, and fell to the ground; one word of his powerful
Providence is enough. Or secondly,

2. It is meant of the Efficacy of his Gospel, as it is accompanied by his
Spirit, called the Sword of the Spirit, Ephesians. 6.17. and it is said to be quick
and powerful, Heb. ^.12. and Rev. 2.16. Repent, or I will come against thee
quickly, and smite thee with the Sword of my mouth; by this word he shall
confound the falsehood and cunning practices which are carried on under this
my^^^^y of Iniquity, and give it such a deadly and incurable wound, that it
shall languish before it be utterly destroyed.

Doct. That Antichrists Destruction is by the preaching of the Gospel, and the
victorious evidence of Truth. It must needs be so; For his Kingdom and Tyranny
is upheld by Darkness, which is dispelled by the Light of the Truth: And
therefore the Papists, as all other Heretics, are lucifugae Scripturarum Dei,
cannot endure the Scriptures, deny them to the people, and seek to make them
contemptible by all the means they can. Again, his Kingdom is carried on by
Falsehood, and his Cheats, and Impostures, and Wickedness, and Usurpation, and
false Interpretations and Delusions are discovered by the truth and simplicity
of the Gospel, and so is consumed yet more and more. Lastly, Popery is a dead
form of Religion, and there is not only Truth in the word of God, but Life; we
are not only enlightened, but quickened by it, and converted to God, and made
partakers of his Spirit; And these will go against their own experience and
inclination, if they should sit down with such empty, beggarly Rudiments.

But here arises a Question, shall Antichrist be consumed no other way ^ but
by the Spirit of his mouth? We read in the Prophecy, of Wars, by which the
Antichristian State is brought to naught. I answer. The pure and powerful
preaching of the Gospel is the principal means, whereby the Spirit of the Lord
consumes Antichrist in the hearts of men; but this is not exclusive of other
means, which God in the ways of his Providence may use to weaken his Worldly
Interest. But we must distinguish between the means God may use, and we must
use: Simply to put down a Religion by force of arms, is not our way, it is not
lawful certainly to invade other Nations upon the pure and sole title of
Religion: But if they invade us on that account, no doubt a Prince and People
so invaded, may defend themselves. But when a War is commenced on other
occasions, it is the most cheerful cause to engage in; when we War against the
Abettors of Antichrist, we War against an Enemy whom God will consume.
Constamine warred against Licinius, his Collegue^ not because an Infidel, but
because he persecuted the Christians, contrary to their Capitulations. Lewis
the XII. caused it to be disputed in a Synod at Tours, Number liceret Papae absque
causa Principi bellum infer? when it was answered, Non licet: a second
Question, Number tali Principi sua defensione fas sit eu^ invadere? Their Answers
were, Licet; which he undertook, and caused money to be stamped with this
Inscription, Perdam Babylonem.

1. Use. We learn hence, not to be discouraged in our greatest extremities,
when all temporal hopes seem to fail, and we have nothing left us, but the word
of our Testimony: let us not distrust our spiritual weapons; for they are
mighty through God to bring down all the strongs holds of sin and Antichrist, 2
Cor. 10.4, 5. Oh encourage your selves in the Lord, you have the merit of his
Humiliation, and the power of his Exaltation: Merit, what cannot the blood of
Christ do to fetch off men from their inveterate prejudices and superstitions?
1 Pet. 1.18. We are redeemed by the blood of Christ from our vain
Conversations: so for the power of his Exaltation, there is his Spirit; the
success of his Spirit on the pouring out of the first Sermon, Acts 2.41.
fetched in 3000. Souls, that had embrued their hands in the blood of their
Savior, and were in no very devout posture at that time: his Word, that is,
the Rod of his strength, Psalm. 110.2. which has a mighty power to convince,
transform and convert Souls, Rom 1.16. For I am not ashamed of the Gospel of
Christ, which is the power of God unto Salvation. Then there is the power of
Providence; all Judgment is put into Christ's hands for the advancement of his
own Kingdom, John 5.22. if all be in Christ's hands, why should you distrust
your cause, or the success of it?

2. If you would defend your selves, and wound the Enemy, be much acquainted
with the word of God, which is the Sword of the Spirit, Ephesians. 6.17. thereby you
may ward off every blow of a Temptation. Surely then we should be much
acquainted with this wo^d, that it may dwell in us richly, that we may have it
ready, this is enough to make wise the simple for all necessary duties and
defense.

3. Pray heartily, that the word of God may have a free course, 2 Thessalonians. 3.1.
and that God would send forth laborers into his Harvest, Matthew. 9.38.

2. The final destruction of Antichrist, and destroy him by the brightness of
his coming. This coming is most likely to be the coming of Christ, so often
mentioned, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8. When the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven,
with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance on those that know
not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. 2 Thessalonians. 2.1,
2, 3. Now we beseech you Brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
by our gathering together unto him, That ye be not soon shaken in mind, nor be
troubled, neither by spirit, not by word, nor by letter, as from us, as that
the day of Christ is at hand. Others conceive some notable manifestation of his
Presence and Power in his Church; but this would engage us in many dark
Pro^hecies, which I shall not meddle withal (intending only a doctrinal
discovery of Antichrist) as how long before his coming, by what means: Sure I
am, that at his coming, the Beast and false Prophet shall be slain, and cast
into the lake of fire, Rev. 19.20. but for other things, I have not light
enough certainly to define. That the utter ruin of Antichrist is not to be
expected till the second coming of Christ.

Use. Be not discouraged though Antichrist yet remain after all the endeavors
against him.

It is enough that Antichristianism shall be finished, and finally destroyed.
And for the time, refer it to God; If it be not till the Day of Judgment, or
Christ's final Conquest over all his Adversaries, you must be contented to tarry
for that, as well a^ for other things.

SERMON VII.
2 Thessalonians. 2.9, 10. Even him, whose coming is after the working of Satan, with
all Power, and Sins, and lying wonders.

And with all deceiveableness of unrighteousness in them that perish; because
they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved.


WE have considered the Titles of Antichrist, his nature, and properties, the
time of his rise, and with it his ruin. Now we are to consider the way and
means, how he does acquire, and keep up this power in the World.

The means are,

(1.) Principal.

(2.) Instrumental.

(1.) Principal, (...), after the working of Satan.

(2.) Instrumental, which are also two.

(1.) Pretense of Miracles, with all Power, Signs, and lying wonders.

(2.) Other Cheats and Impostures, with all deceivableness of unrighteousness;
Their general way of dealing being Sophistical and fallacious. Let us a little
explain these things.

1. The great Agent in setting up this Kingdom, after the working of Satan. It
may note the manner, as we render [after] that is in such a way, as Satan
deceived our first Parents; for he was a murderer and a liar from the
beginnning, John 8.44. I fear, lest by any means, as the Serpent beguiled Eve
by his subtilty; so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity, which
is in Christ: 2 Cor. 11.3. So all this mystery of Iniquity shall be carried on
after this manner, by deceit, by the tricks of lying men, and the works of
deceiving Spirits: Rather it notes Satan's Agency and Influence, and after, or
according to the working of Satan, is as much, as by the working of Satan,
noting not only his Pattern, but his Influence; so is (...) often rendered, and
the energy of the Devil, and Influence upon all wickedness is spoken of
elsewhere, Ephesians. 2. 3. The Spirit that now works in the Children of
Disobedience; the Devil has a great hand over wicked men in the World, his way
of dealing with them is most efficacious and powerful, and certainly he is the
first Founder and main supporter of the Antichristian State.

2. The Instrumental means.

1. By pretense of Miracles, with all power, and signs, and lying wonders:
These three words signify the same thing, and are often joined, when true
Miracles are spoken of, as 2 Cor. 12.12. Truly the signs of an Apostle were
wrought among you in all places, in signs and wonders, and mighty deeds, (...),
(...): So Acts 2.22. Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of God among you, by
miracles, wonders and signs: So Heb. 2.4. God also bearing them witness, both
with signs and wonders, and with diverse miracles: Romans 15.19. Through. mighty
signs and wonders, through the power of the spirit of God: Powers they are
called, because they issue from Power divine and extraordinary: Signs, from
their use, because they served to seal and signify the Doctrine to which they
are applied: Wonders, from their effect, because they breed astonishment in the
minds of the beholders; These were the true Miracles. Now Antichrist, to
countenance his false Doctrines and Superstitions, would ape and imitate
Christ; and pretends to Powers, Signs, and Wonders; as Iannes and Iambres
sought to imitate Moses, God permitting it in some degree; so Antichrist seeks
to promote his Kingdom the same way which Christ took to promote Evangelical
truth. But they are called Powers, and Signs, and lying Wonders; i.e. lying
Powers, lying Signs, and lying Wonders; for it agrees to all the words, though
affixed to one of them. But why lying wonders? partly because the greatest
number of them are mere. Fables, notorious Impostures, and Forgeries: partly,
because others are Diabolical illusions, things beyond humane, but not
Angelical Power; if they are (...), Wonders, they are not (...), as Chrysostom
distinguishes, fit signs to signify the truth of the Doctrines: partly from
the end and scope, for that must also be regarded; God cautioneth his People,
that if they gave them a sign and wonder, though it came to pass,. if it were
to draw them to other Gods, it was to be rejected, Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2, 3. the
Spirits must be tried, whether they be of God, 1 John 4.1.1 Cor. 12.3. No man
speaking by the Spirit of God calls Jesus accursed: If a wonder be wrought,
or pretended to be wrought, to draw us off from Christ, or to promote things
clearly forbidden by the word of God, it is a lying wonder as all Antichrist's
are; for their end is to confirm the Popes Dominion and false Doctrine. The sum
is this then, That many things are pretended, not really done, Impostures and
Forgeries, not Miracles; other things done by Diabolical illusion, as there may
be Apparitions, Visions, Specter; for Satan will bestir himself to keep up
the credit of his Ministers. Lastly, if we cannot otherwise disprove them, if
they tend to false Doctrine and worship, they are to be rejected, whatever
extraordinary appearance there be in them.

(2.) The other expression concerning the means, is general; with all
deceivableness of unrighteousness: which comprizeth,

(1.) Their Sophistical Reasoning from Antiquity, Universality, Unity,
I^fallibility, without coming to the intrinsic merits of the c^use, but
condemning the truth rather by prejudice.

2. Their practical Acts, and feats to beguile Souls, by Fawning or Threatening,
or Preferment and Persecutions: these are the Arts, by which Antichrist shall
deceive men into Unrighteousness, that is, to bring this corruption into the
Church, and acquire this power to himself.

Now I shall observe some points.

1. Doct. The Devil has a great hand in setting up Antichrists Kingdom, as he
has a great interest by it; his coming ^^all be by, or after the working of
Satan. He is the raiser and supporter of that Estate, and he is the great
Seducer, Opposer, and Adversary of the Gospel. This will appear, if you
consider, First the properties of the Devil, how the Devil is set forth in
Scripture, and by what ways he promoteth his own Kingdom.

1. By Ignorance; for the Devils are called, Ephesians. 6.12. The Rulers of the
Darkness of this World, and his Kingdom is called, the Kingdom of Darkness,
Col. 1.13. the Princelike Authority and Government, which by Gods permission he
exercises in the World, is over, those, who remain in a state of Darkness and
Ignorance. Well then, necessarily the Devil must be a great Friend to Popery,
where Ignorance not only reigns, but is commended as the Mother of Devotion:
it is into the ignorant part of the World and the Church, that the Devil has
brought in Errors in Doctrine, Formality and Superstition in Worship, and
Tyranny and Usurpation in Government.

2. The next thing ascribed to him is Error, so it is said, John 8.44. He abode
not in the truth, because there is no truth in him; when he speaks a lie, he
speaks of his own; for he is a Liar, and the Father of it. He soon
Apostatized from God and his way, and ever since is an Enemy of all Truth and
Goodness; he turned from God, and is a deceiver of others: To our first Parents
he called the Truth of God in Question, and was the inventor and beginner of
all Errors, that have since fallen out in the World. Well then, where should
his eminent Power and Residence be, but in that Society of professed
Christians, where most errors and corruptions in Doctrine and Worship have been
introduced, where they teach men to pray to, and for the Dead, to adore the
Bread, and worship it with divine worship, and to worship Images, and to pray
to God in a language which they understand not, and maime the Lords Supper, and
profess they can live perfectly without sin, and meritoriously, and
supererogate besides, and lay up a Treasury of merits to redeem Souls from
Purgatory, etc. There will be errors and mistakes in Religion, while men are
men; but where there is a wilful opposing of evident Truths, and an obstinate
refusing of all healing means, and men will abide in their Errors, rather than
acknowledge that they have erred; surely they are governed by the influence of
his Counsels, who abode not in the Truth, and seeks what he can to hinder the
prevalency of it in the World.

3. That which is ascribed to Satan is Idolatry. Thi^ was his first and great
endeavor in the World, to bring man to worship other Gods, rather than the
True, or the True God by an Idol: so he prevailed among the Heathens, they
thought their Images did represent their gods, and that their gods dwelt in
them, as our Souls do in our Bo^ies: therefore the Psalmist says, All the gods
of the Nations, are Idols or Devils, Ps. 96.5. and the Devil was the great
Master and Contriver of this Idolatry; therefore it is said, Psalm. 106.37. They
sacrificed their Sons and Daughters unto Devils: the service done to Idols, or
Images of man's devising, is not done to God, as men pretend who worship them;
but to Devils, who are the Devisers, Suggesters, and enticers of men unto all
sorts of unlawful worship, and are in effect served and obeyed by a false
Religion, Deuter. 32.17. They sacrificed unto Devils, not unto God: 2 Cor.
10.20. The things which the Gentiles sacrificed, they sacrificed unto Devils,
not unto God: 2 Chronicles. 11.15. And he ordained him Priests for the high places,
and for the Devils, and for the Calves which he had made: they otherwise meant
it, Jeroboam intended it to the true God, Jehovah; but it was of the Devils
Invention, Now if the Devil can get such a party in the Church, as shall not
only set up but be mad upon Image Worship, who can more serve his turn, among
professing Christians, than they, who have consented to, and continued in
idolatrous worship? Surely then Satan is concerned to befriend their
Usurpations, and uphold their Interests; for what will more conduce to the
ruin of Christianity, or at least the ^ecay of the power thereof?

4. That which is ascribed to Satan, is bloody Cruelty, or seeking the
destruction of Christ's most faithful Servants; for he is called a murderer from
the beginning, John 8.44. and Cain is said to be of that wicked one, because he
slew his Brother; and wherefore slew he him? because his own works were evil,
and his Brothers righteous, 1 John 3.12. Enmity to the power of Godliness came
from Satan, and wherever it is encouraged, and notoriously practiced, they are
a party of men governed and influenced by Satan. Now where shall we find this
Character, but in Antichrists Confederacy? In the Prophecy of him, Rev. 13.15.
he caused as many as would no^ worship the Image of the Beast to be kil^ed; and
again, Rev. 17.5. The Woman, whose name was Mystery, was drunk with the blood
of the Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus: and it has been
eminently fulfilled in the blood shed in Germany, France, and England, and
other Nations; and all this to extinguish the light of, and suppress the
Reformation. The World is no stranger to their bloody Persecutions Oh, how many
seeming Chris^ians has Satan employed in these works of Cruelty? When once he
had seduced the Church to so many Errors, and corrupted the Doctrine and
worship of Christ, he presently makes the erroneous party his Instruments of
as cruel and bloody Persecutions as were ever commenced by Infidels and
Mahometans; witness their murders upon so many thousands of the Waldenses and
Albigenses, whom they not only spoiled, but slaughtered with all manner of
hellish Cruelty. Some of their own Bishops complained they could not find Lime
and Stone to build Prisons for them, nor defray the charges of their food. The
World was even amazed at their unheard of Cruelties, smoking and burning
thousands of Men, Women, men, and Children, in Caves, others at St^kes, and
many ways butchered them; proclaiming Croisados, and preaching up the merit of
Paradise to such bloody Cutthroats, as had a mind to root them out, driving
multitudes to perish in snowy Mountains. What Desolations they wrought in
Bohemia, what horrible Massacres in France, what Fires they kindled in England,
and of late, what Cruelties they exercised in Ireland, Piedmont, etc. Histories
will tell you, and will tell all Generations to come, what Principles Rome is
acted by, and how infatiable their thirst is for the blood of upright righteous
men, And after all this tell me, who is he, whose coming is after the working
of Satan? and whether we have cause to be mamoured of Blood, and Fires, and
Inquisitions?

5. That which is ascribed to Satan is, that he is the God of this World, 2
Cor. 4.4.; and again, the Prince of this World, John 12.31. he plays the God
here, the Riches, Honors, and wealth of this World, are the great Instruments
of his Kingdom; and the men of this World whose portion is in this life, are
the proper Subjects of his Kingdom. Of the Saints Christ is their Head; but of
the wicked, ungodly, ambitious World, surely Satan is the Head. There are two
Cities (as Austin distinguishes them.) Ie^usalem is the City of God, and
Babylon that Incorporation which belongs to Satan. Now then, where shall we
find him, whose coming is after the working of Satan, but with him, who with
the loss of Christianity exalts himself, and affects an ambitious Tyranny,
and domineering over the Christian World, both Princes, Pastors, and People?
and to uphold the Tyran^y, cares not what havoc he makes of the Church; and
the whole frame of their Relig^on is calculated for secular Honor, Worldly
Pomp and Greatness.

Secondly, By the visible Appearances of the Devil, and where he is most
conversant, as in his own Kingdom. Before Christ's Kingdom was set up, the Devil
did often visibly appear, but since he plays least in sight; when God openly
manifested his Presence by appearing to the Fathers in sundry ways and manners,
as he did before hen spoke to us by his Son, Heb. 1.1, 2. so did Satan;
V^sions Apparitions, and Oracles, were more frequent; and where Christ's
spiritual Kingdom prevails, the World hears less of the^e things; but where
it is obstructed, more. Now two instances in Popery. (1.) In their Chiefs: how
many Conjurers and Necromancers, (who expressly consulted and contracted with
the Devil) from the Year 600. to the Year 1500. the Chair of pestilence
yielded, the Histories tell us. (2.) In oreder (...) the Devil had formerly, in
the times of Popery, and still where it is allowed, incomparably more power
among men, to appear to them, and haunt their Houses, and vex them, than now he
has; all that I say is, haunting of Houses, and Apparitions, were much more
common.

Uses.

1. A detestation of Popery, whatever is of the Devil should be hated by us,
for we are Christ's Soldiers, listed in his Warfare in Baptism, Romans 6.13 Yield
your selves unto God as those that are alive from the dead, and your members as
instruments of righteousness unto God; but yield not your members as
instruments of unrighteousness unto sin: Romans 13.12. Let us cast off the works
of darkness, and put on the Armor of Light: Now after our military Oath should
we revolt to them, that join with the Devil, and his Angels, to make War
against Michael and his angels?

2. To be more careful to be completely armed, For we fight not against flesh
and blood, but principalities and powers, and spiritual wickednesses in
heavenly places, Ephesians. 6.11, 12. that is, not only with the one, but the other.
The Abettors of Popery ae Satan's Auxiliary Forces, whom he stirs up and
employeth. Now the Devils are of great cunning and strength, and by Gods
permission exercise great Authority in the World, and the matter about which we
contend with them, is the Honor of God and Christ, and our Eternal Salvation.
Therefore since the Subtilty, Power and strength of the Enemy is so great, we
had need to be the better prepared, and put on the whole Armor of God. That
bodily and humane Power, that befriendeth the Kingdom of Satan, is formidable,
and that can only reach the outward man; but Devils and damned Spirits are a
more terrible and dangerous party, who secretly blind our minds, and weaken our
courage, and strangely and imperceptibly, by our own carnal affections, promote
our eternal ruin.

3. It shows us the folly of reco^ciling Babel and Sion; Rome, as it is, and
the Reformed Churches, For what concord has Christ with Belial? 2 Cor. 6.15,
16. What agre^ment has the Temple of God with Idols? You can never reconcile
God and Satan, the Seed of the Woman, and the Seed of the Serpent. I speak not
of holy endeavors to adjust the Controversies; and reclaim Papists from their
Errors; that must be pursued, how fruitless soever the attempt be; but ^o hope
for an agreement, as things now stand, is impossible.

4. Caution, that the Devil prevail not against us; he once suprized Peter,
Mat. 16.23. Get thee behind me Satan; he has prevailed over them, that usurp
the highest Chair in the Christian Church. Let him not blind your Eyes in whole
or in part; though you be not drawn to Antichristianism, do not live in a
carnal Worldly course; For this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he
might destroy the works of the Devil, 1 John 3.8. Every wicked act is Satan's
Invention, he stirs it up, is served by it, delights in it, his Kingdom
goes forward by it: He gains by every wicked action. Show plainly, that you
are not of his party, nor ever mean to be. Give way to fleshly and worldly
lusts, and you are very prone to entertain the grossest Temptations; and by
subtle evasions will wriggle and distort your selves out of your duty, as the
Papists do.

I come now to the second means.

Doct. That Antichrist does uphold his Kingdom by a false show of Signs, and
Wonders, and mighty Deeds. To evidence this,

1. We must inquire what is a Miracle. Miracles are works extraordinary,
exceeding, the ability of second causes, and done to confirm the Truth. Where
we may observe,

1. The general nature of them. 2. Their author. 3. Their Use.
1. Their general nature and kinds, extraordinary works. Some are either
besides nature, when the course of nature is changed, as the standing still of
the Sun in Ioshuah's Days, the going back of the shadow on Ahaz his Di^^, in
Hezekiah's time: Above nature, as the opening of the eyes of a man born blind
by Christ, John 9. Against nature, when the operation of it is obstructed, as
when the three Children remained untouched in the Fiery Furnace, Dan. 3. the
fire had not lost its property to burn, for those that cast them in were singed
and scorched.

2. The Author, they are works exceeding the ability of second Causes, and
therefore are always done by the Power of God, either immediately, or
mediately; using some Creature in the performing of them, as the Apostles of
Christ. Well then, the primary efficient cause is God, and the manner of
working is extraordinary and unusual, exceeding the power and force of any
Creature.

3. The end and use is to confirm some Truth; when they are done for Curiosity,
Ostentation, and Delight, they are but juggling tricks, and have not God for
their Author; much less when they are pretended to confirm a false Doctrine, or
evil end. But real Miracles do oblige by way of sign, declaring Gods interest
in, or owning of the truth and Testimony to which they are annex^d. For God
being the Ruler of the World, good, merciful, just, it is not to be supposed he
will cooperate to a lie or cheat, or leave suc^ a stumbling block before his
Creatures.

II. That the Miracles wrought by Christ, and his Apostles, did sufficiently
prove, that they were Teachers sent from God, for Christ often appealeth to his
works, John 5.36. For the works which the Father has given me to finish, the
same works that I do, bear witness of me, and John 10.38. Though ye believe not
me, that is, his personal verbal Testimony, believe the works, that is, his
Miracles, That ye may know and believe, that the Father is in me, and I in him.
And when John sent his Disciples to know, whether he were the Messiah or no,
(not so much for his own Confirmation as their satisfaction) Mat. 11.4. Go,
show him what ye hear and see, and what is that? The blind receive their sight,
the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, and the dead are raised
up, etc. So Nicodemus was convinced by these, John 3.2. We know, that thou art
a teacher come from God; for none can do the works that thou do, except God
were with him. To improve these Scriptures, let us consider, 1. The necessity
of this Attestation. 2. The sufficiency of it.


1. The necessity the^e was, that Christ's Person and Office should be thus
attes^ed: He had the Law of Moses to repeal, which was well known to be Gods
own Law; a yew Law to promulgate, which is the Law of Faith, or the Gospel, and
before this could be received, it was needful for him to manifest his
Authority. Besides, he came to redeem, and recover Sinners to God, from the
Devil, World, and Flesh: And that he might be more readily and cheerfully
entertained, it was necessary to be evidenced, that he came not only by Gods
Permission, but Commission; for him has the Father sealed, John 6.27. that is,
authorized by Miracles. Look as in the first Institution of the Aaronical
Priesthood, Fire came from Heaven to consume the Sacrifices, whereas afterward
the High Priests were consecrated and admitted by the ordinary rites, without
any such attestation: so there was a greater necessity then, when God brought
forth his Son into the World, and ^id first set up the Gospel State, than there
was afterward, when the course and order of it was settled, and received in the
World.

2. The sufficiency of it; the Mir^cles then wrought were numerous, evident,
and undeniable, being done publicly in the sight of all, and therefore the
clearest attestation to his Doctrine, that flesh and blood could expect; such a
stream of holy, necessary Miracles, that were for the most part not acts of
pomp, but of succor and relief, and such as could be done by no power less
than divine; not like those ludicrous Miracles they talk of in Popery which
look like a cheat rather than a sign from Heaven; These Miracles of Christ
could no way be impeached. For either it must be by some truth of God, which
the new Revelation did contradict, and delivered by more certain means than
those Miracles were; but no such Revelation was there, all fairly accorded with
those former Revelations of his mind given to the ancient Church: and Christ
and his Apostles preached no other things, than what suited with Moses and the
Prophets, Acts 26.22. Or else by some greater works, which should contradict
the Testimony of these Wonders; as Moses did the Magicians of Egypt, Exodus
7.18. but no such thing could be alleged, or was pretended, therefore these
were sufficient.

2. After the Faith of Christ was sufficiently confirmed, Miracles ceased; and
it was fit they should cease, for God does nothing unnecessarily: The Christian
Doctrine is the same that it was, and is to be the same till the end of the
World; we have a sure and authentic Record of it, which is the Holy
Scriptures. The Truth of Christ's Office and Doctrine is fully proved, and
comes trasmitted to us, by the consent of many successions of Ages, in whose
experience God has blessed it to the convert^ng, comforting, and saving of
many a Soul. Look as the Jews, every time the Law was brought forth, were not
to expect the Thundrings and Lightnings, and the voice of the terrible Trumpet,
with which it was given at first on Mount Sinai, (one solemn Confirmation
served for after Ages) they knew it was a Law given by the Ministry of Angels,
and so entertained it with Veneration and Respect; so Christianity needed to be
once solemnly confirmed after Ages have the use of the first Miracles: for the
Apostle compares these two things, the giving of the Law and the Gospel, Heb.
1.2, 3, 4. For if the word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every
transgression and disobedience received a just recompense of reward: How shall
we escape if we neglect so great Salvation, which at first began to be spoken
by the Lord, and was confirmed to us by them that heard him? we must be
contented with Gods owning it now, only in the way of his spirit and Providence.

3. That upon the ceasing of Miracles or their growing to be unnecessary, we
have the more cause to suspect them, who will revive this pretense, of a power
to work Miracles; especially after we are cautioned against these delusions, as
here in the Text against the lying wonders of Antichrist, and elsewhere, Mat.
24.24. For there shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall show
great s^gns and wonders, in so much, that if it were possible, they shall
deceive the very Elect* and again, Rev. 13.13. He does great wonders, so that
he makes fire come down from Heaven upon Earth, in the sight of men. But
herein they triumph, when did they ever pretend to do so? Ans. This is not to
be taken literally, for the whole Chapter is mystical; none can be so ignorant,
that Antichrist shall arise as a Beast out of the Sea, with with seven Heads
and ten Horns; therefore to fetch fire from Heaven, is only an allusion to
Elias, that he should pretend to work Miracles, as did Elias, who brought fire
from Heaven, 1 Kings 18.24. and yet in the Letter it was fulfilled in Pope
Hildebrand, or Gregory the VII. as one Paulus, who wrote his Life, testifies,
who mentions diverse wonders of fire wrought by him, and sundry times
resembles him to Elias; the meaning is, he shall make his followers as
confident of their errors, as if they saw fire come from heaven to confirm
them. But to return. We being thus cautioned and forewarned, Miracles thus
performed are deceitful. But you will say, though Miracles are not necessary to
confirm the Faith; yet they are necessary to convince the falsehood of
Heresies? Ans. Heresies being a corruption of the Faith once received, are to
be confuted by Arguments, not Miracles; by evidence of Doctrine, not wonders;
partly, left the people be deceived by magical Impostures, for it requires
some skill to di^tinguish true Miracles from those that are deceitful, and done
by the power of the Devil: partly, because Verum est Index sui and obliqui,
Faith ^tated and confirmed, shows what is Error; so that to confute Error by
Miracles, is nothing but to confirm Truth by Miracles.

4. Whosoever teach false Doctrine, not consonant to the truth of Scriptures,
or that Faith of Christ which was confirmed by Miracles, their Wonders are
lying wonders, and, how plausible soever they seem are lying wonders, and not
to be believed. Surely Miracles must needs be false and pretended, which are
brought to confirm a Doctrine contrary to that which is already confirmed by
Miracles; For God is faithful, and cannot deny himself, and therefore he cannot
be the Author of Miracles, whereby things contrary to ^^ch other may be
confirmed; if the Faith on^e be established by other Miracles, we are to
believe the latter Miracles to be a mere Imposture; for Christ is not yea, and
nay, but yea, and Amen, 1 Cor. 1.19, 20. The Appari^ion of an Angel is a great
Miracle, but if an Angel preach any other Gospel unto you, than that which we
have preached unto you, let him be accursed, Gal. 1.8. It is a supposition of
an impossible Case, necessary to forewarn the people of God against the
delusions of the Devil, changing himself into an Angel of Light. S^rely God
will never contradict himself.

5. The Miracles wrought by Antichrist and his Adherents, are mira, but not
miracula, some wonderful things, but no true and proper Miracles, else, as
Austin faith, figmenta mendacium hominum, portenta fallacium spirituum, either
the fictions of lying men, or the illusions of deceiving Spirits; many times
the matter of fact is not true, at other times the thing done is but some
illusion of the senses by the Devil; or something taken for a Miracle, which
does not exceed the power of nature; either way it is an Imposture: and indeed
the Miracles of the Legends are so false, so ridiculous, so light and trivial,
that they expose Christianity to contempt; or else if there ^e any thing in it,
it gives suspicions of magical illusion and converse with the Devil, which
among their Votaries and Recluses, is no unusual thing.

6. There are seven points in Popery, which they seek to confirm by Miracles,
and which being senseless in themselves do most scandalize Protestants.

1. Pilgrimages, they show the Shrine, and also the Chamber of the House of the
Blessed Virgin: how the Virgin at Loretto was transported out of Galilee into
Dalmatia, and by Angels in the Air to the remote parts of Italy, and settled
there after some removes.

The Story is ridiculous, and I am serious, yet this draws an infinite
Company of Pilgrims there, where new Miracles are pretended to be wrought
continually.

2. Prayers for the dead, Bellarmine alleges out of Gregory, the miraculous
Apparition of Paschal his Ghost, bes^eching St Germanus to pray for him.

3. Purgatory, all their Miracles are framed, especially for the establishing
of this point, which is of such gain to them, as that a dead man's skull spoke
to Mercarias praying, When thou do offer Prayer for the dea^, then do we feel
a little Consolation.

4. The Invocation of Saints^ Alypius a Grammarian, being forsaken of his
Physicians St Tiola appeared to him by night, demanding what he ailed? or what
he would have? He answered, (to show a touch of his Art, in Achilles his Speech
to his Mother Thetis, in Homer, etc.) Thou know, why should I tell thee,
that know all; whereupon she conveyed a round stone to him, with the touch,
of which he was presently healed.

5. The Adoration of Images, but especially of the Cross, Crucifix, and Image
of Christ; Malvenda says, that at Meliapore in the East Indies, where St
Thomas was killed by those barbarous people, digging to lay a foundation they
found a square stone, in it a bloody Cross, and an Inscription implying the
Saint was slain in the very act of adoring and kissing the Cross, hereupon on
went the building, and the Chapel being finished, in the beginning of the
Gospel, in sight of the whole multitude, the Cross did sweat abundantly, the
sweat wiped off, drops of blood appeared in the Linen with which they wiped
it, till at length it returned to its own color.

6. The Adoration of the Host is made good by such a number of Miracles, as
fill whole Volumes. Bellarmine himself tells us of an hungry Mare, kept three
days wihout meat, yet when Provender was poured to her, in the presence of the
Host, she forgetting her meat, with bowed head, and bended knees, adored the
Sacrament.

7. The Primacy of the Pope has been the beginning, and is the end of all
Popish Legends. A Bishop, being excommunicated by Pope Hildebrand, and
inveighing against his Pride, was smitten with a Thunder Clap. Baronius, That
while Pope Eugenius the Third, was Celebrating the Mass, a beam of the sun
shone upon his head, in which were seen two Doves, ascending and descending,
which an Eastern Legate seeing, submitted instantly to the Primacy.

Use. Another note of Antichrist; These Impostures are not only countenanced,
and encouraged in that Church, but made a mark of it, the Power of Miracles.
When Antichrist first appeared, ridiculous Miracles of all sorts began to be
cried up, and established: Yea, and to this day, these are pleaded, challenging
us for the want of them; what they cannot prove by the Oracles of God, they
endeavor to prove by Miracles of Satan.

SERMON VIII.
2 Thessalonians. 2.10. With all deceivableness of unrighteousness in t^^m that perish,
because they received not the love of the truth that they might be saved.


WE have described unto you the head of the Antichristian State; we come now to
the Subjects, especially the zealous Abettors and Promoters of this Kingdom.
They are described, (1.) By the means how they are drawn into this Apostasy
and defection: (...). Secondly, By their doom or misery, they are in a state of
perdition, in them that perish. Thirdly, By their sin, which is the cause and
reason of ^his doom* because they received not the^love of the truth that they
might be saved.

1. The means, with all deceivableness of unrighteousness. That Antichrist
shall be a deceiver, and that he deceives by lying Miracles, we have seen
already, and is foretold, Rev. 13.14. And deceives them that dwell on the
earth by the means of those miracles which he had power to do in the sight of
the beast, etc. but the deceived are not altogether guiltless, for the fraud
would soon be discovered by an holy and pure Soul: His great engine is either
the baits of lust and sin, which work on none but those that have pleasure in
unrighteousness; verse 12. the gene^ality of wicked and carnal Christians, are
easily drawn from Gods pure worship, and true Godliness: or by Wordly means,
either by the offers of preferment, riches, dignities, or else terrors of the
flesh. Now none catch at these wordly baits but whose eyes the God of this
World has blinded, 2 Cor. 4.4.

Secondly, Their misery, they are said to be those that perish. That bears
three senses. (1.) That they are worthy to perish, because they do not use care
and diligence to understand their duty, being blinded by their wordly
affections. That is the mildest se^^e we can put upon it, they deserve to
perish. No man perishes but for his own fault, Hos. 13.9. O Israel thou have
^^stroyed thy self, but in me is thy help. Now they that will yield to the
deceivableness of unrighteousness, justly perish* though there be de^eit in the
Case, yet there is unrighteousness in the Case also. Fraudulent dealing should
not so cozen us, as apparent unrighteousness, o^ unfaithfulness ^o Christ
should warn us. 2. That they are in an actual state of perdition and unl^ss
they come out of it, are undone for ever. The Apostles when they propounded
Ch^istian Doctrine at first, did use this term to distinguish impenitent
unbelievers, from those that received the Gospel, as 1 Cor. 1.18. The preaching
of the Cross is to them that perish foolishness, but unto us that are saved,
the power of God. So 2 Cor. 2.15. We are unto God a sweet savor of Christ, in
them that perish, and in them that are saved. So he distinguishes them that
receive the Faith, and them that receive it not; pe^itent believers are those
that are saved, but impenitent unbelievers are those that perish; that is, are
for the present, during their infidelity and impenitency, in an actual state of
perdition. So 2 Cor. 4.3. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to those that are
lost: that i^, who are for the present in a lost condition. We know not Gods
secret decrees, but those that refuse and oppose the only remedy, to all
appearance are lost men. Now this he applye^h to those that yield to
Antichrist, showing them that though they are Christians, yet they have no more
benefit the Gospel than Infidels, they receive not the truth, these revolt from
the owning of it upon carnal reasons. And therefore it is foretold, Rev. 14.9,
10. If any man worship the Beast and his Image, and receive his mark in his
forehead, and in his hand, the same shall drink of the wrath of God, which is
poured out without mixture, into the Cup of his indignation, and he shall be
tormented with fire and brimstone, in the presence of the holy Angels, and the
presence of the Lamb. That is, all those that give up themselves as Servants
and Soldiers to the Antichristian Estate, and obstinately adhere to, and
promote that profession; they shall taste of the Mediators vengeance, which
will be very sore and severe, Luke 19.27. These mine Enemies, which would not
that I should reign over them, bring them forth, and slay them before me.
Popery is the high way to damnation. 3. It bears this sense, that they are
f^^e appointed to perish who are left to these delusions. They are such as God
has past by, and not chosen to life: This is to be considered also, for
damnable errors take not effect on Gods Elect. Mat. 24.24. If it were possible,
they shall deceive the very elect. The Elect cannot altogether be seduced and
drawn away from Christ, for God takes them into his protection, and guardeth
them against the delusions of false Prophets, that if they be for a time, they
shall not always be deceived. So it is said, Rev. 13.4. The Locusts shall hurt
none of those that had the seal of God in their foreheads. The delusions of
Antichrist have only their full effect on those who are not elected and sealed;
upon the Hypocritical professors that live in the visible Church. So it is said
again, Rev. 13.8. All that dwell upon the earth shall worship him, whose names
are not written in the Lambs book of life. And again, Rev. 17.8. And they that
dwell on the earth, shall wonder (whose names were not written in the book of
life, from the foundation of the world) The Elect are still excepted, which is
much for the comfort of the Godly, who belong to Gods Election, that he shall
not prevail over them, totally, finally, God has chosen you to life.

Thirdly, The reason of this doom, because they received not the love of the
truth, that they might he saved. By the truth is meant the Gospel, the chief
truth revealed in Gods word, and the only means of Salvation, Ephesians. 1. ^ In whom
also ye trusted, after that ye heard the word of truth, the Gospel of your
Salvation. This is the truth most profitable to lost Sinners: receiving is put
for entertaining, or believing the words, as Acts 8.14. When they heard that
Samaria had received the word of God and Acts 11.1. That the Gentiles had
received the word, and elsewhere. This reception must be with love, Acts 2.41.
As many as received the word gladly, and Acts 17.11. They received the word
with readiness of mind. And this affection must produce its effect, so as to
convert them unto God. Now this is denied of them who are seduced by
Antichrist, that they never had any true love to the truth, nor minded it in
order to their Salvation. Now the business is, whether the clause concerned
only the Jews, or can be applied to Christians. The Jews clearly received not
the love of the truth, but did refuse Christ, and his Salvation: And herein the
Papists glory of an advantage of turning off this Prophecy from themselves. But
the Apostle speaks not of rejecting the truth but of not receiving the love
of the truth: which is not proper to the Jews, but to false Christians. The
Jews Company rejected Christ, and Antichrist was not sent to them for a
punishment: but wrath came upon them to the uttermost, to the excision and
cutting off their Nation. But here is rendered the reason not of other
Judgments, but why men are Captives to Antichrist. Therefore it is not so to be
confined.

Doct. 1. The subjects of Antichrists power and seduction, are those that
perish.

2. The great reason why God sent this Judgment on the Christian World, is,
because they receieved not the love of the truth.

1. Doct. That the subjects of Antichrists power and seduction, are those that
perish.

It is a dreadful argument we are upon, yet necessary to be known for our
caution, however to be handled warily. (1.) It is certainly more meet for us to
have a regard of our own estate, than curiously to enquire what becomes of
others. The Apostle waveth judging them that are without, 1 Cor. 5.12. I know
he means it of the censures of the Church, which are not exercised upon
Infidels, but Christians; but so far we may apply i^ to this case, that we
should not rashly judge of the eternal state of other persons, but rather of
things wherein our selves are concerned. If the enquiry were only matter of
curiosity, surely Christ's rebuke would silence it, What is that to thee, Joh.
21.20. for Christ is ill pleased with curiosity about the state of other men
but it is fit we should know our own duty and danger, and to that end it must
be discussed. (2.) That there is a great diffi^ulty of the Salvation of
Papists, so living and dying, if not an utter impossibility. Partly because,
though it should be supposed that they retain the foundation, yet they build
such Hay, and stubble upon it; so many errors in Doctrine, corruptions in
Worship, and Tyranny in Government, that if a man could be sa^ed, he is saved
but as by fire, 1 Cor. 3.13. and no man that has a care of his Soul, will
either embrace Popery, or continue in it; where the way is plainest, there are
difficulties enough, and the righteous are scarcely saved, and therefore in a
questionable way, none should venture. Worshipping of Angels and Saints
departed, and Images, are no light thing. Nor will a serious Christian choose
that way where the Doctrines of the Gospel are so exceedingly corrupted, and
there is such a manifest invasion of the Authority of Christ, by c^allenging an
Universal Headship over his Church, without his leave, and this maintained by
errors and persecutions. (3.) We must distinguish of those that lived under
Popery, rather as Captives under this Tyranny, than voluntary Subjects of this
Kingdom of Antichrist: As many holy men did in former times, groaning and
mourning under the abominations, rather than countenancing and p^omoting them.
To these God speaks when he said, Rev. 18.4. Come out of her my people, that
ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues. They
were his people while they were there. These were as those seven thousand in
Israel that had not bowed the knee to Baal, Romans 11.4. (4.) There is a
difference to be put between those that err in the simplicity of their hearts,
knowing no better; and t^ose that withstand the light upon carnal reasons, and
will not retract their errors, though convinced of the degeneration of
Christianity. For simple ignorance is not so damning as obstinate error. Luke
12.48. But he that knew not, and did commit things worthy of stripes, shall be
beaten with few stripes, etc. and 1 Timothy 1.13. But I obtained mercy because I
did it ignorantly in unbelief. The Scriptures many times condemn a way as a way
of ruin, but all in that way are not damned, as John 4.22. Salvation is of the
Jews: There it is eminently dispensed, and yet therefore it follows not, that
all the Samaritans were damned. Some among them though tainted with the errors
of their Country, might have such knowledge of the law of God, and love to him,
as might be effectual to Salvation. (5.) We must distinguish between Papists so
living, and so dying; many by Gods grace, may have repentance conferred upon
them at death; and though they lived Papists, might die as reformed Christians
seeking Salvation by Christ alo^e, in the way of true Faith and Repentance, and
so the Lord may manifest his compassion to them, pardoning the errors of their
lives. (6.) We must distinguish Times. God might dispense with many in the
times of universal darkness and Captivity, more than he does afterward, when
the light of the Gospel breaks forth, and his Trumpet is sounded to call them
forth. Whosoever shall compare John Fierus, and John Calvin will find they were
assisted by the same Holy Spirit of God: though the one lived and died a
Papist, and the o^^er was ^n eminent instrument in reforming the Church of God;
but an ignorant fear of separation from the Catholic Church, caused many to do
as they did; but much more does it hold good in the times before. Our Fathers
if alive would not have condemned us, nor should we condemn them being dead,
before they had these advantages which we now enjoy. Illi si reviviscerent,
etc. says Austi^ in a like Case. (7.) We must distinguish between Popish
Errors, some are more Capital, as Adorations of Images, Inovocation of Saints,
Justification by the merit of Works, Inhibition of the Scriptures, etc. others
not so deadly, as when too much reverence is given to Ecclesiastical Orders and
Constitutions, Penance, Auricular Confession, Fasting, etc. Now though the Case
of a re^l Papist, who is complete in this mystery of I^i^uity, and refuses,
hates, persecuteth the truth offered, be desperate, yet the Lord ^ay in tender
mercy accept of other devout Souls, who yet live in that way, if they hold the
head and the foundation.

1. Use. Let us not think Popery a light thing, which the Lord so peremptorily
threatens. Surely, it is no li^^^e mercy that we are freed from it. Therefore
we should be thankful for the light we have, and improve it well while we have
it, and hold it fast. What hope soever we may have of men living in former
times, and foreign Countries, where they knew no better, but after such express
warnings, what hope can we have of English Papists, considering the time when
Rome is not grown better but worse, and what was common opinion, is now made an
Article of Faith; and when the truth is taught and so clearly manifested* so
that for any by their own voluntary choice, to run into Popery, it is a p^ain
defection from Christ to Antichrist; and wilfully to drink that poison which
will be the bane and ruin of your Souls.

2. The great reason why God sent this Judgment upon the Christian World; is to
punish those that received not the love of the Truth.

Here I shall enquire, 1. How many ways men ^ay be said, not to receive the
love of the truth. 2. How just their punishment is f^r such a sin.

1. I^ stating this sin, 1. It is supposed that ^he truth and doctrine of
Christ, is made known to a people, yea comes among them with great Evidence,
Conviction and Authority. For it is not the want of means, but want of love,
that it is charged on them; And the plenty of means aggravateth their fault,
and makes their Condemnation the ^ore just. John. 3.19. This is the
Condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness more
than light. The truth was not for their turns, but was contrary to their lusts,
and passions, and prejudices, and these they preferred before the light of the
Gospel shining to them.

2. That as inevidence of doctrine was not the cause of not receiving the
truth; so not bare weakness of understanding: no it is not weakness but
wilfulness which is here intimated, not a defect of their minds, but their
hearts, Joh. 8.15. Because I tell you the truth, ye believe me not: It was not
weakness but prejudice hindered their believing. They despised the grace of God,
yea hated it, for their lusts sake: Their lusts lie more in opposition to the
truth, than speculative doubts and errors: Luke 16.14. And the Pharisees, who
were covetous, when they heard all these things, they derided him; the words
are, blew their Noses at him. The sensual, carnal, and ungodly World scorneth
heavenly doctrine, and pure Christianity is distasted by false Christians. Err
in mind, err in heart.

3. It is not enough to receive the truth in the light of it, but we must also
receive it in the love of it, or it will do us no good. To make the truth
operative, (1.) Knowledge is necessary, and also Faith; and then Love.
Knowledge, for without knowledge the heart is not good, Prove. 19.2. Nothing can
come to the heart but by the mind; the will is (...), a choice, or des^re
guided by reason, and the Gospel does not work as a charm, whether it be or be
not understood: No, the purport or drift of it must be known, or how can it
have any effect upon us? Next to knowledge, to make it work, there must be
Faith: when we apprehend a thing, we must judge of it, whether it be true or
false, how else can it make any challenge, or lay claim to our respect? 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. Ye received it not as the word of men, but (as it is truth) the
word of God, which works effectually in you, as it does in all them that
believe. Faith does inliven our actions about Religion; to hear of God, and
Christ, and Heaven, does not stir us unless we believe these things. Well, next
to Faith there must be Love, for apprehension and dijudication are acts of the
understanding only, but love belongs to the will, and we must believe with
all the heart, Acts 8.37. There may be knowledge without Faith as an Heathen
may understand the Christian Religion, though he believe it not, profess it
not: And there may be Faith without love, for there is a dead faith, James
2.20. which rests in cold opinions, without any affec^ion to the truth
believed. Love pierces deeper into the truth, and makes it pierce deeper into
us. As a red hot Iron though never so blunt, will run farther into an inch
board, than a cold Tool, though never so sharp. And love makes it more
operative; there is notitia per visum, and notitia per gustum, A knowledge by
sight, and a knowledge by tas^: A man may guess at the goodness of Wine by the
Color, but more by the taste, that is a more refreshing apprehension. And
Augustine prays, Fac me Domine gustare per amoren quod gusto per cognitionem.
Lord make me taste that by love which I taste by knowledge. Surely we are never
sound in Christianity, till all the light that we receive, be turned into love.
These great things are revealed and represented to our Faith, not to please our
minds by knowing them, but to quicken our Love. Faith alone is but as sight,
and Faith with Love is as taste. Now it is more easy to dispute a man out of his
belief, that only sees, than it is him that tastes, and knows the grace of
God in truth. This is the true reason of the stedfastness of weak and unlearned
Christians, though they have not such distinct conceptions, and reasonings, as
ma^y learned men have; yet their Faith is turned into love, and a man is better
held by the heart than by the head: And though they cannot dispute for Christ
(as one of the Martyrs said) they can die for Christ. But alas, many receive
the truth in the light thereof, but few receive it in the love of it, and so
lie open to deceit.

4. This love must not be a slight affection, for that will soon vanish, but
we must be rooted and well grounded, and have a good strenght. The stony ground
had some love to the word, Matthew. 13.20, 21. But he that receives the word in
stony places, the same is he that hears the word, and anon with joy receives
it; yet he has not root in himself, but dureth but a while, for when
Tribulation of Persecution rises, because of the word, by and by he is
offended. So also of the Thorny ground. He hears the word, and the care of
this World, and the deceitfulness of riches, choke the word, and he becomes
unfruitful, ver. 22. Now what are the defects of this love? 1. It is not
radicated: A pang of Love, or flash of Zeal: whereas we should be rooted and
grounded in love, Ephesians. 3.17. Hypocrites had a t^st, Heb. 6. 4, 5. For it is
impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the Heavenly
gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the good word
of God, and the powers of the world to come, if they shall fall away, to renew
them again unto repentance. Tasted, but did but taste; did escape (...), 2 Pet.
2.20 yet not having a good Conscience, may make Shipwreck of Faith, 1. Tim.
1.19. 2. It is partial. The Gospel offers great privileges, and it is also a
pure holy rule of obedience: Acts 2.41. This word of God is made up of Precepts
and Promises: God offers in the Covenant exce^lent benefits, upon gracious
terms and conditions, there must be a consent to the terms as well as an
acceptance of the privileges: The confidence of the privileges, serves to
wean us from the false happiness, therefore that must be kept up, Heb. 3.6. But
Christ as a Son over his own House, whose are we, if we hold fast the
confidence, and the rejoicing of the firm unto the end. And the consent to the
terms, binds our duty upon us, Isa. 56.4. Now as willingly as we yielded at
first, we must keep up the same fervor still, Deuteronomy. 5.29. Oh that there were
such an heart in them, that they would fear me and keep all my Commandments
always; That it might be well with them and with their Children for ever. But
whole pure Christianity is not loved by false Christians; therefore when
Religion crosses their interests, and the bent of their lusts, they seek to
bring Religion to their hearts, not their hearts to Religion. 3. It is not
strong, and in such a prevalent degree, as to control other affections: it is
but a passion, a pleasure, and a delight they take on for a time, not the
effect of solid judgment and resolution: A joy easily controuled and overcome
with other delights; therefore Christ requires a denial of all things, for a
close adherence to him and his Doctrine. And has told us, Matthew. 10.37. He
that loves Father and Mother more than me, is not worthy of me, and Luke
14.26. Cannot be my Disciple. This is a love to which all other loves must give
way, and be subordinate. Many love the truth a little, but love other things
more, will be at no cost for it. Solomon gives advice, Prove. 23.23. Buy the
truth and sell it not. In lesser points we must do nothing against the truth,
for though the matter contended for be never so small, yet sincerity is a great
point; but in the greater truths we should purchase the knowledge of them at
any rate, and be faithful to Christ what ever it cost us. 4. This slight love
may arise from Worldly respects. Now in the Text, it is said, they received not
the love of the truth that they might be saved. It should arise upon eternal
reasons and considerations of the other World which only produce abiding
affections; Heb. 10.39. We are not of them that draw back to ^erdition, but of
them that believe to the saving of the Soul. In closing with Christianity, that
must be fixed as our scope, not to spare ^he flesh, but to save the Soul: and
to save the Soul with the loss of other things, and that will make us true to
Christ. But there are many foreign reasons for which men may s^ew some love to
Religion. As first, Policy* as Ieh^ took up Ionadab into the Chariot with him,
2 Kings 10.15. there is his complement to him: Ionadab was a good man, and this
honored him before the people, to see Iehu and Ionadab so well acquainted.
Sometimes respect to others upon whom we depend: many seem to be good because
they dare not displease others that have authority over them, or an interest in
them: as Ioash was religious all the days of Iehoiada, for he stood in awe of
him, 1 Chronicles. 24.2. Now such sorry Religion depends on foreign accidents, The
life of others or presence of others, and therefore it cannot be durable:
whereas in presence or absence we should work out our Salvation with fear and
trembling, Phil. 2.12. otherwise men only keep within compass for a while, but
they have the root of sin within them still. Or it may be novelty; as our Lord
tells the Jews: John was a burning and shining light; and ye were willing to
rejoice in his light for a season. John was an eminent man for pureness of
Doctrine, and vigor of Zeal and the more corrupt sort of Jews, Pharisees as
well as others, admired him for a while, but they soon grew weary of him, it
was a fit of zeal for the present. Lastly, This love may be to the excellency
of gifts, bestowed upon some Minister or Instrument, whom God raises up, or
some countenance of great men given to their Ministry, may stir up some love
and attendance on their Ministry, and some respect is given for their sakes,
when men have no sound grace in their hearts. There is a receiving of the word,
as the word of man, and a receiving of the word, as the word of God, as the
Apostle intimates, 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. The receiving of the word as the word of
man, so it works only an humane passion, a delight in the gifts of the
Ministry used, Ezech. 33.32. Thou art to them as a lovely Song of one that has
a pleasant voice. Then there is a receiving it as the word of God, and then we
receive it with much assurance and joy in the Holy Ghost, 1 Thessalonians. 1.5. Our
Gospel came to you, not in word, but in power, and much assurance and joy in
the Holy Ghost. Now if we do not receive the truth upon Gods recommendation and
confirmation, we do not love truth as truth; our contest is not who has most
wit and parts, but most grace. 5. They do not receive the love of the truth
when it does not produce its solid effects, which is a change of heart and
life: And they are not brought by the Gospel to a sincere repentance and
conversion to God, or receive the truth so as to live by it: but whilst they
have the names of Christians, have the lives and hearts of Atheists and
Infidels. These were those that debauched Christianity, and meritorie and
effective, by their provocations and negligence, brought this degeneracy into
the Church and Judgment on the Christian World. Certainly a man hates that
Religion, which he does profess when he will not live by it: This
perfidiousness and breach of Covenant, was that which provoked God to permit
these delusions in the Church. The wordly, sensual, carnal Christians, that
hate that life which their Religion calls for. The Godly Christian, and the
Carnal Christian, have the same Bible, the same Creed, the same Baptism, yet
they hate one another as if they were of different Religions, and confound the
distinction between the World and the Church, because the World is in the
Church. And of sensual and godless men, we must speak as Heathens, as if they
were without God, they abhor that Religion which they do profess. That is, they
abhor not the name, but they abhor those that are faithful to it, and serious
in it: who desire to know God in Christ, and desire to love him, and live to
him. It was that Christ taxed in the Pharisees, they honored the dead Saints,
and abhorred the living, Matthew. 23.29, 30, 31. Woe unto you, Scribes, and
Pharisees, Hypocrites, because ye build the Tombs of the Prophets, and garnish
the Sepulchers of the righteous, and say, if we had been in the days of our
Fathers, we would not have been partakers with them, in the blood of the
Prophets. Wherefore ye be witnesses unto your selves, that ye are the Children
of them which killed the Prophets. Christ has not worse Enemies in the World,
than those that usurp his name, and pretend to be his Officers, and yet eat and
drink with the drunken, and beat their fellow Servants, Matthew. 24.49. Christ
will disown such at the day of Judgment, Matthew. 7.22, 23. Many will say unto me
in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name, and in thy name
have cast out Devils, and in thy name done many wonderful works, and then will
I profess unto them I never knew you? Depart from me ye that work iniquity. And
such do most dishonor him in the World. A righteous, sober, godly life, is the
best evidence of our love to the truth.

2. How just this punishment is, (1.) Because God has ever held this course on
the Pagan World, who kept not the natural knowledge of God, he gave them up to
vile affections, Romans 1.28. The Jews who rejected Christ, Joh. 5.43. I am come
in my Fathers name, and ye receive me not, another will come in his own name,
and him will ye receive. When Christ comes merely for our benefit, the
unthankful World will not make him welcome, but they will take worse in his
room. So toward Christians; At first men would not receive the Gospel, while
it was pure, and in its simplicity, as taught by Christ and his Apostles, and
sealed by the blood of the Martyrs, till it was backed by a Wordly Interest,
and co^rupted into a Wordly design; and then they had it and all manner of
superstitions together, and with these strong delusions there came just
damnation. So still the pure Gospel is refused, and God sends Popish Seducers
as a just Judgment; men only prize the light as it may serve their turn (2.)
The neglect and contempt of the truth is so heinous a sin, that it deserves
the greatest punishment: Heb. 2.3. How shall we escape, if we neglect so great
salvation? now it is revenged by these err^rs, as a just judgment on the
perverseness and unthankfulness of the World. The duties of the Gospel being so
unquestionable, show their perverseness. The privileges of the Gospel being so
excellent, their unthankfulness is more intolerable.

1. Use is to show us what cause we have to fear a return of Popery: Alas,
where is this love of the truth? (1.) Some are Gospel-glutted, loath Manna, a
full-fed people must expect a Famine, Amos 8.2. In differences between God and
Baal, Christ and Antichrist, few are valiant for the truth, Ier. 9.3. And they
bend their tongue like their bow for lies, but they are not valiant for the
truth upon the earth: for they proceed from evil to evil, and they know not me,
says the Lord. Contend earnestly. Jude 3. It was needful for me to write unto
you, and to exhort you, that you should earnestly contend for the Faith which
was once delivered unto the Saints. Again, (2.) There are many sensualists,
unclean and carnal Gospellers, to these God owes a Judgment. Usually the
Gospel is removed and given to a Nation that will bring forth the fruits
thereof. They that use the truth only or principally for their own turns, hate
to be reformed, God will reckon with them, Psalm. 50.16, 17. But unto the wicked
God says, What have thou to do to declare my Statutes? or that thou should
take my Covenant into thy mouth? seeing thou hate instruction, and castest my
words behind thee.

2. Use shows you indeed, that you love the Gospel. Carentia remedii, is a
grievous misery, or else Christ had not come as a great Blessing. Neglectus
remedii, is a grievous sin, to be lazy in a matter of such moment. Those that
never set their hearts to obey the truth. Crassa negligentia dolus est. There
should be constant purpose, endeavor, striving, and not cease striving, till
we in some measure prevail; rejectio, or contemptio remedii, if we put away the
word of God from us, Acts 13.46. Then Paul and Barnabas waxed bold, and said,
it was necessary, that the word of God should first have been spoken to you:
but seeing ye pu^ it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of everlasting
life; lo, we turn to the Gentiles. God will be gone, if not from the Land,
from thy Soul. This is the most heinous iniquity of all, Heb. 10.28, 29. He
that despised Moses his Law died without mercy under two or three witnesses: of
how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who has
trodden under foot the Son of God, and has counted the blood of the Covenant
wherewith he was sanctified a^ unholy thing, and has done despite unto the
Spirit of grace? So Esau's despising his Birthright, Heb. 12.15. Lest there be
any Fornicator, or profane person, as Esau, who for one morsel of meat, sold
his Birthright, for ye know how that afterward, when he would have inherited
the Blessing, he was rejected: for he found no place of repentance, though he
sought it carefully with ^ears.

SERMON IX.
2 Thessalonians. 2.11, 12. And for this cause, God shall send them strong delusions,
that they should believe a lie.

That they all might be damned, who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness.


WE have considered the sin of those seduced by Antichrist: now the Judgment:
It is twofold. (1.) Delusion in this World, verse 11. (2.) Damnation in the
next, verse 12.

1. Delusion in this World; where, take notice of three things.

1. The Author of it, God shall send it. 2. The degree, or nature of the
punishment, strong delusion. 3. The issue of it, that they should believe a lie.

2. Their punishment in the next World, That they all might be damned, who
believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness where take notice,
(1.) Of the terribleness of it, it is no less than everlasting damnation, (...)
for (...). 2. The Justice and Equity of it: They believed not the truth, but
had pleasure in righteousness.

1. I begin with their Judgment in this World. For this cause God shall send
them strong delusions, that they should believe a lie.

Doct. That by Gods just Judgment there is an infatuation upon the Followers
and Abettors of Antichrist, that they swallow the grossest errors, to their own
destruction.

To clear this I shall speak, 1. To the Author. 2. The degree or kind of the
punishment. 3. The effect and issue.

1. As to the Author, (...). Here a difficulty arises. For God is not, and
cannot be the Author of sin. He that is essentially good, cannot be the cause
of evil. And he that is Vltor peccati, the avenger of sin, cannot be Author
peccati, the Author of it: If he should cause man to sin, how will his
punishment of it be just? I Answ. As it is a sin, God has no hand in it, but
as it is a punishment of sin, God has to do in it.

To clear this to you, consider,

1. He that is the supreme Lord and Governor of his Creatures, is also their
Judge. For Legislation and Judgment belong to the same Authority. And therefore
God is called sometimes our King, and sometimes o^r Judge. Genesis 18.25. Shall
not the Judge of all the earth do right? Romans 5.6. Is God un^ighteous? how then
shall he judge the World? That is his Office and Prerogative.

2. Gods way of judging for the present, is either external, or internal. As
for instance, there are two acts of Judicature, Reward and Punishment. In
rewarding, Gods external Government is seen: in dispensing outward Blessings to
his people, as the fruit of their obedience, Micah 2.7. Do not my words do good
to him that walks uprightly? His promises speak good, and as fulfilled do
good: yield protection, maintenance, and such a measure of outward prosperity,
as supporteth and maintains them, during their service. David owned Gods
dealing with him in this sort: Psalm. 119.56. This I had because I kept thy
Precepts. So as to his internal Government, in giving them peace of Conscience,
and Joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14.17. For the Kingdom of God is not meat and
drink, but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. Pro. 3.17. Her
ways (are) ways of pleasantness, and all her paths (are) peace. These are the
internal rewards of obedience. And so also God often rewards grace with
grace. As Isa. 58.13, 14. If tho^ turn away thy foot from the Sabbath (from)
doing thy pleasure on my holy day, and call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of
the Lord honorable, and shall honor him, not doing thy own ways, nor finding
thine own pleasure, nor speaking (thine own) words: Then shall thou delight thy
self in the Lord; and I will cause thee to ride upon the high places of the
earth: and feed thee with the heritage of Jacob thy Father: for the mouth of
the Lord has spoken (it.) Psalm. 31.24. Be of good Courage, and he shall
strengthen your heart, all ye that hope in the Lord. Proficiency in the same
grace, is a reward of the several acts, and exercise of it. So in punishing
sometimes he uses the way of external Government, by the terrib^e Judgments
exercised upon men for the breach of his Law. Romans 1.18. For the wrath of God
is revealed from Heaven, against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men,
who hold the truth in unrighteousness. Heb. 2.2. Every transgression and
disobedience, received a just recompense of reward. Sometimes the way of
internal Government by terrors of Conscience, or punishing sin committed with
sin permitted: both these parts are seen in punishing both the godly and the
wicked; as for instance in the godly, in the way of external Government, 1 Cor.
11.32. But when we are judged, we are chastned of the Lord, that we should not
be condemned with the World. In the way of internal Government, the lesser
penal withdrawings of the Spirit, which Gods people find themselves after some
sins and neglects of grace, are grievous: But the Judgments upon the Souls of
the ungodly, are most dreadful, when the sinner is either terrified or
stupi^ied: terrified by horrors of Conscience, 1 Cor. 15.56. The sting of death
is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law; or stupefied by being given up to
their own hearts Counsels, Psalm. 81.12. So I gave them up unto their own hearts
lusts: and they walked in their own Counsels. So that the Sinner is left dull,
and senseless, and past feeling. Ephesians. 4.18. Having the understanding darkened,
being alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in them,
because of the blindness of their heart: by the first, by horrors of
Conscience, they are made to feel Gods displeasure at the courses they walk in;
but when that is long depised and men sin on still, then the other and more
terrible Judgment comes. For the giving up a Sinner to his own lusts, and his
losing all remorse, is the last and sorest Judgment on this side Hell.

3. As to Gods internal Judgments, the Scripture chiefly insists upon two parts
of this internal dispensation, blindness of mind, and hardness of heart, they
usually go together. Blindness of mind is spoken of, John 12.39, 40. Therefore
they could not believe, because that Esaias said again, he has blinded their
eyes, and hardened their hearts, that they should not see with their eyes, nor
understand with their heart, and be converted, and I should heal them. All
passages are obstructed, whereby the word might enter and work Conversion unto
God. It was God laid this punishment of blindness upon them. Hardness of heart,
in that famous instance, Exodus 4.21. I will harden Pharaohs heart. God does not
make them that see, blind; nor them that are soft, hard; but leaves them to
their own prejudice, obstinacy, and unperswadeableness, and that when highly
provoked. The former is under our consideration.

4. To understand Gods concurrence as a Judge, we must not say too much of it,
nor too little. We must not say too much of it, lest we leave a stain and
blemish upon the divine Glory; God infuseth no sin, no blindness nor hardness
into the hearts of men, all influences from Heaven are good; he conveyeth no
deceit into the minds of men immediately, nor does he command or persuade men
to oppose the truth. Nor does he impe^ or excite their inward propensions so to
do. All this belongs not to God, but either to man or Satan. Nor must we say
too little; as for instance, God is not said to blind or harden by bare
prescience or foresight that they will be blinded or hardened; because God
foreseeth other things, and yet they are not ascribed unto God: as that men
will kill, or steal, or do wrong, and yet God is not said to kill, or steal, as
he is said to blind and harden; and therefore there is a difference between
Gods concurrence to this effect, and other sins. Nor only by way of
manifestation, as if this were all the sense that in the course of his
Providence God does in the issue declare how blind and hard they are. That some
other thing is meant by it, is seen in the Prayers by which we deprecate this
heavy Judgment; As when the Saints pray, Isa. 63.17. Lord harden not our hearts
from thy fear, or David, Psalm. 119.19. Lord hide not thy Commandments from me.
They mean not thus, Lord show not to the World how hard and blind I am, but
cure my blindness and hardness of heart: keep back this Judgment from me. Again
we must not say, that all that God does, is a bare, naked, and idle permission,
as if it happened besides his will and intention, and God had no more to do in
it, than a man that stands on the shore, and sees a Ship ready to be
drowned, he might have he^ped it, but permitted it. No, besides all this, there
is not a bare permission only, but a permissive intention, and a judicial
sentence, which is seconded by an active Providence. Many things concur to the
blinding of the mind, and hardening of the heart, all which God wills but
justly. The wicked take occasions of their own accord, to blind and harden
themselves. Satan tempts of his own ma^ice, but all this could not be done
with effect and success, without the will of God. There is a supreme power
overruling, and ordering all that is done in the World.

5. Gods concurrence may be stated by these things. (1.) His withdrawing, or
taking away the light and direction of his Holy Spirit, Deuteronomy. 29.4. The Lord
has not given you an heart to perceive, nor eyes to see, nor ears to hear*
unto this day. Now when God lets them loose to their own hearts Counsels, then
they fall into damnable errors. A Greyhound held in by a slip or Collar,
runs violently after the Hare, when it is in sight: as soon as the slip and
Collar is taken away, the restraint is gone, and his inbred disposition
carries him. So men that are greedy of Worldly things, are powerfully drawn
into errors, countenanced by the World, when God takes off the restraint of
his Grace, and gives them up to their own lusts. Now herein God is not to be
blamed: for he is Debtor to none, and the grace of his Spirit is forfeited by
their not receiving the love of the truth. He is so far from being bound to
give grace, that he seems to be bound in Justice to withdraw what is given
already, by men's wickedness and ingratitude. Voluntary blindness brings penal
blindness; And because men will not see, they shall not see. And when they wink
hard, and shut their eyes against the light of the Gospel; it is just with God
in this manner to smite them with blindness: And since they had no love to the
truth, they are given up to errors and deceits: And because they despise the
Holy Scriptures, they dote on vain Fables: And would not take up a course of
sound Godliness and Holiness, he suffers them to weary themselves with sundry
superstitions.

2. Not only by desertion, but by tradition, delivering them up to the power of
Satan, 2 Cor 4.4. The God of this world has blinded their eyes. Satan as the
Executioner of Gods Curse, works upon the corrupt nature of man, and
deceives them. It is said, 1 Chronicles. 21.1. Satan stood up against Israel, and
provoked David to number Israel. But it is said, 2 Samuel 24.1. And the Anger of
the Lord was kindled against Israel, and he moved David against them, to say,
go, number Israel and Judah. How shall we reconcile these two places? God gave
him over to be tempted by Satan. By God, as a Judge; by Satan, as an
Executioner. Temptations to sin come immediately from the Devil, but they are
governed by God, for holy and righteous ends. So again, 1 King 22.22. The evil
Spirit had leave and Commission, to be a lying Spirit in Ahabs Prophets, Go
forth and do so, and thou shall prevail with him. There is a permissive
intention, not an effective: when they grieve his Spirit, God withdraws and
leaves them to the evil Spirit, who works by their fleshly and worldly lusts,
and then they are easily seduced, who prefer Worldly things before Heavenly.

3. There is an active providence which raises such instruments, and
propounds such objects, as meeting with a naughty heart, do sore blind it.
(1.) For instruments, Job 22.16. The deceived and the deceiver are hi^. Take it
in Worldly, or take it in Religious matters, man's deceiving others, or being
deceived by others, it is of God; for it is said, both are his; not only his
Creatures, but subject to the government and disposal of providence, how and
whom they shall deceive, and how far they shall deceive. So Ezech. 14.9. If the
Prophet be deceived that has spoken a thing, I the Lord have deceived him.
This is a great transaction in the World, a sad judgment not to be cavilled,
but trembled at. For man's ingratitude, God raises up false Prophets to seduce
them that delight in lies, rather than in the truths of God. (2.) For objects,
wicked instruments varnish and dress up this cause* with all the art they can,
to make it a powerful deceit, and then it is befriended and countenanced by the
powers of the World, and so easily prevails with them, who are moved either
with worldly hopes or fears, and have debauched their Conscience by worldly
respects. God says, Jer. 6.21. I will lay stumbling blocks before this people.
If we will find the sin, God will find the occasion: If Judas has a mind to
buy his Master, he shall not want Chapmen to bargain with him; the Priests were
consulting to destroy Christ at the same time that the Devil put it into his
heart, Matthew. 26.3 being Alarmed by the Miracle of raising Lazarus. Birds and
Fishes are easily deceived with such baits as they greedily catch at, so God by
his just vengeance orders such occurences and occasions as take with a
naughty and carnal heart.

2. The degree or kind of the punishment, (...), we render it strong delusion,
or the efficacy of error, that is, such delusion as shall have a most
efficacious force to deceive them. The prevalency and strength of the delusion
is seen in two things.

1. The absurdity of the errors. 2. The obstinacy wherewith they cleave to them.

1. The absurdity of the errors. I will instance in three things. False Image
worship and Bread worship, Invocation of Saints, and supererogation of works.

1. Adoration of Images. Idolaters are usually represented as sottish, as Psalm.
115.8. They that make them are like unto them (so) is every one that trusts
in them. He had described the senselesness of the Idols before; They have
mouths, but they speak not: Eyes have they, but they see not: they have ears,
but they hear not: Noses have they, but they smell not, etc. Now as Idols are
senseless, so the Idolaters are brutish. That is, the makers, Worshippers, and
Servers of them, as void of true Wisdom, as the Images are of sense and motion,
Isa. 44.18. They have not known, nor understood, for he has shut their eyes,
that they c^nnot see, and their hearts that they cannot understand. There is a
fatal obduration upon them all along there: their senselesness is set forth
from ver. 9. to ver. 20. they that worship the work of their own hands, are
themselves but stocks and stones, being blin^ed by the just Judgment of God. If
it be said this is meant of the Idols of the Gentiles, not of the Images of
God, and Christ, and Virgin Mary, and Saints: But God will not be worshipped by
an Idol, and there is no difference between the Images of the Papists, and the
Heathens, but only in the name.

2. The other thing that I will instance in is, the Invocation of Saints, a
sottish error, and respect paid to them that are so far out of the reach of
our Commerce; and a thing not only without precept, promise, or president in
Scripture, but also against Scripture which always directs to God by one
Mediator, the Lord Jesus Christ. The Scripture says, Go to God if you lack any
thing, and they say, Go to the Saints; if they say not as Authors of Grace, or
any Divine Blessing, yet as Intercessors; though that be not true, yet that
derogateth from Christ, whose Office it is to intercede with the Father. So
that this is to put the Creature in the place of God. But it is not only
contrary to Scripture, but the very motion and inclination of the Spirit, when
he stirs us or moves us to pray, Romans 8.15. Ye have received the spirit of
adoption, whereby we cry, Abba Father. Gal. 4.6. And because ye are Sons, God
has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying Abba Father; he
inclines us to come to God, and yet this they will leave.

3. A third Error that I shall instance in is, that man may supererogate, not
only merit for himself, but lay in an overplus to increase the treasure of the
Church; when the Scripture tells us that our best works are imperfect, yea
polluted; and our Lord himself has told us, that when we have done all, say ye
we are unprofitable Servants, Luke 17.10. But what will not men believe, that
can believe these things? There are other absurdities as gross as these, but
this suffices for a taste.

2. The obstinacy wherewith they cleave to them: Nothing will reclaim them; not
Scripture, nor reason, nor evidence of truth, but they still cry the opinion of
the Church, and the Faith of their Forefathers, and will invent any paltry
shift and distinction; rather recede from any thing than once admit that the
Church has erred. Like the obstinate Jews in Christ's time, that denied
apparent matter of fact, Joh. 8.33. We were never in bondage to any man, though
they were in Egypt and Babylon, and were now under servitude, and the power of
the Romans. Though we prove they have erred and do err still, the Church cannot
err; or rather like the Elder Jews in the Prophet Ieremiahs time, Ier. 44.16,
17, 18, 19. As for the word that thou have spoken unto us in the name of the
Lord, we will not hearken to thee, but we will certainly do whatsoever goes
out of our own mouth: To burn incense unto the Queen of Heaven, and to pour out
drink offerings to her, as we have done; we, and our Fathers, and our Kings,
and our Princes, for then we had plenty of Victuals, and were well, and saw no
evil: But since we have left off burning incense to the Queen of Heaven, we
have wanted all things, and have been consumed by the Sword and the Famine.
Such sottish obstinacy is there in men, that dote upon their own invented
Superstitious and Idolatrous Services. Custom, Antiquity, practice of their
Ancestors, the Authority and usage of their great ones, their Rulers, the
generality of observance. This is their knot of Arguments, by which they
confirm themselves; just as the Papists plead for their Superstitions at this
day; and to make the Mess more complete, they add the plenty and prosperity
they enjoyed; what a merry World it was before the new Gospel came in: when
they had nothing but Mass and Mattins. And all the Calamities that have fallen
out, they impute not to their own sins, but to the Gospel. Now when a people
are thus obstinate, and measure Religion not by reasons of Conscience, but the
interests of the Belly, it is a sign that they are under the power of delusion;
and error has more efficacy with such corrupt minds than the truth.

3. The Causes of it show the efficacy of error. (1.) The sinning of their
learned, to keep out all instructions; allowing the vulgar only Prayers in a
strange tongue, and the Scriptures in no tongue, and teaching them implicitly
to believe as the Church believes. When the Lord permits such guides to
order the affairs of his Church, his great Judgment of occecation and
obduration is upon them, Jer. 5.31. The Prophets prophecy falsely, and the
Priests bear rule by their means, and my people love (to have it) so. (2.) When
gain, interests, and ambition move them thereunto. As those Masters in the Acts
exclaim against Paul and Silas, when they saw their hope of gain was gone, Acts
16.19, 20, 21. These men do exceedingly trouble the City. And Demetrius Acts
18.25. Ye know by this craft we have our wealth. This is a tender point to
touch interest, and when once it comes to this, they will proceed in their
fo^ly, and defend one falsehood with another; for the great Idol of the World is
gain, or love of money, 1 Timothy 6.10. For the love of money, is the root of all
evil, which while some coveted after, they have erred from the Faith. It were
an happiness if such kind of Arguments did only prevail with us to embrace a
Religion, that might convince others, that it was Religion it self that we
loved: That our interest did not keep others from their duty, and that we could
embrace a Religion for the goodness of it, even to our own loss. (3.) Another
cause is pride of themselves, and prejudice against others; lest they should
seem to be in an error and wrong, and to learn of a few Novellists: shall they
teach them? No, rather they will remain ignorant still. Alas, it is not easy to
strike Sa^^, and submit to the teaching of those whom they hate: Therefore men
continue those first prejudices they have imbibed, and will rather live and die
in their errors, than give God glory by a submission to truth. Such a proud
opinion and conceit have they of their own Learning and Knowledge. This cause
also conduces to make the resolution more strong, pre-ingagement in a contrary
way. It is disgraceful to change, men think it is taken notice of as a great
wonder, Acts 6.7. That a great Company of the Priests were obedient to the
Faith. But such wonder are not wrought every day, they of all men are most
pertinacious, but God can of stones raise up Children to Abraham. Now would to
God these causes of error were only found in the Antichristian Estate. They are
every where, bu^ these cause strong delusion.

3. The issue and effect, that they should believe a lie; two things must be
explained. 1. The object. 2. The Act.

1. The object, a lie: that is, either 1. false Doctrines, 1 Timothy 4.2. Speaking
lies in Hypocrisy. When palpable errors are taken for truths. A man given over
by God to delusion, will swallow the grossest errors and f^ctions, and that in
matters dangerous and destructive to Salvation. False Doctrines are often
called a lie in Scripture, as opposite to the truth. And yet such things are
received by those from whose parts the World would expect better things. 2.
False Miracles, in their Legends; a man would wonder any should have the face
to obtrude such ridiculous stories, and scandalous to Religion upon the World.
3. False Calumnies against those Instruments whom God employed in the
reformation: Popery is a Religion supported by lies, as that Calvin was a
Sodomite, and burnt in the shoulder at Noyon, for that crime, and the Popish
Dea^ and Chapter of that place have published his Vindicate. That Luther was an
Incarnate Devil begotten by an Incubus. I should weary you to rake in this
Dunghill, but I must close it with the general observation, that Antichristians
will lie; some among them call them pious frauds, but they are Diabolical
Forgeries.

2. The Act is, that they are given up to believe a lie: This must be applied
to their erroneous Doctrines, as common to them all. To their false Miracles
and Calumnies, not to the Inventers, but to the seduced, who swallow these
things. All that oppose the truth do not go apparently against Conscience, but
being given up to the efficacy of error* they may believe that false Religion
wherein they live. Let us open the Term believe. What is it to believe a thing?
you may know ^y the opposites. Now opposite to Faith, there is first
doubtfulness, when men halt between two opinions, 1 Kings 18.21. If the Lord b^
God, follow him, but if Baal, then follow him. This doubtfulness proceeds
from want of bringing the Case to a Trial, and through Hearing. 2. Conjecture,
Acts 26.28. Almost persuaded, Almost thou perswadest me to be a Christian. 3.
Opinion, Matthew. 13.14. Has not root in himself, but dureth for a while, etc.
4. Firm persuasion. They will censure nothing, for if of truth, Joh. 6.69. We
believe and are sure, etc. if of error, Acts 26.9. I verily thought with my
self that I ought to do many things contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth.
5. Resolved adherence, if to the truth, that is called receiving the truth in
the love of it: If to error, it is seen in men's obstinacy and zeal suffering in
it, 1 Kings 18.28. Cutting themselves with Knives and Lances till blood gushed
out. Suffering for it. For a man may give his body to be burned for an error, a
man may sacrifice a strong body to a stubborn mind: 1 Cor. 13.3. Though I give
my body to be burned, and have not Charity, it profits nothing. And
persecuting the contrary, Joh. 16.2. They shall put you out of the Synagogues,
yea the time comes, that whosoever kills you, will think that he does God
service. To apply this: Marry that live within the Kingdom of Antichrist, some
are doubtful, some almost persuaded, so^e espouse the common prevailing
opinions, others adhere to them with much false zeal and superstition. These
are those who are given up to believe a lie.

Uses. 1. Information. 1. To show us the reason why so many learned men are
Captivated by Antichrist, and live yet in the Popish Religion, for this is a
great scruple to many. The answer is ready, The Lord has suffered them to be
deluded by him whose coming is after the working of Satan in all power, etc.
Rev. 17.2. The inhabitants of the earth have been made drunk with the Wine of
her Fornication. It is an intoxication, the errors of that State are plausibly
defended, and supported by Worldly Interests. There is the Witchery of Worldly
allurements, and the intoxicating Wine of errors defended and owned within
their bounds and places of their education and abode. So that men have seemed
to lose their understandings, and not have that advisedness which well becomes
a man: possibly they may have doubts and checks of Conscience, but the name of
the Church charmeth them, and Worldly magnificence strangely inveagleth them.
They may know that the Religion professed by Protestants, is sincere, holy, and
saving, but being allured by Licentiousness, or entangled by Covetousness, or
puffed up with Pride, are loath to change, or are vanquished and astonished with
fear of death and other inconveniences: or it may be do not use that advised
and serious deliberation, which a matter of Salvation requires. Four causes
may be given. 1. Self-Confidence, God will show the folly of those that depend
on the strength of their own wit, Pro. 3. 5, 6. Trust in the Lord with all
thine heart, and lean not unto thine own understandings. In all thy ways
acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths. And therefore will bring to
naught the wisdom of the wise, and destroy the understanding of the prudent,
when it is lifted up against the Interests of Christ's Kingdom, 1 Cor. 1.19. 2.
Prejudice; The Priests and Scribes could readily tell that Christ was to be
born in Bethlehem, when Herod sent to consult them, Matthew. 2.4, 5, 6. yet who
more obstinate against him, that was born there? They expected a temporal
Messiah, and therefore could not see what they saw. What was apparent to
Children, was a riddle to the Rabbis. So they expect some open Enemy of the
Church to attacque it by power and force, little dreaming of a Bishop, etc. 3.
Pride, many of the Jewish Church believed in Christ, but they did not profess
him, lest they should be put out of the Synagogue. Ioh. 11.42, 43. They loved
the praise of men more than the praise of God. They loved not an hated opinion.
Many may fear the Pope to be Antichrist, but Pride and Interest will not let
them submit to a change. 4. The Judgment of God is the great cause that men do
not, or will not know Antichrist: God has not given them eyes to see, as
Christ was not received in Jerusalem, the things of their peace were hid from
their Eyes, Luke 19.42. He beheld the City and wept over it saying, If thou
had known, even thou at least in this thy day, the things which belong unto
thy peace; but now they are hid from thine eyes.

2. It shows us, that the prevalency of this wicked one, should be no blemish
to providence: for the permission of him is one of Gods dreadful providentia^
dispensations; That it should have such success* it raises Atheistical
thoughts in weak spirits, yea, it is an offense to the Godly, as it is a
prejudice to the Truth; but God hereby will show us, 1. That there are deceits
and errors, as well as truth in the World: much of choice, not chance; and lest
we should think this an antiquated dispensation, to try the professors of the
Gospel who lived in the midst of Pagans, it comes nearer to us. But he that
condemns all Religion on this account, judges one ^an for another crime,
which is unjust, does as foolishly as he that thinks there is no tr^e money,
because there are some counterfeit pieces. 2. That God in concomitancy with the
Gospel, will discover his dreadful Justice, as well as his wonderful mercy by
it, that we may tremble whilst we admire grace. 3. That it is a great evil to
be deceivers or active promoters of delusions, and it will not wholly excuse us
that we are deceived, Matthew. 15.14. 4. What need all serious Christians have to
pray to God, not to be led into temptation. Alas, what would become of us if
left to our selves in an hour of temptation? 5. Let us fear to slight the
grace offered. Among other threatenings God threatens to smite his people with
blindness, Deuteronomy. 18.28. The Lord shall smite thee with madness, and blindness,
and astonishment of heart. 6. What a ready way to destruction it is, to measure
Religion by Worldly Interests. This bred Antichrist, kept him up in the World,
and blinds hi^ seduced Proselytes to this day.

2. Use. Is caution to take heed of spiritual blindness and infatuation, that
this Judgment fall not upon us: That God leave us not to our own lusts, hearts,
and Counsels, without check and restraint. It may in part befall Gods people,
what shall we do to avoid it? 1. Take heed of sinning against light, either by
sins of omission, or commission, Jam. 4.17. To him that knows to do good, and
does it not, to him it is sin. They will find it to be sin in the sad effects.
2. Take heed of Hypocrisy in the profession of the truth. God owes the
Hypocrites an ill turn, and seems to be engaged to discover him before the
Congregation, Pro. 26.26. Whose hatred is covered by deceit, his wickedness
shall be showed before the whole Congregation; and usually it is, by giving him
up to some licentious practice, or strong delusion, by which he breaks the
neck of his profession. 3. Take heed of Pride, and carnal Self-sufficiency. God
may leave his people to dangerous falls, when they make their bosom their
Oracle, and think to carry all by the strength of their own understanding, 2
Chro. 32.31. God left him to try him that h^ might know all that was in his
heart: It is good to consult with God continually. 4. Take heed of following
the rabble, Joh. 4.20. Our fathers worshipped in this Mountain, and ye say,
that in Jerusalem is the place where men ought to worship, etc. But learn to
see by your own eyes: That you may have sure evidence you are in Gods way, Pro.
24.13, 14.

SERMON X.
2 Thessalonians. 2.12. That they all might be damned who believed not the truth, but
had pleasure in unrighteousness.


2. THeir punishment in the other World. Where first the terribleness of it, 2.
The righteousness and Justice of it.

1. The terribleness, that they all might be damned. That is, filling up the
measure of their obduration, they may at length fall into just condemnation.

2. The Justice and Equity of it, which is two ways expressed.

1. Negatively, they believed not the truth. That is, received not the Gospel
in the simplicity of it, as revealed by Christ and his Apostles, and recorded
in the Scriptures, but wilfully, and for their interests sake, gave up
themselves to these corruptions.

2. Positively, had pleasure in unrighteousness: in the 10th verse, it was,
They received not the love of the truth. Now when the meritorious cause is
repeated, there is something more added. They had a love to, and delight in,
other things, (...). Here two things must be explained.

1. What is (...), unrighteousness.

2. What is (...), taking pleasure in unrighteousness.

1. What is (...) unrighteousness. Righteousness is giving every one his due;
and denying them their due, is unrighteousness. There is a giving man his due,
and a giving God his due, Matthew. 22.21. Render unto Caesar, the things which
are Caesar's; and unto God the things that are Gods. Righteousness is often put
for giving man his due, Titus 2.12. That we should live soberly, righteously,
etc. and giving God his due, which is worship and reverence, Psalm. 29.2. Give
unto the Lord the glory due unto his name. And again, Ps. 96.8. Give unto the
Lord, the glory due to his name, bring an offering and come into his Courts.
Now this unrighteousness here spoken of, is principally meant in the latter
sense. False ways of worship are the greatest unrighteousness that can be
practiced. For the duty that we owe to God is the most righteous thing in the
World. Now by false worship, you withdraw the Glory of God from him, and
communicate it to another. Worship is his own proper due, both by the light of
nature, and Scripture: and therefore the Gentiles which had the light of
nature, are said to detain the truth, (...), Romans 1.18. why? the reason is
rendered in the after Verses, 23. They changed the glory of God into an Image
made like a corruptible man: Ver. 25. They changed the truth of God into a lie,
and worshipped and served the Creature more than the Creator. This was their
(...), their unrighteousness, or injurious dealing with God. So the
Antichristians that had the light of Scripture, though under palliated
pretenses, changed the truth of God into a lie, loved their own errors more
than simple and plain Christianity, or the true knowledge of God, and diverted
the worship from himself unto an Idol.

2. They had pleasure in unrighteousness, in these things they please
themselves, not lapse into it out of simple ignorance and error of mind. And so
the Apostle parallels the two great Apostasies, That from the light of nature,
and that from the light of the Gospel. Light of nature, Romans 1.32. Not only do
these things, but have pleasure in them that do them. Light of Scripture. Have
pleasure in unrighteousness, they are mad upon their Idols and Images; not only
are Idolaters, but delight in Idolatry and Image Worship, Psalm. 97.7. That
boast themselves of Idols.

Now to observe some things.

1. Errors of Judgment, as well as sins of practice, may bring damnation upon
the Souls of men. All sins do in their own nature tend to damnation. Romans 6.23.
For the wages of sin is death. And Errors of Judgment are sins, for they are
contrary to the rule or law of God, 1 John 3.4. Whosoever commits sin,
transgresses also the Law, for sin is the transgression of the Law. Any
swerving from the Law is sin; And they are inductive of other sins; for if the
eye be blind, the whole body is full of darkness, Matthew. 6.23. It perver^s our
zeal. There is nothing so mischievous, wicked, and cruel, that a man blinded
with error, will not attempt against those that differ from him. Ioh. 16.2.
They shall put you out of the Synagogues: yea the time comes, that whosoever
kills you* will think that he does God service. A blind Horse is full of
metal, but ever and anon stumbleth. Therefore if a man be not guided by sound
Judgment, his zealous affections will precipitate him into mischief. As the
Jews that persecuted Christ, and his Apostles, had a zeal of God but not
according to knowledge, Romans 10.2. So the Popish Zealots, with what fury have
they persecuted the innocent and sincere servants of Christ? The Papists would
be angry if we should not reckon St. Dominick a zealous man, and the poor
Albigenses felt the bitter effects of that zeal in the destruction of many
thousands, by inhumane Butcheries and Villainies about Toulouse, etc. The Lord
deliver us from the furies of transported, brainsick Zealots!

2. Though all errors may bring damnation upon the Souls of men, yet some more
especially than others, may be said to be camning. As 2 Pet. 2.1. Some shall
bring in damnable Heresies. Now this may be either from the matter or manner of
holding them.

1. From the matter, if destructive of the way of Salvation by Christ. Some are
utterly inconsistent with Salvation and eternal life, as errors in the
fundamentals in Religion. As suppose that a man should reject or refuse Christ,
after a sufficient proposal of the Gospel to him, there is no question but this
is damning unbelief, Joh. 3.19. And this is the condemnation, that light is
come into the World, and men loved darkness rather than light, because their
deeds were evil. But yet we are not to say that alone damneth. There are other
things necessary to Salvation, contained under that general truth. The
Scripture says, Joh. 17.3. And this is life eternal, that they might know
thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. There is the sum
of what is necessary to Salvation. That God is to be known, loved, obeyed,
worshipped and enjoyed, and the Lord Jesus to be owned as our Redeemer and
Savior, to bring us home to God, and to procure for us the gifts of pardon and
life, and this life to be begun here, and perfected in Heaven. Other things are
of moment to clear these necessary truths, but they may be all reduced
thereunto. The truth is, the question about the matter to be believed, is not
what divine Revelations are necessary to be believed or rejected when
sufficiently proposed, for all points without exception are so; but what are
simply and absolutely necessary to eternal life, and these are points of faith,
and practice, and obedience. The points of Faith, are a knowledge of God in
Christ, and practice that we be regenerated, Joh. 3.5. Except a man be born of
water and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. And live an
holy life, Heb. 12.14. Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which
no man shall see the Lord.

2. For the manner. 1. When men profess what they believe not, and voluntarily
choose error for Worldly ends, though it be a less error against the Scripture,
and consistent with the main tenor of Salvation; yet it taken up against
Conscience, for by-ends, it is a matter of sad consequence; for this is living
in a known sin. Some may be blinded for a time, out of terror and compassion,
and their case is sad, till they express solemn repentance; but when there is a
reluctation against clear light, and an obstinacy in that reluctation, this man
is condemned in himself, Titus 3.11. Such a man is subverted, and sins,
being condemned of himself. There cannot be a greater argument of a will
unsubdued to God, than to stand out against conviction, out of secular
respects. This is to love darkness more than light, and argues such pravity of
heart, as is inconsistent with Faith and Salvation. Some ignorant Souls may
hold dangerous errors, and which to others would be damnab^e; yet they may not
actually damn them, because they do not rebel against the light; and may be
retracted by a general repentance, or seeking of pardon for all their known or
unknown sins: Psalm. 19.12, 13. Who can understand his errors? Cleanse thou me
from secret faults. Keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins: Let them
not have dominion over me; then shall I be upright, and I shall be innnocent
from the great transgression. 2. When they are vented by some Professor of
Christianity, to the seducing of others, and rending of the C^^^ch, and drawing
Disciples after them, this a^deth a new guilt to their errors, and makes them
the more damnable, Act^ 20.30. Also of your own selves shall men arise,
speaking perverse things, to draw away Disciples after them. There are properly
Heretics, and Ringleaders of Sects; therefore Heresies are reckoned among the
works of the flesh, Gal. 5.20. Emulation, wrath, strife, seditions, Heresies;
increasing their own doom and Judgment; these under a Christian name seduce and
lead away the Church from Christ; they pervert the holy ways of God, and draw
his people from serving him in Spirit and Truth.

3. When though they should not err fundamentally, they so far debauch
Christianity, as that God gives them up to believe a lie, and to take pleasure
in unrighteousness, that is, to defend and maintain apparent corruptions of
Christian Doctrine and Worship. Of Doctrine, for it is here said, they believe
a lie, and they believe not the truth. Of worship, for it is said, they take
pleasure in unrighteousness. A party thus given up by God we should shun as we
would shun a Plague, or come out of Bedlam; for these men have lost their
spiritual wits, and ^ee not that which the common light of Christianity does
disprove; however they retain the name of Christians, and make a cry of the
Church, the Church, as the Jews did of the Temple of the Lord, and retain some
truth among them; for such a party is here described.

4. When there is gross negligence, or not taking pains to know better. It is
equivalent to reluctation, or standing out against light, Crassa negligentia
dolus est; there is a deceit in laziness or affected ignorance, Joh. 3.20. They
will not come to the light, lest their deeds should be reproved: 2 Pet. 3.5.
They are willingly ignorant. Those that please themselves in the ignorance of
any truth, err not only in their minds, but their hearts. It is the duty of
Gods people to understand what is his will, Ephesians. 5.7. Be not unwise but
understanding what the will of the Lord is. And it is their practice. Romans
12.2. That ye may prove, what is the good, and acceptable, and perfect will of
God: Psalm. 1.2. His delight is in the law of the Lord, and therein does he
meditate day and night. We should be searching still. But when men will not
know what they have a mind to hate, it argues a secret sore, and suspicion of
the truth, and are loath to follow it too close, lest it cross their lusts and
interests.

3. That the way and errors of Popery are damnable, and it is very unsafe
living in that Society and Combination. I prove it. 1. Because they live in
wilful disobedience to God: They violate the manifest Commandments of God,
while they hold it lawful to worship Pictures and Images, to make Pictures of
the Trinity, to invocate Saints and Angels, to deny Laymen the Cup in the
Sacrament, to adore the Sacrament, to prohibit certain Orders of Men and Women
to marry, to Celebrate the public service in a language which ordinarily men
and women that assist understand not: In all these things they offer apparent
violence to Gods Precepts. And that their whole worship is polluted with a
gross Superstition; as for instance, to worship Images is expressly against Gods
word, Psalm. 97.7. Confounded be all they that worship graven Images, that boast
themselves of Idols. Worship him all ye Gods. The Scripture you see denounces
confusion to all Worshippers of Images, and they are reckoned as Enemies of
Christ's Kingdom: for it is applied to Christ, Heb. 1.6. And let all the Angels
of God worship him. That would set up the worship and service of them in his
Church, in the exercise of their Religion, especially those who glory in them,
and boast of them, and set them forth as the glory of their way and worship.
No, he disdaineth all this relative worship, at or before Images, which men
would give unto him, and shows, that all the Powers of this World, and the
other, Angels and Potentates should immediately worship Christ. For the second
point, picturing the Trinity. God has not only forbidden it, but argued
against it. Deuteronomy. 4.15, 16. Take therefore good heed unto your selves, for ye
saw no similitude, when the Lord spoke to you in Horeb, out of the midst of the
fire: lest ye corrupt your selves, and make you a graven Image, the similitude
of any thing, Male or Female. See how cautelous God is, to prevent this abuse,
and yet how boldly men practice it. For the third instance, the Invocation of
Saints and Angels. Our Lord has taught us how to repel that temptation, Matthew.
4.10. It is written, thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall
thou serve. That religious service and worship is due only to God: no Creature
can claim it without Sacrilege, nor can we give it to them without Idolatry.
And God being so jealous of his honor, every Christian should be careful that
he does not divert it from him. They have many distinctions to excuse
themselves to the World, but I doubt how they will excuse themselves to God.
For the fourth particular, adoring the Sacrament, I shall speak to again anon,
that is a mean, not an object of worship. The Fifth, prohibiting certain Orders
of men and women to marry, which the Apostle calls Doctrines of Devils, 1 Timothy 4.1, 2. In the latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed
to seducing spirits, and Doctrines of Devils: speaking lies in hypocrisy,
having their Conscience seared with a hot Iron, forbidding to marry, etc. For
the Sixth, Celebrating public Service in an unknown Tongue, it is contrary to
the Apostles reasoning, 1 Cor. 14.15, 16, 17. For if I pray in an unknown
tongue, my spirit prays, but my understanding is unfruitful. What is it then?
I will pray with the spirit, and I will pray with the understanding also: I
will sing with the spirit, and I will sing with the understanding also: else
when thou shall bless with the spirit, how shall he that occupies the room of
the unlearned, say Amen, at thy giving of thanks, seeing he understands not
what thou say; for thou verily give thanks well, but the other is not
edified. For the Seventh, Communion in one kind; this is against Christ's
express Institution, Matthew. 26.26, 27. Jesus took bread, and blessed it, and
brake it, and gave it to the Disciples, and said, Take, eat, this is my Body:
And he took the Cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all
of it. The Apostle supposes every one that can examine himself, 1 Cor. 11.18.
But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of
that Cup. Now for this usurping Synagogue to come as they do, with a non
obstante, to the Statutes of God, Who can join with them in these corruptions
and usurpations, without peril of Salvation? Secondly, That the way of Popery
is damnable because they deprive the people of the means of Salvation, contrary
to the express Injunctions from God, Joh. 5.39. Search the Scriptures, for in
them ye think ye have eternal life, and they are they which testify of me. Col.
3.16. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly, in all wisdom, teaching and
admonishing one another in Psalms and Hymns. The Saints are commended, Acts
17.11. In that they received the word with all readiness of mind, and searched
the Scriptures daily, whether those things were so: and 2 Timothy 3.15. That he
knew the Scriptures which are able to make wise unto salvation, through faith
which is in Christ Jesus. This is the seed of Life, food of Souls, rule of
Faith and Manners, our strength against temptations, 1 John 2.14. I have
written unto you young men, because ye are strong, and the word of God abides
in you, and ye have overcome the wicked one. Now to deprive the Lords people of
the Bread of Life, and Word of Life, what is it but to leave them to perish?

3. The great charge is, they have pleasure in unrighteousness, that is,
delight in Idolatry; and corrupt or false worship, which is the greatest
unrighteousness man can be guilty of. To evidence this, let us enquire, 1. What
is Idolatry. 2. Prove how notoriously they are guilty of it.

1. What is Idolatry? it is a worshipping of a Creature with Divine Worship,
and whosoever gives Divine Worship to a Creature, commits Idolatry. This
Proposition is evident in the Scripture, as when the Israelites worshipped the
Calf, litteral or metaphorical Idolatry, they are called Idolaters, 1 Cor. 10.
7. Neither be ye Idolaters as were some of them, as it is written, the people
sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play. And the covetous, that gives
that delight and trust to his wealth which is only due to God, is called an
Idolater, Ephesians. 5.5. Nor covetous man who is an Idolater; and in many other
places.

Secondly, Now that the Papists are guilty of this, I prove.

1. By the several kinds of their Idolatry, they have more variety of objects
of worship, than any Society of men that ever lived in the World. 1. Angels are
Creatures, and that they worship Angels themselves confess. They Consecrate
Churches unto them, offer solemn Prayers unto them, and own the adoring them,
though an Angel forbids this Adoration, Rev. 19.10. And he said unto me,
See, thou do it not, I am thy fellow Servant, etc. and St. Paul tells us,
that they that worship Angels, do not hold the head, Col. 1.18, 19. So that
Angel-worship proves to be a damnable error.

Secondly, The Adoration of Saints, to whom they give religious worship, and
invoke them as helpers, and honor them with fastings, watchings, and prayers,
as Suarez acknowledges, and yet God is express, that he will not give his
glory to another, Isa. 42. 8. they are to be honored indeed for imitation, but
not adored for Religion.

The third object is the Virgin Mary, to whom they pray more than they do to
God. In the Rosary there is this Prayer. Beata Maria, salva omnes qui te
glorificant. And we beseech thee to hear us good Lady. That Address, Monstra,
te esse Ma^rem, and one divided, inter ubera and vulnera, the Breasts of the
Virgin, and wounds of Christ, as if the milk of the one were as sovereign and
as precious as the blood of the other. It were endless to rake in this filthy
puddle: how many Books are there concluded with Laus Deo, and Virgini Deiparae?
That sometimes there is a more present relief by commemorating the name of
Mary, than by calling on the name of the Lord Jesus. In their exclamations,
Jesus! Maria! How often in their Te Deum, We praise thee O Lady?

Fourthly, Adoration of Images; This is more foul than all the former, because
directed to a more gross object. This is prophesied of Antichrist, that he and
his Abettors, they shall worship Idols of Silver, and Gold, and Brass, and Wood
and Stone, Rev. 9.20. Now tell a Papist of this, and they say, they do not
terminate their worship in the Image, but in the party whom it represents,
the same said the Pagan. Non Lapidem sed Iovem in Lapide, Julian the Apostate.
But God has forbidden bowing to, or before an Image.

Fifthly, The worshipping of the Cross, not only by cuppying, bowing, cringing,
but Prayers. O Crux ave spes unica hoc Passionis Tempore, auge piis justitiam
reisque dona veniam. All hale O Cross, our only hope this time of passion,
augment the Godly's Devot^on, and forgive the transgression of the guilty.

Sixthly, The Bread in the Sacrament, the Papists give it Cultum Latriae, that
worship which is due to God; those Heathens worshipped living Animals, but
these ador^ a piece of Bread, kneel to it in their Chap^els and Oratories; yea,
in the midst of the Streets, when it is carried in Procession; these are the
Idols whom they worship; and what hope of Salvation is there in a Religion
where the heart is turned so much from God to the Creature? 2. That they are
more culpable than the Heathens. 1. As to their Hypocrisy, by distinctions and
veil of Piety, wherewith they disguise all this: For this delight in
unrighteousness was called before the deceiveableness of unrighteousness. They
profess to abhor Idols, and yet worship Images, and make that a point of
Christianity, which is directly contrary to the drift of it, which is to teach
us to worship God in the Spirit. 2. As to their helps against it, the Pagans
were never taught to do better, though they sinned against the light of nature,
in worshipping God by Images, yet they had no Scripture, no such express
prohibitions to caution them, as we have from God. They pretend to believe the
Scriptures, yet how do they seek to evade the force of them by crafty
distinctions, that will never satisfy Conscience; though they help to blind
the mind, and harden the heart. That which I urge is this, they were never
interdicted this kind of worship by their Gods, but these know that it is
severely forbidden by our God, and the second Commandment so stareth in their
Faces, that it is expunged out of their Catechisms; and Vasquez is bold to
affirm, that the second Commandment is Ceremonial. Lactantius of old said, Non
est dubium, religio nulla est ubi cujusque simulac^rum est. 3. The Pagans did
adore their Gods in their Images, but never was any so sottish among them to
imagine that an Image was to be adored with the same degree of worship as God
himself; but this is the corrupt Doctrine of the Papists, that an Image is to
be worshipped with the same worship, w^erewith God himself is worshipped.
Imagini Christi Latria debetur. Aquinas. That is the proper worship of God.

1. Use to show how necessary it is, to take heed that we be not found among
the followers of Antichrist; since these errors are damnable. Salvation and
damnation are not trifles, nor matters to be played withal: Surely we need have
our eyes in our head, and not to be hood-winked, when we are upon the brink of
a bottomless Gulf. Both sides lay damnation at one another Door; they for our
departing from the Catholic Church, out of which is no Salvation as they
pretend; we upon their departing from the Catholic Faith, and simplicity of
the Gospel. Now external order is not of such consideration as Faith; but when
they will be able to prove that Christ has settled this order in the Church,
that all his Subjects should be obedient to one universal visible head, and
that this head is the Pope; and therefore when their very Order is an
incroachment and usurpation; to depart from them, is to return to Christ:
Again, where is Salvation most likely to be found, rather with them who seek
all their Religion in the Scriptures, and stick there; or with those, who not
contented with the Apostolical Doctrine contained in the Scriptures, have
brought in unwritten Traditions, as an equal rule of Faith with Scripture; and
the Sacrifice of the Mass and Purgatory, the Religious Invocations of Saints,
and many other enormities, and uphold these Innovations with all manner of
Tyranny and Cruelty exercised upon Christ's faithful Servants? If men go to
Heaven without Prayers which they understand, and Scriptures, half Christ's
Sacrament, a piece of his merits, and some supe^stitious observances, yea plain
Idolatry, then the way to Heaven is sooner to be had in Popery; but he that
has but half an Eye, may soon see which is the surer side. Surely the surest
way to avoid damnation, is to avoid sin. Now where are Souls so much in danger
of sin, as in the Roman Society, where so little is given to internal life and
piety, and so much to external Pomp and Service; and where errors are so
palpable, that either men do not believe them with their hearts, or if their
hearts were upright and not perverse and obstinate, could not believe them; but
just so is the way of Popery to true Christianity. Surely whatever it be to
Papists, it would be absolutely damnable to us, as wilfully to thrust our
selves upon apparent ruin. There is a cavil or pretense which I shall speak
unto on this occasion. That many Protestants confess Papists may be saved in
their Faith; whereas they hold Protestants and other Heretics may not be saved
out of the Catholic Church. And therefore it is safe to enter into that way
which is safe by the consent of both parts, Ans. 1. Men's opinions are no ground
of Faith. Persons may be in a sad woeful Case, that men speak well of, Luke
6.26. Woe unto you when all men shall speak well of you. It is not what Man
says, but what the word of God says: Now the word speaks terrible things to
them. [ Them that perish] and [ That they all might be damned who believed not
the truth] etc. Secondly, The word of God teaches us to judge of the way,
rather than persons, who stand or fall to their own Master. The way is
damnable. If on the one side there be Charity to some persons, that sin of
invincible ignorance, and are saved as by fire, 1 Cor. 3.13. which the other
side will not grant to a contrary persuasion; it argues Charity on one side,
which hops all things; malice on the other, who rashly condemn men without
evidence, yea, against it. 3. If this argument would hold good, it had been
better in Christ and the Apostles time to be a Jewish Proselyte, than a
Christian; Christ acknowledges Salvation is of the Jews, their promises of
adoption and glory, but the Jews pronounced him and his followers accursed,
scourged, imprisoned them; yet did not get so far as Papists, to murder and
butcher them. Suppose a little time that Catholics owned Donatists as
Brethren, allowed their Baptism, but Donatists are rebaptized, and upon pain of
damnation require all so to be, and say, Save thy Soul, become a Christian. Now
a Pagan should rather by this argument join himself to Donatists than
Catholics. Lastly, The Argument may be retorted, A Protestant keeps himself
to his Bible, Baptismal Covenant, Creed, but denies many things which Papists
believe and practice, as Papal Infallibility, Transubstantiation, Purgatory,
Invocation of Saints, worshipping of Images; they cannot but say Protestants
are in the right.

2. Use, observe the degrees of obduration, not receiving the truth in the love
of it, believing a Lie, discarding Truth, and then taking pleasure in
unrighteousness, and then comes Damnation.

SERMON XI.
2 Thessalonians. 2.13. But we are bound to give thanks always to God, for you,
Brethren, beloved of the Lord, because the Lord has from the beginning chosen
you to Salvation, through Sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the Truth.


THE Adversative Particle [ But] shows what respect these words have to what
went before; He had spoken of God's direful Judgment, of sending strong
delusion on them, that had no love to the pure Truth, but sinned against Light,
and had pleasure in the false worship, and superstitions, countenanced by the
World. Now lest the Thessalonians should be troubled at this sad prediction, he
shows what cause he had to bless God in their behalf. The subjoining of this
consolation does teach us three things:

1. That it is a great favor of God to us, to escape Antichristian Errors.
They are so dangerous in their own nature, so insinuative and inveigling by
plausible appea^ance, and accompanied with such worldly baits and advan^^ges;
that it is a great mercy that God has taught us better things. But then be
sure you be in the right, out of Conscience and Evidence, not out of Faction
and Interest. And that you hate Popery out of the love of the Truth, rather
than because you are out of the reach of the temptation. However it is a great
mercy, that God keeps off the Temptation, till we are better settled in
Religion.

2. That the Election of God gives a People great advantages against Errors,
especially against the impostures of Antichrist; for when he speaks of the
sad estate of those who are seduced by the Man of Sin, he presently adds, but
we are bound to give thanks to God for you, for he has chosen you to
Salvation. You will say the Thessalonians received the Gospel before these
corruptions were brought into the Church: but though Antichrist was not then in
being, and this corrupt Christianity not then set a foot, yet there were some
preparations for it. The mystery of iniquity already works, and they were
preserved from the taint of it, by the Election of God; for either God
suffers not the Elect to be deceived in momentous points, or sooner or later
he reduces them: the purpose of God according to Election must stand, Romans
9.11. and Romans 11.7. The Election has obtained, and the rest were blinded. So
2 Timothy 2.18, 19. They have overthrown the faith of some, nevertheless the
Foundation of the Lord stands sure. Still the Elect of God escape the
seduction, and especially Antichristian Error. Rev. 13.8. The dwellers upon
Earth shall worship him, whose names are not written in the Lamb's Book of Life.

3. How careful we should be to support the Hearts of God's People, when we
speak of his terrible Judgments on the wicked. This was the practice of the
Apostles every where; as when the Author to the Hebrews, had spoken of the
dreadful estate of Apostates, whose end is to be burned, Heb. 6.9. But we are
persuaded better things of you, and things that accompany Salvation, though we
thus speak; he did not condemn them all as Apostates, nor would not discourage
them by that terrible Threatening. So again, after another terrible passage,
Heb. 10.39. But we are not of them, that draw back to perdition, but of them
that believe to the saving of the Soul. Once more* when another Apostle had
spoken of the Sin unto death, which is not to be prayed for, he presently
adds, 1 John 5.18, 19. Whosoever is born of God, sins not; but he that is
begotten of God keeps himself, and that wicked one touches him not. And we
know that we are of God, and the whole World lies in wickedness. Zuinglius
says, Bone Christian, h^^c nihil ad te, etc. Good Christian this is not thy
portion, when he had flashed the terrors of the Lord in the face of Sinners.
The reasons of this are partly with respect to the Saints, who sometimes out of
weakness and infirmity, and sometimes out of tenderness of Conscience, are apt
to be startled, electorum corda semper ad se solicit pudeant. Gregor. We
deserve such dreadful Judgments, and therefore fear them; partly with respect
to our selves that we may rightly divide the Word of Truth. 2 Timothy 2.15. Study
to show thy self approved unto God, a workman that needs not to be ashamed,
rightly dividing the Word of Truth. Give every one his portion, not make their
hearts sad, whom God would not make sad; and therefore they are much to blame
who in reproving Sinners, stab a Saint at the Heart, and take the doctrine but
for a color to make a perverse application. The Apostle here uses more
tenderness; God shall send them strong delusion: But we are bound always to
give thanks for you, Brethren, beloved of the Lord; because the Lord has from
the beginning chosen you to Salvation, through sanctification of the Spirit,
and belief of the Truth.

In the words, are two things:

1. An acknowledgment of this obligation, to give thanks for them. But we are
bound to give thanks always to God for you, Brethren, etc.

2. The matter or particular cause of his thanksgiving; because the Lord has
from the beginning chosen you to Salvation, etc.

First, There are, 1. the Titles he gives: Brethren, and Beloved of the Lord,
they were not only beloved of the Apostle, but the Lord himself; both with an
antecedent Love, bestowing Grace upon them; and also a consequent Love, they
believing in his Name, living according to his Precepts, suffering for the
Truth. 2. His obligation to bless God in their behalf, we are bound to give
thanks to God always for you. There is first giving thanks, which shows his
esteem of the blessing. 2. Always, which s^eweth how deeply he was affected
with it. 3. (...), We are bound, he acknowledges a Debt, and bond of Duty; we
must not only give thanks to God for our own Election, but the Election of
others. Out of the law of Brotherly Love, we loving them as our own Souls;
respect to the Glory of God, which is promoted by the Salvation of others, as
well as our selves.

2. The matter of the thanksgiving, their Election to Salvation, which is two
ways amplified. 1. By the Antiquity of it, from the beginning, that is, from
everlasting; for so it is taken sometimes, as Joh. 1.1. In the beginning was
the Word, and the Word was with God; That is, before the first point of time,
before God began to create all things. 2. From the means of its accomplishment;
two are mentioned: one on God's part, the sanctification of the Spirit. The
other on ours, the belief of the Truth. From the whole observe.

Doct. That the great matter of our thanksgiving to God, is his eternal
Election of us; whether for our selves, or others; This is that which leaves a
Debt, or an indispensible Obligation, always to bless and praise his Name.

In pursuing this Point, I shall first consider, how Election is here set
forth. 2. Give you the reasons why this is the great matter of thanksgiving.

1. How it is here set forth.

1. By the rise of it, which is the mere love of God; for he calls these
Brethren, ^eloved of the Lord. And that the only original cause and motive of
Election is God's Love, and Grace; this is asserted in other Scriptures. As for
instance in the Types of Election and Reprobation, Romans 9.13. Jacob have I
loved, and Esau h^ve I hated. God's respect to Jacob above Esau, is ascribed to
his love. So to the posterity of Jacob, whom he distinguished from other
Nations. Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8. The Lord did not set his love upon you, and choose you,
because ye were more in number than any People, for ye were the fewest of all
People; but because the Lord loved you. And still the Lord's Election is an
Election of Grace. There is no antecedent worthiness in the People whom he
chooses, 2 Timothy 1.9. not according to our Works, but according to his own
Purpose, and Grace, which was given in Christ Jesus, before the World began.
Now Grace is nothing, but the Love of God working freely, and of its own
Inclination.

2. The Act it self, he has chosen you, making a distinction between them, and
others. Upon them he shall send strong delusion, but you has he chosen to
Salvation, through the belief of the Truth. Those whom God has chosen, he
separates from the World of the ungodly, or the corrupt heap of mankind, and
consecrateth them unto himself. So that Election is not a taking all, but some,
and passing by others; 1 John 5.19. We are of God, and the whole World lies in
wickedness. A choice, implies a setting apart some for Objects of his Grace,
and Instruments of his Glory in the World; Psalm. 4.3. And the number is
certain, for their Names are said to be written in the Rolls, and Records of
Heaven, when others are not written. Luke 10.20. Rejoice not, that the Spirits
are subject unto you: but rather rejoice because your Names are written in
Heaven. Phil. 4.3. Whose Names are written in the Book of Life. And others are
said not to be written. Rev. 17.1. And they that dwell on the Earth, shall
wonder, whose Names were not written in the Book of Life, from the Foundation
of the World. And Rev. 20.15. And whosoever was not found written in the Book
of Life, was cast into the Lake of Fire. Namely those that perish by these
Delusions.

3. It is set forth by the Antiquity of it, from the Beginning. Ephesians. 1.4. He
has chosen us in him, before the Foundation of the World. And Matthew. 25.34.
Come, ye Blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, from the
Foundation of the World. Namely as they belonged to his choice Election. Love
in God is of an old st^nding, even from all Eternity; his thoughts and purposes
of Love, were toward us, a long time before they were discovered. Surely the
Ancientness of his Love should beget an honorable esteem of it in our Hearts:
For who are we, that the Thoughts of God should be taken up about us so long
ago? And what is from everlasting, is to everlasting, Psalm. 103.17. For what is
from Eternity is to Eternity, and depends not upon ^he accidents of Time.

4. By the means of its accomplishment. Two are mentioned, one on God's part,
the other on ours. The Sanctification of the Spirit, and the belief of the
Truth. Where note,

1. That God's Decree is both of Ends, and Means. For all his Purposes are
executed by fit Means. He that has chosen us to Salvation, has also chosen us
to be Holy, and to believe the Truth. And without the Means, the End cannot be
obtained. For without Faith and Holiness, no grown Person shall see God, or
escape Condemnation. As to Faith it is clear. John 3.36. He that believes not,
the Wrath of God abides on him. And Holiness is indispensibly necessary. Heb.
12.14. Without Holiness no Man shall see the Lord. God had assured Paul, Acts
27.22. That there should be no loss of any Man's Life amongst them, except of
the Ship; and afterward, Verse. 31. Paul tells them, Except these abide in the
Ship, ye cannot be saved. How could the assurance given to Paul from God, and
Paul's caution to the Mariners stand together? Does the Purpose of God depend
upon the will and actions of Men? I answer^ Not as a cause from whence it
receives its force and strength, but as a means appointed also by God, to the
execution of his Decree. For by the same Decree God appoints the Event, what
he will do, and the Means by which he will have it to be done; and the Lord
revealing by his Word this Conjunction of End and Means, there is a necessity
of Duty lying upon Man, to use these Means, and not to expect the End, without
them, God intended to save all in the Ship, and yet the Mariners must abide in
the Ship. And therefore what God has joined together, let no Man separate. If
we separate these things, God does not change his Counsel, but we subvert his
Order, to our own destruction. The Scripture makes it a grievous Sin, a
tempting of God, to expect the End, without the use of Means. In vain is the
Cavil then of those, who would impeach the Doctrine of God's free and
unchangeable Will, concerning the salvation of the Ele^t, upon the pretense,
that it takes away the Duty of Man; and the necessity of our Faith, and
Obedience. No, God executes his Decree by the proper Means. And wretche^ is
their inference, who say, If I be elected, I shall be saved; no Salvation can
be obtained but by the Sanctification of the Spirit, and the belief of the
Truth. And worse is their confidence, who profess assurance of their Election,
and yet walk after the Flesh: No, till a Man purge himself from Youthful Lusts,
he is not a Vessel of Honor sanctified and set apart for God, 2 Timothy 2.21. And
in vain do we hope to go to Heaven, till we take the way that leads thither.
Devils have been cast out thence for Unholiness, and therefore unholy Men shall
never be taken in there.

2. That these things are not causes of Election, but fruits of Election, and
Means of execution of God's Decree* about our Salvation: Sanctification is not
a Cause, but a subordinate End, or Means. Ephesians. 1.4. He has chosen us to be
holy; not because we are holy, but that we might be holy. So 1 Pet. 1.2. Elect
according to the fore-knowledg of God, through the sanctification of the
Spirit, unto Obedience. Not elected for it, but through it. When God had all
Mankind in his prospect and view, he freely chose out some to be sanctified and
saved. We come to the possession of it, through Sanctification, that is, by it
as a Means. So for the other: Faith is a fruit of Election, not a foreseen
Cause. Acts 2.47. The Lord added to the Church daily such as should be saved.
None comes to the Church but those whom God draws, and they are actually
added to the Church by a profession of Faith; and such as should be saved, were
as many as were ordained to Salvation. Acts 13.48. And as many as were ordained
to Eternal Life, believed. The whole City were met together to hear, but as
many as were ordained to Eternal Life, believed. It is not said as ^any as
believed were ordained to Eternal Life, but the contrary; Faith is not the
cause of Election, but Election is the cause of Faith.

3. That being the necessary Fruits, they are also evidences of our Election.
All that are Sanctified by the Spirit, and believe the Truth, belong to the
Election of God. Election it self, is a secret in God's Bosom, and is only
manifested to us by the Effects, and what are the necessary Effects, but
Sanctification by the Spirit, and a sound belief of the Gospel.

1. The Sanctification of the Spirit, is not only an external Dedication to
God, but an internal and real Change. Some a^e externally dedicated, and may
trample under foot the Blood of the Covenant, whereby they are sanctified. Heb.
10.29. Of how much sorer Punishment (suppose ye) shall he be thought worthy,
who has, trodden under foot the Son of God; and has counted the Blood of the
Covenant, wherewith he was sanc^ified, an unholy Thing, and has done despite
unto the Spirit of Grace? That is, were in external Covenant with God, and
visibly dedicated. But there is an other Sanctification* which is the Fruit of
the Spirit, (...) a real Change in them. 1 Cor. 6.11. And such were some of
you; but ye are washed, but ye are justified, in the Name of the Lord Jesus,
and by the Spirit of our God. Find this, and you find a sufficient Evidence:
Namely, if you become new Creatures, and be enabled to forsake Sin, and follow
after that which is pleasing in the sight of God. Sanc^ification of the Spirit,
is not so much known by Dedication and Profession, but by ^he real and fixed
inclination of your Souls to God and Heaven, and living accordingly; you are
turned to God, and live to God.

2. Your belief of the Truth, that is, of the Gospel. Now this is meant not of
a dead Faith, or such a cold Assent, as only begets an Opinion in us of the
truth of Christian Religion; but such a lively Faith, as brings us under the
power of it. For it is opposed to them that do not receive the Truth in the
love of it, Ver. 10. To them that believed not the Truth, because they had
pleasure in Unrighteousness: Ver. 12. That lived under the power of fleshly and
worldly Lusts. And it is spoken of them who had received the Truth, so as to
obey it, and suffer for it, as the Thessalonians are described all along. And
in short, such a belief of the Truth, as caused them to enter into Covenant
with Christ, and make conscience of their Fidelity to him. And here in this
Verse we learn, That a bare belief of the Truth does not save, unless
accompanied with the Sanctification of the Spirit. And therefore both must be
taken together: when the Word comes to us not in Word only, but in Power, and
much assurance and joy in the Holy Ghost, it is an infallible evidence of our
Election of God, 1 Thessalonians. 1.5. Alas, many have a general cold belief of the
Gospel, that never felt the effect of it upon their Hearts.

4. Observe the necessary Connection that is between both these Means. The
Sanctification of the Spirit, and the Belief of the Truth.

1. There is a necessary Connection between them, as between the Cause and the
Effect: For none are powerfully drawn to believe in Christ, but such as are
Sanctified by his Spirit. It is not in the power of any Creature to incline us
to God, or bring us to come to him by Christ. But this Work is wholly reserved
to the Spirit. And so the Lord himself does powerfully bring to pass his own
Decrees, as by Christ Redeeming, so by the Spirit Sanctifying. The Spirit is
the Author both of Faith and Holiness. Saving Grace is called a New Creature. 2
Cor. 5.17. Therefore if any Man be in Christ, he is a New Creature. Ephesians.
2.10. For we are his Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good Works,
which God has before ordaine^, that we should walk in them. And to Create, is
the Work of a Divine Power. Creat^re, and Creator, are Relatives. And certainly
the noblest Creature, such as the New Creature is, cannot be framed by any but
God. It is called a New Birth, and the New Birth is only from the Spirit, John
3.5, 6. Well then, these are fitly coupled, the Sanctification of the Spirit,
and Belief of the Truth. That God's Work may make way for ours,

2. There is the Connection of Concomitancy between the Gospel and the Spirit.
The Spirit only goes along with the Gospel, and no other Doctrine; and so both
external and internal Grace, are of God. John 17.17. Sanctify them by thy
Truth, thy Word is Truth. It was fit that a Supernatural Doctrine should be
accompanied with a Supernatural Operation, and Power; How else should it be
known to be of God? The Truth and the Spirit are inseparable Companions. Where
there is little of God known, there is little of his Spirit. As in the Natural
Truth revealed to the Heathens; Somewhat God showed unto them, Romans 1.19. In
the darker Revelation to the Jews, there is but a fainter degree of the Spirit;
but Grace and Truth come by Jesus Christ. There goes along with the Doctrine
of the Gospel, a mighty Spirit of Holiness; for thereby God would prove the
Verity and Truth of this Religion, and suitably to the rich Mercy prepared for
us in Christ.

3. There is a subordination of Faith to this Work of the Spirit, by the Truth.
For the greatest Things work not till they be considered and beli^ved. 1 Thessalonians.
2.12. Ye received it, not as the Word of Men, but as it is in Truth the Word of
God, which works effectually also in you that believe. A sound Belief
produces strong Affections* and strong Affections govern our Practice and
Conversation. So that fitly are these things united as the fruits of our
Election, and means of Salvation.

2. Why this is the great matter of our thansgiving to God, That I shall
evidence in the following considerations.

1. That Thanksgiving to God is a great and necessary duty, expressly enjoined
by him, and expected from us. 1 Thessalonians. 5.18. In every thing give thanks, for
this is the will of God concerning you, in Christ Jesus. When God has
interposed his Will, all debates are silenced. If there were nothing else in
the case, this is motive enough to a gracious Heart: for the fundamental reason
of all obedience, is the Will of God. Our thankfulness is no benefit to God,
yet he is pleased with it, as it shows our Honesty and Ingenuity. And to us
Christians, the very Life and Soul of our Religion is Thankfulness; therefore
God will have us continually exercised in it. Heb. 13.15. Let us offer the
Sacrifice of Praise continually, that is, the fruit of our Lips, giving thanks
unto his Name. As our understanding was given us, to think of God, and know
him* So our speech was given us to speak of God, and praise him. We praise God
for all his works, we give him thanks for such as are beneficial to us. In
Praise we ascribe all Honor, Excellency, and Perfection unto him: In giving
thanks we express what he has done, for our selves, or others. Now this must
be done continually, for God is continually beneficial unto us, by daily
Mercies giving us new matter of Praise and Thanksgiving. Besides there are some
Mercies so great, that they should never be forgotten.

2. That we are to give thanks, chiefly for Spiritual and Eternal Mercies. Ephesians.
1.3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed
us with all spiritual blessings, in heavenly places in Christ. For we cannot
give thanks rightly without a just esteem of the Mercy we give thanks for. But
spiritual and eternal Mercies, do much excel those that are temporal and
transitory. We are bound to bless the Lord for temporal Favors, and the
Comforts of this Life, but a renewed Heart is most taken up with spiritual and
heavenly Blessings. A Man may give thanks carnally, as well as pray carnally. A
carnal Man in Prayer gives vent to the desires of the Flesh. James 4.3. So in
Blessing God, he may speak from the relish of the Flesh: though usually carnal
Men, seldom give thanks to God. Hosea 12.8. I am become rich, I have found me
out Substance, etc. Surely Spiritual Blessings should have the pre-eminence,
because they concern our well-being, and they discriminate us from others,
which temporal Mercies do not. Eccl. 9.1, 2. For all this I considered in my
Heart, even to declare all this, that the Righteous, and the wise, and their
works, are in the Hand of God; no Man knows either Love or Hatred, by all
that is before them. All things come alike to all: there is one event to the
righteous, and to the wicked; to the good, to the clean, and to the unclean; to
him that sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not; as is the Good, so is
the Sinner; and he that swears, as he that fears an Oa^h. The wicked have
many of these Mercies. Psalm. 17.14. From Men of the World, which have their
portion in this Life, and whose Belly thou fillest with thy hid treasure: they
are full of Children, and leave the rest of their Substance to their Babes. And
they may own God in them as pleased, and well satisfied with the prosperity of
the Flesh, or a desirous to have more.

3. That the best prospect we have of God's Goodness to us, as to those
spiritual Mercies, is in Election.

1. There we see all our Blessings in their rise, fountain, and bosom-cause,
which is the eternal Love, and Grace of God. Dulcius ex ipso Font, Waters are
sweetest and freshest in their Fountain; there we see that antecedent Love,
which provided a Redeemer for us: which should be matter of continual Love and
Reverence to us. Ioh. 3.16. There we see the rich preparations of Grace, in the
new Covenant; which could never have entered into our Hearts, if elective love
had not provided them for us. 1 Cor. 2.9. There we see, what it was that
disposed all those Providence, that conduced to our good* Bi^th, Education,
Acquaintance, Relations; alas. we knew not the means of all these things, but
elective Love was at work for us, to cast all circumstances, that we might be
best taken in our Month. Romans 8.28. There we see what it was that made all the
means effectual to draw us unto God. Jer. 5.3. He loved u^ with an everlasting
Love.

2. It shows us the Lord's distinguishing Grace, and who it was that made us
differ from others, who are left to perish in their Sins. All are not called,
and why we? Joh. 14.22. Judas says unto him, not Iscariot* Lord, how is it
that thou will manifest thy self unto us, and not unto the World? yea, many
mighty and many noble are not called. 1 Cor. 1.26. God takes not all, nor any
of the highest in esteem among Men, not many wise and prudent. Matthew. 11.25,
26. At that time Jesus answered and said, I thank thee O Father, Lord of Heaven
and Earth, because thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and
have revealed them unto Babes: even so Father, for so i^ seemed good in thy
sight. Yea, many others ar^ left to perish by their ^wn delusions. The
Reprobates are Specula Iudicii Divini. The Judgments of God on the wicked do
exceedingly amplify his Mercies toward us. It was the mere elective love of
God, issuing forth by his powerful and differencing Grace, that pu^ the
distinction between us and others. Surely his peculiar Love to our selves does
most affect us.

3. There we see that Grace, that does take off all self-boasting. Ephesians. 2.8, 9.
For by Grace are ye saved, through Faith; and that not of your selves: it is
the gift of God: not of works, lest any Man should boast. Elective Love
prevented all actual or foreseen worth in us. And from first, to last, it is
carried on in a way of Grace: the Means, the Efficacy, all is of Grace. This
was God's great end, that Grace might be admired and esteemed by us, and be
matter of eternal Praise and Thanksgiving. Ephesians. 1.6. To the praise of the Glory
of his Grace, wherein he has made us accepted in the Beloved. The whole Design
is to show us how we are beloved of God: and that we may love him again.

1. Use. If Election be the great matter of Thanksgiving to God: Then surely
this Doctrine should be heard in the Church; for the Life and Soul of Christian
Religion is Gratitude; and what feeds Gratitude, is of great use unto us: our
Gratitude does not rise high enough, till it come to the first cause that
stirred and set all the Wh^^ls awork, in the business of our Salvation. Surely
this is a very profitable Point.

1. To detect the pride of Man, for here we see the true and proper cause of
difference between us and others. 1 Cor. 4.7. Who makes thee to differ? The
dif^erencing Grace of God, proceeding from his Election, is the only true Grace.

2. Nothing more extol^eth the Glory of God in our Salvation: For if Man can
assume nothing to himself, the Glory alone redoundeth to God. The more reason
and cause why some are chosen, and others past by, is God's good Pleasure.
Matthew. 11.26. Even so Father, because it pleased thee. Christ himself consents
to it, gives Thanks for it, as an act of free and undeserved Mercy.

3. No greater incentive to Holiness. For here we see the absolute necessity of
it, together with the strongest, sweetest motive to enforce it. 1. The absolute
necessity of it; because it is a necessary means to bring God's purposes to
pass. Ephesians. 1.4. He has chosen us, that we should be holy, and without blame
before him in love. He has chosen none to enjoy everlasting Glory after this
Life, but such as he has chosen to be holy here. First, they must be
sanctified, and renewed by the Spirit, and then walk in all holy Conversation
and Godliness. And whatever assurance of Election is pretended unto them who
lead an unholy Life, it is but a vain presumption, or ungrounded Persuasion,
yea a strong Delusion. Secondly, Here is the sweetest and strongest Motive to
enforce it, and that is the singular Love of God, which breeds in us a
sincere Love to God again, and all serious endeavors to approve our selves to
him in purity of Living. There is no such constraining force in any thing, as
there is in Love. 2 Cor. 5.14. For the Love of God constrains us, etc. And no
such Holiness as that which flows from it; this is thankful and Evangelical
Obedience.

4. It is the ground of our solid Comfort, in the midst of all the Calamities
and Temptations of the present Life: because our final happiness is appointed
to us by God's electing Love. Luke 12.32. Fear not, little Flock, for it is
your Fathers good Pleasure to giv^ you the Kingdom. And this is accompanied
with his active Providence and Care over us all the way thither. So that all
things are sanctified to us, that we may be sanctified to God. Romans 8.28. And
we know that all things work together for good, to them that love God, to them
who are the Called according to his purpose.

2. It shows us that the Elect have cause to bless God if they be chosen to
Salvation, though not to Wealth, Pleasure, and Honor. These Thessalonians
endured great Afflictions for the Gospel sake, yet Pa^l looked upon himself as
bound to give thanks always to God for them; because he had chosen them to
Salvation. God disperseth his Gifts variously, some are (shall I say) chosen
(or condemned rather) to Worldly Felicity. It is the Will of God they should
attain great Wealth, and Honor here; and will you envy them, and repine
against Providence, though God has reserved you for a better Estate hereafter?
Compare two places, one is Ier. 17.13. All that forsake thee, shall be written
in the Earth. The other is Luke 10.20. Rejoice in this, that your Names are
written in Heaven. Which is the better Privilege, to be written in Earth, or to
be written in Heaven? To have a great Name in the Subsidy-Book, or to have our
Names written in the Book of Life? The one is their Punishment, the other your
Blessedness.

Second Use is Exhortation. It presses you to two things.

1. Put in for a share and interest in this Mercy, that is to say, in the
Apostle's words, 2 Pet. 1.10. Give deligence to make your Calling and election
sure. God has told us who are Elected, and who are not. Therefore our way is
to accept of the general Grace offered, and to devote and resign our selves to
God, and to depend upon the Merits of our Redeemer, and put our selves under
the Discipline of his Spirit, in the use of the appointed Means, humbly waiting
for his renewing and reconciling Grace, and every Day more and more, by
diligence in the holy and heavenly Life, getting your Interest more assured.
For by this means do we come to know the purposed Love of God, and that he has
not appointed us to Wrath, but to obtain eternal Salvation by our Lord Jesus
Christ. We need not say, who shall go up to Heaven to know the Mind of God? Our
Election is known to us by our Vocation, and our Vocation by the Fruits, our
walking before him in Holiness, and Righteousness all our Days. Surely the
knowledge of our Election is a thing greatly to be desired, because our Eternal
Happiness, and all Spiritual good Things depend upon it. Election is the free
Love of God, by which he intends these Blessings to us. This is manifested by
Calling, by which they begin to be applied to us; then the effectual Operation
which these Blessings have in us discovers Calling, when we call on the Name
of Christ, and depart from Iniquity, 2 Timothy 2.19.

2. We should praise, and admire, and esteem this glorious Grace, and show our
Thankfulness both in Word and Deed.

1. In Word, because that is a means to kindle in our Hearts the Love of God,
and to stir up a Spiritual rejoicing in him. Psalm. 103.1, 2, 3. Bless the Lord,
O my Soul, and all that is within me, bless his holy Name. Bless the Lord, O my
Soul, and forget not all his Benefits. Who forgiveth all thine Iniquities; who
heals all thy Diseases, etc.

2. But chiefly in Deed, you are more obliged to live to God, than other Men;
when passing by thousands who in outward ^espects were better than you: and you
as deep in Sin as they: Not only without, but against all merit of yours, by
his singular Grace set you apart for himself. Shall I sin against God, and
grieve his Spirit? No: Let me glorify him as long as I have a Day to live.

SERMON XII.
2 Thessalonians. 2.14. Whereunto he called you by our Gospel, to the obtaining of the
Glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.


AFter the Doctrine of Antichrist, and God's dreadful Spiritual J^dgments on
his Abetters and Followers, the Apostle interposeth some matter of Consolation
to the Thessalonians: As before he comforted them from their Election, so now
from their Vocation. Therefore as we saw the Doctrine of Election, set forth in
the former Verse, with all its appendant Branches, and Circumstances: So now
the Doctrine of Vocation, with what belongs to it. Here Calling is set forth,
(1.) By the Author of it, he called you; that is God, who from the beginning
has chosen you to Salvation. (2.) The outward Means, by our Gospel. (3.) The
End, which is double. 1. Subordinate, in the word [ Whereunto?] to Faith and
Holiness. 2. Ultimate, to the obtaining of the Glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Whereunto he called you, etc.

Doct. All that are Elected by God, are in time, effectually called by Faith
and Holiness, to obtain Eternal Life.

1. I shall open effectual Calling by what is said of it in the Text. 2. That
all chosen by God are called in this Way.

1. Let me explain Effectual Calling. 1. The Author of it, he called you:
Namely God, spoken of in the former Verse. I prove it by these two Reasons, 1.
None else has Authority to call. 2. None else has Power to call.

1. Authority to call, either to Duties, or Privileges; for Calling is an
earnest invitation to Duties, upon the offer of several Privileges.

(1.) Duties. 1. God is our proper Lord, and rightful Sovereign. He may justly
challenge our Obedience; being our Creator, he is our Owner; and being our
Owner, he is our Sovereign and Lawgiver, and may enact what Laws he pleases.
Certainly Creation gives him an interest in us. For every Man takes himself
to have an^ Authority over what he has made, to dispose of it as he pleases.
Now he that properly made all things is God. Man is said to make a thing as he
bestows Ar^ upon it, but God bestows Being upon it. A Potter may form his
Clay into what Vessel he pleases, to make one Vessel unto Honor, and another
unto dishonor, Romans 9.21. that is, either a Dish for Food, or a Vessel to
serve the vilest uses of Nature, for Meat, or Excrements. But we speak of
Rational Creatures, that are capable of proper Government. Surely God made us,
and has a right to govern us. Our Parents are but Instruments of his
Providence, they know not how the Child is framed in the Womb, etc. Now he
calls upon us to do our Duty, with Original Supreme Authority we may refuse
others; if they speak not to us in his Name, they have no right over our
Consciences, to impose new Duties upon us. James 4.12. There is one Lawgiver,
who is able to save, and to destroy. Now his Calling, being a powerful
Excitation to do our Duty, it originally belongs to God.

(2.) As to Privileges. The Blessings God offers, are so great and glorious,
that none else can give us a right to them but God. And the Soul can have no
security that it does not usurp, and intrude upon the possession of Things that
belong not to us, till we have his Warrant: As the Apostle speaks of an
Office, Heb. 5.4. No Man takes his Honor unto himself, but he that was called
of God, as was Aaron. So it is true of all Prerogatives, we have no leave to
assume and take the Honor of them to our selves, till we are called of God:
That Is our Warrant. None came to the Wedding-Feast, till they were bidden,
Matthew. 22. Or went into the Vineyard till they were hired, Matthew. 20. This is
the difference between Duties, and Privileges. That any Man who will prefer
that Office of Charity and Love to us, may excite us to our Duties, to
unquestionable Duties, due from the Creature to our Creator: But no Man can
assure us of right to Privileges, without the Creators leave. Man cannot make
that to be a necessary Duty to the Creator, which is not. But Man may warn us
of our danger, when we disobey God; but Man cannot assure us of our right to
such Privileges, without God's grant. Therefore certainly it is God that must
call us.

2. None else can have Power: for, to Calling there is necessary not only the
Invitations of the Word, but also the effectual Operation of the Spirit. None
else can change the Heart. A Christian is nothing, and has nothing, but what
God is pleased to work in him by his Divine Power. 2. Pet. 1.3. According as
his Divine Power has given us all things, that pertain unto Life and
Godliness, through the Knowledge of him that has called us to Glory and Virtue.
It is a work of an infinite Power, to give Grace to graceless Souls. To make
those that are Sensual and Worldly, to become Spiritual and Heavenly; there
being so much opposition to hinder that Work: For such is the corruption of
Men's Hearts, the power of Satan over us, that he keeps possession, till a
stronger than he overcomes him, Luke 11.21. Therefore it is always made the
work of his Power, who calls the things that are not, as though they were,
Romans 4.17. It is still ascribed to his creating Power: Either the illumination
of the Mind; 2 Cor. 4.6. For God who commanded the Light to shine out of
Darkness, has shined in our Hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the
Glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ. Or inclinations of the Heart; Ephesians.
2.10. We can neither think, nor effect, nor pursue Spiritual and Heavenly
Things without it. Therefore certainly it is God that calls us.

2. The outward Means, by our Gospel. Where, 1. Consider the Means it self, The
Gospel. 2. The Interest which the Apostle challenges in it, our Gospel.

1. The Means it self, the Gospel. This God uses,

(1.) Because if God will Call, and invite the Creature by his Duty, to his
Happiness: It is necessary that his Call should be evident to the Creature, by
some visible Sign. Now the natural Duty of Man, is much seen by the Creation.
Romans 1.19. Because that which may be known of God, is manifest in them, for God
has showed it unto them. Psalm. 19.1, 2. The Heavens declare the Glory of God*
and the Firmament shows his Handiwork* Day unto Day utters Speech, and
Night unto Nigh^ shows Knowledge. But this Call is made to Man fallen, as a
Remedy to his lapsed Estate, which depending on the Free Grace of God, and can
only be known by his Revelation, conveyed to us by extraordinary Messengers,
such as Christ, who was the principal Revealer of the Doctrine of God for the
saving of the World: And him God authorized and sealed to this end. John 6.27.
Labor not for the Meat which perishes, but for that Meat which endures unto
everlasting Life, which the Son of Man shall give unto you; for him has God
the Father sealed. And then by the Apostles, who were instituted by Christ, and
sent forth to proselyte the World to the Obedience of God; and they were also
authorized from Heaven by diverse Signs and Wonders, as long as it was necessary
to use that Dispensation, for the confirmation of their Message, and to show
how dangerous it was to neglect a Doctrine so useful to Mankind, and suitable
to their great Necessities, and so owned by God, Heb. 2.3, 4. Therefore by the
Gospel God called them to this Grace.

(2.) To convince and stop their Mouths, that refuse this Calling: for the
Gospel brings Grace home to us, and leaves it upon our choice; if we will
accept it, well and good: if not, we justly deserve to be rejected for ever.
Acts 13.26. To you is this Word of Salvation sent. What say you to it? God has
sent a gracious Message to you in particular, will you accept, or refuse? Acts
3.26. He has sent him to you, to bless every one of you, etc. It does excite
all, and every Man, to look after the recovery of his lapsed Estate: Surely God
does you no wrong, if he severely punish your refusal after he has invited you
to his Grace in Christ. Great is the Misery of those that refuse this Call.
None of those that were bidden, shall taste of my Supper, Luke 14.24. They are
not only excluded from Happiness but they incur extreme Wrath and Misery. Prove.
1.24, 25, 26. Because I have Called, and ye refused; I have stretched out my
Hand, and no Man regarded. But ye have set at naught all my Counsel, and would
none of my Reproof: I also will laugh at your Calamity, I will mock when your
Fear comes.

(3.) Because to the Elect he will deal congruously, and preserve the Liberty
of his own Workmanship; and therefore deals with Man, as Man: Does not compel
us to be good whether we will or no, but does at the same time teach and draw
us. John 6.44, 45. No Man can come unto me, except the Father which has sent
me, draw him: And I will raise him up at the last Day. It is written in the
Prophets, And they shall be all taught of God. Every Man therefore that has
heard, and has learned of the Father, comes unto me. Sweetly attemperating
the means to our Liberty, but accompanying them with his powerful Grace. Acts
11.21. The Hand of the Lord was with them, and a great number believed, and
turned to the Lord. It is God does all, prospering the Labors of his Servants.
So Acts 16.14. God opened the Heart of Lydia, so that she attended unto the
things spoken by Paul. God opened her Heart, but by the things spoken by Paul.
And God loves to associate or accompany his Power with his own Means. Romans
1.16. It is the Power of God unto Salvation.

2. The Interest the Apostle challenges in it, [ our Gospel]; Does it not
derogate from the Authority of it, to appropriate it to any Man? I answer, No.
Elsewhere it is called God's Gospel, The glorious Gospel of the Blessed God, 1 Timothy 1.11. He is the Author: It is not an Invention of Man, but a Secret that
came from the Bosom of God. Again, it is called Christ's Gospel. The Gospel of
our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. As the principal Subrevealer, who made
known unto us, most fully the Mind of God. And then on the Apostles, who were
Instruments chosen, and entrusted by Christ to declare it; to the World both by
Word and Writing. The Scripture is an Authentic Record, wherein all things are
delivered to us, both concerning our Duties, and Privileges. Therefore, when
he says, our Gospel, he does not mean it of principal Revelation, but in
regard of Dispensation, and Trust. 1 Timothy 1.11. The glorious Gospel of the
Blessed God is committed to my trust. Therefore this word (our Oospel) is, 1. A
word of Fidelity, that argued the Conscience to this Duty, that owneth the
Trust committed to him, and that this was his chief Work and Charge. 1 Cor.
9.17. A Dispensation of the Gospel is committed unto me. 2. It is a word of
Esteem, Love, and Affection; what we love, we call ours. Rom 16.25. Now to him
that is able to stablish you according to my Gospel. Paul was glad he had such
Interest in it, as to be a Preacher of it. And Believers should be glad they
are partakers of the benefit. Ephesians. 1.13. In whom ye trusted after ye heard
the Word of Truth, the Gospel of your Salvation. It is theirs, and ours. Oh
blessed be God for this! 3. It is a work importing Diligence; our Gospel, that
which he preached with so much Labor, and Hazard; he followed this Work close.
Acts 20.24. I count not my Life dear, that I may finish my Course with joy, and
the Ministry which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel of
the Grace of God? He was willing to die and suffer any thing for the Gospels
sake. 4. The Consent and Harmony between him and the rest of the Apostles.
Sometimes he calls it, My Gospel, to assert his own Apostolical Authority, as
Romans 2.16. Sometimes, Our Gospel, 2 Cor. 4.3. to note their common Consent, who
were the authorized Messengers of our Lord Jesus Christ. It is our Gospel, the
same jointly attested by all Christ's chosen Messengers.

3. The ends of this Calling. They are either Subordinate, or Ultimate. (1.)
Subordinate in the word ( Whereunto he has called you) that is, to Faith,
Holiness, and Salvation, we are called to all.

1. God calls us to the Faith of the Gospel, he has not only ordained us to
believe, but called us to believe; without Calling there can be no Faith. Rom
10.14. How shall they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? But upon
Calling, there must be Faith; or else we make void the Dispensation of God,
which we are under. 1. There must be a belief of the Gospel in general. The
voice of the Creatures calls upon the Gentiles to believe an Infinite. Eternal
Power, that made Man, and all Things: And the condemnation of the Gentle World
is, that they know not God, and glorify not God, as God, after this Revelation
made to them; but to believe in Christ is a mystery to Nature, and depends
upon God's special Revelation in the Gospel. Therefore the Eternal and Internal
Power of the Spirit, accompanies it, to convince the World, that it is Sin not
to believe in Christ. The External Power in Miracles, and the Internal in the
Illumination of the Mind: John 16.9. The Spirit shall convince the World of
Sin: because they believe not in me. That is, receive not the Faith of the
Gospel, or believed not that Christ was the true Messiah, the great Prophet and
Doctor of the Church.

2. This Call does aim at not only a belief of the truth of the Gospel in
general, but also a particular Affiance in Christ, according to the terms of
the New Covenant: General assent to the truth of the Gospel, is only
considerable as it leads on other Things. Now that I may not wander, I will
refer them to two Things. 1. A Fiducial Assent. 2. An Obediential Confidence.
This is the belief of the Truth we are called unto.

1. The Assent must be Fiducial, or accompanied with a trust in Christ. Ephesians.
1.13. In whom ye also trusted, after that ye heard the Word of Truth, the
Gospel of your Salvation. The meaning is, the Gentiles after they heard the
Gospel, and believed the Truth, they did trust themselves in the Hands of
Christ, to be brought by his Saving and Healing Methods to eternal Happiness.
It is a mighty thing to have such a Belief as may produce Trust, or a venturing
our selves in the Hands of Christ, against all hazards; and whatever befalls
us, are content to save our Souls on his Terms. This breeds holy Security, or
Courage. 2 Timothy 1.12. For I know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded, that
he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him against that Day.

2. This Confidence must be Obediential, not a devout Sloth, or Carelessness.
To trust in his Mercies and neglect his Precepts, crosses the Tenor of his
Covenant. Psalm. 119.60. I made haste, and delayed not, to keep thy
Commandments. It is true Religion, when Faith, Love, and Hope concur. Jude ver.
20, 21. But ye, Beloved, building up your selves on your most holy Faith,
joining in the Holy Ghost; keep your selves in the Love of God, looking for the
Mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, unto Eternal Life. I know there is a trusting
in his Pardon for our Failings, and that Justification is a great Privilege, as
well as Salvation; but Pardon is promised to the Sincere, that with an honest
Heart perform their Duty: Psalm. 32.2. Blessed is the Man to whom the Lord
imputes not Iniquity; and in whose Spirit there is no guile. And Romans 8.1.
There is no Condemnation to them who are in Christ Jesus: who walk not after
the Flesh, but after the Spirit. So that still our confidence in Christ must be
obediential.

2. We are called to Holiness, this is every where asserted in the Scripture. 1 Thessalonians. 4.7. For God has not called us to Uncleanness, but to Holiness. And it
enforces it on seveveral Grounds:

As (1.) That there may be a likeness between the Person calling, and the
Persons called. 1 Pet. 1.15. But as he that called you is Holy, so be ye holy
in all manner of Conversation. It is true Religion, to imitate what we worship:
For Knowledge and Esteem, always work an Assimulation; and therefore if we know
the True God, and love him, we will study to be like him. Certainly, we have
not a true knowledge of God, if we do not know him to be a Pure and Holy God; he
has showed it in his Laws, showed it in his Providence, and showed it in his
Gospel, by which we are called. The Gods of the Heathen taught Sin, by their
own Example: Their impure Lives, are recorded by their Poets. Austin t^lleth us
of a Young Man, who was encited to Wantonness, by seeing the Picture of Jupiter
on the Wall, committing Adultery. Quo pacto se non faceret, cum in Templo
adorare cogeretur Jovem potius quam Catonem. But our God is Pure, as appears
by his Laws, which are all Holy, Just, and Good, Psalm. 119.140. Surely such
holy Precepts could come from none, but a Pure and Holy God. As also by the
Work of his Spirit on his People. Ephesians. 4.24. And that ye put on the New Man,
which after God is created in Righteousness and true Holiness. And 2 Cor. 3.18.
We all, with open Face, beholding as in a Glass, the G^ory of the Lord, are
changed into the same Image, from Glory to Glory, even as by the Spirit of the
Lord. He puts into us a Nature that is very tender and shie of Sin, troubled at
it in others. 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. And delivered just Lot, vexed with the filthy
Conversation of the Wicked: For that Righteous Man dwelling amongst them, in
seeing and hearing, vexed his righteous Soul, from day to day, with their
unlawful Deeds. He that made the Eye, shall not he see? He that put into us a
clean Heart, is not he Pure and Holy? This appears also by the dispensations
of his Providence. Hab. 1.13. Thou art of purer Eyes than to behold Evil, and
can not look on Iniquity: Wherefore look thou upon them that deal
treacherously, and hold thy Tongue, when the Wicked devoureth the Man that
is more Righteous than he? Judgments on Sinners, so on his own People. Prove
11.31. Behold the Righteous shall be recompensed in Earth, much more the Wicked
and the Sinner. As for Instance in David: The Child died, his Daughter is
defloured, Ammon slain, Absolon is in Rebellion, his Wives Ravished, himself
Banished from his House and Kingdom. Eli's Sons slain, the Ark taken, his
Daughter-in-Law died, himself brake his Neck. But chiefly in the very
Foundation of the Gospel, the Son of God dies a Shameful, Painful, Accursed
Death, before God wou^d relax the Rigor of his Law, and set a-foot the Gospel:
And all that there might be a perfect Demonstration of his Justice and
Holiness, and displeasure against Sin. Rom 8.3. For what the L^w could not do,
in that it was weak through the Flesh, God sending his own Son, in the likeness
of sinful Flesh, and for Sin condemned Sin in the Flesh.

(2.) The very nature of this Calling enforces this Sanctification, or setting
Man apart from a common to a sacred use. For it is a calling us not only from
Misery to Happiness, but from Sin to Holiness: and the one is indispensibly
necessary to the other. For none but those who are in an holy Estate, can be in
a blessed Condition. Our calling is sometimes called a Heavenly Calling, Heb.
3.1. Sometimes an Holy Calling, 2 Timothy 1.9. Therefore the chief subordinate
end, is Holiness. Romans 1.7. Called to be Saints, from the Devil, the World, and
the Flesh, to God.

(3.) The grace and favor which is showed in our Calling, obliges us to be
Holy, in point of Gratitude: For when we consider in what a sinful estate God
found us, how freely he loved us, and that with a discriminating differencing
Love, when he passed by others worthier than we; and to what estate he is ready
to advance us, to the enjoyment of himself, amongst all those that are
Sanctified by Faith: All these are as so many strong Bonds and Obligations upon
us, to walk worthy of God, who has called us to his Kingdom and Glory, in
Jesus Christ, 1 Thessalonians. 2.12. Worthy of his Grace in Calling; worthy of the
Glory to which we are Called; that is, with the worthiness of Condecency, not
of Condignity: We cannot fully answer this Grace, but we must do that which
will become it.

(4.) This Calling enableth us to be Holy, because it gives us all things
necessary both to holiness of Heart and Life. 2 Pet. 1.3. According as his
Divine Power has given unto us all things that pertain unto Life, and
Godliness, through the knowledge of him that has called us to Glory and Virtue.
Now this Grace must not lie idle, otherwise we receive the Spirit in vain.

2. The Ultimate end to obtain the Glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. The same
expression is 2 Pet. 5.10. The God of all Grace, who has called us to his
Eternal Glory by Christ. Jesus. It is his Glory. Mark, 1. Here is Glory. 2. It
is the Glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.

1. It is Glory for Body and Soul; the Glory is so great we cannot utter it,
and conceive it. Now a little is revealed to us, but then it shall be revealed
in us. (1.) The Soul, is not annihilated after Death, nor does it sleep till
the Resurrection; nor is it detained by the way from immediate passing into
Glory; but as soon as it is loosed from the Body, is admitted into God's
Presence, and gathered unto the Souls of just Men made perfect; where it seeeth
God, and loves him, and enjoys what it sees and loves. For as soon as we
are loosed from the Body, we are present with the Lord. And therefore the first
benefit we receive in the other World, is the Salvation of the Soul. 1. Pet.
1.9. Receiving the end of your Faith, even the salvation of your Souls. It
flitteth hence to God. (2.) The Body has its glory also in due time. For when
it is raised up out of the Grave, it will be another kind of Body, then we now
have, both for Impassibility, Clarity, Agility. For Impassibility, called
Incorruption; Clarity, called Glory; Agility, called Power; Subtilty, called a
Spiritual Body, by the Apostle. 1 Cor. 15.42, 43. It is sown in Corruption, it
is raised in Incorruption. It is sown in Dishohonour, it is raised in Glory: It
is sown a Natural Body, it is raised a Spiritual Body.

1. Impassibility does not only exclude Corruption, for so the Bodies of the
Damned are preserved for ever, but all grievance^ and pain. Rev. 21.4. There
shall not be any more pain.

2. For Glory, a shining Brightness. The Righteous shall shine as the Sun, in
the Kingdom of the Father, Matthew. 13.43. Stephen's Face shone (in this Life) as
it were the Face of an Angel, Acts 6.15. And Moses his Face shone by Converse
with God in the Mount, Exodus 34.30. Our Bodies shall be likened unto his
glorious Body, Phil. 3.21. In the Transfiguration, His Face did shine as the
Sun, and his Raiment did shine as the Light.

3. For Vigor, Activity, and Strength. It shall always be in the height and
excellency of it. God preserved Moses his natural Vigor for a long time, Deuteronomy.
34.7. but glorified Bodies shall for ever remain in an eternal spring of Youth.

4. Subtilty, as Spiritual Body: Here we live an animal Life, after the manner
of Sensitive Creatures; maintained by Meat, Drink, Sleep: But hereafter the
Body shall live after the manner of Spirits, having no need, or use of these
things. There we are (...), as the Angels of God. Matthew. 22.30. and 1 Cor. 6.19
Our Bodies are the Temple of the Holy Ghost. Well then, this is the Glory put
upon us.

2. Why is it called the Glory of our Lord Jesus Christ?

(1.) It is purchased by Christ; we were Redeemed, or bought by the pr^ce of
his Blood, that we might attain to his Glory. Ephesians. 1.14. In whom we have
Redemption through his Blood, even the forgiveness of Sins, according to the
riches of his Grace.

(2.) It is promised by Christ. John 10.28. I give unto them Eternal Life, and
they shall never perish: All that obey this Call have Eternal Life already
begun, nay, completed. 1 John 2.25. And this is the Promise, that he has
promised us, even Eternal Life.

(3.) It is Prayed for by Christ; which is a Copy of his Intercession. John
17.14. Father, I will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me where
I am, that they may behold my Glory, which thou have given me.

4. It is actually bestowed by Christ on his Followers and called People. He
receives our departing Souls as soon as they fleet out of the Body. Acts.
7.59. Lord Jesus, receive my Spirit. They are with him, P^il. 1.23. and 2 Cor.
5.8. when absent from the Body, they are present with the Lord: which is a
mighty comfort to us. At the last day he will solemnly introduce us into
Heaven. Joh. 14.3. I will come again, and receive ^ou to my self: that where I
am, there ye may be also. The great Shepherd of the Sheep will lead the Flock
into their everlasting fold.

5. We have not only Glory by Christ, but with Christ; we shall have the same
Glory Christ now has, but in our measure. The same Glory in kind, whereunto
Christ's humanity is advanced, referring to him only his privilege in the
degree. So Romans 8.17. And if Children, then Heirs, Heirs of God, and
joint-Heirs with Christ: if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also
glorified together. Rev. 3.21. To him that overcomes, will I grant, to sit
with me in my Trone, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in
his Throne. We share with him in his own Blessedness, so far as we are capable.

2. That all those who are elected and chosen by God, are thus called. Election
and Vocation have a great respect one to another; and though we cannot say,
that none are called, that are not elected, for the Lord calls others not
only by the voice of Nature, but the Gospel. Matthew. 22.14. Many are called, but
few are chosen. Yet we may say, that none are chosen, but they are in time
called, so that Vocation is as it were actual Election, they are often put one
for another, as Joh. 15.19. I have chosen you out of the World, therefore the
World hates you: That is, called them, or pursued his choice. So 1 Cor. 1.26.
Ye see your Calling, Brethren, that not many wise Men after the Flesh, not many
noble, not many mighty, are called: for God has chosen the foolish things of
the World, to confound the wise: and God has chosen the weak things of the
World, to conf^und the things which are mighty; verse. 27. as if choosing
calling were all one. So Romans 11.28, 29, As concerning the Gospel, they are
Enemies for your sake; but as touching the Election, they are beloved for the
Fathers sake: for the gifts and calling of God, are without Repentance. So that
Calling is an infallible consequent of Election. And Romans 8.30. Whom he did
Predestinate, them he also Called. Reason shows it. 1. Effectual Calling is
that. powerful operation of God, wherein he begins to execute the purposes
of his Grace. Romans 8.28. And we know that all things work together for good, to
them that love God, to them who are the Called according to his purpose (...).
The first discovery of it to the Creature (...) by drawing us to himself. 2.
This act proceeds immediately from his Choice, as anteceding all that we can
do; all worthiness of ours, or supposed worthiness. 2. Tim. 1.9. Who has saved
us, and called us with an holy C^lling, not according to our Works, but
according to his own Purpose and Grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus.
before the World began. Nothing induced God to do it, on our part, for what
good thing could we do, before w^ were made good by calling? 3. The effect does
infallibly follow, John 6.37. All that the Father has given me shall come to
me, and him that comes to me I will in no wise cast out. In due time they are
Called, and are obedient to the Call, Romans 8.28.

Uses. 1. If it be so, then here is Advice to all.

1. Let us apply our selves to the Means with reverence and seriousness;
because God's Power is shown in them, in converting Souls to himself. Psalm.
65.4. Blessed is the Man whom thou choosest, and causest to draw nigh unto
thee, that he may dwell in thy Courts. It is a good thing to be in Graces way.
The Means have a ministerial efficacy. Acts. 14.1. They so spoke, that a great
multitude of the Jews and Greeks believed. With such clearness and force, so
far God is with the Minister. A Dart flung by a skilful Hand, will pierce
deeper than by its own weight. But yet if you can but tarry, the Hand of the
Lord may be with you also, you do not know the seasons of the Lord's Grace, all
are not called at the first hour; some lie long at the Pool, but yet wait
still. Ere ever you are aware, the Holy Ghost may fall upon you, and open your
Hearts, that Heavenly Doctrine may have its effect upon you.

2. Let us mind not only Privileges, but Duties. We have great Privileges, we
are called to enjoy sweet fellowship with Christ here. 1 Cor. 1.9. Faithful is
he who has called you, to the Communion of Christ Jesus our Lord; and to a
glorious Estate hereafter. But we are also called to the Sanctification of the
Spirit, and the belief of the Truth; and we cannot obtain the one without ^he
other. Do not so mind Comfort, as to slight Holiness; and divide one part of
your Calling from the other. Comfort is consequent to Holiness, and follows
it as heat does Fire. The Spirit is more necessarily a Sanc^^fier, than a
Comforter. For our duty and obedience to God, is a greater thing, than our own
Peace. Holiness is the Image of God upon the Soul, and the blessed perfection
wherein we were created; Genesis 1.27. So God ^reated Man in his own Image. And
when it was lost by Sin, Christ came and paid our Ransom, that he might renew
us by his Spirit. Tit. 3.5. According to his Merry, he saved us, by the washing
of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost. Yea, much of our everlasting
Blessedness lies in it. For Heaven is to be looked upon not only as a state of
complete Felicity, but exact Holiness. 1 John 3.2. We know that when he does
appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as ^e is. Ephesians. 5.27. That
he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not ^aving Spot, or wri^kle,
or any such thing; but that it should be Holy and without Blemish. Then it is a
glorious Church. Christ has done his whole Work. Holiness is the Beauty of God
himself, Exodus 15.11. and puts an Excellency on us, if we love it, and imitate
it. Prove. 12.26. The Righteous is more excellent than his Neigbour: But the way
of the Wicked seduceth them. We do not only excel other Men, but we are more
amiable in the sight of God. Prove. 11.20. The Upright is his delight. In short,
it is a part of Salvation it self, and a Means to that which remains. Act.
26.18. -- Inheritance among them which are Sanctified by Faith in Christ Jesus.

3. Let us reflect upon our selves: Have we God's Call? Have we obeyed the
Gospel? This will clear up your Election to you. 2 Pet. 1.10. Wherefore the
rather, Brethren, give diligence to make your Calling and Election sure: For if
ye do these things, ye shall never fall. Do you find such a belief wrought in
you by the Spirit, as begins in brokenness of Heart, and ends in Holiness; for
Christ came to call Sinners to Repentance, Matthew. 9.14 That is, Men sensible of
Sin to holiness of Heart and Life, to return to God that we may first live to
him, and then with him.

4. To improve the belief of the Glory promised. 1. To sweeten Obedience, or a
c^^se of Holiness which for the present is so tedious to the Flesh. Now here is
our Labor, hereafter our Recompense, 1 Cor. 5.58. Every day we should grow
more meet for his Glory, Col. 1.12. 2. To a contempt of all Worldly Things,
good, or evil. If good, many are pleased with this World's good Things, but
have no affection to Spiritual and Heavenly Things. Like the rebell^ous
Israelites, who more desired the Onions and Garlic of Egypt, than the Milk and
Honey of the Promised Land, or the Celestial Manna, Numb. 11.5, 6. Worse than
Prodigals, that rest satisfied with Husks of Swine, than Bread which is in
their Father's House. They have their good Things. Now we should remember we
are called off from these Things, from dreggy Contentments, base Enjoyments, to
the Glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. 3. The evils of the World, Crosses,
Afflictions: After we have suffered a while, the God of all Grace who has
called us unto his Eternal Glory by Christ Jesus, make you perfect, stablish,
strengthen, settle you. And 2 Timothy 2.11.12. It is a faithful saying: For if we
be dead with him, we shall also live with him. If we suffer, we shall also
reign with him. Our Afflictions are both breves and leves, light and momentary.
2 Cor. 4.17. For our light Affliction, which is but for a moment, works for
us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory. Our sufferings are small,
if compared with the Reward: The time short, if compared with Eternity. There
is a twofold Eternity, that eternal Death which the Wicked must endure; that
eternal Life which we enter into. This should sweeten all bitter Waters. 4. To
dispose and prepare us for Death. The contemplation of Immortality has left
strong impressions on the Hearts of Heathens; some Burnt themselves, as
impatient to tarry longer. If a dark view, vain hope cause this, what should a
sure Promise, and Earnest of the Spirit do?

2 Use To the Called. 1. Bless God for this Calling. The woeful Estate out of
which we are called, and the blessed E^t^te into which we are entered; compared
togeth^^; should make us wonder. 1 Pet. 2.9. Ye should show forth the Praises
of him, who has called you out of darkness, into his marvelous Light. 2. Walk
answerably, Ephesians. 4.1. I therefore, the Prisoner of the Lord, beseech you,
that ye walk worthy of the Vocation wherewith ye are called. And 1 Thessalonians. 2.12.
That ye would walk worthy of God, who has called you unto his Kingdom and
Glory.

SERMON XIII.
2 Thessalonians. 2.15. Therefore, Brethren, stand fast, and hold the Traditions which
ye have been taught, whether by Word, or our Epistle.


THE Apostle after he had comforted the Thessalonians, he exhorts them to
constancy in the Truth, whatever temptations they had to the contrary. The
Comforts he propounds to them were taken; 1. From their Election, verse. 13.2.
From their Vocation, verse. 14. His Exhortation is to Perseverance: Therefore,
Brethren, etc.

In the words observe; 1. The Illative Particle ( Therefore); because God has
chosen you, and called you, and given you such advantages against Error and
Seduction.

2. The Duty inferred, (...), stand fast; It is a Military word, you have the
same in other places, 1 Cor. 16.13. Watch ye, stand ye fast, etc. Ephesians. 6.14.
Stand therefore, having your Loins girt about with. Truth. The word intimates
Perseverance.

3. The Means of Perseverance, Hold the Traditions which you have bin taught,
whether by Word, or our Epistle.

Where observe; 1. The Act. 2. The Object.

1. The Act (...), hold with strong hand; The word implies a forcible holding
against Assaults, whether of Error or Persecution. The Thessalonians were
assaulted in both kinds; the Heathens persecuted them; and some were gone
abroad that began the Mystery of Iniquity, and were ready to pervert them.

2. The Object; which is propounded: 1. By a common and general term, The
Traditions which ye have bin taught. 2. By a distribution, Whether by Word, or
our Epistle.

I. The common and general term, [ The Traditions which ye have bin taught];
There are two sorts of Traditions; Humane, and Divine.

First; Humane Traditions, are certain external Observances instituted by Men,
and delivered from hand to hand, from Progenitors to their Posterity: These may
be either besides, or contrary to the Word of God. 1. Beside the Word; as the
Institutions of the Family of the Rechabites, in the observance of which, from
Father to Son, they were so exact and punctual, that God produces their
example to shame the disobedience of his People; Ier. 35.6, 7. Jonadab the Son
of Rechab our Father commanded us, saying, Ye shall drink no Wine, nor build
Houses, nor plant Vineyards, etc. 2. Contrary to the Word of God; such as were
those of the Pharisee^, Matthew. 15.2 Why transgress ye the Commandment of God by
your Traditions? Humane Inventions in Religion, are contrary to, and
destructive of Divine Laws.

Secondly; Traditions Divine; Are either Heavenly Doctrines revealed by God, or
Institutions and Ordinances appointed by him for the use of the Church. These
are the Rule and Ground of our Faith, Worship, and Obedience. The whole
Doctrine of the Gospel, is a Tradition delivered and conveyed to us by fit
Messengers, such as the Apostles were; 1 Cor. 11.2. Now I praise you, Brethren,
that ye remember me in all things, and keep the Ordinances, [Marg. Traditions]
as I delivered them to you. So that holding the Traditions, is nothing else but
perseverance in Apostolical Doctrine.

II. The Distribution; that no Cheats might be put upon them under any
pretense; therefore, he says, Whether by Word, or our Epistle; that is, by
word of Mouth, when present; or by Epistle, when absent: And he says, not
Epistles, but Epistle, as alluding to the former wrote unto them: They were
bound to yield to both alike credence and obedience; for whether in speaking or
writing, the Apostolical Authority was the same. To improve this Verse for your
benefit I shall lay down several Propositions.

I. That whatever assurance we have of God's preserving us in the Truth, yet
we are bound to use Diligence and Caution.

II. Our Diligence and Caution is to be employed about this, That we may stand
fast in the Faith of Christ, and the Profession and Practice of Godliness.

III. That the Means of standing fast in the Faith of Christ, and the
Profession and Practice of Godliness, is by holding the Traditions which were
taught by the Holy Apostles.

IV. That while the Apostles were in being, there were two ways of delivering
the Truth, by word of Mouth, and Writing.

V. That now when they are long since gone to God, and we cannot receive from
them the Doctrine of Life by Word of Mouth; We must stick to the Scriptures or
written Word.

I. That whatever assurance we have of God's preserving us in the Truth, yet
we are bound to use Diligence and Caution: For the Apostle had said, That God
had chosen and called them to the belief of the Truth; and yet says,
Therefore, Brethren, Stand fast.

First; Reason will tell us, That when we intend an End, we must use the Means,
otherwise the bare intention and desire would suffice; And to the accomplishing
of any effect, we need no more than to will it; And the Sluggard would be the
wisest Man in the World, who is full of wishings and wouldings, though his
hands refuse to labor: but common experience shows, that the End cannot be
obtained without a diligent use of the means. Prove. 13.4. The Soul of the
Sluggard desires, and has nothing; but the Soul of the Diligent shall be made
fat; that is, rewarded with the intended benefit.

Secondly; The Business in hand is, Whether God's Election, Calling, or
Promise, does so secure the End to us, as that we need not be so careful in the
diligent use of Means. Such a notion or conceit there may be in the Hearts of
Men, therefore ^et us attaque it a little by these Considerations.

1. God's Decree is both of End and Means, for all his Purposes are executed by
fit Means. He that has chosen us to Salvation, brings it about by the belief
of the Truth, and sanctification of the Spirit. 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. and without
Faith and Holiness no Man shall see God, and escape condemnation. God had
assured Paul, That there should be no loss of any Man's Life among them, except
of the Ship, Acts 27.22. And yet afterward, verse. 31. Paul tells them,
Except these abide in the Ship, ye cannot be saved. How could that Assurance
given to Paul from God, and Paul's Caution to the Mariners stand together? Does
the Purpose of God, depend upon the uncertain Will and Actions of Men? I
Answer, Not as a Cause, from whence it receives its force and strength, but as
a Means, appointed also by God to the execution of his Decree. For by the same
Decree God Appoints the Event, what he will do, and the Means by which he
will have it to be done: And the Lord revealing by his Word this conjunction of
end and Means, there is a necessity of Duty lying upon Man to use these Means,
and not to expect the End without them. God intended to save all in the Ship,
and yet the Mariners must abide in the Ship; therefore what God has joined
together, let no man separate: If we separate these things, God does not change
his Counsel, but we pervert his Order to our own Destruction.

2. God that has bidden us to believe his Promises, has forbidden us to tempt
his Providence, Mat. 4.7. Now we tempt God, when we desire him to give an
extraordinary proof of his care over us, when ordinary Means will serve the
turn, or be useful to us.

3. Though the Means seem to have no connection with the End, yet if God has
injoined them for that end, we must use them; As in the instance of Naaman, God
was resolved to cure him; but Naaman must take his prescribed way, though
against his own fancy and conceit; 2 King. 5.10. Wash in Jordan seven times,
and thy flesh shall come again unto thee, and thou shall be clean: compare
verse. 13. If the Prophet had bidden thee to do some great thing, etc. So John
13.6, 7. Peter must submit to be washed, though he could not see the benefit of
it. So John 9.6, 7. The blind Man must submit to have his Eyes anointed with
Clay, and wash in the Pool of Siloam; though the Clay seemed to put out his
Eyes, rather than cure them; And the Pool could not wash away his blindness:
but means appointed by God must be used, whatever improbabilities are
apprehended by us.

4. That when God's Will is expressly declared concerning the Event, yet he will
have the means used: As for instance, 2 Kings 20.5, 6, 7. God was absolutely
resolved to add fifteen years more to Hezekiah's Life, yet he must take ^ lump
of Figs and lay i^ on the Boil: which plainly shows that no promise on God's
part, nor assurance on ours, hinders the use of means; God will work by them,
not without them.

5. In Spiritual Things, assurance of the Event is an encouragement to
Industry, not a pre^ence to Sloth; 1 John 2.27, 28. Ye shall abide in him; and
now, little Children, abide in him. The promise of Perseverance does encourage
us to use endeavors that we may persevere, and quicken Diligence, rather than
nourish Security, or open a gap to carnal Liberty; 1 Cor. 9.26. I run not as
one that is uncertain: We are the more earnest, because we are assured the
means shall not be uneffectual.

II. Prop. Our Duty is to stand fast in the Faith of Christ, and profession of
Godliness, whatever temptations we have to the contrary: [ stand fast] being a
Military word, it alludeth to a Soldier's keeping his Ground; and is apposed
to two things; 1. A cowardly Flight; 2. A treacherous Revolt.

1. A cowardly Flight, implies our being overcome in the evil Day, by the many
Afflictions that befall us for the Truths sake; Ephesians. 6.13. Wherefore take to
you the whole Armor of God, that you may be able to withstand in the evil Day;
that after ye have done all things, ye may stand. Their Temptation, was the
many troubles and persecutions that befell them, called there the Evil Day.
Their defense lay in the whole Armor of God; which is there made of six
pieces, The Girdle of Truth or Sincerity, which is a strength to us as a Girdle
to the Loins; The Breastplate of Righteousness, or an holy i^clination and
desire to perform our Duty to God in all things; And the Shield of Faith, or a
steadfast adhering to the Truths of the Gospel, whether delivered in a way of
Command, Promise, or Threatening; The Helmet of Hope, or a certain and desirous
expectation of the promised Glory; The Shoe of the preparation of the Gospel of
Peace, which is a readiness to endure all encounters for Christ's sake, who
has made our Peace with God; And the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of
God. Now if we take this Armor, and use it in our Conflicts, what does it
serve for? to withstand and stand; The first is the Act of a Soldier; the
second is the posture of a Conqueror: Here is withstanding till the Field be
won, and then standing when the Day of Evil is over. Here we make our way to
Heaven by Conflict and Conquest; and hereafter we triumph.

2. A treacherous Revolt, or yielding to the Enemy, by complying with those
things which are against the Interest of Christ and his Kingdom for
advantage-sake; 2 Timothy 4.10. Demas has forsaken us, and loved the present
World. Back-sliders in Heart are the worst sort of Apostates, such as lose
their af^ection to God, and delight in his ways, and esteem not of his glorious
Recompenses, for a little Pleasure, Profit, or Pomp of Living, sell their
Birthright for one morsel of Meat, Heb. 12.15, 16. Some fail in their
Understandings, but most miscarry by the perverse inclination of their Wills;
they are carnal worldly Hypocrites, that never thoroughly mortified the fleshly
Mind; price things as they are commodious to the Flesh, and will save them from
Sufferings. The bias of such Men's Hearts does easily prevail against the Light
of their Understandings.

III. Prop. The Means of standing fast, is, by holding the Traditions which
were taught by the Holy Apostles. Here I will prove;

1. That the Doctrine of Christianity taught by the Apostles is a Tradition. 2.
That holding this Tradition by strong hand, when others wrest it from us, is
the means of our Perseverance.

1. That the Doctrine of Christianity is a Tradition, I prove it by two
Arguments; First, Matters not evident by the Light of Nature, nor immediately
revealed to us by God, must be either an Invention or a Tradition; an Invention
is something in Religion not evident by natural Light, nor agreeable to sound
Reason, but is some cunningly devised Fable, invented by one or more, and
obtruded by various Artifices upon the belief of the World. Inventions in this
kind were Man's Disease, not his Remedy; Eccles. 7.29. God made Man uprigh^,
but they sought out many Inventions. As when the Philosop^ers sat abrood upon
Religion, a goodly Chymaera it was they hatched and brought forth! Romans 1.21,
22. They became vain in their Imaginations, and their foolish Heart was
darkened; and professing themselves to be wise, they became Fools. The
Inventions little became the Nature of God; nor were they profitable to Man,
for still the great Sore of Nature was unhealed, which is a fear of Death, and
the righteous Wrath of God, Romans 1.32. So that neither Man's Comfort nor Duty
was well provided for. Surely the Gospel is none of this fort, not an Invention
of Men, but a Revelation of God; and a Revelation not made to us in Person, but
brought out of the Bosom of God, by Jesus Christ, and by him manifested to
chosen Witnesses, who might publish this Mystery and Secret to others. Well
then, since the Gospel is not an Invention, it is a Tradition, or a delivery of
the Truth upon the Testimony of one that came from God, to instruct the World,
or reduce it to him: not an Invention of Man, but a Secret brought out of the
Bosom of God, by our Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore it is said, Heb. 2.3, 4. How
shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation, first spoken by the Lord
himself, and then confirmed to us by them that heard him; The Lord bearing them
witness, etc. Christ delivered it to the Apostles, and the Apostles delivered
it to others; 2 Timothy 2.2. Those things which thou have heard from me among many
Witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful Men, who shall be able to teach
others also. The Apostles received the Gospel from Christ; and the Churches and
Ministers from the Apostles; and they delivered it down to others until it came
to us; which is the Means of our believing the Truth, and confessing the Name
of Christ. This Testimony delivered and conveyed to us by the most credible
means, and which we have no reason to doubt of, is as binding, as if we had
heard Christ and his Apostles in Person: For we have their word in writing,
though we did not hear them preach and publish it with the lively Voice; their
Authority is the same delivered either way. And that these are their Writings,
appears by the constant Tradition of the Church, and the acknowledgment of
Friends, and Enemies, who still appeal to them as a public authentic Record:
And as they have bin attested by the Church, they have bin owned by God, and
blessed by him to the Conversion and Sanctifying of many Souls throughout all
successions of Ages: And by this Tradition Christianity has held up the Head
against all encounters of Time, and the persecutions of Adverse Powers have not
suppressed it; nor the disputes of Enemies silenced the Profession of it; but
from Age to Age it has bin received, and transmitted to future Generations,
tho sometimes at a very dear rate. And this is binding to us, though we saw no^
the Persons, and Miracles by which they confirmed their Message, and heard not
the f^^st report, Yet the Universal Tradition having handed it to us, is a
sufficient ground of Faith; and so we believe through their Word, and are
concerned in Christ's Prayers, John 17.20. For with them and their Success^rs
(as to these necessary things) Christ has promised to be to the end of the
World, Matthew. 28. 20.

2. My next Argument is; Because Christian Religion must needs be a Tradition,
partly because matter of Fact is the Foundation of it, and it is in it self
matter of Faith. 1. Because it is built upon matter of Fact; That the Son of
God came from God, to bring us to God; that is to say, appeared in human^
Nature, instructed the World by his Doctrine and Example, and at length died
for Sinners, confirming both in Life and Death the truth of his Mission, by
such unquestionable Miracles as showed hi^ to be the Son of God, and the
Savior of the World. Now a Testimony, Tradition, or Report, is necessary in
matters of Fact, which of necessity must be confined to some determinate time
and place. It was not fit that Christ should be always working Miracles, always
dying, always rising, and ascending in every place, and in the view of every
Man; but those things were to be o^ce done in one place of the World, in sight
of some particular and competent Witnesses: But because the knowledge of them
concerned all the rest of the World, they were by them to be attested to
others; Matters of Fact can only be proved by credible Witnesses, and this was
the great Office put upon the Apostles, Acts 1.8, 21, 22. and Acts 2.32. Acts
3.15. Acts 10.39, 40, 41. 2. As it is matter of Faith, or the Doctrine built
upon this Matter of Fact: We cannot prope^ly be said to believe a thing but
upon a report and testimony: I may know a thing by sense or reason, but I
cannot believe it, but as it is affirmed or brought to me by credible
Testimony. As we are said to see those things, which we perceive by the Eye, or
the sense of Seeing, and to know those things which we receive by Reason, or
sure Demonstration; so we are said to believe those things which are brought to
us by valuable Testimony, Tradition, and Report. As for Instance, if any one
ask you, Do you believe the Sun shines at noon Day? You will answer, I do not
believe it, but see it. So if any one ask you* Do you believe that twice two
make four, and twice three make six? You will say, I do not believe it, but
know it, because certain and evident Reason tells me, that two is the half of
four, and three of six; and every whole consists of two halfs or moities: But
if he should ask you, Do you believe that the Sun is bigger than the Earth? You
will say, I believe it; for though your Eye does not discover it, nor does an
ignorant Man know any certain demonstration of it; yet having the authority of
Learned Men, who are competent Judges in the case, you judge it a rash and
foolish obstinacy not to believe it. Apply it now to the Mysteries of Godliness
revealed in the Gospel, they cannot be seen with the Eye, for they are
invisible; nor found out and comprehended by any humane understanding, because
they exceed the reach of Man's Reason, and depend upon the Love and Arbitrary
Will of God, John 3.16. yet you believe them, because God has revealed them to
the Prophets and Apostles: And God being Truth and Wisdom it self, cannot
deceive, or be deceived; and therefore you believe them with the certainty of
Divine Faith, and do no more doubt of them, than you do of those things which
you see with your Eyes, and know and understand by a sure demonstration. The
sense of Seeing may be deceived, and Humane Reason may err; but it is
impossible God should deceive, or be deceived. It oftentimes falls out, that
Men do prefer the authority and report of a Man whom they judge to be Wise and
Good, before their own Sense and Reason. As for Instance: That Man who by his
Eye judges the Sun to be less than the Earth, yet does not obstinately stand in
his Opinion, when he hears a knowing and skilful Philosopher assert the
contrary. Now, If we receive the witness of Men, the Witness of God is greater,
1 John 5.9. And this Testimony of God is brought to us, by his Authorized
Messengers, as the ground of Faith: And what is that but Tradition? We believe
in God by hearing of him, and we hear by a Preacher, Romans 10.14. Ordinary
common Preachers give us notice, but Christ and his Apostles give us assurance;
and by their Testimony and Tradition, our Faith ultimately resolved into the
veracity of God.

2. That holding this Tradition is the great means of standing fast in the
Faith of Christ, and the Confession of his Name. For in the Word of God
delivered by Christ, and his Apostles, there is sure Direction to walk by; and
sure Promises to build upon. For whatever they made known of Christ was not a
Fable, but a certain Truth; for they had the Testimony of Sense, 2 Pet. 1.16,
17. 1 John 1.2, 3, 4. and so could plead both the Authority of his Command, and
the certainty of his Promise, and that with uncontrollable Evidence; and
without this relation, there can be neither Faith, nor Obedience, nor sure
expectation of Happiness. For we cannot trust God for what he has not
Promised, nor obey God in what he has not Commanded; nor in our Difficulties
and Distresses, expect Happiness from him without his Warrant and Assurance.
But by this Doctrine delivered to us, we have all that belongs to Faith,
Obedience, and Happiness; and beyond that the Creature can desire no more. 1.
There can be no Faith till we ^ave a sure Testimony of God's Revelation; for
Faith is a believing such things as God has Revealed, because he has Revealed
them. It Is not Faith but Fancy, to believe such things as God has never
Revealed; n^r is it trust and a regular confidence to think, that he will
certainly give us what he has never promised; this were to lay us open to all
manner of Delusion: And therefore we are never upon sure and stable ground, but
by sticking so such a Tradition, as may justly entitle it self to God. 2. Nor
Obedience; for Obedience is a doing what God has Commanded, because he has
Commanded it. The fundamental reason of Obedience, is the sight of God's Will,
1 Thessalonians. 4.3. 1 Thessalonians. 5.18. 1 Pet. 2.15. To do what God never Commanded, or
not to do it upon that account, but for other reasons, is not Obedience; and in
difficult cases the Soul can never be held to its Duty, till we are persuaded
that so is God's Will concerning us. Now to know his Will concerning us, we are
often bidden to search the Scripture; but never bidden to consult with the
Church, to know what unwritten Traditions She has in her keeping to instruct
us in our Duty. 3. No certain expectation of Happiness. We are never safe till
we know by what Rule Christ will judge us, that is, reward or punish Men at the
last Day: Now he will judge us according to the Gospel, Romans 2.16. 1 Thessalonians. 1.8.
Obey the Gospel, and you have a perfect Rule to guide you to Happiness; but if
you neglect this great Salvation, or be unfaithful in the profession of it,
this Word condemns you, and God will ratify the Sentence of it.

IV. Prop. That whilst the Apostles were in being, there were two ways of
delivering the Truth, and that is by word of Mouth, and Writing. So in the
Text, W^ether by Word, or our Epistle. The Apostles went up and down, and
preached Christ every where; that needs no Proof, unless you would have me to
produce the whole Book of the Acts of the Apostles: But they did not Preach
only, but Write, and both by the Instinct of the Holy Spirit, who guided their
Journeys, and moved them to write Epistles: For being often absent from
Chur^hes newly Planted, and Heresies arising, or some Contentions, which could
not be avoided among weak Christians, God overruled these occasions for the
profit of the Church in after Ages; upon one occasion or another, they saw a
necessity to write (...). Jude ver. 3. It was needful for me to write unto you.
As in the Old Testament, God himself delivered the Law with great Majesty and
Terror, and afterward caused the same to be written in Tables of Stone, for
the constant use of his People. And the Prophets first uttered their
Prophecies, and then wrote unto them: So the Apostles first preached
Evangelical Doctrine, and then consigned it to writing for the Use of all Ages.
And though all things delivered by them were not delivered in one Sermon, or
one Epistle; yet by degrees the Canon of the New Testament was Constituted, and
made perfect by the Writings of the Evangelists and Apostles.

V. Prop. That now when they are long since gone to God, and we cannot receive
from them the Doctrine of Life by word of Mouth, we must stick to the
Scriptures, or written Word. 1. Because we are taught to do so by Christ and
his Apostles. Christ always appealeth to the Writings of the Old Testament,
both against Traditions, which he condemns, Matthew. 15.2. and against
pretended Revelations; Luke 16.31. If they hear not Moses and the Prophets,
neither will be persuaded to repent, if one should come from the Dead. And the
Apostles still have recourse to this Proof, Acts 26.22. Witnessing no other
things than the Prophets and Moses did say should come to pass. And when they
pleaded they were Eye and Ear-witnesses, and so their Testimony was valuable;
yet they say ye have (...), a surer Word of Prophecy, whereunto ye shall do
well to take heed, 2 Pet. 1.19. Now how can we do better than to imitate these
great Examples? 2. Because those things were written for our sakes. 1 John 1.4.
These things write we unto you, that your Joy may be full. The Apostles being
to leave the World, did know the slipperiness of Man's Memory, and the danger
of corrupting Christian Doctrine, if there were not a sure authentic Record
left; therefore they wrote, and so fully, that nothing is wanting to complete
our Joy and Happiness. 3. Because the Scriptures are perfect. The perfection of
Scripture is known by its End, and intended Use, which is to give us a knowledge
of those things which concern our Faith, Duty, and Happiness. 1. Our Faith in
Christ. If there be enough written for that end, we need not unwritten
Traditions, to complete our Rule. Now St. John tells us, he might have
written more things; But these things are written that ye might believe in the
Son of God, and have Life through his Name, John 20.30, 31. Certainly, nothing
is wanting to beget a Faith in Christ: The Object is sufficiently propounded;
the Warrant, or Claim, is laid down in the New Covenant, and the encouragements
to believe it are clear and strong. What would Men have more? So that here is a
perfect Rule, perfect in its kind, and for its proper use. 2. For our Duty:
That is sufficiently provided for. The Apostle tells us, that the Grace of
God (take it objectively for the Grace of the Gospel, or subjectively for Grace
in our Hearts) teaches us: If you mean Objective Grace, it prescribes,
directs: If Subjective Grace, it persuadeth and exciteth what to do: To live
Soberly, Righteously, Godly in the present World, Tit. 2.12. There are all the
branches of Man's Duty enumerated: Sobriety relates to self-government;
Righteously to our carriage toward our Neighbor; Godly to our Commerce and
Communion with God. What is there wanting, that belongs either to Worship, or
Justice, or Personal Holiness? Therefore certainly we need no other Rule; for
it lays down whatsoever Men are bound to do in all Ages and places of the
World, and in whatsoever Circumstances God shall put them: And so it is fit to
be the Law of the Universal King, and Lawgiver; yea, it is so perfect, that
whatever other Way is set up, it presently dasheth against those Notions that
we have, or should have of God, his Service, and Worship; or it i^^^^ngeth, or
perverteth the Liberty and Nature of Man. 3. For our Happiness. Tha^ Doctrine
and Institution, which is able to make us wi^e unto Salvation, is enough for
us; but so the holy Scriptures are said to do. 2. Tim. 3.15. And that from a
Child thou have known the hol^ Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise
unto Salvation, through the Faith which is in Christ Jesus. Nay, afterward,
Ver. 17. The Man of God is by them made perfect, and thoroughly furnished to
every good Work.

If the Scriptures do thoroughly direct Men to know God in Christ, and save
t^eir own Souls, why should we look any further? Now they do not only furnish
every private Christian with this knowledge; but the Man of God, who is to
Instruct others, he needs look no further, but is furnished out of the
Scripture with all things necessary to discharge his Office. Therefore here we
fix and rest, we have a sufficient Rule, and a full Record of all necessary
Christian Doctrine.

Use 1. The Use of all is: Let us not seek another Rule than the Word of God.
Papists cry up unwritten Traditions, to be received with equal respect and
reverence, as we receive the holy Scriptu^es. But you, Brethren, stand fast,
holding the Apostolical Tradition: You cannot have it by word of Mouth from
them now; therefore you must stick to what is Written, or else you cannot
preserve your selves from the Frauds and Impostures of Antichrist. These
Apostolical Writings have been received in all Ages, and Times of the Church,
from the ^eginning; and all Disputes among Christians have been tried by them:
None were allowed good or sincere Christians, who doubted of the truth of them.
But because we have to do with a People that will sacrifice all to the honor
and interest of their Church, and knowing they are not able to stand before the
Light of Scriptures, have, to the no little prejudice of the Christian Cause,
done all they can to weaken the Authority, Sufficiency, and Perspicuity of
them, that we might have no Religion without the Testimony and Recommendation
of their Church; therefore I shall resume the Matter and declare it afresh.

1. Mankind lying in Darkness, and in the shadow of Death, it was necessary
that one way or another, God should reveal his Mind to them; that we may have
what belongs to our Duty and Happiness, for our chief good and last end.
Being altered by Sin, we strangely mistake things, and put Light for Darkness,
and Darkness for Light, Good for Evil, and Evil for Good; weighing all things
in the balance of the Flesh, which we seek to please. We confound both the
names and natures of Things, and wander in a maze of a thousand Perplexities;
therefore God in pity to Mankind, has given us a sure direction in his Word,
which is a Lamp unto our Feet, and a Light unto our Paths, Psalm. 119.105. Mark
the words of Light and Lamps; the use of a Lamp is by Night, and in the Day we
have the Light of the Sun; whether it be Day or Night with us, here we are
taught how to carry our selves. Mark again the words of Path and Fee^: The one
signifies our Way, and general Course; the other all our particular Actions;
so far as Religion is concerned in them, we have directions in the Word about
them. Besides, Man's condition is such, that he needs a Supernatural Remedy
by a Redeemer; which depending upon the mere Love and free Grace of God, cannot
be found out by Natural Light left to us: for that only can judge of things
necessary, but not of such things as depend upon the mere Pleasure of God;
therefore a Divine Revelation there must be.

2. Since it is necessary that God should some way or other reveal his Mind to
his People; it must be done by Oracles, Visions, Dreams, or by extraordinary
Messengers, who by word of Mouth might convey it to us: Or else by Writing, or
^y ordinary Teachers, whose Lips may preserve Knowledge in the Church. The
former ways might suf^ice while God saw fit, to reveal but a few Truths, and
such as do not burden the Memory, and Men were long-lived, and of great
Simplicity, and the Church was confined within a small compass of Ground, and
not liable to so many Miseries and Changes, as now in the latter Ages; but when
once God had spoken to us by his Son, those extraordinary Ways ceased. Heb.
1.1, 2, God who at sundry times, and in diverse manners, spoke in times past to
the Fathers by the Prophets; has in these last Times spoken to us by his Son.
As formerly God did speak (...), in diverse manners: That is to say, by Visions,
Oracles, Dreams; and so (...), at sundry times, by several Steps and Degrees,
he acquainted the World with the Truths necessary for Man to know, delivering
them out by Portions, not altogether at once, till he came who had the Spirit
without measure, John 3.34. The Prophets to whom God revealed himself before,
by Visions, Oracles, Dreams, or the coming of the Spirit upon them, had the
Spirit, (...), by measure, to fit them for some particular Errand, or Message,
on which God sent them. But when God sent his Son out of his Bosom to reveal
the whole Doctrine of Faith at once, and to declare his Fathers Will with full
Authority and Power, he fixed and closed up the Rule of Faith. So 'twas not fit
that after him there should come any extraordinary Nuncio's and Ambassadors
from Heaven, or any other should be owned as Infallible Messengers, but such as
he immediately sent abroad in the World to disciple the Nations. Therefore all
former extaordinary ways ceased, and we are left to the ordinary Rule stated by
Christ.

3. Being left to the ordinary Rule, it was necessary it should be taught, not
only by word of Mouth, but committed to Writing: For Christ is ascended into
Heaven, and the Apostles do not live for ever; and we have no Men now that are
immediately and divinely inspired: And ordinary Pastors and Teachers, cannot
make more Articles of Faith, but do only build on the Apostles Foundation, 1
Cor. 3.10.. or that divinely inspired Doctrine which they delivered to the
Church: Yea, that Doctrine cannot well be preserved from oblivion and
corruption, without writing. Therefore God accounted this the safest way, those
things that are only delivered by word of mouth, or from hand to hand, may
easily be changed, corrupted, or utterly lost. Certainly if you consider Man's
Sloth, Treachery, Levity, and the many vile Affections which may easily induce
him to extinguish, or corrupt the Truth, which is contrary to them; you will
see that it is necessary there should be an Authentic Record, by which Truth
and Error might be tried and distinguished. Yea, that the Church which is
dispersed throughout the World, might have Truth at hand, and particular
Believers have this Doctrine ever by them for their comfort and use; it being
the property of a Blessed Man, to delight in the Law of God, and to exercise
himself therein day and night, Psalm. 1.2. In short, while the Apostles were
living, 'twas good to take the Tradition from their Mouth; but now they are
dead, we take it from their Writings. Surely if God saw some Writing necessary,
when those extraordinary ways (we spoke of before) were in use, and the Church
of the Old Testament was in a much quieter estate than the Church of the New: I
say, if some writing were necessary then, it is more necessary now, for the
Christian Church is more exposed to dreadful storms of Persecution, the deceits
of Heretics of all sorts, especially to the frauds of Antichrist, which we are
forewarned of in this Chapter, and are detected and discovered by their
contrariety to the written Word.

4. This Truth being written, it is both a safe and a full Rule for us to walk
by: It is a safe Rule, because it is written by the Apostles and Evangelist,
holy Men moved by the Holy Ghost. The Apostles did not lose their
Infallibility, when they committed what they preached to writing: the same
Spirit that assisted them in delivering the Doctrine by word of mouth, assisted
them also when they delivered it by writing. And it is a full and sufficient
Rule, because it contains all things which are necessary for Men to believe
and do, in order to Eternal Life. Let them name what is necessary, beyond what
is recommended there, or may be delivered from thence. Yea, it does contain,
not only all the Essential, but also the Integral parts of the Christian
Religion; and therefore nothing can be any part of our Religion which is not
there. The Direction of old was, Isa. 8.20. To the Law, and to the Testimony;
if they speak not according to this Word, it is because there is no Light in
them. Every thing was then tried by Moses and the Prophets; every thing must be
now tried by the Prophets and Apostles, which is our Foundation of Faith,
Worship, and Obedience, Ephesians. 2.20.

5. That which we blame in the Papists, is, That they cry up a private,
unproved, unwritten Tradition of their own, as of equal authority with this
safe and full Rule, which is contained in this written Word of God. Their Crime
and Fault may be considered, partly with respect to the Object and Matter; that
these Traditions are not indifferent Customs, but essential Points necessary to
Faith and Christian practice: And so though a Christian be never so through and
sound in his obedience to the Word of God, and true to the Baptismal Covenant,
yet if he submits not to these unwritten Traditions, he wants some Point
necessary to Faith and Practice, and so to Life eternal: which is contrary to
Mark 16.16. He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved; and he that
believes not, shall be damned. And John 17.3. This is Life Eternal, to know
thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. Partly as to the
Subject, as they make their own Faction to be the only keepers of these things;
and that nothing is to be owned as Apostolical Tradition, but what is delivered
as such by their Authority; which is to leave the Church to the tyranny and
usurpation of a corrupt Faction; to declare for Apostolica^ Tradition any thing
which serves their end and Interest, and for which no true historical Evidence
is produced. Now the unjust and fraudulent practices which they have used, to
promote this usurpation over the Churches of Christ, render them false Men,
most unfit to be trusted in this kind. Partly with respect to the Manner, they
will have these things to be received, pari reverentia and pietatis affectu,
with the same reverence and pious affection with which we receive the Holy
Scriptures; and so Man's Post is set by God's and unproved Traditions equaled
with Doctrines of Faith. Their Opinion is bad enough; but their Practice is
worse; for there they show they value these things more than the Scriptures. As
Superstition always abounds in its own things. Did ever any of their Doctors
say the same things of Traditions, which they take the boldness to say of
Scripture? Did they ever call them Pen and Inkhorn, or Parchment Divinity, a
nose of Wax, a dumb Rule, an obscure and ambiguous Doctrine? These Blasphemies
they vent boldly against the Scriptures: but did they ever spoke these of
Traditions? And again common People are a thousand times better instructed in
their Tradition, than in the Doctrine of Salvation. They skill more of Lent,
and Ember-weeks, etc. than they truly understand the Doctrine of Man's Misery
and Remedy. And call you this Reverence and pious Affection to the Scriptures
and Traditions? Partly because they would never give us a Catalogue of
unwritten Traditions, necessary to be observed by all Christians; It may be
lest they should amaze the People with the multitude of them, or else that the
People may not know how many of their Doctrines are destitute of Scripture
proof, and so they plainly be discovered to be Imposers on the belief of the
Christian World.

6. Though we blame this in Papists, yet we reject not all Traditions;

1. Because Scripture it self is a Tradition, as we proved before, and is
conveyed to us by the most credible means, which we have no reason to doubt of.
The Scriptures of the Old Testament were preserved by the Jews, to whom were
committed the Oracles of God, Romans 3.2. Protestants received all the Books
which they admitted into their Canon. And for the Books of the New Testament,
the Christian Church has received them, as the Writings of those whose names
they ^ear. And by the constant Universal Tradition of the Church they are
transmitted to us; and we have no more reason to doubt of them, than we do of
Statutes and Laws made by Kings and Parliaments, who lived long before we had a
being. Yea, we may be much more confident, as the Matter is of greater weight
and consequence, and these Writings have the signature and stamp of God's
Spirit on them, and have bin blessed by God, to the converting and sanctifying
of many Souls: And have bin delivered down to us by a succession of Believers
unto this very day: And by them Christianity has bin preserved in the World,
notwithstanding the wickedness of it, and has held up head against all the
encounter of Time. The persecutions of Adverse Powers have not suppressed it,
nor the disputes of Enemies silenced the profession of it; but still from Age
to Age God's Truth is received and transmitted to Posterity.

2. Because the truth of Christianity depending upon Matter of Fact, chiefly
Christ's rising from the Dead, it can only be proved by a Testimony; which in
so extraordinary a case, must be made valuable, and authorized to the World by
the Miracles accompanying it. Now the notice of these things is brought to us
by Tradition, which being unquestionable, gives us as good ground of Faith, as
it did to them that lived in the Apostles Time, and heard their Doctrine, and
saw their Miracles. God's wonderful Works were never intended for the benefit
of that Age only in which they were done; but for the benefit also of those
that should hear of them, by any credible means whatsoever, Psalm. 145.4. Joel
1.3. Psalm. 78.3, 4, 5, 6, 7. these things were told them that they might set
their hope in God, etc.

3. Because there are some Doctrines drawn by just consequence from Scripture,
but are the more confirmed to us, when they are backed with constant Church
usage and practice; as Baptism of Infants, Lord's Day, singing of Psalms in our
Public Worship, etc.

4. Because there are certain words which are not found in Scripture indeed,
yet agreeable thereto, and are very useful to discover the frauds of Heretics,
as Trinity, Divine Providence, consubstantial procession of the Holy Ghost,
Satisfaction, etc.

5. We reject not all Church History, or the Records of Ancient Writers
concerning the Providence of God in their Days, in owning the Gospel; which
make much for our instruction in Manners, and help to encourage us to put our
trust in God.

6. There are certain Usages, and innocent Customs, or Circumstances, common to
Sacred and other Actions, which we despise not, but acknowledge and receive as
far as their own variable Nature and Condition requires; not rejecting them,
because anciently practiced; nor regarding them, when the general Law of
Edification requires the omission of them. But that which we detest, is, that
the Traditions of Men should be made equal in dignity and authority with the
express Revelation of God: Yea, that manifest Corruptions and Usurpations, as
making Rome the Mistress of other Churches, and superinducing the Pope as the
Head of the Universal Visible Church, and the Vicar of Christ, without his
leave and appointment, and suchlike other Point, should be obtruded upon the
World as Apostolical Traditions, and to be received with like religious
reverence, as we do Articles of Faith set down in Scripture: This is that we
cannot sufficiently abhor, as apparently false, and destructive to Christianity.

SERMON XIV.
2 Thessalonians. 2.16, 17. Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God even our Father,
which has loved us, and given us everlasting Consolation, and good hope
through Grace; comfort your Hearts, and stablish you in every good Word and
Work.


The Apostle, 1. Gives thanks for their Election, and Vocation, Ver. 13, 14.

2. Exhorts them to stick fast to the Truths delivered by Epistles, or word
of Mouth, Ver. 15.

3. Prays for them, in the words now read: So that is the third means of
confirming their Faith in the Truth of the Gospel. (Prayer to God for them).
Now in a Prayer all things are plain; we must put off our Shoes when we draw
nigh to God, appear before the Lord with naked and bare Feet: Therefore here
nothing of difficulty will occur; our Prayers the more simply and plainly they
are expressed, the more sincere they are.

In this Prayer observe,

I. The Persons to whom this Prayer is addressed; Now our Lord Jesus Christ
himself, and God even our Father.

II. The Ground of Audience, and success are intimated, which are two, 1. God's
Love, which has loved us. 2. The Pledges of his Love; which are also two, 1.
Without us. 2. Within us.

1. He has given everlasting Consolation. 2. Good hope through Grace.
III. The Blessings prayed for.

1. Increase of Comfort, comfort your Hearts. 2. Perseverance, or
Establishment; And stablish you in every good Word and Work: Where, by every
good Word, is meant the sound Doctrine of the Gospel, by every good Work
holiness of Life.
So that here is a great harvest of Matter, but we must gather it in by
degrees; for all cannot be spoken of at once.

First, We begin with the Persons to whom the Prayer is addressed, Now our Lord
Jesus Christ himself, and God even our Father. That is, I beseech the Lord, our
Savior, and God our Father, to comfort and stablish you. The Observations for
this Branch shall be brief and short, because the proper seat of them lies
elsewhere.

I. That Exhortations prevail little without Prayer. He had exhorted them to
hold fast the Traditions, and presently adds, Our Lord Jesus Christ, and God
the Father stablish you, in every good Word and Work. It is good to observe,
how all the parts of the Apostle's Discourse cohere, and agree together: He
first blesses God for their Election, and then shows how it is accomplished
by Vocation, or Effectual Calling: Yet the effectually Called need Quickening
and Exhortation, that we may concur to our Salvation in that way which is
proper to us. But left the business should seem wholly to rest upon our Will,
he carries up the Matter to God again by Prayer: Election does not exclude
God's Means, which is Vocation, nor Man's means, which is Exhortation; but that
avails little, unless the Matter be brought before God again by Prayer.

Now this Method is necessary.

1. Because all from first to last come from God, he is Alpha and Omega, First
and Last, all Things are from him, through him, and to him. The business began
with God in his Election, and is still carried on through God, not only by
Effectual Calling, but actual Assistance, which gives Success and Blessing,
and then the Glory of all redoundeth to him.

2. Because what comes from God, must be sought of God. Ezekiel. 36.37. I will
yet for this be enquired of by the House of Israel, to do it for them. Compared
with the 26 Verse. A new Heart will I give you, and a new Spirit will I put
within you. We must express our desires to God for things agreeable to his
Will, for God will not force Spiritual Blessings upon us, nor give them to us,
unless we desire them: Some things he gave us unasked, and without our desire,
consent, or knowledge, as a Mediator, a New Covenant, or offers of Grace, yea,
the first gift of the Spirit; but in other things we are obliged to ask.

3. A great part of Man's Duty depends on Prayer seriously performed: There
is nothing so conducible to the maintaining of Communion between us and God, as
a daily sense of our Emptiness, and God's both Fullness and readiness to supply
all our Wants.

1. That it is so, that we are empty, and God is All-sufficient, otherwise
there would not be a foundation for Practical Godliness. That we are empty,
John 15.5. Without me ye can do nothing: Not only nihil Magnum, but Nihil. So 2
Cor. 3.5. Not that we are sufficient of our selves, to think any thing as of
our selves, for our sufficiency is of God. That is we are not able to think any
thing in order to the Conversion of other Men, or our selves; we cannot imagine
to enter upon this design without any hope of success without God. That there
is a Fullness in God to supply all our Wants. Ephesians. 3.20. Now unto him that is
able to do exceeding abundantly, abo^e what we can ask, or think: that is,
above what we can imagine and pray for. If any Man seriously address himself to
any serious Business, he is full of Imaginations, may it be effected, yea, or
no? Alas, God outworketh their Thoughts and Prayers, and does things which
never entered into our Hearts to conceive: That there i^ a Readiness in God to
supply all our Wants, otherwise our Prayers would be little encouraged, and be
dead in the Mouth. Now James 1.5. If any Man lack Wisdom, let him ask it of
God, who gives to all Men liberall^, and upbraideth not. You need not make
s^ruple, or be ashamed to consult with God upon every occasion; for he is
ready, and has not a con^ined Bounty like ours, who waste by giving, and give
from our selves, what we impart to others.

2. That without this, Communion with God would be interrupted, and all
Religion would die and languish. For if we had the Stock in our Hands, we would
forget, and forsake our Father; but when still we must be enabled by God to
every good Work, and we cannot have it unless we acknowledge Him, and seek it of
him by Prayer. Th^s keeps up a sensible dependence of the Creature upon God;
this Dependence begets Observance, Phil. 2.12. And they that continually
receive their Dole and Portion from Him, are obliged to please him in all
things.

Use of Direction. When you come to wait on the Word, or receive here any
quickening Exhortation, call God into the Business, that the thing may not die
away in your Hearts. Make conscience of Praying, as well as Hearing; you hear
from Man in God's Name, but carry it again to God, that he may bless it. All
Religion is carried on between the Pulpit, and the Throne of Grace. You will
thrive if you conscienciously make use of both Ordinances; if you hear of
Christ in the Word, and make use of him in Prayer.

II. Observation. That Prayer must be made to God alone. Psalm. 65.2. Oh thou
that hear Prayer, unto thee shall all Flesh come: The Apostle here
addresseth himself to God, and so must all Flesh.

I. He alone is capable of hearing Prayers. We conceive of God as an infinite
Being, Wise, Powerful, and Good; as knowing all things, as able to do all
things, as willing to give all things, that we can in reason and righteousness
ask of him.

(1.) He knows all things, our Persons, Wants, Necessities, Prayers. Our
Persons: God knows that there is such a Creature in the World as thou art;
for surely God knows whom he has made, and whom he supporteth, and
governs. A notable Instance we have, Acts 9.11. And the Lord said unto him,
Arise, and go into the Street that is called Straight and inquire in the House
of Judas, for one called Saul of Tarsus: for behold he prays. What a
description is here of God's particular Providence? the City of Damascus, the
Street called Straight, the House of one Judas, the Person, a Lodger there, one
Paul of Tarsus; the Action he was employed in, behold, he Prays! He knows
our Wants and Necessities, Mark 6.8. Your Father knows what things you have
need of before you ask him. He observed every weary step of David in the
Wilderness, and all his Tears and Sorrows. Psalm. 56.8. Thou tellest my
Wanderings; put thou my Tears in thy Bottle: are they not in thy Book? He
particularly took notice of all the Troubles and Sorrows of his Exile and
wandering Condition, as if his Tears had been preserved in a Bottle, and his
Troubles registered, or recorde^ in a Book. The Doctrine of the Gentiles was,
Dii magna curant, parva negligunt: The great and weighty Matters the Lord took
into his Care, but left other things to their own event and chance; but the
Doctrine of the Scriptures is otherwise; God takes notice of every particular
Person. For our Prayers, Psalm. 34.6. This poor Man cried unto the Lord, and the
Lord heard him, and saved him out of all his Troubles. How obscure soever the
Worshipper be in the account of the World, if he depend on God, the Lord will
regard him.

(2.) For his Power, he is able to do all Things. Mark 14.36. Abba, Father, all
things are possible to thee.

(3.) For his Goodness, he relieveth all his Creatures, hears the moans of
the Beasts, much more the Prayers of the Saints. Psalm. 145.15, 16. The Eyes of
all things wait upon the Lord, and thou give them their Meat in due season,
etc. Now this he makes a ground of fulfilling the desires of them that fe^r
him, and being near to all that call upon him, Verse. 18, 19. He that feeds a
Kite, will he not provide for a Child? Surely we have more reason to trust in
God than they, if you think this belongs to his common Bounty? But in
Spiritual things it is otherwise, he is most pleased, when we ask Spiritual
Blessings. 1 Kings 3.10. It pleased the Lord, that Solomon asked this thing.
Well then, since none other is capable, and God is, to him must we come.

2. The Scriptures, which are the proper Rule of Worship, direct us to no
other. When Christ taught his Disciples to pray, he directs them to God. Luke
11.2. When ye pray, say, Our Father which art in Heaven. Invovation is Divine
Worship, and so done to God alone.

3. When the Spirit moves us to pray, he inclines us to come to God, Romans
8.15. Ye have received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father.
Gal. 4.5, 6. Because ye are Sons, he has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into
your Hearts, crying, Abba, Father. He does not move us to go to the Saints, but
to God.

The Use. Well then, if any t^ouble befall us, let us call on God, unbosom our
selves to him; Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me in the day of trouble, I will deliver
thee, and thou shall glorify me. If we want any Grace, let us go to the God of
all Grace, in the Name of Christ; Heb. 4.16. Seeing therefore we have a great
High Priest that is entered into Heaven, Jesus the Son of God, let us come
boldly to the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain Mercy, and find Grace to help
us in a time of need. We can pray to none but to him in whom we trust; Psalm.
62.8. Trust in the Lord at all times; pour out your Hearts before him. Trust is
the Foundation of Prayer, they that look to God for all, will frequently apply
themselves to him: Our Necessities and Wants are continual, both as to the
Temporal and Spiritual Things, we need not only daily Bread, but daily Pardon,
daily Strength against Temptations; therefore let us often come to God.

III. Observation; That Jesus Christ is invoked together with the Father, as an
Author of Grace, and thereby his Godhead is proved; for he that is an Object
both of Internal and External Worship, is God: Now such is Christ. Of Internal
Worship, Ioh. 14.1. Ye believe in God, believe also in me. Though Christ died
as Man, yet he is God equal with the Father, and an Object of Faith and Trust.
For External Worship or Prayer, the Text is clear; Our Lord Jesus Christ, and
God even our Father. That is much for the comfort of the Faithful, that we have
God to trust in, and Christ to trust in; that we that have sinned with both
hands earnestly, have a double ground of our Comfort and Hope, the infinite
Mercy and Power of God, and the infinite Merit of a Mediator. There is a great
latitude in the Object of Faith, and so of Invocation, The Lord Jesus Christ
himself, and God our Father. There is no pain so great, that God in Christ
cannot remove; no Danger so dreadful, but he can prevent; no Misery so deep,
but he can deliver from it; no Enemy so strong, but he can vanquis^ them; no
Want that he cannot supply: When we have a Want that he cannot supply, or a
Sickness that he cannot cure, or a Danger that he cannot prevent, or a Misery
that he cannot remove, or Enemies that are too hard for him, then we may sit
down and despair, and die. I speak of both as one, for God and Christ are here
joined as to the same effect, comforting their Hearts, and stablishing them in
every good Word an^ Work.

IV. We can obtain nothing from God unless we seek it in Christ. Therefore the
Apostle begins his Prayer, Now our Lord Jesus Christ, and God, etc. God
Alone i^ abundantly enough for our happiness, for there is in him more than
abundantly enough to satisfy all the Capacities of the Creature; but without a
Mediator, how shall we come to receive of his fullness? If Man had kept
innocent, God had been enough to us; for in Innocence there was no Media^or,
but to Man fallen a Mediator is necessary.

1. I shall state the necessity of i^. Because of Distance and Difference, we
are unworthy to approach his Holy Presence; and God has a Quarrel and
Controversy with us; which till it be taken up, we can expect no good thing
from him.

(1.) Distance. We are stranged from God by the Fall, and having lost his
Image, lost his Favor, and Fellowship, and all communion with him; so that God
now is looked upon by us, as out of the reach of our Commerce, which hinders
our love and confidence in him; for we can hardly depend upon one so far above
us, that he will take notice of us, or take care for us, so as to relieve us in
our Necessities, or help us in our Miseries, and give us the Blessings we ask
of him, or that we shall be welcome to him, when we come with our Prayers and
Supplications. God taught the Israelites their distance; and the Apostle
tells us, that all that dispensation the Holy Ghost did signify, That the way
into the Holiest was not yet made ^anifest, w^ile the first T^bernacle was
standing, Heb. 9.8. They could not come near God without danger of Death; he
would not have them so familiar with him.

(2.) Difference, or Controversy; A Mediator is used only between disagreeing
Parties. When Man was guilty, God was angry. Conscience of Sin presents God
terrible, and takes away all confidence from us, so that we are obnoxious to
his Wrath and righteous Vengeance; Who is able to stand before this Holy God? 1 Samuel 6.20. And who can dwell with everlasting Burnings? Isa. 33.14. We cannot
approach God in any friendly manner.

2. I shall show what Provision God has ^ade for us. The Lord Jesus took this
Office at God's appointment, of reconciling God to us, and appeasing his Wrath,
and us to God, by bringing us back again, our alienated and estranged
Affections to God. How so! what has he done?

1. The Distance is in truth taken away by his very Person, he is God-Man; God
and Man meet together in the Person of Christ; God does condescend and come
down to Man, and Man is encouraged to ascend to God; God in Christ is nearer to
Man than he was before, that we may have more familiar thoughts of him: The
pure Deity is at so vast a distance from us, that we are amazed and confounded
when we think of it, and cannot conceive an hope that he should concern himself
in our ^ffairs: But the Son of God is come in our Nature; John 1.14. The Word
was made Flesh, and dwelt among us. 1 Timothy 3.16. Grace is the Mystery of
Godliness, God manifested in the Flesh: So that he is more acceptable to us,
and nearer at hand, and more readily inclined to help us, for he will not be
strange to his own Flesh.

2. The Difference and Controversy is taken up by the Work of his Redemption;
for God has set him forth to be a Propitiation, or a means of appeasing his
Wrath, Romans 3. 25. and to be the Foundation of that New Covenant, wherein
Pardon and Life is offered to us: It is not enough to our Recovery, that God be
reconciled, but Man must be renewed, otherwise we remain for ever under the
displeasure of God. Now he has purchased the Grace of the Spirit, to be
dispensed by the Covenant, to bring us home to God; Titus 3.5, 6. Nor by Works
of Righteousness which we have done, but according to his Mercy he saved us, by
the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost, which he shed on
us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Savior, And, Romans 8.2. For the Law of
the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, has made me free from the Law of Sin and
Death.

Use. Let us be sensible of this unspeakable Mercy, that God has provided a
Mediator for us, that we may come to God by him: Heb. 7.25. Wherefore he is
able to save unto the ^ttermost, all that come unto God through him, seeing he
ever lives to make Intercession for us: That the legal Exclusion is removed,
and a way opened to the Father; John 14.6. I am the W^y, the Truth, and the
Life; no Man comes to the Father but by me: Otherwise we could not immediately
converse with God, nor trust in him.

(1.) We see God in our Nature as near at hand, and ready to help; he came down
amongst us, and became one of us; was bone of our bone, and flesh of our flesh:
And though he has removed his dwelling into Heaven again, it is for our sakes,
he has carried our Nature thither, to take possession of that blessed Place in
our Name, if we have a mind to follow him; John 14.2. I go to prepare a Place
for you.

(2.) Here we see the means of appeasing God's Wrath; 2 Cor. 5.19. God ^as in
Christ reconciling the World unto himself: There is a full Ransom paid, all
that enter into God's Peace shall have the benefit of it.

(3.) By him we are encouraged to come to pray for every Blessing we stand in
need of; Ephesians. 2.18. Through him we both have an access by one Spirit unto the
Father. Liberty to approach unto God, is a privilege which we cannot enough
value; the Wall of Partition between God and us, is broken down by Christ, he
has completely satisfied God's Justice, Heb. 10.19. He is now at the right
Hand of God interceding for us: 1 Timothy 2.5. There is one God, and one Mediator
between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus; and remains with God as the great
Agent of the Saints: Heb. 8.1, 2. We have such an High Priest, who is set on
the right Hand of the Throne of the Majesty in the Heavens, a Minister of the
Sanctuary, etc. Perfuming their Prayers with the smoke of his Incense; Rev.
8.3, 4. And another Angel came and. stood at the Altar, having a Golden Censer,
and there was given unto him much Incense, that he should offer it with the
prayers of all Saints upon the Golden Altar which was before the Throne. And
the smoke of the Incense, which came with the prayers of the Saints, ascended
up before God out of the Angel's hand.

V. Mark the distinct Titles given to God and the Mediator; Christ is called
our Lord, and God our Father: Let us see what these Titles import of Lord and
Father.

[1.] Christ is represented to us as the Lord, so he was set forth by the
Apostles at the first preaching of the Gospel: Acts 10.36. We preach Peace by
Christ Jesus, he is Lord of all. 2 Cor. 4.5. We preach Christ Jesus the Lord.
Col. 2.6. If ye have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk in him. Christ is
Lord two ways.

(1.) By that right which belongs to him as Creator, and is common and equal
to him with the Father and the Spirit: Surely the Creator of the World, is the
Sovereign of it; this Right continues still, and shall continue while Man
receives his being from God by Creation, and the continuance of his being, by
daily preservation and providence.

(2.) There is novum jus Dominii and Imperii, a new Right of Empire and
Government, which belongs to him as Redeemer, and this accrueth to him,

1. Partly by the Donation of God; Acts 2.36. Let all the House of Israel know,
that this Jesus whom ye have crucified, is made Lord and Christ. This Office of
Lord is derivative and cannot be supreme, but subordinate, it is derived from
God; All Power is given to me both in Heaven and Earth, Matthew. 28.18 and it is
reffered to him, Phil. 2.11. That every Tongue should confess, that Christ is
Lord, to the glory of God the Father. The supre^m right of governing is still
in God, and s^bjection to him is not vacated, but established, and reserved.

2. It is acquired by his own purchase, Romans 14, 9. For this end Christ both
died, and rose again, and revived, that he might be Lord both of Dead and
Living. 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. Ye are not you own, for ye are bought with a price;
therefore glorify God in your Body, and in your Spirit, which are God's: He had
a full right in us before, but this Lordship and Dominion which the Redeemer is
possessed of, is comfortable and beneficial to us, and the end of it is to
effect Man's Cure and Recovery. We could not by our sin make void God's Right
and Title to govern us, but yet it was not comfortable to us, it was but such a
Right as a Prince has to chastise his Rebellious Subjects. We forfeited our
Interest in his gracious Protection, therefore was this new Interest set afoot
to save and recover Fallen Man; therefore this Lordship is spoken of as
Medicinal, and Restorative, to reduce Man to the Obedience of God that made
him. Acts 10.38. God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost, and with
Power, who went about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed with the
Devil. It is a Lordship, that conduces to make Peace between God and Man, that
we may again enjoy his Favor, and live in his Obedience. Acts 5.31. Him has
God exalted with his right Hand to be a Prince and a Savior, for to give
repentance unto Israel, and remission of sins. This new Lord has made a new
Law of Grace, which is, Lex Remedians, a Remedy propounded for the recovering
the lapsed World of Mankind; the great benefit is, Remission of Sins, the great
Duty, Repentance.

Use 1. To persuade us to submit our selves to this Blessed Lord, by our
voluntary consent; Psalm. 45.11. He is thy Lord, worship thou him. There is a
passive Subjection, and a voluntary Submission. By a passive Subjection all
Creatures are under the Power of the Son of God, and our Redeemer; And amongst
the rest the Devils themselves, though grievous Revolters and Rebels, are not
exempted; Every Knee is forced to bow to Christ. By voluntary submission, those
are Christ's Subjects, and admitted into his Kingdom, who willingly give up
themselves to the Redeemer, to be saved upon his own terms: 2 Cor. 8.5. They
first gave their own selves to the Lord. The Devils and wicked Men are his
against their wills; bu^ all Christ's People are his by their own consent.

Use 2. Let us perform the Duties, which this Title calls for: Our Obedience
is the best Testimony of our subjection to him. Many seem to like Christ as a
Savior, but refuse him as a Lord; whereas Christ is not only a Savior to
Bless, but a Lord to Rule and Command. Therefore if we catch at Comforts, and
neglect Duty, we ^o not own Christ's Authority. The Libertine yokeless Spirit
is natural to all. Luke 19.14. We will not have this Man to reign over us.
Psalm. 12.4. With our Tongues we will prevail; our Lips are our own, who is Lord
over us? Psalm. 2.3. Let us break their Bands ass^nder, and cast away their
Cords from us. Some are so in Opinion, but most in Practice. We would not be
uner Command; we love Privileges, but decline Duties. But he is the Head of the
Church, who is the Savior of the Body, Ephesians. 5.23. If we would have
Privileges by him, we must set our selves to obey his Laws: If thou have no
care to obey him as a Lord, thy esteem of Christ is but imaginary, thy knowledge
but partial, thy application of him unsound. But we will own him as Lord: How
is that understood? Will you give him an empty Title, or some superficial
Complements, and Observances? Luke 6^ 46 And why call you me Lord, Lord, and do
not the things that I say? It is a Mockage. Or, will you please your selves
with strict Opinions? Matthew. 6.21, 22. For where your Treasure is, there will
your Heart be also. The light of the Body is the Eye, if therefore thine Eye be
single, thy whole Body shall be full of Light; if therefore the Light that is
in thee be Darkness, how great is that Darkness? No, nothing less than a
through subjection to his holy Laws, forsaking all other Lords. Isa. 26.13. O
Lord our God, other Lords besides thee have had dominion over us, but by thee
only will we make mention of thy Name. And then a strict Observance, Col. 1.11.
strengthened with all might according to his glorious Power, unto all Patience
and Long-suffering, with joyfulness.

Use 3. Depend upon Christ for the effects of his Love to you, which are the
Privileges of his Kingdom, which are Pardon of Sins. Col 1.13, 14. In whom we
have redemption through his Blood, the forgiveness of our Sins, the
santification of the Spirit. Heb. 8.10. This is the Covenant, that I will make
with the House of Israel after those Days, says the Lord, I will put my Laws
into their Minds, and write them in their Hearts. Assistance in carrying on the
Spir^tual Life, that here surely our Lord will not desert us, but help us in
our O^^^ience to him. Finally, everlasting Life. Heb. 5.9. And being made
Perfect, he became the Author of eternal Salvation unto all them that obey him.
When the Devil and his Instruments are cast into Hell, Christ's faithful
Subjects and Servants are advanced into eternal Glory and Blessedness.

[2.] God is represented under the Title of a Father; and God even our Father.
God is a word of Power, Father expresses his good Will and Love; God stands
in both Relations to us, as he did also to Christ. John 20.17. I go to my God,
and your God; my Father, and your Father. Both joined together signify his
Power, and readiness to do Good. He that is our Father is true God also, and he
that is true God is also our Father; and therefore we may depend on him. That
which we are to open is, the term Father, which speaks both Comforth, and
Duty to us.

1. Comfort. For God's dealing with us will be very Fatherly; as a Father
loves his Children, so will God love his People. 2 Cor. 6.18. I will be a
Father to ^ou, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters* says the Lord.

(1.) He will pardon our Sins, and Frailties, and spare us and pity us,
notwithstanding our ill deservings. Psalm. 103.13. Like as a Father pitieth his
Children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him. Mal. 3.17. They shall be
mine, says the Lord of Hosts, in that Day when I make up my Jewels, and I will
spare them, as a Man spares his won Son that serves him. Surely this is a
Grace we stand in need of, because of our manifold Infirmities, and daily
Failings.

(2.) He will give Grace, that we may ^^rve him better. Luke 11.13. If ye then,
b^^^g evil, know how to give good gifts to your Children: how much more shall
your Heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them that ask him? Do but cry to
him, as an hungry Child to his Father for Bread, and God will not deny this
great Gift to you.

(3.) God will provide for us, and give such an allowance of Temporal Mercies
as are convenient. Mark 6.25. Take no thought (...) your Life, what ye shall
eat, or what ye shall drink, nor yet for your Body, what ye shall put on. And
Ver. 32. For after all these things do the Gentiles seek, for your Heavenly
Father knows that ye have need of all these things. The belief of Adoption
and particular Providence, kills all distrustful fears and cares at the very
Root.

(4.) He will protect you and preserve you against Temptations. 1 Pet. 1.3, 5.
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his
abundant Mercy, he has begotten us again unto a lively hope, by the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, etc. Who are kept by the Power of
God through Faith unto Salvation.

(5.) He will give you the Kingdom. Luke 12.32. Fear not little Flock, for it
is your Father's good pleasure to give you the Kingdom.

2. On the other side, this Relation bespeak^th Duty. For if God be a Father,
we must carry our selves as Children by our subjection to him; that is, by
submission to his Disposing-Will, and obedience to his Governing Will.

(1.) By an absolute submission to his Disposing-Will. For if you would enjoy
the Privileges of God's Family, you must submit to the Discipline of his
Family. Heb. 12.6, 7, 8, 9. For whom God loves he chasteneth, and scourges
every Son whom he receives. If you endure chastening, God deals wit^ you as
with Sons: for what Son is he whom the Father chasteneth not? But if you are
without chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then are ye Bastards, and not
Sons. Furt^ermore, we have had Fathers of our Flesh, which chastened us, and we
gave them Reverence: Shall we not much rather be in subjection to the Father of
Spirits, and live? In Heaven, where there is no danger of Sin, there is no use
of the the Rod; but while we are in the Flesh, we need Correction, and if God
should not give it us, we are (...), not Legitimate, but Degenerate Sons. But
in the 10th Verse, the Apostle argues from God's Paternal Authority, For they
verily for a few days chastened ^s after their own pleasure, b^t he for our
profit, fit, that we might be partaker^ of his Holiness. Children, though they
take ^t ill to be beaten by others, yet not by their Parents, who (under God)
are the cause of their Being, and love them, and in correction of them seek
their Good: Much more do we owe this respect to our Heavenly Father, who has a
more absolute right over us. Parents may err through want of Wisdom, their
Chastisements may be arbitrary, and irregular, do much in Passion rather than
Compassion; but all God's Chastisements come from purest Love, and are
regu^ated by perfect Wisdom, and tend to, and end in Holiness and Happiness.

(2.) Obedience to his Governing Will. The great duty of Children is to love,
please obey, and honor their Father. Mal. 1.6. A Son honors his Father, and
a Servant his Master. If I be a Father, where is mine Honor? If I be a Master,
where is my Fear? 1 Pet. 1.14, 15. As obedient Children, not fas^ioning your
selves according to the former lusts in your Ignorance: But as he which has
c^lled you is Holy, so be ye holy in all manner of Conversation. John 15.8.
Herein is my Father Glorified, that ye bear much Fruit, so shall ye be my
Disciples. There should be a great tenderness upon us to do any thing that may
be a breach of God's Law, or tend to God's Dishonor. What diligent Observers
were the Rechabites of the Institutions of their Family? Jer. 35.6. But they
said, We will drink no Wine: for Jonadab the Son of Rechab our Father commanded
us, saying, Ye shall drink no Wine, neither ye, nor your Sons for ever.

VI. Observe. They to whom Christ is a Lord, to them God is a Father: his
special Fatherly Love flows in the Chanel of Redemption, and is brought about
by the Gospel. The Lord from all Eternity, predeterminated some to the Adoption
of Sons: Ephesians. 1.5. Having predestined us to the Adoption of Children by Jesus
Christ to himself* according to the good pleasure of his Will. But how does he
bring to pass this Decree? By the Redemption of Christ. It is no mean
Privilege, Christians, that needs so much ado to establish it. Gal. 4.4, 5.
Bu^ when the fullness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a
Woman, made under the Law, To redeem them that were under the Law, that we
might receive the Adoption of Sons. Christ came to be the Foundation of a New
Covenant, before we could have this Privilege. Well, but whence arises our
actual Interest? I answer: By accepting the offer of the Gospel, or receiving
and owning Christ to the ends for which he came into the World, or God sent him
into the World. John 1.12. But as many as received him, to them gave he power
to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name: That is, by
depending on his Merits for our Reconciliation with God, and submitting to his
Laws, that he might reduce us to our Primitive Obedience, and Love to them.

Use. Therefore if you would have a share in this blessed Privilege,

1. You must be Regenerated by his Spirit: for the Relative Change depends on
the Real; our State is not changed, till our Natures be changed, John 1.12, 13.
Being born again of the Will of God. If you would enter into God's Family, and
enjoy the Privileges thereof, you must be changed by the Spirit.

2. There is required on your part, an entrance into the Kingdom of the
Mediator by Faith and Repentance. Matthew. 18.3. Except ye be Converted, and
become as little Children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of God. As
little Children are newly entered into the World, and beginning their Life, all
things are become new to them: So those that have the priveleges of God's
Children, must become as little Children, enter into a new State, carry on a
new Life and Trade, with which they were not acquainted before. Our first
admission is by a consent to the New Covenant; Gal. 3.26. Ye are all made
Children of God by Faith in Christ; depending on the merit of Christ's
Sacrifice, and binding our selves by a solemn Word, to perform the Duties
required of us, which we renew again in the Lord's Supper.

VII. That we most comfortably come to God by Christ for Grace, when we
consider our Interest in him, and Relation to him. Their Relation is here
intimated, for Jesus Christ is our Lord, and God is our Father; and surely our
Lord will not refuse his own Subjects, nor our Father be strange to his own
Children.

1. It is certain that among Men, Relation to any Person or thing indeareth
them to us, (...), Men love their own Children; though not so fair and good as
others, yet they are their own. And is it not so as to God? See John 13.1.
Having loved his own that were in the World, he loved them unto the end. And
John 17.6. I have manifested thy Name to the Men which thou gave me out of
the World; thine they were, and thou gave them me, and they have kept thy
Word.

2. Interest gives us more encouragement. Isa. 63.19. We are thine, thou never
bear rule over them, they were never called by thy Name: That is, we are thy
People, thy Subjects, so called, so accounted. That Interest gives some hope
and confidence is evident, because sometimes the Saints plead the common
Relation, that they are the Workmanship of his hands; Psalm. 119.73. Thy hands
have made me, and fas^ioned me; give me understanding, that I may learn thy
Commandments: They will not quit their Interest in God, if they cannot come as
his special Servants, yet as his Creatures, one way another, they will entitle
themselves to him.

Use. To direct the Servants of God, when they ask any Grace of him, to bring
it to his still, Our Lord, and our Father. But how shall they do so, if they
have no assurance? I answer:

1. There are some Titles which imply a claim to Benefits, and Privileges;
others that infer an obligation to Duty: these latter may be used without any
usurpation, Ioh. 20.28. My Lord, and my God.

2. Resignation of your selves to him, shows you are his, and in time you
will come to know that he is yours, if you make it good; Psalm. 119.94. I am
thine, save me, for I have sought thy Precepts. Resolve to obey him, and serve
him, however he deal with you. Choice of God for our Portion, and Christ for
our Lord, shows you are resolved to be his.

3. Speak as the Covenant speaks that you are under, till your sincerity be
more unquestionable; God offers himself to be our God, and Redeemer, and
Father; Christ to be our Lord and Savior: Isa. 63.16. Doubtless thou art our
Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledge us not, thou, O
Lord, art our Father, our Redeemer, thy Name is from everlasting. God offered
himself to be so, and God is angry for not owning it; Jer. 3.4. Will thou no^
from this time cry unto me, My Father, thou art the guide of my Youth?

SERMON XV.
2 Thessalonians. 2.16, 17. -- Which has loved us, and given us everlasting
consolation, and good hope through Grace.


WE come now to the second Branch, The ground of Audience and Success in
Prayer, Which has loved us, and given us everlasting consolation, and good
hope through Grace. Where three grounds of Acceptance are intimated.

1. The first is taken from the Rise and Foundation of all the Love of God, he
has loved us.

2. From the Matter of our Comfort, he has given us everlasting Consolation.

3. From the Way whereby we receive it, and entertain it, and good hope through
Grace.

The first relates to our Redemption by Christ.

The second to the New Covenant.

The third to the disposition of our Hearts, and how we are affected in the
reception of these thi^^^ as will appear more in the expli(...) Branch.

(...) with the Rise and Founda(...)race, which we expect and ^^g of ^od in
Prayer, He has loved us.

Doct. That God's Love to Sinners, manifested in our Redemption by Christ,
gives great boldness and encouragement in Prayer.

1. I shall prove this is the Love here intended. 2. That this gives boldness
in Prayer.
I. That this is the Love here intended, for these Reasons.

1. This is a visible effect and demonstration of his Love to us; 1 John 3.16.
Hereby perceive we the Love of God to us, in that he laid down his life for
us. And I John 4.9, 10. In this was manifested the Love of God toward us, in
that he sent his only begotten Son into the World, that we might live by him:
Herein was Love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent ^is Son
to be a propitia^ion for our sins. From these places I gather, that to found
our Confidence and Hope, it was needful that the Love God had to us, should
show it self by some manifest and real proof. How can we tell how God's Heart
stands affected to mankind but by the Effects? Whatever benevolence or
good will he had toward us, it is not evident to us till it break forth into
some Action, and real performance of some great thing for us. Now this was
fully manifested, in giving his Son to die for a sinful World, that he has a
love for us, and does really desire our Salvation. There is an hidden love of
God, which is his eternal Purpose and Decree; and there is an open and declared
Love, and that is first and most seen in our Redemption by Christ. In
Predestination his Love was conceived in his Heart; in Redemption it is
manifested in the Effects, that was the Rise, this the visible Demonstration
and Sign of it: Now the Apostle would not reason from what was hidden and
secret, but from what is open and manifest.

2. This is not only the Demonstration and visible Proof of the reality of his
Love, but an ample representation and commendation of the greatness of his
Love: Romans 5.8. But God commends his Love to us, in that while we were yet
Sinners, Christ died for us. A thing may be demonstrated to be real, that yet
is not commended or set forth as great and glorious: But God would express his
Love in such an astonishing Instance, that we might admire the greatness, as
well as believe the reality of it. John 3.16. God so loved the World, etc. that
is, so unspeakably, so unconceivably would he express his Love to Mankind, as
to send his Son to assume our Nature, and die for our Transgressions: He does
not tell you how, but leaves you to admire at it, and rejoice in it. What may
we not expect from this Love, this great Love! if God loves us at such rate,
surely he is in good earnest, his Heart is set upon our Salvation, or else he
would never have taken this course of giving his only Son to suffer an accursed
and shameful Death. Now when the Apostle says, God has loved us, he means
it of the great instance of his Love, Analogum pe^ se positum, stat pro suo
significatu famosiori: Words not restrained by the Context, must be interpreted
in the most famous and known sense.

3. This is the first motive to draw our hearts to him; 1 John 4.19. We love
him, because he loved us first: The first motive of our Affection is not his
special Electing-Love to us above others, for that we cannot know before we
love him; but his common Love and Mercy to Sinners, and that was manifested in
Christ's being sent to be a Propitiation for our Sins; and not for ours only,
but also for the sins of the whole World: This is that which is propounded to
us to recover and reconcile our alienated and estranged Affections to God; 2
Cor. 5.19, 20. God was in Christ reconciling the World to himself, not imputing
their Trespasses unto him. This Grace God offers to us, as well as others;
namely, that for Christ's sake he will pardon our Sins, if we will lay down our
Weapons, and enter into his Peace. None are bound to believe that God specially
loves them, but those that are specially beloved by him; for none are bound to
believe a falsehood, and a falsehood it is to us, till we have the saving Effects
and Benefits. Therefore it is not the special, but the general Love which first
draws in our hearts to God; yea, the Saints after some Testimonies received
of God's special Love, still make this to be the great engaging Motive, Gal.
2.20. I live by Faith in the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me.
Well then, this is most likely to be meant by the Apostle.

II. This must needs give great boldness in Prayer.

1. By this we see the God's Love is not a cold ineffectual Love, that consists
only in raw wishes, but an operative active Love, that issues forth to
accomplish what he intends to us, though by the most costly means, and acted
at the dearest rate. God is good, and does good, Psalm. 119.68. He has a Love
to us, and will do good to us. Our Love many times goes no further than good
Wishes, or good Words, Be warmed, be clothed, but gives not those things
which are needful to the Body, James 2.16. but God rests not in kind Wishes,
but gives a full demonstration of it: If Christ be needful to ^he Saints, they
shall have him; if God spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all,
how shall he not with him also freely give us all things?

2. It is an act of such infinite Love in God to give us Christ to die for us,
such as may raise our wonder and astonishment. God's Love is an unmeasurable
Love, and so inlargeth our expectations and capacity for the reception of other
things. Ephesians. 3.18, 19. That ye may comprehend with all Saints to know what is
the breadth, and length, and depth, and height; and to know the Love of Christ,
which passes knowledge, that ye might be filled with all the fullness of God.
There is such an immensity in the Love of Christ, as raises our desire and
hopes to expect all other things from God, that belong to our Duty and
Happiness. If God will do this, what will he not do for those whom he loves?
He that has given the greatest Gift, will not stick at lesser things; He that
has given a Talent, shall he not give a Penny? He that has given Christ, will
he not give pardon to cancel our Debts? Grace to do our Duty? Comfort to
support us in Afflictions? Supplies to maintain and protect us during our
Service? Finally, Will he not reward us when our Work is over? Reconciliation
by his Death is propounded as more difficult, than Salvation by his Life: Romans
5.10. For if when we were Enemies, we were reconciled to God by the Death of
his Son; much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his Life.

3. It is a Gift in order to other things, and therefore he will complete that
Gift. Christ came to purchase all manner of Blessings for us, the Favor of
God, The ^ruition of God, the everlasting Fruition of God in Glory and all
things by the way n^c^^sary thereunto. There are two Argum^^^ implied.

(1.) That God may now do us good without any impeachment of his Honor: His
Justice and Holiness is sufficiently demonstrated, the Authority of his Law,
and Truth of his Threatenings kept up. Romans 3.25, 26. Whom God has set forth to
be a Propitiation through Faith in his Blood, to declare his Righteousness for
the remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God. To
declare, I say, at this time his Righteousness, that he might be just, and the
justifier of him that believes in Jesus.

(2.) That after God by an antecedent bounty has laid the Foundation so broad
and deep, the consequent bounty, which is as the upper Building, for which this
Foundation was intended, will be laid on also. It was said of the foolish
Builder, That he began and was not able to finish: Surely the wise God, if we
be qualified, and put no impediment on our part, will finish what he has begun.

4. Because the giving of Christ shows how freely God will give all things to
us, he gave Christ unasked, unsought to; in this instance we see his free and
undeserved love: This was love to Rebels and Enemies, when the World had
corrupted their way, and cast off God, then Christ died for us; a consideration
which serves to support our Confidence, notwithstanding the sense of our
unworthiness. In the Covenant of Grace, great and wonderful Mercies are given
out to a world of Sinners, and to our selves among the rest; we see how loath
God is Sinners should perish. That sins may be pardoned, if we will accept
God's terms, that has given such general testimony of his Love to Mankind, his
Love to miserable sinners; That is willing they should be reconciled, that
there is not so much difference between us and others, as between him and all.
Now this incourageth us to fulfill the Conditions of the Gospel, notwithstanding
our unworthiness of the Privileges thereof.

1. Use is Caution. Let us not have wrong thoughts of God, when we come to him.
We think of God the Father as one that is all Wrath and Justice, and unwilling
to be reconciled to Man, or brought to it with much difficulty. No: Christ came
on purpose to show the Love and Loveliness of God to us; for our Redemption
came first out of the Bosom of God; and Christ's mission into the World, and
dying for Sinners was the fruit of his Love, and mainly for this end to give us
a full Demonstration of the Love of God, and his pity to the lost World of
Sinners, that when our Guilt had made him frightful to us, we might not fly
from him as a Condemning God; but love Him, and serve Him, and pray to Him, as
one willing to be Reconciled to us; therefore take heed what Picture of God you
draw in your Minds: Light and heat are not more abundant in the Sun, than Love
is in God.

2. Use of Direction to us, How to conceive of God in Prayer, as one that
loves us. We have gained a great point, when we are pe^^uaded of this, and can
come with this thought into his Presence; that I am praying to a God that
loves me, and will do me good. You will say, If I could come to that, I have
gained a great point indeed: But what hinders? There is, I confess, a twofold
Love; his General Love, and his Special Love. His General Love, which intends
Benefits to us; and his Special Love, which has already put us in possession
of them. His General Love to the lost World, and his Love and Mercy to us in
particular, putting us in possession of the saving Benefits purchased and
intended.

(1.) The General Love to the lost World, that is a great thing the Devil
seeks to hide and obscure, the wonderful Love of God revealed in our
Redeemer, that we may still fly from God, as more willing to Punish than to
Save; and many poor dark Creatures gratify his design. We are still seeking
signs and tokens of God's Love, something to warrant us to come to God by
Christ, and to persuade us that we shall be welcome if we do so; and because we
cannot find any thing in our selves that he will admit us, we are troubled. But
all this while we are but seeking the Sun with a Candle. What greater evidence
of God's willingness to receive you, than the Death of Christ, than the
Institutions of the Gospel? This is above all Evidences, that he sent his Son
to die for us. This is like the Jews, who, when they had seen many Wonders
wrought by Christ, would still have a new Sign; the greatest Sign is given
already, Christ dying for a sinful World. Men and Angels cannot find out a
Sign, Pledge, and Confirmation of the Love of God above that: Yet, if that be
not enough, we have another Sign, the Promises, and Invitations of the Gospel,
which show his willingness to welcome Sinners. Salvation is offered, but not to
named, but described Persons. Therefore if we are willing to come under these
hopes upon God's Terms, this may satisfy our scrupulous Minds, there is no Bar
put to us, but what we put to our selves by our refusing the Grace as God
offers it. Certainly, God's Love and Mercy to lost Mankind is our first
motive, and his willingness to impart good things to them upon his own Terms,
and surely he is well pleased with our acceptance of them.

(2.) There is Special Love, where this Grace is applied to us. Ephesians. 2.4, 5.
But God who is rich in mercy, for his great Love, wherewith he loved us, has
quickened us, when we were dead in Trespasses and Sins. He did not begin to love
us when we were converted, that is of a more ancient and eternal Rise, but when
he did begin to apply his Love to us; and this is no ordinary, but great Love,
when God was angry with us, and pronounced Wrath on us in the Sentence of the
Law, and appeared as an Enemy in the course of his Providence, and the
apprehensions of our guilty Fears, then to be Reconciled; and surely this is a
great advantage to draw nigh to God as a Reconciled Father. This is the Object
of our everlasting Love and Joy, Romans 5.11. And not only so, but we also joy in
God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received the Atonement:
And this is a prop of confidence in Prayer. Could we once believe that he
dearly loves us, and is reconciled to us, and takes us for his Children, that
he delights in our Prosperity; Oh how cheerfully could we come into his
Presence! John 16.27. The Father himself loves you, because you have loved me,
and believe that I came out from God. They have not only his Intercession, but
the Father's especial Love, which is the ground and hope of Audience. Now this
particular Interest depends on something wrought in our Souls by the holy
Spirit; our Lord mentions two things, their Faith in Christ, and Love to God.
(1.) Faith in Christ, or a thankful acceptance of him, as our Lord and Savior,
therefore called receiving Christ, and entitleth us to the Privileges of
Christ's Children. John 2.12. To as many as received him, to them gave he
liberty to become the Children of God, even to as many as believe in his Name.
(2.) Love to God. John 14.21. He that has my Commandments, and keeps them,
he it is that loves me: and be that loves me, shall be loved of my Father,
and I will love him, and manifest my self to him. And Verse. 23. If any Man love
me, he will keep my Words: and my Father will love him, and we will come unto
him, and make our abode with him. We cannot perceive our Interest in the
special Love of God, but by our Sincerity, Faith in Christ, and Love to God.
When we see God's Love taken in our Hearts, we may know that he loves us,
especially the latter; for by the latter, the former is manifested also. Gal.
5.6. Faith works by Love. Now the evidences of sincere Love to God, are
seeking after God, and delighting in him; if you cannot find the latter, the
former will evidence it to you. Prove. 8.17. I love them that love me, and those
that seek me early shall find me.. The desiderium unionis, the desiring seeking
Love, if it be serious and earnest, it is sincere, though you find not such
delightful apprehensions of his Grace to you. Clear that once, and when you
come to Prayer, you may know God loves you; and the dearest Friend we have in
the World, has not the thousandth part so much as he; yea, the highest Angel
does not love God so much as he loves the lowest Saint. God loves like
himself, becoming the Greatness and Infiniteness of his own Being, and with
this persuasion pray to him.

Secondly, The second ground of Audience is from the fruit of his Love, as
demonstrated in the New Covenant, wherein we have the matter of everlasting
Consolation. Surely this Clause respects not the effect and sense in our own
Hearts, but respects the Matter and Object of our Comfort; for he prays for
the Application of it afterward: Comfort your Hearts, etc. And besides,
nothing is more fleeting, and oftener interrupted, than our Comfort in this
Life: It would contradict plain sense to call that Comfort which Christians
feel, and actually enjoy everlasting Comfort. Therefore I understand it of the
Matter, and observe this Doctrine,

That God has given all true Believers solid ground of perpetual and endless
Comfort.
I will prove it by three Arguments.

[1.] The Comforts propounded are of an everlasting Tendency and Benefit,
Pardon and Life, to free us from everlasting Death, and to bring us into the
possession of everlasting Happiness, when our Souls and Bodies shall be for
ever glorified in Heaven. Now the Consolation grounded on the promise of
Eternal Life, whatever it be in our feeling, is in its causes and foundation
Eternal. The Scripture often insists upon this: 1 John 2. 25. And this is the
Promise that he has promised us, even Eternal Life. Heb. 5.9. And being made
Perfect, he became the Author of eternal Salvation unto all them that obey him.
We have by Christ deliverance from Sin, and and all the Consequents of it, not
only for a time, but for ever: Eternal Peace and Felicity is our Portion. So it
is said, Psalm. 119.111. Thy Testimonies have I taken for an Heritage for ever;
for they are the rejoicing of my Heart. It is not an Heritage to lean upon for
a while, as all our Worldly Comforts are, but for ever: So Psalm. 73.26. God is
my Portion for ever: That is, when all other things fail, have spent their
allowance, can afford us no more relief; then we begin to enjoy our true and
proper Portion. It were endless to heap up places. Man for his Sin was cast out
of Paradise: but surely in the other World, there is no change of Estate; for
Men are past their Trial, and must be what they are for ever. If you could
imagine (as some have had the large charity to conceit it) that the condition of
the Wicked should be changed, yet there is no Reason at all why the state of
the Godly should be changed, who have past the Pikes, and are triumphing with
God, that they should ever lose that Estate again.

[2.] They depend on everlasting Foundations, such as are these:

1. The everlasting Love of God. Psalm. 103.17. The Mercy of the Lord is from
everlasting to everlasting, on them that fear him. Not only from the beginning
of the World to the end of the World, but from Eternity to Eternity. It was an
ordinary Form of praising God in the Old Testament, for his Mercy endures for
ever.

2. The everlasting Merit of Christ, which never loses its force and effect.
Heb. 9.12. He has obtained eternal Redemption for us. Not that Christ is
always propitiating: No, the Work was performed in a short time, but the Virtue
of it is of everlasting continuance.

3. There is an eternal and unchangeable Covenant. Heb. 13.20. Through the
Blood of the everlasting Covenant. Though the Covenant made with Israel was
abolished, yet this is everlasting, and continues for ever, and shall never be
altered; because it was able to reach the end for which it was appointed, which
is the eternal Salvation of Man: That was a Temporary Covenant, this Eternal.
Now because this is the main Circumstance, and the next ground of our eternal
Consolation, the Covenant of Life and Peace that God has made with us in
Christ; I shall prove the eternal truth, and immutable constancy of this
Covenant. That a Promise be immutable, certain, and firm, three things are
required.

1. That it be seriously and heartily made, with a purpose to perform it.

2. That he that has promised, continue in his purpose without change of Mind.

3. That it be in the power of him that promises, to perform what he has
promised. Now of all these things there can be no doubt.

1. God means as he speaks, when he promises to give eternal Life to those
that believe and obey the Gospel. There is no question, but he is so minded,
when he sent the Lord Jesus Christ from Heaven to assure us of it by his
Doctrine, to die the Death to purchase it for us, and afterward to rise again
and enter into that Happiness that he spoke of; and as soon as he was ascended
up on High, gave gifts to Men to give notice of this blessed Estate to be had
upon the Terms of his New Covenant, his Spirit attesting the truth of it by
diverse Signs and Wonders; partly to alarm the drowzy World to regard it, and
assure the incredulous World that it is no Fable; and because they live not for
ever, did inspire those holy Men before they went out of the Body, to write a
Book of thi^ Salvation, for the use of the World in all Ages. To think that God
is not serious in all this; yea, to make him a Liar indeed; yea, to establish a
Falsehood with the greatest solemnity and demonstration, that can be offered to
Mankind; yea, to make a Lie necessary not only to the Governing, but
Sanctifying of the World: Surely then, there is a truth in that great Promise,
which he has promised us, even Eternal Life.

2. That God does continue in his Purpose without change of Mind, there is no
doubt of it, if we consider his Eternal, and Unchangeable Nature. Mal. 3.6. I
am the Lord, I change not. James 1.17. With him is no variableness, neither
shadow of turning. And what should alter his Purpose? Does he meet with any
thing that he foresaw not, or knew not before? No: This is a weakness incident
to Man: God does never repent and call back his Grant, which he has by this
condescending Act of Grace ensured to the Heirs of Promise. 1 Samuel 15.29. The
strength of Israel will not Lie, nor Repent: for he is not as Man, that he
should Repent. Psalm. 110.4. I have Sworn, and will not Repent; thou art a
Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedek. Christ is by Oath instated in
full power of entertaining and blessing his Faithful Servants, which shall
never be retracted and reversed. To take off all doubt, he has given double
Assurance, his Word, and his Oath. Heb. 6.17, 18. God being willing more
abundantly to show unto the Heirs of Promise the Immutability of his Counsel,
confirmed it with an Oath; That by two Immutable things, wherein it is
impossible for God to lie, we might have strong Consolation, who have fled for
refuge to lay hold on the hope that it is set before us. That we might know
that the New Covenant is Unchangeable and Irrevokable, and so our Comfort be
the more strong, certain, and stable, God was pleased to give sincere Believers
this double Assurance, by his Word, and Oath, having regard to our Infirmity,
and those many Doubts, wherewith we are haunted about the World to come. God
has ever bin tender of his Word; above all that is famed, or believed of him,
this is most conspicuous, Psalm. 138.2. Thou have magnified thy Word above all
thy Name. And Matthew. 24.35. Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but my words
shall not pass away; And an Oath is (...); and the Apostle tells us, it is
(...). It is interposed usually indeed in a doubtful Matter. But though here it
needed not, God would show his extraordinary care for our Salvation: We see his
good Will in the Promise, his solicitude in the Oath. In short, God wou^d never
be so fast bound, but that he does and will still continue his purpose.

3. That he is able to perform it: Faith looks to that also; for this was the
ground and prop of Abraham's Faith; Romans 4.21. Being fully persuaded, that what
God had promised, he was able to perform: So must all Abraham's Children, that
would give glory to God in believing. The Way of Salvation is so rare and
mysterious, and so many difficulties object themselves to our view, that we are
soon puddered, unless we reflect upon the Power of God. God is able to find out
a way, whereby Sinners may be reconciled, our corrupt Hearts sanctified, and
our Sins subdued by his Spirit, whereby his Interest in us may be preserved
against the Assaults and Temptations of the Devil, World and Flesh; he is able
to receive our Souls to himself after they flit out of the Body: And finally,
He is able to raise our vile Bodies, after they are eaten out by Worms, and
turned into Dust; Phil. 3.21. Who shall change our vile Bodies, that they may
be like unto his own glorious Body; according to the working, whereby he is
able even to subdue all things unto himself. Matters of Faith being wholly or
mainly future, or to come, and difficult to be performed. And in the mean time,
we being exercise^ with so many Trials, an express belief of God's Power is
necessary to convert such an obstinate Creature as Man is: to sanctify such a
sinful Creature, to preserve us in the midst of Temptations, to raise the Dead,
are no slight things.

[3.] It is called everlasting Consolation, because it is sufficient to do its
Work: That is to say,

(1.) To reduce us from temporal and fleshpleasing Vanities. Alas! the
pleasures of Sin are but for a season, not worthy to be compared to the
Recompense of Reward, which Christ has promised, Heb. 11.25, 26. Ghusing
rather to suffer affliction w^^^ the People of God, than to enjoy the pleasures
^f sin for a season: Est^eming the reproach of Ch^^st gre^ter Riches than the
Treasures of Egypt; (...) had respect to the recompense of Reward. Whatever is
temporal, we may soon see the end of it: All carnal Enjoyments, like Flowers,
wither while we smell on them; and the most shining Glory in the World is soon
burnt to a Snuff: But Eternal Life, and Eternal Glory, and Eternal Pleasure, is
secured to us by Christ's Promise: All the Delights in the World are but a
May Game to these Eternal Pleasures, which we shall have at God's right hand
for evermore. Psalm. 16.11. Thou will show me the Path of Life; in thy presence
is fullness of joy; at thy right Hand there are pleasures for evermore. Now will
you sell your birthright for one morsel of Meat? part with your Eternal
Inheritance for a little carnal Satisfaction? We have Souls that will no^
perish; and shall we spend our whole time in seeking after things that perish
in the using? Temporal things carry no proportion with an immortal Spirit. We
shall live for ever, we should look after things that will abide for ever: 1
John 2.17. The World passes away, and the Lust thereof; but he that does the
Will of God, abides for ever. Otherwise what will you do when the Soul shall
be turned out of Doors? To what Regions must the poor shiftless harbourless
Soul be-take it self? Surely then this Consolation, though we feel it not
always, and it be frequently interrupted, may be well c^lled Eternal
Consolation; because it affords Argument enough to check our worldly and
sensual Inclin^tions* and to call us off from Time to Eternity.

(2.) To make us steadfast in the Truth, and cheerful under Sufferings, for he
says here, The Lord that has given us everlasting Consolation, comfort your
hearts and establish you. The great use of everlasting Consolation, is to
comfort and stablish us in a suffering Condition. The loss of Temporal Comforts
is grievous; but it is recompe^ced with the promise of eternal Joys, revealed
in the Gospel. Heb. 10.34. Ye took joyfully the spoiling of your goods, knowing
in your selves, that in Heaven ye have a better and an endu^ing substance; cast
not away therefore your Confidence, which has great recompense of Reward. And
all our Pains and Afflictions are sweetened, so far as to keep us from fainting.
2 Cor. 4.17, 18. Our light Afflic^ion which is but for a moment, works for us
a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory; while we look not at the
things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen: for the things
that are seen, are temporal; but the things that are not seen, are eternal. The
end of God's Covenant and Promises, is ^o give us strong Consolation in the
midst of Temptations, Persecutions, and Trials. Wo^ldly Joys appear and vanish
in a moment, every blast of Temptation scatters them: It is eternal
Blessedness which is the cause of solid Comfort in all Dangers, Storms, and
Tempests: hither we retreat as to our Sanctuary, and find relief. In the World
all is unstable and uncertain; but the Covenant provideth for us eternal Joy
and Bliss.

(3.) The third Effect, which it is to produce in us, is an increase of
Holiness, to stablish us in every good Word, that is not only in sound
Doctrine, but in every good Work, in Holiness of Life, our Endeavors should
answer our Motives and Ends; Abound in the Work of the Lord, forasmuch as your
Labor is not in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.58. Diligence should not be
grievous to us, when there is everlasting Consolation at the back of it; surely
this should put life into all our Endeavors. Should we trifle away that time
which we are to improve for Eternity? John 6.27. Labor not for the Meat that
perishes, but for that which is to endure to everlasting Life. Faith in Christ
joined with solid Godliness, will lead you to eternal Life. There should be in
the Saints an eternal Principle, which is the Grace of the Holy Spirit; and an
eternal End, which is the pleasing, glorifying, and enjoying of God; and an
eternal Rule, which is the Will of God: and they will have eternal Consolation
and Reward.

Use of Exhortation.

1. Look upon the New Covenant as it is in it self, as containing the only
solid Grounds of rejoicing; the Blessings of it are real, certain, stable, and
suitable to the great necessities of Mankind. The Blessings are Pardon and Life,
they are real, no Fancies or Chimera's. The Gospel is not a Dream, or well
devised Fable; but the greatest reality in the World, it speaks much for it
self, commending it self to the Conscience by rational Evidence; 2 Cor. 4.2. By
manifestation of the Truth, commending o^r selves to every Man's Conscience in
the sight of God: But more by the Authority of the Son of God, who came from
Heaven to show us the way thither. And if it had not been so, he would have
told us, John 14.2. For he used great plainness of Speech and Fidelity; and is
more fully ratified by the Spirit; John 16. 8, 9, 10, 11. He will reprove the
World of Sin, of Rig^teousness, and of Judgment. They are stable and
unchangeable, as appears by the Covenant Form, in which the Co^veyance is so
strong and firm, as will make a Plea in Law. 2 Samuel 23.5. He has made an
Everlasting Covenant with me, ordered in all things, and sure, in which is all
my hope and desire. And suitable to many necessities. Here is a Cure for our
great Sore by Pardon, and satisfaction to our Desires by a fit Happiness.

2. Let it be so to you, do you fulfill the Duties required, if there be any
room for doubting, it must be of your Qualification; therefore that must be
made more explicit. 1 John 3.19. Hereby we know that we are of the Truth, and
shall assure our hearts before him. We miss much of this everlasting
Consolation; because we are upon such loose terms with God; never hope to have
peace upon cheaper terms, than clear and undoubted Holiness. You are not to
model God's Covenant, and new make it, and bring it down to your humor and
liking: No, the Covenant is unalterable and eternal: So the Duties as well as
the Privileges. You must take it as you find it, and choose the things that
please God. Isa. 56.4. There is your claim, follow that close, -- henceforth is
laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord, the Righteous Judge,
shall give me at that day; and not to me only, but to all them that love his
appearing.

3. Carry it so as those to whom God has given grounds of everlasting
Consolation. We are up when we have the World with us, but dead in the Nest
when our temporal Dependencies are broken. The Covenant is the same still, and
there should be your Hope and your Joy; 2 Cor. 1.20. All the Promises of God in
him, are Yea, and in him Amen, unto the Glory of God by us. 2 Samuel 23.5.
Although my House be not so with God, yet he has made with me an everlasting
Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure: for this is all my Salvation, and
all my desire, although he ma^e it not to grow. Heaven is where it was, the
World cannot make void your Interest in it: Therefore you should rejoice in the
Lord always. Phil. 4.4. Rejoice in the Lord always; and again, I say, rejoice.

SERMON XVI.
2 Thessalonians. 2.16. -- And good hope through Grace.


WE now come to the third ground of Audience and Acceptance; he has given us
good hope through Grace. This shows how we entertain the everlasting
Consolation offered in the Gospel, with good Hope, and this wrought in us by
God. Here is,

1. The Gift, good Hope. 2. The moving Cause, through Grace.
Doct. That it is a great advantage, when we pray for Consolation and
Confirmation in Holiness, to consider that God has already given us the Hope
of Eternal Life.

Here I shall,

1. Open the Gift. 2. Show what encouragement this is in Prayer.
In the opening the Gift, let me inquire.

1. What is this good Hope mentioned, and what are the Properties of it? 2.
That this is the free Gift of God?
1. What is this good Hope? Hope is sometimes put for the Object, or Thing
hoped for. As Prove. 13.12. Hope deferred, makes the Heart sad. That is, the
delay of the good expected is very tedious, and troublesome to us. So in
Christian Hope, Col. 1.5. For the Hope which is laid up for you in Heaven.
Where Hope is put for the Object of it, the blessed and glorious Estate, which
is reserved for us hereafter. The great objects of Hope, which yet do not
exclude intervening Blessings, are these:

(1.) The coming of Christ to o^r Comfort. Tit. 2.13. Looking for the blessed
hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus
Christ. 1 Pet. 1.13. Gird up the loins of your Minds, and be sober, and hope to
the end; for the Grace that is to be ^rought unto you at the Revelation of
Jesus Christ. Hope is there described by its singular Object, the coming of
Christ, called there the Revelation of Christ. Christ is now under a Vail, his
Bodily Presence being removed, and his Spiritual Glory seen, but darkly, as in
a Glass; but then he shall appear in Person, and in his Glory. When Christ
withdrew out of sight, our Comfort seemed ^o be gone with him; but he will come
ag^in; he is not gone in anger, but about Business, to set all things at rights
against the day of solemn Espousals; and then he comes to possess what he has
purchased, and to carry the Church into the everlasting place of her Abode:
This is the great Hope of Christans, and a blessed and good Hope it is indeed.

(2.) The Resurrection of the Dead. Acts 2.36. My flesh shall rest in Hope.
Acts 24.15. I have hope toward God, tha^ there shall be a Resurrection both of
the Just and Unjust. Acts 26.6, 7, 8. Now I stand judged for the hope of the
Promise made unto the Fathers, unto which Promise our twelve Tri^es instantly
serving God day and night, hope to come. Why should it be thought an incredible
thing with you that God should raise the Dead? Death seems to make void all
the Promises at once, but there is an estate after Death, the Dead shall rise;
and to Men bred up in the Bosom of the Church, this should not seem incredible:
It is not incredible in it self, considering the Justice and Power of God. But
why to you, Since all Religion tends to it? But it is a matter of undoubted
certainty all Believers do look for, long for, and prepare for this
Blessedness, otherwise why should they trouble themselves about Religion, which
abridgeth us of present Delights, and exposes us to great Difficulties and
Sufferings: But there is another Life after this, where all is happy and
joyful; and therefore we serve God instantly day and night.

(3.) The Vision of God, I John 3.2. that at length we shall be admitted into
his blessed Presence, and see him as he is, and be made like him both for
Holiness and Happiness.

(4.) Our heavenly Inheritance. 1 Pet. 1.4. An inheritance incorruptible, and
undefiled, that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for us. Called Eternal
Life, Tit. 1.2. In hope of eternal Life, which God, that cannot lie, promised
us. The Glory of God, Romans 5.2. We rejoice in hope of the Glory of God. Well
then, all this is a good Hope, if there be the things hoped for: for the object
of our Hope is the chiefest Good, the eternal Vision and Fruition of God; this
is that we must aim at as our Happiness. Psalm. 17.15. As for me, I shall behold
thy Face in Righteousness, I shall be satisfied when I awake with thy Likeness;
we must seek after it, and make it our constant Work. Heb. 11.6. God is a
rewarder of them that diligently seek him; this is that we must take hold of,
as having a right and title to it. Heb. 6.18. Who have fled for refuge, to lay
hold on the Hope set before us. We challenge it by the Law of Grace, as we
fulfill the Conditions. Our Hold is more strong, Right more evident; as we get
greater measures of the First Fruits, we gain more security and confidence in
the spiritual Conflict. Ver. 19. Which Hope we have as an Anchor of the Soul
sure and steadfast. By good Works we enter upon the possession of it, in part,
as we get the First Fruits of the Spirit. Romans 8.23. We our selves also, which
have the Firstfruits of the Spirit, even we our selves groan within our selves,
waiting for the Adoption, to wit, the redemption of our Body. 2 Cor. 5.5. Now
he that has wrought us for the self-same thing is God, who also has given
unto us the earnest of the Spirit. In whole, when we come to Heaven, for then
we enter into our Master's Joy, Matthew. 25.21. when we die, our Souls enter into
that blessed place, where the Spirits of just Men are made perfect; not only
preserved in manu Dei, but admitted in conspectum Dei. 1 Pet 1.9. Receiving the
end of your Faith, the salvation of your Souls: But after the Resurrection and
general Judgment, John 14.3. I will come again, and receive you to my self;
that where I am, there ye may be also. Then in Body and Soul, we enter into our
everlasting Mansions.

2. Sometimes Hope is put for the reasons and causes of Hoping; and so he that
gives me solid reasons of Hoping, gives me good Hope. In this sense it is
taken, Heb. 7.19. The Law made nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a better
Hope did: whereby we draw nigh to God. By the better Hope, is meant the sure
and comfortable Promises of the Gospel, depending merely on the Grace of God,
which gives Hope to lost Sinners, of recovering Commerce and Communion with
God: That is, solid grounds upon which they may expect the pardon of their
Sins, and Eternal Life. In this sense good Hope is Hope well warranted, the
solid Reasons are contained in the Word of God. Romans 15.4. Whatsoever things
were written afore-time, were written for our Learning, that we through
patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have Hope. The great end of the
Scriptures, is, that we might have a sure Hope in God: Quod agit tota Scriptura
ut credamus in Deum. The business of the Scripture is to bring us to believe in
God, and wait upon him for eternal Salvation: There the rule of Commerce
between God and us is stated, whatever is promised is sure. There may be reason
to expect some things from God's merciful Nature, though we have no Promise
about them, but the sure and certain Hope is grounded on the Promise, that is,
an express ground of Confidence and Hope, that will never leave us ashamed: it
is well grounded Hope, therefore good Hope built on the Promise, and Word of
the Eternal God.

3. By the act or grace of Hope it self, this may be called Good; either in it
self, or with respect to the Degree.

(1.) In it self: It is good that a Man should both hope, and quietly wait for
the Salvation of the Lord, Lam. 3.26. Bonum is either Honestum, Iucundum, or
Vtile, it is good in all regards: It is our duty to rest assured in God's
Promise. It is pleasant to anticipate, and forecast a Blessing to come. Surely,
it is delightful to live in the foresight of endless Glory: It is profitable
to support our Hearts under present Difficulties and Troubles, and the
uncertainties of the present Life.

(2.) In respect of the Degree and Measure of it; that is good Hope, which is
most able to do its Office, when it is lively Hope. 1 Pet. 1.3. Blessed be the
God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant Mercy
has begotten us again to a lively Hope. Such as does most support and quicken
us: The more serious and earnest our reflections are upon Eternal Life, the
better is the Hope. Heb. 6.12. Show the same diligence to the full assurance of
Hope unto the end. We should still keep up this sure and desirous Expectation.
Briefly, Hope the Grace is twofold.

1. There is an Hope, which is the immediate effect of Regeneration, and is a
constitutive part of the New Creature. Of that the Apostle speaks, 1 Pet.
1.3. Begotten to a lively Hope. This merely flows from our acceptance of the
New Covenant, and depends upon the conditional offer of Eternal Life, we take
it for our Happiness, resolving to seek it in God's Way; without this a Man
cannot be a Christian, till he hope for Eternal Life to be given him upon
Christ's Terms.

2. There is an Hope, which is the fruit of Experience, and belongs to the
seasoned and tried Christian, who has approved his own fidelity to God, and
has much trial of God's Fidelity and Faithfulness to him: Of this it is said,
Romans 5.4. that Experience works Hope. It differs from the former, because
it produces not only a conditional Certainty; but an actual confidence of our
own Salvation. The former is necessary, for we live and act by it; the other is
very comfortable, for it facilitateth all our Acts, when we know there is
reserved for us a Crown of Life, which the Righteous Judge will give in that
Day, and do not only believe a Resurrection both of the Just and Unjust, but
our own Resurrection unto Eternal Life.

But now for the Effects, I shall instance in two, which suit with the Prayer
in the Text, Consolation in Troubles, and Confirmation in Holiness.

1. Support in Troubles, when we are certainly persuaded of an happy issue, we
are the better kept from fainting: Phil. 1.19. I know that this shall turn to
my Salvation, etc. He speaks it of his Troubles, and the Machinations of his
Adversaries; and this Knowledge he calls in the 20th Verse, his earnest
Expectation and his Hope. The bitterest Cross is sweetened by Hope, this carried
him through his Sufferings, not only with Patience, but Comfort. As Men in a
storm, when they see Land, take courage; it is but enduring a little more
Tempest, and they shall be safe on Shore. To a hoping Christian, his whole Life
is a rough Voyage, but a short one.

II. To encourage us in working; it is Hope sets the whole Wo^rld a-work. 1
Cor. 9.10. That he that ploweth, should plow in hope; and that he that
thresheth in hope, should be partake^ of his Hope. Certainly it is Hope sets
the Christian a-work; Acts 26.7. Unto which Promise our twelve Tribes instantly
serving God day and night, hope to come. Why are God's Children so hard at work
for God? but ou^ of love to him, and hope to enjoy him for ever? Oh! let us
continually be serving God; let us live always either for Heaven, as seeking
it, or upon Heaven, as solacing our selves with the Hopes of it, do what ever
we do in order to eternal Life, and not be taken up with Trifles, and this will
put Life into our Endeavors; it is for a glorious and blessed Estate, on which
we employ all this labor.

2. That this is the free Gift of God; I must prove two things.

1. That good Hope is his Gift, he does not only give us Objective Grace; this
is the free and undeserved Mercy of the Gospel, or a sufficient Warrant to hope
for it, which are his gracious Promises: But Subjective Grace, the Hope by
which we expect this Blessedness, is freely wrought in us by his Holy Spirit,
which is a farther confirmation of his love to us; That he has not only given
us the Blessedness ^ we hope for, but the very Hope it self. The Spirit's Work
is necessary,

(1.) By way of Illumination* to open the eyes of our minds, that we may see
what is the hope of his Calling, Ephesians. 1.18. Alas! otherwise our sight cannot
pierce so far, nor discern any reality in a happiness that lies in an unseen
and an unknown World, so as to venture and forsake all that we see and love for
a God and a Glory that we never saw. Nature, if it be not blind in discerning
the Duty of Man, yet it is pur-blind* it cannot foresee the happiness of Man,
which lies afar off from us; 2 Pet. 1.9. But he that lacks these things is
blind, and cannot see afar off: A short-sighted Man cannot see things at a
distance from him, not from any defect in the Object, but through the fault in
his Eyes; so the natural Man, blinded by Delusions, does either not believe, or
forget the World to come: though these things be set before him in the Promises
of the Gospel, they leave no impression upon his heart. There needs a very
quick sight to be able to look from Earth to Heaven; therefore till we are
enlightened by the Spirit, we can have no saving knowledge of those things which
pertain to the Kingdom of God, or eternal Life.

(2.) By way of Inclination, the Spirit does not only open the Eyes of our
Mind, but he does also incline our hearts to mind and seek after these things
as our Portion and Happiness. Acts 16.14. God opened the Heart of Lydia. There
is an opening of our Mind, and an opening of our Hearts necessary; for the
Wisdom of the Flesh is kneaded into our Natures, and we are prepossessed and
entangled with diverse foolish and hurtful Lusts. Though we know these things,
we regard them not, and therefore the Work of the Spirit is necessary to
incline us earnestly to look and long, and patiently to wait for Blessedness to
come; Gal. 5.5. For we through the Spirit wait for the Hope of Righteousness by
Faith. Alas! otherwise we should never regard these things, certainly we would
not wait for them with so much patience and self-denial, and solace our hearts
with these Hopes in the midst of all our Labors, Adversities, and Troubles,
when all is in Expectation, and so little in Possession.

(3.) By way of Excitation, he does quicken us, and comfort us, by raising our
Thoughts, Desires, and Endeavors after the promised Glory and Blessedness;
Romans 15.13. Now the God of Hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing,
that you may abound in Hope through the Power of the Holy Ghost. It is by his
lively Impressions, that this Grace is acted in us with any profit; our Hope is
acted and increased by his Power, blessing the Promises of the Gospel to this
end.

2. That it is his free Gift. That which moves God to give us this Hope, is
his mere Love and Grace.

1. The Matter of Hope is God's free undeserved Mercy: The Mercy of God is
every where made the great invitation of Hope to the fallen Creature. Psalm.
130.7. Let Israel hope in the Lord, for with the Lord is Mercy and plenteous
Redemption. Without this there were no Hope for us, and therefore the Saints
make this their Anchor-hold. Psalm. 13.5. I have trusted in thy Mercy, therefore
my Soul shall rejoice in thy Salvation. Let others trust in what they will,
Lord, I will trust in thy Mercy. This is that which makes Hope lift up the
Head, Jude 21. -- Looking for the Mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal
Life: There is our best and strongest Plea. But,

2. For the Grace of Hope, it is the mere Fruit of the Lord's Mercy; such are
our undeservings and ill-deservings, that nothing else could incline him to
give us this Hope. He was not induced by any Merits of ours, which are none;
nor hindered by any demerits or sins of ours, which were many and great; only
his Grace moved him to bring us under the hopes of the Gospel, that we might
set our selves with longing and certain expectation in the way of Holiness, to
seek after the eternal enjoyment of himself: 1 Pet. 1.3. Of his abundant Mercy
he has begotten us to a lively Hope. There were so many Provocations on our
part, such great privileges to be enjoyed, that nothing but abundant Mercy
could give us this Hope.

II. What encouragement is this in Prayer, if God has given us good Hope
through Grace.

1. God would not invite and raise an Hope to disappoint it. For surely the
Lord will not deceive his Creature, that depends upon his Word; and therefore
we are allowed to challenge him, Psalm. 119.49. Remember thy Word unto thy
Servant, on which thou have caused me to hope. The words contain a double
Argument; the Promise was of God's making, and the Hope of his operation, it is
thy Word, and thou have caused me to hope, his Grant in the New Covenant, and
his Influence by the Spirit; we have a strong Tie upon him, as he gives us the
Promise, which is a ground of Hope; surely we may put his Bonds in suit,
Chirographa tua tibi injiciebat, Domine; but when his Spirit has caused us to
hope, it is not with a purpose to defeat it; and therefore we may expect
necessary Blessings, such as are support and establishment in Holiness.
Sometimes God promises, that we may believe, and then promises again because
we do believe, and trust in him; Isa. 26.3. Thou will keep him in perfect
peace, whose mind is stayed on thee, because he trusts in thee. Actual Hope
and Trust gives a fresh Claim, or new Interest; for God will not fail a
trusting Soul, as a generous Man will not fail his Friend if he rely on him. We
count this to be the strongest Bond we can lay upon another, to be mindful of
us, and faithful to us, I wholly trust upon you. Now much more will God do so,
when he has sent his Work before him, he will bring this Reward with him, when
he has invited Hope by his Promise, and caused Hope by his Spirit, he will
give the Mercy you hope for, for he has prepared you for it by his preventing
Grace. I remember the Prophet tells God, Jer. 20.7. O Lord! thou have
deceived me, and I was deceived; words that seem to entrench upon the Honor of
God. Some interpret them, as if they were spoken by the Prophet in a Passion;
others soften them by another rendering, Thou have persuaded me, and I was
persuaded, that is, to undertake the Prophetical Office, to which I was nothing
forward of my self, and have found it more troublesome than I expected. But why
may not the words be spoken as a supposition, If I be deceived, thou have
deceived me? God had told him, that he would make him as a Brazen Wall, and had
raised a Faith and Hope in him, that he would bear him out in his Work, and so
it signifies no more, but I cannot be deceived. When you have God's Word, and a
well-grounded Hope, it is not a foolish Imagination or vain Expectation. God
will not deceive a poor Creature that trusts in him for necessary things, such
as Perseverance and Establishment in Holiness.

2. He that gives us Hope, will give us all things necessary to the thing
hoped for * therefore when God has called us to the Hope of Eternal Glory by
Jesus Christ, we may with the more confidence pray for necessary support and
establishme^t in the way. This Argument seems to be urged by the Apostle, 1
Pet. 5.10. The God of all Grace, who called you to his Heavenly Glory by Jesus
Christ, after ye have suffered a while, make you perfect, stablish, strengthen,
settle you. God that called us to Eternal Glory, foresaw the Difficulties and
Troubles we should meet with by the way, and therefore provideth Grace
answerable, which we are to sue out by Prayer. Surely he that called them to
the possession of Everlasting Blessedness by the Mediator, did not flatter them
into a vain Hope, as it will prove, if he help us not: Therefore he will assist
us in these Difficulties; and though he will not exempt us from the Conflict,
yet he will not deny strength. When we consent to his Calling, it is a sure
ground to our Faith, that he that has called, will give us all things
necessary to our Perseverance; for his Calling, when it is effectual, will not
be in vain and to no purpose. 1 Cor. 1.9. God is faithful, by whom ye were
called into the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord. 1 Cor. 10.13.
There has no Temptation taken you, but what is common to Men; but God is
faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye a^e able; but
will with the Temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear
it. The intent of his Calling, is to bring them to the possession of what he
has called them to: If he would at first take us with all our Faults, and put
us under the Hopes of the Gospel when we were Sinners, he will follow the first
Grace with continual aids and supports, until he has perfected his Work: and
therefore when a People are sincere, and willing to run all hazards for Christ,
God will not only give them Glory at the end of their Journey, but bear their
Expenses by the way; and therefore we need not be discouraged, and say, How
shall we hold out? God, that has given such hope as to venture upon the
Difficulties, will support you under them, he will add more Grace to that Grace
that we have received.

3. They that have received good Hope through Grace, have God's Nature and
Promise to rest upon; His Nature, as he is a gracious God; and his Promise, as
he is a faithful God.

(1.) His Nature, as he is a God merciful and gracious. That former Experience
does fully manifest, he is sufficiently inclined to do us good, and therefore
will not fail us in our Necessities: He has ever born us good Will, never
discovered any backwardness to help us, thought of us before the World was,
sent his Son to die for us before we were born, or had a being in the World;
called us when we were unworthy; warned us of our Danger when we did not fear
it; offered Happiness to us when we had no thought of it; And lest we should
turn our backs upon it, followed us with an earnest and uncessant importunity,
till we came to anxious Thoughts about Christ, and began to make it our
Business to seek after it; by the secret drawings of his Spirit, inclined us to
choose him for our Portion, and to rejoice in the Hopes offered. How many
Contradictions and struglings of Heart were we conscious to, e're we were
brought to this? Ever since he has bin tender of us in the whole conduct of
his Providence, afflicted us when we needed it, delivered us when we were ready
to sink; has pardoned our Failings, visited us in Ordinances, supported us in
Doubts, helped us in Temptations, and is still mindful of us at every turn, as
if he would not lose us; and shall not we hope in him to the last? We may
reason as they, Judges 13.23. If the Lord had a mind to destroy us, he would
not have received a Sacrifice at our hands. And so if God had no mind to save
us, he would not use such Methods of Grace about us.

(2.) His promise; so that we must trust his faithfulness, after we come under
the Hopes of the Gospel. There are two great Promises to support us, His
Presence with us in the midst of our Afflictions, and our being ever present
with the Lord in Eternal Glory. This is that we have hope of, all the
difficulty is, How far God has promised his Presence with us. Certainly he
has promised it, Psalm. 91.15. I will be with them in troubles. And again, I
will be with them in Fire and Water. And again, certain it is, That God is most
with his afflicted People, as the Mother keeps most with the sick Child, or
the blood runs to comfort the wounded part. And again, that he will never
leave us to unsupportable Difficulties; Heb. 13.5. I will never leave you, nor
forsake you, a negative Gradation. And besides, there is a general Promise,
though the Particulars be (...) absolutely made certain to us; namely, that all
shall work together for good, Romans 8.28. That gives us but a probability of
Health, and outward Protection, and Deliverance, of a ready support in every
Temptation, because we are uncertain how far they are for our good; but for
necessary Grace to our Preservation, there is express provision in the
Covenant, Ier. 32.40. I will make an everlasting Covenant with them, that I
will not turn away from them to do them good, etc.

4. It gives us encouragement in Prayer, beacuse they that have this Hope are
so much exposed to the scorn of the World; because they trust in an Invisible
God, and look for all their Recompense in a World to come: They think
Christians are a company of credulous Fools, that please themselves with Dreams
and Fancies; Psalm. 22.7, 8. They laugh me to scorn, because, they say, he
trusted in the Lord. 1 Timothy 4.10. We therefore labor and suffer Reproach,
because we trust in the living God. Christians thought their Reward sure, and
therefore endured all things; but Atheists and Infidels scoff at them, and at
all their Comforts as Fanatical Illusions, and persecute them. Therefore God is
in point of Honor engaged to stand by them, and to justify their Hope and
Trust; not always by Temporal Deliverance, but by Spiritual Suppo^^ and
Establishment: That it may be seen t^^^e is a Spirit of God, and Glory rests
upon them, that is, glorified by him, however he be evil spoken of in the
World, 1 Pet. 4.14. God will do so in condescension to his People. Nothing
goes so near their Hearts, as a disappointment of their Hope in God: It is a
mighty damp to their Spirits, when God does as it were spit in their Faces, and
reject their Prayers. Psalm. 25.2. Oh my God! I trust in thee, let me not ^e
ashamed. At such times the Lord seems to countenance the slanders of their
Enemies, and to cover their faces with shame.

Use 1. To persuade you to get this Hope of Eternal Life wrought in your hearts.

1. This is the Characteristic and Note of Difference betwixt God's People and
others: By this we are distinguished from Pagans, who are described to be such
as have no hope, and without God in the World, Ephesians. 2.12. And 1 Thessalonians. 4.13.
Sorrow not as them without hope. But Christians are such as have good Hope
through Grace, and by this we are distinguished from temporary and slight
Believers. Heb. 3.6. His House we are, if we hold fast the confidence and
rejoicing of Hope firm unto the end. So also, Ver. 14. If we hold the beginning
of our confidence steadfast unto the end. Their Hope is slight and fluid, the
Temporary loses his Joy and Comfort, which he conceived in the offers of the
Gospel, and so either casts off the profession of Godliness, or neglects the
Power and Practice of it: But the true Christian is Serious, Patient, Heavenly,
and Holy; because he is always looking to his End, and sweetneth his Work by his
great Hope, keeps up his Taste or lively expectation of the Mercy of Christ
to everlasting Life. Nay, this differenceth the Children of God, those that are
in their Conflict, from those that are in their Triumph, the Sanctified and
Glorified; those that are in their Way, and those that are at Home: They that
are at Home are enjoying what we expect, and in posse^^ion of that Supreme
Good, that we yet hope for; they have neither Miseries to fear, nor Blessings
to desire, beyond what they do enjoy; they see what they love, and possess what
they see. But the time of our Advancement is not yet come, and therefore we can
only look and long for it; this is our Work and present Happiness.

2. Now the Covenant of God is contrived to raise Hope in us. The Iachin and
Boaz, the two Pillars that support it are Mercy and Truth. Micah 7.20. Thou will perform the Truth to Jacob, and the Mercy to Abraham. Psalm. 25.10. All the
Paths of the Lord ^re Mercy and Truth unto such as keep his Covenant, and his
Testimonies. And Psalm. 138.2. I will praise the Name for thy loving Kindness
and Truth: For thou have magnified thy Word above all thy Name: And in many
other Scriptures.

1. The Mercy and Grace of the Covenant.

(1.) In the frame of it, where excellent Benefits are dispensed upon free
Terms, that our Faith and Hope may be in God; the Lord would not leave the
sinful Creature under Despair, but has provided a way how we may be R^conciled
and Glorified. Psalm. 130.4. There is forgiveness with thee, that thou may be
feared. Mercy opens the Door for us; the very offer speaks much Mercy, the
terms are Mercy. So much Duty is required as is necessary, and does arise from
the nature of the thing; Violence would be offered to the Reason of a serious
Creature, if such things were not required.

(2.) In the dispensations of the Blessings of the Covenant. Now, (Gal. 6.16.)
To as many as walk according to this Rule, Peace be on them, and Mercy, and on
the Israel of God. There are many Infirmities and Fra^lties, but God passes
them by when there is Sincerity. Our Faith is weak, and mingled with Doubtings;
our Love to God clogged with much inordinate Self-love, our Obedience often
interrupted; Too much deadness and coldness in holy Things, yet these do not
cast us out of the favor of God, nor make void our Interest in the Covenant,
where the Heart for the main is set to serve him, and please him. Mal. 3.17. I
will spare them, as a Man spares his own Son that ^erveth him.

(3.) At the very close of all it is Grace. Hope unto the end, for the Grace
that is brought unto you at the Revelation of Christ, 1 Pet. 1.13. Then there
will be the fullest and largest Manifestation of God's Love and free Grace:
There is Grace brought to us now, by the Revelation of Jesus Christ in the
Gospel; but when his Person shall be revealed, Grace shall be seen in all its
Graciousness* We see his Grace in the pardon of Sins, and that measure of
Sanctification, which now we attain unto, that he is pleased to pass by our
Offenses, and take us into his Family, and give us right to his Heavenly
Kingdom, and some taste of his Love, and remote Service. But when Pardon shall
be pronounced by the Judge's Mouth, when he shall take us not only into his
Family, but into his Palace, and Father's House, and give us not Right only,
but Possession; and we shall be admitted to the immediate Vision and Fruition
of God, and be everlastingly employed in Heavenly Praising, and delighting in
him, then Grace will be Grace indeed.

2. His Truth and Mercy opens the Door for us. Truth keeps it open. Mercy
is the Pipe, Truth is the conveyance. Now God binds himself by Promise, and
has ever been tender of his Word: We may see for the present, that a
Covenant Interest is no fruitless thing, he has confirmed this Hope to the
World by Miracles; to us within the Church by the Seal and earnest of his
Spirit, or the impression of his Image, preparing the Hearts of the Faithful
for this blessed Estate. Ephesians. 4.30. Grieve not the holy Spirit of God,
whereby ye are sealed unto the Day of Redemption. 2 Cor. 5.5. Who has given us
the earnest of his Spirit. He has appointed Ordinances to revive our Hopes: 1
Cor. 11.26. For as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show
the Lord's Death till he come. By daily experience, we see many of God's
Children have gone out of the World cheerfully, professing this Hope; we have
the same Father, of whom the whole Family in Heaven and Earth is named, Ephesians.
3.15. are reconciled to him by the same Christ. Col. 1.20. Having made peace
through the Blood of the Cross, by him to reconcile all things to himself; by
him, I say, whether they be things in Earth, or things in Heaven. If he be so
good to that part of the Family that is now in Heaven, he will be good to them
also that are working out their Salvation with fear and trembling.

3. What an advantage is it to the Spiritual Life, to have good Hope wrought in
us through Grace.

1. It makes us diligent and Serious; Christianity implies a serious
application of our Heart and Mind, to do what Christ requires, that we may
obtain what he has offered; to do it as our first work and chief business.
Phil. 2.12. Work out your own Salvation with fear and trembling. Heb. 4.1. Let
us labor to enter into that rest. That is, imply our utmost care and
diligence. Now all the Executive Powers are fortified and strengthened in their
Operation by Hope.

2. To be Patient and Mortified, that we subdue our Lusts, and bear the loss of
our Interests with an humble and quiet Mind. Romans 12.12. Patient in
Tribulation, rejoicing in Hope. And for Lusts, 1 John 3.3. He that has this
Hope, purifieth himself even as he is Pure.

3. To be Heavenly and Holy; the one respects our End, the other our Race. For
it is not a few dead lifeless Thoughts now and then, but the continual and
delightful foresight of Eternal Bliss. What is the way to Heaven, but Hope?
And who more pure and holy, than they that look for such things? 2 Pet. 3.14.
Wherefore, Bel^ved, seeing ye look for such things, be diligent that ye be
found of him in peace, without spot, and blameless.

Use 2. Well then, get this Hope. But what must we do? You will say, It is
God's Gift: Yet you are bound to use the means.

1. Remove the Impediments. 1 Pet. 1.13. Be sober, and hope to the end. Draw
off the Affections from Carnal Vanities, and the delights of the Senses, and
consider what God offers to you in the Gospel; there can be no certain and
desirous expectation of better things, while the Mind and Heart is so occupied
and thronged with Vanity, and deadned by Carnal Satisfaction.

2. Wait on all the opportunities of Profiting, and use the known means of
Grace more conscionably. Certain it i^, that the grace of Hope is of God, not
acquired, but infused; but God will bless his own Means. The propounding of the
Object, the offering of the solid Grounds, maket^ way for the infusing of the
Grace. Tit. 1.1, 2. Paul was the Apostle to bring them to the acknowledgment of
the Truth, for the hope of Eternal Life. And it is called, the Hope of the
Gospel, Col. 1.23. b^^^^se it is wro^ght by the Preaching of the Gospel.

SERMON XVII.
2 Thessalonians. 2.17. -- Comfort your Hearts, and stablish you in every good Word and
Work.


WE come now, Thirdly, to the Prayer it self. He asks two Benefits.

1. Comfort. 2. Establishment.
First, Comfort. [ Comfort your Hearts.] But why does the Apostle pray for
that, which they had already? He had told them in the former Verse, That God
had given them everlasting Consolation, and now he prays that God would
comfort them. The Answer given by some is, That he prays that God would give
them an increase of Comfort: By others, That God would give them the
continuance of it. Rather by everlasting Consolation, is meant, the solid
matter of Comfort; by his Prayer, now the effectual Application of it: For
though sufficient matter of Comfort be provided for us, yet God must powerfully
apply it. The Gospel is a sovereign Plaster, yet God's Hand must make it
stick. Observe here

Doct. 1. That all true and solid, and heart-Comfort, is of God. He is called
the Father of Mercies, and the God of all Comfort, 2 Cor. 1.3. And again, The
God of Patience and Consolation, Romans 15.5. His Spirit takes an Office upon
him to accomplish this Effect in us, therefore called the Comforter.

1. I shall enquire what Comfort is. 2. Show why it is of God. 3. What
Advantage we have thereby.
I. What Comfort is, Three things are to be Explained.

(1.) Comfort. (2.) Comforting. (3.) In what sense it is of God.
II. What Comfort is. We call Two things by that Name.

1. Our natural Refreshment. 2. Our support in Troubles.
1. Our natural Refreshment, or the benefit that we have by the Creatures, for
the support of Nature. We cannot enjoy our Temporal Mercies with any delight
and pleasure, without God's leave and Blessing: As to eat and drink with
Comfort, that the Soul may enjoy good by its Labor. In one place it is said,
it is by the Hand of God, Eccles. 2.24. In another place it is said, to be the
Gift of God, Eccles. 3.13. It is by his Power and his Grace, that the Comfort
of the Creature is not in Man's Hands, but God's: Nor can the Creature yield to
us any Comfort without his Gift, or Grant. And because of our forfeiture by
Sin; we have neither these Mercies from our selves, nor the use, nor the
natural benefit from the bare Creature, which is Health, Strength, and
Cheerfulness. All Goodness resideth chiefly in God, and it is to be found in
the Creatures only by Participation, and that at his Pleasure. Acts 14.17. He
gave us Rain from Heaven, and fruitful Seasons, filling our Hearts with Food
and Gladness. That is, the comfortable use of Food. We must still look to the
Giver. But the Apostle here does not speak of the Comfort of the Creatures, but
the Comfort of the Scriptures; not the supply of the Body, but the support of
the Soul.

2. Comfort is taken for Support in Troubles. The Thessalonians were now under
great Persecutions. Comfort is a strengthening of the Mind, when it is in
danger to be weakened by Fears, and Sorrows, or the strength and stay of the
Heart in Trouble. Psalm. 119.50. This is my Comfort in my Afflictions, thy Word
has quickened me. And 2 Cor. 1.4. Who comfort us in all our Tribulations,
that we may be able to comfort them which are in any Trouble, by the Comfort
wherewith we are comforted of God. As Cordials are for a Fainting-time, so are
Comforts for a time of Afflictions. Indeed Spiritual Comfort is never out of
Season; because we are now in the House of our Pilgrimage, and our chief Good
is at a distance from us: And because of the labors and difficulties of the
Spiritual Life: Therefore it is said, Acts 9.31. When the Churches had rest,
they walked in the fear of God, and the Comforts of the Holy Ghost. But the
great need of Comfort is in our Afflictions, therefore here I shall show Three
things:

1. That God can give his People Comfort in the greatest Tribulation: His
Favor is enough to support them against the Frowns of all the World. Isa.
51.12. I, even I am he that comfort thee. Who art thou that thou should
be afraid of Man that shall die, and the Son of Man that shall be made as the
Grass? As long as we have the Almighty and Immortal God to stand by us, and the
Promise of Eternal Life, it will counterballance all our Trouble. Romans 5.2, 3.
We rejoice in hope of the Glory of God. And not only so, but we glory in
Tribulations. Also 2 Cor. 4.17. This light Affliction which is but for a
moment, works for us a far more exceeding and ^ternal weight of Glory. There
is everlasting joy against a heaviness for a Season; and everlasting ease and
rest against a little present pain; there is enough to outweigh all that we
can suffer for, and from God. So the pardon of Sin, Isa. 40.1, 2. Comfort ye,
comfort ye my People, says my God. Why? Because her Iniquity is pardoned.
Matthew. 9.2. Be of good cheer, thy Sin is forgiven thee. Here is sound Comfort,
the Sting of all our Troubles is taken away. Well then: This the People of God
have to support them in all their Tribulation. They can set God against the
Creature, Heaven against Earth, Pardon of Sins against all the bitterness they
meet with in the World.

2. That there is a special allowance of Comfort for God's Children in their
Afflictions. The Lord is more tender of his People then, when they want
Comfort, than at another time; they have a more plentiful measure of the
supporting Operations of his Spirit then: As 1 Pet. 4.14. If ye be reproached
for the Name of Christ, happy are ye; for the Spirit of Glory, and of God
rests upon you. As the Mother keeps most with the sick Child, so God
looks to the Afflicted. This is the difference between God and the World: The
World ever runs most after those that are Prosperous, and flourish, and
rejoice, as Rivers into the Sea, where there is Water enough; but forsakes
those that are in Poverty, Disgrace, and Want: But God is most mindful of his
Afflicted People, visits them most, vouchsafes most of his comfortable
Presence to those, that holily and meekly bear the Afflictions he lays upon
them. He comfort us in all our Tribulations, 2 Cor. 1.4. The Soul is the^
more capable of Spiritual Comforts, because their Taste is more purged and
refined from the dregs of Sense; and Grace is more lively and exercised now;
the more Grace, the more Comfort. And Prayers are more frequent: And Prayers
are seldom in vain.

3. That our Comforts carry proportion with our Sorrows. 2 Cor. 1.5. As our
Afflictions abound, so do our Consolations. This comes from the Wisdom of God,
that the Evil may not be greater than our Support, and from the Faithfulness of
God, who will not suffer us to be tempted above what we are able to bear, 1
Cor. 10.13. And therefore if he bring on heavy Troubles, he puts a suitable
measure of Comfort, and cheerfulness into our Hearts. This is Comfort.

2. What it is to have our Hearts Comforted. It shows that the Heart is the
proper seat of Spiritual Comfort. Psalm. 4.7. Thou have put gladness into my
Heart. God's Comfort is like a soaking Shower, that goes to the Root, and
refreshes the Plants of the Earth, more than a Morning dew, that wets only the
Surface. Other Comforts tickle the Senses, and refresh the outward Man, but
this penetrateth to the very Heart. Christ prays, John 17.13. That they may
have my Joy fulfilled in themselves. Christ's Comforts are not reported to the
Ear only, but felt in the Heart: The joy of the World makes a great noise, but
in the midst of it the Heart is sorrowful: Bu^ God feasts his Children with
hidden Manna; they have Meat and Drink, which the World knows not of. In
their outward Man, they are exposed to great Difficulties, but their Hearts are
filled with joy unspeakable, and full of Glory. The joy of the Carnal in
outward things is foraign; and as much as their Senses are pleased, their
Hearts are full of tormenting Fears, and secret Disgusts. They may put a good
face upon it, but dig the most jovial of them to the bottom, they have their
inward stings, and secret horrors of Conscience. But in comforting his
Children, God chiefly deals with the Heart. Romans 5.5. The Love of God is shed
abroad in our Hearts, by the Holy Ghost given unto us. And 2 Cor. 1.22. He has
given us the earnest of the Spirit in our Hearts. In establishing this Comfort,
God does immediately work upon ^he Soul; he uses Means indeed: As the Word,
Romans 15.4. That you through Patience and Comfort of the Scriptures, might have
Hope. There we have the grounds of Comfort set forth, Christ's Redemption, the
Promi^^s of the Gospel, both of Pardon and Life; and the Ordinances, as the
Sacraments; as the Eunuch after his Baptism, Acts 8.39. He went away rejoicing.
So in the Lord's Supper, we come to eat of Christ's Peace Offerings, that we
may rejoice in God. Psalm. 22.26. The meek shall eat be satisfied: they shall
praise the Lord that seek him: your Heart shall live for ever. But his Spirit
works immediately upon the Soul. Either (1.) By opening the Understanding to
see the grounds and reasons of Comfort. Romans 15.13. Now the God of Peace fill
you with all Joy and Peace in believing, that you may abound in Hope, through
the Power of the Holy Ghost. Or (2.) By raising the Heart to the lively a^t of
Joy. Acts 13.52. The Disciples were filled with Joy, and with the Holy Ghost.
Certainly, God comfort the Heart both ways, by seeing the Grounds; as he
works Faith. Man is a reasonable Creature, and it is not imaginable that the
Holy Ghost should comfort us we know not why; he reveals indeed Supernatural
grounds of Comfort, but if they be not evident to Reason, they are evident to
Faith: But then the very Joy is executed by the efficacy of his Impression. But
of that more anon.

3. In what sense Comfort may be said to be of God. I answer, Three ways.

1. When it is allowed by him. 2. When the Matter is provided by him. 3. When
it is wrought by him.
1. When it is allowed by him, and warranted by him. Every Man affects Comfort
and Oblectation of Mind; for otherwise they could never be pleased in that
condition they are in, nor satisfy themselves. It would much undeceive the
Carnal World, and make them see the folly of their unreasonable joy and quiet,
if they would put Conscience to the question, Is our Joy from God, or no? that
is, Does God allow it me? Certainly, God does allow us to rejoice in our
outward Portion. Eccles. 5.18. It is good and comely for one to eat and drink,
and to enjoy the good of all his Labors that he takes under the Sun, all the
days of his Life, which God gives him; for it is his Portion. But so that his
Favor may be the matter of our chief Joy; for otherwise it is exceeding Folly,
and gross Carnality, to rejoice in the Creature apart from God. And in the
midst of the greatest Soul-dangers, you must first enquire, Are all things
right between God and me? It is a mighty contempt of God, yea, brutish Atheism,
to sit down contented with any thing on this side God, Luke 12.19. and to say,
Soul, take thine ease, thou have Goods laid up for many years. To sing
Lullabies to our Souls, when God is angry for Sin, this Comfort is not allowed
by God: There is no peace, says my God, to the Wicked, Isa. 57.21. It is
Spirtitual Madness to dance about the brink of Hell.

2. When the Matter is provided by him. God in the New Covenant has propounded
excellent grounds of Comfort: John 14.1. Let not your Hearts be troubled; ye
believe in God, believe also in me. The two great general grounds of support
against Heart-Trouble, are God's merciful Nature, and Christ's Mediation; more
particular in the New Covenant, the promises of Pardon and Life. Of Pardon of
Sin, Romans 5.1, 2, 3. Therefore being justified by Faith, we have peace with
God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. And of Life Eternal, 1 Thessalonians. 4.18.
And so shall we ever be with the Lord; wherefore comfort one another with these
words. It is good to see what Comforts we live upon, and propound to our
selves, and others, more expressly as to Afflictions, God's particular
Providence, that nothing falls out without God's Appointment. 1 Thessalonians. 3.3.
That no Man should be moved with these Afflictions, for your selves know that
we were appointed thereunto. It is not Chance, or a natural Accident, but that
which God has appointed. If any Shimei rail, the Lord has bid him curse: If
any evil come to us, is it without God's Fatherly care over his People, who
orders all things for their Profit? Heb. 12.10 They verily for a few days
chastened us after their own pleasure:, but He for our profit, that we might be
partakers of his Holiness. And his unchangeable Love, which does not vary, and
alter with our Condition: Heb. 12.6. Whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and
scourges every Son whom he receives. He is our God still, though he seems
to deal hardly with us. We learn of Christ on the very Cross to cry, My God,
Matthew. 27.46 and if we cannot find enough in him, when the Creatures and our
natural Comforts fail, it is meet we should lose them. Heb. 3.18. Though the
Fig Tree should not blossom, etc. yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in
the God of my Salvation. This is the sum of God's Comforts; and when these
things are suggested to us, God comfort our Hearts.

3. When by these means God works Comfort in us. Joy is often called the
Comfort of the Spirit, and Joy in the Holy Ghost, Rom 14.17. Now all the
Spirit's. Works are singular, and do much exceed the natural Work of Man's
Heart: The groans which he stirs up in Prayer are unutterable, Romans 8.26.
His Joys unspeakable and glorious, 1 Pet. 1.8. The Heathens counted that Fire
more sit and pure for their Altars, which was inkindled by a Sunbeam, rather
than a Coal taken from a common Hearth. So this Comfort which is raised in us
by the Holy Ghost, is more Rich and Glorious, and Affective, than that which is
the fruit of our bare Reason, or the mere working of our Human Spirit, even in
the common grounds of Christian Comfort. Or as Elementary Fire differs from
Culinary and Kitchen Fire, and is much more pure: So does this Joy, which is
immediately wrought in us by ^he Spirit, from all Joy that we can work by our
selves, out of the Scriptural Grounds of Comfort. Carnal Men have their Joy at
the second or third Hand, as God blesses the order and influence of Inferior
Causes, it comes to them from Creature to Creature, so as they discern not the
Work of God in it; yea, the Joy of common Christians in the proper grounds of
Comfort is not strong, as that which is raised in us by the immediate impression
of the Comforting Spirit.

II. Why this is of God.

1. Because God challegeth this as his own Right, to comfort the Heart of Man:
and therefore whatever the Means of the comfort be, God will be owned as the
Spring and Fountain of it. He keeps this as his great Bridle upon the World,
to govern the Hearts of Men. Job 34.29. When he gives Quietness, who then can
make Trouble? And when he hides his Face, who then can behold him? Whether it
be done against a Nation, or against a Man only. Our Peace and Trouble is in
God's Hands, and at his disposing. It is true, he exercises his Sovereignty
according to Law, and in his Internal Government according to the Law of Grace,
penally withdrawing his Comforting Spirit, and leaving us to our Doubts, and
Troubles, and Fears; by the rewarding our Obedience and Faithfulness with the
manifest Tokens of his Love, as the Matter shall require. It is enough for the
Point in hand, that God alone does powerfully dispense Peace, or Trouble. And
when he will give Comfort; none can make his Gift void; for it is at his
Command: and in both, a Nation is all one with a particular Person, as to any
ability to resist God.

2. Though grounds of Comfort be never so clear, yet if God concur not, we find
not the effect; therefore it is his Spirit, that can only comfort the Heart. To
have God's Warrant for our comfort is much, but to have his Impression is more;
both mus^ concur, or the Soul will not be comforted. It falls out many ways,
sometimes out of Ignorance. When a Well of Comfort was near, poor Hagar saw it
not, and was almost famished with thirst, until God opened her Eyes, and she
saw a Well of Water, Genesis 21.19. We know not the grounds of our comfort.
Sometimes out of Passion: Grief is obstinate, and will admit no Remedy; as
Rachel would not be comforted, Jer. 31.15. They are so peevishly addicted to
their Worldly Comforts, that if they be crossed in them, they will not admit of
God's Comforts, though they are evident, clear, and pertinent. Sometimes out of
Forgetfulness, Heb. 12.5. Ye have forgotten the Exhortation, which speaks
unto you as unto Children. And Oblivion is an Ignorance for the present. Had
they remembered, they would not have fainted, and waxed weary. It is a great
Work of the Spirit to bring to Remembrance, sometimes questioning their
interest in Comfort; besid^s, that there are general Comforts, when Interest is
not clear. Now the Spirit, that shows us ^he things given us of God, does
also reveal and evidence our Right to them. What is wrought in our Hearts, that
is to say, by quickening us to exercise Grace, he evidenceth the truth of Grace;
and in our Afflictions by Patience makes out our Comfort. Romans 5.3, 4, 5. We
glory in Tribulations, knowing that Tribulation works Patience; and Patience
Experience; and Experience Hope: And Hope makes not ashamed, because the Love
of God is shed abroad in our Hearts by the Holy Ghost, which is given unto us.
From the whole, there can be no true solid Comfort, but what God bestows, his
Favor, and our Interest in his Favaour is manifested to us by his Spirit.

III. What advantages we have by this, that all solid Comfort is of God.

1. It assures us of God's readiness to comfort poor afflicted Creatures, that
humbly submit to him. He that is the God of all Comfort, is also the Father of
Mercies, his Mercy and Compassion inclines him to comfort us. God has his
Name from this effect; Nomina sunt a notioribus, God that comfort those that
are cast down, 2 Cor. 7.6. He is very tender of all Afflicted Creatures, much
more of his People.

2. God's Comforts come with more Authority, and silence all our Doubts and
Fears. Psalm. 94.19. In the multitude of my thoughts within me, thy comforts
delight my Soul: We have many intricate perplexing thoughts, out of which we
cannot disentangle our selves; no comforts come with such Authority and Power,
as God's Comforts. In the Comfort we have, it is good to consider whence it
comes: Is it God's Comfort, or a Fan^y of our own? If it be made up by our own
Fancy, it will be like a Spider's Web, that is weaved out of its own Bowels,
but is gone and swept away with the least turn of a Besom: but God's Comforts
are more durable, they flow from the true Fountain of Comfort, upon whose
Frowns, or Smiles, our happiness and misery depends. There is little warmth
in a Fire of our own kindling. God's Comforts are built on his Covenant, and
have a commanding force and over-powering efficacy on the Soul. God in his Word
speaks by Sovereign Authority, in our Hearts he works by powerf^l Efficacy.
The Authority of his Word we own, when we speak to others, or to our selves,
when we know trouble, but in supposition, or imagination: The Efficacy of his
Grace we feel, when Trouble comes actually upon us; many that strengthen
others, when it comes upon them faint themselves. Job 4.4, 5. Thy Words have
upholden ^im that is falling, and thou have strengthened the feeble Knees. But
now it is come upon thee, and thou faintest: it touches thee, and thou art
troubled. Which shows, that not only the matter of Comfort, but the effectual
Blessing comes from God, or Comforting of Souls is his Work.

3. That God's Comforts are full and strong: For he works like himself, and
therefore can and will support his People in the greatest Difficulties. It is
sometimes represented as full, Acts 13.52. The Disciples were filled with Joy,
and with the Holy Ghost. And, I am filled with Comfort, and am exceeding joyful
in all our Tribulations, 2 Cor. 7.4. (...). And our Lord Jesus, when he took
care for our Comfort, took care for our full Comfort: John 15.11. These things
have I spoken, that my Joy may remain in you, and your joy might be full. Thus
we see the joy of Believers is a full Joy, that no other Joy needs to be
added to it; it is a full Joy to bear us out under all Discouragements. For
what is wanting to them, who have God for their Portion, and the promised Glory
for their Inheritance, and God's Providence engaged for their Protection,
Safety, and Comfort, while they are here by the way. And it is Strong as well
as Full, Heb. 6.18. That by two immutable things, in which it is impossible for
God to lie, we might have strong Consolation. Other Comforts are weak and of
little force, they are not Affliction-proof, much less are they Death-proof,
and Judgment-proof, they cannot stand before a few serious, sober thoughts of
the World to come. The Comforts of the World cannot stay and revive the Heart;
for every blast of a Temptation scatters them.

Use 1. To reprove Christians for their overmuch dejection and fainting in
Troubles. Why are we so much cast down? Is there no Balm in Gilead, nor Comfort
in God? Why has God taken the Name upon him, of being the God of all Comfort,
and put this Office upon his Spirit to be the Comforter? Has he not made
sufficient provision in the New Covenant? Is there any evil, which the promise
of Eternal Life cannot countervail? Is God backward to give you Comfort? Why
then did he send Christ, write Scriptures, appoint a Ministry, and Ordinances,
seek to prepare you for it, by the seal and earnest of his Spirit, and invite
you so earnestly to trust in him, to cast all your care upon him, and so often
forbid your Fear and Sorrow?

2. If all Comfort be of God, let us go to God for it. But then take these
three Directions.

1. See you be qualified for it. Comfort follows Holiness, as Heat does Fire;
the Spirit is first a Sanctifier, and then a Comforter: And according to God's
Promise, is more necessarily a Sanctifier than a Comforter. Ephesians. 1.13, 14. In
whom ye also trusted after that ye heard the Word of Truth, the G^^^el of your
Salvation. O^ whom alone after that ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy
Spirit of Promise, which is the Earnest of our Inheritance, until the
redemption of the purchased possession, unto the praise of his Glory. Comfort
is our Happiness, but we are made Holy before Happy: Hereafter we enter into
our Master's Joy, we have a taste of it in the World; But who have this Taste,
but the sanctified and self-denying Christians? The Work of Sanctification is
carried on more certainly, but his Comforting Work is many times obscure and
interrupte^. Do your Work thoroughly and faithfull^, and you may refer your
selves to God for ^omfort.

Use 2. Expect not a singular way of Comfort besides the Word: It was Eliphas's
Charge upon Job, Chap. 15.11. Are the Consolations of God small with thee? Is
there any secret thing with thee? The Charge is, that he undervalued the common
Consolation of God, and looked for some secret way peculiar to himself, of
getting Comfort, besides humbling of himself, and turning unto God: No, God
has sufficiently provided for the Comfort of his People; and we must not
expect singular manifestations of his Love, and special Signs and Tokens,
beyond the common allowance given to the whole Family. It is a thousand to one
but it is some false Consolation, and Dream of Comfort which they affect and
cry up, beyond or besides the usual Comforts of his Word.

Use 3. Do not compare lower Discoveries of God, with that great Revelation he
has made of his Mind in the Word, for the Comfort of his People; for this
argues great unthankfulness, and a secret desire to set up Man's Comfort
against those which are unquestio^^bly of the Lord. Sure it is, that whatever
good is in Nature, is from God; but it is mingled with so many weaknesses, that
what is of God can scarce be seen in it. I speak of those that cry up Heathen
Philosophy, to ^he disparagement of the Word of God: As if it were a better
Institution to quiet the Mind, and fortify it against all Troubles, than
Christianity: But alas! they neither know the true ground of Misery, which is
Sin, nor the true ground of Comfort, which is Christ. And that which mere Man
offers, can neither come with such Authority and Blessing, as what comes
immediately from God. This is a Moonlight that rotteth things before it
ripeneth them. In short, Philosophers were never acquainted with Christ, the
foundation of Comfort; nor the Spirit, the efficient cause of Comfort; nor the
promise of Pardon and Life, which is the matter of Comfort; nor Faith, which is
the Light, by which we know things that depend upon Divine Revelation, and so
the proper Instrument of Comfort. This I thought good to say, because Comfort
and Rest for Souls, is one of the great Benefits of our Religion. Jer. 6.16.
Stand in the way and see, and ask for the old Pa^hs, where is the good Way, and
walk therein; and ye shall find rest for your Souls. Mat. 11.28, 29. Come unto
me all ye that labor, and are heavy ^^d^n, and I will give you Rest.

Use 4. Seek it in the use of Means and Ordinances, which God has appointed
for the raising of Comfort in us, as the Word, Prayer, and the Lord's Supper.
In solemn Duties God renews the pledges of his Love to us, exciteth Grace,
and by Grace Comfort; it must needs be so, because then the grounds of Comfort
are anew laid in the view of Conscience: Graces are in their lively Exercise,
and God is not wanting to his own Institution. Take all these three together,
and the reverend use of the Lord's Supper must needs increase our Comfort. The
Ground of Comfort is Reconciliation with God, by Christ. Romans 5.11. We joy in
God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by w^om we have now received the Atonement.
And here we raise up your Faith and Love, Cant. 1.4. The King has brought me
into his Chambers; we will be glad and rejoice in thee, we will remember thy
Love more than Wine; the Upright love thee. God's Ordinances are not empty,
there is some participation; 1 Cor. 10.16. The Cup of Blessing which we bless,
is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ? The Bread which we brake, is it
not the Communion of the Body of Christ?

Use 5. Consider the ends why God gives us Comfort; it is to fortify us
against the Enemies of our Salvation, so far as they are vexing and troubling,
and molesting us in the way to Heaven. The Spirit has two great Offices, to be
a Sanctifier, and Comforter, and both serve all the needs of Christians. When
we are enticed to Sin, he helps us as a Santifyer; when we are discouraged in
God's Service, he helps us as a Comforter. And therefore Christians are to
consider their condition, and what their present state requires; for God
dispenses his Grace according to the Assaults made upon them by the Enemies of
their Salvation. As for instance, Our Enemies are the Devil, the World and the
Flesh, these we renounced in Baptism: And in the progress of Christianity these
are those with whom we conflict, and must overcome. As for instance; The Devil
is a tempting Devil, who seeks to draw away the Saints from God; and by the
love of the Flesh, to weaken our Love and Obedience to our proper and our
rightful Lord. Now what are we to do in this case, to beg Comfort and Peace,
that we may not be troubled, though we yield unto his Temptations? Alas! this
were to turn the Grace of God into Wantonness: No, we are to be sober and
watchful, 1 Pet. 5.8. to use all the Rules of Sobriety and Vigilance, that our
Worldly Comforts may not be a snare to us. Sobriety is an Holy Moderation in
the use of all earthly things. Vigilance is an Holy Diligence, and seriousness
in the use of Means; and also add to both, the help of the Sanctifying Spirit,
that we may keep up our Love to God, and be faitful in our Obedience to him.
But the Devil is not only a tempting Devil, but a vexing and disquieting Devil,
who accuses us before God day and night, Rev. 12.10. raises in us many
troublesome Fears, to make our Service uncomfortable, and tire us, and clog us.
What is our Duty then? to beg the help of the Comforter, not only to show Love
to God, but that we may have some persuasion of his Love to us, and quench his
fiery Darts, that we may go on cheerfully in our Work, because the God of Peace
shall bruise Satan under your feet shor^ly, Romans 16.20. So for the World; The
World is a tempting World, drawing our Affections from God and Heaven, to
present things; and when it smileth on us, in incroaches upon our Heart more
and more. 2 Timothy 4.10. Demas has forsaken me, having loved this present World.
Now what is our business then, to beg comfort and assurance of God's Love? No,
that would be our Bane, there is work for the Sanctifier rather than the
Comforter, that the worldly Spirit may be subdued in us; there is need of
Mortification rather than Assurance, that we may be crucified to the World,
Gal. 6.14. But sometimes the World is a Persecuting World, and reproacheth and
troubles us with all manner of vexations, then there is work for the
Comforter, to seal up to our Souls the Love of God, or Interest in Christ: John
16.33. These things have I spoken to you, that in me ye ^ight have peace, in
the World ye shall have tribulation: but be of good cheer, I have overcome the
World; and to become to our Souls the Earnest of eternal Glory. Comfort is for
Tribulation; at other times we are glutted with it, but then it is our great
support. When all t^ings fail, we feel the great necessity of the Joys of
Faith: It is good to time well our Duties; David says, Psalm. 56.3. What time I
am afraid, I will trust in thee. So for the Flesh, it inticeth us, James 1.14.
Every Man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own Lust, and enticed. Many
times it draws to Actual Sin by indulgence to its desires; yea, disposes us
often to Apostasy and falseness of Heart: for Apostasy usually begins at
falseness of Heart, when the fleshly Mind and Interest is not thoroughly
overcome. Well, when we are conscious to this, what shall we do in such a case?
Certainly the great and proper Work, is to beg the Spirit, and implore the
Spirit as a Sanctifier, and to be more obedient to his sanctifying Motions;
Comfort will come in time. Well, but the Flesh is not only enticing, but
troublesome and grievous to the Saints; witness Paul's groans, Romans 7.24. Oh
wretched Man that I am; who shall deliver me from the body of this Death? We
are quite wearied, and tired out with the importunity of its motions; we would
serve God more purely and perfectly: Then there is work for the Comforter, and
confidence in his Operations to help the faithful Soul; Phil. 1.6. Being
confident of this very thing, that he which has begun a good Work in you, will
perform it unto the day of Jesus Christ. Then it is seasonable to remember the
Covenant we are under. Romans 6.14. For Sin shall not have dominion over you, for
you are not under the Law, but under Grace. The serious striving Soul will not
be left destitute. Thus must we expect Comfort.

Use 6. Remember that Comfort has a latitude in it, and is expressed by diverse
words.

1. Sometimes by it, Support is implied, when the sense of Sin, and fear of
God's Wrath, is not altogether removed and taken away, but so mitigated and
abated, that Hope does more easily prevail in the Soul than Fear: And we
resolve to wait on God, though we cannot so fully clear up our Interest in him.
You have many Conflicts and Fears, yet some Hope and Expectation toward God:
Jonah 2.4, 5. I am cast out of thy sight, yet will I look again to thy Holy
Temple. Resolute adherence gives great support. Job 13.15. Though he slay me,
yet will I trust in him; I will maintain my own ways before him. He depends
merely on the Covenant.

2. Peace, or some rest from Troubles, and accusations of Conscience, there is
some calm and quiet of Soul; Romans 5.1. Being justified by Faith, we have peace
with God. Gal. 6.16. As many as walk according to this Rule, Peace be on them,
and Mercy: Assaulted with none or light Fears, John 16.33. In me ye shall have
Peace. I will give you Peace, though not full Spiritual Suavities.

3. The third word is Joy, 1 Pet. 1.8. Ye rejoice with Joy unspeakable, and
full of Glory. In Peace all things are quiet, they have no anxious Thoughts;
but in Joy there is a sensible motion of Pleasure and Delight, they are feasted
with the pleasures of Faith, Love, and Hope. Let us then bless God for any
degree of Comfort.

SERMON XVIII.
2 Thessalonians. 2.17. -- And stablish you in every good Word and Work.


WE come now to the Apostle's second Request for them, and stablish you in
every good Word and Work: By every good Word, is meant sound Doctrine; by every
good Work, holiness of Life.

Doct. Establishment in Faith and Holiness, is a needful Blessing, and
earnestly to be sought of God.

1. What this Establishment is. 2. How needful. 3. Why it is to be sought of
God.
I. What this Establishment is? Answ. Confirmation in the Grace that we have
received. Now this Confirmation must be distinguished.

1. With respect to the Power wherewith we are assisted; there is Habitual
Confirmation, and Actual Confirmation.

(1.) The Habitual Confirmation is, when the habits of Grace are more settled
and increased; 1 Pet. 5.10. The God of all Grace Strengthen, Stablish, Settle
you. God has effectually called and converted them, and he beggeth the
strengthening of the Grace which they had received. Now thus we are established,
when Faith, Love, and Hope, are increased in us; for these are the Principles
of all Spiritual Operations; and when they have gotten good strength in us, a
Christian is more established. (1.) Faith is necessary, for we stand by Faith;
Romans 11.20. Because of unbelief they were broken off, but thou stand by
Faith: We do not only live by it, but stand by it, and are kept by it; 1 Pet.
1.5. Who are kept by the Power of God through Faith unto Salvation. He is
strong, that is, strong in Faith, as Abraham was, that believes the Gospel,
and can venture his All upon it, and trust himself in God's hands whatever
befalls him. Luke 22.32. I have prayed for thee that thy Faith fail not. That
was the Grace likely to be assaulted, and would most keep him: had he bin
persuaded that Jesus was the Son of God, would he have denied him with Oaths
and Execrations? (2.) Love is strong; We are told, Cant. 8.6. That Love is as
strong as Death; many Waters cannot quench it; If a man would give all the
substance of his House, it would utterly be contemned. It will not be bribed,
or quenched. Our Backsliding comes from losing our complacency in, or desire
of God. There is an averseness from Sin, and zeal against it, as long as we
have a sense of our Obligations to God, and a value and esteem of his Grace in
Christ; then we continue in delightful obedience to him, and level and direct
our actions to his Glory. (3.) Hope is necessary to stablish the Soul on the
promise of Eternal Life. For this is the sure and steadfast Anchor of the Soul.
Heb. 6.19. Which Hope we have as an Anchor of the Soul, both sure and steadfast:
If Hope be strong and lively, present things do not greatly move us.

(2.) Actual Establishment, when these Habits are fortified and quickened by the
actual Influence of God. As God does establish by these habitual Principles, so
by the actual motions of his Spirit; for otherwise neither the stability of our
Resolutions, nor of Gracious Habits will support us. Not stability of
Resolutions; Psalm. 73.2. As for me, my Feet were almost gone, my steps had well
nigh slipped. Not Habits; Rev. 3.2. Be watchful, and strengthen those things
which remain, that are ready to die. It is true, God ordinarily works most
strongly with strongest Graces, because their Hearts are most prepared; yet
sometimes weak Christians have gone through great Temptations, when strong ones
have failed. Rev. 3.8. Thou have a little strength, and have kept my Word, and
have not denied my Name. Sometimes the strong Christian stumbleth and falls,
when the weak stands: God may in an instant confirm a weak Person in some
particular Temptation, by his free Assistance, but ordinarily concurreth with
the strongest Grace. Thus with respect to the Power, wherewith we are assisted.

2. With respect to the Object, or Matter about which it is conversant;
stablished in every good Word and Work; stability in the Doctrine of Faith, and
Practice of Godliness.

(1.) In the Doctrine of Faith. It is a great advantage in the Spiritual Life,
to have a sound Judgment: Some Men are never well grounded in the Truth, and in
the nature and reasons of that Religion which they do profess, and then are
always left to a wandering uncertainty, because they resolve not upon Evidence:
as Men ordinarily abide not in the place to which they are driven by a Tempest,
or the current of the Tides, rather than by aim and choice, though they take
shelter there for the present. 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. Prove all things, hold fast that
which is good. Certainly Religion in the general must be taken up by Choice,
and not by Chance; not because we know no other, but because we know no better:
As Jer. 6.16. Stand ye in the Ways and see, and ask for the old Paths, where is
the good Way, and walk therein. And the same is true of particular Opinions and
Controversies about Religion, till we have (...), our own stedfastness, 2 Pet.
3.17. We stand by the stedfastness of others, when we profess the Truth, merely
because of Company; and when the Chain ^s broken, we all fall to pieces. Now we
ought to be well settled, left we appear to the World with a various Face,
which breeds Atheism in others, and Shame to our selves. It is possible in
particular things, future Light may disprove present Practice; but then we must
be able to give a very sufficient account of it. Luther, when he was charged
with Apostasy, Consitetu^ se esse Apostatam, sed beatum and sanctum, qui sidem
Diabolo datam non servavit. While we cry up Constancy, we must not cherish
stubborn Prejudice, which shuts the Door upon Truth: However* to avoid the
opinion of Lightness, before Religious Persons profess any thing, their warrant
need to be very clear, both for the World's sake and their own, that they may
not make needless Troubles, and afterward change their Mind to the
scandalizing of others: And their own sake (...), James 1.8. A double-minded
Man is unstable in all his ways. And we had need to take care to be right,
because every error has an influence upon the Heart, and Practice: Upon the
Heart, as it weakeneth Faith and Love, and Practice. Some Opinions have no
malignity in themselves, yet the profession of them may divide the Church, and
make us by Contentions, Enemies of the growth and progress of Christ's Kingdom.
Now if we would be established in the Truth, we must see what Influence every
Truth has upon the new Nature, either as it works toward God by Faith, to
keep up our respects to him, or Men by Love, as it furthereth our Duties to
them. A Man will not easily let go Truth, that is wont to turn it into
Practice, and to live as he believes. Once more we need to be established in
the present Truth; it is no zeal to fight with Ghosts, and antiquated Errors,
but take God's part in our time; but usually the Orthodoxy of the World, is an
Age too short, Men please themselves in things received.

(2.) In every good Work, or in holiness of Life. Here needs the greatest
establishment, that we may hold on our course to Heaven; and the usual
Apostasy, and Backsliding that Men are guilty of, is from the practice of
Religion. It is ill when the Mind is tainted, but worse when the Heart is
alineated from God; and commonly it is the perverse inclination to the Will,
that tainteth the Mind: Therefore the great Establishment, is to be settled in
a course of Godliness. 1 Thessalonians. 3.13. That he may establ^sh your Hearts
unblameable in Holiness before God, even our Father, until the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ, with all his Sain^s. Now this Establishment is very
difficult.

First, Because of the contrariety of the Principles that are within us. Gal.
5.17. For the Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the
Flesh, and these are contrary one to the other; so that ye cannot do the things
that ye would. The Garrison is not free from Danger, that has an Enemy lodged
within. The love of the World and the Flesh, was in the Heart, before the love
of God and Holiness, and these are not wholly rooted out; yea, these are
natural to us, whereas Grace is a Plant planted in us, contrary to nature: And
the Ground that brings forth Weeds and Thistles of its own accord, but the
Flowers and good Herbs, with mush T^llage and Cultivation; if it be neglected,
the Weeds will soon overgrow the Flowers.

Secondly, Because it is more hard to continue in Conversion, than to co^vert
our selves at first. In our first Conversion we are more passive, it is God
that converteth us, and draws us to himself, and quickens, and plants us into
Christ; but in Perseverance, and fulfilling our Covenanting Duty, we are more
active; it is our Work, though we perform it by God's Grace. An Infant in the
Mother's Womb is nourished by the nourishment of the Moth^r, but afterward he
must suck, and seek his own Nourishment; and the elder he grows, the more
care of his Life is devolved upon himself. Now that which is more our work, is
more difficult. It is true, that God that has begun a good Work, does perfect
it, but not without our care, Phil. 1.6. When we are fitted and prepared unto
good Works, God expects from us, that we should walk in them. God
establishes us in the Text, but it is in every good Work. Beside, in
Conversion we make Covenant with God, but by Perseverance we keep Covenant with
him. Now it is easier to consent to Conditions, than it is to fulfill them; the
Ceremonies at first consent of Marriage are not so difficult, as to perform the
duties of the Marriage Covenant: It is more easy to build a Castle in time of
Peace, than to keep it in a time of War. Peter more easily consented to come to
Christ upon the Water, but when he begun to try it, his Feet were ready to
sink, Mat. 14.29, 30. When Winds and Waves are against us, alas, how soon do we
fail? Therefore a good Spring does not always foreshew a fruitful Harvest, nor
plenty of Blossoms store of Fruit. We are carried on with great Life and
Earnestness for a while, in the profession of Religion, we consent to follow
Christ; but when we meet with Difficul^ies not foreseen, or allowed for, we
faint and are discourage.

Thirdly, With respect to the Subject in which it is seated, which is the Soul
with its faculties. The strength of the Body is known by Experience rather than
by Description; but the strength of the Soul must be determined by its right
constitution toward Good and Evil. The Faculties of the Soul are either the
Understanding, wherein lies the Directive Council, or the Will, wherein lies
the Imperial Power, or the Affections, wherein lies the Executive Power of the
Soul.

1. The Mind, or Understanding, is established, when we have a clear, certain,
and full Apprehen^^on of the truth of the Gospel, it is called Knowledge; the
sure, and sound, and certain apprehension of them, is called Faith, or
Intellectual Assent, or the full assurance of Understanding, Col. 2.2. when
there is a due knowledge of what God has revealed, with a certain persuasion of
the truth of it wrought in us by the Holy Spirit. Now the more clearly, and
orderly, and certainly we know these things, the more powerfully do they affect
the Heart, and the more we are established. He that has little Knowledge, and
little Certainty, is called weak in the Faith. Romans 14.1. Him that is weak in
the Faith receive, but not to doubtful Disputations. And those that have a
clearer Understanding, are called strong. As Romans 15.1. We that are s^rong,
ought to bear the Infirmities of the Weak; meaning strong in Knowledge: So also
for certainty of Persuasion, it is said, Romans 4.20. Abraham was strong in
Faith, giving glory to God. When in all his Trials, he bore up himself upon the
Confidence of God's Word and Promise. Well then, the Mind is confirmed and
established, when we have a good stock of Knowledge, and do firmly believe what
we know of God and Christ, and eternal Salvation: But alas, how few Truths do
many Christians know, especially in their order, and as to their worth and
weight, and certainty, and so that if we know these things, we know them not as
we ought to know them. 1 Cor. 8.2. If any Man think that he knows any thing,
he knows nothing yet as he ought to know them. If we know them Speculatively,
we know them not Practically: If we are able to discourse of these things, we
do not live by them: If we know them generally, we do not know them
particularly, to direct us in all Cases, wherein they concern us, but are
blinded with Temptations: If we know them comprehensively, so as to look about
the compass of them, yet not certainly, John 17.8. and have kn^wn surely, that
I came out from thee, so as to venture our Interests upon them. If we know them
darkly, and with an half light, we do not know them clearly and with a full
light. There is many times conviction in the Ore, which is not refined into a
clear, and distinct knowledge, such as may awe the Heart; if we know these
things habitually, we know them not actually, when we should remember them in
their season; and Oblivion is a sort of Ignorance. Hence come the many doubts
we are assaulted with, and all the unevenness and uncertainty of our Lives, so
that the Mind needs to be established in Grace.

2. The Will, which is the Imperial power of the Soul. Now the Wills
establishment is known by its firm and through resolution for God, and against
Sin. For God: as Acts 11.23. Barnabas when he had seen the Grace of God, was
very glad, and exhorted them all, that with full purpose of Heart they would
cleave to the Lord. First choosing, then cleaving, and this with full purpose,
when the Will is so fixed in the Knowledge and Faith of the Gospel, that they
resolve to abide by their choice: Psalm. 27.4. One thing have I desired of the
Lord, this will I seek after. When Spiritual Resolution carries the force and
authority of a principle in the Soul, and nothing can break it. 1 Pet. 4.1. Arm
your selves with the same Mind. As constantly as Christ persevered in the work
of Mediation, so be you in the work of Obedience, notwithstanding the
difficulties of it. This powerful Will, that bears down Oppositions and
Temptations, and the greatest Impediments in the way to Heaven, So that you
rather make advantage of Opposition, than are discouraged by it, when sensual,
or carnal Good is of little force to you, and you can despise the most pleasing
baits of Sin.

3. The Affections are the executive power, and do excite and stir us up to do
what the Mind is convinced of, and the Will resolved upon, as to the necessary
Duties of the Gospel in order to Eternal Happiness. There is a Backwardness
within, and many Temptations without; but an holy Delight overcomes the
unwilling backwardness within, and over ballanceth either Worldly Fear, or
Wordly Hope without, that the Soul is carried on powerfully toward God. We
never work better, than when we work in the strength of some eminent Affection,
when the Heart is enlarged. Psalm. 119.32. I will run the way of thy
Commandments, when thou shall enlarge my Heart. Either Love, or Hope. Love
fills us with delight, overcoming our natural slackness and sluggishness in
the Ways of God. Psalm. 40.8. I delight to do thy Will, O my God, yea, thy Love
is within my Heart. 1 John 5.3. For this is the Love of God, that we keep his
Commandments, and his Commandments are not grievous. Psalm. 112.1. Blessed is
the Man that fears the Lord, that delights greatly in his Commandments.
Hope bears us up in contempt of present delights, and terrors of Sense. Heb.
3.6. Whose House are we, if we hold fast the considen^e, and rejoicing of Hope
firm unto the end. So that we serve God with vigor and alacrity. When our
Affections are damped, Grace falls into a consumption; and if you lose your
taste, your Practice will languish, your Service of God will not be so uniform.
It is a great part of our establishment to keep up the vigor and fervency of
our Affections.

4. With respect to the Uses for which it serves, as to Duties, Sufferings,
Conflicts.

(1.) Doing the Will of God, or discharging our Doings with Delight,
Cheerfulness, and Constancy: for all strength is for Work. Ephesians. 3.16. That he
would grant you according to the riches of his Glory, to be strengthened with
might by his Spirit in the inner Man. That we may do our work with that
readiness of Mind, which becomes Faith in Christ, and Love to God. This is
often spoken of in Scripture, Phil. 2.13. For it is God that works in you,
both to will and to do, of his good pleasure, (...). And Heb. 13.21. Make you
perfect in every good work to do his will, working in you what is well pleasing
in his sight. It is of great use to our establishment, that the Soul be kept
doing; for as Wells are the sweeter for draining, so are we the more lively for
exercise. Frequent omission of good Duties, or seldom exercise of Grace,
necessarily produces a decay: As a Key rusteth that is seldom turned in the
Lock, thereby we lose the life and comfort of Religion, and at length cast it
off as a needless and unprofitable thing.

(2.) For bearing Afflictions, and passing through all conditions with Honor
to God, and safety to our selves. Phil 4.13. I can do all things through Christ
which strengthens me. Col. 1.11. Strengthened with all Might, according to
his glorious Power, with all Patience. The great use of Establishment, is to
fortify us against all the evils and inconveniences of the present Life; that
we may hold on our Course to Heaven in fair Way, or foul, and not be greatly
moved by any thing that befalls us within time.

(3.) For Conflicts with Temptations from the Devil, the World, and the Flesh.
The World is round about us, and we are accustomed to these enveigling Objects,
whose importunity prevails at length; the Devil seeks to work upon our
Affections and Inclinations, and the Flesh urges us to gratify them; How then
is a Christian safe? God establishes him. Ephesians. 6.10. Finally, be strong in
the Lord, and in the power of his Might. A Christian here is in a Military
State, and we of our selves left unto our selves, are like Reeds shaken with
every Wind; we have need of establishment in regard of our own Feebleness, and
the force of our Enemies. We must be established against the Devil soliciting;
against the World, the silent Argument, by which he soliciteth us, and draws
us from God and Heaven; against the Flesh, the rebelling Principle, which is
apt to be wrought upon by Satan. Well then, this establishment is that Grace,
which enableth us to carry on the Duties of Religion with constancy, frequency,
and delight; to bear all the inconveniences of Religion with Patience and
Fortit^de; to be more deaf and resolute against all the suggestions of the
Devil, or the machinations of the Flesh, stirred up by the World.

5. With respect to the Degree, it is such a strengthening of the Soul, as does
prevent not only our Fall, but our shaking. Before falling away, or our being
drawn to Apostasy, there may be a shaking, a doubtfulness, and wavering of mind
with respect to the Truth, and much inconstancy and unevenness of Life with
respect to practice. Now Christians, as they must not draw back to Perdition,
so they must not be always fluctuating and unfixed, either in Matters of
Opinion, but settled in the Truth; or in matters of Practice, there must be a
strength and stability of holy Inclinations, and Resolutions for God and the
World to come, still kept up, or else there will be no evenness or uniformity
in the course of our Lives; and though we avoid Apostasy, yet we cannot avoid
Scandal; though there be no falling back* there is a stepping out into
Bypath: 1 Cor. 15.58. Be steadfast and unmovable, always abounding in the
Work of the Lord. And Ephesians. 3.17. That ye being root^d and grounded in Love,
etc. And Col. 1.23. If ye continue in the Faith grounded and settled, and be not
moved away from the Hope of the Gospel. If we do not look to the Degree, our
weakness and instability grows upon us: As in matters of Opinion, some have
an unsettled Head of a vertiginous Spirit, Ephesians. 4.14. carried about with every
wind of Doctrine: They never were well grounded in the Truth, nor took up the
ways they are engaged in upon sufficient Evidence; and therefore by their own
weakness, and the cunning and diligence of the Seducers, are drawn into Error.
Light Chass is blown up and down by every Wind, when solid Grain hitcheth in,
and rests in the Floor where it is winnowed. An half light makes us
uncertain in our Course. For Matter of Practice, if we allow our selves in our
first Decl^nings, the Evil will grow upon us, when the Judgment reasons more
remisly against Sin than it did before, and the Will does oppose it with less
resolution, or with greater faintness and indifferency, or when Opposition does
more discourage us. No, there must be a resolved conquest of Temptations that
wo^ld pervert you, this will only serve our turn. Heb. 12.3. Consider him that
endured such Contradictions, lest ye be weary, and faint in your minds.
Weariness is a lesser degree of Deficiency. Many a Man is weary, that is not
faint or quite spent: So the practice of Godliness, when the Heart beginning to
be ali^nated and estranged from God, and the Lif^ of Duty does decay; when our
first Love is gone, our first Works will in a great measure cease. Rev. 2.4, 5.
Nevertheless I have something against thee, because thou have left thy first
Love. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do thy
first Works. Well then, the Degree must be minded, for though a Man may be
steadfast in the main, yet he may be somewhat moved and shaken; But a Christian
should not only be steadfast, but unmovable, otherwise we shall be very
uncertain in our Motions.

2ly; How needful it is, this is in a great measure showed already. But yet
more fully.

(1.) Man at best is but a Creature; the New Creation does carry a great
correspondence with the Old and First Creation: It Is not enough that the
Creature be, but he must be sustained in Being; we have our Being in God still,
Acts 17.28. For in him we live, and move, and have our Being. As Providence is
a continual Creation, so stablishing Grace is the continuance of the New
Creation. The same Grace that sets us in the state of the New Creation, the
same stablisheth us. God found no stability in the Angels, therefore it is said
he trusts them not, Job 15.15. Behold, he puts no trust in his Saints;
yea, the Heavens are not clean in his sight. They stand by the Grace and Favor
of God. Take the best Creatures even as Creatures, they are defective and
unstable in themselves; for God will have the Creature, as a Creature, to be a
dependent thing on the Creator, who only is a Being of himself. Man at his best
estate was but an unstable Creature, for Adam gave out at the first assault,
and since we are very unstable, blown down with the blast of every little
Temptation. Even in the State of Grace, we are like a Glass without a bottom,
broken as soon as out of hand; and therefore God alone is able to make us
stand, and persevere in this Grace that we ^ave received. 2 Cor. 1.21. Now ^e
tha^ stablisheth us with you in Christ, is God. After we are in Christ, our
stability is in God alone.

(2.) The Indisposition of our Natures both to every good Word and Work. 1. To
every good Word. The Truths of the Gospel are supernatural: Now things that are
planted in us contrary to Nature, can ^ardly subsist and maintain themselves.
We have some Seeds of the Law yet left in our Hearts, Romans 2.14. But the Gospel
de^endeth on sure Revelation; therefore are th^re so many Heresies against the
Gospel, but none against the Law: Therefore as they depend upon a Divine
Revelation, they must b^ settled in our Hearts by a Divine Power, and by a
Divine Power preserved there; that as the Doctrine is supernatural, so the
Grace may be also by which we do receive it. Faith is the Gift of God, Ephesians.
2.8. For ^y Grace ye are saved through Faith; and that not of your s^lves, it
is the Gift of God; both as to its beginning, so to its preservation and
in^rease. 2. To every good Work. There is not only slowness and backwardness o^
Heart to the Duties of the Gospel, but somewhat of the old enmity and
averseness remains still. Our Hearts are not only inconstant and uns^tl^d,
but very wayward, Ier. 14.10. T^us ^^ith the Lord to this People, Thus ^ave
they loved to wander. Psalm. 95.10. It is a People that do err in their Heart.
Moses was no sooner gone aside with God in the Mount, but the Israelites after
their solemn Covenant fell to Idolatry. Before the Law could be written, they
brake it. Now we that have a warring Principle within, how can we ^^and unless
God e^tablish us? There is a b^ck-byass, there are the S^eds of Wantonness,
Anger, Revenge, Envy, Impatience, Worldliness, Ambition, and Sensuality. God
knows how little the fl^shly Mind and Interest is conquered in us; and
therefore if he did not establish us, we should soon show our selves

(3.) In regard of those Oppositions that are made against us after once we be
in Christ. It is not enough that we are brought out of the Kingdom of Satan,
but after we are rescued out of his Hand and Power, he pursues us with
continual malice; therefore there must be the same power to stablish us still
in Grace, that first brought us into the ^tate of Grace: Col. 1.13. Who has
delivered us from the power of darkness, and has transl^ted us into the
Kingdom of h^s dear Son: compared with 1 John 4.4. Ye are of God, little
Children, and have overcome them: because greate^ is he that is in you, than he
that is in the World. The World runs a quite contrary course th^n those do
that set their faces Heavenward, and therefore malign them, and pursue them
with Reproaches and Troubles. 1 Pet. 4 4, 5. Wher^in they think it strange that
you run not with them to the sam^ excess of Riot, speaking evil of you; who
shall give account to him that is ready to judge the quick and the dead. And
most commonly our Supports are invisible, and we have no temporal Intere^t to
lean to. But, 2 Timothy 1.17. For the which cause I also suffer th^se things,
neve^theless I am not ashamed; for I know whom I have believed, and I am
per^^^d^d he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him against that
day. We bear these Afflictions by the Power of God.

4ly; We see here the Saints miscarry when God withdraws his supporting Grace
but in part; as Peter, David. Peter was in the state of Grace, and Christ
prayed that his Faith might not utterly fail; yet when God did not est^blish
him, you see what Sins he was guilty of in that combat: David was a Man after
God's own Heart, but how did he fall when God upheld him not? Psalm. 51.
Hezekiah, (...) Cron. 42.31. Howbeit in the business of the Ambassadors of the
Princes of Babylon, who sent unto him to enquire of the Wonder that was done in
the Land, God left him to ^ry him, that he might know all that was in his
Heart. Thus is God fain for to humble his Children, to teach them Depend^nce;
and to put them in ^ind that they do not stand by their own strength.

3. Why it is to be sought of God?

(1.) He only is able, Romans 16.25. Now to him that is of power to establish you
according to my Gospel, and the preaching of Jesus Christ, etc. Surely God
never made a Creature too hard for himself. He is able to d^f^at the Power of
Enemies, and to preserve ^is People in the midst of Temptations. So Jude v^^.
24. To him that is able to keep you from falling, etc. And, He is able to keep
that which I have committed to h^^, 2 Timothy 1.12. The Saints gather much com^or^
from this: ^or it is a relief to their thoughts against the dread^ul and
powerful opposi^ion of the World; they have no reason to doubt of their
Fath^r's Love. That which surprizeth thein, is to see all the World against
them. It is the dreadfulness of power in the Temptation, and sense of their own
weakn^ss, therefore the power of God is a fit relief to them.

(2.) God is not very forward to cast you off, when he has a just cause to do
it. Your constant experience evidenceth this; If he here had done so, what had
become of you long ago? For you have given him abundant occasion, you have
wearied him with your Sins, abused his Mercies; and yet he has not cast you
off: He has not utterly forsaken you, when you have turned the back upon him,
and have been ready to forsake him, but has kept you from Dangers, and in
Dangers; yea, called you to his Grace, confirmed you hitherto, why should you
doubt of his Grace for the future? 2 Cor. 1.10. Who delivered us from so great
a death, and does deliver: in whom we trust that he will yet deliver us, 2 Timothy
4.17, 18. Notwithstanding the Lord stood with me, and strengthened me; that by
me the preaching might be fully known, and that all the Gentiles might hear:
and I was delivered out of the Mouth of the Lion. And the Lord shall deliver me
from every evil Work, and will preserve me unto his Heavenly Kingdom: To whom
be Glory for ever and ever. Amen.

(3.) He has made Promises of Sustentation, and ^^eservation: Psalm. 73.23.
Nevertheless, I am continually with thee, thou have holden me by my righthand.
Though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down, for God upholdeth him with
his Hand. If God has promi^^d to preserve that Grace which he has once given,
should not we pray ^or the continuance of it with the ^ore encou^agement?

(4.) The experience of the Saints. Psalm. 9^.18. When I said my foot slippeth,
thy Mercy O Lord, held me up. God's Manutenancy is there asserted.

Use. Is to press us at all times, to look up to God for establishment: But
especially in two S^asons.

(1.) When we begin to d^cline, and grow more remiss and indifferent in the
practice of Godliness. If Grace be weak, you must get it strengthened. When you
grow bolder in Sin, and more strange to God and Jesus Christ, and have little
converse with him in the Spirit; Oh! it is time to be ins^ant and earne^^ with
God, that he would recover you: Though you have embezled your Strength, yet you
have to do with ^ Merciful God; go to him for Help. Psalm. 17.5. Hold up my
^oings in thy Path, that my footsteps s^ip not. You have ^orfeited the more
plentiful aids o^ Grace; but beg him not to forsake you utterly. You must
confess the Sin, but God must remedy the ^vil. Psalm. 119.133. Order my steps in
thy Word: and let not any Iniquity have dominion over me. Lord, I am apt to be
led away with worldy Allurements, my Spiritual Ta^^e is dis^empered with carnal
Vanities: But, let not Iniquity have dominion over me.

(2.) In unsettled Times, when we are full of Fears, and think we shall never
hol^ out in a holy Course; God that keeps us in times of Peace, will hold us
up in times of Trouble. Psalm. 16.8. I have set the Lord always before me:
because he is at my right hand, I shall not be moved.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is lately Printed, Twenty Select Sermons, Preached by the late Reverend
and Learned Divine, Doctor Thomas Manton, in Quarto, published by Dr. William
Bates.


