LETTERS TO A Sick Friend, CONTAINING SUCH OBSERVATIONS AS MAY Render the Use
of Remedies Effectual toward The Removal of SICKNESS, AND PRESERVATION OF
HEALTH.

By J. M.

LONDON, Printed by J. A. for Thomas Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns at
the lower end of Cheapside, near Mercers Chapel, 1682.

The PUBLISHERS EPISTLE TO THE READER.
THese ingenuous and excellent Letters being sent me at several times, and upon
particular Occasions, from the City of London, into the Country, I thought
them very well deserving to be exposed to public View, as containing most
necessary Observations tending to Health and long Life, with the Way to render
Remedies Effectual: A Theme I do not remember I ever saw in Print before. The
Subject is Great and Noble, and the Style is smooth and pleasant, and
accommodate to the Genius of this Age: And I am of Opinion, that if the Divine
and Physical Intimations given in these Letters, were improved to Practice, the
Use of Remedies would very seldom fail of success, and most men might arrive
unto a very great Age, and their passage through this World would be much more
Easy and Comfortable, than which nothing can be more desirable. I heartily
wish they may be as Delightful and Useful to thee in Print, as they were to me
and some others in Manuscript; and then I am recompensed for the Publication,
and shall more easily obtain the Authors Pardon for thus Reading them aloud to
the whole World.

T. C.

LETTERS TO A Sick Friend TENDING TO HEALTH.
LETTER I.
SIR,
I Received yours dated the thirteenth instant, wherein you give me an account
of the loss of your Health, and also request me to give you such prudential
Observations as may tend toward your Recovery. Sir, you know my Service is
always at your Beck; but I must take leave to tell you, that I cannot serve
you better in such a deplorable Distemper as yours is, than to persuade you to
take the Advice of your able and Learned Physician, whose Prescriptions have so
often been attended with success. Need I use Arguments to persuade a wise man
to endeavor to restore his Health? Sir, your Health is highly valuable upon a
public as well as upon a private account, it being subservient unto the good
of Communities as well as of particular persons. A whole Fleet has been
disabled for two Months by the Indisposition of the Admiral, and two Towns lost
by the Governor falling ill in the time of the Sieges. Accidents of Health
sometimes become Accidents of State; and the pulse of the Government sometimes
beats high or low with that of the Governor. Health is that which makes all our
Delights delightful. A sound Mind in a sound Body, consummates the perfection
of Humane Nature. The Health of the Body conduces unto the Harmony of the
Soul, and the Harmony of the Soul preserves the Health of the Body: It
preserves the Faculties of the Mind in strength and vigor, clears the
Understanding, makes the Wit acute, and the Memory retentive. Without Health
the most delicious Dainties will not please the Palate, the most fragrant
Odors will not delight the Smell, the most harmonious Melodies will not
gratify the Ear, the most beautiful Object will not please the Eye, nor the
softest Down ease the Bones. When men's flesh upon them is in pain, it makes
their Souls within them to mourn. Health is that which is of most Comfortable
Importance next unto the Salvation of the Souls of men; especially when we
consider what a multitude of Distempers the mortal Bodies of men are exposed
unto. Some Physicians have found two hundred in that small and tender part the
Eye. Our bodies are like a Curious Instrument of a thousand strings; and it is
very wonderful if one or more of those strings be not out of tune. It were a
great favor, if it were the pleasure of Heaven, to give men a constant frame
of Health during their pilgrimage, and might very deservedly be reckoned
amongst the Catalogue of our Mercies, to have our bodies like the Jews bodies
in the Wilderness, little worn or impaired by pining sicknesses. If the Woman
in the Gospel had spent all her substance upon any thing but the inestimable
Jewel of her Health, she had not gone out of our Saviors presence without a
Reprehension. If men did but consider the wonderful composure of their bodies,
the situation of the parts, the circulation of the blood, the several Meanders
of the Veins and Nerves, and the curious distribution of our Aliment into Flesh
and Blood, they would then admire that every Obstruction did not stop their
breath, and that the least Inflammation did not send them out of the World as in
a fiery Chariot, and that the least Degree of putrefaction did not crumble them
into their first Original; so that instead of wondering they live no more in
health, they would think it strange they live one hour in ease. All our good
things may be reduced into those of the Mind, of the Body, and of Fortune;
which three if enjoyed, render a man as happy as Solomon in all his Glory. He
that has Health to enjoy his Riches, Grace to preserve his Health, and the
hope of Glory to remunerate his Grace, needs no more. When a healthy
Constitution and a holy Disposition join hand in hand, they complete our
Happiness. Health without Religion is but like a Down Pillow to a Restless
Head, which the best Chamberlain cannot make easy: And Riches without Health
is but like Meat without a Stomach, which the best Cook cannot make relishing.
Restoration to health is a Kind of Resurrection, and it is called by St. James
a Raising up. When the Organs of our bodies are untuned, and our Spirits are
wasted by Sickness, our Souls cannot act with Vivacity; our teeming Invention
becomes barren, our soaring Fancy droops and hangs the wing, and the
remembrance of things pass away as water through a Sieve; Men's parts and
abilities being according unto the number, activity and orderly motion of their
Spirits; and they are more or less pure and regular, according unto the Healthy
Complexion of the Blood and Humors.

When the golden Bole is broken, and the sound of the Grinding is low, and the
Pitcher is broken at the Fountain, and the Wheel broken at the Cestern, then
the Sun and the Moon and the Stars will be darkened. Were it possible for a man
to stand upon one of the Battlements of Heaven, and with one glance of his Eye
to behold all the Wounds and Diseases, all the Groans and Complaints of Dying
Mortals, how would Health and Ease be prized by such a one? But Health is never
so much prized, as when it brings Letters of Recommendation from Sickness. But,
Sir, that your Pulse may beat harmoniously, and your Blood circulate regularly
to extreme old Age, is the Wish of

Your entirely affectionate Friend, J. M.

LETTER II.
SIR,
I Received yours, dated the tenth instant, wherein you give me an account of
your reception of the last Remedies I sent you; but I am sorry to hear you
should be guilty of so great a Mistake, as to think that no Observation of
yours can render the use of Medicines subservient toward Health and long Life.
Sir, I pray give me leave to assert the contrary, and to prove, that the
practice of Piety and true Religion, have a wonderful tendency toward long
Life. If you desire to wear a Crown of Glory in this World and the next also,
it may be obtained by gray Hairs found in the Way of Righteousness: And you
know it is promised as a Blessing to the Good man, that he shall come to his
Grave in a full Age, as a Shock of Corn comes in its season. The beloved
Disciple of our Lord survived the other Disciples; and many of the Fathers of
the Church were long-lived: Which shows that the Blessing of long Life, so
often promised under the Law, had less abatement after our Saviors days than
other Blessings had, Enoch and Elias never Dyed, and became Examples that a
spotless Life might possibly have been Immortal, as it is probable that Man
before his Fall was: Yet had he never sinned, perhaps he had not still remained
here upon Earth; though his Age might have been extended to some thousands of
years, and at length have been translated from hence to Heaven, where he could
neither have sinned nor dyed.

When our great and wise Creator made Man the Masterpiece of his Creation, he
was pleased as an expression of his Kindness to plant him in a Garden, wherein
he might have an opportunity at the same time both to Contemplate his Makers
Goodness, and to preserve his own Life; being furnished with supernatural
Wisdom, he could discern the particular Qualities of those Plants with which he
conversed: But Man being too familiar with the Tree of Knowledge, forfeited his
Right unto the Tree of Life, and has exposed himself unto the assaults of
innumerable Diseases. But such is the kindness of Heaven unto Man in his lapsed
state, that he is pleased to promise some of the Influences of this Symbolical
Tree, upon his Obedience unto the Divine Will: So that by our Observance of the
Eternal Laws of Evangelical Purity, which are prescribed as the Christians
Rule, we may as it were transplant the Tree of Life into our own Gardens, and
sit under the shadow thereof with great Delight, and its fruit may become sweet
unto our taste: There are certain practices which have a great tendency toward
long Life; and this the inspired Penman intimates when he says, Righteousness
tends to life; and there are frequent Promises of long Life made to the
Obedient. Caleb and Joshua survived all the Jews who came out of Egypt, the
rest were not suffered to see Canaan, lest they should introduce Egyptian
Innovations. Nothing does more conduce unto the preservation of our natural
Health, than our living the Divine Life; but when our Expectations and Actions
are wholly employed about the Gratifications of the Animal Life, we do but
prepare for the Messenger of the Grave. The practice of serious Christianity is
a great friend unto the Health of Humane Nature. The circumstantial actions of
Religion are very influential toward the lengthning men's Lives; as the sweet
sleep of temperate persons, their freedom from violent and enraged Passions,
with the admirable Contentment that dwells in a holy Conscience; also the great
Moderation that is exercised by such Persons. There are attending the Divine
Life leisurely Contemplations of Heavenly things, Joys refined from the Dregs
of Sensuality, Hopes of a noble and generous nature, wholesome, sweet and
comfortable Fears, and a universal Harmony in the Mind. These things make the
Lamp of Life burn bright and clear; and from hence by the favor of Divine
Clemency Health springs forth speedily. Plato's Observation is excellent,
That all the Pleasures of the Body proceed from the Joy of the Mind: The
breaking off our sins by Righteousness, many times proves a lengthening of our
temporal Tranquillity. The Jewish Doctors say, That Adam felt no Cold
notwithstanding he was naked, because he had Communion with God; but as soon as
ever he had eaten the forbidden Fruit, his Head aked. Faith and Obedience, like
the Tree of Life in Paradise, not only Sacramentally but really conduce unto
Health and long Life, so far as it is a Blessing; and this it does by
impregnating our Food with the tincture of a Divine Benediction, by meliorating
our Constitutions, and infusing wholesome Dispositions in the Air, and Friendly
Influences in the Host of Heaven. The Jews came under a Promise of having their
Bread and their Water blessed, and Sickness removed, if they obeyed the Divine
Law: And Solomon urges the consideration of our Health as a strong Argument to
promote holy and Religious Fear; telling us it should be health unto our
Navels, and marrow to our Bones: And Godliness has the promise of the Life
that now is, as well as of that which is to come: If men love Life, and desire
many days, and make it their request to obtain the Divine Wisdom, the way
prescribed is to desist from evil, and to do good, and then length of days and
long life shall be added, as the Wisest of men observed. Yielding Subjection
unto the Father of Spirits, is as sure a way to obtain the Blessing of Health
and long Life as Obedience unto our natural Parents; for there is a Command
with a Promise annexed unto both. And we find Life in the Inventory of a
Christians goods, when drawn up by the great Apostle of the Gentiles. And the
inspired Penmen frequently prescribe Religion as an Antidote against immature
Death, it being a direct Enemy unto Sin which brought in Sickness. True
goodness does as well conduce to the prolongation of the Body in natural Life,
as to its Immortality in Eternal Life; and the Body has the perfection of
Life, viz. Health from the Soul, as well as Life it self: Dying unto sin is an
excellent means to preserve Life, if men would try the Experiment, and
endeavor to procure the Divine Providence to be their Lifeguard. We live by
the Word of Blessing out of the Mouth of God; every Command, if observed, like
Food and Physic tends unto the lengthening our Days: Now although it be a
known truth, that of our selves we can do nothing; yet it is as true, that by
the Grace of God we may do much in the practice of Religion, and consequently
may contribute toward the lengthening of our Days, and rendering the use of
Medicines effectual toward that great and noble end. Moreover, Religion
secures Men from the Terrors of a guilty Conscience, which many times makes Men
wash their Hands in their own blood; and it also preserves Men from the
Condemnation of Humane Tribunals, many being cut off by the Hand of Justice,
for their flagitious impieties, as Murders, Thefts and Rapines. But Sir, that
the great Preserver of Men may so balance the Humors in your Body, that you
may live to see the accomplishment of all your good Wishes, is the hearty Wish
of him who has no more time left at present, than to tell you that he is and
will be

Yours in the most unreserved Respects. J. M.

LETTER III
SIR,
THis comes to Kiss your Hand, and to make an Inquiry after the happy Success
of the last Remedies, and also to encourage your Perseverance in their use,
although you do not presently find them answer your expectation: for I hope you
do not expect Medicines to Operate merely by their natural Energy infused into
them at their first Creation, but also know that their efficacy does depend
primarily upon the Pleasure of the Divine Will, who has limited the periods of
humane Life: We Live not at an Adventure, but the manner and Moments of our
Life and Death come under a Divine appointment, and the success of all Remedies
depends upon the peculiar Blessing of Heaven. The most Infallible way to have
our Distempers removed, is to endeavor to procure the concourse of that Divine
Influence, and to engage the Sovereign Power of that Almighty Healer, unto whom
belong the Issues from Death. Though our Lord was not corporally present with
Lazarus, yet he knew without Creature Intelligence that he was Dead, and told
his Disciples so; God also told Samuel that Moses was Dead. It matters not who
Plants or Waters, if God denies to give the Increase. The Divine Favor is the
best Skreen to shelter men from the innumerable Accidents of Humane Life, in
which every Minute we are Surrounded with a Thousand Deaths and dangers. When
the great Preserver of Men withdraws his protection, we are left exposed to the
malignant Aspects of Planets, to the fatal Contingencies of Wars and Battles,
and are endangered by every Accident; the Dust of a Wheel, the fall of a Tile,
the largeness of a Morsel, the Lash of a Whip, the unevenness of a Stone, the
Plenty of a Humor, may stop our Breath. It is a confessed truth, that every
natural motion has its beginning, duration and period, dependent on the
pleasure of the first Mover: now the Life of Man being a nutural motion, our
Nativity and Death are both ordered by that Omnipotent Agent, in whom we live,
move, and have our being. The Disciples themselves could not cure Diseases at
all times, if they could, St. Paul would not have left Trophimus Sick at
Miletum, nor have Sorrowed so much for Epaphroditus's Sickness. The Life of Man
consisting in a requisite Harmony of Qualities, and in a due commixture of the
natural Heat and radical moisture, which Harmony is more or less, according
unto the more or less exquisite temperament of Body assigned unto each single
Person, by the free dispensation of the Divine Will, it must follow that the
continuance of every man in this natural Life, depends upon the pleasure of him
who has determined our Days, numbered our Months, and set our Bounds, which we
cannot pass without his leave who gave us the durability of our temperaments,
and compassed our periods within the Circle of his special Providence. To
imagine the Life of Man fixed beyond the possibility of being prolonged or
shortened by an Almighty pleasure, seems highly unreasonable; because he has
reserved a power in his own Hands to contract or prorogue as he pleases;
Sometimes Divine Wisdom best knowing his own Reasons, does resolve the Death of
some Persons, and then the most proper Remedies are used in vain, either
toward the removal of Sickness, or the preservation of Health. The universal
Conserver of all things, takes notice of the principal and subsequent Causes of
things, Governing, Disposing and Ordering according unto his own free Will, and
yet his Government is void of any fatal Violence, and comes to an efficiency
from the ordination of various natural causes and humane elections, which prove
the occasions of supporting or destroying Life. Divine goodness does not
abolish, but Disposes of future Contingencies without nulling the freedom of
the Agent; he moderates and governs Events according to his pleasure, and yet
suffers the Creature to exercise its own proper motions. The rage of Men and
Devils cannot accelerate the motions of Divine Providence. A Sparrow does not
fall to the ground, much less a man into the Grave, without a Divine
Permission. The Manner and Moments of our death are not the effects of
Contingency: To God the Lord belongs the Issues from death, or in the Original,
the Inlets to Death, viz. Diseases. Natural Remedies are but like Elijah's
Staff laid upon the dead Child, they will not help unless a supernatural
virtue concurs. The Egyptians in their Temples had a remarkable Hieroglyphick,
A Young man, an Old man, and a Hawk in the middle: Intimating, the Beginning
and Period of humane Life depends upon the Influence of divine Providence.
Josiah's death might seem the effect of Juvenile rashness in War, but it
conduced toward the accomplishment of Huldah's Prophecy. The Advice of the
Philistine Diviners is very observable: When the People were smitten with
Hemorrhoids, they prescribed the offering up of golden Hemorroids, thinking by
that mystical Remedy to appease the Displeasure of Heaven; and to intimate,
that they thought the best of their Substance not valuable, to purchase Health;
but chiefly to represent their Belief that the Cure of Diseases depended upon a
divine Influence.

Many smart the longer under the Rod of God, because they eye not the Hand that
moves it. The Rabbis say, when Jeroboam's Hand withered, the false Prophets
told him it came by Chance, thereby to divert his reflections from the first
Cause. Some have observed, that the best way to cure the King's Evil is by the
Stroke of the Kings Hand; and sure the best way to remove the smart of
Distempers inflicted by the Hand of God, is to consider that it is his Hand: No
man knows, when Divine Providence, who has the Pen in his Hand, and writes
down the Days and Actions of our Lives, will be pleased to set a Comma of
Afflictions, or a Period of Death. The Weights and Plummets of Man's restless
Impatience, cannot make the Clock of Gods appointed time strike one Minute
sooner than he has set it: And he only has appointed how many tedious Days
and wearisome Nights we shall have, before the bright Morning of Eternity dawn
upon us. The reason why Natural Remedies do many times prove ineffectual, is
because there is a Determinate season wherein all Persons and things must have
their final issue. Thus we find Moses died the Year before the People entered
into Canaan: Daniel some few Years before the Foundation of the Temple: And
John the Baptist in the first Year of the Baptism of our blessed Savior, when
the Gospel he began to preach, was to be published in its Glory: At their
seasons they must go their ways to rest, and lie down until they receive their
lot at the end of Days. If God had not the Disposal of the Lives of Men in his
own Hands, what miserable confusions would there be in the World? If Alexander
the Great had been strangled in the Cradle, how could the Prophesies of Daniel
have been fulfilled concerning him? The Jews could not prejudice the Life of
the Lord of Life, until that hour which was appointed to be his last hour was
come: For, as it is appointed once to Die, so also when to Die: and that you
may enjoy a Long and Healthful Life, and at last a happy Eternity, is the
prayer of

Your humble Servant, J. M.

LETTER IV.
SIR,
I Joyfully entertained the welcome News of the good success of your last
Remedies, but am sorry to find you attribute all to Necessity; as if because
the Period of Humane Life is appointed, and the success of Medicines depends
upon a Supernatural Concourse; therefore to infer, we cannot be accessory
toward the shortning of our own Days. Sir, it is a fond Opinion, and a great
mistake so to think: for the Jews were wickedly instrumental in taking away the
Life of the Lord of Life, notwithstanding they did nothing but what Divine
goodness had determined before to be done. The Prophet told Amaziah, he knew
God had Determined to destroy him, and yet he also tells him, that he was
instrumental toward his own Death, in not harkening unto the Voice of the
Lord. Eli's Sons disobedience pronounced the Sentence of Death against them;
and it is rendered as the reason why God had resolved to slay them. The Date of
the Old Worlds Duration was fixed to one Hundred and twenty Years; Yet we find
it not so long-lived by twenty Years; their wickedness contracted that which
seemed to be a determined period.

At what time soever the Almighty be but pleased to speak concerning a Nation,
People or Person, to pluck up, to pull down or to destroy, if that Nation,
People or Person turn from their evil way, he will Repent of the intended evil,
whether Sickness or Mortality. The flight of that Arrow which procured King
Ahabs Death, was guided by a Divine Hand, who aimed at his Mortal Wounds; yet
his rash going to Battle by the advice of his false Prophets, rendered him
instrumental toward his own Death. The Evangelical Prophet tells us of a
Consumption determined upon the whole Earth, occasioned by their great
Provocations: The Divine determination concerning our Lives should not lessen
our care to preserve our Lives. King David understood that the determination
concerning the Child's Death was past, yet he prayed and used means to restore
it. It Is a Turkish Principle, to dream that because the manner and moments of
Men's Deaths are appointed, therefore to think it Vanity and Cowardice to arm
our selves, or Antidote our Bodies against the injuries of War and Assaults of
Diseases.

A Man may live out all Gods time, who wickedly shortens his own, and may be
permitted to do those forbidden Acts which inevitably tend to his own
destruction, and cut the Thread of his Days.

The Israelites Murmuring anticipated their Funerals, and Buried them in the
Wilderness, notwithstanding their Promise of seeing Canaan. The Impiety of the
old World, brought a Deluge, which possibly might have been prevented, had
their Repentance been as visible as that of Ninive, who were Reprieved from
Execution, after the Sentence of Death seemed Passed upon them, their
Reformation prevented Ruin and Destruction.

The addition of fifteen Years to Hezekias's Life, was the result of the Divine
Favor, but not without signal demonstrations of Repentance. The Rabins tell us
of one going to gather his Remedies prescribed by King Solomon against his
peculiar Distemper, was met by an Apparition of Death in the shape of a
Skeleton, which told him with an audible Voice it was too late, for he was
struck by the Angel who kept the Key of the Grave. The Moral is obvious enough
to a wise man, unto whom a word is enough: And I pray Sir excuse this
unravelling my Thoughts in such a ruffled manner from

Your Healths Friend, J. M.

LETTER V.
SIR,
THese Medicines the Doctor has now Prescribed, I have conveyed unto you
according unto your desire; the Directions are given with the particular
Parcels: and I am of Opinion that a firm belief that men may be many ways
accessory toward the shortning their own days, may much conduce toward the
good Success of Remedies, by exciting greater care and circumspection, and
greater Piety and Prudence in the management of our selves. Sin and Wickedness
does apparently shorten Life and multiply Diseases. The Life of Man seems to be
much pared away, but it cannot be artributed unto any Decay in Nature, and its
universal Frame; but rather unto the great Immorality and Imprudent
extravagancy of Nations and Persons indulging effeminate, luxurious and
pernicious Customs. Sin brought Death at first; and as Sin increased, so Death
came nearer by five hundred years. After the Flood men sinned still, and built
Castles in the Air, and then Death came nearer by three hundred years: And by
Moses's time a great part of that remnant is pared away, and threescore and ten
is the period: Had offended Justice gone on still to shorten men's days as men
increased in Sin, our Life by this time had not been a Day long; and therefore
he no longer destroys the Kind, but punishes the Individuals, and sets it down
as a standing Rule, That evil shall slay the Wicked, and he shall not live out
half his days. We cannot now observe one in five hundred arrive at that Age
unto which they might attain by the course of Nature, but end their days in
Sin and Folly. From surfeiting proceeds dissolutions of Members, relaxations of
Nerves, fractures of Bones, Inflammations of Blood, Crudities of the Stomach,
besides the uncleanly Consequences of Lust, which like a Dart strikes through
the Liver. Our great Creator has composed our Bodies like Lamps, and to supply
the Oil consumed by the flame, has given us Appetites of Hunger and Thirst,
and Reason to guide our Appetites, and the Revelation of his Will to guide our
Reason; but if men through the depravation of Nature, and the predominancy of
Temptation, suffer their Appetites to dethrone their Reason, and give way to
Intemperance, which extinguisheth Natures Lamp, by corrupting the Oil, or
spilling it, or blowing out the flame; men may then justly expect to be cut off
in the midst of their days, and to be made a Sacrifice unto their overmuch
wickedness. I'ts not improbable that Baalam's wish to dye the Death of the
Righteous, did not only include his being saved at last, but also that he might
come to his grave in a good old age, with his Fathers in peace, and might not
be cut off like the Moabites and other Nations, who were to perish in their
wickedness before his eyes. Since Mankind Bruised himself with his Fall, he
has corrupted his Blood, and sowed the Seeds of innumerable Diseases: We daily
feel the smart of our first Sentence, viz. Thou shall dye the Death; or, In
Dying thou shall Dye, or, Thou shall become exposed unto Sickness and Death.
Men may naturally be said to Die daily, mouldering away by piecemeal. The
forbidden Fruit has produced a Worm that eats our Lives away. The malicious
Serpent has bruised our heel, as is observed in the Jerusalem Targum, supposed
to be said to the Serpent by Almighty God, viz. When the Children of the Woman
shall forsake the Commandments of the Law, thou shall be strong, and shall
strike them on the Heel, and inflict Diseases on them. We are like men going
from Jerusalem to Jericho, half dead; the Sick and the Aged being but half
alive, as some Critics observe, senex quasi seminex. With the same Motion of
our Lungs we draw in Air, we throw away Breath. Some parcels of our selves
steam away continually, and we live a dying Life, or a living Death. Men have
shortened their days by increasing their Vices. Some men do that by
Intemperance which the very Devils desire to shun, viz. Torment themselves
before their time: No impious Person was ever said in Scripture to be full of
Days; none being full of time, but they that are prepared for Eternity. And we
never Read in the Holy Book, of any impenitent person that was ever raised from
the dead, to try a second time for a Crown: Lazarus, Tabitha and the Saints at
Jerusalem, came into the World only to make a Visit and declare a Glory, and to
them it happened literally to have their part in the first Resurrection, upon
whom the Second death shall have no power. Julian's Motto may fit every Man, An
Eagle shot through with a Dart feathered with a Quill from its own Wing. The
Life of Man is swifter than a Weavers Shuttle, especially if wickedness be
interwoven, then divine Justice cuts the thread; excellently shadowed by the
Poets Fiction of the three fatal Sisters: The one holding the Distaff, the
other drawing the Thread, the third cutting it off. Men's Impieties, like
Hazaels wet Cloth, prove fatal unto their Lives and Healths, in spite of the
most proper Remedies. When Sin and Sickness is mingled together, no marvel to
see Men's Bodies moulder, being like the feet of Nebuchadnezzar's Image, made of
Clay. It Is no wonder to see a strange punishment to happen unto the workers of
Iniquity. The Jews are very often threatened with fore Sicknesses and wonderful
Plagues, if they did not hearken unto the divine Law. That a wicked Life
procures a short one, we find plainly exemplified in most of the Bad Kings of
Judah and Israel, as A^ijam, Athaliah, Ahaziah, Nadab, Elah, Omri, and many
others; who reigned but two, three or four years apiece; and the reasons are
sometimes recorded, that it was for their sins which they sinned, they shortened
their Lives with their Kingdoms; in them sin and a sudden death reigned
together. When men's Lusts have conceived, they bring forth Sin, and Sin when it
is finished, brings forth Death. Pharaoh's bloody Persecution drowned him in
the Red Sea. Ahab's cruelty proved fatal to his own Life. The Samaritan Lords
infidelity pressed his Soul out of his Body. Hananiah's false Prophecy did but
predict his own death. Ahaziah's evil Consultation with the God of Ekron, to
know whether he should recover of his Sickness, made his Disease prove
incurable. The calumniating rage of the Children against the good old Prophet,
excited the rage of Bears to devour their Bodies. Herod's vainglorious
Ostentation brought such a Disease upon his Body, whereof he had no reason to
boast. Saphira's Perjury summoned the feet of those who had carried her Husband
to his Grave, to carry her unto the same place. Benhadad's Curiosity proved the
fatal Messenger of his death, the Prophet returning Answer that he might
recover, but should surely dye. Jeroboam's Idolatry in praying unto false gods,
provoked the true God to stop his breath. Readiness disobedience unto the King of
Kings, brought the King of terrors. Belshazzer for his riotous Revelling, by a
Handwriting on the Wall had the end of his Life and Kingdom denounced against
him. Nadab and Abihu offering strange Fire, had a stranger fire sent to devour
them. The Pride of the Daughters of Sion changed their sweet Smells into a
Stink, and their well-set Hair into Baldness. The Candle of the Wicked is often
put out, and the Number of his Months cut off in the Middle. But, Sir, that no
Cloud may have power to discompose the Serenity of your days, but that you may
enjoy a Spring of Happiness in the Winter of Age, and may want nothing but Want
it self, shall never be left out of the Prayers and Wishes of

Your true Friend, J. M.

LETTER VI.
SIR,
I Received your dated the sixth instant, wherein you seem to wonder, that the
Cause of your disease is not long since removed, and you restored unto a state
of health. I beseech you give me leave to deal plainly, and to tell you that
there are Moral as well as Natural Causes of diseases; and unless both be
removed, Remedies very often prove ineffectual: And the sincere belief of this
conduceh very much toward the success of Medicines. Many of the Church of
Corinth were sick and weak, and lost their Lives, for their unworthy reception
of the Holy Supper. If men contemn the Sacred Body of the Son of God, how can
they expect the Almighty goodness should take care of their bodies? and if they
neglect to commemorate his Death, they have little reason to expect he should
regard their Lives, although precious in his sight is the Death of his Saints.
Miriam's Sedition raised a tumultous disturbance in the harmony of her health:
The dissimulation of Gehaza's Tongue procured the Leprosy upon his Skin:
Uzziah's invadeing the Priests office, and Burning Incense, caused the divine
displeasure to smoke against him. Abimelech was restored to his health, when he
restored Abraham's Wife, but not before: When our blessed Savior cured the man
sick of a Palsy, he forgave him his sins, to show him they were the cause of
his sickness. We may observe in our Saviors days, that Infidelity did as it
were tie up the hands of Omnipotence, and set bounds to the operation of his
mighty Works on men's bodies. St. Anselm observes, that the reason why diseases
did so much abound in his time, was, because the holy Eucharist was
irreverently received at Easter. Jezabel for her Impenitence is threatened to be
cast into a bed, and her Children to be killed with Death: Good men may dye,
but they cannot be killed with Death: The Prophets are frequently Menaced with
Death and Sickness, that shall presume to speak without a Mission from Heaven.
In vain are external Remedies applied, when the Cause is internal: The Fable of
the Kite when sick, imploring help and recovery, but being denied by reason of
her rapine and violence; it affords an excellent Moral. The sickness of the
Body is sometimes designed to promote the Health of the Soul; and the Leprosy
on Naamans Flesh may conduce toward the whitening of his Mind: They are sent
as trials of Grace, and are Declarative of Divine mercy. When the Question was
asked our Savior, Who sinned, this Man or his Parents, that be was born Blind?
Our Lord Answered, Neither this Man nor his Parents; but it was for the
Declaration of Divine Mercy, that the work of God might be made manifest in his
wonderful Cure and Recovery: Also the sickness of Lazarus was designed for the
Glory of God, and Honor of our Savior, that he might have an opportunity to
manifest his Divine Power. Hyppocrates advises Physicians, to search if there
be not something Divine in the Causes of Diseases. The Living man seldom
complains without giving his maker a cause to inflict punishment; for the
righteous Judge does not afflict willingly nor grieve the Children of Men:
There is some Babilonish Garment has infected the Body with Leprosy, or some
spiritual disease in the mind, that has procured the thorn in the flesh, when
the Rod of God utters it is voice, and men are fed with the Bread of Affliction
and with the Water of Adversity, in order to cure the tympany of Pride, the
Feavour of Passion, the Dropsy of Covetousness. The plague in the Body is
sometimes sent to cure the Plague in the Heart: Sin is that root of bitterness
from whence all our troubles in the flesh spring up. Men are like Baalam, when
any thing pains or hurts their Bodies, are apt to Blame and strike the External
Instrument, but never mind the Angel that stands in the way with a drawn Sword,
and caused that instrument to hurt. There are many happy intentions Divine
goodness aims at in laying diseases on men's bodies: Sometimes the sacrificing
Knife is laid upon the neck of an Isaac, to try whether the indulgent Parent
will prefer the life of his natural Son before the Will of his heavenly Father.
When men come to perceive that there is no soundness in their flesh, nor rest
in their bones, because of their transgressions, and that it was their own
wickedness that corrected them, and procured the Plagues, the Consumptions, the
Inflammations and extreme burnings, that attended as Pages upon their pride,
wantonness, intemperance and carnality; and this produces a strict commune
with their hearts upon their sick beds, so that they make a Diligent search
into the causes of their Distempers; then they find a rebuke given unto the
disease. Sir, I pray excuse this great freedom, from one who I hope shall not
stand in need of many words to persuade you, that he is

Your inviolably affectionate Friend, J. M.

LETTER VII.
SIR,
AMongst the many things which conduce toward the rendering the use of Remedies
effectual, I think nothing can contribute more than our endeavor to use those
Means which may be influential toward the procuring the divine Blessing: And
amongst many others, I judge these that follow are very considerable: To begin
with a serious Repentance for our former Miscarriages, which often proves very
successeful toward Health and Recovery. The Israelites Repentance proved a
Sovereign Plaster against the Stings of the fiery Serpents: And King David's
Remorse prevailed with the destroying Angel to sheathe his Sword, after the
slaughter of Seventy thousand People. Rehoboams Repentance at the preaching of
Shemaiah, prevented the destruction of himself and his Princes. When men's flesh
is consumed, and they are afflicted with strong pains upon their Beds, then the
Almighty looks upon Men, to see if any say they have sinned and perverted that
which is right, to deliver them from going down to the pit, that their Lives
may see the light. When the Divine hand binds men with Fetters, and holds them
in the Cords of Affliction, then he shows them their work and their
transgression, that they have exceeded: Then he opens their Ears to Discipline,
and commands that they return from Iniquity; If they obey and serve him, they
shall spend their Days in Prosperity, and their Years in Pleasure: But if they
obey not, they shall Dye in their Youth, for God preserves not the Life of the
wicked, as Elihu tells Job: The sick Bed is the attiring room of the Grave, in
which Men should be preparing themselves for the Solemnities of their Funerals:
by lingering Distempers men are gradually putting off their Vail of Flesh, to
be Clothed upon with their house which is from Heaven. When Sickness has done
its Errand, and accomplished the end for which it was sent, then it receives a
Commission to depart; its that which leads Men by the Hand unto their long
homes, and gives them a Prospect of that House appointed for all Living:
Diseases are sent to unravel humane Nature, but when the inward Man is renewed
by the Decays of the outward, and men hold fast their Integrity,
notwithstanding the Almighty touches their Bone and their Flesh, and bodily
Pain give a prospect of endless Pleasure, then the Disease many times takes its
leave. When Sickness makes Men sensible of the Vanity of Beauty and Strength,
which a blast of Wind, or a lump of Phlegm may take from them, when it makes
Men listen unto the Striking of the Clock of Time with greater Attention, and
excites their endeavors to render Death a stingless Serpent, then the great
part of the Cure is performed: when Men are as 'twere knocking at the gates of
the Grave by Tortures and Agonies of Body, and the blow of Gods heavy Hand
presses Men sore, so that a Man may read the Sentence of some Men's Deaths
written in their Foreheads, in the lines of a lingering Disease, the difficult
motion of their Lungs to draw in Air, being like a Passing Bell always
sounding in their Ears, yet upon their sincere Repentance many times comes a
Reprieve. When the Arrows of the Almighty, viz. Diseases, fly thick in the
world, and are shot sometimes into Men's Lungs, and sometimes into their Joints
and Hearts, and give denomination unto various Diseases; there they will stick
until pulled out by an Omnipotent Hand, a firm belief of whose Divine Power,
does mightily conduce toward the procuring the Blessing of Heaven with the use
of Remedies. The Power of our Blessed Lord is the same now in Heaven as when on
Earth, his Hand from Heaven can reach all our Maladies, and cure, like the
Weapon Salve, at a distance; if Men did but act a vigorous Faith and a holy
Confidence in the Divine Providence, and as it were touch the Hem of their
Saviors Garment, they would quickly find a healing Virtue go forth toward
their Cure. When Men are disquieted by Pains, and cast down by Sickness, their
only way to Recovery, is to hope in him who is the Health of their Countenance,
and in quietness and confidence they will find Strength. To humble our selves
under the mighty Hand of God, is the way to be exalted to Health in his due
time. Acts of Faith are engaging, and the way to obtain the Divine Power, is to
glorify it in our dependence. When Miracles were in their full force, the
effect is always ascribed unto Faith; our Savior told the Woman her Faith had
made her whole. Again, humbly to implore the help of that great Physician who
was Typified by the Brazen Serpent, would be a very effectual means to be cured
both of the Sting and Pain of Sickness: It well becomes the most holy Soul
under Distempers, to abound with an O Spare me, that I may recover Strength.
When Men are like Moses, commanded to go up into a Mount, as it were, of a
Sickbed, and Dye there, the same Hand that Wounded must make whole: many lose
their Lives for want of asking it at his Hands, who grants it if Invited to our
Bed-sides by fervent Prayers, joined with Faith and Patience. When the only
wise God resolves to make Men sick with smiting them, they ought to beware of
Murmuring and Impatience, which does exasperate all Calamities; it being far
more advantageous toward recovery, patiently to hope and quietly to wait for
the Salvation of God; for they that wait upon the Lord have a Promise they
shall renew their Strength, and be saved with a temporal as well as a spiritual
Salvation, if they continue in Faith and Patience with Sobriety. The Poets have
an excellent Fiction, that the Image of the Goddess Augerine was with a Muffler
at her Mouth, placed at the Temple of Volupia; signifying that Pleasure should
be their Portion who bear Sicknesses with Patience, Silence and Submission.

Good Men never question the Divine Favor so much at any time as under
sickness; because the Body discomposeth the Mind, and hinders the free exercise
of spiritual Reason: besides, they have not such express comfort from their
Saviors Sufferings; for we never read he was ever Sick, yet he had Passions
equivalent to Sickness, as Hunger, Thirst, Weariness, which afflicted his Body
with Pain, and therefore can be touched with the feeling of our Infirmities: The
best way to obtain Cure, is by the Power of a Divine Faith to shake off
Diseases as St. Paul did the Viper from his Hand. And Sir, that the great
Physician may make your Soul like his Body in the Gospel, every whit whole,
shall be the Desire of

Your true Friend and faithful Servant, J. M.

LETTER VIII.
SIR,
I Received yours dated the Second of this Month, wherein you acknowledge your
self a Convert unto the several Arguments of Discourse which have formerly
passed between us; but you seem very much to doubt whether humane Prudence,
Care and Art can any way contribute unto long Life: And that they may be very
subservient thereunto, there is nothing more plain and evident. Certainly King
David's departing from Keylak diverted Saul's Rage, and preserved his own Life
for that time: And our blessed Saviors own practice in preserving himself
until the time he knew that his hour was come, is recorded for our Imitation.
St. Paul's Mariners saved their Lives by abiding in the Ship, who otherwise in
all probability might have been Drowned: The Wisdom of Joseph and Mary in
observing the Angels advice, and flying into Egypt with the blessed Babe, in
all humane probability it prevented his Death at Bethlehem. The Centurion
Importuned our Savior to cure his Servant, which he would never have done, if
it had not conduced toward the prolongation of his Life. 'Twas not without
cause that Naomi was foretold Obed should be a restorer of her Age. As fire
dies for want of air, and is extinguished when the flame is suffocated; so does
our vital flame: as our Spirits are repaired by Air, so are our sanguine
Humors by Aliments. Much may be done by Art for the retarding the course of
Nature, as may be seen in many Insects and Animals, and in Men restored from
Consumptive pineing Sicknesses, their flesh becoming like that of Children, as
in Naamans Case: The efficacy of Remedies with some is so great, that their
Youth is as 'twere renewed like the Eagle, their natural strength not abating
at a great Age: Moreover, it does not seem probable that means should be used
with good success to answer all other intentions in Nature, and be used in vain
in attaining that which is the most desirable thing in Nature, and which
renders a Man capable of perfection in all Arts and Sciences, viz. Health. And
yet as none can speak of Death by experience, because they who speak of it have
not felt it, and they who have felt it cannot speak of it; the Case is much the
same concerning Life: For unless a Man live unto extreme old Age, he will not
believe his Life has been prolonged, but rather that his hour was not yet
come: but yet it is not inconsistent with reason to say, that he who would
Infallibly have Dyed of a Gangreen in his Leg, has had his Life prolonged,
when his Leg was Cured; or to say, that a Consumptive Body has been saved from
Death, when restored to a healthful State by a Medicinal Diet, which has added
Oil to the Lamp of Life. The Nectar and Ambrosia of the Poets, which kept their
gods from growing old, seems to be an Emblem of the Tree of Life, which was to
have been a Restorer of Nature, as well as a Symbal of future things. Suppose
we with Pithagoras, that Life is a strait line, and that the accidents which
disturb it, and at length bring Death, constitute another Line; and as these
two lines incline less or more one toward another, Death approaches sooner or
later, and consequently Life is longer or shorter; yet may we not suppose that
Divine Providence and humane Prudence may probably conduce toward the
retarding the Neighborhood of those lines? Or suppose with the Aristotelians,
that Life consists in the union of Heat and Moisture, and Death approaches by
the Predominance of the contrary Qualities, viz. Cold and Dryness; why may not
such means as preserves the former, and keeps back the latter, have a natural
tendency to prolong Life? Or suppose with the Chemists, that Life consists in a
volatile Armoniack Salt, why may we not suppose that Art improved, may compose
such fixed Alkali, as may stop the wingy motions of the former Volatility?

The pleasing gratifications of Sense walk Hand in Hand with Death, and
pursues Mortals as the Waves of the universal Deluge did the Posterity of
Cain; and though they went from one story to another, higher and higher, yet at
last they were overflowed. Though Temperance does not always prove an Antidote
against Sickness, yet it is a likely means. Sir, I pray distribute my Service
where you think it is due, for it is time to come to a full point, and to tell
you that in Truth I am

Yours in all that Power and Will can manifest, J. M.

LETTER IX.
SIR,
I Received yours dated the 11th instant, wherein you give me an account of the
great Sickness and Mortality of your Town and Country, now Languishing under
this Epidemick Fever, which indeed rages in the City also, and carries
hundreds, if not thousands unto their long Homes. You may easily believe that
there are greater Languors, Sicknesses, Weaknesses and decays of Nature now
than in former Ages; (though thanks be to God, Pestilences have not been very
fatal of late years) and we observe from our weekly Bills of Mortality, that
the numbers of the deceased are greatly augmented; for in the year 1604. there
dyed 4323, and 895 of the Plague: but in the year 1659. there dyed 14720, and
36 of the Plague; and yet we observe near the same number of persons Born and
Christened both years; so that the Disproportion is near nine Thousand in a year
in about sixty years distance. We may observe in the space of sixty years, so
small a spot of ground as a Churchyard swallows up a whole Parish. I knew an
old Sexton in London, who told me he lived to Bury his Parish almost three
times over. As one Generation comes on the Stage, another goes off: And very
evident it is, that more dye now in a state of Childhood than in former Ages.
We lick new bodies off our Trenchers once in seven years; and the very fear of
a Clymacterical Year has Killed some, who have not understood how groundless
such a fear is. In the days of Ancient times it was a strange thing to hear of
the death of a young Child, according unto the ordinary course of Nature. Some
of the Jewish Doctors tell us, that there was not a Son dyed of a natural death
before his Father for near three thousand years after the Creation; but the
course of Nature was observed, and he that was born first, dyed first; until
Terah's time, who was the first that taught the People to make Images of Clay,
and to corrupt Divine Worship with Idolatry; and as a punishment of his Sin,
his son Haran was snatched away before him; and Moses observes, that Haran dyed
before his Father Terah, in the Land of his Nativity: And we find it was looked
upon as a great Judgment, that the Male Heir of Eli's Family as soon as born
dyed for many Generations; so that an Old man could not be seen of his
Posterity. And we find the good Woman expostulating passionately with the
Prophet, when she says, Art thou come to call my Sins to remembrance, and to
slay my Son? Every Age has its peculiar diseases: In the state of Infancy Life
is like a Spark in a pile of Wood; the Candle is so newly lighted, that every
breath of Air, or the least shaking puts it out, and it dies. Childhood is so
active and unwary, so subject to run into dangers, that unless a Messenger be
sent from Heaven, to stand Sentinel and watch its playing, sleeping, eating and
drinking, it is exposed to death every minute. The Middle age is apter to lend
its helping hand to the use of Remedies, but when we consider how many new
distempers invade us, and how many old ones intermingled with collateral
complications, and many Diseases are not fully understood as in time they may
be; and many Symptoms are often alike, and sometimes there are none at all, as
in several Impostumes; and some Diseases are lodged in remote parts of the
Body, that oftentimes no application can be made, or at least the effects of
Medicines cannot reach them until after two or three Alterations and
Concoctions, which change the Species of Medicines: And sometimes new Methods
come upon the Stage, and alter old Foundations. Old Age has Diseases incurable
by nature. The House must fall when the Foundation is decayed. Old men in
Scripture account are said to be as good as dead, as Abraham was. In some
Diseases the Patient seems Bailable, yet a distemper lies in ambush, and sets
upon him with full strength, when the bitterness of death seemed to be past:
and some men live and dye like Fools, pour in Drink and let out Life, and so by
inconsideration pull the Monumental Stone upon their own heads. Men are like
Water, if the Sluices be opened it runs away apace, if the Current be stopped it
swells and grows troublesome, and spills over; if it stands still, then it
stinks and putrifies. Some Sicknesses walk in darkness, and destroying Angels
are wrapped up in the Curtains of Immateriality, whom we cannot see but feel: in
some Chronick distempers men walk about, and hear Passing-bells ring for
stronger men. There is no age of Man but has some Posterns and Out-lets to
death, out of which thousands pass into the Land of Forgetfulness: Every breath
of wind troubles our Faces, and our little Cares wrinkle our Foreheads, and
trifling accidents dig our Graves. In Feavors men ride post to the Chambers of
death, they prove a Beesome of Destruction to three parts of Adam's race. If
all the ages of all Mankind were put together, it would scarce make One and
twenty to each single person. It Is more natural for Youth to dye than the Aged,
it being more common, having more natural causes, as being more subject to
acute Diseases, which surprise men suddenly and undiscernably; but to dye of
Age, is a very rare Thing; old Age is a young Death. But to speak strictly, all
men dye before they come to be of age, every man being within an inch of Death.
Like a Mariner at Sea, we carry our Lives in our hands. Many a man in a state
of health has a secret Enemy lying hid, ready to surprise: Either Gods Archers
cleave our Reins in sunder with the Stone or Strangury, or our feet are set in
the Stocks by the Gout; or our Breath is corrupt by the Ptysick, or our Gaul is
poured on the ground by the Dissentery, or our Skin cleaves to our Bones by a
Hectic. The Clock has struch Twelve this night, therefore take it not ill
that I abruptly style my self

Yours whilst I am J. M.

LETTER X.
SIR,
I Received yours Dated the 7th instant, wherein you speak very slightly of old
Age, as if you did not look upon it as so great a blessing; and also seem to
Question whether the Patriarchs lived so long as some imagine. To which I
answer, you are certainly under a great mistake: for nothing is more certain
than that the Antediluvian Patriarchs were very long lived; and particularly
Father Adam, who may well be accounted above a thousand years old, if we
compute that time whch he might have lived had he been born as Methusalem was;
we may judge him at his Creation as Perfect as one of the Ancients at two
hundred: They outlived all their titles of Consanguinity, and yet none of them
lived a complete Thousand years; which possibly might be to accomplish the
threatening unto Adam, That the day he eat the forbidden Fruit he should Dye;
computing a day for a thousand years: But a more probable reason may be, to
Demonstrate to Man the Vanity of Life, when those who lived longest, could not
arrive to that Period, which compared to Gods Eternity, is but a day. As there
are at this day some who exceed a hundred, so there are a hundred times as many
who do not arrive at that Period. Had men in all Ages and Places arrived at the
age of the Patriarchs, the Earth by this time had not been able to sustain the
Inhabitants with Food. The Egyptians calculated the bounds of men's days from
the weight of their Hearts; and judged a hundred years the utmost period,
taking their estimate from the weight of their Hearts, which they say
increases two Drachms every year under fifty, and then decreaseth two Drachms
until a hundred: But this opinion seems questionable. The reason given by the
Bishops of Rome for Contracting the year of Jubilee from one hundred to fifty,
and from fifty to five and twenty, is grounded upon the Supposition that the
age of man is contracted. To what causes to consign the long Lives of the
Ancients, it need not be Difficult, if we consider how necessary it was so to
be, for the propagation of Mankind, and peopling the World with Inhabitants;
and also for the learning Arts and Sciences, wherein it was requisite Men
should have the experience of former Ages: For as many Sensations breed an
Experiment, so many Experiments breed a Science. The several motions of the
Heavenly Bodies could not be known, without a long time to observe their
Motions and Revolutions. It was an old complaint, that Art was long, and Life
was short, and therefore Almighty God proportioned men's lives accordingly. We
now account him wondrous Old who lives fourscore Summers, to see the
Resurrection of the Year fourscore times. The length of men's age since Moses
dwelt amongst us, seems considerably abbreviated, he computing Threescore and
ten the ordinary period unto which men generally arrived in those times:
Whereas now a third part of all that are born in populous Cities dye under
seven years old; and the greatest part of those that are alive, are between
fifteen and five and thirty. Few Princes, either Jewish, German, Greek or
Roman, arrived at Fourscore. Queen Elizabeth outlived all her Predecessors
since the Conquest: And I think his Majesty our present Sovereign (whom God
grant long to live) is the eldest Crowned Head in Christendom. And it is to me
observable, that during the standing of the first Temple there were but
eighteen Highpriests, but three hundred while the second stood; and but ten
years difference between the standing of the former and the latter. Which
plainly demonstrates, that men's Lives have been cut and pared away in several
Ages. The Fathers in the primitive times had great Advantages for the
Prolongation of their Lives, as they had conveyed to them the Nature of
Life-preserving Remedies from Adam, who gave Names to all Creatures according
to their particular Qualities: And wonderful was their skill in all the Secrets
of Nature. Also the Air in the first Ages of the World might be more pure, and
not corrupted with terrene Exhalations, as it was after the Flood had drencht
it; and for ought we know, its Fruits might be more Nutritive. Moreover, Adam
was the immediate Work of God, and being come as it were newly from the Shop of
his Creator, he could not be like a House built of rotten Timber, but of a far
stronger Constitution than this weak Age affords: Their Bodies were not wasted
with fuccession of Sicknesses, nor weakened with hereditary Diseases, but were
armed to resist those few things contrary to their healths. The seminalities of
Diseases were not so pregnantly conveyed from Parent to Child, their Infants
were not so tenderly brought up; wastfull Riot was a stranger to them, and
variety of Meats was to them unknown: their Nature was not oppressed with
burdens, and forced to stagger with her load. We cannot with any show of
Reason pretend to mistake in the manner of computing the years of the
Patriarchs; for if you suppose them to be only Lunar years, and that twelve of
theirs made but one of ours, then gross absurdities must follow from thence; as
that they were Prolifique at seven years of age, Enoch being no more when he
begat Methusalem: At that rate the Date of their Lives must be reckoned shorter
than many of ours. Moreover, the Scripture says, that Abraham dyed in a good
Old Age, and full of Days, being one hundred seventy and five years old; which
Number, according to that computation was but seventeen years and a half; a
very ridiculous old Age. But it is very manifest that Moses's computation of
the year was the same with ours; for mention is made of the first, second and
seventh Month, and mention is also made of the seventeenth day of the Month. We
find but one Woman's Age recorded in Scripture, and that is Sarah: Some give
this reason, Because a Woman first occasioned the Shortning the Lives of men,
by listening to the Serpent. Old Age is doubtless a very great Blessing, being
subservient to great and noble ends, namely, our better Preparation for a
blessed Eternity: And there are some Privileges that holy Souls are capable of
in this World, which they cannot partake of in the Regions of immortal Bliss,
and they are the Opportunities of Doing good to others, and preparing them for
the Eternal Mansions, and thereby Brightning their own Diadems, and making
their weight of Glory the Heavier by turning many to Righteousness. Which that
you may do, is the Wish of

Your Cordial Friend, J. M.

LETTER XI.
SIR,
I Received yours dated the Second Instant, wherein you seem to question
whether the Practice of Religion on have any tendency toward Health and long
life; because sometimes good Men Dye sudden and Immature Deaths: But nothing
is more plain and evident, than that the Carcasses of good Israelites may fall
in the Wilderness of this World, whose Souls may be entertained in the Heavenly
Canaan. A good Prophet, for some single Act of Disobedience, may be made a Prey
to a devouring Lion: If an Eli neglect to Chasten his Rebellious Children, he
may be permitted to break his Neck: When Uzzth shall touch the Ark without a
Commission, his Death shall immediately succeed his Rashness: When a Moses
shall neglect to Circumcize his Child, an Angel shall threaten his Life with a
drawn Sword: When a Jonas shall go contrary to a Divine Command, he shall be in
danger of being swallowed up by Death, as well as by a Whale. Many times
Judgment begins at the House of God, and he makes good Men the examples of his
Severity in this Life: It Is thought that King David's numbering the People, was
the last Act he did, before he took his Bed. Evil Angels sometimes contend with
good ones, about the Bodies of good Men: Sampson lost his natural Strength by
his Disobedience and violation of his Vow, rather than by the mere Cutting off
his Hair, it being rather a Moral than a Natural Cause of his Weakness: The
Righteous may sometimes be taken away from the evil to come, as the good
Patriarchs were before the Flood; and as Abijah was laid to sleep before the
Calamity of his Fathers House: And sometimes the Child may derive those
Distempered Humors from the Parent, which may prove the occasion of its Death.
Though God has Promised long Life to them that Obey, yet he has never
Promised that he would not sometimes as it were borrow Men's natural Lives, and
make a happy exchange, making good his Promise, and answering other ends of
his Providence, by recompencing the loss of a Temporal with the grant of
Eternal Life. On the conrrary, because sometimes wicked Men live long, to infer
Piety has no Influence on Men's Health and Longaevity, is as great a Mistake;
for a long and a wicked Life may be twisted together for Reasons best known to
Omnipotence* as the Posterity of Cain may be longer Lived than any of the
Patriarchs, being reserved to be punished in the general Deluge; and Manasseh
Reigned longer than any of the Kings of Judah. But no more of this at present,
only I beseech you take me as I am, and ever must be

Your real Friend and Servant, J. M.

LETTER XII.
SIR,
I Received Yours, wherein you Write very contemptuously of the Art of Physic,
as if the use of Medicine were not an Ordinance of God, and men were not
obliged in Conscience to the application of Remedies: But with your leave,
nothing is more plain and demonstrable, than that Physic is a Divine
Institution. He who breathed into man the breath of Life, and by an Eternal Law
has commanded him not to Kill, but commanded him to Pray for his daily Bread,
with all the necessary supports of this Life, has thereby laid an Obligation
upon him, to use all means to preserve both his own and others Lives: Many of
the Inspired Penmen were well Skilled in Medicine, particularly St. Luke, who
was the Evangelical Amanuensis, and Wrote a History of our Blessed Saviors
Passion and Life, he was called the beloved Physician: and we find the great
Doctor of the Gentiles prescribe Wine as a chearing Cordial unto his Timothy,
under his frequent Infirmities for his Healths sake: nay, the Blessed God is
pleased to Style himself the Lord, the Physician; and the Holy Jesus derives
his Name from his healing Nature, and tells us, though the Whole need no
Physician, yet the Sick do: and the Holy Ghost assures us by the Psalmists
Pencil, that God has given Medicines to heal Men's Sicknesses. Every man is
bound by the Law of God and Nature to endeavor to keep his clayey Tenement in
reparation, and if he neglect it and let it run to ruin, he may be in danger
of being Indicted at the Bar of Heaven for Dilapidations. The holy Prophet
ressecting upon the deplorable Condition of the Church, with The whole Head
sick and the whole Heart faint, full of Wounds, Bruises and Putrefactions,
being not Bound up nor mollified with Ointments; plainly intimating, how
necessary he thought the natural as well as the spiritual Application of fit
Remedies; lamening there was no Balm in Gilead, nor any Physician there.
Jothams Parable may instruct the World, that not only the Olive, the Fig Tree
and the Vine are useful to cheer the Heart of God and man, but also the
Bramble has a healing Virtue in some Distempers. Since the appearance of the
second Adam, we may eat of every Tree in the Garden, asking no Question for
Conscience sake, for the Earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof: The
wonderful work of Providence is very apparent in preserving the Seminal Virtue
of Plants in the Deluge, when we read not of any Seed secured in the Ark; the
Innocent Dove showing a Leaf to the new World, Preached a Sermon of Divine
goodness. The Utility of Physical Remedies, is not only demonstrated by
Christians, but also by Jews and Pagans: In the Temple of Aesculapius there was
a Fountain of Oil, with a Golden Arch, a perfect Symbol of Physic, denoting
its usefulness and Honor. The design of Medicine is not to prevent Death, but
to render Life comfortable, and to preserve Natures Lamp burning, until there is
no more Oil to feed it. The Son of Syrack Counsels men to Honor the Physician
with the Honor due unto him; telling us, that God had created him, and has
given Men Skill that he might be Honored in his mavelous works, with the
Medicines that he has Created out of the Earth, to heal Men and take away
their pains. Apollo and Aesculapius amongst the Greeks were adored as gods for
the excellency of their Invention in Physic; and the knotty Staff, the
Serpent, the Pineapple, the Dragon, the Dog, and the Cock, with which the
pourtraicture of Aesculapius was Beautified, were very significant Symbols.
Medicine has by barbarous Nations been accounted Sacred: The Priests of
Memphis were bound to Write in the Temple of Isis such Remedies as were found
effectual: the same practice the Greeks practiced at the Temple of Apollo;
Authorizing Medicine by Religion, and Converting Remedies into Oracles: The
Jews tell us, that at the Temple of Solomon, there hung a long Catalogue of the
Virtues of all Plants, collected by Solomon himself; so that if any were
Smitten with any Disease, he might go and gather his Remedy: And the Holy
Prophets in their Descriptions of the Holy Land, represent the excellency
thereof from its abounding with Trees, whose Leaves are good for Medicine. St.
James places our Visiting the Sick, amongst the parts of that pure Religion
which is undefiled before God; and our blessed Savior numbers this Christian
Duty amongst those good works, according unto which we shall receive our final
Sentence; when he says, I was sick and ye Visited me: As the Jews by their
particular Laws were constrained to be at the Charge of Cure unto any whom they
had hurt or Injured in their Health, much more ought men to be concerned for
their own Health and Recovery when Sick and Weak. King Asa was not reprehended
for advising with, but for trusting to the Physicians, making them his end,
when they were only the means; which was Recorded to Instruct us, that we
should use means as if there were no Providence, and yet trust Providence as if
there were no Means. When the Mariners in the Ship in which St. Paul Sailed,
were in danger of Drowning, he told them they could not be safe unless they did
abide in the Ship, notwithstanding the Safety of their Lives was promised him.
When the Lives of the Jews were in danger, Queen Esther not only appointed a
Fast to Implore the Protection of Heaven, but also prepared a Feast, the better
to prevail with the King. The Prophet David not only Trusted in the Name of the
Lord, when he went against Goliath, but also used his Stone and Sling: So Jacob
sent a Present to pacify the Anger of his Brother, as well as made
Supplication to the great Peacemaker. The Bodies of good Men, are the Temples
of the Holy Ghost, and neglecting the same, is reputed a part of Will Worship,
and strictly prohibited. Baalam's Ass may Instruct the World that a merciful
Man ought to be merciful to his Beast; how much rather ought he like the
Shunamite Woman, take a Journey if the Case require it, for the recovery of a
Child from the Jaws of Death? The Life is more worth than Meat, and the Body
than Raiment. The Jews thought their Lives more worth than their Liberty, for
they told the King, If they had been Sold for Bondmen, they had held their
Peace. Life is the form of Gods own Oath. Those Bodies which are the Members of
Christ, ought to have Care and Respect used toward them, that they may be fit
for the Service of the Soul. That which was sick was not to be Offered in
Sacrifice under the Law, and they that are sick, are not fit to Offer
Sacrifices: The Father of Lies never spoke a greater Truth, than when he said,
Skin for Skin, and all that a Man has, will he give for his Life. It Is a grand
Impiety, under a pretense of Gods Power, to be Disobedient to his Will, in
neglecting the means of Health; that is to try what he can do, and yet to
neglect what he Commands, in not administering those things which are requisite
and necessary for the Body. King Solomon, who had a Patent granted him from the
King of Heaven, to receive the greatest measure of Wisdom of any Man before or
after him, made it his business to search into the Nature of Vegetables, from
the tallest Cedar, unto the Hyssop that grows out of the Wall; and though his
Gold was so plentiful as to pave his Palace, and he had all the Delights of the
Sons of Men, yet he Condescended unto the Study and Improvement of Physic, and
tells us, That there is a time to heal; every Herb bearing Seed, being
prescribed for Food or Physic by our great Creator. It Is not improbable but
that the Sons of the Prophets had a Physical Intention in gathering the Herbs
for their Pottage, although they were mistaken in the particular Plant, and
gathered a deadly, instead of a wholesome one: Ahab understood the usefulness of
a Garden of Herbs, when he coveted Naboth's Vineyard to Convert it into the
same. The good Will of him that dwelt in the Bush, is further declared unto
Mankind by the Virtue that he has planted in the Leaves, and Fruit that grow
thereon, being useful for the healing of the Nations in a Natural as well as
in a Mystical Sense. Those persons who cut up Mallows by the Roots in Holy
Job's time, could not but understand their Physical Virtue: A Dinner of Herbs
with Evangelical Charity, is preferred by Solomon, before a Costly Banquet; and
those Medicinal Herbs of Mint, Annise and Cummin, were so much in use amongst
the Jews, that they laid Tithes and Customary Impositions upon them: It Is very
probable that the bitter Herbs appointed to be eaten with the Paschal Lamb,
were not only Typical but Medicinal. When the Church would make a metaphorical
Description of the External and Internal Quallifications of her Beloved, she
compares him to those things which are most excellent and useful, as Myrrh,
Aloes, Cassia, and all the Chief Spices. Joseph used Physicians of old, and the
Art of the Apothecary was Employed, not only to prepare Holy Ointments for the
Consecration of Kings and Priests, but also to compound Medicines for the
Restoration of Inferior Persons. Sir, I will Discourse no longer upon this
Argument, only conclude with good Wishes, that your Sorrows may be short, and
your Joys long, and all your Desires may end according to your own Heart.

I am Yours, J. M.

LETTER XIII.
SIR,
I Received your last, which gave me an ample account of the great satisfaction
you gained by my late Letter, proving the Divine Original of Physical Remedies:
But you seem to question whether any Arguments may be brought from Scripture to
prove, That we are not only obliged to the use of means in general, but also to
the use of such as are most rational, and such as have the fairest prospect of
probability. To me it seems very apparent, that we are to use such as are most
agreeable to Reason and Experience: When the extraordinary means of
understanding Tongues ceased, men made use of rational and ordinary means, by
the study of Arts and Sciences: So the Jews in the Wilderness were miraculously
preserved with Quails and Manna, but when they came into Canaan, they were to
plow, and sow, and reap, and eat their Bread by their Toil and Industry. Though
we live not by Bread alone, but by the word of Blessing out of the Mouth of
God, yet that Blessing is promised to Bread, not to Stones; and he that shall
expect to have Stones turned into Bread, does not trust but tempt his Maker; it
being not Faith but Fury, to go down by a Precipice when Stairs are appointed:
And very remarkable it is, that most of the Cures that we find recorded in
Scripture, though they were extraordinary and miraculous, yet usually some
physical Remedies were appointed, which were not disagreeable to Reason and
Experience: to show our Obligation not only to the use of Means, but also to
the use of such as are most proper, and likely to succeed: Indeed our blessed
Savior cured some by his Word alone, and by seeming improbable means, thereby
to discover his extraordinary power, in doing that which no mortal man could do
with the same Materials, viz. Restore Sight to the Blind, who were born so; yet
his stupendous Wisdom was pleased to honor such a Remedy as had been used by
Physicians of that Age, most opthalmick Ointments being composed of Terras:
Moreover, his ordering the Blind man to wash in Siloam, was agreeable enough
with a physical intention. In truth our Lords making use of Clay, might seem an
excellent Expedient to declare to the World his Divine power; that being the
fittest Ingredient to restore a defective part, out of which by the same hand
the whole was at first composed. Moreover, Naamans washing in Jordan was a
natural Remedy, though attended with supernatural success. The Wine and Oil
poured into the wounds of the distressed Stranger by the good Samaritan, were
specifically appropriated, although the success depended upon a supernatural
Influx; and the Plaster of Figs applied unto Hezekiah's Plague Sore, was a
rational Remedy, being proper to mollify hard Tumors in the flesh, and to
ripen Imposthumes. The extraordinary Pool of Bethesda was not without some
natural Virtue, being adjoining unto the Slaughterhouse of the Temple, the
blood of the sacrificed Beasts being mingled with it; and that is by
Naturalists said to be of a Healing nature: Yet this does not exclude the
Necessity of a divine Angelick Influence, to render it efficacious; and perhaps
several kinds of Meats prohibited under the Law, might in a natural way be
prejudicial to the Health of Men's Bodies, and they might be forbidden upon a
Moral as well as upon a Mystical account. There was also a rational Conformity
between the Leprous Contagion and the Law of Cleansing; the Leprosy did
putrify the Skin, opposite to that was Cedar Wood commended by Physicians
against Putrefaction; it was of an ill Scent, contrary to that was the smell of
Hyssop, an excellent Aromatique Plant, yet the Cure was wholly from a Divine
Influence. The Jews observe, that though Leprosy be the Finger of God, yet the
Hand of man must be used in the Cure; and therefore we find that the Leper whom
our Savior healed, was commanded to use the Method prescribed in the Law of
Moses, to be sprinkled and washed. The Aromatique Oil used in extreme Unction
in the Apostolical times, was a natural Remedy, though the Cure was attributed
to the Prayer of Faith. Mary's supposition that the Presence of her Savior
would have kept her Brother from Dying, was not improbable, though she was
under a Mistake with respect to that present Dispensation: Many under
Distempers expect to be raised as Lazarus was, only by the Physician taking
them by the Hand; or as Naaman, who expected the good Prophet to Cure him by
only striking his Hand upon the Wall. But my Dear Friend, Farewell, and Pardon
me I have made no more Scruple of exercising your Patience, and take the humble
Subscription of

Your Constant Friend, J. M.

LETTER XIV.
SIR,
I Received yours of the Fifth Instant, together with the strange Relation of
the Person thought to be afflicted with strange Diseases by the the Power of
the Devil; and for that reason I observe the Cure is Despaired of, but I
suppose without Cause; for should we grant that many Diseases are caused by a
Diabolical Influence, it need not therefore follow that the Cure is impossible:
Indeed it must be acknowledged, that there have been multitudes of Cheats and
Impostures of this kind, but to say they are all Delusions, is very Imprudent:
for sometimes divine Providence, for reasons best known to himself, may permit
evil Angels to afflict the Bodies of men with distempers, vulgarly called Lying
under an evil Tongue, or being Bewicht, as having no dependence upon the Chain
of natural Causes. The Jews were threatened with some Diseases which should not
be Cured by natural means, even wonderful Plagues and of long continuance.
There are in Scripture many instances of Diseases Inflicted by supernatural
Agents, as Angels and Spirits, who disturb the Humors, and raise Storms and
Tempests in Men's Bodies as well as in the Air: Evil Angels were sent to Afflict
the Jews with diverse Calamities; and many thousands in one Night were Slain by
the destroying Sword of an Angel, in a Pestilential Contagion: An evil Angel
visited Saul with Stupendous Melancholy; and Job with painful Boils; and
Bowed a Daughter of Abraham eighteen Years: When an Omnipotent Power gives
leave, the Devil can as easily possess the minds of Men with Distraction, as
the Swine with Rage. The Excommunicate Corinthian being delivered up to Satan,
for the Destruction of the Flesh, in order unto the Salvation of his Spirit,
may as well be understood of his being Afflicted with some corporal Distemper,
by the power of the Prince of Darkness, as be taken in any other Sense: As we
know St. Paul's Thorn in the Flesh, the Messenger of Satan sent to Buffet him,
has by some Learned Men been Interpreted to our purpose: The Lascivious
Persons seeking for Lot's House, to gratify their vile Intentions, were struck
Blind by an Angel, and those Windows were stopped up that let in wanton Glances.
And the several Persons possessed, whom our Blessed Lord delivered from the
power of the Prince of the Air, were miserably Afflicted with Epilepsies,
Lunacies, Convulsions, and other Direful Symptoms and Distractions, which threw
them sometimes into the Fire, and sometimes into the Water. In the Primitive
times, Corporal Inflictions and Subjection to a Satanical Power, was the sad
consequence of Excommunication; proportionable unto the Execrations in the
Jewish Cherem, which we find exemplified in Saul after his defection from God:
And it is observable, that the Essens amongst the Jews, when expelled the
Congregation, dyed of miserable Deaths: And Ecclesiastical Writers tell us,
Heliodorus in his Sacrilegious attempts was Scourged by two Angels in the shape
of young Men, and hardly came off with his Life. The Catechists in the
Primitive times, that prepared Persons for Baptism and Admission into the
Church, was wont to be called the Exorcist, that cast out Satan: for by the
performance of our Baptismal Covenant we renounce the Devil and his Propriety,
and thereby the better secure our Health as well as our Peace. The Jews
observed, that after the destruction of the Sanctuary and Sanhedrim, there
still continued amongst them four kinds of capital Punishments, instead of the
four appointed by the Law of Moses; for he that deserved to be Stoned, either
fell from a House, or was torn by Wild Beasts; he that deserved to be Burnt,
either fell into the Fire, or was stung by a Serpent (therefore called fiery;)
they that deserved to be Killed by the Sword, fell into the Hands of Thieves,
or of the King; they that deserved Suffocation or Hanging, were Drowned in the
Water, or fell into Melancholy, and were strangled thereby, as Judas was. But
Religion very much secures men from the power of the Evil Angels, and from all
other misfortunes. But, Sir, to be sure you shall always be happy, if it lie
in his power to make you so, who is

Your entire Friend, J. M.

LETTER XV.
SIR,
I Received your last Letter with wonder, to find you entertain so strange an
Opinion, as to believe that Diseases are now cured in miraculous and
extraordinary ways, as they were in the Apostolical times, without the use and
application of Rational and experimental Remedies. To dream that Charms,
Amulets, Spells, etc. are of any virtue in curing Diseases, is vain; and that
because St. Paul's Handkerchief, St. Peter's Shadow, and the Hem of our Saviors
Garment, miraculously cured some in the Primitive times, therefore we must use
them now. The reason why those Miraculous ways of healing were used in those
times, was for the Confirmation of the Gospel in its first Plantation: But that
being now done, those ways of Cure are ceased. How can men expect the Divine
Blessing with such means as have no natural virtue, as Words and Characters?
For if one Text of Scripture carried in a man's Sleeve, will cure a Disease,
surely the Bible in a man's Pocket must cure all Diseases. The Divine Oracles
were given to guide our Faith, not to tickle our vain Imaginations. I once knew
a fatal Event attend the use of such an accursed Medicine: A Gentlewoman having
an Ague, a Beggar gave her a Charm to hang about her Neck, bid her not read it,
but when she was cured, burn it: The Minister of the Parish being a sober,
Learned and pious conformable Divine, came casually to visit her; she telling
him the Medicine, and the Cure which had attended it, threw it into the fire in
his presence; but he catching it, read it: The words were, Ague farewell, till
you and I meet in Hell: Upon hearing of which, she fell into her Ague again,
with greater violence than ever, and also into deep Melancholy, which
occasioned her to lay Violent hands on her self. So dangerous it is to leave
the Methods prescribed by Reason and Experience, to consult the Oracles of the
Prince of Darkness. It Is highly unreasonable to give heed to seducing Spirits,
and Doctrines of Devils; enquiring of the god of Ekron, when there is a God in
Israel. Some men's Curiosity in this kind has cost them dear, such practices
being forbidden upon pain of Damnation. What wise and good man would so far
violate his Baptismal Covenant, as to consult with Judicial Astrologers,
Wizards, and such like Cunning persons, who by a Diabolical Confederacy will
undertake to foretell the Events of Diseases, and Periods of Men's days, and a
multitude of other Accidents, known only to Omniscience; who knows the Effect
because he knows the Cause: Suppose it were the Devil in Samuel's Mantle, that
did foretell Saul's death; it does not prove the Certainty of the Devils
prediction, or the fatal Necessity of Readiness Death: It being easy from
probable Conjecture to say what he did, there being all the forerunners of his
approaching ruin visible to the World: For David was anointed King, and Saul
grew worse and worse, the Battle drew near, and what else could be expected but
Destruction? If it should be granted, that the Lying Spirit in the Mouth of a
false Prophet should foretell a Man's Death; it may only proceed from the
observation that he violates some divine Command, and thereby exposes himself
to ruin. Magicians indeed use Charms, and Signs, and Good words, the better to
deceive the ignorant, herein being Gods Ape, that as he has made a Covenant
with good men, and has appointed Signs and Seals, upon the faithful use of
which he is present to perform what he has promised: So the Devil makes a
Covenant with Astrological Wizards, upon which he has given Signs and Tokens,
that if they use the one, he will perform the other. And its an Atheistical
Dream, to imagine that the period of Man's days depends more on the malevolent
influence of a Planet, than upon the Conduct of divine Providence: A Belief
very contrary to the Articles of the Christian Faith, to suppose an
Astrological Necessity imposed upon all sublunary Agents by the influence of
Celestial Bodies, and that the Manner and Moments of men's Deaths, depend upon
these things. Many have descended into the Earth, for fear of using Remedies
upon the ascension of a particular Star in the Heavens. The celestial Dog does
neither Bark nor Bite in our Climate. The heavenly Bodies operate according
unto the variety of the Matter with which they are conversant; as we may
observe in the instance of Twins born under the same Planet; although they have
the same seminal principles, Bed of Nature, and time of Birth, yet they differ
in Sex, Complexion, Life and Death; as in the Example of Esau and Jacob. Can
any man of Reason imagine, that all that are slain in the same Battle, were
born under the same Ascendent? The proper reason why such a Child is strong,
and such a one weak, is rather to be fetched from the Complexion of the Parent
than the influence of the Stars; it is strength is rather to be attributed to
the Mothers Milk, than the Via lactea: And the reason why such a one was shot
to death, was not because his Roroscope was directed to Saturn, but because the
Gun was directed to him. Besides, Education, Custom, Example, alter Nature; and
our second Births divert the mischievous Effects of our first Nativity:
Therefore not to use Remedies except such or such a Sign be searched into, is
great folly, and a Sign men are led more by Indiscretion than prudence, to
regard an Antique picture in the Almanacks, rather than Art and Reason. But
though the World be guilty of many Errors, I shall be guilty of none in
subscribing my self

Your Devoted Servant, J. M.

LETTER XVI.
SIR,
I Received yours, which gave an intimation of your intention to lay aside all
Physicians, because you have been so unhappy as to fall into the hands of
Quacks; whose advice has not only proved unsuccesseful, but dangerous and
almost deadly. Shall the Merchant never venture to Sea, because an unskilful
Pilot once cast away his goods? that were absurd: There is no action of humane
Life that discovers a wise man more, than the choice of an able, learned and
experienced Physician, whose natural abilities are advanced by ingenuous
Education, such being most fit to rectify the Disorders in men's Bodies; who by
their inquiry into Anatomy understand the use of the parts, and taking notice
of the Figures, Springs, and Wheels by which Nature moves, become the better
able to regulate her disorderly motions: Besides, they best understand the
nature of Animals, Minerals and Vegetables, and can the more dexterously apply
fit Remedies according unto the several Indications of Distempers, and
Circumstances of Patients. I pray what reason is there Physicians should be
neglected? Is it because they are not Infallible? if they were, then they might
alter the Statute Laws of Heaven, which were absurd to imagine: As in Religion
the most Sacred Institutions are rendered insignificant unto the Souls of men,
if not rightly administered, even so the most useful Remedies are rendered
useless unto the Healths of men, if not prescribed by prudent Physicians. How
can men expect the Blessing of Heaven, to concur with the advice of ignorant
and unworthy pretenders to Physic? Broken Tradesmen, disbanded Soldiers,
Bankrupt Merchants, and the very scum of the People, whose Receipts prove
equally fatal with the Jaw Bone of an Ass: if one of these confident Fellows
pretend to skill, though never so ignorant, yet some credulous Souls are as
ready to proclaim it, as if they thought some good Angel, like Mahomets Pidgeon
whispered it in their ears; when it proves like Gunpowder, only serves to blow
up men's Health. Can men expect Preservation, when they suffer their brains to
be beaten out with the Bills of Quacks and Mountebanks, in such a Nation as
ours is, where there is such great variety of able and Legal Practicers? It Is a
shame such should be suffered, who can sooner cure all Diseases, than one; and
like the Lion in the Fable, pretend to pull the Thorn out of the Lambs foot,
but in the end devour it* So that for ought I know, it may not be imprudent to
add one Casualty more to our weekly Bills of Mortality, and to say, So many
dyed Martyrs to their Physicians Ignorance. The folly of the World is more apt
to gaze upon a Blazing Commet, that infects the Air, and poisons men with
pestilential vapors, than on the glorious Sun, whose beams yield light and
health to humane Nature. Quacks resemble the Serpent, pretend to give that
which shall be good for Food and Physic, but in the end beguile men of their
health, and a while after the Patient dies the Death. To consult the Ignorant,
is to tempt our Maker; the curing Diseases being like the mending of a Watch,
if not done by a skilful Artist, the rectifying one Spring may disorder the
regular Motion of the whole Engine. Reason prompts men to consult the ablest
Farriers when their Horses are sick, and not take the Hostler, who has the
Confidence to prescribe a Drench. We have many amongst us nicknamed Doctors,
who are as unskilful in Physic as the Athenians were in Religion; dedicating
their Medicines unto an unknown Disease: Men who took their Degrees in a
Drinking-School, or did their Exercise in Fees, affect the Title Doctor, though
they want the Participle Doctus: Having no more Learning than what may serve to
conceal their Ignorance: To run to these men, is as if a man to lance an
Imposthume should run his Body against the point of a Sword in the hands of a
mad man; or as if to cure a Quinsie, a man should desire the help of the common
Executioner. People ought to know that Diseases are cured by Method, as well as
by Medicine, by Rules as well as by Receipts. Multitudes amongst us may be said
to dig their Graves with their thick Skulls, and destroy their Bodies as well
as their Souls by an implicit Faith, in hearkening to such Fellows; if a Cure
succeeds, it is more by accident, than Art, as a blind man hits the mark. It Is
madness to choose Physicians by the Commendations of the Vulgar; they only talk
like an Echo, because they hear a Voice, but know no reason why: and it is as
imprudent to choose Physicians by their Garb, because an Ass may have gilded
Trappings: Many of these men have more skill in mending Garments, than Bodies
that wear them, and yet will pretend to cure all Diseases that ever Sin
intailed on the Race of Adam. Let me advise you, as a prudential Observation,
tending to Health and Long Life, to use the same discretion when your Health is
in danger, as when your Estate is, not to depend on the advice of an Attorney,
but to fee a Counselor: And since you say you are deeply engaged unto me, give
me leave to prescribe the Recompense, which is, that you would believe me to be
what I truly am,

Your constant Friend, J. M.

LETTER XVII.
SIR,
I Received yours Dated the 11th instant, wherein you give me an account of the
rare secret Medicine lately recommended to you, as an infallible cure for your
Distemper; being recommended as a cure for all diseases. Sir, let me tell you,
I have often found those kind of Medicines but mere Cheats, and Springes to
catch Woodcocks; and yet men will not learn Wisdom, until the dust of the
Grave, that Powder of Experience, be cast in their Eyes. He that will venture
his life with the use of such a Medicine, will give the world cause to suspect,
he stands in need of a large dose of Hellebore: Without doubt, there is no
Observation can conduce more toward the rendering Remedies effectual, than to
be well assured that they are safe, known, and experienced Medicines, and
faithfully prepared by the hand of an Artist, whose Profession it is, and
exposed to the view of the world upon the Apothecaries file. The design of
keeping Medicines as Secrets, being chiefly to conceal the ignorance of the
recommender, who could not write it in Latin; or the same persons dishonesty,
who dare not publish so dangerous a Medicine; or else his Covetousness in
exacting, in the price of a mean, ordinary, familiar Medicine, which it appears
to be when published: If a Pill be but gilded over with the pretenses of Rare
and Excellent, it is cried up, and swallowed down, when it is as common in the
Shops as Salt and Pepper in a Kitchen: and there are abundance of Poisonous
Remedies abroad in the World, that have nothing to kill them but Fasting
Spittle and a smooth tongue, their best corrective being such an ingredient as
wants a Corrective; but yet these Remedies must needs cure all diseases at one
blow, as Sampson did the Philistines: But these by rash snuffing Natures
Candle, put it quite out. That Medicine costs the Patient dear, that costs him
his Life: yet many such there are, that ride post daily, making every Corner do
penance in venomed sheets; the Directions for the use of them being like David's
Letter to Uriah, only giving Instructions for the Death and ruin of the
Patient. Is there any pleasure in being destroyed, because we are not able to
say what hurt us? A Medicine may cure the disease, and kill the Patient; and a
safe Medicine may do much hurt, by occasioning the omission of more proper and
effectual Remedies. The world has been much imposed upon, by being made to
believe that Chemistry is a distinct art from Pharmacy; when the most excellent
Rules for Chemical Preparations have been proposed to the World by Physicians
and Apothecaries; it being but a Modern way of preparing Medicines, and does
peculiarly belong to that trade: As much as for a Tailor to make a Garment in a
new fashion as well as in an old: Indeed such Medicines ought to be very
prudently advised; because a Child may do more mischief with a Knife of Steel,
than of Bone: You shall many times have Death in the pot babtized with the name
of the Elixir of Life, and a Dram of it cried up beyond a bushel of March Dust,
to Reinthrone the deposed Archeus, and do no man knows what: And at another
time you shall have Alexipharmagons Pantimagogons, and medicines of such
conjuring names, that if you understood their natures, you would think them a
kind of Tophet Potabile, and fitter for Country Farmers to treat Rats with,
than to cure diseases in humane Bodies. There is nothing has more contributed
to the Brevity of men's Lives, and the languishments of humane Nature in this
Age, than the Multitude of secret private Medicines, cried up as Infallible,
which have laid the foundations for innumerable diseases, and made work for
able Physicians: And that which is a strange Paradox to me, is, that when a
known experienced Remedy is recommended, every one must be advised with whether
it may be used or no; but if a Medicine which none understand, nay not he that
commends it, yet down it must go, without inquiry into it is nature, until by
the fatal consequences we repent the using it. Sir, I beseech you interpret
these lines as the expressions of my tender respects and care for your Health:
one request more and I have done. Put me into the number of those that you
count your most faithful Friends: For indeed I am,

And ever will be so, etc. J. M.

LETTER XVIII.
SIR,
I Received yours Dated the Fifteenth instant, wherein I perceive your great
inconstancy and want of Regular Perseverance, in the use of those proper
Remedies the Physician last prescribed. I should be glad I could say these
things to your Ears as well as to your Eyes, but London finds me too much
Business to grant me so great a happiness: therefore give my Pen leave to tell
you, that the Regularity of the Patient is as necessary, in order unto the
success of Remedies, as the skill of the Physician, or the Faithfulness of the
Apothecary, which in my two former Letters I hinted to you: And the wisdom of
the Patient is discernable, in taking advice in time, and in presevering in the
use of the means until the distemper be removed: But on the contrary, many
Patients are so imprudent as to follow directions by halves, and yet censure
Physicians if their distempers be not removed in a week, which it may be have
been contracting some months or years, slighting the use of good advice and
proper Remedies, until Nature be spent, and the disease have taken
considerable root. English People are usually sick too late, and well too soon,
as the Proverb says; and the Physician is frequently sent for, to try if he
can work Miracles, rather than cure Diseases; the time for that being slipped,
Nature being not able to lend it is helping hand. Many unwary Patients flatter
themselves into their graves with conceits of Colds and Surfeits, confounding
diseases with their Symptoms, and mistaking Internal maladies for External
causes; giving some common Denomination to their distempers, and supposing them
to be no other than what they have known some recover from, neglect advice
until it be too late; and then the Physician is sent for, to share with the
Patient in the infamy of the miscarriage: the time for Purgation and Bleeding
being over, nothing now remains but to toll the Bell: The usual discourse is,
nothing but leaving off a Coat, or putting on a Damp Shift, or eating a Dish of
meat that did not agree with the Stomach, or Drinking a Glass of Bad Wine, or
over-walked, or a little frighted, or the like: when it may be all the time the
Stomach is disordered with a Quagmire of corrupt humors, the Blood inflamed,
the Liver obstructed, the Lungs perished, and all these not taken notice of: as
if a man whose House is on fire, should omit timely Quenching it, because it
only happened by a Boys throwing a Squib. Many sick Patients are like the
Babel Builders, when the Physician prescribes a Trowel they will bring a Hammer;
when the Distemper requires Sweat, they will bring cooling Juleps: and if the
repetition of a Medicine be requisite, the Patient is presently weary: as if a
wound could be cured immediately upon the Application of a Plaster, before it
has lain a quarter of an hour; or as if the Cook were to be blamed because a
Morsel of Meat does not allay hunger, when it may be a pound is requisite. If
the Physician throw water to extinguish the fire of a Fever, and the Patient
throws on more fuel, how can it be put out? In vain is Care used in the
Physicians Study, and in the Apothecaries Shop, if Errors be committed in the
Patients Chamber. But Sir, your conduct is too great to be guilty of splitting
your health upon such Rocks, especially after you have been warned of the
Danger, by one who shall ever take it as a great favor of Divine Providence,
to be placed in any capacity to serve you. I can say no more but what I must
ever say, that

I am Yours, J. M.

LETTER XIX.
SIR,
I Received your last Letter, wherein you give me an account, that all the
regular progress you had made toward the procuring your health, had like to
have been lost, by the indiscretion of a friendly Visitant, who would needs put
you out of conceit with your Physician, with an intention to make way for his
own; and indeed it is a very great fault in the World, and that which is very
prejudicial unto the lives and healths of men. And it may well be accounted one
of the requisites in order to the success of Remedies, for Visitants to
exercise great prudence, or else by their impertinent discourse they may put a
sick Patient out of regular methods. What reason is there the retained
Physician, while he is pursuing of rational intentions, and in the middle of
his Cure, must be thrust out to make way for the Friends Doctor, who forsooth
must by all means be the Best in the Town, because theirs? As if the sick
Patient had not prudence enough to choose a Physician as well as the Visitant:
especially when we consider, the retained Physician has been long acquainted
with the Patients constitution and distempers, and has often relieved him,
when the other has no acquaintance with the Patient, but must be recommended
to recompense for their own ingratitude the last time they used him. Nay, it
may be the indiscreet Visitant shall persuade to lay aside the able Legal and
Learned Physician, to make room for an ignorant, but bold and confident Quack;
who shall pretend to great skill in such or such a disease, and yet knows
nothing but only how to kill people dexterously: If violent distempers surprise
the brain and cause want of sleep, in comes a loving Friend and recommends
Syrup of Poppies or else some other sleeping medicine, which Translates the
Morbifick humor to the Brain, causing a Frenzy, or such a sleep which only
the last Trumpet can awake. Sense is a riddle, and Reason is a paradox to some
people: I knew a Gentlewoman, who coming to visit a sick Friend, much blamed
the Doctors prescriptions, and persuaded the Patient to the use of a Pill,
which she found commended in a printed Bill; he took it, and dyed that night:
which so troubled the Gentlewomans mind, for meddling without a just call, that
it cost her Husband ten pounds to prevent her real distraction; she is not as
yet fit to be left alone. I could name another imprudent Visitant, who being
ambitious of being thought skilful in Physic, because a great reader of
Culpepper, commended to a Friend a Dram of a Vomiting Medicine instead of a
Scruple, because the Printer had made that mistake, and the Reader not having
Judgment enough to correct it; but by a good Providence the dreadful
consequences were prevented, by the Apothecaries refusing to let it go out of
his Shop: The Electuary of Beef and the Julep of warm Broth, is the fittest
Physic for a loving Friend to administer: thus they may cure the Chollick
coming from wind and emptiness; that Charity being better which sets the Poors
teeth a going, than that which cures their aching. The most regular Charity to
the Poor who are sick, is to gratify Physicians for their advice, and to be at
the charge of their Medicines when prescribed by the Learned, as a Gentleman in
this City does, who allows his Physician a yearly Stipend to give his advice
to any Poor people recommended to him; and his Apothecary the same, to let them
have Medicines. I knew a Gentlewoman, who was constrained to hold up her hand
at the Bar, for giving two Children a Mercurial medicine against worms, which
sent them to the worms, and had almost sent her thither also. Such is the
severity and excellency of the English Laws against such as have no Authority
to practice Physic, that they are liable to an Indictment for Felony, if any
Person dye under their hands: and yet we frequently find friendly Visitants
crying up such, when they might better spend their time in serious counsels and
Christian advices to bear their visitations with patient submission to the
Divine Will, until they find ease and relief from the hand of Heaven; and also
in timely intimations to set their Houses in order, and prudently dispose of
their temporal concerns by making their Wills. In a sick Friends Chamber,
Friends have an Excellent opportunity both to do and to receive good, by being
put in mind of the Vanity of man in this mortal state, causing them to be more
industrious in the faithful improvement of their own health, and in a Christian
Preparation for Death. Now, Sir, that you may be strengthened upon your bed of
languishing, and visited with the Divine saving health, that so your most
mortal sickness may not be unto death Eternal, but for your Glory and passage
into endless bliss, shall be the Prayer of

Your True Friend, J. M.

LETTER XX.
SIR,
I Am sorry you meet with so many cross Winds in your Voyage to the Haven of
health; particularly, that the carelessness of an Attendant (I mean a Nurse)
should blow you back again into the wide Ocean, and threaten a Shipwreck, when
you seemed to be gotten within Ken of harbor. Great care ought to be used in
choosing honest and careful Persons to attend sick Patients, whose Office it is
to administer Remedies prescribed by the Physician, and prepared by the
Apothecary: Every of these ought to know their peculiar province; for the
skilful Nurse as well as the ignorant Physician makes a fat Churchyard; and we
find that in many Distempers careful attendance is half the cure: But when the
Ignorant Nurse shall usurp the Learned Physicians employment, and prescribe as
well as administer, it is intolerable presumption: care and watchfulness are
their most commendable qualities; but when they are Drowsic and careless, it is
very prejudicial to the Patient: when like the first woman they tempt to that
diet which is Destructive both to the Patients health and the Physicians
credit. Eating forbidden Fruit was at first our sin, when it was contrary to a
Divine command; and it now causes sickness, when it is contrary to the
Physicians advice: I have sometimes known a Nurse persuade the Patient to eat
that which she her self loved, when it was contrary to the patients Distemper:
and sometimes the Physician must be forbid to prescribe Gascoin Powder, because
she has known one to dye after it; and sometimes the Physicians prescriptions
must be all set behind the Window curtain, because she does not approve of
them; and in the mean time she gives her Diascaudle, and what call 'um Water. A
Child once dying of the Smallpox, yet under the Care of an able Physician, the
Nurse threw away all his Medicines privately, and when it could not sleep, sent
to the Apothecary for Syrup of Lettuce; and when it was costive, for Syrup of
Roses, which was discovered a while after in the Apothecaries Bills, who knew
not what use it was put to, until she confessed it to her Shame and Ruin. Sir,
I hope you will survive this unhappy accident of your Nurse, and live to see
her repent. The smell of a Violet I hope will be restorative; and believe it,
you shall never want health, if it be in my Power to contribute toward it, who
am

Your Loving Friend, J. M.

LETTER XXI.
SIR,
I Understand by the Physician that your Distemper requires Bleeding, and I
also perceive you have a very great aversation to it: Good Sir, I beseech you,
why is it not better to part with your Blood than your Life? but you say the
Blood is the Life; and I Will say, the Blood is the cause of Death also, when
there is too much of it, or when it is naught, as I am persuaded yours is,
because your learned Doctor judges so. Are not all Creatures relieved with
bleeding? and is it not practiced by all wise Nations? The French and Spaniards
use it two or three times in a day; and our forefathers shed their Blood by
pounds to save their Lives, and shall not we do it by Ounces? Indeed, Sir, you
had better sleep with a healthful body, than in a whole skin. Some learned
Jewish Doctors will tell you, that Circumcision was a means of health, as well
as a Tipifick Institution: But Sir, if you do open a Vein, make use of a
skilful Chyrurgeon, that may not make you lame, to make you sound, and open a
Door with a Lance to let out your Soul with your Blood; for some such there are
in the World, that want both skill and care, and pour Gaul and Vinegar instead
of Wine and Oil into their Patients wounds. Choose a man of honesty and reputed
skill in his profession, and one whose particular employment it is; venture not
your Life in the hand of one whose covetousness prompts him to venture out of
his own Calling; neither he nor you can so rationally expect the Divine
Blessing upon your bleeding, which will promote the Circulation of the
remaining mass of Blood, whereby it will the better purify it self; and the
Blood being clarified, the Spirits will become more lively and vigorous to push
off your Distemper; which good news will as it were kindle Bonfires of Joy in
the Breasts of all your cordial Friends: In which catalogue you may safely
number

J. M.

LETTER XXII.
SIR,
I Cannot but wonder, that you should wonder at the unsuccesfulness of the last
Prescriptions, when I hear you perplex your Thoughts with melancholy
Contemplations. A man may muse himself into his Grave, and think himself to
Death. To be careful for nothing, but to please our Maker and to save our
Souls, will very much promote the Health of our Bodies. The Effects of Love and
Hope cherish the natural Heat and radical Moisture, beget gentle and vigorous
Spirits, which makes the vital Powers more brisk and lively. On the contrary,
tedious and perplexed Studies, restless Impatience, fretful Murmurings, and
discontented Thoughts, they stop the regular motion of the Blood, damp the
Spirits, and hinder the faculties of the Mind. When the Briskness of the vital
Heat is suffocated, and the Contraction of the Heart weakened, and the Blood
grown thick and cold in the extremities of the Vessels, and is not able to
thrust it self into the remoter branches of the Arteries and Fibers of the
Veins, but stagnates in the narrow passages of the Body and Brain, from thence
is laid a foundation for Pains, Palsies, and all Scorbutic Distempers; and
then we sigh and groan, and live a dying Life or a living Death, which is very
burthensom to humane Nature. Spiritual pleasure is an excellent Medicine
against bodily pains, and true Piety is the best Cure of Melancholy in the
whole World.

When the Soul is filled with light and vigor, it infuseth a strange kind of
Alacrity into the Humors by a physical Efficiency: Internal Joy, grounded upon
the Reflections of a good Conscience, has a mighty power both to correct and
exalt a man's natural temper. Those Ardent Breathings wherewith the pious Soul
is continually carried out toward God and Goodness, are to the Body like so
much fresh Air and wholesome Exercise, they fan the Blood, and clarify the
Spirits, and purge them from their feculency, which would otherwise cloud the
Understanding, and make us dull and listless: Therefore, Sir, I beg of you, as
you tender your Health, pare away all your superfluous thoughts; and let a
lumpish Spirit be a Stranger to your Habitation, because it is a Scandal to
Christianity: Who has more cause to rejoice than they that have the Smiles of
Heaven, and the foretastes of endless pleasure? Therefore suffer your Harp to
hang no longer upon the Willows, but contemplate the Song of Moses and of the
Lamb, which will elevate all the powers of Nature. When men give way to violent
and unreasonable passions, and lay out more in expectation than the fruition
will make amends for, they purchase Diseases at a dear rate. The passions of
the Mind influence the Humors of the Body: Anxious Solicitudes about Events,
and Murmuring at the Allotments of Providence, suspend the Influence of divine
Blessing, and withdraw that holy protection who has promised to care for us,
if we cast all our care on him: Hope deferred will make the heart sick: Eager
desires after terrene Enjoyments, as they drowned men's Souls in perdition, so
they pierce men's Bodies with many sorrows: When swarms of perplexing Cares hive
in men's Heads, they yield more Sting than Honey. There are many in the World
who stab themselves with pining grief, and poison themselves with pensive
Melancholy. Wrath kills the foolish man, and Envy slayes the silly one:
Nehemiah's grief changed his countenance; and we know that Fear has torment:
When the Mind is kept in an equal, calm, serene temper, the Body is sensible of
the Convenience: A cheerful spirit does good like a Medicine; but on the
contrary, a sorrowful spirit dryes the Bones. The way to pull out the thorn in
the Flesh, is to heal the wound in the Spirit. If men did sigh for nothing but
Sin, and set their affections on him who best deserves their Love, and make use
of the Remedy provided for all the evils of the World, viz. a Contented Mind;
their healths would be better secured: but when any created good lies too near
the Heart, or the Clouds of Melancholy eclipse the upper Region of the Mind,
they hinder the vigorous Reflections of the vital Spirits, and render Medicines
ineffectual. By melancholy, sad and gloomy thoughts, we expose our selves to
the power of the Prince of Darkness, who loves to inhabit sad Souls, who love
Sunless days. Spend not your Life like a man possessed, amongst Groves and
Tombs: by profound Sorrow and Melancholy, we give place to the Devil. That
made St. Paul compassionate the excommunicate Corinthian, lest being too much
cast down, Satan should get advantage of him. Too much sadness, like the Earth
lying under water, makes it unfruitful. Therefore, Sir, let me beg of you to
hoise the sails of your Soul, and to bid adieu to needless Thoughts. Forgive
the haste that made these Blots, and believe that I am without spot of
complement,

Your unreserved Friend, J. M.

LETTER XXIII.
SIR,
I Am glad to hear you find your distemper abate, upon the use of the last
Remedies: but let me tell you, I attribute very much of their success unto the
temperate, exact and regular Diet I find you observe; and you will experiment
that it will very much facilitate the Cure: for in some distempers a very
slender Diet, and taking in little Drink, does withdraw much of the fuel that
increases the Disease. It ill becomes a sick man to dig his Grave with his
teeth, make his Table a snare, and Dedicate meat and drink Offerings unto the
god of his Belly: when men's hearts are overcharged with Surfeiting and
Drunkenness, it not only causes Diseases, but hinders their Cure: some
patients lie continually like John Babtist's head in a Charger, and so oppress
Nature with a greater load, when they should be making the Vessel lighter; more
being killed by Meats then by Muskets: But though you do well to be very exact
in observing a Physical Diet, yet so much ought to be taken as may support
Nature, and make it is burden tolerable. Sir, I must bid you good Night, and
only take leave to tell you, that my best Endeavors are at your service, and
remain

Your Humble Servant, J. M.

LETTER XXIV.
SIR,
I Received yours Dated the 10th instant, wherein you seem very inquisitive to
know what may further contribute toward the Perfecting your Health, and render
the means yet more effectual: Unto which I must answer, If you would exercise
your Body, by Walking, Riding, Bowling, Pumping, or Shooting in the Long-Bow,
or the like: for by Labor and Exercise we get both our bread and our health;
and Adams curse becomes a blessing unto a Christian, That in the sweat of his
brows he should eat his bread. Idleness, one of Sodom sins becomes a great
punishment. The running Stream is pure and clean, when standing water gathers
mud: But on the contrary, you ought to be Cautious of violent motions, lest
thereby you extinguish the flame of Natures Candle: by walking too fast, you
may make more have than good speed, and leave your health behind you: Many
people like the two Disciples, running not out of love, as they did, but out of
rashness into a Sepulcher: But yet moderate Exercise is of great advantage, to
warm the Blood, and open Obstructions, and excite the operation of Medicines,
and render them much more effectual. In a Physical sense bodily Exercise
profits more than a little. Sir, so often as your Pen gives me a taste of your
Ease and recovery, I relish much happiness, who am

Your Sympathizing Friend, J. M.

LETTER XXV.
SIR,
ONce more give me leave as a Friend to tell you, that I am confident the Air
taken in a morning this pleasant month of May, wherein nature provides
something to entertain all your Senses, would prove exceeding advantageous, and
make your Dyetdrink more prevalent: for there is a Nitre in the Air that
contributes nourishment to all beings, especially to follow a Plow, and suck in
the cherishing steams from the breasts of your Mother the Earth: and if you
can, your native Soil, where you drew in your first breath. But on the other
hand, have a care of that which we Vulgarly call taking Cold: for Death
sometimes creeps into the body through the pores of the Skin; so that if at any
time the alterations of the Air put a stop to the genuine operation of
Medicines, do not unjustly blame the Physician or the Remedies: have a care of
taking cold in your feet, lest you go wet-shod to your Grave; or of leaving off
a Garment, lest you put on a Winding Sheet. The humors in men's bodies are tossed
in the Air, like waves in the Sea by the winds; and sometimes the blood grows
as 'twere moldy, for want of that Fan of Nature: Many men's bodies, and
particularly yours, being like a Weather-glass, subject to the least
alterations in the Air, and easily blown into their Graves by a sharp northern
wind. Many by long looking out at a Window have espied the grim face of Death;
The Air of an open Casement being sometimes like the blow of a Cross-bow. Sir,
I pray take this advice, from one that hopes you may walk up many May hills in
this World, and at last arrive at the holy Hill of Sion.

Yours, J. M.

LETTER XXVI.
SIR,
I Am very well pleased to hear that you are pleased with my last Advice; but I
am also concerned, that you should continue an ill custom, so apparently
injurious to your Health, as your taking so much Tobacco is like to prove:
Indeed I am of opinion, there is no Plant that ever God made for the use of
Man, that has done more good and more harm than that has done. It must be
confessed, prudently used, it is a sovereign Medicine in many Distempers; but it
proves no better than a Poison to many men, as it is so familiarly used and
abused, being in our days more taken as Food than Physic: And there is no one
practice wherein wise men more frequently play the Foll, than in the immoderate
use of this Indian Weed, which may not improperly be called Man-bane. Men spend
their days in Smoke, and shorten their days also by its too frequent use,
smothering themselves into their graves, as we do Bees when we take and destroy
the Hive. It was a tart Reflection of a Comical Wit, who being in a great Fogg,
said, The Prince of the Air was taking a Pipe of Tobacco. It Is very strange to
me, that such an unpleasant practice should prevail so much, to the apparent
prejudice of so many thousands, who spit away their Lives, and drein away that
sweet Moisture which would keep the Blood cool, and promote its regular motion.
That practice which was scandalous amongst our Forefathers, is now become a
piece of good Entertainment; and he that threatened to burn his Pipes, and to
cut his Tobacco to pieces, was thought a great Reformer about Thirty years ago:
but that which greatly excites our care lest we use it too freely, is its
palpable enmity to the Brain and Nerves, disposing men to Apoplexies, Palsies,
Convulsions and Vertigo's: Many great Physicians taking notice in their
Observations, of many of their Patients, falling into apoplectick Fits with
Pipes in their Mouths, it being a great Opiate. It is also greatly prejudicial
to the Memory, and also ^^^t^ the Body of its due Nourishment, by its laxative
Quality thrusting the A^^^ too soon out of the Stomach, before there is a
perfect Concoction, especially if taken too soon after a Meal: if ever it be
proper, it is toward Bedtime. He that can give a good reason for taking above
three Pipes a Day, may very safely take more. I have known the Oil of Tobacco
poison a Dog: And I dare affirm the Smoke of it has poisoned many men. A Noble
man in our time lost his Head by taking a Pipe of Tobacco; that is to lay, the
being observed to burn Letters to light his Pipe, was the Cause of his
Apprehension, and raised the suspicion of his being the Person sought for;
whereupon he was taken, and condemned and executed: I wish it has not
separated many other men's Souls from their Bodies. Some make it a question,
whether Guns or Pipes have Killed most. I am sure there is no Smoke, but there is
some Fire. Doubtless, if men would take it at the other End, it would do less
hurt, and it may be more good. I remember one of the wisest Princes of Europe
said upon an occasion, It was good for nothing but to perfume a Hog-stye: But
in that I think he was a little too severe: for there are excellent uses may be
made of it: And amongst many others, it may serve for Contemplation, to put men
in mind that their Life is but a vapor, and that all things under the Moon
vanish into Smoke: Except it be the Friendship of your faithful Servant, which
can never evaporate whilst he is

J. M.

LETTER XXVII.
SIR,
I Received yours the 12th instant, wherein you complain exceedingly of the ill
Effects of the Waters at Epsam this Summer: I beseech you inquire whether the
Cause be not from your own irregular Use of them; and also take notice, whether
you do not drink more Wine than Water: For those Symptoms you complain of, give
a greater suspicion of the former, than the latter, being used; sure I am, the
Doctor that recommended them to you, understood their fitness for your
Constitution and Disease, therefore if you follow his Direction, in the use of
them, I question not but they will have their desired Effect. I know there are
more go thither to gratify Curiosity, than to serve the end of Health; and
Pleasure is more frequently propounded than Ease. But let me tell you, those
physical Waters by the preposterous use, often prove like the Waters of
Jealousy, they make Peoples Bodies to swell, and their Thighs to rot, and lay
the foundations for many distempers, as Dropsies, Agues, Gouts, and the like:
Many long as much to drink them, as King David did to drink of the Water of the
Well of Bethlehem, but men venture their Lives in so doing, as they did in that
case, especially by the unreasonable quantities many men take. I have larely
known one come home swelled with a Dropsy, another tinctured with a Jaundice,
and a third shaking with an Ague. All immoderate Evacuations are very
destructive to Nature: There are hundreds that Drowned themselves in Wells,
that are never mentioned in the weekly Bills. Nature is destroyed by all
Extremes, too much Food, or too long Fasting; too much Rest, or too much
Motion; too much Sleep, or too much Watching; too much Joy, or too much Sorrow;
too much Heat, or too much Cold; too much Wine, or too much Water Quantities
shorten Life more than Qualities. Many who were only wantonly Sick, become
really so; and that which was intended for a Cure, many times becomes a
Surfeit. At those Waters men are served like the Impostor who fained himself
Blind, that the Arrian Bishop might work a Miracle in his Cure; and when he
would have opened his Eyes, could not, but was ever after really Blind. People
depending upon the cleansing Virtue of those Waters, and neglecting the use of
proper Remedies to render them Effectual, do but like an improvident Laundress,
who thinks to wash her Linen white and clean with Water without Soap. They
should be chiefly used as Posset Drink to a Purge. Indiscrect Persons think to
take off the Mischief of too great Quantities of Wine, by drinking plentiful
Draughts of Water; but this is to run Nature out of one Extreme into another,
and to render men's Bodies more subject to Diseases and Putrefaction; like
Timber that lies sometimes in the wet, and sometimes in the Sun, more subject
to Rot. There are thousands that purge their Souls out of their Bodies by
immoderate Evacuations one way or other. Sir, I shall conclude this Discourse
of Mineral Waters with a hearty wish, That you may ever find them successeful,
until you come to Drink of that Well of Life which makes glad the City of God:
Where I hope you will be accompanied by

Your true Friend, J. M.

LETTER XXVIII.
SIR,
I Think there are few things requisite in order to the desirable success of a
Course of Physic, but I judge you have had a friendly Intimation of, except it
be this: That you would not too much indulge your self in Sleep. Many shorten
their days by sleeping in the Day, and as it were turning themselves into
Dormice. To lie in Bed until the Sunbeams lash men for their Drowziness, is
an injurious Custom. The first Man lost his Rib in his Sleep, and many of his
Posterity lose their Health in it. Sir, I take this for an undoubted Truth,
That if Rules of Religion, Moderation and Prudence were observed in the whole
course of Men's Lives, Gray hairs would be more in Fashion, Physicians would
gain more credit by their Prescriptions, sick Patients would find Remedies more
Effectual, and a Divine Influence would more infallibly attend them all. Sir, I
must now conclude, and so may you, that

I am a Respecter of you and your Health, J. M.

FINIS.

