SERMONS Preached on several Occasions, BY John March, B. D. Late VICAR of
NEWCASTLE upon TINE.

The last of which was Preached the Twenty Seventh of November, 1692. Being the
Sunday before he Died.

With a Preface by Dr. John Scot.

The Second Edition.

To which is added, a Sermon Preached at the Assizes, in New Castle upon Tine,
in the Reign of the late King James.

LONDON: Printed for Robert Clavell, at the Peacock in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1699.

Imprimatur,

C. ALSTON.
R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris, Julii 3. 1693.
THE PREFACE.
THE Reverend Author of the following Sermons, was a Person of that great Worth
and Excellency, that among those who knew him, they need no other
Recommendation than his own Name; for (besides that they carry in 'em a certain
strain of serious and unaffected Piety, and this imbellished with such
Clearness and Perspicuity, such strength and vigor of Expression, such
solidity of Argument and Discourse, as must have rendered the perusal of them
very pleasant and profitable to all well-disposed Readers; though their Author
had been Anonymous) besides which, I say, the truly Pious and Learned Author of
them was a Person of such great Accomplishments, both Moral and Intellectual,
as would have justly given Credit, with all that knew his Personal
Excellencies, to much meaner Performances than these. The main Objection this
degenerous Age had against him was, that he was a faithful Son of the Church of
England, and a zealous Asserter of its Doctrine and Discipline; and one would
think, for a Man to be true to his Profession, to that which he has ex animo
subscribed his Judgment, and declared his unfeigned Assent and Consent, it
should be so far from being reputed a Fault, in him, by those who pretend
either to common Honesty, or Modesty, that it should rather be esteemed his
Glory and Excellency. As for his Conversation, it was in all respects so Sober
and Regular, so Pure and Incorrupt, as that though he had but little reason to
apprehend himself concerned in that Denunciation, Woe be to you when all Men
speak well of you; yet so far, as I ever heard, even those who spoke worst of
him, durst never bespatter him with an Immorality. He was a very diligent
Pastor of the Flock committed to his Charge; and that not only in the course of
his Public Ministry, from which without some necessary Occasion he very rarely
absented himself, but also in his private Converses: For besides that, every
Lord's Day in the Evening, he generally spent a considerable Portion of time in
Instructing the Youth of his Parish, (from which Pious and Charitable Exercise,
he very rarely suffered himself to be diverted, even by the Visits of his best
and greatest Friends) besides which, I say, his known Abilities in resolving
Cases of Conscience, drew after him a great many good People, not only of his
own Flock, but from remoter Distances, who resorted to him as to a common
Oracle, and commonly went away from him entirely satisfied in his Wise and
Judicious Resolutions; and by these his excellent Qualities and Labors, he
has not only purchased to himself a Crown of Glory in Heaven, but also so
indeared his Memory upon Earth to all that are Virtuous and Good, that like the
Leaves of Roses still retain their Fragrancy, though the Rose it self is
withered and dead, and that being dead he may yet speak to his surviving
Auditors, and that the Memory of his good Example and Doctrine, may ever
flourish among them; it is the earnest desire of his Friends, that these
Sermons of his may be made Public, which though they have not that
accomplished Accuracy as they would have had, had they had his last hand to
them, and been prepared for the Press by his own skilful Pen, yet as they are,
they are rightly worthy the Christian Readers perusal, and as such I recommend
them to his View, and remain his

Affectionate and Humble Servant, John Scot.

SERMON I.
Psalm lxxvi* 7. Thou, even thou art to be feared; and who may stand in thy
sight, when once thou art angry?
I Know no Motives nor Arguments more likely to awaken Sinners to their Duty,
than a due consideration of Gods Infinite Goodness and Almighty Power. Know
thou not, says St. Paul, that the goodness of God leads thee to Repentance?
Transcendently great is the Goodness of God toward poor Sinners. He freely
gave us his Son to Purchase Heaven and Eternal Happiness for us. He sent down
his Holy Spirit to dwell with us, that he might sanctify our corrupt Natures,
and make us meet to partake of the vast Inheritance of the Saints in Light; and
he excites us to a due improvement of these assistances of the Spirit by
proposing the most glorious Rewards of Heaven and Eternal Happiness. Thus God
draws Sinners to their Duty by the bands of Love and the cords of a Man, that
is, by Arguments of such an obliging Nature, as are most likely to prevail with
men whom he has endowed with Reason and Understanding. But how few are there
who have so much ingenuity as to be won by kindness? The greatest part of
Mankind must be treated with severer methods, according to the observation of
St. Austin, Plures sunt quos terror corrigit, pauciores quos allicit amor:
Such, says he, is the corruption and degeneracy of our Natures, that very few
are drawn to their Duty by the Bands of Love; the generality of men must be
driven to it by the fears of Punishment. For this reason the wiser Heathens
made Hercules their God of Power, their God of Eloquence too; intimating that
no Arguments are more forcible or more prevalent than those which alarm our
fears. Now God, who is never wanting in any thing that may conduce to our
Salvation, is observed in Scripture frequently to urge these powerful Arguments
upon us. Fear-not them, says our Savior, who can do no more than destroy the
Body; but fear him who is able to destroy both Body and Soul in Hell. Knowing
therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade men, says St. Paul, 2 Cor. 5.
11. To the same end and purpose we find Asaph, the Author of this Psalm,
magnifying the power of God in the defeat of Sennacheribs Army. Thou have
broken the Arrows of the Bow, the Shield, and the Sword, and the Battle, ver.
3. The Stout hearted are Spoiled, they have slept their sleep, and none of the
Men of Might have found their Hands, ver. 5. At thy rebuke, O God of Jacob,
both the Chariot and Horse are cast into a deep sleep, ver. 6. Those
expressions of our Psalmist relate unto Sennacherib, King of the Assyrians;
this Monarchy, in Daniels Vision, is, for its strength, compared unto the Lion:
and it was at its Zenith in the reign of Sennacherib, whose very name signifies
a fierce Warrier, and whose Subjects, the Assyrians, are deservedly styled by
our Psalmist the Stout-hearted, because, being flushed by many Victories they
feared neither Man nor God himself, whom they reviled in a horrid manner, as
appears by the Blasphemies of Rabseca: And yet even these stout-hearted
Assyrians were spoiled; the Army of this great Monarch Sennacherib was
miraculously defeated, either by the Pestilence, as Josephus reports, or by a
destroying Angel, as the Scripture relates. Even Sennacherib himself, though then
the greatest King upon Earth, was not able to stand in God's sight when he was
angry; he came to a fatal end, and was slain in the Temple of his God by his
own Sons. Nay farther yet, after his death he had a Statue erected in the
Temple of Vulcan, with this pious Lesson inscribed on it, (...), that is in
English, Whosoever beholds me, let him learn Piety. And since these things
were so, our Psalmist had good reason to make this Epiphonema in the Text,
Thou, even thou art to be feared, and who may stand in thy Sight, when once
thou art Angry? From the words thus far explained, I shall take occasion to
show you,

First, That there is great reason to fear the Lord our God. And

Secondly, The vanity of those reasons which cause most men to show so little
fear of God in their Lives and Conversations.

First, Let me show you what great reason there is to fear the Lord our God,
and this will appear at large by these particulars.

1st. We shall find reason enough to fear the Lord our God, if we consider his
Sovereign Power over all Creatures, which he is able to command at his
Pleasure, and make them revenge his Quarrel upon impenitent Sinners. As God
Almighty by the bare speaking of a word created all things both in Heaven and
in Earth; so he can with as much ease command all Creatures to execute his
Wrath and Vengeance upon Sinners. It is the observation of the Eloquent
Tertullian, that God, as soon as he had finished the great work of the
Creation, did then, but not till then, assume the dreadful Title of Lord of
Hosts. And it is further observed by others, that this Dreadful Title is
mentioned in Scripture more than two hundred times, the better to deter Sinners
from affronting Omnipotent Majesty. It seems the Sinner cannot make War with
Heaven, but he must at the same time arm the whole Creation against himself; he
cannot fight against the Almighty, but he must also fight against all those
Creatures which are under the Command of this Lord of Hosts. The Heathen Poet
is able to tell us, (...), etc. All the Elements, says he, are full fraught
with Evils, and ready when God pleases to pour forth ruin and destruction upon
Sinners. Sodom and Gomorrah did no sooner kindle their impure flames, but the
Element of Fire descending in sulphurous Streams, made them most dreadful
Monuments of Eternal Vengeance. As soon as Israel began to murmur against
Moses, the Element of Air mingled Pestilential Vapors with their Vital Breath,
and chastised their Rebellion with a dreadful Plague. When proud Pharaoh
gathered together all the strength of Egypt, and furiously pursued the Children
of Israel to the Red Sea, the waters thereof soon swelled themselves into
mountainous Billows, as if they had been proud to be employed in the service of
Heaven, and the destruction of the Egyptians. The Earth also, as dull and
senseless as it seems to be, is yet able to resent such indignities as are
offered to the Almighty; and when commanded by God, will open its devouring
Mouth, and swallow down alive Corah, Dathan and Abiram. Thus all the Elements
are at Gods command, yea even rejoice to be employed by Heaven, in executing
Wrath and Vengeance upon Sinners. And whither now will the Sinner fly from this
Lord of Hosts? Will his Alliance with Hell protect him from the Almighty? Or
can he hope to hide himself from the heat of his fury in the shades below? No
certes; he may as well seek Heaven in Hell as expect one single beam of comfort
from these Regions of Darkness: for from these black quarters it was that God
of old commanded an evil Spirit to vex Saul, and drew whole Legions of Devils
to punish the degenerous Jews in the days of our Savior. Nor does our God rule
only in this sublunary World, in the Seas and in all deep places, but he rules
also in the Heavens. For if the Almighty does at any time frown upon the
Sinner, each Planet will put on its Malign Aspect, and every Constellation
shall foretell his destiny. Thus the Stars fought in their Ranks against Sisera,
and, as Josephus reports, poured down such prodigious showers of Hail, as
served instead of Shot to destroy his Army. Thus also the Sun and Moon became
fixed Stars in Heaven, that the Israelites might not want the benefit of the
light to complete their Victory over the Amorites. Thus the Elements, the
Heavens and Hell it self are at the Command of Almighty God; and if there yet
be wanting more Forces to fight these Battles of the Lord, the Angels are still
remaining, those mighty Hosts of Heaven and standing Militia of the Almighty.
Indeed God does not always draw forth these Trainbands of Heaven; an Army of
Lice serves sometimes to baffle a proud Pharaoh, and a silly Worm, when
commissioned by God, is able to spoil the Divinity of a Blaspheming Herod: But
when the King of Heaven appears, as it were, in Person against his Enemies;
then these Courtiers of Heaven attend the Divine Presence, and putting on their
Robes of Light, add what Luster they can to the Majestatick Appearance. Hence
it is that Christ, when he shall come at the last day to destroy at once all
the Works of Satan, he shall not only have Angels for his Trumpeters, but Matt.
16. 27. he is said to come in the Glory of the Father, because he shall come
attended with these Glorious Angels. And now when all these Battalions of the
Almighty shall set themselves in array against the Sinner, when he shall not
only fear with Cain lest he fall a prey to every Wild Beast, but with Pashur,
in the Prophet Jeremy, becomes a Magor Missabib, that is, surrounded with fears
from all parts of the Creation, then doubtless he will say with the Psalmist,
Thou, even thou art to be feared, and who may stand in thy sight when once thou
art angry? Our Savior in the Parable makes him more stout than wise, who
having only ten thousand, is not afraid to meet him who comes against him with
twenty thousand: But sure every Sinner stands guilty of infinitely greater
madness, who with his single valor dares the Almighty, and bids defiance to
him, who comes not only with twenty thousand, but with the whole Universe
against him. O consider this all ye that forget God, lest he pluck you away,
and there be none to deliver you: Take our Saviors advice, send and sue for
peace, whilst this Almighty Adversary is but yet on his way: Labor by your
Prayers, your Fasting and Humiliation to reconcile your selves to this Lord of
Hosts.

2ly, We shall find yet more reason to fear the Lord our God, if we consider
seriously that great power he exercises over the Souls and Consciences of men.
It is a true Saying of Seneca, if understood with respect to men, In corpore
exercentur supplicia, animus ipse sacer and aeternus est, cui nequeat injici
manus: The Sword of Justice which Earthly Potentates carry before them as the
Ensign of their Power, can only hurt the Shell of Man; insomuch that the
greatest Tyrants are honored in Scripture with no higher Titles than those of
Masters according to the flesh: For the Soul or Spirit is far enough out of the
reach of their Power, the Conscience is secure from their Rage and Fury; and it
is the Prerogative Royal of God, as by his Omniscience to know the most inward
thoughts; so by his Omnipotence to be able to punish them. When the Almighty
pleases he breaks into the solitary Recesses of the Soul, and lodges his
revenging Furies in the Inner Man. And now could we set a Casement upon the
Breast of an Orestes, or some despairing Sinner, and there see those ictus and
laniatus, those gnawings of the Worm which prey upon all the Vitals of the
Soul, we should easily grant with Tertullian, that an enraged Conscience is
praejudicium judicii, the Antedate of the last Judgment: we might then see Hell
seizing the Wretched Sinner here upon Earth; at least inflicting some part of
its Torments on this side the Grave. Such a dreadful Monument of Vengeance was
cursed Cain; no sooner did he kill his Brother Abel, but he became a wretched
Vagabond; he trembled at the sight of every Beast, says Josephus, and was
forced to bear such incredible Torments, as he himself confessed were greater
than he could bear. It is sad enough for the Sinner to have God Almighty and
the whole World against him, but his condition must needs be sadder when he
becomes a Traitor to himself, nay more, his own Tormentor. So much of Truth
there is in that Saying of Seneca, Nemini gravius imprecari potes, quam ut
seipsum habeat iratum. Thou can not, says he, lay an heavier Curse or
imprecation upon any person, than to wish him angry, or at enmity with himself.
And now, I hope, we will join with the Psalmist in the Text, and say, Thou,
even thou, O Lord, art to be feared; and who may stand in thy sight when once
thou art Angry? Fearful we are to offend an earthly King; how careful of our
Words and Behavior, lest by Treason or any Misdemeanour we fall under his
Displeasure? But what, I pray, are Gibbets, Racks, or the most ingenious
Torments they can invent, to the sullen Lashes, and silent Girds of an enraged
Conscience? Let Solomon, if you please, determine this matter, Prove. 18. 14. The
Spirit of a Man, says he, can bear all his Infirmities, but a wounded Spirit
who can bear? How many noble Martyrs have sung and danced amidst the devouring
Flames? But what Judas, what Spira, what daring Sinner, was ever yet able to
bear the stings of a wounded Spirit? What reason then have we to fear the Lord
our God, who can, when he pleases, wound our Spirits, and fill our Souls with
the ineffable Torments of black Despair? But,

Thirdly, We shall find yet more Reason to fear the Lord our God, if we
consider those most exquisite and eternal Punishments he is able to inflict
both on the Bodies and Souls of Sinners in the Lake below. If the bold Sinner
has but courage enough to look beyond the Grave he will find prepared for him
the eternal Tophet, such a dreadful place of Torments, as is most tragically
described by the Prophet Isay, Chap. 30. 33. Tophet is prepared of old, says
he, the Pile thereof is Fire and much Wood, and the Breath of the Lord, like a
stream of Brimstone, does kindle it continually. See how each word is armed
with Thunder! It seems there is Fire in this eternal Tophet, yea there is a
great Pile of Fire. Now how dreadful, how terrible is Fire? Which the Persians
of old were wont to call, immanissima bellua, a most fierce and devouring
Monster: And yet this Fire of Tophet is no ordinary Fire; it is no such
material Fire as we have in our Chimneys. For the Scripture tells us, it was
originally prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Now the Devil and his Angels
being spiritual Beings, cannot be tormented by any material or corporeal Fire:
The Fire therefore of Tophet must be some strange metaphorical Fire, such as
the Fire we use is only fit to be made a cold and faint emblem of it; and we
will the rather believe this, when we consider that it is said to be kindled by
the Breath of Almighty God. The fiery Furnace of Babylon was dreadful enough,
though kindled only by the finite power of an earthly King: How dreadful then
must the Furnace of Hell be, which has all the Treasures of Torment infinite
Wisdom could invent? If all this be not sufficient to make these Torments
dreadful, remember that they are said to be prepared for the Devil and his
Angels. We know these infernal Fiends are the most inveterate and most
malicious Enemies of Heaven; such as did not only at first endeavor to
dethrone their Almighty Creator, but have ever since employed all their malice
and subilty to affront God, and draw Mankind into a conspiracy against him.
Sure then that Fire which was at first prepared for these inveterate and
malicious Enemies of Heaven, cannot possibly want any ingredients of Torture,
either Infinite Wisdom could invent, or Infinite Power inflict: And yet such
devouring Flames as these, are not only prepared for the Devil and his Angels,
but likewise for all impenitent Sinners. How fearful a thing then will it be to
fall into the Hands of the Living God? And yet it will be more fearful, if we
consider the eternity of all these Torments. For, in Hell the Worm never dies,
and the Fire shall never be quenched. When the Sinner has lain in Hell as many
millions of Ages as there are Stars in Heaven or Sands on the Seashore, he
will be no nearer an End of his Torments than he was the first Moment he entered
into that place of Torments. Who then will not fear the Lord our God? Who may
stand in his sight when once he is Angry? But it seems our Psalmist met with
some in his days who had no fear of God before their Eyes: who did set their
Mouths against Heaven, and bid defiance to the Almighty. And are there not
still too many in the World, who discover little or no fear of God in their
Lives and Conversations, such, I mean, as are not afraid to spit in the Face of
Heaven by their drunken Vomits, who profane his tremendous Name by Oaths and
Blasphemies, deride his Ordinances, and break his Holy Laws, by their notorious
Debaucheries? But sure these men have other apprehensions of the Majesty of
Heaven than our Psalmist had; surely they frame to themselves such notions of a
Deity, as allow them with Iehu, to drive on furiously in the ways of
wickedness. It will therefore be a piece of Charity to undeceive these deluded
Wretches, to show them the weakness of those Principles they build upon, and
the vanity of those Reasons which so much emboldens them in their evil
Practices, and this was the Second General I proposed to speak to. And,

First, Atheism is one main Reason why many discover so little fear of God in
their Lives and Conversations. As the Belief of a Deity is the Foundation of
all Religion, and he that comes unto God must first believe that he is, as S.
Paul speaks, Heb. 11. 6. So, on the contrary, Atheism must needs be the spring
and source of all Irreligion and Profaneness: Hence is that of the Psalmist,
Psalm. 14. 1, 2. The Fool has said in his Heart, there is no God; and then
follows in the next words, they are corrupt, they have done abominable works,
there is none that does good. But how well does he deserve the Title of a Fool,
who denies the Being of a God, which the whole Creation is one great evident
and undeniable demonstration of? This vast and wonderful Fabric of Heaven and
Earth proclaims with a loud voice, the infinite Power and Wisdom of that
Glorious Being which did at first Create it. For, as the Roman Orator observed
of old, Should a Traveller come into a strange Country, and find some vast
magnificent Palace there, though he should see nothing but Rats, Weasels, and
such like Creatures in it; yet he would easily conclude some Wise and Skilful
Architect had been there: even so the Heavens declare the Glory of God, and the
Firmament shows his Handiwork? Hence is that of S. Paul; Romans 1. 20* The
invisible things of God, from the Creation, are clearly seen, being understood
by the things that are made, even his Eternal Power and Godhead; so that they
are without excuse. The Atheist therefore must needs be in a very dangerous
condition, who denies that Almighty Being the whole Creation does so loudly
proclaim.

Secondly, Infidelity of the Scripture is another great reason why Men discover
so little fear of God in their Lives and Conversations. Many there are that
believe a God, who do not yet believe those dreadful punishments which are
threatened in the Scripture, and therefore the hopes of impunity makes them run
to all excess of riot. For when there is an evil heart of unbelief, there will
be a departing from the Living God; hence is that advice of the Apostle, Heb.
3. 12. Take heed; Brethren, lest there be in any of you an Evil Heart of
Unbelief. And what better remedy can there be of this Unbelief, than a serious
consideration of those Miracles, which were wrought to confirm our Faith in the
Gospel? For as Miracles are the highest Evidence Heaven can give; and the
Truths of the Gospel have been confirmed by many prodigious Miracles; so these
Miracles have been attested both by Friends and Foes. The Universal Tradition
of the Church, for more than 1600 years, cannot but be a very substantial
Evidence of these Miracles to all Christians: and yet besides this, we have the
concurrent Testimonies both of Jews and Pagans. Josephus, the Jew, reports of
our Savior, that he went about doing good, and confirmed his Doctrine by Mighty
Signs and Wonders: Nay farther yet, Pontius Pilate, as Eusebius informs us,
sent a large Narrative of our Saviors Miracles to Tiberius Caesar, who laid
them up among the Records of the Empire, and accordingly they are appealed to
by the Ancient Fathers. Let us not therefore be any longer faithless, but
believing. We cannot have a surer Foundation for our Faith, than the Evidence
of Miracles; and he must needs be a Miracle of Infidelity himself, who does not
believe those Miracles which were wrought by our Savior, seeing they have been
attested both by Friends and Foes, and confirmed to us, not only by Christians,
but also by Jews and Pagans.

Thirdly, I shall name but one Reason more, why many men discover so little
fear of God in their Lives and Conversations; and that is a dangerous opinion
they have imbibed of a state of Annihilation after death. The Infamous Author
of the Monstrous Leviathan has sadly debaucht this unhappy Age of ours, by
teaching That the Wicked after Death shall have no Resurrection: no, as he
tells them, they shall return to their Primitive Nothing; and have no more
sense of Pain than they had before they received their Being. A Doctrine this,
most fatal to Piety and Virtue! For if Wicked Men can once persuade themselves
that they need not fear any severer punishment after Death than that of
Annihilation, then they will for certain run to all excess of Riot. For this,
and no other was the use which was made of this pernicious Doctrine in the days
of St. Paul; this and no other, was the language of Epicureans then, as you may
read in 1 Cor. 15. 32. If the Dead rise not, say they, let us Eat and Drink,
for to morrow we Die. But what says Solomon to such Sinners as these, Eccles.
11. 9. Rejoice, O Young Man, in thy Youth, and let thy Heart cheer thee in the
days of thy Youth; walk on in the ways of thy own Heart, and in the sight of
thine own Eyes: yet know thou that for all these things God will bring thee
unto Judgment. What a dismal day will the day of Judgment be to such deluded
Sinners? They will then at least find this Doctrine of Annihilation sadly
confuted, when they shall wish in vain, that they had never been born; and
shall call upon the Rocks and Mountains to do them so much kindness, as to
crush them into nothing. For certainly the gnawings of the Worm, and the
unquenchable burnings of Fire denote another state than that of Annihilation. I
hope by this time you will allow me to say with the Psamist in the Text, Thou,
even thou, O Lord, art to be feared. Believe it, there is no contending with
Almighty God Let the Potsherds strive with the Potsherds of the Earth, but woe
unto him that striveth with his Maker. Cease therefore to do evil, and learn to
do well; perfect Holiness in this fear of the Lord all the days of your lives,
and then that God who is able to destroy you, will be found as able, and much
more willing to save you for the Merits of your dearest Savior Jesus Christ,
to whom, etc.

SERMON II.
Revel. ii. 5. I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy Candlestick
out of his place, except thou repent.
ST. Ierom says of this Book of Revelations, that it has as many Mysteries as
Words; and St. Austin gives a like Character of it, when he tells us, it will
exercere mentes legentium, that is, set their Wits to work, who set themselves
to read it. But notwithstanding all this, what is said of the Scripture in
general, is also true of this Scripture in particular: Namely, that though there
be many Floods, yet there are many Fords, though there be many Depths where the
greatest Elephants may swim, yet there are also some Shallows, where the least
Lambs will be able to wade. In some places the Holy Spirit soars aloft above
the reach of the Highest, and in other places he stoops so low, as to
condescend even to the Capacity of the Meanest: And so he does here in the
Text, where there are no difficulties to puzzle us, but plain things to
instruct and direct us. The Text is a part of that Epistle which was sent by
Christ to the Angel of the Church of Ephesus. Ephesus was a large City, upon
which depended several lesser places, as the Learned Hammond and others
observe. And according to that Government Christ had set up in his Church;
there was an Angel or Bishop constituted to oversee the Flock of Christ in
these places. Hence St. Austin, speaking of the seven Angels which are
mentioned in this Book of Revelations, styles them the Bishops or Governors of
these seven Churches. Such a Bishop or Angel was set over the Church of
Ephesus; and Antiquity tells us, Onesimus was their Bishop; to this Bishop or
Angel does Christ send an Epistle, as may be learned from ver. 1 of this
Chapter, Unto the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, write. The whole Epistle,
besides the Prologue and the Epilogue, consists of four Principal Parts.

First, A commendation of them for their Labor and Patience, and unwillingness
to suffer them that are Evil, ver. 2, 3.

Secondly, A Reprehension, wherein they are blamed for leaving their First
Love, and abating something of the Zeal and Fervor for the Gospel of Christ,
verse. 4. And,

Thirdly, An Exhortation to things of great Importance here, in the beginning
of the Text, Remember from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do thy first
works. And,

Fourthly, A Commination in the last words of the Verse, Else I will come unto
thee quickly, and will remove thy Candlestick out of his place. For the fuller
understanding of which words,

First, We will first inquire why the Church of Christ is compared unto a
Candlestick.

Secondly, Show you that this Candlestick may be removed out of his place.

Thirdly, That it is an heavy Judgment to have this Candlestick removed out of
his place.

Fourthly, The Causes of this heavy Judgment. And,

Fifthly, The Means to prevent it. I begin,

First, With the first of these, Namely, to enquire why the Church of Christ is
compared unto a Candlestick. That the Church of Christ is compared to a
Candlestick, is plain from Chap. 1. 20. where we are told, that The seven Stars
are the Angels of the seven Churches; and the seven Candlesticks are the seven
Churches. And well may the Church of Christ be compared unto a Candlestick,
since it holds forth the Word of God, which is so often compared unto a Light.
We have a more sure word of prophecy, says St. Peter, whereunto ye do well
that ye take heed, as unto a light shining in a dark place. 2 Pet. 1. 19. To
the same purpose is that of David, Psalm. 119. 105. Thy word is a lamp unto my
feet, and a light unto my path. The World indeed, of it self, is a very dark
place, and stands in need of Light: It is a dark and dismal place, in respect
of those manifold troubles and miseries which infest this Life. Now the Word of
God is a Light which helps to scatter and disperse these Mists of Trouble. So
King David found it, Psalm. 119. 50. This is my comfort in my affliction; thy
word has quickened me. The whole world, says St. John, lies in wickedness; and
it were impossible for us to find our way to Heaven without the light of God's
Word. But God is so gracious, as to give us his Word to be a lamp unto our
feet, and a light unto our paths. How ought we then to prize and value the
Church of God, which is no less than the Light of the World; without the
direction whereof, we must have wandered up and down the Wilderness, and never
have found out the way to Canaan! There is no Salvation out of the Church, Nec
erit illi Deus Pater, cui non est Ecclesia Matter; God, says St. Cyprian, will
not be his Father, who does not own the Church for his Mother. Had we been born
without the Pale of the Church, we had been Aliens from the Commonwealth of
Israel; Strangers to the Covenant of Promise, without God, without Christ, and
without Hope in this World. Sure then we who are born within the Pale of God's
Church, and enjoy the glorious Light of the Gospel, should rejoice in this
Light, and learn to Prize and Value it; otherwise we may be deprived of it, and
lose all the advantages thereof, as will appear by considering the Second
General.

Secondly, Which is to show that this Candlestick may be removed out of his
place. This is plain from the words of the Text, where we have our Savior
speaking thus to the Church of Ephesus, Except thou repent, I will come unto
thee quickly, and remove thy Candlestick out of his place. Christ's Church
therefore may fail and be extinguished. But for the more distinct decision of
this point, we must carefully distinguish of Christ's Catholic and Universal
Church, and of some particular Church of Christ, seated in some particular
Kingdom or Nation; as the Church of England, the Church of Scotland, the Church
of Denmark, and the like. Now,

1st. It is certain in the first place, that the Catholic or Universal Church
can never fail, and be totally extinguished; this larger Candlestick shall
never be removed. We have several promises in Scripture, which assure us of the
perpetuity of Christ's Church, and that it shall continue even unto the end of
the World. So our Savior promises his Apostles, Mat. 28. ult. Lo, I am with
you always, even unto the end of the world. And again, Mat. 16. 18. it is said,
that Christ has built his Church upon a Rock, and the gates of Hell shall not
prevail against it. Thus firm and stable is the Catholic Church, as St.
Chrysostom speaks elegantly, it may be assaulted, but not defeated; it may be
distressed, but not destroyed; it may be wounded, but it shall not fall; it may
be tossed, but not wrecked; it may, and shall be militant, but yet never be
overcome. But,

2ly. Though the Catholic and Universal Church be thus stable and perpetual, yet
no particular Church can claim this privilege: The Church of any particular
Place or Nation, may utterly fail, and have its Candlestick removed from it.
This is threatened in the Text to the Church of Ephesus, and has been the sad
fate of several other particular Churches. For where are those many Famous
Churches in Africa, which were so glorious and flourishing in the days of St.
Austin? Where are those seven Golden Candlesticks, those seven Famous Churches
of Asia St. John mentions in the three first Chapters of this Book of
Revelations? Are they not utterly ruined and destroyed? And dwells there any
thing in these places but Ignorance, Barbarity and Mahumetanism? Thus ye see it
is most plain, that though the Catholic shall never fail, yet the Church of any
particular Place and Nation may. Though he will not remove his Candlestick quite
out of the World, but will always have a Church in some place or other; yet it
is not certain it shall be in this or that Nation: He may remove his
Candlestick from England, or Holland, or any other particular Nation, which has
filled up the measure of their Iniquity. In such a case he deals with them as
our Savior threatens to deal with the Jews, Mat. 21. 43. Therefore I say unto
you, the Kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a Nation bringing
forth the fruits thereof. Thus Christ threatened, and because the Jews did not
repent, he dealt with them accordingly; for they are now become Loammi, no more
a People, but wrath is come upon them to the uttermost. I cannot dismiss this
point, without an Inference or two. And,

1st. If every particular Church may fail, then the Church of Rome is vain in
boasting so much of her Perpetuity and Indefectibility. We know she is but a
part of the Catholic Church, and a very corrupt part of it too; and therefore
in vain do they fancy, that the gates of Hell shall never prevail against them.
St. Paul gives them better advice, Rom 11. 21, 22. Be not high minded, but
fear; for of God spared not the natural branches, take heed lest he also spare
not thee. This Epistle, ye know, is written to the Church of Rome; and if this
Church of Rome had been Infallible and Perpetual, St. Paul had mightily failed
in his Logic; for he makes them subject to the same fate which befell the
Jews, and that they might fail as well as they had done.

2ly. Since particular Churches may fail, then this should make them study
their preservation, and use such means as may be effectual to that purpose. If
the Professors of Christianity, in any Nation, shall become vain in their
imaginations, exchanging plain and wholesome Truth, for fond Speculations and
Opinions; if they shall turn Factious and Schismatical, neglecting their
Spiritual Guides and Pastors; if they be Dissolute in their Manners, and
confute their Religion by their Lives; they will provoke God to remove his
Candlestick, and bring confusion upon them. Christ is so far from promising
safety and protection to any particular Church and People, who neglect their
own safety that he threatens ruin and destruction to them, except thou
repentest, I will come unto thee quickly, and remove thy Candlestick out of his
place. How careful then should we, of this Nation, be to preserve the Gospel
among us, left God carry it away from us unto a People that will better bring
forth the fruits thereof? And to excite us all to this study and carefulness, I
proceed in the third place to,

Thirdly, Show you, that it is an heavy Judgment to have this Candlestick
removed out of his place. It is in the Text threatened as an heavy Judgment to
the Church of Ephesus, Except thou repent, says Christ, I will come unto thee
quickly, and remove thy Candlestick out of his place. So our Savior threatens
it as an heavy Judgment unto the Jews, Mat. 21. 43. Therefore I say unto you,
the Kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a Nation bringing
forth the fruits thereof. And the greatness of the Judgment will appear at
large from these following particulars.

1st. It deprives a Nation of its chiefest Honor. As it is the highest Honor
in this World to be related to an Earthly King, so it is a much higher Honor
to be related to the King of Kings. Hence is that of the Prophet Isay, Chap.
43. 4. Since thou wast precious in my sight, thou have been honorable. Now all
this Honor is lost, when once a Nation loses its Relation to God. Thus God
dealt with the Jews, Hosea 1. 9. Then said God, call his name Lo-ammi, for ye
are not my People, and I will not be your God. When God removes his
Candlestick, and rejects a Nation from being his People, they become then as
contemptible as Heathens and Infidels, as vile and despicable as the Jews have
been in the World ever since God disowned them for his People.

2ly. This heavy Judgment does also deprive a Nation of God's special care and
providence. We know God's Church and People are as dear to him as the Apple of
his Eye; and he is, as he has promised, a Wall of Fire round about them. Now a
Wall of Fire is both Defensive and Offensive, and denotes that God by his
special Providence does not only defend his chosen People, but also offends and
destroys their Enemies. Behold, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 33. 18. Behold, take
notice of this, says he, namely, that the Eye of the Lord is upon them that
fear him: Of these he takes a special Care, and exercises a most tender and
watchful Providence over them, to deliver their Soul from Death, and to keep
them alive in the time of Famine: thus happy are the People whose God is the
Lord. But if by our Sins we provoke God to remove our Candlestick out of his
place, and reject us from being his People, then shall we lose our right and
title to this his special Care and Providence; we shall soon then become a prey
unto our Enemies, a reproach and by word to all that are round about us. When
the Jewish Nation had filled up the Measure of their Iniquity, a Dreadful Voice
was heard in their Temple, saying, Migremus hinc, migremus hinc, let us go
hence, let us go hence; intimating that God and his Holy Angels were then
departing from them, and withdrawing their Care and Providence over them: And
presently after this the Abomination of Desolation was brought upon them, so
that they have ceased ever since, not only to be the Church and People of God,
but also to be a Nation; being scattered and dispersed up and down the World,
and hated in all places. But this will appear yet farther.

3ly. To be an heavy Judgment, if we consider that the Holy Ghost in Scripture,
esteems it an heavier Judgment than others are. Adversity and Oppression are
heavy Judgments, and yet but light in comparison of this. So much may be
gathered from Isaiah 30. 20. Though the Lord give you the Bread of Adversity, and
the Water of Affliction: yet shall not thy Teachers be removed into a corner
any more; but thine Eyes shall see thy Teachers, and thine Ears shall hear a
Voice behind thee, saying, this is the way, walk in it. Though oppression and
Adversity be heavy burdens, yet are they nothing to the loss of Teachers, and
the deprivation of God's Ordinances. So long as God's Candlestick shines
amongst us, and we enjoy the great advantages of Prayers, Sermons and
Sacraments, other Judgments may the better be dispensed with. Famine is another
very sore Judgment; when this rages, God is said to march through the Land in
indignation, Hab. 3 12. and we will not stick to believe it, when we consider
the direful effects and consequences of Famine. We read in our Chronicles that
there was formerly such a dreadful Famine in this Island, that when Malefactors
were lead out of Prison toward the place of Exeeution, the poor hungry People
would presently fall upon them, and tearing them in pieces, eat them up. And we
will not wonder at it, when we read Ezekiel. 5 10. Of Fathers eating up their
Sons, and Sons their Fathers: And which is stanger and more unnatural yet, we
find Lamen. 4 10. Tender compassionate Women, forced by the extremity of
hunger, to sees their own Children. These are horrid instances of a dreadful
Judgment, and yet we have a sadder instance of it; and Famine is said to be
such a devourer, as causes a man to devour himself, as you may read Isai. 9.
20. where every man is brought in eating the Flesh of his own Arm. Thus great
and heavy a Judgment is Famine; yea, by some it is thought to be one of the
sorest Heaven can inflict; and yet it is inferior to this of the Text, when
God in wrath removes our Candlestick out of his place; when he takes his Gospel
away from us, and deprives us of all the privileges and advantages of his Holy
Ordinances. No less than this is asserted, Amos 8. 11, 12. Behold, the days
come, says the Lord God, that I will send a Famine in the Land, not a Famine
of Bread, not a thirst of Water, but of hearing the Word of the Lord, And they
shall wander from Sea to Sea, and from the North even to the East shall they
run to and fro, to seek the Word of the Lord, and shall not find it. Thus a
Famine of the Word is a sorer Judgment than the Famine of Bread; and well
indeed it may, since the one destroys only the Body, the other destroys the
Soul. If the Light of the Gospel be taken away, worse than Egyptian darkness
will ensue, such as will cause us to fall, and that into the bottomless Pit,
from whence there is no Redemption. Thus I have dispatched the three Generals,
and shown you that it is an heavy Judgment to have our Candlestick removed out
of his place. For this heavy Judgment deprives a Nation of its Chiefest Honor,
and makes them become Lo-ammi, or no people: It deprives them also of God's
special Care and Providence, and renders them an easy prey unto their Enemies.
And, lastly, it surpasses the sorest of God's Judgments; and a Famine of Bread
is far more tolerable than a Famine of the Word. These Considerations, if any,
will teach us to value God's Ordinances at an higher rate than formerly we
have, and excite our greatest care and diligence to prevent such an heavy
Judgment as this; and to help us to perform this Duty the better, I come in the
fourth place,

Fourthly, Briefly to consider some of those Causes which bring such an heavy
Judgment upon a Nation. And

1st. Sin is the General Cause of this heavy Judgment; we need no other proof
of this than the Text it self, where Christ bids the Church of Ephesus remember
from whence she had fallen, and repent, and do the first works. Nothing but our
Iniquities can separate betwixt our God and us; if we do not repent of them,
they will be our ruin. For God will not continue his Gospel to a backsliding
and disobedient People, but will take it away, and give it to a Nation that
will better bring forth the Fruits thereof.

2ly. The contempt of God's Word and his Messengers is another Cause of this
heavy Judgment. This may easily be gathered from 2 Chronicles. 36. 15, 16. Where we
are told, that the Lord God sent to the Jews by his Messengers, rising up
betimes, and sending, because he had compassion on his People, and on his
dwelling Place. But they mocked the Messengers of God, and despised his Words,
and misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose against his People,
till there was no remedy. So Amos 8. where the Prophet threatens them with a
Famine of the Word, he assigns this among other reasons, ver. 5. namely,
because they profaned his Sabbaths, and despised his Ordinances. And indeed
when a Nation undervalues the Light of the Gospel, and judge themselves unworthy
of it, it is but just with God to remove their Candlestick, and carry his
Gospel to a People more worthy of it.

3ly. Schisms and Divisions are another grand Cause of this heavy Judgment.
Historians tell us, that this was it which opened the way to the Turks and
Saracens to overflow the Eastern Churches, and let Mahumetanism into the World.
It was this which brought that deluge of Goths and Vandals, and other barbarous
Nations upon the West: And indeed we need not wonder at it, since S. James
tells us, Chap. 3. 16. That where envying and strife is, there will be
confusion and every evil work. Thus I have dispatched the fourth General, and
shown you some of those Causes which provoke God to remove his Candlestick from
a People and Nation. Sin in the General is the Cause of it: In particular the
contempt of God's Messengers and his Ordinances, and those Schisms and
Divisions which rage in a Nation: And if we should now reflect upon our selves,
I fear we should find so much wickedness and debauchery raging in the Land;
such gross profanation of God's Sabbaths, contempt of his Messengers and his
Ordinances, and withal so many dangerous Schisms and Factions amongst us, as
may justly cause us to dread the heavy Judgment of the Text. But I will not
foretell your danger, but exhort you to prevent it, and that by Repentance as
the Text directs. Which

Fifthly, brings me to the fifth and last General proposed, which is, to show
you the Means to prevent this heavy Judgment. Now this cannot better be
learned, than from that advice Christ gives the Church of Ephesus in this place
remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first
works. Repentance therefore is the best means we can take to appease God's
Wrath, and prevent his Judgments. If we repent of the evil of our ways, God
also will repent of the evil we have reason enough to fear he is bringing upon
us. Hear what is said to this purpose in the Prophet, Jer. 3. 12. Return, O
back sliding Israel, says the Lord, and I will not cause mine anger to fall
upon you, for I am merciful. What a gracious motive is here urged? What will
persuade us to repent, if the hopes of Mercy will not? In what a sad condition
should we be, if God should remove our Candlestick out of his place; if he
should take away his glorious Gospel from us, and deprive us of all the
advantages and privileges of his Holy Ordinances? Indeed our sins call aloud
for such heavy Judgments. Our Superiors both in Church and State have
acknowledged for us, that profane Swearing, Perjury, Drunkenness, and a
violation of God's Sabbaths, have sadly made this Land to mourn. And may we not
add, a great contempt of God's Word, a misusing of his Messengers, a slighting
of his Ordinances, besides those Factions and Schisms which abound among us?
And may not God justly visit for these things? Oh then it is time that we
should all smite upon our Breasts, and return unto the Lord with humiliation
and repentance, that our iniquities may not be our ruin, but every kind of
Repentance will not serve the turn: the Greek word in the Text is (...), which
Lactantius translates mutationes mentis in melius, that is, a change of the
Mind from worse to better; not a change of the Looks, or hanging down the Head
like a Bullrush, for all this may be done by a Pharisee or an Hypocrite. It is
not a change of our Apparel, or a putting on of Sackcloath; for such
humiliation and repentance may be performed by a wicked Ahab; but the
Repentance of the Text denotes a real change of the Mind; or as the Prophet
Joel describes it, a turning unto the Lord with all our Hearts, Chap. 2. 12.
Such a Repentance as this, will make us fruitful in every good word and work,
and pay an universal Obedience to all God's Commandments; it will make us
reform our Lives, honor God's Gospel, value his Ordinances, and have no hand
in the encouraging those Schisms and Divisions which are amongst us: This is
the Repentance Christ recommends; and if it be carefully Practiced by us we may
prevent the heavy Judgment of the Text, and procure the continuance of the
Gospel amongst us; which God Almighty grant for the sake of Jesus Christ, etc.

The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Love of God, etc.

SERMON III.
2 Pet. iii. 28. But Grow in Grace.
IT is a Famous Dispute among Papists and Protestants, where St. Peter was when
he wrote this and his former Epistle: The Papists would have him to be at Rome,
that they may the better establish their Papal Monarchy, and derive the
Succession of their Bishops from that great Apostle. But St. Peter himself
tells us that he was at Babylon 1 Pet. 5. 13. The Church that is at Babylon
elected together with you, saluteth you. Indeed St. John, in his Book of the
Revelations, takes Babylon in a mystical sense for Rome, which well became his
prophetic and mystical style; but there is no reason to believe that St.
Peter, who, in these Epistles writes no Prophecy, but only plain Instruction,
for the dispersed Jews, should take Babylon in any other than a Literal Sense,
namely for that Ancient and famous City which was the Metropolis of Chaldea;
and indeed there are sundry Arguments to induce this belief. As,

First, St. Paul, who about this time wrote this Epistle to the Romans, makes
no mention at all of St. Peter's being then at Rome, notwithstanding he sends
Commendation to all that were of Eminency in the Church.

Secondly, It is agreed on by both Papists and Protestants, that the
Apostleship of the Jews was in a peculiar manner committed to St. Peter, as
that of the Gentiles was to St. Paul. This St. Ierom calls Principale Mandatum,
the main of their Commission; from whence it necessarily follows, that St.
Peter's chief employment must be where the greatest numbers of Jews were. Now it
is certain that Babylon in Chaldea was the place where the Jews resided in
greatest numbers after their Captivity.

Thirdly, St. Peter directs his Epistles to the Jews scattered throughout
Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, which all belonged to the
Jurisdiction of the Patriarch of Babylon.

Fourthly, St. Peter, writing to these dispersed Jews, rehearses several
Nations where they resided, as Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia,
but leaves out Chaldea, where they resided in greatest numbers, which he would
never have done, had not Chaldea been the place from whence he wrote these
Epistles. I shall add but one Argument more, from Acts 18. 2. where we are
told, that Claudius Caesar commanded all the Jews to depart from Rome; so that
we may conclude St. Peter would not keep his residence there, where he wanted
his Flock committed to his Charge; and therefore it is more rational to believe
he resided at Babylon, where vast numbers of the Jews resided also. I have
premised thus much to prove that St. Peter wrote these two Epistles from
Babylon in Chaldea; because it will follow from hence, that the Papists have
not one Text of Scripture to found their belief of St. Peter's being at Rome,
though on it depends their whole Papal Monarchy: For this is the only Text they
pretend to, and you see how little it makes for their purpose, so that they
have nothing but human Testimony to build this great Article of their Faith
upon, and that such as is derived from Papias, a weak, credulous person, as
Eusebius styles him. By this time you will in some measure understand the Place
from which, and the Persons to whom St. Peter writes; and being shortly, as he
tells them, to put off his Earthly Tabernacle, we need not doubt the excellency
of those Instructions he bequeaths to the Jews: All which he concludes with the
most important words of the Text, Grow in Grace. For the better understanding
of which,

First, We will first consider the Duty it self, Grow in Grace.

Secondly, We will enquire what is that degree or stature of Grace a Christian
must grow to before he can assure himself of Eternal Salvation.

Thirdly, Whether any farther growth in Grace be attainable in this Life.

Fourthly, What Reasons and Encouragements we have to endeavor after the
highest degrees of Grace. I begin with the first of these.

First, Namely to consider the Duty it self, which is to Grow in Grace. A
Christians life must be a continual progress in Holiness; he must not with
Hercules, erect his Pillars, and write a non ultra upon them, saying hitherto
will I go and no farther: for true Grace is of a growing and multiplying
Nature; so that the good Christian must not be content with his present
seize, but with St. Paul, he must always be pressing forward, forgetting
those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are
before. To this purpose is that Character Solomon gives of the just Man, Prove.
4 18. The Paths of the Just is as the Shining Light, that shines more and more
unto the perfect Day. He is not like Iosuahs Sun that stood still in the
Firmament, much less like Hezekiahs, which went ten degrees backward; but he is
like David's Sun which comes forth as a Bridegroom out of his Chamber, and
rejoices as a Giant to run his Race. Now this growth in Grace denotes at least
these two blessings.

First, The getting all sorts of Graces; And,

Secondly, Serious endeavors after the highest degrees of them.

First, This growth in Grace denotes the getting all sorts of Graces. It is a
known Maxim in Philosophy, aucto toto augetur quaelibet pars, in the Natural
Growth of Plants, when the whole increases, every part increases also; and
the Maxim holds in Spiritual Growths too: For all the Faculties of the Soul are
improved together, and the New Creature must be adorned with all sorts of
Virtue. To this purpose is that saying of Cicero, Omnes virtutes inter se nexae
conjugataeque sunt, all the Virtues, says he, are linked and joined together,
so that he that has one, must have them all. Hence we find Christ's Spouse in
the Canticles, compared to a pleasant Garden, which is adorned with great
variety of Flowers, and perfumed with all sorts of Fragrant Spices; thus the
Kings Daughter must be all Glorious within. The good Christian that will grow
in Grace must be possessed with all sorts of Virtues, according to that
exhortation our Apostle gives, Chap. 1. 5. Give all diligence, says he, and
add to your Faith, Virtue; and to Virtue, Knowledge; and to Knowledge,
Temperance; and to Temperance, Patience; and to Patience, Godliness; and to
Godliness, Brotherly Kindness, and to Brotherly Kindness, Charity. All these
Virtues must dwell together; and that man has none of them, who has them not
all in some degree and measure. But,

Secondly, This Growth in Grace, as it denotes the getting all sorts of
Virtues, so it denotes our serious endeavors after the highest degrees of
them. As the growing Christian must add Virtue to Virtue, and pile one Grace
upon another; so he must not sit down with some lower seize, but advance
to the highest pitch and degree of every Grace. I need not tell you that there
are several degrees in every Grace and Virtue, the number of which is variously
reported by Learned Men. Aristotle, that Prince of Philosophers, reckons but
eight; Gregory the Great, fifteen; Johannes Climachus doubles the number, and
makes them Thirty. But these Great Men do all fall short of the truth, for
there cannot be fewer than infinite degrees in every Virtue; seeing God
Almighty possesses them all in infinite degrees of Perfection. Now this is the
Pattern which is proposed to the Christians imitation: For as our Savior
speaks, he must endeavor to be perfect even as his Heavenly Father is perfect.
Sure then he must endeavor to grow very high, who is to grow as high as
Heaven; he must not be content with low seize, who is to imitate the
infinite Perfections of the Divine Nature. Thus the Righteous must hold on in
his way, and he that has clean Hands, must wax stronger and stronger,
according to the advice of St. Ierom; it must be his constant study to grow in
Grace as he grows in Years. Like the Vine to which the Holy Ghost so frequently
compares him, he must know no other period of his growth, than that of his
Life; and like Caleb, must be active and vigorous, even at eighty years of Age.
The serious Christian still finds something that needs to be amended; something
also decayed he must be careful to repair, and something not yet attained he
must press hard after. As the diligent Be flies from Flower Flower, that it
may gather greater plenty and abundance of Honey; so the serious Christian goes
from Duty to Duty, and from Ordinance to Ordinance, out of a longing desire to
gain higher degrees of Grace. To this purpose is that Character the Psalmist
gives of a Righteous Man, Psalm. 92. 12. etc. The Righteous shall flourish like
the Palm Tree; he shall grow like a Cedar in Lebanon; those that be planted in
the House of the Lord, shall flourish in the Courts of our God. They shall
still bring forth Fruit, yea even in Old Age; they shall be fat and
flourishing. What elegant and significant Expressions are these! Here is not
only mention of growing, but of Flourishing too, and here is Flourishing
mentioned no less than three times, and it is the flourishing not of an
ordinary Tree, but of a Palm tree, which is famous for its Flourishing under
the heaviest burdens: Nay further, it is flourishing like a Cedar, and that
not growing in a barren Wilderness, but in Lebanon it self, where the Best, the
Goodliest, the Tallest Cedars grew: Nor is he said only to Flourish in Boughs
and Leaves; but also in Fruit; and that not for one year only; but the
Righteous Man is still bringing forth Fruit, and that not only in the Years of
his Youth, or the beginning of Grace, but in Old Age too. What a Divine Climax,
what an Elegant Gradation is here used by the Holy Ghost to represent the
continual growings of a Righteous Man in Virtue! He is still climbing higher
and higher, till he climbs as high as Heaven. Thus have I considered the Duty
it self, Grow in Grace. And come now in the Second place,

Secondly, to enquire what is that Degree or Stature of Grace a Christian must
grow to, before he can assure himself of Eternal Salvation. I have shown
already, that the degrees of Grace and Virtue are no less than Infinite; so
many indeed, that the best of Christians may more easily endeavor after them
than ever perfectly acquire or attain them. But notwithstanding all this, there
are certain degrees of Grace, which must be attained to, before a Christian can
have any comfortable assurance of his Eternal Salvation. There is such a state
of Holiness and Perfection he must grow to in this Life, before he can have any
evidence of his Title to a better Life. Now for your better information in this
important Point, I shall show you these two things.

First, That there is a certain growth in Grace attainable in this World, which
is sufficient to assure us of Eternal Salvation.

Secondly, What this saving growth in Grace imports.

First, Let me show you, that there is a certain growth in Grace attainable in
this World, which is sufficient to assure us of Eternal Salvation. Solomon
tells us, Prove. 4. 18. That the Path of the Just is as the shining Light, which
shines more and more unto the perfect Day. There is therefore a perfect Day of
Grace the Just Man may arrive at; and this will receive farther light from
those Elegant Expressions of our Apostle, 2 Pet. 1. 19. We have, says he, a
more sure word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well, that ye take heed, as to a
Light shining in a Dark Place, until the Day dawn; and the Day Star arise in
your Hearts. It is plain from hence, that the Day Star of Grace does arise in
the Hearts of Believers in this Life, such as will be sufficient to bring us to
Heaven. It is yet a clearer proof of this, which you will find Ephesians. 4. 11. where
St. Paul tells us, that Christ at his Ascension gave Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers, for the edifying of the Church, and the
perfecting of the Saints, till we all come in the unity of the Faith, and of
the Knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect Man, unto the measure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ: From hence it is plain, that there is a just
and full stature Christians may grow to in this Life; they may come to the
Perfect Man, that is, to such degrees of Grace, to such a state of Evangelical,
though not Legal or Absolute Perfection, as will be sufficient to carry them to
Heaven. As in natural growths Men have a fixed and determinate stature to which
they arrive; so in spiritual growths there is a certain stature too, which,
when we arrive at, we become perfect Men, and Complete Christians, that is,
such as are infallibly in a state of Salvation.

Thus I have shown you, that there is a certain growth of Grace attainable in
this Life, which is sufficient to assure us of Eternal Salvation. I come now in
the second place to show you, what this saving Growth in Grace imports, and
that both Negatively and Positively. And,

1st. It does not import an absolute freedom from all sin, but is consistent
with sins of ignorance and infirmity. There is no state of absolute perfection
on this side the Grave; for there is Dung in all our Sacrifices, and our very
Righteousness is as filthy Rags. As the best Grain has its Chaff; and the
brightest Marble its Spots and Flaws; so the best of Christians want not a
mixture of sin; and the highest Saints have some allay of Original Corruption.
Hence Solomon tells us, that the justest man falls seven times a day; and St.
John, though the beloved Disciple, comprehends himself in those expressions of
his, 1 John 1. 8. If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the
Truth is not in us. Plain therefore it is, that sins of ignorance and infirmity
are consistent with this saving growth in Grace.

2ly. This saving growth in Grace, is also consistent with some falls into
wilful and presumptuous sins. Thus David, a man after Gods own Heart, was
guilty of Pride in Numbering the People; of Adultery also and Murder, which he
himself calls presumptuous sins; and yet recovered himself into a state of
Salvation, by this timely Repentance. Thus also the Prodigal, in the Parable,
was upon his Repentance, reinstated in his Fathers Favor: so that willful and
presumptuous sins, if repented of, are consistent with this saving growth in
Grace.

3ly. Saving growth in Grace denotes such an habitual obedience to all God's
Holy Laws, as allows no continuance or practice in any known sins. St. John
gives a true Character of a Child of God, 1 John 3. 9. Whosoever is born of
God, says he, commits not sin, that is, he does not live in the practice of
any known willful and deliberate sin: And this he illustrates by the contrary
Character, of a Child of the Devil, verse. 8. He that commits sin, is of the
Devil, for the Devil sins from the beginning, that is, goes on in a constant
trade and practice of wickedness without repentance. He therefore that is a
Child of God, and has attained to a saving growth in Grace, is one that does
not sin after this manner; through the main tenor of his Life he pays a sincere
obedience to all the Laws of God; his Actions are generally innocent and
laudable; and when at any time, like David, he falls into presumptuous sins, as
he does so very seldom, so he always declares his abhorrence of them by a
speedy and suitable repentance. Thus I have dispatched the second General, and
shown you what is that degree or stature of Grace a Christian must grow to,
before he can assure himself of Eternal Salvation. I come now in the third
Place to inquire,

Thirdly, Whether any farther growth in Grace be attainable in this Life, than
what is just necessary to eternal Salvation: And indeed if it were not so, all
God's Saints would be of the same size and stature, they would all be equal as
to their degrees and measures of Grace. But though all of them have enough to
carry them to Heaven, yet there is a difference in their seize, and some,
like Saul, are taller than the rest by the Head and Shoulders. For every Saint
has not the pleriphory or strong Faith of Abraham, the Meekness of Moses, the
patience of Job, the zeal of Josiah, the temperance of Timothy, or the
diligence of St. Paul, who is said to have labored more abundantly than the
rest of the Apostles. All indeed have so much Grace as is necessary to
Salvation, yet it seems they have not all the same eminent degrees and measures
of Grace. Some with their Pound, do only gain five; others by their greater
diligence, gain ten pounds, as we have it in the known Parable: And for this
reason God is pleased to promise higher degrees of Glory, proportionable to
those higher degrees of Grace men attain to in this Life. Some shall have their
Aureolae, as the Schoolmen speak, that is larger Crowns of Glory than ordinary
Saints shall wear, and those adorned with peculiar Ensigns of Honor, as St.
Paul tells us, 2 Cor. 9. 6. He that sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly; and
he that sows abundantly, shall reap abundantly; both it seems shall reap and
receive the rewards of their pious labors, but yet in different degrees,
according to their different services in this World. He that gains but five
Pounds shall be made Ruler over five Cities; whilst he that gains ten Pounds
shall be made Ruler over ten Cities. There is therefore a further growth in
Grace attainable in this Life, than what is just necessary to Salvation The
Christian therefore, who has arrived at this saving growth in Grace, is bound
still to advance higher, and endeavor after further Improvements in every
instance of Virtue: For we are enjoined, not only to do the Work of the Lord,
but to abound in it; not only to grow in Grace, but also to grow till we be
perfect, even as our Heavenly Father is perfect. Here therefore is work enough
cut out to employ all our faculties for ever; and though we should be growing in
Grace to all Eternity, we shall still fall short of that Infinite Standard of
Perfection, whereunto we are obliged to aspire. But though we are not able to
reach the Infinite Perfections of God, yet by our greater watchfulness over our
selves, by our more frequent Fastings, fervent Devotions, zealous attendance on
Ordinances, and eminent works of Charity; by these and such like Heroic
Exploits, we shall more nearly resemble God, and obtain a larger share of
Happiness: Whereas those that content themselves with such a lower growth as is
just necessary to Salvation, shall not indeed forfeit Heaven, but only those
higher degrees of Happiness which are to be enjoyed there. Thus I have
dispatched the third General, and shown you, that there is a further growth in
Grace attainable in this Life, than what is just necessary to Salvation. I come
now,

Fourthly, In the fourth place to show you what Reasons and Encouragements we
have to endeavor after the highest degrees of Grace. And,

1st. Our serious endeavors after the highest degrees of Grace, will be an
excellent means to preserve that saving growth in Grace the pious Christian has
already attained to. There is a dangerous Opinion in the World, that a man
cannot totally and finally fall away from Grace. According to these men's
sentiments, he that is once sincerely Righteous, will infallibly hold on and
persevere unto the end. Now if this Opinion were true, this exhortation would
be vain. But certainly nothing can be more contrary to the plain Doctrine of
the Scripture: Hear what St. Peter says, Chap. 1. of this Epistle, verse. 10.
Give all diligence, says he, to make your Calling and Election sure; for if
you do these things you shall never fall. You see he puts an if in the case,
such as fairly implies, that we may neglect our Duty, and fall from our own
stedfastness. For the same reason St. Paul gives this necessary Caution, Romans
11. 20. etc. Be not highminded, but fear; for if God spared not the natural
branches, take heed lest he also spare not thee. Behold therefore the goodness
and severity of God; on them which fall severity; but toward thee goodness, if
thou continue in his goodness; otherwise thou also shall be cut off. But a
fuller confutation of this dangerous Opinion we cannot desire, than what may be
gathered from the words of the Prophet, Ezekiel. 18. 24. When the righteous man
turns away from his righteousness, and commits iniquity, and does
according to all the abominations that the wicked man does, shall he live,
says the Lord? No, All his righteousness that he has done shall not be
mentioned; in his trespass that he has trespassed, and in his sin that he has
sinned, in them shall he die. Thus plain it is, that a Christian may fall away
from that saving state of Grace he has attained to. And what, I pray, is more
likely to secure his steadfastness than serious endeavors after the highest
degrees of Holiness? Our Apostle, it seems, thought so; for having in the
foregoing Verse given this necessary Caution, Beware, Brethren, lest you fall
from your own steadfastness; he presently subjoins in the Text, as the
properest means to secure them from falling, but grow in Grace. It is the same
in spiritual growths, that it is in naturals: For as a man by eating and
drinking, and other natural Actions, preserves his natural Life; so the
Christian, by serious endeavors after higher degrees of Holiness, preserves
his spiritual Life. The Musician screws up his Peg to an higher pitch, that he
may be sure it will not fall lower than the true Note: Even so the higher
degrees of Perfection we aspire to, the less danger shall we be in of falling
lower, than what is absolutely necessary. And this certainly is sufficient
encouragement to continue these our serious endeavors.

2ly. These serious endeavors after a further growth in Grace, than what is
absolutely necessary to Salvation, will give the pious Christian a more
comfortable assurance of Eternal Happiness. It is no doubt, a kind of Heaven
upon Earth to be assured of Heaven whilst we are here upon Earth. This is that
hidden Manna mentioned in the Revelations, which fills the Soul with all
variety of Delights. Now, nothing besides a particular Revelation from Heaven,
can be more likely to create this full assurance in the Soul, than these
Heroic seize of Grace and Virtue. Grace is that Seal of the Spirit, by
which we are marked and sealed unto the day of Redemption: And certainly the
brighter and more evident that Grace is, the more evident will it be to our own
selves, and the fuller our assurance of Heaven and Eternal Happiness. Many good
Christians are in a safe condition, and yet their condition is not so
comfortable, by reason of those fears and doubtings, which do often accompany
these lower degrees of Grace: But the more we abound in good Works, and the
more eminently our Graces shine, the more comfortable will our Assurance be,
and the clearer our Title to Heaven and Eternal Happiness. Read St. Paul's 11
Chap. to the Hebrews, where he sets down a large Calendar of God's eminent
Saints, such as advanced into the highest form of Piety and Virtue, and you will
find their Faith as great as was their growth in Grace, and their assurance of
Heaven bearing a just proportion to their improvements in Holiness. For St.
Paul describing their Faith, ver. 1. calls it the substance, or subsistence, of
things hoped for; the evidence, or clear demonstration, of things not seen.

3ly. These serious endeavors after the highest degrees of Grace, as they will
secure our Title to Heaven, and give us a more comfortable assurance of it for
the present, so they will hereafter advance us to higher degrees of Glory in
Heaven. We know there are different degrees of Glory in Heaven, even as one
Star differs from another Star in Glory, so also, says St. Paul, shall be
the Resurrection of the Just: As St. Austin speaks, Splendour dispar, Caelum
commune, the Saints shall dwell together in the same Heaven, but yet like
Stars, they shall shine with different Rays of Glory. Now these higher degrees
of Glory will be conferred on such who arrived at higher degrees of Grace:
Hence when our Savior tells his Disciples, John 14. 2. In my Fathers House are
many Mansions, Tertullian remarks thus upon the place, Quomodo multae
Mansiones, si non pro varietate Meritorum? Wherefore, says he, should our
Savior mention many Mansions in his Fathers House, if there were not several
Rooms of different Size and Glory provided for his Saints, according to the
variety of their deserts? Indeed Heaven has room enough to lodge all the Godly;
but as in other Magnificent* Palaces, so in this of Heaven, there are higher
and lower, larger and lesser Mansions, in which God's Saints shall be disposed
of according to those Services they have performed upon Earth. Their Rewards
hereafter shall be answerable to their Obedience here. See then what
encouragement there is to endeavor after the highest degrees of Glory. These
it seems, will create an Heaven in our Souls whilst we live here on Earth.
These will at our Deaths, carry our Souls as high as Heaven; nay, which is
more, they will lodge them in the best Mansions there. Hence is that of our
Apostle, Chap. 1. 11. If these things be in you, and abound, then shall an
entrance be ministered unto you abundantly, into the everlasting Kingdom of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Having therefore these Promises, Dearly Beloved,
let us cleanse our selves from all Filthiness both of Flesh and Spirit,
perfecting Holiness in the fear of the Lord. Let us go from Strength to
Strength, and grow from one degree of Grace unto another, until we appear
before our God in Sion. I shall conclude all with St. Paul's Exhortation, 1 Cor.
15. ult. Wherefore, my beloved Brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable, always
abounding in the work of the Lord; forasmuch as ye know, that your Labor shall
not be in vain in the Lord. This, God of his Infinite Mercy grant unto us all,
for the sake of Jesus Christ, etc.

SERMON IV.
Psalm. lxxvi. 10. Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee; the remainder of
wrath shall thou restrain.
THIS Psalm is confessed by all, to be a Psalm of Thanksgiving, a Song composed
to perpetuate the Memory of some wonderful and extraordinary Deliverance: But
what this Deliverance was, is not so well agreed on by Interpreters. Some would
have it to be a Psalm of David, penned to commemorate those Victories he
obtained over the Philistines, the Moabites and the Syrians; others would have
the occasion of it to have been the discomfiture of that formidable Army which
was brought up by the Ethiopians, in the days of Asa; but most understand it of
that remarkable defeat which was given by the Angel to Sennacheribs Army, in
the Reign of Hezekiah. Upon this account the LXX inscribe it (...), the Latin
Canticum ad Assyr^^^, that is, an Ode or Song made upon the Assyrians. And this
Interpretation will receive further Light from those words of verse. 5. The
stout-hearted are spoiled, they have slept their sleep, and none of the men of
might have found their hands. The Assyrian was now an Universal Monarch, his
Soldiers were reputed the stoutest hearted in the World, having made their
Valor renowned by their innumerable Conquests; but yet notwithstanding all
this, when they brought a formidable Army against Jerusalem, their Numbers and
their Strength did signify nothing; for the Angel of the Lord went forth, and
in one Night slew 185000 men in the Camp of the Assyrians, 2 Kings 19. 35. They
indeed slept their sleep; and the opinion of their own strength, and Hezekiahs
weakness, made them secure; but in the midst of their security, God smote them
in the nighttime by his Angel; so that the Mighty Men of valor slept indeed,
but it was the sleep of Death, for they never awakned again, never found their
Hands. Hence we read, 2 Chronicles. 32. 21. That the Captains, the Leaders, and all
the Mighty Men of Valor were cut off in the Camp of the King of Assyria. Thus
the God of Israel, who had been blasphemed by the Assyrians, vindicated his own
Honor, by this wonderful overthrow, and his Servant Hezekiah, who was
delivered, became Famous and Renowned amongst the Nations. Hence we read 2 Chronicles. 32. 23. That many brought Gifts unto the Lord, unto Jerusalem, and
Presents to Hezekiah, King of Judah; so that he was magnified in the fight of
all Nations from thenceforth. Thus the wrath of Man did praise the Lord; the
remainder of wrath he did restrain.

Before I can draw from the words, such Observations as the Solemnity of the
Day will require, I must bestow some little explication on them.

First, The wrath of Man, the Hebrew word is Chamath, and properly signifies
Rage. Though Anger, Wrath and Rage be often in Scripture used promiscuously, yet
sometimes they are distinguished; and indeed a real difference may be found
between them. For Anger is the boiling of the Blood about the Heart, a Fever
darted into the Veins, which causes a violent Commotion in the Spirits. Wrath
is the manifestation of this inward distemper by Looks, or Gesture, or Actions
tending to Revenge. But Rage is the height or extremity of both the former; it
causes the Heart to study Destruction, to mediate and contrive the utmost of
Mischief and Villainy, and the outward Man to watch all opportunities of putting
it in Execution, and that with the greatest depth of Malice and height of Fury.
One would think this one word had been sufficient to express that Helish Malice
which the Wicked bear against the Church of God. But what is Chamath in the
beginning of the Verse, is Chemoth in the close: What was put in the singular
number, is afterward put in the plural; for so the words should be rendered the
wrath of Man shall praise the Lord; the remainder of wraths or rages shall thou
restrain. The Rage of the Wicked is not small; their Fury does not terminate in
one Plot, but it is exceeding great, ever working and multiplying by
continuance; so that there is not any Design so Barbarous, any Conspiracy so
Bloody or Devlish, which their Rage will not put them upon; if one Plot fail,
they are ready for another; and like the troubled Sea, they never rest, but are
still casting up Mire and Dirt: Well then might the Psalmist call them Rages in
the plural number; they are as Gad, a Troop; or if you please, you may call
their Name Legion, they are so many. But,

Secondly, It is called the wrath of Man, in the Hebrew, the wrath of Adam.
This Livery can fit the Shoulders of none but a very wicked Man, one that is
descended from the First Adam, and is not yet ingrafted into the Second. But
yet it is some comfort, that he is but a Man, whose Heart is filled with all
this Rage; we may be safe it seems, so long as the God of Heaven is on our
side: He can restrain all this wrath, he can make it turn to the benefit of his
People, and his own Glory. The LXX are very ingenious upon the last words of my
Text; for what we translate the remainder of Wrath shall thou restrain, they
render (...) the Rage of Man shall keep Holy Day unto the Lord, and give his
People opportunity to Laud and Magnify his Glorious Name. By this you cannot
but understand how well the Text and the Day, will agree. We shall in the Day,
as well as in the Text find Anger, and Wrath, and Rage, yea Rages in the plural
number. And though our Adversaries call themselves Christians, and pretend to be
the only Catholics in the World; yet their Anger will be found to be fierce
and Cursed, their Wrath and Rage, Cruel; such as the Psalmist here calls the
Wrath, the Rage of Adam, of one that is not yet regenerate or grafted into the
New Stock. Their Plots have been many, their Conspiracies Black and Bloody; but
thanks be to Heaven, we have found our Enemies to be but Men, though Cruel and
Wicked to the height; we have had the experience of God's Power and Goodness
overruling and restraining their Wrath and Fury; so that if our Gratitude had
kept pace with our Mercies and Deliverances, we should have had more days of
Thanksgiving in our Calendar than now we have. But to help us a little in the
performance of these Duties, which this Solemn Day calls aloud for: I shall
observe from the words three Things.

First, That the Rage of the Wicked against God and his People is very great.

Secondly, God by his Providence wonderfully does overruled the Rage and Malice
of Wicked Men. And,

Thirdly, The end that God has in these Providence, his is Praise and Glory;
surely the wrath of Man shall praise thee.

First, The Rage of the Wicked against the People of God is very great. This is
the very Nature and Disposition of Wicked Men, as the Psalmist tells us, Psalm.
37. 12. The Wicked plotteth against the Just, and gnasheth upon him with his
Teeth. Nay so great is their Malice, that the Holy Ghost in Scripture, compares
them to Fire and Water, to Briars and Thorns, to Lions, Bulls, Dogs, Unicorns,
Wolves, and the like. You Will find this Truth also confirmed by a thousand
Examples: How did Cain hate his Brother Abel? What wrath did boil in Esau
against Jacob? How cruelly were the Israelites treated by the Egyptians? I
should be too prodigal of the time, should I reckon up all those Examples of
Holy Writ which are recorded for this purpose: I shall therefore content my
self at present, with the Example of Sennacherib, to which the Text, as you
hear, alludes. Now how did this Bloody Emperor swell with Rage, how full was
his Heart of Wrath! The Prophet Esaias, speaking of this proud Assyrian, Chap.
10. 7. tells us, that it was in his Heart to destroy and cut off Nations, not a
few. And what the Prophet avers of him, in the general, is confirmed more
particularly of him by Berosus, an Ancient Historian, which has left this
Character of him, Sennacherib, qui apud Assyrios regnabat, omnem Asiam and
Egyptum Bello infestabat; Sennacherib, says he, King of the Assyrians,
infested all Asia and Egypt with War. But though other Nations felt the weight of
his Wrath, yet none more than the People of God. For the Scripture tells us,
that he waged War three years together with the King of Israel, whom he took at
last, and carried him, with the ten Tribes into the Land of Captivity. Eight
years after this, his Rage brake forth against good Hezekiah; for we read 2
Kings 18. That he came up and seized into his Hands all the frontier Cities of
Judah: Whilst he was at Lacish, one of the frontier Cities, Hezekiah sent
Ambassadors, and purchased an Ignominious Peace at a very dear rate; for
Hezekiah was forced to give him all the Silver that was found in the House of
God, and in the Treasures of the Kings House; nay, all the Gold that was upon
the Doors and upon the Pillars of the Temple: And yet all this would not
satisfy his Wrath, but he presently sends Tartan, Rabsaris and Rabshakah with
a great Host against Jerusalem, and with words of Blasphemy against God
himself: Nay, Rabshakah threatens the People, that they should be forced to eat
their own Dung, and drink their own Piss. If all this be not sufficient to show
the Anger, the Wrath and the Rage of this proud Assyrian, I shall add one
instance of it more out of the Book of Tobit, where we find that after the
slaughter which the Angel made in Sennacheribs Army, he was forced to return
home, and dwell at his great City Niniveh; his Fury which was stopped at
Jerusalem, brake forth against the poor Jews, the Ten Tribes which were now
Captive at Niniveh, and therefore Tobit tells us, Chap. 1. 18. That when King
Sennacherib slew any of the Jews, after he was fled from Judea; I buried them
privily (for, says he, in his wrath he killed many.) Here was the remainder of
his Wrath, here was that which made it Rages in the plural number: But even
this remainder of Wrath did God restrain; for this wicked King was soon after
killed by his own Sons, in the House of Nisroth his God, as I shall show you
afterward. And as we have seen Anger and Wrath in the Text, so may we see much
more in the Day; and find the Rages of the Papists, far exceeding all the Rage
of these Barbarous Assyrians. It is the saying of St. Gregory, Dilatat Behemoth
Caudam suam in fine Mundi nequius, which Latin I cannot English better, than in
those known words of the Revelations, Woe unto the Inhabitants of the Earth, and
of the Sea, for the Devil is come down with greater wrath, because he knows
that his time is short. The Malice of Hell never appeared unto the World with
more Rage and Fury, than since it has been managed by the Church of Rome. Who
can recount without horror, and detestation, the Barbarous Murders of the
Albigenses, the Massacres of France, the Wars of Germany, and the most inhuman
Cruelties of the Spanish Inquisition? Here is presented a large Field to range
in, and a Field of Blood too; but the time would fail me to give a tolerable
account of that Wrath and Rage which they have exercised from time to time
against this poor Church of England since the Reformation. We may justly take
up the words of the Psalmist, and say, Many a time have they fought against us,
from our Youth up; yea, many a time have they afflicted us from our Youth, from
the beginning of the Reformation, may our Israel say. How many were those
Funeral Piles which were kindled by them in the reign of Queen Mary? How well
did Ignatius deserve his name, which signifies Fire, when several hundreds of
Innocent Protestants were sacrificed to the Moloch of their Rage, in the space
of less than four years? Nay, our late Historian of the Reformation tells us,
that like Wild Beasts, they preyed upon the very Carcasses, and dead Bodies of
God's Saints, for they dug up the Bones of Wickliff, and exercised the
utmost of Malice upon the Ashes of Bucer and Fagius. If we pass on to the reign
of Queen Elizabeth, our English Deborah, we shall find Anger, and Wrath, and
Rage enough. Indeed, for well nigh eleven years, they were pretty quiet, hoping
to gain Queen Elizabeth by their politic flatteries: But as soon as these
failed, they erected three Colleges for English Seminary Priests, one at
Doway, another at Rhemes and another at Rome; and indeed these proved the
Seminaries of all those Treasons and Rebellions which were acted afterward.
And now the Popes Bulls begin to roar, the Queen is Excommunicated, her
Subjects absolved from their Oaths; and now see their Wrath and Rage in the
Rebellion of the unhappy Earls of Northumberland and Westmorland, in the
Treasons of the Stanlies in Darbyshire, and of 120 Priests and Jesuits, such as
Sanders, Brislow, Parsons, Campian, and the like: You may see more of this Rage
in the Plots of Somervile, Main, Ntlson, Tompson, and the rest of that Crew;
and of Pain and his fifty Resolutes, hired by the Pope, to murder the Queen.
What need I speak of Throgmorton, Paget, Moody, Parry, with several others;
when the Invasion of 88 proclaimed their Wrath and Malice to the full? For in
their Ships they had great Knives, with this Inscription, (as Bishop Andrews
reports) Cut English Throats; they had also Whips of Cord and Wire, which Don
Pedro de Valdez, one of the Commanders, confessed were intended to whip us
Heretics to death; and being asked by the Council what they would have done
with the young Children, he answered boldly, that all above seven years old
should have been murdered with their Parents, the rest should have lived, but
they were to be branded in the Forehead with the Letter L. signifying Lutheran,
and so be reserved for perpetual Bondage. These and many other Specimens have
they given of their Cruelty, but this days Conspiracy seems to exceed them all.
For had this Hellish Plot obtained its desired end, the Metropolis of our
Nation had become a flaming Aetna, our Church and State been turned into a
Chaos, our Court into a Golgotha, and our whole Island into an Aceldama, or
Field of Blood. Here is more than Assyrian Rage and Fury; now at least we see
the Rages of the Text, such as we may well call the Wrath of Man, the Wrath of
Adam, of the worst, the wickedest of Men: For let Men pretend what they will,
there is nothing of Religion, nothing of Christ in such Wrath as this, for he
would not suffer his Disciples to call for Fire from Heaven to destroy a little
Village of the Samaritans; whereas these Heathen Catholics, these Bloody
Barbarous Papists, would have fetched Fire, I cannot say from Heaven, but at
least from Hell, to have destroyed one of the greatest Cities in the World, but
the remainder of wrath God did restrain. Which brings me to the second thing
proposed; namely,

Secondly, That God by his good Providence does overruled and govern the Wrath
and Rage of Wicked Men, so as may be for his own Glory and his Peoples Good. As
for the Wicked, they are far from proposing such ends; this proud Assyrian in
the Text, did not in the least design the Glory of God, or the Good of his
People, as the Prophet Esaias tells us, Chap. 10. 7. He meant not so, neither did
his Heart think so, but it was in his Heart to destroy, and to cut off Nations,
not a few. His Head and Heart were full of devices how to satisfy his
Ambition, and raise his Empire on the ruins of other Nations; but God's
Providence overruled his Ambitious Rage, and made the Wrath of this Assyrian
to praise him.

But for the fuller opening this part of the Text, we will consider,

First, How God makes the Wrath of Man to praise him.

Secondly, Whom he makes to praise him.

First, Let us inquire how God makes the Wrath of Man to praise him. Now he
does this several ways.

1st. By diverting their Power and their Rage, otherwise than they first
intended. The Wise Man tells us, That the Hearts of Kings are in the Hands of
God; he turns them whithersoever he will, Prove. 21. 1. Thus Nazianzen reports
of Julian the Apostate, that when he had designed the utter ruin of the
Christians, God cut him out work elsewhere, and made it necessary for him to go
first against the Persians, by whom he was overthrown. So this Sennacherib, in
the Text, you will find Esaias 10. 5. called but the Rod of God's Anger, and the
Staff of his Indignation, to denote, that the greatest of Men are but a kind of
Instruments in the Hand of God's Providence, and must expect the direction of a
Superior Cause. Hence it is very observable, that when this proud Assyrian had
bent his Rage against Hezekiah, it was diverted by Tirhakah, the King of
Aethiopia, waging War against him, as you may read 2 Kings 19. 9. And it is
easy to parrallel this out of the late History of the Reformation. For in the
Reign of Queen Mary, Gardener and other Papists, endeavored to destroy the
Lady Elizabeth, on whom alone, under God, the hopes of the Reformation did
depend. K. Philip did interceed for her, and preserved her out of interest of
State, God putting it into his Heart, to fancy, that if she were put out of the
way, and he should have no Issue from Queen Mary, which he very much feared;
then the Queen of Scotland, who was to be married to the Dauphine, would
succeed, and make too great an accession to the French Crown.

2ly. God makes the Wrath of Man to praise him sometimes, by suffering it to
proceed so far, till nothing but a Divine Power, an immediate Arm of the
Almighty can deliver. God does not always blast the designs of the Wicked in
the Bud, or crush their Enterprises in the Shell; but frequently suffers them
to come to the Birth, and his chosen People to fall into great extremity; thus
the tale of Bricks was doubled, before Moses was sent. Thus Haman was allowed
to go so far, as even to erect the Gallows for Mordecai. Thus Pharaoh was
allowed to pursue Israel, not only to the Banks, but even into the midst of the
Red Sea, that by destroying him there, the Right Hand of the Lord might become
more Glorious in Power. And were we not delivered in such a sort this day? Were
not all the Instruments of Death made ready? Were not the Barrels lodged, the
Train laid, the Match burning, and the time well-nigh expired, before the Lord
made bare his Arm, and plucked his People as so many Brands out of the Fire?

3ly. God does sometimes make the Wrath of Man to praise him, by infatuating
the Counsels of his Churches Enemies; thus he is said to have made the Princes
of Zoan Fools, and the wise Counselors of Pharaoh to become brutish, Isaiah
19. 11. Thus he Countermined the politic Advice of Achitophel, and made that
great Oracle appear according to his Name in Hebrew, which signifies the
Brother or Cousin-german to a Fool. A like instance of of God's Providence was
that which happned in the Reign of Queen Mary; for when She first fell into
that kind of Dropsy, which Physicians call the Mola, the wisest of her Friends
and Physicians were so far infatuated, as to conclude her to be with Child; by
this means all Physic was forbid, till her Distemper grew Desperate, and that
great Obstacle of the Reformation was happily removed.

4ly. God does sometimes make the Wrath of Man to praise him, by making
wonderful discoveries of their most secret Plots and closest Conspiracies. Thus
strangely did he discover Hamans bloody Plot against the Jews; and that of the
Jews against St. Paul: But surely the Goodness of God was never seen more
eminently in the discovery of any Plot, than it was this day; for the subtilty
of the Serpent did never appear more, than in the managing of this Conspiracy.
We know it was laid in the very Bosom of Hell, hammered in the Devils Forge,
nursed up in a dark Vault: We know also that the Traitors bound themselves by
the Holy Sacrament, and the strictest Oaths of Secrecy not to discover it. But
yet how wonderfully did God discover it? For did not the Lord cause one of the
Conspirators, notwithstanding he had taken three solemn Oaths to conceal the
Plot, to reveal it by Writing, verifying that of the Wise Man in his
Ecclesiastes, That which has Wings shall tell the Matter? Nay further, was it
not the overruling Providence of God which inclined the Heart of that Noble
Lord to communicate the Letter, which otherwise might easily have been slighted
as the offspring of some melancholy Brain? Nay, was it not our merciful God,
who at this time put a Divine Sentence into the Lips of the King, and suffered
not his Mouth to transgress in Judgment? His Royal Breast, at other times, used
to be free from Jealousy, accounting it no less than a Badge of Tyranny: But
now Providence so ordered it, that by an unnatural construction of an
Aenigmatical Phrase, he discovered that unnatural destruction which was
hatching by his Enemies.

5ly. God does sometimes make the Wrath of Man to praise him, by inflicting
some extraordinary Judgments upon the Enemies of his People. The Lord, is
known, says the Psalmist, by the Judgment he executes; the Wicked is snared
by the work of his own Hands, Psalm. 9. 16. Thus God also chastised the Wrath of
Sennacherib at the siege of Jerusalem, by sending his Angel to destroy 185000
of his Army: And though Sennacherib himself was spared, that he might the better
know the Power of that God, whom he had despised and blasphemed; yet because he
was not thoroughly reformed by this first Judgment, but his Wrath still remained
when he came to his chief City Niniveh, where he fell to persecute the Ten
Tribes which were captive there, God restrained this remainder of his Wrath by
another signal Judgment, and made him die an ignominious Death by the Hands of
his two Sons, and that in the House of his own God, whom he had blasphemously
opposed to the great Jehovah, but was not able to protect him from the Hand of
his Almighty Vengeance. And did not God also Glorify himself thus, by those
strange Judgments which he executed on the Powder-Traytors? Was it not
remarkable what happened at Holbeach in Worcestershire, where some of this days
Conspirators, being drying Powder to make Resistance, one spark of Fire
lighting accidentally amongst the Powder, wounded them so sadly, that they were
forced to acknowledge the Justice and Vengeance of God upon them by that
Powder, wherewith they had intended the Destruction of so many? After this,
Catesby and Piercy, two Principal Conspirators, were accidentally shot to Death
by one Shot of a Musket; and so fell by the Hand of God, taking revenge on
them by Powder, before the Justice of Man was able to seize them. Add to this
what we read in King James's Works, how that God did secretly exasperate the
Spirits of all Men against these Popish Traitors, that in the Countries where
they wandered, some of them were killed, others taken before any Proclamation
could overtake them, and before the People who seized them, knew any thing of
this particular Treason. Thus God this day did make the Wrath of Man to praise
him, to praise his Justice, his Power in executing such strange Judgments upon
these bloody unnatural Traitors. But it is time I should show you in the second
place,

Secondly, Who they are God makes to praise him.

I shall name two sorts of Men.

1st. God by such means as these makes his very Enemies to praise him, by
acknowledging either his Power or his Justice in their Punishments. Thus
Pharaoh and the Egyptians acknowledged God's Power in the Red Sea, when they
cried out, Let us flee from the Face of Israel, for the Lord fights for them
against the Egyptians. It is very remarkable what Herodotus reports of
Sennacherib, the burden of the Text; namely, that he had a Statute erected
after his Death, with this good Advice engraven on it, Whosoever looks upon
me, let him learn to be Pious, and to fear God. So Julian, the Apostate,
acknowledged the Power of Christ, crying out at his death, Vicisti Galilaee,
Thou art too strong for me, O thou Galilean. What Confessions and
Acknowledgments has God also extorted from our Romish Adversaries! Don Pedro
seeing the terrible dissipation of that invincible Armado which was sent in 88.
professed, that now he perceived that God was turned Lutheran. And on this very
day, Faux who was appointed to be the Black Executioner, and Garnet the Priest,
that was to Consecrate the Plot, did confess to the praise of God, as well as
the rest, at their Execution, the outrageous wickedness, and odiousness of
their Hellish design. But

2ly. God does more especially receive Honor and Praise from his own People,
whom he wonderfully delivers from the Rage of Wicked Bloody Men: Thus Israel,
when they saw the Egyptians dead upon the shore, they sang praise unto God,
proclaiming him fearful in praises and doing wonders: Thus Hezekiah sent this
Psalm to the chief Musician on Neginoth, that solemn Praises and Thanksgivings
might be returned unto God, for their wonderful deliverance from the Rage of
Sennacherib. Even so Religious King James did erect this day for a Pillar of
Gratitude to our good God, who did so miraculously preserve our King, the Royal
Family, the Parliament, with our Laws, Liberties and Religion: Let us therefore
rejoice in the Lord, and again I say rejoice; let us rouse up our Spirits, call
up our Hearts, and let all that is within us bless his Holy Name. Sure if God
extort praises from his very Enemies, he may more justly inhabit the praises of
his own People, those that he has so wonderfully preserved: Nay, consider how
he has restrained also the remainder of Wrath; How many Plots of these Blood
thirsty Papists he has since defeated. If it had not been the Lord, who was on
our side, when Men rose up against us, they had swallowed us up quick, when
their Wrath was kindled so hot against us: Let us therefore bless the Lord our
God, who has not given us over as a prey unto their Teeth. And to help us a
little in the performance of this Duty, I shall conclude all with these two
following Directions.

First, If you praise God aright for the Mercies of this Day, you must be
zealous for that Church, which God has hitherto so wonderfully preserved. You
have heard how that because God had so wonderfully preserved Hezekiah from the
Fury of Sennacherib, they brought Presents unto him, and he was magnified in
the sight of all Nations from thenceforth. How ought we then to magnify that
Church which God has magnified! How precious, how honorable ought it to be in
all our Eyes, which God has honored with so many Miracles! We know this Church
is the greatest Eye-fore of Rome; and to use the words of the Author of the
Review of the Council of Trent, There has not been more woeful Tragedies of the
Papal Fury acted upon any Stage, than this of England: Yet how has God all
along restrained their Wrath? Well then may we own that Church, and be zealous
for her, whom God has so signally owned, and been at the expense of so many
Miracles to preserve. But

Secondly, The Life of Thankfulness does chiefly consist in the Lives of those
that are Thankful. He that orders his Conversation aright, is said to
glorify God, in this Book of Psalms. If after such wonderful deliverances, as
you have heard this day, we still indulge our selves in sin, our most costly
Sacrifices will prove an abomination; the Lord will even spread the very Dung
of them on our Faces: See therefore with what passion Ezra exhorts the Jews to
this Duty after their Deliverance from the Babylonish Captivity, Ezra 9. 13.
When we have received such deliverance as this, should we again break thy
Commandments, would thou not be angry with us, till thou had consumed us?
We must therefore keep holiness in our Lives, otherwise we shall not be fit to
keep an Holy Day to the Lord. It becomes well the just to be thankful; let the
high praises of God be in their Mouths, and it will please him better than a
Bullock that has Horns and Hoofs. Let us therefore reform our Lives, and being
thus wonderfully delivered from the Hands of our Enemies, let us serve without
fear, in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our Life; which
God of his Infinite Mercy grant, etc.

SERMON V.
1 Cor. xi. 19. For there must be also Heresies among you, that they which are
approved may be made manifest among you.
COrinth being seated on the Peloponnesian Isthmus, had the advantage both of
the Ionian and Aegean Sea, to bring into its Bosom all the Treasures of the
World: And indeed these Temporal Blessings flowed there in such great
abundance, that Corinth is styled by Homer (...), and by Pindar (...), that is,
in plain English, the Rich and Happy City of Corinth. And as Corinth was thus
happy in respect of its Trade and Commerce, so it was much more happy in having
the Gospel planted there by the great Apostle S. Paul. It was accounted the
honor of these Primitive Churches to have some Apostle or other to be their
Founder; and the more eminent the Apostle was, the greater was the honor of
the Church he planted. Now in this respect Corinth was inferior unto none, as
being founded by St. Paul, the great Apostle of the Gentiles; one who is
sometimes styled by the Ancients, Prince of the Apostles; and who in that
modest Character which he has left of himself in 2 Cor. 11. 5. tells us
expressly, That he was not a-whit behind the very chiefest Apostles The honor
therefore of the Church of Corinth could not but be great, since it was planted
by this great Apostle St. Paul: And the honor of it will appear yet greater,
if we add the observation of a Learned Author, Super hac Ecclesia maxim
triumphat Paulas, St. Paul, says he, though he converted several other Nations,
and planted several other Churches, yet he seems to glory most, yea even
triumph in the Conversion of the Corinthians: These he calls his special work
in the Lord, and the very Seal of his Apostleship, Chap. 9. of this Epistle,
ver. 1, 2. And as the Church of Corinth had the honor to be planted by the
Labors of St. Paul, so it had also the happiness to be watered by the
Eloquence of Apollo, and the powerful Preachings of St. Peter. Now one would
have thought a Church thus happily Planted and Watered, might, if any in the
World, have promised it self an immunity from Schisms and Divisions, at least,
so long as these Infallible Apostles and Unerring Guides were still alive: But
alas even Infallibility it self is so far from proving an Antidote against
Schisms, that it was a great means of raising and promoting them here at
Corinth; for in the first Chapter of this Epistle we find them crying out, I am
of Paul, I am of Apollo, and I am of Cephas: And besides these Schisms, which
took their rise from the eminency of their Teachers; we find in this 11th
Chapter, several other Divisions about the Sacrament. Unity is indeed a signal
Blessing, yet such as the best of Churches may not always enjoy. Corinth, as
Glorious and Eminent a Church as it was, was rent in pieces by Factions and
Divisions; nay, which is stranger yet, St. Paul in the Text, stamps an Oportet
upon them; there must, says he, be Heresies, or as he calls them in the
foregoing Verse, Divisions among you, Satan and his Instruments will always
watch their opportunity to sow these Tares: And God it seems is willing to
permit them, that the rottenness of some, and the integrity of others may be
discovered. So much St. Paul tells us in the Text, for there must be also
Heresies among you, that they which are approved may be made manifest among
you. From which words I shall endeavor to show you.

First, That the best of Churches are subject to the Misfortune of Schisms and
Divisions.

Secondly, What those Causes are which make Schisms and Divisions in some sort
necessary.

Thirdly, That God's design in suffering these Schisms and Divisions is to
discover the Rottenness of some, and Integrity of others.

Fourthly, That those are truly Noble and Honorable Persons, who continue
steadfast in the Communion of God's Church amidst these Schisms and Divisions
which arise in it: These are the (...), the approved ones in the Text. There
must, says St. Paul, be Heresies among you, that they which are approved may
be made manifest. I begin with the first of these.

First, Namely, to show you, that the best of Churches are subject to the
misfortune of Schisms and Divisions. He must be a very great Stranger both to
Scripture and Ecclesiastical History, who does not know, that the misfortune of
Corinth, in the Text, is the usual fate and misfortune of other Churches. There
is not any Church mentioned in the New Testament, but what was sadly distracted
with Schisms and Divisions. We find at Galata, such as preached up Judaism, and
bewitched the Galatians with a Dangerous Opinion of the necessity of Legal
Rites. St. Paul warns the Colossians of such as were ready to spoil them
through vain Philosophy, and bids them take care, that no man beguiled them in
a voluntary humility, and worshipping of Angels. When he wrote his Hierarchial
Epistle to Titus, the first Bishop of Crete. It seems Heretics were so
numerous in that Church, that he was obliged to give him this Apostolical Canon
among the rest, An Heretic after the first and second Admonition, reject. If
we take a view of the Seven Churches of Asia, recorded in the Book of
Revelations, St. John will show us a Synagogue of Satan in the Church of
Smyrna; Nicolaitans and Balaamites in the Church of Sardis; Heretics
stigmatized with the name of Iezabel, in the Church of Thyatira; and in
Ephesus, the Mother Church, Counterfeit Apostles, who said they were Apostles,
and were not, but upon trial were found Liars. Though the Faith of the Romans was
at this time so famous, that it was spoken of, says S. Paul, throughout the
whole World, yet they were not so happy as to be free from Divisions; for our
Apostle gives them this Advise, Romans 16. 17. I beseech you, Brethren, mark them
which cause Divisions and Offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which you have
received, and avoid them. Thus we have found Schisms and Divisions in all those
Churches which are recorded in the New Testament; and if we descend to
succeeding Ages, we shall find Schisms and Divisions too many. Whosoever have
learning and leisure enough to consult Epiphanius and S. Austin, will find them
reckoning up no fewer than an 100 Heresies, even in those best and purest Ages
of Christianity. All this, I hope, will suffice to prevent any sinister opinion
of the Church of England, which at this time is torn in pieces by Schisms and
Divisions: This indeed ought to be matter of Lamentation to us, and engage our
most ardent prayers for the peace of Jerusalem. But sure it cannot be managed
as an Argument against our Church, but the blow will reach other Churches too,
even all those Churches which are now in Christendom, and as you have heard,
those best of Churches which were in the first and purest Ages of Christianity.
Let not therefore your present Divisions lessen your esteem of the Church of
England. The best of Churches are subject to these misfortunes, and will be so
to the end of the World. For as our Savior speaks, Luke 17. 1. It is
impossible but that Offenses will come; And St. Paul says the same in the Text,
where he tells us, that there must be Heresies, which brings me to the second
General proposed.

Secondly, Namely, to enquire what those Causes are, which make Schisms and
Divisions, in some sort, necessary; and here I cannot but assign,

1st. The first and principal place to the infernal Fiends. Satan is the Enemy
in our Saviors Parable, who is said to sow these Tares in the Field of the
Church. Hence St. Paul calls Heresies the Doctrins of Devils. Ignatius styles
them the Plants and Snares of Satan; and to name no more, Epiphanius calls the
Arch-heretick Arius (...), that is, the Image and Statue of the Devil. However
the Devil labors to keep his own Kingdom in peace and tranquillity, yet he
seeks nothing more than to cause Divisions in the Kingdom of Christ. The
Egyptians, who worshipped of old, Dogs and Cats, and shed penitent Tears before
the Shrine of a Deified Onion: The Pagans, who worship the Sun, Moon and all
the Host of Heaven; and the Mahometans, who worship a cursed Impostor, these
never had such divisions among them, as have been, and still are in the Church
of Christ. Unity is the strength and stability of all Communities: So that
Satan would fight against his own Interest, should he disturb the quiet of
those Societies which are devoted to his Service. But the Church of Christ, the
purer it is either in Doctrine or in Worship, the more does it threaten ruin and
destruction to Satan's Kingdom; no wonder then if this subtle Serpent does use
all his stratagems and devices to stir up differences and contentions in these
Christian Societies. Well then might St. Cyprian conclude, that the Schisms and
Heresies which happened in his time, were industriously raised by the Devil,
that he might revenge himself on the Christian Religion, which had struck his
Oracles dumb, and almost banished his Worship out of the World. Thus Satan, you
see, is the Principal Cause of those Divisions which disturb the Peace of God's
Church; and this, by the way, affords us another Apology for the Church of
England. We must confess our Divisions are great and sad; but this only argues
Satan's greater Rage and Malice against her. And, I pray, what wonder is it,
that the Father of Lies should be a malicious Enemy against that Church which
is the Ground and Pillar of Truth. But,

2ly. Though Satan be the Principal Cause of Schisms and Divisions, yet he
employs the Lusts and Passions of Men as Instruments to raise them. Hence is
that of St. James, Chap. 4. 1. Whence are Wars and Fightings among you? Are
they not hence, even from your Lusts? Man before his Conversion is no better
than a Centaur, half Bruit and half Man: And till Grace has ascended the
Throne, he exceeds for Rage and Fury the wildest Inhabitants of the Forest.
Lactantius compares his Exorbitant Passions to mad furious Horses, which hurry
him violently on such things as are mischievous and pernicious to Society. Now
Satan works upon these Passions of Men, and raises them as Wind does the Seas,
into tumult and commotion; no wonder then if St. Paul, Chap. 5. 20. reckons
among the Lusts of the Flesh, Hatred, Variance, Emulation, Strife, Seditions,
Heresies and Envyings: But though there be not any Lust which does not contribute
more or less to those contentions which happen in the Church; yet Pride,
Covetousness, Curiosity and self-love are observed to be the chief Beautifeau's
and Incendiaries of them.

1. Pride is one great Cause of those Divisions and Contentions which happen in
the Church. It is a true saying of Solomon, Prove. 13. 10. Only by Pride comes
Contention. Melanchton in his Comment upon the place mentions a famous Proverb
to this purpose, Duo Montes non miscentur, two swelling Mountains will not mix
well together. When Men begin to swell with Pride and Ambition, they soon grow
too big for the little Fold of Christ. Thus Diotrephes, loving the
pre-eminence, disturbed the Peace of the Asiatick Churches. Thus Arius, priding
himself in his skill in Logic, sought to raise his reputation by opposing his
Diocesan. Ambition is a very turbulent and seditious Passion; and if Men once
give the Reins to it, it will make them fire the Temple of God, as Herostratus
did Diana's, only to get a name, and to be talked of in the World.

2. Covetousness is another great and special Cause of those Divisions which
happen in the Church. Since St. Paul tells us, that the love of money is the
root of all evil, we may well conclude it one cause of the evil of Schism; and
indeed St. Peter tells us so expressly, 2 Pet. 2. 3. where the Character he
gives of Heretics is this, Through Covetousness they make merchandise of
people with feigned words. Mammon is owned for a God by the greatest part of
Mankind; and with most men in the world Gain passes for Godliness. We need not
wonder then if the desire of Wealth prove often both the Mother and the Nurse
of Heresies. As soon as Demetrius had told the Silver-Smiths of Ephesus, that
their Craft was in danger to be set at naught, they presently fill the City
with noise and uproar; and cry out stoutly, Great is Diana of the Ephesians.
St. Jude describing the manners of the Gnostick Heretics, tells us, they ran
greedily after the error of Balaam for reward. St. Cyprian writes of the
Heretic Novatus, that he was Avaritiae inexplebili rapacitate furibundus, most
insatiably covetous and rapacious, even to a degree of madness. But to name no
more, the Magdeburgenses long ago observed, that Covetousness helped to Spawn
most of the Heresies in the World.

3. Curiosity is another unhappy Cause of Schisms and Divisions. Christ has
given us a Rule to walk by; and the Holy Scriptures contain all things
necessary to be believed in order to Salvation: And so long as men hold fast
that form of sound words which was at first delivered to the Church, there can
be no danger of Schisms and Divisions: But curiosity makes men desire to be
wise above what is written, and consequently disturb the Peace and Tranquillity
of the Church. This St. Paul foresaw, when he commanded Timothy to charge some,
That they give no heed to Fables, and endless Genealogies, which minister
Questions, rather than Godly Edifying, 1 Timothy 1. 4. and Chap. 6. 3, 4. he
condemns such as dote about Questions and Dispute about Words, whereof comes
Envy, Strife, Railings and Surmises.

4. Self-love is another unhappy Cause of Schisms and Divisions. This is the
strongest and most violent Passion of the Soul, and therefore St. Paul gives it
the precedence of all the rest, 2 Timothy 3. 2. It is a true saying of Luthers,
Societies would continue longer than they do, if it were not for this little
Pronoun Ego, I my self. For whilst Men prefer their own Interest before the
Public; whilst they seek their own things, rather than the things of Jesus
Christ and his Church; they tear his seamless Coat in pieces, and make unhappy
Divisions among Christians. To prevent therefore these Divisions, St. Paul
gives this Advice amongst others, Let nothing be done through strife: Look not
every man on his own things, but also on the things of others, Phil. 2. 3, 4.
Thus I have shown you what are the Causes of Schisms and Divisions in the
Church, and so long as these Causes remain, we must expect the fatal
consequences of them; so long as the Devil is allowed to go about as a Roaring
Lion seeking whom he may devour; so long as he has men's Lusts and Passions to
join with him in the Work; so long as he can employ such Instruments as the
Ambitious, Covetous, Curious and Lovers of themselves, he will be able to
disturb the Peace of God's Church. Indeed God has power sufficient to prevent
these Divisions; he can create a firm and lasting peace among Christians. But
as St. Cyprian speaks, Fieri haec Dominus permittit and patitur, manente
propriae libertatis arbitrio, The Lord, says he, suffers these Divisions to be
in his Church, because he leaves men to act according to the liberty of their
Wills. God does not employ his irresistible power in keeping men from Schism,
more than from other sins. But having forbidden it with all the solemnity
imaginable, having discyphered the damnable nature of it, and pressed Christians
by innumerable, and those most powerful Motives to keep this Unity of the
Spirit in the Bond of Peace, he leaves them to act for themselves in this, as
in other matters, appointing a day in which he will judge and punish
everlastingly such as dare to disturb the Peace of his Church. We need not
wonder then if men be Traitors to the Church as well as to the State; if they
rebel against Christ as well as against their Prince; seeing God leaves men at
liberty to commit this as well as any other sin. Now if any should put the
Question, why God leaves men thus to their liberty? Though I might chastise such
curiosity with Solomon's Answer, Eccles. 7. 10. who tells such Curious Persons,
That they do not enquire wisely concerning this matter; yet since St. Paul has
furnished me with a more satisfactory reply in the Text, I shall return them
this Answer in my third General, Namely,

Thirdly, That God's design in suffering these Schisms and Divisions, is to
discover the rottenness of some, and the integrity of others. This may easily
be gathered from the Text, where St. Paul tells us, That there must be
Heresies, that they who are approved may be made manifest. It is a Golden
Sentence of St. Austin, That God who is Infinitely Good, would never suffer
Evil, but that being also Omnipotent, he is able to extract Good out of Evil.
When God suffers Schisms and Divisions to befall his Church, his design is to
discover to the World, the Rottenness of some and the Integrity of others. It
may be said of Religion, what good old Simeon said of Christ, the Author of it,
It is set for the fall and rising of many in Israel. So long as Religion
prospers and flourishes in the World, Hypocrites and the worst of Atheists will
be content to own it. But if at any time it falls into Distress, or labors
under Persecution, then they fall off like Leaves in Autumn. Indeed, as St.
Cyprian observes, Nemo existimet bonos Ecclesia posse discedere, None can
imagine, says he, that Good Men will abjure the Communion of God's Church; as
he goes on, the Wind drives not away the solid Wheat, but the Chaff; the Storm
may overturn the weaker Shrubs, but the sturdy Oak gains strength and firmness
by the Tempest. To the same purpose is that of St. John, 1 John 2. 19. They
went out from us, but they were not of us: for if they had been of us, they
would, no doubt, have continued with us: but they went out, that they might be
made manifest, that they were not of us. Times of Division are times of Trial;
and do, as the Father speaks, in some sort anticipate the day of Judgment; for
at such times the Tares will gather themselves into Bundles, and leave the
purer Corn without any mixture in the Field of the Lord: Sound Believers will
now be known from Hypocrites; and though the Church may not be crowded with
such numbers as it was before, yet its greatest loss will be only of rotten
Members: It will now be able to discern its Friends from its Foes: And though an
Acacius, an Ecebolius, and such like Changlings, may serve the Times and
themselves more; yet all sincere Christians will think it both their Duty and
Honor to adhere courageously to the Church of God, which brings me to the
fourth General proposed. Namely.

Fourthly, To show you, that those are truly Noble and Honorable Persons who
continue steadfast in the Communion of God's Church amidst these Schisms and
Divisions which arise in it. These are the (...), the approved ones in the
Text. The Greek word which is here rendered Approved, is a Metaphor taken from
Gold tried in the Fire. We know such a trial makes its solidity and luster
shine the brighter; yea, it is now valued at an higher rate than it was before.
Even so Christians, when they continue steadfast amidst Schisms and Divisions,
it renders them much more honorable than they were before: There is an
advantage, says Plutarch, which men receive from their very Enemies; had there
been no Trojan Wars, Hector's Valor had never been so renowned; and the
greater the violence of a Tempest is, the more highly does it commend the skill
of the Pilot: Even so the integrity of Orthodox Christians shines the brighter,
when others are unsettled by the turn of the Times, or by the crafty subtilties
of Schismatics and Heretics. And the honourableness of such stedfastness will
appear more at large, by these few Particulars.

1. This Steadfastness is an Argument, that men have formerly taken just pains
to inform themselves about matters of Religion: As Ignorance is a Stain to
Human Nature, so Knowledge, on the contrary, must be the Honor and Glory of
it. This is one of the greatest perfections of the Soul, without which, as
Solomon tells us, the Mind cannot be good, and as Knowledge, in the General, is
thus honorable, so no Knowledge is so Honorable as the Knowledge of Religion.
Religion is the chiefest concern of Mankind, and consequently ignorance of this
is the most shameful brand; and yet such ignorance as this, for the most part,
are they guilty of, who prove unfaithful to the Church of God. Hence St. Paul,
2 Timothy 3. 6, 7. speaking of some who suffered themselves to be perverted by
Seducers, he calls the silly Women, such as are ever learning, but never able
to come to the knowledge of the Truth: Nay, elsewhere he styles them Children
in understanding, who are tossed to and fro with every wind of Doctrine. For a
man therefore to be steadfast in the Truth, must needs be Honorable, because
it argues him to be a Knowing Man, and that in matters of the highest
importance.

2. Stedfastness in Religion must needs be honorable, because it is an
Argument of the greatest Wisdom. To be accounted wise is a piece of Honor men
have always been covetous and ambitious of; and there are none think they have
a better title to it, than such as change their Religion to serve their
Temporal Interests. Indeed our Savior tells us, That the Children of this
World, are in their Generation, wiser than the Children of Light. It must be
acknowledged they are wiser as as to worldly Affairs; and by renouncing their
Religion, they may make better provisions for the remainder of their Life here.
But alas! What is a man profited, if he gain the whole World, and lose his own
Soul; or what shall a man give in exchange for his Soul? Esau, in the judgment
of St. Paul, was a very profane Person, when he sold his Birthright for a
Mess of Pottage; and Judas made but a sorry Bargain, when for thirty pieces of
Silver he betrayed his Savior and his Soul together; such worldly Policy is
not the best sort of Wisdom: He is truly the wisest man, who prefers his Soul
before his Body, Heaven before Earth, and Eternity before a Moment. Now none is
such a Wise Man as this, but he who adheres steadfastly to the Church of God,
and values his Religion above Estate, Life, and all the fading Enjoyments of
this transitory World.

3. Stedfastness in Religion must needs be Honorable, because such shall be
honored by Christ in an especial manner, at the day of Judgment. God has
promised, that those that honor him, he will honor. Now we have no better way
to honor God, than by owning his Truth, and adhering to his Church. Religion
is the great concern God has in the World, for the Honor and Advancement of
which, all those Miracles were wrought which are recorded in the Bible: It is
not therefore possible to please God more, than by being true and faithful to
Religion. Hear what Honor our Savior promises to put upon such at the day of
Judgment, Whosoever shall confess me before men, says Christ, him shall the
Son of Man confess before the Angels of God, Luke 12. 8. However, sincere
Christians may be reviled and evil entreated by a wicked World; it seems they
will be owned and honored by their Dearest Savior: and if there be one Crown
of Glory larger than another, he will bestow it on such as are faithful to the
death. I might, if the time and your patience would permit, add several other
Arguments to show the Honourableness of those Persons who continue steadfast in
the Communion of God's Church; but these I am confident will suffice at
present. I shall therefore conclude with a word of Exhortation, beseeching you
to continue steadfast in the Communion of the Church of England. It will not be
prudence in me to make any Reflections on other Churches; but this, I hope, may
be said without offense, that I know not any Church this day upon Earth, with
which we may more safely Communicate, than with the Church of England. The
Church of Rome is deservedly reckoned one of the Ancientest Churches in
Christendom; and yet, if we may believe Baronius, one of the best of their
Historians, the Church of England is Senior to it more than five years. The
Government of this Church is known to be Episcopal: That Government which was
instituted by Christ, and was the only Government in the Church for fifteen
hundred years after the Times of the Apostles. And as this Church is governed
by Bishops, so we have had a continued Succession of them, from the very
beginning, to this present day, as may be learned from Godwins Catalogue of
Bishops, and Parkers Antiquitates Britannicae. The Faith which our Church
professes, may be found in her Creeds, which are the Apostles, the Nicene, and
the Athanasian Creeds; the only Creeds which were owned by the Primitive
Church: so that if we may be saved by that Faith which was thought sufficient
by the Apostles and the best of Christians, we need not seek a new one from any
Church in Christendom. No Church can pretend to more Loyal Principles, or
recommend it Self more to the Favor of Princes by the constant Fidelity of its
Members, than the Church of England. This also is that Church which enjoyed
Lucius, the First Christian King, and had the honor to have born in it, the
First Christian Emperor and Empress, namely, Constantine the Great, and the
most Religious Helena. These are great and signal Honors, such as no other
Church is able to boast of; and I shall add one greater than them all, namely,
that the Religion of our Church was sealed by the Blood of King Charles I. the
first Royal Martyr that ever was in the World. This certainly is a Church none
of us have the least reason to be ashamed of, and as little reason to be afraid
to own; since we are so well assured of their present Majesty's Gracious
Protection. I shall therefore conclude this Discourse as St. Paul does the 15th
Chapter of the First Epistle to the Corinthians, Wherefore, my Beloved
Brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the Work of the
Lord; for as much as you know that your Labor shall not be in vain in the Lord.

To God the Father, etc.

SERMON VI.
Luke xxiii. 39, -- 43. And one of the Malefactors, which were hanged, railed
on him, saying, If thou be Christ, save thy self and us. But the other
answering rebuked him, saying, Do thou not fear God, seeing thou art in the
same condemnation? And we indeed justly, for we receive the due reward of our
deeds, but this man has done nothing amiss. And he said unto Jesus, Lord,
remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom. And Jesus said unto him, Verily
I say unto thee, to day thou shall be with me in Paradise.
AS Repentance is owned by all sorts of Christians to be a Duty of absolute
necessity, and consequently most seasonable to be performed at all times; so
they do not deserve the Name of Christians, who refuse to set about a Duty of
such great importance, in this time of Lent. I have already pressed this Duty
on you by several Arguments. One you may remember was taken from that Obedience
which we owe to our Lawful Superiors. He has not the least spark of Loyalty in
him, who does not acknowledge our Obedience is due to those Commands of our
Superiors which concern indifferent things: And sure then he must not pretend
the least tittle to Loyalty, who lives in actual disobedience to the known
Commands of his Superiors, when they require things of the greatest importance
and most absolute necessity. Now we all know, that our Superiors call upon us
to Repent in this season of Lent; and, I hope, we will all acknowledge, that
Repentance is a Duty of greatest importance, and most absolute necessity. Where
then is that Loyalty we use to boast of? Will he, think you, obey his Superiors
in smaller matters, who denies obedience in matters of greatest concernment,
and of Eternal importance to his own Soul? But because I know it is easy for
some to boast of their Loyalty, when, in truth, they either know not what it
means, or at least are unwilling to give the truest demonstrations of it: I
have urged other Arguments drawn from the consideration of that Glorious Prize
God proposes unto sincere Penitents, and those Dreadful Punishments which are
threatened the Impenitent. Hope and Fear are the great Hinges on which Human
Nature is made to move: And one would think Arguments, which alarm two such
powerful Passions of the Soul, should not want success, but prevail with
sinners of what size soever, to engage themselves in this important Duty: And
yet experience sadly informs us, that neither Heaven nor Hell, neither the
Hopes of the one, nor the Fears of the other can persuade the generality of Men
to repent of their sins. Sure then there is some considerable Stumbling block
in the way; something more than ordinary that makes men so careless and
negligent in the performance of this Duty. And indeed there is a very great
Stumbling Block in the way. For though all Christians acknowledge Repentance to
be a work of absolute necessity; yet they believe it may be done sufficiently
when they are a dying. They think they may safely dedicate the fair Blossoms of
their Youth to Sin and Satan, provided they are careful to bequeath their Souls
to God in their last Will and Testament; and they are highly encouraged to this
vain and most dangerous belief, by the Example of the penitent Thief in the
Gospel. For this Reason I have chosen this portion of Scripture at this time;
all the Parts of which I do not intend to examine at this time, but only show
you from them these two things:

First, That there is no encouragement at all for a late Deathbed Repentance,
in the Example of the penitent Thief. And,

Secondly, From the Example of the Impenitent Thief show you, that a late
Repentance is a thing most dangerous, if not in some sort impossible.

First, Let us Enquire, what little encouragement there is for a late Deathbed
Repentance, in the Example of this penitent Thief. Indeed this famous Story of
the penitent Thief, seems at first view to give great encouragement to a late
Deathbed Repentance. It is, I confess, a Relation of a Dying-man, one laden
with many and great sins: Sins of such an heinous Nature, as deserved, by his
own Confession, the greatest of Punishments, to wit, that of the Cross. As he
had spent his whole Life in Robbing and Stealing, sins which seldom want the
company of other Enormities; so when he was upon the Cross, he joined also at
the first with the other Thief in reviling our Savior; hence the other
Evangelists tells us, in the Plural Number, that the Thieves reviled him. So
great, so notorious a sinner was this poor Thief, and yet upon his turning to
God at the last gasp; upon his humble Confession of his Faults, and expressing
his sorrow for them, his Pardon is sealed, the Arms of Mercy open themselves
wide to embrace him, and Christ gives him a Promise, that his Soul should be
with him that very day in Paradise. And since these things are so, who dares
now bode ill to the Clinicks of our Age, those I mean, who add drunkenness to
thirst, and thirst to drunkenness, who labor daily to swear God Almighty out
of Heaven; who, with Solomon's Young Man, rejoice all the days of their Youth,
walk in all the ways of their own Hearts, and in the sight of their own Eyes:
Why should we, say they, disturb our Mirth and Jollity, with the melancholy
Thoughts of Religion? It is time enough to think of Heaven, when we shall be
allowed to stay no longer upon Earth! A few salt Tears at the Hour of Death, a
little Confession to a Priest, attended with sighs and groans, will be a
sufficient atonement for our former Miscarriages: God's Mercy, which was
sufficient for this penitent Thief, will also serve our turns at the last; and
therefore Ministers shall never make us out of love with our darling Lusts; we
are not such Fools, as to be cheated so easily of all our Pleasures: Let them,
if they can, impose upon Vulgar Hearers, we are too Learned ever to be
persuaded to begin so soon to think of Heaven and Eternity. But how sadly, how
fatally are such Presumptous sinners mistaken! Though the Text be a Relation of a
Dying man returning from great sins to God; yet it is attended with
extraordinary Circumstances, such as will make even the boldest Sinner to
tremble, and, I hope, be so wise, as to make more early Provisions for his
Immortal Soul: For in some things this Example is vastly different from their
Condition, and in many others it is above their imitation; so that if they will
but seriously consider all Circumstances, they will find them so remarkable,
and so extraordinary, that this Example can be no safe Rule for them to walk
by. For,

1st, Let us consider, that in all probability this was the first Call that was
given this Thief to repent; it was the first opportunity that was offered him
to be acquainted with Christ. The Scripture says nothing at all to the
contrary, and Ecclesiastical History may confirm us in this belief. Hear what
account St. Austin gives of this penitent Thief* Ad consequendam fidem, non
fuit illi extrema hora, sed prima: Nec Religionem ante, nec Christum scivit:
Non remedia status sui in momenta ultima infelici fraud posuit. If (says this
Father) we respect his Opportunities for attaining Faith, his Repentance was
not late, but early; he took the very first season: As soon as ever he descried
Christ and Religion, he readily embraced them: He did not wretchedly cheat
himself of the Remedies of his miserable condition, he did not adjourn the use
of them to a late uncertain Futurity, which seldom or never succeeds well. Let
now the bold Presumptuous sinners of our Times, compare themselves, if they
please, with the Example of the Text: Let them see, if they can extract any
Comfort or Encouragement from hence. Will they say indeed, that they never had
any Call to Repentance? Will they pretend, that there was never offered them
any Opportunity to be acquainted with Christ? Alas! how often has Christ been
Crucified before their Eyes, in the Ministry of the Word? How often have they
seen him in the Sacrament bleeding for their sins? Have they not had Line upon
Line, and Precept upon Precept? Have they not had private and public
Admonitions? How many National Judgments and Calamities have called aloud for
their Humiliation? How many public Mercies and Deliverances have invited them
to the Duty? Sure, then, they cannot draw a parallel between their own Case and
the Case of the Thief: They cannot at the Hour of Death expect any Comfort or
Consolation from his Example.

2dly, Consider how remarkable, how wonderful, how extraordinary the Repentance
of this Thief was. As Jewels contain vast Riches in a little room, so his short
Life of Penitency had a whole Age of Repentance in it. Though his Repentance had
but a little time to breath in, yet how busy, how active, how vigorous was it
in all the great and important parts of hearty Mortification?

1. We may view here in the Text, his deep sense and humble acknowledgment of
his former sins. We suffer justly, says he to the other Thief; we receive no
more than the due rewards of our former Deeds. Magnum enim poenitentiae signum
in poena sua acquiescere. It is a great sign of true Repentance, says Grotius,
patiently to bear the Punishment which is inflicted, or for the Malefactor to
approve of his own Condemnation. Confession is called by the Father, the Vomit
of the Soul, it shows Sin to be bitter to us when we cast it up by such open
Acknowledgments. And now, I pray, what Comfort is there in this Example for
such Presumptuous sinners amongst us, who put off their Repentance to the time
of Sickness? How rarely do we find in them such a deep sense of their Sins, and
a serious Humiliation for them? How lame are their Confessions, and for the
most part but General? Ministers, when they come to Visit them in their
Sickness, are forced to transgress the bounds of Modesty, before they can
extort a slender acknowledgment of their Faults. Though they have sinned in an
impudent manner, and never were ashamed to dishonor God, and affront their
Savior; yet now they are unwilling to take shame to themselves, but desire
their sins may be buried with them in the same Grave. Thus the Clinicks of the
Age, do generally fall short of the Example in the Text, as to this part of
Repentance. But,

2dly, Let us Consider, that this honest Penitent Thief was not only sensible
of his sin, and willing to make an open Confession of it; but he showed great
Charity to his fellow Thief, and labored to bring him to an hearty Humiliation
for his Transgressions. See how his Compassion to his Soul displays it self, in
his passionate Expostulation with him? What, says he, do thou not fear God?
Is this a time for thee to revile this Innocent Person, who has done nothing
amiss? It would better become thee to reflect upon thy former Life, to call thy
past Sins to remembrance, and spend that little Breath which is left thee, in
suing for a Pardon at the Throne of Grace. Sure thine Heart must be harder than
an Adamant, if Death, that King of Terrors, has no Darts that can pierce it.
What, says he, do thou not at such a time as this fear God? Thus great, thus
remarkable was his Charity to the Soul of his Fellow-Thief. But alas! how cold
is that Charity which the Clinicks of the Age express for the Souls of others?
Though they have been all their life time Factors for Hell, and saved the Devil
the labor of Tempting men to sin: Though they have delighted formerly in putting
the Bottle to their Neighbors mouth, and even gloried when they have been able
to drink them into Brutes: Though they have enticed them to all sorts of Lusts,
and made them bear a share in all their Debaucheries; yet in their sickness,
how seldom do they send for their boon Companions? How seldom do they endeavor
to rid their Souls of the guilt of other Men's sins? If their Brethren in
Iniquity come at any time unsent for, and have so much Civility as to Visit
them in their sickness, how frothy, at least how unseasonable is their
Discourse? When do we hear them reminding them of their former Debaucheries,
telling them the danger of them, and by ghostly Admonitions laboring to draw
them out of the snare of the Devil? And since they are so unlike this penitent
Thief, in their Charity for the Souls of others, they have little reason to
encourage themselves by his Example. But,

3dly, Consider farther, what a strong prodigious Faith did live and act in
this penitent Thief when he was a dying? We find in the Text, he believed
Christ to have been a Just Person, even when he was numbered among
Transgressors: He pronounces that our Savior had done nothing amiss,
notwithstanding the great Sanhedrim had pronounced him worthy of Death, yea,
the Death of the Cross, and fit to be hanged between two Thieves. This was a
strange prodigious Faith indeed! And yet did it exert more prodigious Acts than
these, for he farther believed, that Christ had a Kingdom, and that a Kingdom
of another World; and therefore he says to our Savior, at the point of Death,
Lord remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom. What a strong prodigious
Faith was here! The wisest of the Jews dreamt of nothing so much as a Temporal
Kingdom; yea, his own Disciples were deficient in this great Article of their
Faith: They are for sitting at his Right hand, and at his Left hand, in some
worldly Empire. Nay, after Christ had given several Checks to their misguided
Ambition, we find them still harping on this string, and at the very time of
his Ascension, putting this foolish Question to him, Lord, Will thou at this
time restore again the Kingdom unto Israel, Act. 1. 6. But this penitent Thief
desires no Earthly Glories; he begs not to sit at his Right hand or at his
Left; but, Lord, says he, remember me after Death, when thou come into thy
Kingdom. These are strange and wonderful Acts of his Faith, and yet not all
that are here recorded in the Text; for it seems he believed Christ to have
been both able and willing to save him, which is in effect, to own him for a
Mediator: Hence we find him making solemn and earnest Addresses to him for
Mercy; Lord, says he, remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom. One would
think these Circumstances which I have mentioned, namely, his deep Sense of his
Sins, his humble Confession of them, his Charity to the Soul of his Fellow
Thief, and his strange and prodigious Faith; I say, one would think these
Circumstances so wonderful, and so extraordinary, that they were sufficient of
themselves to evidence the sincerity of his Repentance, how short soever it
was; and yet by way of Overplus, we have the Testimony of our Savior himself
concerning it, This day, says our Savior, thou shall be with me in Paradise.
Sure that Repentance must be sincere and perfect which enters into Heaven,
passes into Paradise, and makes so notorious a Thief, all on a sudden; so fit
a Companion for the Holy Jesus. And now let us enquire, what matter of Comfort
here can be for the bold Daring Sinners of the Times? Have they any reason to
expect such a lively, vigorous, and extraordinary Faith? Or is it possible they
should be so well assured of the sincerity of their Repentance? The Age of
Miracles did expire long ago, and God having abundantly confirmed the Truths of
the Gospel by mighty Signs and Wonders, did resolve to leave the succeeding
Ages of the Church to the ordinary Means of Grace. How then can we expect at
the Hour of Death, to find such a wonderful Faith wrought in those profligate
Wretches, who have all their Life time despised Gods Ministers, quenched all
the Motions of his Holy Spirit, trampled on the Blood of the New Covenant, and
shamefully abused all the ordinary Methods and Dispensations of the Gospel? And
as we cannot expect to find in the Clinicks of the Age such a prodigious and
extraordinary Faith, as was in this penitent Thief; so neither is it possible
they should be so well assured of the sincerity of their Repentance, as he was*
I am willing to be as Charitable to these Penitents, as the Salvation of their
Souls will allow me to be: And therefore let us suppose such Presumptuous
sinners to be deeply sensible of their sins, and willing to Confess them: Let
us suppose them sending for their Debauched Companions, to remind them of
Eternity, and the great danger of delaying their Repentance: Nay farther let us
suppose them watering their Couches with their Tears, and making most solemn
Protestations of better Obedience, if God should restore them to their former
Health. Supposing all this be done by the Clinicks of the Age, is it possible
for a Minister to afford them a Cordial, or any solid Comfort from this Example
of the Text? For my part, I must declare, that I think it impossible. We may
hope well, in the Judgment of Charity; but to give them any such Assurance, as
this penitent Thief, is beyond the power and skill of the wisest Minister; for
the Heart is deceitful above all things; and since Ministers are not
Omniscious, as our Savior was, they cannot pass an infallible Judgment upon
the sincerity of such a late Repentance. When Esau had lost his Birthright for
a Mess of Pottage, did not he shed as hearty and unfeigned Tears, as these
supposed Penitents can do, and yet it is said; found no place for Repentance?
Did not Judas run to the Scribes and Pharisees? Did he not confess publicly,
that he had betrayed the Innocent Blood? Nay, did he not throw down the Thirty
pieces of Silver? And sure if he had not been in earnest, such a Covetous
Wretch would never have parted with his Money; and yet we know his Repentance
was not right. Alas! the Horrors of Conscience, and the ghastly Apparitions of
Death, will force men to do many things which God will not accept of, because
they proceed from fear of Punishment, and not from the Love of him. Nay, let me
add yet farther, that sad Experience has set its Seal to this Observation, That
many such Penitents, who have made the most solemn Protestations of better
Obedience in the time of their Sickness; when God has restored them in Mercy to
their former Health, they have with the Dog returned to their Vomits, and with
the Sow to their wallowings in the Mire. Thus you see, that Repentance of the
Thief in the Text was so remarkable, so wonderful, so extraordinary in all the
parts of it, as will afford little solid Comfort to repenting Sinners at the
Hour of Death.

4ly. This Repentance of the Thief will be found yet farther extraordinary, and
such as can afford little Comfort to the Clinicks of the Age, if we consider
those great and extraordinary Temptations he had to grapple with. Christ was
now in his worst Estate, in the very lowest degree of his Humiliation; there
was no Beauty, no Form, no Comeliness in him, that he should be desired: The
Chief Priests, the Scribes, and the Elders mocked him; all that passed by
reviled him, wagging their Heads: Of his own Disciples, some denied him, and
all of them shamefully and most ungratefully forsook him: This poor penitent
Thief was the only Confessor he had. And what Inducements had he at this time
to own him? He could expect no Wordly Advantages; all that he could promise
himself was only this, that as he was now Crucified as a Malefactor only; so
for such his Confession, his Torments would have been enhanced, and he
persecuted as a Martyr: And can now the Clinicks of the Age show us any such
extraordinary Repentance? Is Christ now under the same Circumstances of Pain
and Ignominy that he was then? Do not all our Creeds tell us that he is now at
the Right Hand of God? That He is made the Head of all things both in Heaven
and in Earth: And will it be any such heroic Act of Faith now to seek unto
such a Glorious and Triumphant Savior? Sure there is a vast difference between
the case of the Thief, and the case of the presumptuous Sinners. The Thief had
no inducements to fly to Christ for succor; and these have none to fly to but
their Savior There is therefore but little solid comfort for such Penitents in
the Example of the Text.

5ly. The case of the Thief will yet further be found extraordinary, if we
consider the time when he obtained Mercy; it was no ordinary time, but a time
when God was showing a public Act of Grace and Mercy to the World. God at this
time was giving his own Son, out of great love to Mankind: And therefore it
might seem proper and well, becoming so solemn a time, that there should be
some Monument of this Infinite Mercy. It may possibly deserve your serious
observation, that God Almighty did always something extraordinary to grace the
several Passages of our Saviors Mediatorship. We know at his Nativity, a
Glorious Star shone in the Air, and conducted the Wise Men of the East to the
Son of Righteousness. At his Resurrection all the Graves were opened; and those
Patriarchs which had slept for many years, had a Jail-delivery, and graced the
solemnity of our Saviors Resurrection. The Holy Martyr Ignatius has left it
upon Record, that those very Saints who were with our Savior at Easter, had a
share also in his Ascension upon Holy-Thursday. What wonder then if we find one
Penitent Thief converted, in a miraculous manner, to grace his Crucifixion?
Christ was now triumphing over Principalities and Powers; he was now making a
show of them openly on the Cross: That therefore he should bear off the Field,
the prey which he had taken out of the Jaws of the Enemy, was no more than was
due to the solemnity of his Triumphs. Very pretty is St. Austin's Remark upon
this passage; Christ, says he, in rescuing the poor Thief upon the Cross, was
but quits with the Devil; for the Devil took Man from God out of the midst of
Paradise: Christ takes this poor Man from Satan when he was no less than in the
very Jaws of Hell. Satan ruined Man on the Forbidden Tree, and Christ saves him
on the Cursed Tree. How proper for this occasion was such an Experiment of this
Sovereign Balsom? There is then no question to be made, but this Conversion of
the Thief was an extraordinary Act of Grace; Novae and insolitae quaedam
Divinae Virtutis Efficacia; it was, says Grotius, an unusual Ray of Divinity,
which darting, at this time, into the Thiefs heart, wrought such strange and
wonderful Repentance in him. And indeed the Conclusion will run thus high, if
we lay all the premised circumstances together, that the Grace of God should
work in this Thief such a deep sense of his sin; such an open confession of it,
such wonderful Charity for his Neighbor, such a miraculous Faith, yea such a
complete change, all on a sudden, and that without means; yea, as you have
heard, against means, and amidst the greatest Temptations to the contrary: All
these show the Conversion of this Thief to have been perfectly extraordinary,
and such as was designed to Grace the Crucifixion of our Savior. And now, I
pray, what comfort can this example afford to the Clinicks of the Age? Do they
think that God Almighty is obliged to work Miracles for their Conversion? And
yet it is a known Rule in Divinity, that extraordinary Cases must not be made a
Rule. Because God did once translate Enoch into Heaven, must any of us expect
the same Honor and Dignity? Because some Saints arose with Christ, and
ascended with him into Heaven, is this any ground for our Faith, that we shall
rise before the General Resurrection? So, because God did once, in a wonderful
manner, Convert a poor Thief at the hour of Death; we must not presume upon
such extraordinary Mercy. It will better become us to be terrified at the
example of the other Thief. We read he was left unconverted, and his Soul dropped
into Hell sooner than his Carcass was taken from the Cross. If thou do reject
the ordinary means of Grace, which God does plentifully afford thee, thou can
not promise thy self extraordinary mercy at the hour of Death: in all
probability it will fare with thee, as it did with the Unconverted Thief.

SERMON VII.
Luke xxiii. 39, -- 43. And one of the Malefactors, which were hanged, railed
on him, saying, If thou be Christ, save thy self and us. But the other
answering rebuked him, saying, Do thou not fear God, seeing thou art in the
same condemnation? And we indeed justly, for we receive the due reward of our
deeds, but this man has done nothing amiss. And he said unto Jesus, Lord,
remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom. And Jesus said unto him, Verily
I say unto thee, to day thou shall be with me in Paradise
I Told you the last Lords Day, that I did not design to examine all the parts
of so large a Text, but only take occasion from them to show you two things.

First, That there is no encouragement at all for a late Deathbed Repentance
in the Example of the Penitent Thief. And,

Secondly, Take occasion from the Example of the Impenitent Thief, to show you,
that a late Deathbed Repentance is a thing most dangerous, if not in some sort
impossible.

First, I showed you at large, the last Lords day, that there is no
encouragement at all in the Example of the Penitent Theif, for a late Deathbed
Repentance. For this example, in many things, is vastly different from the
condition of presumptuous Sinners in our times. This in all probability was the
first Call that was ever given to this poor Thief, the first opportunity that
was ever offered him to be acquainted with Christ; whereas the Clinicks of the
Age have had the means of Grace plentifully afforded them; they have had Line
upon Line, and Precept upon Precept, public and private Admonitions to Repent.
I showed you further, how wonderful and extraordinary his Repentance was. We
find here in the Text, his deep sense of his sins, his humble and public
Confession of his Faults; his great Charity and Compassion for the Soul of the
other Thief: a Faith also strange and Prodigious, such as pronounced Christ a
just and innocent Person, when the great Sanhedrim had condemned him for a
Malefactor; such as owned Christ to have a Kingdom, and that a Kingdom of
another World, such as made him address to Christ for Mercy, own him in his
lowest degree of Humiliation, when all the World reviled him, and his own
Disciples forsook him. Such a change as this, so sudden, and so perfect, could
not be wrought without a Miraculous Power; and was designed as I showed you, to
grace the Passion and Crucifixion of our Savior, but not to encourage
presumptuous sinners to delay their Repentance. As therefore we cannot think
God obliged to work Miracles for the Conversion of bold daring Sinners, so we
cannot administer any solid comfort to them at the hour of Death, from this
example of the Penitent Theif. All the kindness* the Text will allow us to show
unto bold presumptuous sinners, is only to awaken them in the time of their
health, to a serious and timely Repentance, from the Dreadful example of the
Impenitent Thief. This wicked Malefactor, as he had lived a most wicked Life,
so he dies a most miserable Death; his Body was not sooner buried in Golgotha,
than his Soul was hurried to the place of Torments. All the Charity of the
Penitent Thief is lost upon him; all his Admonitions prove ineffectual; he dies
Reviling and Blaspheming his Savior, and consequently could not be long from
receiving the just but dreadful rewards of such final impenitency.

I come therefore in the next place to show you from this Example,

Secondly, That a late Repentance is a thing most dangerous, if not in some
sort impossible. The generality of Mankind are ready enough to acknowledge the
absolute Necessity of Repentance: They know it is as possible for a Camel, with
his great Bunch upon his Back, to pass through the Eye of a Needle, as for an
impenitent Sinner, made gross with the sins of many years, to enter in at the
strait Gate of Heaven; but yet with Felix, they put off their Repentance to a
more Convenient Season: They think they shall have time enough to repent, when
sickness calls upon them to pay their last debt to Nature. Indeed few men love
their sins so well, as that they are willing to be damned for them: And
therefore, however they live, they earnestly desire they may die like
Christians; with Balaam they wish their death may be like the Death of the
Righteous; and resolve not to go out of this World in an impenitent State. But
yet at present they think they are not at leisure to prepare for such a death
as this. Alas, they are now young and healthful; their Pulse beats evenly, and
their Blood moves briskly; they have not the least Symptom of any Distemper, to
make them fear the approaches of Death; and therefore, as yet, they fancy they
may safely delay their Repentance; they fancy it will be time enough to begin
to live well, when they shall be allowed to live no longer. The great Enemy of
Mankind has not, in all his Magazine, a more deadly Engine for the destruction
of Souls. So great, so fatal are the dangers which attend such practices, that
Trembling is fitter than Words to express them; however the madness and folly
of them will in some measure appear in these following considerations.

1st. The madness and folly of putting off Repentance to the time of Sickness,
or the hour of Death, will appear if we seriously consider the uncertainty of
Death. We cannot, says Solomon, boast our selves of to morrow; we cannot
command the next fleeting minute. Death lurks in every corner, and waits for us
in every Place. There is not a crumb of Bread we eat, nor a drop of Liquor that
we drink; but if it goes a little a-wry, Physicians tell us may be our ruin.
Histories afford us a thousand instances of sudden death. Manlius Torquatus
died whilst he was at Supper; Cn. Bebius, asking the hour of the day, met with
his last hour; two of the Rom* Emperors stepped into their Graves, even whilst
they were putting on their Shoes; C. Servilius died whilst he was standing in
the Market; M. Terentius whilst he was a Writing; and to name but one more, and
that out of our own Chronicles, Mr. H. Morris died at a game of Tennis. Thus
uncertain is the time of Death, and therefore their madness is both great and
certain, who procrastinate their Repentance till the hour of Death. We know not
how soon this may come, we know not how suddenly it may surprise us. Were not
Zimri and Cosbi smitten in the very Act of their Uncleanness? Were not Ammon
and Belshazzar taken in the midst of their drunken Cups? Corah and his factious
Crew were swept away in their Rebellion: And to name no more, the Covetous Fool
in the Gospel received his Summons to another World, even when he was singing a
requiem to his Soul in this; saying, Soul take thine Ease, thou have Goods laid
up for many Years. What folly then will it be, to put off Repentance till the
time of Sickness, or the hour of Death? But since Men are of this Humor, let
us, for once, take them at their words; and try if they will repent one day, at
least, before they die? This they profess they are willing to do, because they
know their Salvation depends upon it. But if in truth they are in earnest; if
they are unfeignedly resolved to Repent one day before they die, they must
begin the Work this very day; for what know they but this may be their last
day? Sure they have not made a Covenant with Death, or an Agreement with Hell.
Sure it is not in their Power to dispose of Times and Seasons: Their Breath is
in the Hands of God, and not in their own. Hear what Solomon says, Eccles. 9.
12. Man knows not his time; as the Fishes that are caught in an evil Net; and
as the Birds are caught in the Snare; so are the Sons of Men snared in an evil
time, when it comes suddenly upon them. If therefore men have any real
kindness for their Souls, they will not run the hazard of an uncertain
futurity; they will rather think it reasonable to follow our Saviors advice,
Mat. 25. 13. Watch, for ye do not know the day nor the hour when the Son of Man
comes.

2ly. A late Repentance will further be found a thing full of danger, if not in
some sort impossible, if we consider that the time of Sickness, or the hour of
Death is a very improper, and unseasonable time for Repentance. If Men be not
surprised by sudden Death, or snatched away in wrath before the Pots perceive
the Thorns, as the Psalmist phrases it; yet how often are they seized on by
such kind of Diseases, as render their Repentance a thing impossible? Seneca
speaks of a Morbus insanabilis qui animo afficiat, and mentem concutiat, such a
violent Distemper, as either deprives Men wholly of their Reason, or else
disturbs the use of their Understandings: And though he speaks but of one in the
singular number, yet Physicians tell of many in their Books, such as the Coma,
the Lethargy, the Carus, the Appoplexy, the Catoche, Catalepsiis, Erisipylas,
Phrenzy, Mania, and several others. Now has any presumptuous Sinner a
protection from Heaven against these drowsy stupifyed Distempers, such as will
deprive him of his Reason, and consequently incapacitate him for any works of
Piety and Religion? but supose the sinner should escape such Diseases as these,
do not other Diseases render the time of Death a most improper season for the
work of Repentance? Let but such a presumptuous Sinner sometimes bestow a visit
on his sick Friends and Nieghbours, and then let him judge whether the time of
sickness be a fit time to perform such a difficult and important work as
Repentance is. May he not now see how troubled and disturbed their thoughts
are? How uneasy and disturbed their Minds? How strangely does their Reason and
Understanding decay? How fast their Memories and Senses fail them* whilst their
Bodies groan under great anguish and extremity of Pain? And is this, think ye,
a proper time to prepare for Eternity? is so much Weakness able to wrestle with
Principalities and Powers? Is he, who cannot help himself, fit to encounter sin
at its greatest strength; and work in himself all the pious habits of the
contrary Virtues? We do not ordinarily account them wise Men, who leave their
Worldly Affairs to be settled at this time. What stupendous folly then will it
be to leave all our Spiritual Concerns, matters of everlasting Moment and
Importance to be transacted at our dying hour? The best of Men are so
indisposed in the time of sickness, that they are unfit to engage themselves in
any Religious Exercises. Good Hezekiah, as pious and excellent a Prince as he
was, was able in his sickness to do no more than chatter as a Crane. Though none
at other times knew better how to pray, yet now it seems he can but chatter,
and is obliged, by reason of his Infirmity, to beg the prayers of the Prophet
Esaias: And as it was with Hezekiah, so it happens unto other holy Men; which
occasioned that advice of St. James, Chap. 5. 14. Is any Sick among you let him
call for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray over him. And if good men,
if such as Hezekiah be rendered by sickness unfit for Prayer, and the other
exercises of Religion; how must sickness indispose the wicked, who never were
acquainted with these Religious Exercises before? They of all men are most
unfit to set about such Duties as these: For besides those exquisite Pains they
labor under; besides all those indispositions both of Body and Mind, which
they have common with other men; the sad remembrances of their former sins, and
the more dreadful apprehensions of an incensed Deity, will now inhaunce their
troubles; they will fill their Souls with unspeakable horrors, and even deter
them from endeavoring to make their peace with Heaven. And besides all this,
Satan, we may be sure, will be busy at this time to draw these sinners to
despair: Though he used to tell them in the time of their health, that it was too
soon to Repent, yet this malicious Fiend will now suggest that it is too late;
he will tell them the Door of Mercy is now shut upon them, and that God, whom
they refused to hear all their life long, will now be as backward to hear them.
All these considerations laid together, will, I believe, make a late Repentance
a thing most dangerous, if not in some sort impossible.

3ly, a late Deathbed Repentance will appear a thing most dangerous, if not in
some sort impossible, if we consider what is required to the completing and
perfecting of Repentance. Now Repentance does denote our ceasing to do evil,
and our learning to do well: Our rooting out all the inveterate habits of Vice,
and planting in our Souls the contrary habits of Virtue: And this sure must be
a work of great difficulty, and consequently of time. For sin, as it grows up
by degrees, and gains strength by custom and continuance, so it must be
conquered by degrees, abate by a long series and succession of contrary Acts.
Every step we made forward must be repeated backward; the Web we formerly spun,
must now all be unravelled: And believe it, we will find it a work of time and
difficulty too, to correct our impetuous inclinations, to render our sensual
Appetites obsequious to Reason, our Passions regular and steady, and cleanse
our Souls from vanity, sloth, perverseness and all vicious distempers. It takes
good men many months and years to conquer one impetuous Lust, and subdue one
unreasonable Passion; and do these presumptuous Sinners expect to conquer all
their Lusts in a trice, to blow them away with a little breath, a Lord have
mercy upon us, and the like? And as Vice is not easily conquered, so neither is
Virtue so easily obtained: It is not like Ionahs Gourd, which grows up in a
night; no, it is a tender and delicate Plant, it grows but slowly, it needs
much pains to cultivate it, much care to guard it, much time to mature it,
especially in the untoward Soil of corrupt Nature, and the unkindly weather of
this wicked World. And if it be so hard a matter to obtain one single Virtue,
what pains, what time is required to get the whole circle of them; to add as
St. Peter speaks, to our Faith, Virtue; to Virtue, Knowledge; to Knowledge,
Temperance, and so on? Is this, think ye, the work of a dying hour, the
business only of a day, or the short time of sickness? The whole time of our
life seems too little for it, and would in truth be so, if God were not so
Merciful, as to crown our imperfect Endeavors with his gracious assistance,
and render them in some sort perfect by his favorable Acceptance. One thing
more I shall add unto this Head, which you may learn from Romans 2. 7. where St.
Paul tells us, that we must by patient continuance in well doing, seek for
glory, and honor, and immortality. It seems we cannot expect Eternal life,
unless we conquer Sin, and gain the contrary habits of Virtue, yea, which is
more yet, we must patiently continue in well-doing. All this will certainly
make a Deathbed Repentance a thing most dangerous, if not in some sort
impossible, as the Prophet Jeremiah represents it, Chap. 13. 23. Can the
Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his spots? Then may you also do good,
who are accustomed to do evil.

4ly, A late Repentance will yet farther appear to be a thing most dangerous,
if not in some sort impossible, if we consider how little it is such a
Presumptuous Sinner is able to do in the Time of Sickness. I grant, such a
person may express some Grief and Sorrow for Sin; but since this Sorrow
proceeds more from fear of Punishment, than any real love of God and Virtue, it
cannot be that Godly Sorrow, which works Repentance to Salvation, never to be
repented of. I grant yet farther, that such a sinner may with great earnestness
beg pardon for his sins, restore perhaps his Ill-gotten Goods, and which is the
most he can do, make solemn Resolutions of Amendment and better Obedience, if
God should restore him to his former Health. This is all such a sinner can
possible do at the Hour of Death; but will all this amount to a sincere and
hearty Repentance? Pray, let it be considered, what I told you the last Lord's
Day, namely, that Experience has frequently declared these dying Resolutions to
be but forced and feigned; and such Penitents, when by God's Mercy they have
been restored to their former Health, notwithstanding all their Protestations,
have with the Dog returned to their Vomits, and with the Sow to their wallowing
in the Mire. And have we any reason then, to look on such Resolutions as these
to be hearty Repentances? Besides, a Resolution to repent and amend, is not
properly to Repent and Amend. Apply this to other Cases, and you will easily find
the falsity of it. Suppose a man resolves to learn the Art of Sailing, does
this Resolution presently make him a skilful Mariner? No more does a Resolution
to repent and amend, make a true Penitent or honest Christian: Such a Change as
this is not so easily wrought such a Reformation is not so suddenly produced.
The Mathematics, or any other Art, may more easily be learned, than the Art of
Living-well; because all Arts must be acquired by repeated Acts; and since
Corrupt Nature is more opposite to the Art of Living-well, than to any other,
it is impossible it should be attained by a bare unactive Resolution. Now though
all this do abundantly show a late Deathbed Repentance to be a thing most
dangerous, and in some sort impossible; and yet seeing this is a Subject of
most serious importance.

5ly, I will in the Fifth place add one Consideration more, which will show it
yet to be more dangerous, and in some sort impossible: And pray let it be
Considered, that the Day of Grace may be lost, before the Day of Death come.
Sure, it is not possible that such sinners should repent, without the
assistance of God's Grace; and yet before their death they may sin to such an
height, as to forfeit this assistance of God's Grace. It is the vain fancy of
such presumptuous sinners, that the Day of Grace and the Day of Life run
parallel, and that as long as the one lasts, the other will last too; and
therefore they encourage themselves in their wickedness, thinking they shall
have time enough to repent when they come to dye. But if this Fancy of theirs
be vain, the delaying of Repentance till the Hour of Death, must needs be a
thing most dangerous, and in some sort impossible. Now it is very plain from
Scripture, that God has set bounds to his Patience, and limits to his Mercy:
Though he bears very much with sinners, and waits a long time to be gracious; yet
he has told us expressly, Genesis 6. 3. My Spirit shall not always strive with Men:
We find in the following Verse, that God allowed the Anti-Deluvians, or Old
World, a long Day of Grace, he promised to bear with them 120 Years: now during
this time he sent unto them Noah, a Preacher of Righteousness: Besides those
Admonitions and frequent Calls the Holy Man gave them to repent, his very
building the Ark, was a constant daily Sermon to them; but when they would not
hearken unto this Preacher, but scoffed at his Discourses, God did not tarry
for the time of their death, but with a dreadful Deluge swept them all away. In
Luc. 19. 41, 42. we find our Savior weeping over Jerusalem, and declaring
their wretched Condition in such like doleful Accents as these: O that thou
had known, even thou, at least in this thy Day, the things which belong unto
thy Peace, but now are they hid from thine Eyes. It seems the Day of Grace has
an Evening, before the Night of Death approaches: The things of Peace were hid
from the Eyes of Jerusalem, before they were closed by the Hand of Death. To
this we may add what we read in Prove. 1. 28. Then shall they call upon me, but
I will not answer; they shall seek me early, but shall not find me. There is a
certain measure of Iniquity, God is said in Scripture to allow Sinners to fill
up; and when this Measure is full, they may call upon him in vain, they may
seek him early and late, but he will not hear them. And as is it thus plain
from these Texts, that the Day of Grace may be lost before the Day of Death; so
the same Truth may be evidenced by sundry Scripture Examples. God allowed Cain
a Day of Grace, and during the Time of this Day, Cain though he sinned again and
again, yet he heard nothing but this Still Voice, if thou do well, shall not
thou be accepted? but if thou do ill, Sin lies at the door. But when all the
Means of Grace were lost upon him; when notwithstanding the frequent
Admonitions of his Father, and solemn Remembrances of Heaven, he added sin to
sin, till at last, he filled up the Measure of his Iniquity, by murdering
Righteous Abel; His season of Grace was then gone, and God tells him in plain
terms, that he was then accursed from the Earth. Now this happened unto him some
hundreds of years before his death. Another Instance we have in Esau, whom the
Apostle styles a Profane Person: He was an idle, unprofitable Fellow, one who
spent too much of his time in Gaming and impertinent Recreations; and to all
his other sins he added, the felling of his Birthright, on which were entailed
all the Blessings of Heaven; and this indeed showed him to be a Profane Person
with a witness? one that preferred his Sports and Recreations before God and
his Religion. Now this great sin filled up the Measure of his Iniquity, so that
his Day of Grace expired some 50 years before his death, as Divines compute:
And though now he endeavored to regain his Birthright; though he sought the
Blessing earnestly and with Tears, yet he was rejected, there was no place
found for Repentance, Heb. 12. 17. I shall add but one Instance more, and it
shall be the Example of wicked Saul, God had striven with Saul many ways, and
many times: He had given him Riches and Honors, yea, all the Glories of a
Kingdom, and which were more than all, the gifts of his Spirit; but when Saul
multiplied his Transgressions, and notwithstanding such signal Tokens of his
Favor, rebelled against the Lord, God then cast him off; yea, he sent an Evil
Spirit to torment him, and would no longer hearken to his Cries, as he sadly
confesses to the Witch of Endor. Now this Rejection happened 36 years before he
died, according to Iosephus's Chronology. Thus God does withdraw the Assistance
of his Spirit from sinners long before they dye: In their Life time he delivers
them up to a Spirit of slumber and of giddiness: He hardens their Hearts, and
sears their Consciences; and gives them over to a Reprobate sense. And since
these things are so, it will be too late for the Clinicks of the Age to Repent
when they come to dye. If they will obstinately go on in a Course of
wickedness, and multiply their Transgressions, till the measure of their
Iniquity be full, then they are beyond the possibility of Salvation; they have
then forfeited the Assistance of God's Grace, without which it is impossible
they should repent. It will therefore be safe for sinners to follow St. Paul's
Advice, To day if you will hear his Voice, harden not your Hearts: As the
Prophets Exhorts, Seek the Lord while he may be found, call upon him while he
is near. Let not this present Discourse, this present Opportunity be lost upon
you; for, as the Apostle speaks, Now is the accepted time, now is the day of
salvation: Begin this very moment to resolve against thy sins; come this day to
the Holy Sacrament, and there vow and swear, that thou will hereafter keep all
Gods Righteous Judgments. I shall conclude all with the excellent Advice of the
Son of Sirach: Say not, God's Mercy is great, and he will be pacified for the
multitude of thy Sins: For Mercy and Wrath is with him; he is mighty to
forgive, and to pour out Displeasure; and as his Mercy is great, so are his
Corrections also. Therefore make no long tarrying to turn to the Lord, and put
not off from day to day: For suddenly shall the Wrath of the Lord come forth,
and in thy security thou shall be destroyed. Humble thy self before thou be
sick, and in the time of Sins show Repentance: Let nothing hinder to pay thy
Vows in due time, and defer not till Death to be justified.

The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ etc.

SERMON VIII.
Luke xxiv. 43. To day shall thou be with me in Paradise.
THE Occasion of which Words we may easily learn from the Context: We find Ver.
33. that our Blessed Savior was Crucified betwixt two Theives, or Malefactors:
Though he was without Sin, yet, as the Apostles speaks, he appeared in the
likeness of sinful Flesh; and, as the Prophet Esaias tells us, was numbered with
the Transgressors, Chap. 53. 12. Now one of these Malefactors begins to rail on
our Savior, saying, If thou be the Christ, save thy self and us, verse. 39. It
is an Argument of desperate Wickedness, to insult over such as are in Misery;
it is no less than to defy Almighty God, who is the Protector of such as are
in misery, and uses to avenge their quarrel: And therefore the other Malefactor
rebukes him, ver. 40. saying, Do not thou fear God, especially since thou art
in the same Condemnation? Such as are in Prosperity do ordinarily forget God,
but in time of Adversity most men will consider: When they are approaching
toward the Gates of Death, they are then generally serious, the Thoughts of
another World, and the prospect of a Future State, usually strikes an awe into
their Souls: But this Thief is so desperately wicked, that even on the Cross,
and when Death was near at hand, he despises God, and reviles our Savior. But
the other Thief gives ample demonstrations of his sincere Repentance and Faith
in the Messiah: For he does not only rebuke his Fellow Thief, and endeavors
his Conversion; but he also acknowledges his Fault, and patiently submits to
the Punishment, as a just reward of his evil deeds, ver. 41. If such scandalous
persons that are amongst us, would, when they are upon their Deathbeds, thus
take shame to themselves by a free Confession of their Faults: If they would
send for such persons, whom in the time of their Health they have endeavored
to debauch, either by their Example or Counsel, and acquaint them with the
danger of Sin, and the bitterness they then find in it; they would give the
World much better demonstrations of their sincere Repentance, and much surer
grounds to hope their Eternal welfare. And as this poor Thief gives such ample
demonstrations of his sincere Repentance; so he gives also very good proof of a
true and steadfast Faith in Christ; for ver. 42. he says unto Christ Jesus,
Lord, remember me, when thou come into thy Kingdom. Ye see he believes Christ
to be the Lord, and to have a Kingdom, though not in this World, which was more
than Christ's own Disciples did: Nay farther, he owns Christ upon the Cross,
and when in the lowest degree of his state of Humiliation, even when all the
Jews were mocking and persecuting him; yea, when his own Disciples forsook him,
and St. Peter, one of the Chiefest, had denied him thrice: Nay farther yet, how
wonderful was his Humility? He only desires, that Christ would remember him in
his Kingdom. He does not presume to ask, that he might sit on Christ's Right
hand, or on his Left, in his Kingdom; but only, that he would remember him. A
true penitent humble Soul will think the least degree of Mercy great enough, or
too great for him. I have the rather noted all this, because too many encourage
themselves in their Wickedness by the Example of this poor Thief: They think
they may live as they list, and yet be saved if they repent on a Sickbed, and
at the Hour of Death: But how rare is it, that God does give such Presumptuous
sinners so much Grace in the time of their Sickness? How seldom do they give
such ample demonstrations of their Faith, Humility, and sincere Repentance?
Now, what Answer does Christ return to this honest Thief? The Text will give
you a fair account of this: Then said Jesus unto him, Verily I say unto thee,
to day shall thou be with me in Paradise. In which Words we have a fair
description of the happiness of pious Souls, after they are departed from this
wretched Body. I shall consider the Words in the same order that they lie: And,

First, They assure us, That pious Souls are immediately admitted to the actual
possession of Happiness, upon their departure from the Body: To Day, says
Christ.

Secondly, They do farther assure us of the greatness of this Happiness; they
shall be with Christ, and they shall be in Paradise: To day shall thou be with
me in Paradise.

First, These Words assure us, that pious Souls are immediately admitted to the
actual possession of Happiness, upon their depature from the Body. There are a
sort of Men in the World they call Psychoparruychites, who hold, that the Soul,
after its departure from the Body, sleeps all the while till the General
Resurrection, and consequently is neither in a state of Joy nor Misery till the
Day of Judgment; when it shall be reunited united to the Body, and sent with it
either to Heaven or Hell. But it is plain from the Text, that the Souls of Good
men are immediately, after their departure from the Body, admitted to the
actual possession of Eternal happiness: For Christ does here promise this
honest Thief, that he should be that very day with him in Paradise. Paradise is
a place of Joy and Bliss, and to be with Christ, is to be in a state of
Happiness. Now in such a place, and in such a state was the Thief to be that
very day. So Act. 7. 56. St. Stephen saw the Heavens opened, and the Son of Man
standing on the Right hand of God: He knew the Heavens were opened for him, and
that Christ stood there ready to receive him into Glory; and therefore he
prays, ver. 59. Lord Jesus receive my Spirit. So again, 2 Cor. 5. 8. We are
confident, I say, and willing rather to be absent from the Body, and to be
present with the Lord. It seems the pious Soul, as soon as it is absent from
the Body, it is present with the Lord, and consequently in a state of Bliss and
Glory. Again, Revel. 14. 13. I heard a Voice from Heaven, saying, Write,
blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord from henceforth, yea, says the
Spirit that they may rest from their labors, and their works do follow them.
Ye see here the Godly are said to be blessed as soon as they dye; and not only
to rest, but also to receive the reward of their good Works. I shall add but
one Text more, which you will find, Phil. 1. 21, 22. I am in a strait betwixt two,
says St. Paul, having a desire to depart and to be with Christ, which is far
better. Nevertheless, to abide in the flesh is more needful for you. As much as
if the Apostle should have said, I cannot tell whether I should desire, to live
longer, or to dye sooner, being pressed with Arguments on both sides: If I
consult my self and my own good, it is doubtless better for me to dye, and
enter presently into Happiness: But then, if I consult your Convenience, it
were better I should live longer in the World, to be serviceable unto your
Edification. Now I think it is evident, that if the Apostle could have
supposed, that his Soul should have slept after death, and not presently have
entered into the fruition of Bliss, there could have been no strait in the
case, nor any dispute, but that it was better to live still in the World, to
continue in the Comforts of a good Conscience, and of doing good to others,
rather than to be in a constant sleep, or in a senseless state of stupidity and
inactivity. From all which Places of Scripture it is most plain, that the Souls
of good Men do not sleep, after their separation from the Body, (as some among
us fancy) but are immediately received into Bliss, as Lazarus was into Abraham's
Bosom, and the Thief here in the Text into Paradise.

Use. And we learn from hence the Reason, why the Primitive Christians did
celebrate their Funerals with Joy and Feasting: We use to rejoice at the
Happiness of our Friends in this World; and they much more, at their happiness
in a better. They did not therefore, as we do now, hang their Houses and
Churches with Mourning; but, as Prudentius tells us, with White, the Emblem of
Joy: For they looked upon the day of their Deaths, as their Birthday to an
Eternal life; and their going out of this World, as an entrance upon the
incomprehensible Happiness of a better. And indeed we shall find, they had
Cause enough to rejoice, if we consider the greatness of the Happiness they
were possessed of; and this I told you was expressed in the Text by these two
things:

1st, They shall be with Christ.

2dly, They shall be in Paradise.

1st, The Godly, after death, are said to be with Christ. Now, how great is the
Happiness which lies couched in these Words? We cannot be with Christ, but we
must be with all the Saints and Angels of Heaven: Nay farther, we must enjoy
the sweet and ravishing Communion of all the Persons of the Ever Blessed
Trinity: And sure such Company cannot but enhaunce the happiness of Heaven.
Society is ordinarily styled Sal vitae, the Salt of Life; without this the Life
of Man would be most unsavory and unpleasant. We know God said at the Creation
of the World, It is not good for Man to be alone. It seems Paradise it self
would have been a Valley of Bacha, little less than a Comfortless Solitude,
without the refreshments of Society. That therefore nothing may be wanting to
complete the happiness of the Paradise above, St. Paul, Heb. 12. 22. gives us a
large Catalogue of that Glorious Company we shall converse with in Heaven; We
shall come, says he, to the General Assembly of the First born, to the Spirits
of Just Men made Perfect, to an innumerable Company of Angels, and to God the
Judge of all, and to Jesus, the Mediator of the New Covenant. From which place
it is most plain, that we cannot be with Christ, but we must also be with God,
with Angels, and with the Spirits of Just Men made Perfect. Now such Glorious
Company cannot but make the Happiness of Paradise exceeding great, as will
appear more at large by considering in particular what it is to be,

First, With all the Saints of Heaven.

Secondly, What it is to be with the Angels. And,

Thirdly, What it is to be with God and Christ.

1st. Let us enquire what it is to be with all the Saints of Heaven, and how
the happiness of Paradise is inhaunced by such Glorious Company. It is the
unhappiness of the Godly here below, that with Daniel, they are forced
sometimes to dwell in the same Den with Lions, or else converse, as St. Paul
did at Ephesus, with Men that did more truly deserve the name of Beasts. How
was righteous Lot vexed daily with the filthy Conversation of the Sodomites?
How does David mourn, that he was forced to dwell in Mesech, and sojourn in the
Tents of Kedar? The good Man whilst he lives in this World, has his Eyes daily
bloodshot with Murders; his Ears unhallowed with Oaths and Blasphemies; his
Nostrils offended with the Drunkards Vomits; and his Memory made too often the
Cabinet of vain frothy or obscene Discourses; so that with good Lucullus in
Tully, he frequently desires his Memory were worse, or that he could learn the
Art of Oblivion. But in Heaven the Godly shall be free from all such vile and
troublesome Company: Here there will be no Murderers, no Whoremongers, no
Drunkards, no Dogs to molest them, Rev. 22. 15. In the Heavenly Canaan there
will be no Canaanites to be pricks in their Eyes, and Thorns in their Sides:
But they shall converse for ever with all the Saints of Heaven, and live in the
general Assembly of the Firstborn. Now what it is thus to live with all the
Saints of Heaven, I shall show you more distinctly in these following
Particulars.

1st. The Godly shall know all the Blessed Saints that are in Heaven. It is a
wonder it should be disputed by any Divines, whether the Saints in Glory shall
know one another: But sure there can be little comfort in Society, where there
is not a particular Knowledge and a familiar Acquaintance. St. Austin therefore
tells us, In Caelo a singulis omnes, ab omnibus singuli cognoscentur, In
Heaven, says he, all Men shall be known of every Man, and every Man shall be
known of all Men. It is reported of Luther, that being reasonable well the
night before he died, he sat at Table with his Friends, and the matter of
their Discourse happened to be, Whether they should know one another in Heaven?
Whether the Father should know his Child, a Husband his Wife, and a Friend his
Friend? Luther resolved the point in the Affirmative, and gave this Reason,
among others, for it; Adam, says he, knew Eve as soon as he saw her; and be
sure our Knowledge in the Heavenly Paradise shall be much greater than his was
in the Earthly Paradise; none will be stranggers there, but every Glorified
Saint shall know all the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and all the
Servants of God. We find, Mat. 17. 4. Peter, James and John, who were allowed
to see. Christ's Transfiguration, knew Moses and Elias, whom they had never seen
before; how much more shall we, being fully illuminated, and perfectly
Glorified in Heaven, know exactly all the blessed Ones, though never acquainted
with them upon Earth? This therefore is one part of the Happiness of the Godly
in Heaven, they shall see Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in the Kingdom of God, as
our Savior speaks, Luke 13. 28. They shall know all those Worthies and Heroes
that have gone to Heaven before, or shall come thither after them; but this is
not all, For,

2ly, We shall not only know all God's Saints in Heaven, but we shall have more
sweet and ravishing Communion with them. Here a Nazianzin shall repeat the
embraces of his beloved Basil, a David for ever enjoy his Dearest Jonathan, and
the Pious Soul possess what Socrates could of old but wish for; namely, the
intimate converses of all those Brave Heroes who have gone thither before him.
And you will easily believe there shall be most sweet Communion among the Saints
in Heaven, when you have considered the important Phrase, by which it is
expressed, Mat. 8. 11. And I say unto you, that many shall come from the East and
West, and shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of
Heaven. In our Translation it is shall sit down, but in the Greek it is shall
lie down upon Beds, as they used to do at their greatest Feasts. So that there
shall be much sweet and pleasant Communion among the Saints in Heaven, as uses
to be among Friends at their most solemn Feasts. Hence also we read, Luke 16.
22. That Lazarus was carried by the Angels into Abraham's Bosom. It was the
manner of the Jews, when they feasted, to lean in the Bosom one of another:
Thus St. John, when he sat to eat with Christ, is said to lean in his Bosom. So
here, Lazarus being laid in Abraham's Bosom, denotes they have a continual Feast
of Joy in Heaven; they are constantly entertained with the Supper of the Lamb;
and consequently must needs have sweet and ravishing Society and Communion each
with other. And how does this inhance the Happiness of Paradise above? Ask your
own experience, what sweetness you have found in their Conversation here below?
Did not King David account them the most excellent Persons upon Earth, and
delight exceedingly in the society of God's Saints? And if so much delight be
to be found, if so much Sweetness be to be tasted in the Society of the Saints
here on Earth, How much more abundantly shall we be satisfied with their
Company and Conversation in Heaven? Alas, here the very best of men have so
many Imperfections, and are subject to so many Misfortunes, as do often make
their Acquaintance troublesome and unpleasant to us. Hence it was good Advice
which was given by Aristotle, namely, that we should not greatly multiply
Friends, because their frequent falling into Miseries and Misfortunes, would
imbitter our Lives, and make our Condition wretched and miserable. But in
Heaven we are told to our Comfort, that we shall converse with the Spirits of
just men made Perfect. The Saints in Heaven will have no infirmities, no
imperfections to abate and allay the solaces of their Conversation: But on the
other hand, they will have all those Excellencies and Advantages which are
requisite to make their Company Sweet and Desirable; and how great must this
Happiness needs be? When Christ's Disciples, at the Transfiguration enjoyed the
Company only of Moses and Elias, they were so well satisfied with it, that they
cried out bonum est nobis esse hic, it is good for us to be here. How much
greater will their Happiness be, who shall be with Christ in Paradise! For they
cannot be with him, but they must be with all his Saints. As soon as this
Penitent Thief entered the gates of Heaven, he was joyfully received with all
the Honorable Companies and Troops above. There did the Patriarch meet him,
the Prophets hugged him, and the Martys struck up their Harps and bid him
welcome to the Celestial Regions; such joy as this did enter his Soul, when he
did enter into the joy of his Master. But,

2ly. To be with Christ, is not only to be with all the Saints, but also with
all the Angels of Heaven. St. Paul tells us, Heb. 12. 22. That when we come to
the Heavenly Jerusalem, we shall come to an innumerable Company of Angels. How
great must the pleasure be of being acquainted with such Glorious Creatures!
How great the Happiness of hearing their ravishing Music! The Seraphims and
Cherubims are continually Blessing and Praising God; and their Heavenly Harmony
consists of ten thousand times ten thousand various Voices. So we read. Rev. 5.
11. I heard (says St. John) the Voice of many Angels round about the Throne,
and the number of them was ten thousand times, ten Thousand, yea even thousands
of thousands: This is the true Music of the Spears, and it will certainly be
most ravishing, since it is performed by such vast numbers of such Glorious
Choristers. This is the great Happiness of the Godly in Heaven, they shall live
with the General Assembly of the Firstborn, and with an innumerable company of
Angels, crying out continually with them, Thou art worthy, O Lord to receive
Honor, and Glory and Power. But this is not all, for the Godly shall not only
be with Christ's Saints and Angels, But

3ly. They shall be with Christ himself. Now the Godly in Heaven shall be with
Christ.

First, In respect of his Humility.

Secondly, In respect of his Divinity.

First, The Godly shall be with Christ in respect of his Humility. This day,
says Christ, shall thou be with me. As soon as Christ's Soul was separated
from his Body, it went to Heaven, and the poor Thiefs went along with it. But
the Godly that die now, they see not only the Soul, but also the Body of
Christ. Hence St. Paul, describing the Happiness of the Godly in Heaven, tells
us, That they shall come to Jesus, the Mediator of the New Covenant. Now
Christ, as Mediator, was Man as well as God: And it will be part of our
Happiness to be with him as Man. It was one of St. Austins three wishes, that
he might see Christ in the Flesh: But in Heaven we shall not only see Christ's
Body, but we shall see all that Glory God has bestowed upon it there. To this
purpose is our Saviors Prayer, John 17. 24. Father, I will, that they also
whom thou have given me, may be with me, where I am, that they may behold my
Glory, which thou have given me. How great will our Happiness be, when we shall
behold all Christ's Glory? When we shall see him sitting at the Right Hand of
Power, highly exalted above every Name; yea, even above the most Glorious
Cherubims and Seraphims. And this Glory of Christ will rejoice us the more,
because our Nature is Glorified in him. As a Queen that sees the Prince in his
Glory, delights the more in it, because she looks upon it as her own. So when
the Church Triumphant shall see Christ her Husband in all his Glory, she will
rejoice in it, because it is her own Glory. Who can express this part of our
Happiness? Blessed are the Eyes, says Christ, which see those things that you
see here. If it were such a blessed thing to see Christ in his state of
Humiliation. How great will that Blessedness be, when we shall see him in his
State of Glory and Exaltation? It will be the business of God's Saints in
Heaven, eternally to follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes, and admire the
Luster and Beauty of the Glorified Jesus. So we are told, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 10. where
it is said, that when Christ shall come in the Glory of his Power, he shall
come to be Glorified in his Saints, and to be admired in all them that believe.

2ly. The Godly shall be with Christ in respect of his Divinity. In Heaven we
shall enjoy the Glorious presence of the Divine Majesty. Here we shall see God,
and which is more, we shall see him as he is. Here it is that we shall see the
King of Heaven in his perfect Beauty, and we shall not only see him, but we
shall also enjoy him, and have sweet and ravishing Communion with all the
persons of the ever blessed Trinity: And this is that which is the very height
of bliss. To enjoy the Company of Saints and Angels is happiness, great beyond
our utmost imagination; and yet they are but as little drops, if compared to
that Ocean of Bliss which will flow into the Soul upon the enjoyment of God
himself. It was a noble saying of Luthers, that he had rather be in Hell with
God's presence, than in Heaven without it: And if the presence of God be thus
able to convert even Hell it self into Heaven, the enjoyment of this will
certainly make Heaven become what it is styled in Scripture, an Heaven of
Heavens. This therefore is the Flower of Joy, the Quintessence of Comfort, the
Crown of Blessedness, and the very Soul of Heaven. For whilst we enjoy God, we
must needs enjoy all things. All that is good did at first flow from him, and
therefore is more eminently to be found in him, as in its Fountain and
Original. All that can delight our Souls, or ravish our Hearts; all that is
lovely and desirable, are here to be found, in their greatest perfections: Well
then might the Psalmist say* Psalm. 16. 11. In thy Presence there is fullness of
Joy, and at thy Right Hand, there are Pleasures for evermore. But because so
Copious, so Pleasant, and so edifying a Subject does deserve better than to be
lightly touched in the close of a Sermon, I shall reserve the fuller handling of
it till the next opportunity. Thus ye see the top of our Happiness in Heaven,
consists in our enjoyment of the Blessed Trinity. And since these things are
so, give me leave to exhort you to acquaint your selves with this great Mystery
of the Trinity. The more we know of the Trinity here, the more capable shall we
be of enjoying Communion with the Father, Son and Holy Ghost hereafter. When
therefore ye go home, meditate on the Lessons, and other Portions of Scripture
which our Church this day recommends to your serious consideration: This is the
way to be well acquainted with the Three Persons of the Blessed Trinity, and
prepare your selves for the happy enjoyment of them in Heaven; which God grant.

SERMON IX.
Luke xxiv. 43. To day shall thou be with me in Paradise.
I Have formerly made some entrance upon these Words, and hope now to finish
them. The Method I proposed was,

First, To show you, that the Souls of the Godly are immediately admitted to
the actual possession of Happiness, upon their departure from the Body.

Secondly, The Happiness is exceeding great, for it is said here in the Text,
That they shall be with Christ, and they shall be in Paradise.

First, The Souls of the Godly, after their departure from the Body, are
immediately admitted to the actual possession of Happiness. There are a sort of
Men in the World they call Psycho-pannicletes, who hold, the Soul after its
separation from the Body, sleeps all the while till the general Resurrection,
and consequently is neither in a State of Joy or Misery. But how do these men
err, not knowing the Scripture? For here in the Text, our Savior says unto the
Thief, to day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Paradise is a place of Joy and
Bliss, and to be with Christ is to be in a state of Happiness. Now in such a
place, and in such a state was this honest Thief to be that very day. I named
several Texts for the clearing of this Truth, but I shall only name one of them
at this time, which you will find, Phil. 1. 21, 22. I am in a strait betwixt
two, says St. Paul having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is
far better: Nevertheless, to abide in the Flesh is more needful for you. As
much as if the Apostle should have said, I cannot tell whether I should desire,
to live longer, or die sooner, being pressed with Arguments on both sides. If I
consult my own good, it is doubtless better for me die, and enter presently
into Happiness; but then if I consult your convenience, it were better I should
live longer in the World to be serviceable to your Edification. Now I think it
is evident, that if the Apostle could have supposed, that his Soul should have
slept after Death, and not presently have entered into the fruition of Bliss,
there could have been no strait in the case, nor any dispute, but that it was
better to live still in the World, to continue in the Comforts of a good
Conscience, and of doing good to others, rather than to be in a constant Sleep,
or in a senseless state of Stupidity and Inactivity. From these places of
Scripture it is most plain, that the Souls of good Men do not sleep after
Death, but are immediately received into Bliss, as Lazarus was into Abraham's
Bosom, and this honest Thief, in the Text, into Paradise.

Secondly, This Happiness of the Godly is exceeding great, for they are said,

1st. To be with Christ. And,

2ly. To be in Paradise.

1. The Godly after Death, are said to be with Christ; and how great is the
Happiness which lies couched in these words? For we cannot be with Christ, but
we must be with all the Saints, and with all the Angels of Heaven; nay further,
we must enjoy the sweet and ravishing Communion of all the Persons of the ever
Blessed Trinity. So much may be gathered from Heb. 12. 22, 23. We shall come,
says St. Paul, to the General Assembly of the Firstborn; to the Spirits of
Just Men made Perfect; to an innumerable company of Angels, to God the Judge of
all, and to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant. From this place it is most
plain, that we cannot be with Christ, but we must be with God, with Angels, and
with the Spirits of Just Men made perfect: And sure such Glorious Company
cannot but make the Happiness of Paradise exceeding great.

1. I showed you, that we shall in Paradise be with all the Saints in Heaven;
nor shall we barely be with them, but we shall know them. If the Three
Disciples, who were admitted to Christ's Transfiguration, knew Moses and Elias,
whom they had never seen before; no doubt but we, being fully illuminated, and
perfectly Glorified in Heaven, shall know all the Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, Saints and Martyrs; and therefore our Savior says expressly, Luke 13.
28. That the Godly hereafter shall see Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom
of God: Thus we shall see and know all the Blessed Inhabitants of Heaven: Nor
shall we only know them, but we shall have sweet Converse and Communion with
them. To this purpose is that, Matt. 8. 11. Many shall come from the East, and
from the West, and shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob in the
Kingdom of Heaven. Sit down, that is, as the Original imports, they shall feast
with them. And this sure does not only denote their mutual Knowledge each of
other, but also the highest Caresses of Love and Friendship, such as this
Metaphor of feasting is used in Scripture to denote. And this sure cannot but
mightily inhance the Happiness of Paradise: David accounted the Saints of God,
the most excellent Persons here upon Earth, and delighted in nothing so much as
in their Society: But in Heaven they shall be made perfect; there they shall be
freed from all those Human Infirmities and Imperfections which use to allay the
solaces of their Conversation. Yea, on the contray, they shall be adorned with
all those Excellencies and Advantages which are requisite to make their Society
most pleasant and desirable. And indeed we find the Disciples, at the
Transfiguration, were so satisfied with the Company of Moses and Elias, two of
these Glorious Inhabitants of Heaven, that they presently cry out, it is good
for us to be here, and would have built Tabernacles, and have been content to
have taken their rest on this side of Heaven. How much greater will their
Happiness be, who shall enjoy the most ravishing Society of all the Blessed
Inhabitants of Heaven! But,

2. We shall not only enjoy the Society of Saints, but of Angels too, So I have
shown you already, from Heb. 12. 22. where it is said, We shall come to an
innumerable Company of Angels. Angels are far more glorious Creatures than the
Saints, and therefore the enjoyment of them must needs be a farther addition to
our happiness.

3dly, We shall also in Paradise be with Christ, in respect of his Humanity. To
day shall thou be with me in Paradise: With me, whom thou now see hanging on
the Cross. It was one of St. Austin's three famous Wishes to see Christ in the
Body; but it shall be our happiness in Paradise, not barely to see Christ's
Body, but also to see that Glory God has adorned it with there. To this purpose
is that Prayer of our Savior, Ioh. 17. 24. Father, I will that they also whom
thou have given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my Glory which
thou have given me. We shall there see Christ sitting on the Right hand of
Power, highly exalted above Seraphims and Cherubims; and the sight of all this
Glory will rejoice us the more, because our Human Nature is glorified in him.

4thly, The Godly, by being with Christ in Paradise, shall also be with God
himself. St. Paul therefore giving a full Catalogue of that glorious Company we
shall enjoy in Heaven, tells us, Heb. 12. 22, 23. that we shall not only come
to the General Assembly of the Firstborn, and to an innumerable Company of
Angels, and to Jesus, the Mediator of the New Covenant; but he adds, to God
the Judge of all. To enjoy the Company of Saints, Angels, and Christ, as Man,
is Happiness great, beyond our utmost Imagination: But yet they are but as
little Drops, if compared to that Ocean of Bliss, which will flow into the Soul
upon the enjoyment of God himself. It was a Noble Saying of Luthers, That he
had rather be in Hell with Gods presence, than in Heaven without it. Now if
this Presence of God be able to convert even Hell it self into a kind of
Heaven; the enjoyment of this must certainly make Heaven become what it is
styled in Scripture, an Heaven of Heavens. This therefore is the Flower of our
Joy, the Crown of Blessedness, and the very Soul of Heaven: For whilst we enjoy
God, we must needs enjoy all things. All that is good did at first flow from
him, and is therefore certainly more eminently to be found in Him, as in its
Fountain and Original. All that can delight our Souls, or ravish our Hearts;
all that is lovely and desirable, are here to be found in their greatest
perfections. Well then might the Psalmist say, Psalm. 16. 11. In thy presence, O
God, there is fullness of Joy, and at thy right hand there are Pleasures for
evermore. But because this will be the Quintessence of our happiness in Heaven,
we will enquire wherein it will consist. But,

1. Give me leave to premise this Caution, That in this Vale of Misery we
cannot fully understand those Joys which God has prepared for us in Heaven:
They are such, says St. Paul, as Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither
has it entered into the heart of Man to conceive. You Will find also St. John
speaking the same Truth, 1. Ioh. 3. 2. Beloved, now are we the Sons of God, and
it does not yet appear what we shall be; but we know that when he shall appear,
we shall be like him. As God gave Moses the sight of the Land of Canaan only,
from Mount Nebo; so he gives us a prospect of the Heavenly, but it is at a
distance: So that we do not fully here understand the greatness of our
happiness; and it is some honor and advantage to it, that it is so great, as
that we cannot fully comprehend it: But so far as God in Scripture has revealed
the happiness of Paradise to us, it will chiefly consist in these two
Observations:

1st, A clear and perfect Knowledge of God, and his Infinite Perfections.

2dly, In the enjoyment of him to all Eternity.

1st, Our happiness in Paradise will chiefly consist in a clear and perfect
Knowledge of God, and his Infinite Perfections. Knowledge was the fairest Fruit
that ever grew in the Earthly Paradise; and we cannot imagine the Paradise above
should be complete and perfect without it. Knowledge is so sweet and pleasant
to the Soul, that the Roman Orator calls it, Natural Anim^ pabulum, the most
grateful and palatable Food of the Soul. It is dearer to us, says Aristotle,
than our Eyes, which are usually wasted and worn away in pursuits after it. Now
as Knowledge in the general is thus sweet and pleasant to the Soul, so the
nobler the Objects are which we know, the sweeter and more pleasant must the
Knowledge be. Now there can be no Object so noble and excellent as Almighty
God: He is Infinite in Perfections, and therefore to have a clear and perfect
Knowledge of his Infinite and Divine Perfections, must needs make a
considerable part of our future happiness. Now it is plain from Scripture, that
we shall have a clear and perfect knowledge of God in Heaven. Here it is, that,
as the Prophet Esaias speaks, we shall see the King of Kings in all his beauty,
Esaias 33. 17. Indeed, the Soul here below, like the Spouse in the Canticles,
seeks her Beloved only in the dark, beholds his Backparts in the Glass of his
Creatures, reads a little more of him in the Holy Scripture, and tastes a little
more of him in his Comfortable Ordinances; yet still she sees him but darkly,
and through the Lattice, and all is able to do no more, than to make her sick
of Love: But hereafter we shall see God face to face, and we shall know him,
even as we are known, 1 Cor. 13. 12 We shall not then sit down content with the
School-mans Negative Knowledge, and be proud, when we know only what God is
not: No, we shall then have a Positive Knowledge of him, and as St. John
phrases it, see him even as he is, 1 John 3. 2. What strange Expressions are
these! How clear and how full a Knowledge of God do they import! We shall no
longer read of God in the Scripture, or hear of him by his Ministers, but we
shall see him with our Eyes, yea, and we shall see him as he is, in all that
wonderful Glory, which is the Light and Sun of the highest Heavens. Now, how
much such clear Knowledge of God will increase our future happiness, we may
learn in some measure from the Story of the Queen of the South: The Q. of Sheba
heard indeed some imperfect Reports of Solomon's Wisdom in her own Country; but
when she came and saw his Person, heard his incomparable Wisdom, and had been
an happy Spectator of all the Pomp and Royal Magnificence of his Court, she was
then sweetly astonished, so that there was no more Spirit left in her: Even so,
when the pious Soul shall come to the Court of Heaven, and there see God, as he
is clothed with Majesty and Honor, infinitely beyond and above all she ever
heard of him by his Ministers, or read of him in the Scripture; when she shall
behold the Attendance of his Throne, even ten thousand times ten thousand
Angels and comprehend all those ineffable Glories, which neither Eye has seen,
nor Ear heard, with what pleasing Ecstasies of Admiration will she then be
transported! But this is not all: For,

2dly, Our happiness in Paradise will not barely consist in the clear and
perfect Knowledge of God; but also in the enjoyment of him unto all Eternity,
Knowledge without Fruition, can only give us the Happiness of Moses upon Mount
Nebo; at best, but a fairer prospect of the Heavenly Canaan: but we are assured
in Scripture, that we shall not only see this Land of Promise, but we shall
taste the Milk and the Honey of it: We shall not only see and know God* but we
shall also enjoy him. This Enjoyment of God is elegantly set forth in Scripture
by the Metaphor of a Feast, because Friends usually enjoy themselves most, when
they Feast together. Now what strange Expressions to this purpose are those
which we read, Rev. 19. 9. where the Angel bids S. John write thus, Blessed are
they which are called to the Marriage Supper of the Lamb. They used to have
their greatest Feasts at Supper; but the happiness of Heaven is here set forth,
not only by the Metaphor of a Supper, but also of a Marriage Supper, to denote
that more intimate and pleasant enjoyment of God and Christ the Saints may
expect in Heaven: And lest we should in the least doubt of this, these
Emphatical words are added, which perhaps ye do not use much to take notice of,
but now I desire you to do; these, says the Angel, are the true Sayings of
God: So that we may well believe, the Saints shall enjoy all this happiness I
have spoken of. Though this which I last mentioned, be a most comfortable Text,
yet, I think, you will find one fuller to this purpose, Luke 12. 37. Blessed are
those Servants, whom the Lord when he comes shall find watching: Verily I say
unto you, that he shall gird himself, and make them sit down to meat, and will
come forth and serve them. Here again the happiness of Heaven is set forth by
the Metaphor of a Feast; and our Savior alludes to those Feasts among the
Romans, which they called their Saturnalia; when the Masters were obliged to
provide sumptuous Feasts for their Servants, and to gird themselves and come
forth and serve. It seems God will deal thus with his poor unworthy Servants:
He will prepare as great a Feast for them, as Heaven can afford, and will come
forth himself and serve them. In this World he makes use of Angels, as
Ministering Spirits, and imploys them for the good of his People: But in the
other World, the happiness of the Godly will be so great, and so infinite, that
Angels being but finite Creatures, cannot serve any longer as Conduits, to
convey it to them: No, God himself, as he will be the Feast, so he will be the
Entertainer, too, and in a word, All in all. Thus I have shown you, how great
our happiness will be in respect of God himself; we shall have a clear and
perfect knowledge of him and his infinite Excellencies, and we shall also have
a full Enjoyment of him unto all Eternity. I proceed now to the last thing
proposed, namely, to consider the greatness of this happiness, with reference
to the place.

Lastly, We shall not only be with Christ, but we shall be with Christ in
Paradise. To be with Christ in any place, cannot but be happiness: Had our
Savior took the Penitent Thief along with him, when he descended into Hell,
there to have seen him Triumph over Principalities and Powers, and all our
spiritual Enemies, this had been a blessed and most pleasant sight: But to
carry him along with himself to Paradise, the pleasantness and glories of the
place could not but add to the happiness of it. To this end you will find the Holy
Ghost in Scripture exceeding large in the description of this place, and it is
set forth by such Metaphors as denote the most incomprehensible, both beauty,
pleasantness, strength, splendor, and glory: for pleasure, it is in the Text
called Paradise; for Magnificence, a Kingdom, yea, a Kingdom of Glory too: It
is styled, an House not made with hands, but by God himself, to denote both its
strength and workmanship: For Magnitude, it is called a Great City: For Purity,
the Holy and Heavenly Jerusalem. Would we some Evening take a walk with Isaac
into the Fields, and there view how God has garnished these upper Regions of
the World, how many are those Stars which sparkle there? And they are also,
most of them, of such an incredible Magnitude, as to be more than an hundred
times bigger than the Earth; and yet this Firmament, as glorious as it is, is
only the outside of the Pavement of that Jerusalem which is above. What
incomprehensible Glory then must shine within it! We read in the Book of
Revelations, that the very Streets are of pure Gold, the Walls and Foundations
all of Precious Stones: Such incredible luster and glory is in it, that the Sun
shall not need to give his Light, nor the Moon to shine in it; for the Glory of
God shall inlighten it, and the Lamb shall be the light thereof for ever. Thus
happy shall the Godly be after they depart this Life, they shall be with
Christ, and which is more, they shall be with Christ in Paradise. I come now to
draw some practical Inferences from what has been delivered.

Application.
1st. Has the Holy Ghost in Scripture made such discoveries of Paradise, and
our future happiness; then certainly they ought to fill our Souls with earnest
Longings, and vehement Pursuits after them. When King Hezekiah had shown to the
Ambassador of Baladan, King of Babylon, the House of his Precious things, his
Silver and his Gold, and all his Treasures; we read these finite perishing
Treasures, proved Load-stones powerful enough to draw these Babylonians to War
against Judah: How much more ought the infinite Glories of Heaven, which God
has revealed in the Scripture, raise such violent Desires in us, as may make us
resemble the Spouse in the Canticles, who is compared to a Pillar of Smoke,
mounting continually toward Heaven; or them who lived in the days of John the
Baptist, who are said to have taken the Kingdom of Heaven by violence. Such a
temper of Spirit as this we find in the Saints of God: My Soul faints for thy
Salvation: I have longed for it, says Holy David Psalm. 119. 81 It is a
remarkable Passage of Cornelius a Lapide, upon Genesis 47. where enquiring why the
Patriarchs of old were so passionately desirous to have their bones buried in
the Land of Canaan, he gives this Reason: God, says he, had revealed unto
these Holy men the Day of Christ; they all, as well as Abraham, saw Christ Day
and rejoiced: Not only the Day of his Nativity, but that more glorious Day of
his Resurrection; In which not only Christ himself should rise, but others that
slept should rise with him, and attend upon him into Heaven at his Ascension.
These hopes of Rising with Christ, and getting sooner to Heaven, both in their
Bodies and Souls, than others, made them thus careful and solicitous to be
buried near the place where Christ was to rise. How unlike these Holy
Patriarchs are many amongst us, whose heavy Souls move down to Earth, as to
their Center: Neither God nor Heaven does ever so much trouble their Thoughts,
as to make them breath forth their desires after them. But such as are true
Believers, and sincere Christians, are in Scripture described by this known
Periphrasis, of being such as love the appearing of Christ; such as desire to
be dissolved, that they may be with him; such as earnestly groan to be clothed
upon with their House which is from Heaven, and therefore pray often with the
Bride in the Revelations, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

2dly, If we do earnestly and seriously desire this exceeding great happiness
of Paradise, we must be willing to use the Means which will bring us to it. It
is a known Maxim in the Schools, Qui vult finem, vult media ad finem: He that
effectually desires the End, desires also the Means which lead unto that End
If, with the Thief upon the Cross, we expect after Death to enjoy Christ in
Paradise, we must labor to imitate him, and give such demonstrations of our
Humility, Faith in Christ, and sincere Repentance as he did. Our Savior tells
us, that the wise Merchant in the Gospel had no sooner found a Pearl of great
Price, but he presently sold all he had and purchased it. It is reported of
Camillus, that Famous French Commander, that when he had tasted some of the
pleasant Grapes of Italy, he could never be at rest, till he had raised a great
Army, and Conquered that pleasant Country. God has been pleased in Scripture,
to present us with some of the Grapes of Canaan, to give us some taste of the
Heavenly gift, and the Powers of the World to come: How should this make us
restless and unquiet, till we arrive at this happy Country? Should we not now
raise all the Forces that we can to fight our Spiritual Enemies, and conquer
those Lusts which oppose our happiness? Should we now spare any Sin, though it
were as dear to us as a beloved Jonathan? Sure, Heaven will recompense the loss
of a right Eye, and a right Hand, should we pluck them off and sacrifice them
to our Savior. And indeed we must thus forsake sin, every sin, the most
darling sin, if ever we hope to get to Paradise. The Young man in the Gospel
lacked but one thing, and yet fell short of Heaven: And if thou will still
indulge thy self in thy Covetousness, Uncleanness, Swearing, Drunkenness, or
any other known sin, thou can never expect to be with Christ in Paradise. For
Christ has told us plainly, Mat. 19. 17. that if we will enter into Life, we
must keep the Commandments.

Which that we may all do, God of his Infinite Mercy grant, etc.

SERMON X.
Matt. xxiv. 3^ And then shall appear the sign of the Son of Man in Heaven: and
then shall all the Tribes of the Earth mourn, and they shall see the Son of Man
coming in the Clouds of Heaven, with Power and great Glory.
THE Office of our Blessed Saviors Mediatorship consists chiefly in three
Parts, his Satisfaction, Intercession, and Judging the World at the Last Day.
The First of these he performed here on Earth; the Second he is still
performing in Heaven; and the Third he will perform in the Air, When he shall
come in the Clouds of Heaven, with Power and great Glory. We know he satisfied
infinite Justice, when he offered up himself a propitiatory Sacrifice on the
Cross; and he is still interceeding in Heaven at the Right Hand of God. As he
purchased Salvation for sinners by dying for them, so he interceeds that this
Salvation may be applied unto such as repent sincerely of their sins and
believe on his Name. The third part of his Mediatorship is still to be
performed; for he is not, as Mediator, to judge the World, till the time
appointed by his Father; and then he will for certain Judge both the Quick and
the Dead. Indeed the Father himself Judges no Man, but has committed all
Judgment unto the Son, as our Savior speaks, John 5. 22. and he gives the
reason of it verse. 27. because he is the Son of Man As he became the Son of
Man, that he might be in a capacity to save the Penitent: So God has appointed
the same Son of Man to judge the World, that he may be able to punish the
Impenitent: Such as before would not accept him for a Savior, will now be
forced to admit him as a Judge. Hence we are told, Act. 17. 31. That God has
appointed a Day, in which he will Judge the World in Righteousness, by that Man
whom he has Ordained; and whereof he has given us assurance, in that he has
raised him from the Dead. Though we are not certain when the day of Judgment will
come, that we may be always preparing for it; yet you see it is certain that
there will be such a day, and that Christ, our Mediator, is ordained Judge: A
happy day for all that are truly pious; they need not fear this Judge, who is
no other than their Merciful Savior. But it will be a day of darkness and
gloominess unto the Wicked; these will then mourn, when they shall see this Son
of Man coming with great Power and Glory; so much we are told in the Text, Then
shall appear the sign of the Son of Man in Heaven, and then shall all the
Tribes of the Earth Mourn; and they shall see the Son of Man coming in the
Clouds of Heaven with Power and great Glory. For the better understanding of
these words, we will enquire.

First, Why Christ is called the Son of Man.

Secondly, What is here meant by the Sign of the Son of Man.

Thirdly, That this Son of Man will come to Judge the World.

Fourthly, That he will come with great Power and Glory.

Fifthly, That all the wicked of the Earth will then have just cause to Mourn.

First, Let us briefly enquire why Christ is called the Son of Man. Some
learned Men observe, that he is called so in the Scriptures more than forty
times; and there are two reasons of the Name.

1st. He is called the Son of Man, in token of his Humanity. Christ our Blessed
Mediator, was both God and Man; and therefore as he is often called the Son of
God, to denote his Divinity; so he is as often called the Son of Man, to denote
his Humanity.

2ly. He is called the Son of Man, to denote that state of Humiliation, to
which he condescended for our sakes. It was usual for the Jews to style Princes
and Potentates (...) Sons of strong Men; but such as were poor they styled
Beni-Adam, Sons of Men. Christ therefore aspired to no higher title than that
of Son of Man: He was pleased to humble himself for us. He, as the Apostle
speaks, became poor, that we might become rich. Born he was of the poorest
Parents, such as neither had an House of their own to lay him in when he was
born, nor able to procure any place besides a Stable for his reception into
this World. And as he was born in this poor condition; so though the Birds of the
Air have Nests, as he speaks, yet whilst he lived, he had not, of his own,
where to lay his Head. Nay, further yet, when he came to die, we know he was
beholding to the Charity of Joseph of Arimathea for a room in his Sepulcher. No
wonder then if Christ be ambitious of no more Honorable Title than this of Son
of Man, since he made himself so vile, so mean, so contemptible for our sakes.
Thus I have briefly shown why Christ is called so often the Son of Man; it
denotes the truth of his Humanity, as also that state of Humiliation, to which
he condescended for our sakes.

I come now in the second place to enquire.

Secondly, What is here meant by the sign of the Son of Man. It would spend too
much of our time to mention all those conjectures, which learned Men have made
concerning this Sign, since it is a matter we may be safely ignorant of. I
shall only set down two of the best interpretaions I have met with.

1st. Very many learned Men, both Ancient and Modern, do by the Sign of the Son
of Man, understand the Cross. St. Ierom, St. Chrysostom, and Venerable Bede,
upon this place, affirm this Sign to be no other than that of the Cross. The
Ethiopian Church is so peremptory in this matter, that it is put into the
Articles of their Creed, as the Learned Gregory informs us. There is hardly any
thing the Ancient Fathers are more unanimous in than this: And to say the
truth, there is some tolerable Reason for this Ancient Opinion. For what can be
more Honorable to our Lord and Savior, or more full of Terror to his Enemies,
than that the Cross of Christ, which they counted foolishness; and more than
so, esteemed the greatest reproach of the Christian Faith, should at that day
be made the Herald to Proclaim his Coming, and call all Nations of the World to
appear before him? But though this interpretation be backed both with Reason and
great Authorities; Yet,

2ly. There is another interpretation that seems as plausible, if not more
plausible than it: For the learned Vossius, Mede, Twisse, Millet, and several
others, do understand by the Sign of the Son of Man, who is a Sign. This kind
of Dialect, this manner of Speaking is frequent in the Scripture; thus the Law
of Faith is all one with Faith that is a Law, the Law of Sin, that is, Sin it
self, which dwelling in unregenerate Persons, reigns as it were by Law. So the
Sign of the Son of Man, that is, the Son of Man, who is a Sign. And that which
gives the greatest Authority to this Opinion, is that St. Luke, in the parallel
place, interprets it so, Chap. 21. 27. where the word Sign is left out, and the
Verse runs thus, Then shall they see the Son of Man coming in a Cloud, with
Power and great Glory. And St. Mark renders the words the same way, Chap. 13.
26. If therefore St. Mark and St. Luke may be allowed to be as good
interpreters of St. Matthew as any other, by the Sign of the Son of Man, we may
understand the Son of Man himself, whose Glorious appearance in the Clouds will
be a certain infallible sign that the day of Judgment is come. Thus I have
shown you what Conjectures learned Men have made concerning this Sign of the
Son of Man: Some understand the Cross, others Christ himself, whose Glorious
appearance will be a certain sign of the approaching Judgment. I come now in
the third place to show you,

Thirdly, That this Son of Man will come to judge the World. None but that God
who made us, has any right to judge us. As we have received all things from
him; so as Stewards, must we render an account of all things to him. Indeed
this Judgment belongs originally to the whole Trinity; but the outward
administration of it shall be committed to the Son of Man. So we are told
expressly in the Text, Then shall ye see the Son of Man coming in the Clouds of
Heaven. Thus you see the Judgment of the last Day is committed to the Son of
Man; and indeed it is committed to him, because he is the Son of Man; our
Savior tells us so expressly, John 5. 20, 27. As the Father has life in
himself, so has he given unto the Son to have life in himself, and has given
him Authority to execute Judgment also, because he is the Son of Man. Ye see
the Son of Man will come as Judge at the last Day, and he comes, because he is
the Son of Man. It will not be amiss to enquire briefly into the Reasons of it.

1st. God has committed the Judgment of the last Day to the Son of Man, because
he has appointed it should be Visible. This is fairly hinted in the Text, where
it is said, they shall see the Son of Man coming in the Clouds of Heaven. God
himself is a Spirit, and consequently invisible; but the Son of Man is Visible,
and therefore he is appointed to Ride the Circuit, that he may be seen of all
his Enemies: And that we might take the more notice of this Reason, it is
repeated again, Chap. 26. 64. where Christ tells his Enemies, that hereafter
they shall see the Son of Man sitting on the Right hand of Power, and coming in
the Clouds of Heaven. It seems the Son of Man shall come, and his Enemies shall
see him, and be confounded at the sight of him. This may be farther confirmed
from Act. 1. 11. where you will find the Angels preaching this Doctrine; This same
Jesus who is taken up from you into Heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye
have seen him go into Heaven. The Comparison is here made between our Savior's
Ascending into Heaven, and his returning again to Judgment: Ascendit
visibiliter, and descendit visibiliter: He Ascended, says Gerhard, in a
visible manner, and he shall descend to Judgment in a visible manner too.

2ly. God has committed the Judgment of the last Day to the Son of Man, for the
reward of his Obedience, and greater exaltation of his Human Nature. It is but
Justice in God to make this Son of Man Judge the World, seeing he came into the
World, and was judged by it. It is but equal to invest Christ with a power of
Absolution and Condemnation; seeing he was Condemned by us to dye, and dyed
that he might be in a capacity to Absolve us. It is but reasonable that all the
Sons of Men should bow before his Throne, and submit to his Judgment, who
disdained not for our sakes, to stand before the Tribunal of wicked Men, and
receive the Sentence of Condemnation. To this purpose are those Expressions of
St. Paul, Phil. 2. 8, 9. Being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself,
and became obedient unto the Death, even the death of the Cross: Wherefore God
also has highly exalted him and given him a name which is above every name,
that at the Name of Jesus every knee should bow. He that came at first to save
us, must it seems come at last Judge us: And, it is but just, that he who
before carried a Reed in his hand, and was derided by his Enemies, should
hereafter sway a Scepter of Righteousness, and break his Enemies in pieces with
a Rod of Iron. But,

3ly, God has committed the Judgment of the last Day to the Son of Man for the
greater Comfort and Consolation of the Godly. What a joyful sight will it be
unto all sincere Penitents, when they shall see the Advocate become their
Judge, and none but their Savior siting on the Throne of Glory? For he knows
all the Frailties and Infirmities of our Natures: He knows our frame, and
remembers that we are but Dust: Yea, he will be yet more ready to pity us,
seeing he was pleased to assume our Natures, bear our Infirmities, and to be
tempted in all things like as we are. Well then may the Godly be said in
Scripture, to long for this glorious appearance of the Lord Jesus. Well may the
Bride in the Revelations cry, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly; seeing this Day of
Judgment will be to her, no other than the Day of Nuptuals: A Day in which
Christ will be married to his People, and admit them unto the nearest Union and
Communion with himself, and that unto all Eternity.

4thly, God has committed the Judgment of the last Day to the Son of Man, for
the greater Terror and Confusion of the Wicked. The Angels, who were present at
our Saviors Ascension, tell his Disciples, Act. 1. 11. that the same Jesus who
then ascended into Heaven, should descend in like manner as he then ascended up
into Haeven. Now, we know our Savior, when he ascended into Heaven, carried
along with him the print of the Spear, and all those Scars that were made by
the Nails and Thorns: And these it seems he will bring along with him, when he
returns to Judgment. How then will the wicked mourn, as we are told in the
Text, when they look upon him whom they had formerly pierced! Those Wounds
which were at first opened to heal their Souls, will now open their Mouths and
call for Vengeance on them. Christ's Eyes, says St. John, will now become
flames of Fire, and such as will certainly consume them; his Feet like fine
Brass burning in a Furnance, and cannot but destroy them. Well may the wicked
call then upon the Rocks to cover, and the Mountains to hide them; since the
presence of the Lamb will be infinitely more dreadful, than the presence of the
fiercest Lion. For unto such as have trampled this Son of God and Man under
foot; unto such as have counted the Blood of the Covenant an unholy thing; unto
such, I say, there will now remain nothing, but a certain fearful looking for
of Judgment and fiery Indignation, which shall devour these Adversaries. Thus I
have dispatched the Third General, and shown you, that this Son of Man must
come at the last Day to judge the World, and the Reason of it. I come now,

Fourthly, In the Fourth place to show you, that He will come with great Power
and Glory. This is plainly delivered in the Text, Then shall they see the Son
of Man coming in the Clouds of Heaven with Power and great Glory. And,

1st, He will come with great Glory. And,

2dly, He shall come with Power.

1st, Let us consider the greatness of that Glory with which this Son of Man
shall come to Judge the World. Though his first coming into the World was mean
and contemptible, clouded with Poverty and Grief, and such other humble
Circumstances as were proper for his state of Humiliation; yet his second
Coming will be splendid and glorious, as will appear from these following
Particulars:

1st, Let us consider the immediate Forerunners and Harbingers of our
Savior's Second coming. Kings and Princes have their Harbingers, and so has
this King of Kings too. St Jerome tells us of an Ancient Tradition of the
Jewish Doctors, namely, that for fifteen Days together, before the great Day of
Judgment, there shall be transacted upon the Stage of Nature, a continued scene
of fearful Signs and Wonders. The Sea shall lift up his mountainous billows,
and make a fearful noise with its rouling Waves: The Heaven shall crack night
and day with loud and roaring Thunders: The Earth shall groan under hidious
Convulsions, and quotidian Earthquakes: The Air shall blaze with portentous
Comets: The Moon shall shed forth purple streams of discolored Light: The Sun
shall shroud himself in perpetual Darkness; and the rest of the Stars shall
suffer themselves to be hid in dismal Obscurity. Thus the whole frame of Nature
shall be hung with Mourning, a little before the approach of the Day of
Judgment. Nor is this only a Tradition of the Jews; but it is also the
Prediction of our Savior, who tells us in the Verse foregoing the Text, that
in those days the Sun shall be darkened, and the Moon shall not give her light;
and the Stars shall fall from Heaven, etc. and then shall appear the sign of
the Son of Man. Such Harbingers, such Forerunners as these, do abundantly
declare the glorious coming of our Savior to Judgment. But,

2dly His glorious coming to Judgment will yet farther appear, if we consider
the transcendant luster of his own Person. How beautiful, how glorious is our
blessed Savior, whilst he now sits at the right Hand of God? He is now
clothed with Light, as with a Garment; and his Human Nature does far surpass
the globe of the Sun for luster. What an astonishing description of his Glory
is given, Rev. 1. 13, etc. In the midst of the seven Candlesticks was one like
the Son of Man: His Head was white as Wool, and his locks were white as the
Snow: His Eyes were as a flame of Fire, and his Countenance was as the Sun
shining in his strength. Thus glorious is Christ in his own Person: Wherever he
goes he carries Day along with him, and therefore when at the Last Day he shall
descend from the right Hand of his Father, to that part of the Air where he
will fix his Throne, he will appear like a large walking Star, sparkling with
beams of Majesty, and dazzling Glory. And this is called in Scripture Christ's
own glory, Luke 9. 26. When the Son of Man shall come in his own Glory. But,

3dly, This glory of Christ's own Person will receive additional luster from the
glory of his Attendants. This Son of Man, when he comes to judge the World, he
will not come alone, but he will come attended with Myriads of Saints and
Angels. St. Jude has Recorded an ancient Prophecy of Enoch's to this purpose,
ver. 14, 15. Behold, says he, the Lord comes with ten thousand of his Saints,
to execute Judgment upon all and to convince all that are ungodly, of all their
ungodly deeds. Now how will the attendance of so many glorious Saints add to
the luster of this great Day? We are told in Scripture, that the Just shall
shine with the brightness of the Sun. What an amazing spectacle then will it
be, to see this Son of Man descend from his Imperial Seat, far above all
Heavens, and coming in the Clouds with a glorious Train of shining Saints, all
following him with Crowns of Glory on their Heads, and the most ravishing
Hallelujahs in their Mouths. But he will not be attended only with innumerable
of his Saints; but Myriads of Angels will also augment his Train. Hence in Luke
9. 26 it is said, that he shall come in his own glory, and in his Fathers, and
of his holy Angels. All the Angels of Heaven will deck themselves with all
their Ornaments of Light, and wait upon our Savior, when he comes to triumph
over his Enemies. We know these glorious Beings attended on him at his Birth,
and when he was but in a state of Humiliation; and therefore we need not
question, but they will add to the pomps and triumphs of his glorious Day. Well
then may our Savior be said in the Text to come with glory when he shall come
attended with all the Host of Heaven, with an inumerable Retinue of glorious
Saints and Angels. But this is not all: For,

4thly, The great Glory of Christ's coming to Judgment will yet farther apear,
if we consider the glory of his Throne: According to the transcendant Majesty
of his Person, so shall his Throne be, even a Throne of Glory: Hence is that of
St. Matthew. Chap. 25. 31. When the Son of Man shall come in his glory, and all
the Holy Angels with him, then shall he sit upon the Throne of his Glory. Now
what this Throne of Glory will be, is fairly hinted in the Text, where it is
said, that the Son of Man will come at the last Day in the Clouds of Heaven.
Christ will sit on a bright radiant Cloud, when he keeps the General Assizes of
the last Day. This may farther be gathered from the Testimony of the Angels,
Act. 1. 11. where they tell his Disciples at his Ascension, that the same Jesus
who was then taken up into Heaven, will so come in like manner, as they saw him
then go up into Heaven. Now if you will know how he ascended into Heaven, the
9th verse will inform you, where it is said, that He was taken up, and a Cloud
received him out of their sight. Now as he rode up to Heaven on a radiant
Cloud, so will he in like manner come riding down from thence. No wonder then
if we read often in the Revelations, of Thunderings and Lightnings coming out
of the Throne of Christ: For these roaring Meteors are ordinarily discharged
from some terrible Cloud. Christ therefore will sit on a bright shining Cloud,
when he shall judge the World: And indeed this is the general Opinion of the
Jews, as Learned Men observe: For this is a Common saying among them, as
Raimundus reports, If ever the Jews deserve that the Messiah should come, he
shall come gloriously, according to the Prophet Daniel, i. e. in the Clouds of
Heaven. Now how will such a bright shining Throne, hanging in the Air, add to
the luster of of our Saviors appearing; For the Heathens, when they would
describe the glorious Majesty of their Deities, were wont to bring them wrapped
up in some bright and radiant Cloud. Thus Homer represents one of the Gods
coming to Diomedes: -- (...) With his Shoulders wrapped up in a Cloud: And so
Virgil represents Jupiter coming to assist Aeneas in a bright shining Cloud.
Thus both Jews and Gentiles looked upon a bright Cloud, as a glorious sign and
Character of a Divine Majesty. Thus I have shown you with what Glory and
Majesty the Son of Man will appear at the last Day: His appearing will be
ushered in with dreadful Harbingers and Forerunners; he will descend with all
the glory and luster of his own person. He will come attended with a glorious
Retinue of shining Saints and Angels; and he will sit upon a Throne of Glory,
namely, a bright and radiant Cloud. All this will be sufficient to show you,
that the Son of Man at the last Day will come in the Clouds with great Glory.
before I proceed farther, I shall crave leave to draw one or two Inferences
from what has been already delivered. And,

First, We may learn from hence, the place which is appointed for the Judgment
of the last Day. This place it seems will be the Air; for ye hear our Savior
is to have a bright shining Cloud for his Throne; and is said accordingly in
the Text, to Come in the Clouds of Heaven. To the same purpose is what we read,
1 Thessalonians. 4. 17. where we are told, that the Righteous shall be caught up in the
Clouds, and meet the Lord in the Air: And indeed the Air is a most proper place
for our Savior to keep his great Assizes: For being here advanced some
distance above the Earth, he will more easily be seen by all the Inhabitants of
it. Nay farther yet, this is now the Seat of the Devils Empire. Satan we know
is called the Prince of the Air; and the Infernal Fiends are styled Spiritual
Wickednesses in high places. Here therefore will the Son of Man fix his
Judgment Seat; here he will place his Throne: That all the World may know, that
he has now spoiled Principalities and Powers, and got a complete and perfect
Victory over these his malicious Enemies. Then is the time when he will trample
Satan under his Feet, and put a full Period to that Tyranny which he has
exercised so long over the Sons of Men.

Secondly, We may infer from hence, what deep Impressions such Doctrins as
these ought to make upon us. The News of our Saviors coming to Judgment with
all this Glory, should cause us to take the greatest Care imaginable, to fit
and prepare our selves to meet him at this great Day. We have a remarkable
Instance to this purpose in Ecclesiastical History, which is attested by many
and great Authors. It seems about Four hundred years after our Saviors
Ascension, one Gregentius, a Bishop, endeavored the Conversion of those Jews
which lived in Arabia Felix; after a tedious Disputation of three days
continuance, some of the Jews desired the Bishop to show them Jesus alive, and
it would convince them: Immediately upon this the Earth began to tremble, and
the Sky to shine and echo with Lightnings and Thunder: After these ceased, the
Gates of the Celestial Palace opened, and a bright serene Cloud appeared,
darting forth Beams of an extraordinary luster: At last our Blessed Savior
showed himself, walking on this bright Cloud; and a Voice was heard from this
Excellent Glory, saying, I am he who was Crucified by your Fathers. This
glorious Appearance cast all the Jews prostrate on the ground, and beating
their Breasts, they cried with a loud Voice, Lord, have mercy on us; and
afterward were Baptized into the Faith of Christ. A like account we have of
the Conversion of St. Paul, Act. 9. 3, etc. where we read, that as he journied
toward Damascus, breathing forth nothing but Rage and Malice against
Christians, suddenly there shined round about him a Light from Heaven; and he
heard a Voice saying unto him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Upon which
he trembling and astonished said, Lord, what will thou have me to do? Such
effects as these are the Natural Attendants of such great and glorious
Appearances as these: And ought they not to have the same influence upon us?
What though they are not made to the Eye of our Sense, yet in Scripture they are
made to the Eye of our Faith. If we are sincere Christians, and do heartily
believe the Gospel, we have no more reason to doubt of this Coming of our
Savior with great power and glory, than if we were actual Spectators of it.
Let us therefore bethink our selves, what manner of persons we ought to be in
all holy and godly Conversation. If we were certain this great Day were near at
hand, I am confident we would walk more circumspectly, not as fools, but as
wise: We would then soon be persuaded to break off our League with Sin, and
endeavor, by a sincere and speedy Repentance, to make a firm Peace with our
God and Savior. I shall not pretend to tell you the precise time of this Day
of Judgment; but this I can assure you, that several Learned and Pious Divines,
who have lately enquired into the Scripture Prophesies with great accuracy and
diligence, do tell us, that this great Day is even at the door, and that we may
expect this glorious Appearance of the Son of Man in a very short time. But
though they should be mistaken in their Conjectures, yet this is most certain
that it will come at last, and that the time of our Life, which is all the time
we have to prepare for it, is exceeding short. Let us therefore beseech
Almighty God, that we all may be found such wise and faithful Servants, as are
described, v. 46. then shall we with joy meet our Savior in the Air, and make
a part of his glorious Train, when he returns to the highest Heaven; giving, as
is most due, all Honor and Glory unto him that sits on the Throne, and unto
the Lamb for evermore.

Let us therefore beseech Almighty God, to give us Grace so to redeem our time,
that we may be found in the number of his wise and faithful Servants; then
shall we at the Day of Judgment meet our Savior in the Air, and return with
him to the Highest Heavens, singing Praises and Hallelujahs unto him that sits
upon the Throne, and to the Lamb for evermore. Amen, Amen.

SERMON XI.
Prove. xvi. 9. A man's heart devises his way: but the Lord directs his steps.
WHat great Esteem and Veneration the Ancient World entertained of Proverbs,
may easily be learned from the Writings of Aristotle: He tells in his
Rhetoric, that they always allowed them the next place to Oracles: And in
other parts of his Writings, he gives them the noble Epithet of (...), as if
they were the very Extract and Quintessence of Refined Wisdom. The Divine
Solomon sets them yet higher, and thinks them worthy to be placed in the very
Throne; for Prove. 86. he styles them (...), which though our Translation renders
only Excellent words, Gejerus, and other Learned Critics translate them more
agreeably to the Hebrew, Princes of Words: Intimating thus much to us, That
these Divine Sentences, which are called Proverbs, excel as much other Schemes
of Speech, as Kings and Princes do their ordinary Subjects. But though Proverbs
in the general have so much of Majesty in them, and have always challenged a
particular veneration from the Sons of Men: Yet the Proverbs of Holy Writ are
farther commended to us from the very Inscription and Title Page of the Book.
It is a known Observation of Learned Men, that neither the Books of Moses,
Joshua, nor other Penmen of Sacred Writ, are recommended to the World by the
Name of the Author, till we come to this Book of Proverbs; as if the Holy Ghost
had designed some extraordinary advantage to this Heavenly Book, when in the
very Front of it was prefixed the most August Name of Solomon Son of David,
King of Israel; and we may be sure the Queen of the South will rise up in
Judgment against us at the last Day, if we do not give our best Attention to
these Excellent Words of Solomon; that Solomon, who was once a Famous and
Renowned King of Israel, and who, besides those Advantages of Education which
he received from the pious Care of his Father King David, was also inspired
with Wisdom from on high, and endued with such Understanding and Largeness of
Heart, as was commensurate to the Sand of the boundless Ocean. Besides what has
hitherto been said concerning the excellency of Proverbs in general, and these
of Solomon in particular, there is one Observation still behind, which will yet
farther recommend the Text to your best Attention. For of all those three
Thousand Proverbs, which are Recorded as the products of Solomon's Wisdom,
there is not any one the Holy Ghost has thought fit to repeat so often, or
inculcate more frequently, than this of the Text; for it is repeated thrice in
this one Chapter, besides what it is in other places of this Book of Proverbs.
In all which places the Wise man gives us to understand, that the wonderful
Providence of God does rule and govern all the Actions of Men. The Metaphor of
a Way, which is here used in the Text, is known in Scripture to denote all the
Actions of Men, whether good or evil: And according to this latitude, the
Metaphor here used is understood variously by Divines: St. Cyprian refers it to
the good Actions of Men, and accordingly interprets the Text thus, Cor viri
cogitet justa, ut a Deo dirigantur gressus ejus: Let the Heart of Man, says
he, think righteous things, that so his goings may be directed by the Lord. But
though this be a very great Truth, namely, that Good Actions are governed and
directed by the Providence of God, yet others rather understand the Text of
men's wicked Actions; for the Hebrew word (...), which we render Devises, is
for the most part used in a bad sense; and what we render Man, is Adam in the
Original, which according to Luther's known Observation is seldom taken in a
good sense: So that the words taken in this limited and restrained sense, will
run thus; A man's Heart, i.e. the Heart of Adam, or of a wicked Man, deviseeh
and contriveth his wicked ways; but the Lord, by his wonderful Providence,
governs and directs all his steps. The Heathen may rage, as the Psalmist
speaks, and the People devise vain things; yet he that sits in Heaven shall
laugh them to scorn, the Lord shall have them in derision. God, as he is
Omniscient, can easily know all the wicked devices of sinful Men; and as he is
Omnipotent, he can as easily overruled them, and direct them so as may be most
for his own Glory and the good of his People. God, He is no idle Spectator in
this vast Theater of the World; but does continually, as the Psalmist speaks,
whatsoever pleases him both in Heaven and in Earth. Indeed, he has made Man a
free Agent; and therefore as the Son of Sirach speaks, He leaves him in the
Counsel of his own hand, and allows him to act according to the liberty of his
Will: But then, as the Wise Rector and Almighty Governor of the Universe, He
over-sees and overrules all the Actions and Devices of wicked Men; so that
such as will not do him true and laudable service, by obeying the known Will of
his Precept, are forced to obey the secret Will of his Providence, and are made
subservient to his Everlasting Counsels. Thus, though the Heart a of wicked man
devises his wicked ways; yet the Lord governs and directs all his steps.
For the fuller opening of which Words, I design to confine my present discourse
to the discovering of these two things.

First, How the overruling Providence of God is employed about sin and
wickedness whilst it is but in fieri, or the Heart of Man is but yet devising
it. And,

Secondly, How it governs and directs sin in facto esse, when sin is brought
forth into act. And,

First, Of the First, how Gods, overruling Providence is employed about sin
whilst it is yet but in fieri, whilst the Heart of Man is yet but contriving
and devising it. And this will appear in some measure from these following
Considerations.

1st. God's Providence orders and directs sin and wickedness to such objects as
he thinks fit. It is a true saying of Hugo de Sancto Victo, i.e. Deus non dat
malis voluntatibus corruptionem, sed tantum ordinem, God, says he, never
infuses any corruption or wickedness into the Wills of Men, but only gives
Order and Direction to their Wicked Actions. All the preparations and
contrivances of sin are from the depraved hearts of Men; the ordering of them
to particular and suitable objects, from the good providence of God. As the
Huntsman in Bellarmines comparison, holds the Hound in a Slip, and suffers him
only to run at such Game as he best likes: So God keeps a constant Watch upon
the Wicked, he puts his Hook in their Nose, and his Bridle in their Lips, and
suffers not their Rage to break forth, but only on such persons as he thinks
fit. We know Gods Providence extended it self to the very Swine, and would not
suffer Satan to enter into them without his particular Warrant; and sure then
we need not doubt but this Providence of God is more eminently concerned about
Man, whom he was pleased to make after his own Image and likeness. God does
therefore set a Guard upon the malice of Satan and his Instruments, nor can it
break forth but as he permits it; sometimes on his Enemies for their
destruction, and sometimes on his own People for their chastisement: A proof of
the latter we have, Isa. 10. 5, 6, 7. at the 5th Verse Sennacherib King of
Assyria is called the Rod of God's Anger, and the Staff of his Indignation;
which metaphorical expressions import thus much, that Men are but Instruments
in the Hands of Gods Providence, and must expect the direction of a superior
Cause. Now this Assyrian, this Sennacharib, is said to be sent and directed
against Israel, an hypocritical Nation, and now become the People of God's
Wrath. And at the 7th Verse we find that this Staff of Gods Indignation was
more in the Hand than in the Heart of this proud Assyrian Howbeit, says God,
he means not so, neither does his Heart think so; but it is in his Heart to
destroy, and to cut off Nations, not a few. There was no need God should instill
any wickedness into the Heart of Sennach arib, who is here in the Prophet
called the Assyrian; it seems it was full enough, and too full before. Berosus,
an Ancient Historian, has left his Character of him, Sennacherib, qui apud
Assyrios regnabat; omnem Asiam and Aegyptum bello infestabat, Sennacherib,
says he, who was King of the Assyrians, vexed and insested all Asia and Egypt
with Bloody Wars. Ye see the Head and Heart of this Assyrian were full enough
of devices how to satisfy his Ambition and raise his Empire on the ruins of
other Nations. And now was the time for God's Providence to step in and
determine him to what Object he thought most proper. He therefore directs the
fury of this Assyrian chiefly against Israel, and uses him as a Rod to chastise
his own chosen People. And as God does thus employ the wicked, as
Schoolmasters, to correct his People; so he also imploys them as Executioners
to punish his Enemies. Hence, Isaiah 13. 17. God is said to stir up the Medes
against the Babylonians, a People notorious for their Enmity to God, and the
Jews. These Medes and Persians, are upon this account, called God's sanctified
ones, Verse 3. not in respect of any inherent righteousness or holiness in
them, but because, like the Vessels of the Sanctuary, set apart for Gods
service, and excited by a secret instinct of Providence, to execute wrath upon
wicked Babylon. Thus God turns the Hearts of Kings, as the Rivers of Waters,
whither soever he pleases. Though their Hearts be very full of wickedness, and
like the troubled Sea, are always ready to cast up the Mire and Dirt of Sin,
yet God's Providence shuts up this Sea with Bars that it cannot pass, till God
is pleased to break up these Bars, and let it rush sometimes on his Enemies, to
overwhelm them; sometimes on his own People to chastise them, and wash away
their Filth.

2ly. The Providence of God does not only determine the wickedness of Man, as
to the Object: but likewise as to the Modus, and measure of it. If God did not
bound the Malice of Satan and wicked Men, their little Finger would be bigger
than their Loins are now; and instead of Chastising God's People with Whips,
like cruel Rehoboam, they would scourge them with Scorpions. When God was
pleased to break down the Hedge of his Providence, he had set about Job, with
what fury did the Sabeans and Chaldeans kill his Servants, drive his Camels,
and spoil him of all his Goods? Nor did all this mischief satisfy Satan's
Malice; he would fain have gone further, and made attempts upon his Life: But
God here was pleased to set limits to his fury, as we read, Job 2. 6. Behold,
says God to Satan, he is now in thy Hand, only spare his Life. I need not
spare much time in proving the boundless Malice of Satan and his Instruments
against God's People; we may learn enough of this, from that remarkable Name
the Prophet bestows upon them, Isaiah 27. 1. In that day the Lord, with his
great and strong Sword, shall punish Leviathan, the peircing Serpent. By
Leviathan in this place, is generally understood Satan and his malicious
Instruments; and the word in the Hebrew signifies Augmentation or Addition,
intimating the boundless Malice of Satan and his Instruments, who still desire
to lay more burdens on the Godly, to increase their Troubles and augment their
Afflictions. But God, he is faithful and merciful, and by his Providence takes
care, that his People be not tempted above what they are able to bear: And
therefore the same Prophet tells us at Verse 8. That God allows Satan and his
Instruments to smite his People only in measure. There is a greater Elegance in
the Hebrew, than is expressed in our English Translation; for the word which we
render Measure, signifies one of the smallest Measures in use among the Jews,
namely, that Measure which they called the Sea, containing no more than the
third part of an Epha. Such, you see, is the wonderful goodness of God, that he
curbs and restrains the Fury of those Leviathans; and though they think no
Strokes too many, no Burdens too heavy for the People of God, yet he limits
their Malice, and allows them only to smite in Measure, and with Moderation.

3ly. The Providence of God does also determine the Malice and Wickedness of
Men, as to its time and duration. There is indeed a great and sad truth in the
observation of the Ancient Tragedian, Nullum ad nocendum tempus angustum e
malis, No time, says he, is too little, no time unseasonable for the Wicked to
do Mischief; yet there is some comfort in what the Wise Man tells us, Eccles.
3. 1 That God has set a Season to every Thing, and a time to every Purpose
under Heaven. And indeed the Providence of God does limit the Wicked, both as
to the time, when their Fury shall begin, and also how long it shall continue.
Our blessed Savior was no sooner born into the World, but there was a bloody
Herod seeking to destroy him, and send him out of it again: Afterward when he
was to enter upon his Ministry, we find Satan carrying him to a Pinnacle of the
Temple, and tempting him to cast himself down from that dangerous height: And
when all this proved succesless, several stratagems were used by the Jews to
dispatch him out of this World. But God, who has put Times and Seasons in his
own Power, defeated all these their wicked purposes, till that determinate time
was come mentioned by St. Luke 22. 53. Though I was with you daily in the Temple
says Christ, yet you could not stretch forth any hands against me; but now is
your Hour and the power of Darkness. And as the Wickedness of Man is limited,
in respect of its beginning, so likewise in respect of its continuance and
duration. Thus God determined the afflictions of Israel in Egypt four hundred
years; and their Captivity in Babylon to seventy. If God had not predetermined
the persecutions of the Primitive Christians, St. John could not have foretold
they should last no longer than forty two Months. Now if we reckon these Months
by Sabbaths of Years (as the honest Author of the Book of Martyrs tells us, he
was taught to reckon them by a particular Revelation) they will amount to the
sum of two hundred ninety four years, the precise time of the ten first
Persecutions. I shall add but one instance more of these effects of God's
Providence, and that one is hinted to me by a Right Reverend Historian of our
own Nation. It seems in Queen Mary's days, Gardener and the other bloody
Papists hoped to continue their persecution of the Protestants till they had
utterly destroyed them: But God's good Providence allowed them but a very short
time to rage in; for when Queen Mary fell into that kind of Dropsy, which
Physicians call the Mola, the wisest of her Friends and Physicians were so far
infatuated, as to conclude her to be with Child. By this means all Physic was
forbid, till her Distemper grew desperate, and so her unexpected death put a
speedy period to the Rage and Fury of the Papists. Thus I have shown you how
the Providence of God is employed about sin and wickedness whilst it is in
fieri, whilst the Heart of Man is but conceiving and devising it. I now proceed
to show how the same Providence is employed about sin in facto esse, after it
is finished and brought forth into Act. Though Almighty God can wither the Arm of
a wicked Jeroboam, and hinder the Execution of his wicked Designs: Though he can
strike the Sinner with a Thunderbolt into Hell before he accomplishes his
mischievous Enterprises, yet having made Man a free Agent, as I said before, he
allows him to act according to the liberty he has implanted in his Nature.
Ratio non est absque liberate Arbitrii, says Damascen, there can be no
Reason, where there is no liberty to act. But though God does permit the heart of
man freely to devise and accomplish its ways, yet still by his Providence, he
rules and directs his Steps. Indeed the wicked themselves are far from
designing any good, but yet God makes their blackest designs subservient to his
glory. They do at best but resemble those monstrous People, in Pliny, whose
Feet stood contrary to their Faces, or, if you please, to take a more familiar
comparison, like Watermen, they are made by Providence to row one way whilst
they look another. To this purpose is the known observation of St. Austin,
Bonus Deus non sineret fieri mala, nisi Omnipotens ex malis bona elicere
potuisset, God who is good, says he, would never permit sin, but that being
Omnipotent, he is able to extract Good out of the greatest Evils. The Rod of
Moses, whilst it lay upon the Earth, was an ugly, dreadful, and poisonous
Serpent, but in the Hand of God and Moses an Instrument of great and glorious
wonders. Such is the Power and Wisdom of God, that he is able to bring Light
out of Darkness, and work great and glorious ends out of the most black devices
and machinations of sinful Men. Some few Instances of this I shall give you in
these following particulars.

1st. God does often take occasion from sin, to glorify the Riches of his
Goodness and Mercy. It is the Tradition of the Ancients, that the Skull of Adam
was found on Mount Calvary, the very place of our Saviors Crucifixion. And
there is not less Comfort in St. Ieroms Note, on Mat. 1. Namely, that no holy
Women, but such Notorious Sinners as Thamar, Raab and Bathsheba are mentioned
in the Genealogy of the Blessed Jesus, and all this to denote thus much unto
us, that sin was the Cause which brought our Savior into the World, and gave
God an opportunity to magnify his Free Grace and Mercy unto Sinners. So that
now we may take up the ranting language of St. Gregory, O felix culpa! quae
talem meruit Redemptorem, O happy sin! happy sure upon this account, that it
has through Gods good Providence, obtained so great and so glorious a Redeemer.
The Whole, says our Savior, needs not the Physician; and where there is no
Misery, there is no need of Mercy. Had there been no bitterness in the Waters
of Marah, Moses had not needed Sweet wood to have thrown into them. So had
there been no sin, there had not needed the Tears of Repentance, and
consequently there had been no need of the Wood of the Cross to sweeten these
bitter Waters.

2dly, As God has thus taken occasion from Sin to commend his Free Grace and
Infinite Mercy to the World; so he has also taken occasion from hence to
glorify his Holiness and Justice. If bold sinners shall dare to run upon the
Bosses of his Buckler, and bid defiance to the great Majesty of Heaven: If
neither the Threats of his Law can drive them to Obedience, nor yet the
Promises of the Gospel invite them to their Duty, there remains then nothing,
but a fearful looking for of Judgment and fiery Indignation, to devour these
Adversaries. Hence Solomon tells us, ver. 4 of this Chapter, that God has made
all things for himself; yea, even the wicked has he made for the day of Evil
Though he may endure with much Long-suffering the Vessels of Wrath, and employ
them as Rods for the Chastisement of others; yet at the last he casts these
Rods into the Fire, and magnifies his Power and Justice upon them, when once
they are ripe for destruction. It is very observable, that the first Hallelujah
which we find in the Old Testament, is in the Psalms, where mention is made of
the destruction of Gods Enemies; and the first Hallelujah which is mentioned in
the New Testament, is, where the overthrow of Antichrist is foretold in the
Revelations. Should God suffer sinners still to go unpunished, it would reflect
upon his Holiness, and cast a stain upon his Justice. Men would be apt to think
God a Patron of Wickedness, and would be very much encouraged in the ways of
Ungodliness. God therefore, to vindicate his Honor, and deter Men from sin, is
pleased very frequently, in this World, to send signal Judgments upon the
Workers of Iniquity. Thus when proud Pharaoh had a long time withstood all the
Miracles of Moses, and wrought his Heart at last to the highest degree of
hardness, God did then resolve to glorify himself in his ruin and destruction:
And that he might leave some signal Monuments of his Wrath to succeeding
Generations, Orosius an Ancient Author tells us, that the prints and footsteps
of their Chariots were a long time after to be seen on the shore, and in the
bottom of the Red Sea. We may do well also to remember that Fire and Brimstone,
which was rained from Heaven on Sodom and Gomorrha. Brochardus, and other
sacred Geographers, inform us, that that very Land does still mourn in Dust and
Ashes, and such dismal Clouds of Smoke continually ascend from it, as make it
represent nothing so much, as the very Mouth and Entrance of Hell. Nay farther
yet, that God might make abundant provisions for the Honor of his Justice (as
some have computed) this one single Judgment is mentioned in Scripture above
twenty times: God's Providence so ordering it, that these wicked Sodomites
might be set forth for an Example, suffering the vengeance of Eternal Fire. And
this is the second End to which Gods Providence direct sin, namely, the
glorifying of his Justice.

3dly, God's Providence does farther make use of sin, to humble his own People.
When David had murdered his loyal Subject Vriah, and committed Folly with his
Wife; God does afterward make use of these sins, to keep his Servant humble.
To this end we find Shimei, one a kin to Vriah, sent by a secret impulse of
Providence, first to Curse David as a Bloody Man, and so to remind him of the
murder; and then to make him sensible of his Adultery, by casting Stones at
him, a Punishment under the Law appointed to the Adulterer. Now what Influence
this piece of Providence had upon David, we learn from 2 Samuel 16. 9, 10. where,
when the Sons of Zerviah would have slain Shimei, according to his deserts,
David returns a Negative Answer in these passionate words, What have I to do
with you, ye Sons of Zerviah? And then see his Humility in the next words, Let
him Curse, because the Lord has said unto him, Curse David. He knew God, by
this piece of Providence had a design to call his sins to remembrance, and the
sense of these makes him so humble, as to think himself worthy of all the
Indignities a Cursed Shimei could offer to the Lords Anointed. There is a great
Truth in the Saying of St. Austin, Audeo dicere superbis interdum utile esse in
peccatum cadere: I dare boldly affirm, says that Holy Father, that it is
profitable for proud men to fall sometimes into Scandalous sins. St. Peter,
that Great Apostle, is observed by the Ancients to have been one of the
forwardest and most confident of Christ's Disciples: And we may also gather so
much from that Confident Answer he returned to Christ, when he told him, that
though all Men forsook him, yet he would follow him to the last: But when God's
Providence had allowed Satan to sift him, and chastise his Confidence by a sore
Fall, we find him falling lower in his own Thoughts to: For when Christ, John
ult. puts the Question to him, Peter, love thou me more than these? And he
puts it thrice to remind him of his thrice Denial. Peter, ver. 17. returns this
modest and humble Answer, Lord, thou know all things, thou know that I
love thee. There is indeed no better way to take down the Peacock's Plumes,
than by discovering her black Feet; and hold but a Looking-Glass before the
stout Elephant, and you will soon teach him to abhor his Deformity.

4thly, One end more to which God directs the Wickedness of the World, is the
glorifiing his Wisdom. The Prophet Esaias tells us, that God is wonderful in
Counsel, and excellent in working. Every Event of Providence is of such
excellent contrivance, and managed with such admirable Wisdom, that we may say
of the Works of God's Providence, what the Psalmist does of the Works of
Creation: O Lord how manifold are thy Works! In wisdom have thou made them all;
the Earth is full of thy Riches. So clear a Truth is this, that it has not
escaped the Observations of the Heathens; hence it was that they set forth
their Gods with Harps in their hands, to show the Harmony they observed in the
Government of the World. Though there may happen very often great Confusions here
below, and the World may seem to run upon Wheels, as Ezekiel himself once
thought; yet the same Prophet found at last, that there were Eyes in these
Wheels, a Wise Providence which did move and conduct them all to great and
Glorious Ends. The truth of this might easily be made to appear more at large
by considering some of the most rugged passages of Providence, such as seem at
first view to have been performed with the greatest negligence and deformity,
and yet when examined from the beginning to the end, have been found to have
admirable beauty and Comeliness in them. But because the Time will not allow of
many Instances, it may suffice at present to show the truth of this in the
famous History of Jonah: That this Prophet, when sent about so weighty a matter
as the preservation of great Niniveh, that he should make delays even when
their destruction was but Forty days off: Nay more, that he should fly to
Tarshish; nay farther yet, that he should be cast into the Sea by the malicious
Mariners; and swallowed up presently by a merciless Whale: All these seemed at
first to be so many Errata's of God's Providence and contribute little to the
Conversion of Nineveh; yet all these seeming Disadvantages were so wisely
managed by God's Providence, as to prove great Advantages to that so important
business: For it is more than a probable Opinion of Divines, that these
malicious Mariners were a special Occasion that Ionah's Preaching was so
successful. For it was these Mariners that informed the Ninevites what had
happened unto Jonah, how he had been cast into the Sea, swallowed up by the
Whale, and consequently could not, but by a special Miracle, have been
conducted unto Niniveh: And this was that which procured the more credit to
Ionah's Preaching, which frightened the Ninivites into that most rigorous Fast,
which was enjoined by Sardanapalus both on Man and Beast. Thus we see how the
Wisdom of God's Providence directed the sin of Jonah, and the malice of the
Mariners, to work out that end they seemed directly to oppose. In this and such
like Instances as may be observed in the World, we cannot but take notice of
the beauties of Providence, and ought to admire and adore the infinite Wisdom
of our God, which does so eminently appear in the wonderful government of the
greatest Disasters and Confusions here below. I proceed now to draw some few
Corolaries from what has been delivered.

First, We may learn from hence, to abhor the Blasphemy of such men as seem to
make God the Author of Sin. Ye hear it is the Heart of Man which devises its
own wickedness, and that God by his wise Providence does only direct their
Wickedness to great and glorious Ends. Just as a skilful Physician, who does
not put Poison into Serpents and other Venomous Creatures, but only converts
their Poisons into Sovereign Medicines.

Secondly, We also learn from hence, whence it is that there is no more
Mischief done in the World. When we consider the great Malice of Satan and his
Instruments, how great also is their Power, and how formidable their Numbers,
we may justly wonder that this World is any better than a larger Bethlehem: But
we owe our safety and happiness to the good Providence of God: He sets an hedge
about his People; he curbs the Fury of their Enemies, and directs even the
Wickedness of Satan and his Instruments, so as may best serve his own Glory,
and the good of his People. It was well said of Antoninus, that noble
Philosopher, Who would desire to live in this World, if it were destitute of
God and Providence? If all were left to Chance and we exposed every where to
innumerable Enemies and Dangers? But since there is an overruling Providence,
says he, (...). I adore that Providence, and live sweetly and pleasantly,
confiding always in Gods Almighty Protection. To the same purpose is that of
the Royal Psalmist, Psalm. 97. 1. The Lord reigns, let the Earth rejoice: Let
the multitude of the Isles be glad thereof. But,

Thirdly, It is not enough that we rejoice under the protection of God's
Providence; but we must also adore and worship his great and glorious Name, who
does such Wonders for the Children of Men. Psalm. 78. 10. we are told that the
Wrath of Man shall praise the Lord: The remainder of Wrath he shall restrain:
The Septuagint read the latter part of the Verse thus, (...) the Rage of Man,
say they, shall keep Holiday unto the Lord, i. e. give his People opportunities
of lauding and magnifying his glorious Name. And sure no People in the World
ever had more cause to praise and magnify the Name of God, than we of this
Church and Nation. What miraculous Preservations has his good Providence
wrought for us? What Plots and Descents has he detected and defeated? How has
he baffled the profoundest Policy of the subtilest Achitophel, and made him
prove, according to his name in Hebrew, no better than the Brother or
Cousin-Germain to a Fool? Oh then! let us praise our God according to his
excellent Greatness; and being wonderfully delivered from the hands of our
Enemies, let us serve him without fear, in holiness and righteousness before
him all the days of our life.

This God of his infinite Mercy grant* for the merits of his dearest Son, etc.

SERMON XII.
Preached November. 27. 1692. the Sunday before the Author died.
Heb. ii. 3. How shall we escape, if we neglect so great Salvation?
SAint Paul in the former Chap. displays the excellent Glory and Majesty of our
Savior: He styles him, ver. 2. the Son of God; the Heir of all things, and
Maker of the Worlds: He tells us us farther, ver. 3. that He is the brightness
of his Fathers Glory, the express Image of his Person, and the upholder of all
things: In the following part of the Chapter he shows, how far Christ
transcends all the Holy Angels: These, he says, are but Servants and Ministering
Spirits; but Christ, he is the Eternal and only begotten Son of God: These are
all commanded to fall down and worship Christ; but He has a Throne, a Scepter,
a Scepter of Righteousness, yea, the Scepter of his own Heavenly Kingdom. Thus
great, thus glorious a Person is Christ, Heaven it self has nothing greater;
and yet as great, as glorious as He is, his Father thought fit to employ him in
the work of Man's Salvation. O the wonderful Condescentions of Heaven! We may be
sure God is most willing to save poor Sinners, seeing he sends to them, and
that his own Son, to beseech and entreat them to accept of Salvation. Hence is
that of St. Paul, in the beginning of this Epistle, God, who, at sundry times,
and in diverse manners, spoke in time past unto the Fathers by the Prophets,
has in these last days spoken unto us by his Son. Had God spoken to us by the
meanest of his Prophets, it had been strange and wonderful Condescension, but
that he should send his own Son to preach the Gospel, and entreat Rebel sinners
to be reconciled to Heaven, and accept of Eternal Happiness; this is such an
instance of stupendous Love and Mercy, as does as much exceed our
imaginations, as it does our Deserts!

St. Paul having thus dispiayed the Excellent Majesty of Christ, and the
infinite Riches of Gods Free Grace and Mercy, in that he sent his Eternal Son
to be the first Preacher of the Gospel, and tender Salvation to lost and undone
sinners, he begins the 2d. Chapter with a serious and passionate Admonition; We
therefore, says he, ought to give the more earnest heed to the things which we
have heard, lest at any time we should let them slip. If God had conveyed the
Gospel to Christians, as he did the Law unto the Jews, by the Ministry of
Angels, we could not have slighted it without gross ingratitude; and our
Disobedience, as we are told, ver. 2. would have received a just recompense of
reward: Of how much sorer punishment shall we now he thought worthy, seeing the
Eternal Son of God condescended to be of the Order of Predicants, seeing Christ
Jesus himself vouchsafed to be the first Preacher of the Gospel; how should we
then honor and value this Gospel? What earnest heed should we give to the
things contained in it, or preached from it? Whatever Admonitions, Exhortations
or Reproofs Ministers give us out of these Sacred Oracles, should not be looked
upon as the Words of frail Men, but as they are in truth the Words of God and
Christ. Christians therefore will be most inexcusable: They of all men will
deserve the severest Punishments, if they shall neglect so great Salvation. And
because the danger is thus great, our Apostle is the more earnest and
passionate in his Exhortation: He employs all his Divine Rhetoric, to make
Christians sensible of their greater Privilege, and consequently of their
greater Obligations to obey the Gospel: How shall we escape if we neglect so
great Salvation.

Having by this short Preface led you into the very Bowels of the Text, I shall
fetch from thence these Three Observations.

First, That the Salvation which is published by the Gospel, is exceeding great.

Secondly, That those Christians which neglect this great Salvation, must
expect the severest Punishments in Hell.

Thirdly, That Ministers may very well be allowed to be mighty earnest and
passionate in their Exhortations of Obedience to the Gospel.

First, I begin with the first of these, namely, to show you, that the
Salvation which is published by the Gospel, is exceeding great. It is called
Great Salvation in the Text, yea the Apostle puts an Emphasis upon it, and
calls it, So great Salvation. Learned Men render it Eximiam ut mire magnam
salutem, i. e. Most admirable and most excellent Salvation: And it will appear
at large to be so from these following Considerations:

1st. The greatness of this Salvation will appear if we consider the greatness
of the Price that was paid for it. The worth and excellency of a thing, is
usually measured by the greatness of its price. Now how great was that price
which was paid for this Salvation? St. Peter tells us, we were not redeemed
with such corruptible things, as Silver and Gold; but with the precious Blood
of the Son of God. Had we offered a thousand Rams, and ten thousand Rivers of
Oil: Had we given the fruit of our Bodies, for the sin of our Souls; yea, had
it been possible for us to have sacrificed* whole Hecatombs of Angels to the
Justice of Heaven, they would not all have been sufficient to atone for our
Sins, and purchase this Salvation: Nothing could purchase it but the Blood of
Jesus; and that not only as he was Man, but as he was God too. Hence we are
said expressly to be purchased with the Blood of God, Act. 20. 28. We see an
Infinite price was paid Heaven to purchase this Salvation: And therefore we may
well allow the Apostles Emphasis of so great Salvation.

2ly. The greatness of this Salvation will yet further appear, if we consider
the greatness of those evils it delivers us from. It is an excellent saying of
Seneca, Lenocinium est gaudii antecedens metus, the greatness of the danger
uses to commend and inhance the greatness of the deliverance. Now how great was
the danger we were in? how great those Evils we were exposed to? The Prophet
Esaias gives us a most Tragical Description of the Infernal Tophet, which was to
be the Portion of the Rebellious Sinner, Chap. 30. 31. Tophet, says he, is
prepared of old, the Pile thereof is Fire and much Wood, and the Breath of the
Lord like a stream of Brimstone, does kindle it continually. See how each word
is armed with Terror: It seems there is an eternal Tophet prepared for all the
Enemies of Heaven: It seems the Torments of this dreadful place is set forth by
Fire, one of the cruellest of the Elements. Nay give me leave to observe
farther to you, that this Fire of Tophet can be no ordinary material Fire,
seeing we are told it was originally prepared for the Devil and his Angels. For
since they are Spiritual and Immaterial Beings, they cannot be Tormented by any
ordinary material Fire, The Fire therefore of Tophet must be of such a strange
and dreadful Nature, that this Fire we use is only fit to be a cold and faint
emblem of it; and well may we conclude so much, seeing it is said to be kindled
by the Breath of the Almighty. The fiery Furnace of Babylon was dreadful
enough, though it was kindled only by the breath of an Earthly King; how dreadful
then must the Furnace of Hell be, which has all the Ingredients of Torture
Omnipotent Vengeance can furnish it with? This Fire of Tophet of Hell, is said
yet farther, to be prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Now we know these
Hellish Fiends are the most malicious Enemies of Heaven: These ambitious
Spirits endeavored at the very first to dethrone their Almighty Creator; and
since they failed in that black design, they have ever since discovered their
inveterate hatred of God, by tempting Mankind into the same cursed Conspiracy
against him. Sure then that Fire, which is prepared for these malicious Enemies
of Heaven, cannot possibly want any Ingredients of Torture, Infinite Wisdom can
invent, or Infinite Power inflict. Now such devouring Flames as these were
prepared for obstinate sinners, as well as for these fallen Angels. There is
one Consideration still behind, which will make these Torments appear more
dreadful, and that is the Eternal Duration of them. For here it is that the
Worm never dies; here it is that the Fire is not quenched: When the sinner has
lain in Hell as many millions of years, as there are Sands on the Seashore, he
will be no nearer an end of his Torments, than he was the first Moment of his
entrance into them. Who can read without trembling, what St. Mark tells us,
Chap. 9. 49. Namely, that the Damned shall be salted with Fire. Such it seems
is the dreadful Nature of the Infernal Flames, that they do Torment, but not
Consume: Like Salt they preserve those wretched Persons they seem to devour. O
cruel Mercy of Hellish Flames! O Preservation, worse than the most dreadful
Destruction! Thus great are those Evils we are delivered from, and you will
easily conclude how great that Salvation is which delivers us from them. The
Children of Israel did exceedingly rejoice when they were delivered from the
Tyranny of Pharaoh, and the Slavery of Egypt. But sure Hell is a more dreadful
kind of Bondage than Egypts; and Satan a worse sort of Tyrant than Pharaoh,
therefore the Salvation of the Text, which delivers us from these dreadful and
infinite Evils, must needs be exceeding great.

3ly. The greatness of this Salvation will appear yet further, if we consider
that Infinite and Eternal Happiness it brings along with it. This Salvation
does not only deliver us from Hell, and Eternal Damnation; but it gives us also
a Right and Title to the endless Joys of Heaven: Even those Joys which Eye has
not seen, nor Ear heard, neither has it entered into the Heart of Man to
conceive. If the sweet society of Saints and Angels, if the most ravishing
enjoyment of the Blessed Trinity, if an uninterrupted and eternal fruition of
the most desirable Pleasures; if all this be sufficient to make the Salvation
in the Text exceeding great, then we may pardon St. Paul's Emphasis, and allow
him to call it so great Salvation; for this is that Salvation which Christ has
purchased, and the Gospel published to the World. Hence Christ is styled the
Author of Eternal Salvation, Heb. 5. 9. and is said to have obtained Eternal
Redemption for us, Heb. 9. 12.. Joshua was deservedly accounted a mighty
Savior, because having delivered Israel from their malicious Enemies, he gave
them a quiet Possession of the Earthly Canaan. How great a Savior is our
Joshua, or Jesus, who having vanquished our Spiritual Enemies, has purchased
for us the possession of the Heavenly Canaan?

4ly. The greatness of this Salvation will further appear, if we consider the
Extent and Amplitude of it. This Salvation is an universal Salvation, all Men
have a Right and Title to it; though Salvation of old was only of the Jews, yet
now Christ is a Light to lighten the Gentiles, as well as the Glory of his
People Israel. God is now no respecter of Persons, but in every Nation, he that
fears God and works Righteousness, is accepted of him. They are highly
injurious to the goodness of God, and to that Salvation which was wrought by
Christ, who would have it restrained to a certain number of Persons. For it is
most plain from Scripture, that God would have all Men to be saved. Hear what
the Angels said unto the Shepherds. Luke 2. 10. Behold, I bring you good
Tidings, of great Joy, which shall be unto all People. Hence Christ is said to
give himself a Ransom for all, 1 Timothy 2. 6. as St. John speaks, 1 Epist. 2. 2.
He is the Propitiation for our Sins, and not for ours only, but also for the
Sins of the whole World. If these places of Scripture be not full and clear
enough, St Paul will tell you, that Christ tasted Death for every Man, Heb. 2.
9. I shall add but one Text more to convince you of this Truth, and it shall be
that of St. Peter, 2 Epist. 2. 2. where he speaks of False Teachers, such as
privily bring in Damnable Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and
bring upon themselves swift Destruction. It seems Christ bought those that are
Damned, as well as those that are Saved; and consequently the Salvation or
Redemption which he wrought, must needs be Universal: None are excluded from
it, but such as exclude themselves by their Obstinancy and Impenitency. Now if
we lay these Four Cnsiderations together; namely, The greatness of the Price
which was paid for this Salvation. The greatness of those Evils it delivers us
from. The Infinite and Eternal Happiness it brings along with it. And Lastly,
The Extent and Amplitude of it, which is so great, as to include both Jew and
Gentile; we may safely conclude with St. Paul, that it is great Salvation. Thus
I have dispatched the First General I proposed, and proceed now to the Second.

Secondly, Namely, To show you that those Christians, who neglect this great
Salvation, must expect the severest punishments in Hell. This may be gathered
from the words of the Text, where St. Paul delivers himself in these Emphatical
Expressions, How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation? As much as
if the Apostle should have said, Christians, who disobey the Gospel, must never
hope to go unpunisht; nay, these, of all others, must expect the severest
punishments. He tells Christians in the foregoing Verse, that the Jews for
transgressing the Law of Moses, were to receive a just recompense of reward;
how then, says he, shall we escape, if we neglect the much greater Salvation
of the Gospel? fairly intimating, that Christians, as they have greater
Privileges and Advantages than others, so the abuse of them will bind them
over to proportionably greater Punishments. It is the observation of Menochus,
that Joshua, when he aggravates the sin of Achan, plays the Herald, and gives
an account of his Pedigree; for we are told, Jos. 7. 1. that Achan was the Son
of Carmi, the Son of Zabdi, the Son of Zerah, of the Tribe of Judah. Had Achan
been a poor Ignorant Heathen, his sin, even in these lower circumstances, would
have kindled the Wrath of Heaven, and have pulled down heavy Judgments upon
him: But Achan that was a Jew, and that no mean Jew, but of the Royal Tribe of
Judah, and descended from such Noble Progenitors, as Carmi, Zabdi, and Zerah,
All Honorable Persons; for him to commit a Trespass of this Nature; his
Privileges and Advantages loaded his sin with the heavier Aggravations, and
rendered him obnoxious to a double Punishment, to wit, that of Lapidation, and
the other of Burning, which were both inflicted on him, as we read, Ios. 7. 25.
It seems God proceeds with Sinners according to the Rules of Distributive
Justice: He proportions his Punishments according to their respective
Privileges and Advantages. Such as have enjoyed lesser Privileges, shall be
beaten with fewer Stripes. The poor Gentiles still find a cooler place in Hell
than the Jews, and the Jews than the Christians. Hear what St. Paul says, Romans
2. 12. As many as have sinned without the Law, shall perish without the Law,
and as many as have sinned in the Law, shall be judged by the Law. As St.
Austin speaks, the Law of God which Moses delivered to the Jews, as it did more
clearly discover and forbid all manner of Sin, so it did ingeminate, or double
their guilt. The poor Gentile, who wants the advantages of the Mosaic Law,
will have the Law of Nature only to answer for. But the Jew at the day of
Judgment will find himself condemned both by the Law of Nature, and the Law of
Moses; and consequently, his Guilt will be double, and his Punishment so much
the greater. Hence St. Paul tells us, in that same, Romans 2. 9. That God will
render Tribulation and Anguish upon every Soul of Man, that does Evil, of the
Jew first, and also of the Gentile. It seems the Jew shall have the precedence
of the Gentile in Hell; a cursed kind of precedence, and such, as I fancy, few
will be very ambitious of.

Thus you see the Jew shall, in Hell, be beaten with more stripes than the
Gentile: And the Condition of the disobedient Christian will be worse than the
Jews. He has enjoyed greater Advantages than the Jew, and must expect greater
Punishments: He has the Law of Nature, the Law of Moses, and the Law of the
Gospel to answer for; and therefore if the Guilt of the Jew be double in
respect of the Gentile, the Christians Guilt will be treble, and render him
worthy of much sorer Punishment. Hence it is that our Apostle, Chap. 10. of
this Epistle Verse. 28, 29. If he that despised Moses's Law, died without mercy,
of how much sorer Punishment shall he be thought worthy, who has trampled under
Foot the Son of God? It Is plain the Christians Punishment will be greater than
the Jews; even as great as the Salvation which was offered him; in a word, so
great, that St. Paul, who had the gift of Tongues, was not able to express it
otherwise, than in these most Astonishing Expressions, of how much sorer
Punishment shall he be thought worthy?

Thus you see, that as there are diversity of Torments in Hell, so the greatest
of them will be the Portion of such sinners as do neglect the Salvation of the
Gospel; and you will more easily believe this Dreadful Doctrine, when I have
given you the true Reason, of it. And,

1. The Gospel which brings this great Salvation, was first Preached and
Published by Christ, the Eternal Son of God; and this does mightily aggravate
the disobedience of Christians. God he sent his Messengers, his Prophets, yea
sometimes his Angels to publish and deliver the Law unto the Jews. But he has
sent his own Eternal Son to Preach and Publish the Gospel to the Christian
World; and sure such a wonderful Instance of astonishing Mercy and
Condescension, cannot but load the sins of Christians with the most dreadful
aggravations. Hear what our Savior himself says, John 15. 22. If I had not
come and spoken unto them, they had not had sin, but now they have no Cloak for
their sin. The same Argument is here urged by St. Paul, in the Text, How shall
we escape, says he, if we neglect so great Salvation, which at the first began
to be spoken by the Lord? As much as if the Apostle should have said, the
Gospel which we, the Ministers of Christ, Preach unto you, it is Christ's
Gospel, the very same that he, in his own Person, first Preached and Published to
the World. Sure then you will reverence this Eternal Son of God. Sure ye cannot
but think it your Duty to obey his Gospel. As he is the Lord, he may command
your Obedience; and as he is your Savior, who died for you, he does most
deserve it. Ye cannot therefore offend against this Gospel, but you must
affront the highest instance and demonstration of God's Love. And what
Punishments can be great enough to punish such Ingratitude? The Heathens, the
Jews and Devils themselves, who are now howling amidst everlasting Burnings,
they never sinned against such stupendous Mercy as Christians do; Of how much
sorer Punishment shall they be thought worthy, who trample under Foot the Son
of God?

2. Another Reason, why Christians must expect the severest Punishments if they
neglect this great Salvation, is because the Light of the Gospel is greater and
clearer than that of the Law. Esaias Prophesying of the times of the Gospel,
Chap. 11. 9. Says, That the Earth shall then be full of the Knowledge of the
Lord, as the Waters cover the Sea. St. Peter 2 Epist. 1. 19. Compares the Light
of the Law, to a dim Light shining in a dark place; alluding, as it is thought,
to those Candles which were always shining in the Temple, because it was a dark
place, as having but very small Windows to let in the light of the Sun. But the
Light of the Gospel he compares to the Day, intimating that the Light of the
Gospel does as far exceed the Light of the Law, as the Light of the Sun does
that of a Candle. We know the Vail was upon the Face of Moses, and the weighty
concerns of Religion were then wrapped up in obscure Types and Shadows. But the
Shadows being now vanished, the Sun of Righteousness is risen, and Christ has
brought Life and Immortality to Light, through the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1. 10. Thus
great is the Light of the Gospel, and therefore those sins which are committed
against it, are the more heinous and damnable sins against Knowledge, have more
of wilfulness in them, and argue greater contempt of God. Hence such sinners
are said in Scripture to reproach the Lord, Numb. 15. 30. Yea, to rebel against
the Light, Job 24. 13. Since therefore Christians sin against greater Light,
they must expect severer Punishments; Fer he that knows his Masters will, and
does it not shall be beaten with more stripes.

3. Another reason why Christians must expect the severest Punishments, if they
neglect this great Salvation, is because the means of Grace, which the Gospel
affords for the obtaining of this Salvation, are now more plentiful than they
were before. St. John tells us, Chap. 1. 17. That the Law was given by Moses,
but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ; of whose fullness, says he, Verse 16.
we all have received, and Grace for Grace, or Grace upon Grace, to denote the
great plenty and abundance of it. The Law could do no more than show Man his
Duty, but the Gospel affords him Grace to perform it. Hence the Preachers of
the Gospel are styled Able Ministers of the New Testament, not of the Letter,
but of the Spirit; for the Letter kills, but the Spirit gives Life, 2 Cor.
3. 6. The Law is here called the Letter, and is said to Kill, because it shows
our Duty, and the Danger of neglecting it, but gives no Grace to help us in the
performing of it. But the Gospel is called the Spirit, because the Spirit of
Grace does by his internal Operations, accompany the outward Ministration of
the Gospel, and so gives us Life.

Thus you see what plentiful Means of Grace, the Gospel affords us for the
obtaining of this great Salvation: And therefore if we do neglect these Means
of Grace, our Condemnation, as it will be more just, so it will be more heavy
too. This is plain from our Saviors threatening Chorazin and Bethsaida, Mat.
11. 21, 22. Woe unto thee Chorazin, woe unto thee Bethsaida, for if the mighty
works which were done in you, had been done in Tire and Sidon, they would have
repented long ago in Sackcloath and Ashes: But I say unto you, it shall be more
tolerable for Tire and Sidon, at the day of Judgment, than for you. Thus
Christians, as they enjoy more plentiful Means of Grace than others; so if all
these be lost upon them, they must expect the severer Punishments.

Thirdly, I come now in the Third and Last Place to show you, that Ministers
may very well be allowed to be mighty earnest and passionate in their
Exhortations and Admonitions. See how earnest and passionate St. Paul is in the
Text; with what Vehemence and Fervency of Spirit does he cry out, How shall we
escape if we neglect so great Salvation? St. Paul was one of the greatest
Orators in the World: And he never thought his Oratory better employed, than in
the winning Souls to Christ. Hence we find him in the Acts, Preaching with such
Zeal and Eloquence that the Men of Lycaonia fancied Mercury, their God of
Eloquence, was come down from Heaven. And as St. Paul was thus Fervent in
Spirit, serving the Lord, and promoting the Salvation of Souls, so 2 Timothy 4. 2.
He charges Ministers to be Instant in Season, and out of Season, Reproving,
Rebuking, and Exhorting with all long Suffering. And in truth what Zeal, what
Vehemence can be thought too much for the Pulpit? Indeed the Heathen of old
said well, Stultus labor ineptiarum, It is a ridiculous thing, said he, to make
a noise about Trifles. But sure Life and Death, Heaven and Hell, these are no
Trifles. Men do not well consider the worth of Souls, and the greatness of that
Salvation Christ has purchased for them, when they are offended at the Zeal and
Earnestness of Ministers; when they are angry at the seriousness of their
Exhortations, or the severity of their Reproofs. But what pity is it, that Hell
should be hung with such rich Furniture as the precious Souls of Men? And who
would not employ their utmost Zeal to save such wicked sinners, as are ready
every moment to drop into Hell Fire? Let me therefore with all seriousness
entreat you to work out your Salvation with Fear and Trembling. As you love
your own Immortal Souls, and value that Infinite Price which Christ has paid
for them; as you dread the everlasting Burnings of the infernal Tophet, and
earnestly desire the endless Joys of Heaven, be persuaded to break off your
League with Sin, and make your Peace with Almighty God, that when ye come to
die, your Blessed Savior may see the travel of his Soul, and be satisfied;
that he may then be as ready to Bestow on you, as he was to Purchase for you;
that you may at last obtain this great Salvation. Which God grant unto us all,
for the sake of Jesus Christ, to whom, etc.

The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ* and the Love of God, etc.

A SERMON,
Preached at the Assizes, in New Castle upon Tine, in the Reign of K. James II.
Ephesians. ii. 19, 20. verse. Now therefore you are no more strangers and
foreigners, but fellow-citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God,
Verse. 20. And are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets.
ST. Paul having planted the Gospel among the Ephesians, labors in this most
excellent Epistle to confirm them in the same, by sundry Arguments. Some of
these Arguments are drawn from the consideration of that wretched condition
they were in before; and some from the excellency and blessedness of their
present State. Their former condition is displayed in all its colors, ver. 12.
of this chapter, where he tells them, that they were then without Christ, they
were then Aliens from the common wealth of Israel, strangers from the covenants
of promise, having no hope, and without God in the World. It seems such as are
without the pale of the Church, are no better than the Children of Wrath; they
are exposed to all the dreadful effects of God's anger in this World, and must
hereafter be cast into everlasting burnings in the next. But though this was the
lamentable condition of these Ephesians before their conversion, yet the
planting of the Gospel had made a happy change, for they were now no more
strangers and foreigners, but fellow citizens with the Saints, they were now
delivered from the fears of Eternal damnation, and had a Right and Title to all
these glorious Privileges, which Abraham, and the other blessed Citizens of
Heaven, did actually possess. And what was it which gave them a right and title
to all this happiness? If you please to look a little farther into the Text,
you will find it was because they were of the household of God; or in plain terms
Members of the true Church; for this indeed is the true Gospel which enjoys the
bright beams of Heavenly light, whilst all the World besides groans under worse
than Egyptian darkness: This is the true Gideons fleece which is watered with
the dew of Celestial Grace, whilst the other parts of the Earth lies dry and
parched, not unlike some barren and cursed wilderness. This in St. Austine's
comparison is the true Ark in which alone we can be secure from the deluge of
God's wrath: Thus great is their happiness who are in the Church of Christ! But
some difficulty there is to find out the true Church, as Tertullian observed of
Old, faciunt favos and vespae faciunt Ecclesias and Marcionitae, the most
dangerous Wasps have their Cells, says he, even so the worst of Heretics are
ready to cry out the Temple of the Lord are we: That therefore we may not
mistake Leah for Rachel, or embrace a Cloud instead of a Juno; we must
carefully observe that description St. Paul gives us of the true Church; he
tells us it is founded on the Doctrine of Heaven, or if you had rather take it
in the words of the Text, it is; says he, that household of God which is built
upon the foundations of the Apostles and Prophets: From the words thus far
explained, I shall crave leave to prove these four things.

First, That the Doctrine of the Apostle and Prophets is the foundation on
which the true Church is built.

Secondly, That this Doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets is sufficiently
delivered to us in the Holy Scriptures.

Thirdly, That the Church of England is built upon this foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets; And

Fourthly, That such as continue in the communion of this Church, are as happy
as were those Ephesians of whom St. Paul says, they were no more strangers and
foreigners, but fellow-Citizens with the Saints of this household of God.

I begin with the first of these, to show you that the Doctrine of the Apostles
and Prophets, is the only foundation upon which the true Church is built: The
Church of Ephesus, if we will believe St. Paul, was the household of God, or a true
Church of Christ: and it seems it was so, because built upon the foundation of
the Apostles and Prophets; we are sure these inspired Ministers of the Holy
Jesus preached and planted none but the true Religion, and we may be sure it
can be no bad Church, which owns and professes the same Religion. I know there
are several marks given of the true Church, such as Unity, Universality,
Antiquity, Succession, Sanctity, and the like; but though these, where they are
found, are Great Ornaments to a Church; yet the best and most infallible mark
to know it by, is its conformity to the Doctrines delivered by the Apostles:
For the true Church as the Apostle speaks elsewhere, is the ground and Pillar
of Truth; but it will not deserve this honorable Character, if its Doctrines
be repugnant to the Doctrines delivered by the Apostles. It Is said of the best
and most Catholic Christians, Acts, 2. 42. That they continued steadfast in the
Apostles Doctrine: And therefore, such as follow the Primitive example, will be
far from deserving the brand of Heretics. Does not our Savior himself tell
us, that his Sheep will hear his Voice, and not the Voice of Strangers? And
where is this voice of Christ to be heard, but sounding in the writings of
these Apostles and Prophets? This therefore is the sure word of Prophecy,
whereunto says St. Peter, ye do well if you take heed: nor is this any other
mark of the Church of God, then what is generally owned by the ancient Fathers.
Tertullian brings in the Church speaking such words as these, Sum, Apostolorum,
sic teneo, sicut illi testamento caverunt: I am Heir, says she, to the holy
Apostles, whatever Truth they left me in their Writings; whatever Doctrines
they bequeathed me in their Testament; these I firmly believe; these I will
constantly hold. Ireneus calls the Gospel, columnam and firmamentum Ecclesiae,
the Ground and Pillar of the Church. St. Chrysostom treating at large upon
this Question, How the true Church may be known? returns this answer more than
once; The true Church is best known by the holy Scriptures, says he, that is
the Christian Church which agrees with these sacred Oracles: and that is the
Heretical which is repugnant to them. None speaks more largely, or more
excellently to this point, than the great St. Austine, who in his admirable
Book against the Donatists writes thus, The question between us and the
Donatists is, where we shall find the Church? What therefore shall we do? shall
we seek it in our own words? or in the words of our Lord Jesus Christ? I think,
we had rather seek it in his words, who is the truth, and best knows his own
Church. Let not therefore these Speeches be heard amongst us, This I say, and
this thou say; but let us hear, Thus says the Lord: There are certain Books
of God to whose Authority we both stand, we both consent, we both believe;
there let us seek the Church, there let us try our cause: I will not have the
Church demonstrated by Man's teaching; but by the holy Oracles of God. Setting
therefore aside all such matters, let them show forth the Church, if they can,
not by the speech and rumors of the Africans, not in the Councils of the
Bishops, not in the Writing of any Disputer, not in Visions and Revelations,
not in Signs and false Miracles; because God's word has abundantly prepared us,
and made us ready against these things. But let them declare it out of the
Prescript of the Law, the predictions of the Prophets, the Songs of the Psalms,
the testimonies of the Apostles, the words of the Pastor himself, whether they
have a Church or no; let them declare only by the Canonical Books of the holy
Scripture; these be the instructions, these be the foundations, these be the
supporters of our cause. Thus far St. Austine, and because he is so clear and
so full to this case, I shall not need to trouble you with any further
Authorities, especially, since the Church of Rome does acknowledge in her Trent
Catechism, that no Church is Catholic that does not profess that faith which
is built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles. She must not hold
any new faith, say they; but that which was delivered of old by the holy
Apostles. And it follows in the same Catechism, the Nicene Fathers did well to
add the word Apostolic to their Creed, saying, I believe one Catholic and
Apostolic Church; namely, that all might know that is the only true Catholic
Church, which is Apostolic. That therefore must needs be the truest mark of
the Church, which both Romanists and Protestants own to be so: and indeed
without this all those other marks which are pretended will signify nothing.
Unity without Apostolical Doctrine, is so far from being a mark of the Church,
that it may not only be found in the Societies of the worst of Men; but of the
Devils themselves: For it is the known saying of our Savior, that Satan's
kingdom if it were divided against it self, it could not stand. Unity indeed is
such a blessing as the Church of God will earnestly desire and pray for: but
yet the Church of Corinth did not cease to be a true Church, when it wanted
this blessing, and was torn in pieces by divisions. In vain also do some Men
make Universality or largeness of extent a mark of the Church: for we are told
plainly in the Holy Scriptures, that Christ's flock is but a little flock, and
it is at this day so far exceeded in Amplitude, both by Mahometans and Pagans,
that if the whole World were divided into thirty Parts, as Breerwood calculates
in his Inquiries, five only would be found Christians, six Mahometans, and
nineteen Pagans. As for Antiquity, which some pretend is the mark of the
Church, though we may well allow it to be a great Ornament when attended with
truth: yet when this is wanting, it is but vetustas erronis; as St. Cyprian
calls it, not Age but dotage, nothing but error of a longer standing, and so
harder to be rooted out. Some also are fond of a long Series, or uninterrupted
Succession of Bishops in the Church; but, as St. Ambrose speaks, those who have
not St. Peter's faith, cannot succeed to St. Peter's Inheritance; and since the
Pontificate of Aaron may sometime descend upon a wretched Caiaphas, such an
ancient Pedigree as this may be more honorable in Heraldry than it can be in
Religion.

But of all the marks which some make of the true Church, that of Holiness best
deserves the name; for the Church of Christ should be holy like its Head; but
when we say the Doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets is the true mark of the
Church, we do not exclude, but include Sanctity: for since the Doctrine of the
Apostles is, as St. Paul defines it; a Doctrine according unto Godliness, where
this Doctrine is preached in its greatest purity, there substantial holiness,
free from from all Superstition and Hypocrisy, is most likely to be found; and
if such holiness does not at all times flourish alike, the fault is not in the
Church, but in the Professors of it: These are reckoned by some the principle
marks and Characters of the true Church; but since they are so far from being
true marks, that without Apostolical Doctrine they signify little; I hope, you
will allow me to conclude according to the Sense of the holy Scriptures and the
Ancient Fathers; That the Doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets is the only
foundation on which the true Church is built: I come now in the next place to
show you, That this Doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets upon which the true
Church is built; is sufficiently delivered to us in the holy Scriptures.
Whatever Doctrines are contained in these sacred Oracles, are owned by the
Church of Rome, as well as by us, to be the Doctrines of the Apostles and
Prophets: but they are pleased to charge the holy Scriptures with imperfection,
pretending that they contain not all things necessary to Salvation; but must be
aided by their unwritten and uncertain Tradition: but sure if there were any
such Traditions handed down from the Apostles through the several Ages of the
Church to this present Age; these Traditions must needs pass through the hands of
the Ancient Fathers, before they could come to ours: but the Ancient Fathers
knew no such Traditions, but every where assert the Perfection and Sufficiency
of the holy Scriptures. Ireneus calls the holy Scriptures such a Rule of Faith,
as none must vary from. St. Chrysostom says, that all things that are
necessary are plain and manifest in the holy Scriptures. Non credimus, quia non
legimus, we believe no more than we read, says St Jerome. I shall only add the
Authority of St. Basil, who says, it is contrary to Faith, and a certain
argument of Pride, to reject any thing contained in the Scriptures, or to
impose any thing that is not written there: Thus the Fathers knew nothing of
any unwritten Traditions; that were to cut out the holy Scriptures, but they
refer us to them, as to a perfect Rule. And well indeed they might, since St.
Paul tells us they are able to make us wise unto Salvation: and he adds more
fully yet, if it be possible to do so, when he tells us, they are able to make
the man of God perfect, thoroughly furnished unto every good work. Thus great is
the perfection of these holy Oracles, and thus plain it is, that the Doctrine
of the Apostles and Prophets, on which the true Church is built, is fully and
sufficiently delivered to us in the holy Scripture. I come in the

Third place to show you, that the Church of England is built upon the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets. King Charles the First, as he was not
unwilling to dye a Martyr for the Church of England; so at his death he left
her the richest legacy he could, even the most honorable Character that could
possibly be bestowed on the best of Churches; for this advice he gave to his
Royal Sons, The best profession of Religion I have ever esteemed that of the
Church of England; I tell you I have tried it; and after much search and many
disputes, I have concluded it to be the best in the World, as coming nearest to
the word of God for Doctrine, and the Primitive example for Government.
Whosoever does but look into the Articles of our Church will find how well she
deserves this most honorable Character: For she professes to believe the Holy
Scriptures, which (as I showed above) contains the whole Doctrine of the
Apostles and Prophets. She believes the same Faith, and no other than that
which is comprised in the Apostles Creed, and explained more largely in those
Creeds which are called the Nicene and the Athanasian. And as for those
Doctrines which are controverted between us and the Church of Rome, a little
examination will discover which Church is built upon the foundation of the
Apostles and the Prophets.

And (1.) Let us examine that Supremacy which the Church of Rome does challenge
for St. Peter: If we look into the Holy Scriptures, we shall find nothing there
that makes St. Peter the chief of the Apostles: For if Christ had ever intended
St. Peter any such Power over the rest, he would doubtless have declared so
much when the Apostles were at strife who should be the greatest: But so far is
our Savior from declaring St. Peter's Supremacy, that he chides them for their
vain strife and contention; yea tells them in plain terms, that it should not
be among them as in secular Kingdoms and Monarchies, where one is chief. And if
St. Peter had at any time afterward been made a Prince, we cannot imagine St.
Paul could have been ignorant of it, and yet he tells us, 2. Cor. 11. 5. That
he was not behind the very chiefest Apostles. We read also, Gal. 2. 9, 11. that
he did not only rebuke St. Peter openly at Antioch, but also took of him the
right hand of fellowship: Now we cannot suppose St. Peter's Supremacy, but we
must convict St. Paul, either of gross Ignorance, when he said he was not a
whit behind the very chiefest Apostles; or of greater rudeness when he took
place of his Prince: and yet so true it is, that he did so, that in memory of
it, the Popes own Seal has St. Paul and St. Peter engraven upon it, and St.
Paul is allowed to hold the dexter point.

2. If we examine by Scripture, that Controversy between the Church of England
and the Church of Rome, about the Deposing Doctrine; we shall find which is
built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets. For how does the
Scripture every where abhor and detest that most disloyal and Antichristian
Doctrine! Let every Soul be subject to the higher Powers, says St. Paul; and
that not only for wrath, but also for Conscience sake. Observe, Let every Soul,
of what rank, quality, or degree soever, (...), says St. Chrysostom upon these
words, Tho thou art an Apostle, tho an Evangelist, tho a Prophet, yea what ever
thou art, thou must be subject to the higher Powers. Thus says St. Paul, yea
St. Peter also, from whom the Pope pretends to derive his Power, is so far from
challenging any power over Kings and Princes, either for himself or Successors;
that he requires Christians to submit themselves not unto him, but unto the
King as Supreme. Nay, he would have them be subject not only to the good and
gentle, but also to the froward. And is not this the Apostolical Doctrine of
the Church of England, which teaches all her Members to pay active obedience
unto all the lawful Commands of Princes; and when their commands interfere with
the Laws of God, not to resist, but to obey Passively?

3. The Prayers of our Church are made in a Language well known unto the
People, and such as will tend (if they are not wanting to themselves) to their
Edification. And sure I need not tell you, that this is agreeable to the
Doctrine of the Apostles, when St. Paul has spent a whole Chapter to assure us
of it: For in 1. Cor. 14. 14. If I pray(says he) in an unknown Tongue, my
Spirit prays, but my understanding is unfruitful; but I will pray with the
Spirit, and I will pray with the understanding also. Again, ver. 16. How shall
he that occupies the room of the unlearned say Amen at thy giving of thanks;
seeing he understands not what thou say? Again, v. 19. In the Church I had
rather speak five words with my understanding, that by my voice I might teach
others also, than ten thousand words in an unknown Tongue. These are plain
Texts of Scripture, and show the practice of our Church to be Apostolical.

4. The Church of England allows the Laity the Cup as well as the Bread; and
this is no other Doctrine than what Christ and his Apostles teach. For our
Savior delivering the Cup to his Disciples, says, Drink ye all of it. Mat. 26.
27. And S. Paul assures us, that in his time the People partook of the Cup as
well as of the Bread. 1 Cor. 12. 13. We have all been made to drink into one
Spirit. But I need not produce any more Texts of Scripture for the proof of
this, since it is acknowledged by the Church of Rome: For in the Council of
Constance we find these expressions, Notwithstanding the Institution of Christ,
and the Practice of the Apostles, we decree and determine that the Laity shall
not partake of the Cup. It seems they find some inconvenience in the
Institution of Christ, and the Practice of his Apostles: but our Church thinks
it convenient to stick close to both.

5. The Church of England condemns Transubstantiation, as being contradictory
to Sense, Reason, and Scripture. Our Senses tell us it is Bread and not Flesh
after Consecration. Our Reason will not allow one and the same body to be in
millions of places at the same time: And as for Scripture, S. Paul, 1. Cor. 11.
26. etc. calls it Bread at least three times after Consecration. But tho we
have all this to say for our selves, yet we are anathamatized by the Church of
Rome, because we refuse, as they say, to believe as plain words as any are in
the Bible. For what can be plainer, say they, than these words of our Savior;
This is my body? But in truth, if these words were as plain as they tell us, we
would be content to sacrifice both our Sense, and our Reason to our Faith. But
if these words of our Savior be taken in a literal Sense, as they take them,
they are so far from being plain, that their Learned men are very much divided
about the meaning of them. For ask them only what is the subject of the
Proposition, or what is denoted by this demonstrative Pronoun Hoc or This; and
you will find them mightily at a loss about it; for Scotus says, it is Hoc ens,
this entity is my body; Aquinas this substance; Bellarmine these species of
bread; the Sarbone this Individuum vagum, and the famous Glossary, Hoc nihil,
or this nothing. Now if these words of our Savior were so very plain and
easy, as they say; It Is very strange their Learned men should differ so much,
and at last make nothing of them. But indeed, if we take them in a figurative
sense, as Protestants use to do, they will be plain and easy enough: For the
demonstrative particle Hoc or This must needs relate to bread; for it is said
in the Text, that as they were eating, Jesus took bread, and blessed it, and
brake it, and gave it to the Disciples, and said Take, Eat, This is my body. It
seems what our Savior took, blessed, brake, and gave to his Disciples, was
bread; and of this and nothing else can he speak, when he says, This is my
body. Now this bread is my body, is false, if we take it in a literal sense;
for bread is not flesh; but it is true in a Figurative sense, This bread is, i.
e. does signify Christ's body. And this kind of Dialect or manner of speech is
very usual in Scripture. Genesis 41. 26. we read these words concerning Pharaohs
Dream, The seven kine are seven years, i. e. they signify seven years. So
again Exodus 12. 11. Moses speaking of the Paschal Lamb, says it is the Lords
Passover, i. e. it signifies the Lords passing the Children of the Israelites,
when he destroyed all the Firstborn of Egypt. Now if, according to this known
Dialect of Scripture, we interpret our Saviors words, This is my body, the
meaning will be plain and natural, this bread does signify or represent my
body. And this will appear to be the sense of these words, if we consider what
our Savior says of the Cup, namely, This is my blood, which must be taken in
this Figurative sense, this Cup represents my blood: For it follows presently
after, I will not drink henceforth of the fruit of the vine, says Christ,
until that day when I drink it new with you in my fathers kingdom. The fruit is
called sometimes the blood of the Grape; but sure without a figure it cannot be
called the blood of Christ. Thus you see that our Church is Apostolical also in
denying Transubstantiation.

6. The Adoration of the Host is accounted by the Church of England a most
dangerous crime; for since, as you have heard, there is no Transubstantiation,
but it remains bread, we dare not pay our Adoration to it which we believe a
Creature; for it is the plain Doctrine of our Savior, Thou shall worship the
Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

7. The Church of England in condemning the Worship of Images, condemns only
what the Apostles and Prophets had condemned before; for this charge is given
in the Second Commandment, Thou shall not make unto thy self any graven Image,
nor the likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath,
or in the waters under the earth; thou shall not bow down to them nor worship
them. Here we are forbid, and that in most comprehensive terms, the making of
any Image whatsoever to Worship it. It is not said, Thou shall not make Images
of Idols or false Gods; but it is said, Thou shall not make any graven Image,
nor the likeness of any thing. To make an Image of the true God is a violation
of this Commandment; for the Golden Calves are condemned in Scripture,
notwithstanding the Children of Israel worshipped the true God under those
representations. Our Church therefore does not allow her Members to picture God
the Father in the likeness of an Old Man, or the Holy Ghost in the similitude
of a Bird or Dove. For God is a Spirit, yea an infinitely glorious Spirit, and
consequently cannot be pictured without an injury; but to worship such Pictures
or Images, is as S. Paul speaks, Romans 1. to change the glory of the
incorruptible God into an Image made like unto corruptible Man, and to Birds.

8. The Church of England does also justly condemn the Invocation of Saints by
mental and vocal Prayers, as the Trent Council enjoins. This Doctrine of the
Church of Rome by the confession of Learned Papists, has neither Precept nor
Example in Scripture to warrant it, and consequently it cannot be built upon
the foundation of the Text, i. e. the foundation of Apostles and Prophets The
Temple of old was called the house of Prayer, to denote that Religious Prayer
is a principal part of the Worship of God; and does not our Savior say
expressly, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve?
To hear mental Prayers belongs only to God, who alone tries the reins and
searches the heart; and therefore to make such Prayers unto Creatures, is to
make them more than Creatures. The Saints must be Omnipresent, if they can hear
all their Votaries, who pray to them in all quarters of the Earth: Now
Omnipresence is an Attribute which belongs to the Divine Essence. Thou art a
God that hears Prayers, says the Psalmist, and therefore unto thee shall all
flesh come. We are told in Scripture that there is but one Mediator between God
and Man, the Man Christ Jesus; and since he is most willing and able to save
them to the uttermost who come unto God by him, we do not use the Intercessions
of the Saints, for fear we should injure the merits of that All-sufficient
Mediator, who ever lives to make intercession for us.

By these few Instances which I have given, and I might have given you many
more, it cannot but be evident to all serious unprejudiced persons, that the
Church of England keeps close to the Rule of the Scripture, and like the Church
of Ephesus in the Text, is built upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets. And because the Testimony of an Adversary has always been thought
considerable, I shall conclude this head with the Testimony of Pope Paul IV.
who, as Bishop Andrews Reports, made this offer to Q. Elizabeth, that if she
would but own his Supremacy, he would confirm our way of serving God in all
things appertaining to his Worship in the very same manner as we now do. Sure
this Holy Father would never have confirmed the Religion of the Church of
England, had he not thought it consonant to the Doctrine of the Apostles. But
since he was pleased to offer his Confirmation, we will requite his kindness by
valuing our Church the more upon his Approbation.

Thus I have dispatched the Three Generals I proposed. I have shown you, That
the Doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets is the only Foundation upon which the
True Church is built; That this Doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets is
sufficiently delivered to us in the Holy Scripture, and that the Church of
England, like that of Ephesus in the Text, is built upon this and no other
foundation.

I shall now in the close, leave a word or two of Exhortation with you, and
beseech you to continue steadfast in the Communion of the Church of England. It
is the chief design of St. Paul in this Epistle, to keep the Ephesians steadfast
in the Faith of Christ: He desires them Chap. 3. not to faint; and bows his
knees to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; that he would strengthen
them by his Spirit in the inner Man; He bids them Chap. 4. have a care they
were no more Children tossed to and fro with every wind of Doctrine, by the
sleight of men, and cunning craftiness whereby they lie in wait to deceive. As
he would not have them scared out of their Religion, by fear of Persecution; so
neither would he have them gulled of it by the sleights and subtleties of false
Teachers. It is therefore our duty, when we have found the True Church, to
continue steadfast in the Communion of it. We must resemble those best of
Christians, of whom it is said, Acts 2. 42. That they continued steadfast in the
Apostles Doctrine and fellowship: But alas! how apt are men to barter away
Religion for some worldly emolument? How many are there who carry their
Religion in their Pockets, and stick not with Judas to betray their Master for
Thirty pieces of Silver; unless perhaps their Covetousness be greater, and a
larger sum be requisite to patch up their broken Fortunes. If Naamans
Preferment be inconsistent with his Religion, you must allow him a
dispensation, and permit him to bow in the House of Rimmon: and to name no
more, rather than Pilate will hazard the loss of Caesar's favor, he will
pronounce our Savior innocent one hour, and condemn him the next. Thus Christ
is made to truckle under the World, and Gain will be Godliness in spite of the
Bible. But those that are sober and serious in the World, they will remember
such Texts of Scripture as these, Prove all things, hold fast that which is
good. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. Take heed, lest ye being led away with the error of the
wicked, fall from your own stedfastness. 2. Pet. 3. 17. Nay St. Jude carries
the duty one step higher, and tells us we must contend earnestly for the Faith
which was once delivered unto the Saints. Ministers must contend by their
Tongues and Pens; Magistrates and Gentry by their Power, Interest and
Authority; and private Christians by their Prayers and open Profession of it.
And if St. Jude would have the Primitive Christians not barely own, but even
contend, and that earnestly for the faith, when they groaned under the heavy
Persecutions of Pagan Emperors; sure we have little reason to be afraid to do
so, who live under the Protection of a most gracious King.

And since these things are so, I hope, I shall need no more than these two
Motives to back the Exhortation, and to enforce the Duty.

1. Let us consider, The great happiness of such as continue steadfast in the
Faith of Christ, and Doctrine of the Apostles.

2. The lamentable condition of those that shall dare to disown it.

1. Let us consider the great Happiness of such as continue steadfast in the
Faith of Christ and Doctrine of the Apostles. As the Church of Christ is that
Golden Candlestick which holds forth the light of the Gospel, so it is the
Treasurer of all the Riches of Heaven; for to it belong the Adoption and the
Glory; to it appertain the Covenants, the Service of God, and all the Promises.
Here we may enjoy all the Ordinances of God, and satisfy our Souls with the
marrow and fatness of his Sanctuary. Yea, if we will believe our Apostle in the
Verses following my Text, every Christian does now grow into an holy Temple in
the Lord, he becomes an habitation where God vouchsafes to dwell, and manifest
his special Presence by the saving Operations of his Holy Spirit. Happy Souls!
who have the Honor and the Privilege to lodge and entertain their God! What
Joys and Comforts will now crowd into the Soul, and attend this glorious Guest!
And yet all this is only a preparatory for much greater Happiness: For these
happy Believers, as our Apostle speaks, are now become fellow citizens with the
Saints; such are here of the household of God; and if they make a just
improvement of that Grace which is afforded them, they shall hereafter be
admitted into the Society and Fellowship of Saints and Angels. And what Tongue
is able to express this Happiness! How great an Honor, how great a Privilege
was it thought of Old to be a free Citizen of Rome, and to have a right to all
the Offices and Franchises of that Imperial City? So highly valuable was this
Freedom, that the chief Captain in the Acts tells us, he did not obtain it but
with a great sum of Money. To these Privileges, S. Paul alludes, when he tells
the Ephesians, and in them all Christians; that if they are of the household of
God, and built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, then they are
fellow citizens with the Saints, that is, Denizons of Heaven, and free of that
City, which is above, even the heavenly Jerusalem. Glorious things are spoken
of thee, O thou City of God. St. Paul tells us, Heb. 12. That here dwell an
innumerable company of glorious Angels, the general Assembly of the Firstborn,
That is, the Holy Apostles the Firstborn of the Gospel, the Spirits of
Prophets, Martyrs, Confessors, and all those just men that are already made
perfect. Nay farther yet, here God the Judge of all vouchsales his glorious
Presence, and Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant appears in all his Glory.
To be Citizens therefore of this Heavenly Jerusalem, is to enjoy the most
ravishing Society of Saints and Angels, to be admitted to the Beatifick Vision
of God himself, and to live for ever in Paradise with the Holy Jesus. It is to
lie with Lazarus in Abraham's bosom, feeding continually on the feast of the
Lamb, and drinking of those Rivers of pleasures, which ran at Gods right hand
for evermore. This one would think should be argument enough to make us hold
fast the profession of our Faith steadfast unto the end. But if all this will
not prevail with us, I know nothing that can, unless it be what I proposed to
be considered in the

2d. place, Namely the Lamentable condition of those who dare disown and deny
the Truths of the Gospel. And I cannot give you a truer prospect of their sad
condition than in the words of our Savior. Mat. 10. 33. Whosoever shall deny
me or be ashamed of my words, before men, him will I deny before my Father and
his holy Angels. How many Woes are crowded into this one sentence, I will deny
him? It is, to say no more, a compendious expression of Hell, an Eternity of
torments comprised in a word. Oh the ineffable horror that will seize the poor
Sinner, when he stands arraigned before the Tribunal of Heaven! When at the
great Assize, at the last day, he shall see his very Advocate become his
Accufer, and hear his Sentence pronounced by his merciful Savior; the very
hearing of it will be a kind of Hell, and the Promulgation of the Punishment
anticipate the Execution.

And now, if I could give you a lively representation of the guilt and horror
on the one hand, and paint out eternal Wrath and Vengeance on the other; I
might then hope to show you the condition of such a Sinner, as shall be thus
disowned and denied by his Savior. But alas! this is not all; we shall find
more ingredients of horror in this Condemnation, if we consider that Christ
threatens to deny such a Sinner before his Father and the Holy Angels.

If there could be any room for comfort after the Sentence of Damnation, it
would be this, of being executed in secret: But it seems the Sinners folly must
be laid open before God and his Holy Angels, and all his baseness ripped up
before the whole World. Christ will now in the presence of God the Father, of
Men and of Angels, compare himself who was denied, and the Cause for which he
was denied together; he will now parallel his infinite Merits with a Lust, and
lay Eternity in the balance with a Trifle; he will now propose that worthy
price for which he was denied, he will hold it up to open view; he will call
upon Men and Angels, saying, Behold that piece of dirt, that windy applause,
that corruptible dower, that poor transitory satisfaction, for which I was
dishonored, and my Truths disowned; for which Life, Eternity and God himself
was scorned, yea trampled on by this vile wretched Sinner. Judge all the World,
whether what he despised in the other Life, he deserves to enjoy in this. How
will the vile wretched Sinner then crawl forth, and appear in all his filth? He
will then call in vain upon the Mountains to cover him, and the Rocks to hide
him.

FINIS.
An Advertisement of some Books Printed for Robert Clavel, in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
A Discourse upon the Form and Manner of Making, Ordaining and Consecrating
Bishops, Priests and Deacons, according to the Order of the Church of England.
By Tho. Comber, D. D. Dean of Durham, in 8.

The Christians daily sacrifice duly offered, or a practical Discourse teaching
the right performance of Prayer, by Lancelot Addison, D. D. Dean of Litchfield.

A Letter in Answer to a Book entitled, Christianity not Misterious; as also
to all those who set up for Reason and Evidence, in opposition to Revelation
and Mysteries, by Peter Brown, B. D. Sen. Fellow of Trin. Coll. Dublin.

Dr. Izhams daily Office for the Sick. Second Edition reviewed; to which is
added an Office of Thanksgiving for Recovery.

The Acts and Negotiations, togegether with the particular Articles at large,
of the General Peace concluded at Reswick, by the most Illustrious Confederates
with the French King, to which is premised the Negotiations and Articles of the
Peace concluded at Turin between the same Prince and Duke of Savoy, in 8o

Iohannis Clerici ars Critica, etc. in 8.

The genuine use and necessity of the two Sacraments, namely Baptism and the
Lords Supper, with our obligation frequently to receive the latter, in small
12o, by Lancelot Addison D. D. Dean of Litchfield.

Sir William Pettyes Political Arithmatick Reprinting, with other Tracts.

The Church History cleared from the Roman Forgeries, and Corruptions found in
the Councils, and Baronius, in 4 parts, by Tho. Comber D. D. Dean of Durham. 4o.

An Historical Vindication of the right of Tithes from Scripture, Reason, and
the Opinion and Practice of Jews, Gentiles and Christians in all Ages, with a
Discourse of Excommunication, by Tho. Comber D. D. Dean of Durham in 4o.

A Sermon preached in the Cathedral Church of Durham, on the 2d of December,
1697, being the day of Thanksgiving for the Peace: By Tho. Comber D. D. Dean of
Durham.

A Sermon preached at the opening of the Lecture at Maldon in Essex, lately
established by the Lord Bishop of London: by William Brampston late Fllow of
Queen's College in Cambridge.

Mr. Stalker's Book of the Art of Japanning.

A Volume of Sermons on the following Texts, Io. 13. 13. Matthew 11. 30. Hebrew
12. 28, 29. Acts 16. 30. Acts 16. 31. Mark 10. 17. Three Sermons on Luke 18. 8.
Matthew 14. 9. Jeremiah 45. 5. By Tho. Pierce, D D. late Dean of Sarum.

Mr. Scrivener's Body of Divinity in fol.

The History of the Turks in 2 vol. fol.

The History of the Execrable Irish Rebellion in 1641. By Dr. Burlase in fol.

A Treatise of Spousals and Matrimonial Contracts, by the late Famous and
Learned Mr. Henry Swinburne.

Bishop Pearson's Opera Posthuma Chronologica in 4o.

Bede's Tracts in Latin 4o.

The Dean of Durham's short Discourses on the Common Prayer in 8o, and o^ the
Offices for the 5th of November, 30th of January, and 29th of May.

Ogleby's Aesop in 2 Vol. with 160 Cuts, sold cheap.

The Frauds of the Romish Priests, the Journey to Naples, and the History of
the Monastical Order, by Mr. Demilion.

The Art of Gauging: By Thomas Everard Esquire The 3d Edition.

A Defense of Pluralities, etc.

Martindal's Survey-Book, or Land-meeters Vade mecum.

A Treatise of Preternatural Tumors, in 8o. with Cuts.

An Enquiry into the Right use and abuses of the Hot, Cold and Temperate Baths
in England: By Sir John Floyer, Knight. M. D.

The Touchstone of Medicines, Discovering the Virtues of Minerals, Animals,
etc. by their Tastes and Smells: By Sir John Floyer, Knight. in 8o.

Sermons preached on several occasions; by Io. March, B. D. late Vicar of
Newcastle upon Tine, the last of which was preached the 27th of November 1692.
being the Sunday before he Died, with the late Rev^^end Dr. John Scot's
Preface: To which is added a Sermon preached by the Author at the Assizes at
Newcastle, in the Reign of the late K. James.

Lucius Florus in usum Delphini.

Leusden 's Compendium.

Horace in usum Delphini, Reprinting. Drelincourt of Death.

Aristophanis Gl -- Comediae duae, Plautus and Nubes, cum Scholiis Graecis
Antiquis quibus adjiciuntur notae quaedam simul cum gemino indice in usum
Studiosae Iuventutis.

A Future World in which Mankind shall survive their Mortal Durations,
demonstrated by Rational evidence from Natural and Moral Arguments against the
Atheists Pretensions, by William Smith D. D. Printed for Robert Clavell, at the
Peacock in St. Paul's Churchyard.

FINIS.

