Maria Misera Miseranda: Or, A brief RELATION OF THE Life and Death OF An
Unfortunate Young Maid IN THE COUNTY of DESMOND IN IRELAND.

Together with the Most Horrid Murder of her LOVER, an Englishman, committed
by the FATHER of the said VIRGIN.

Very Strange and True.

LONDON: Printed for R. T. at the Crown in Little-Britain, 1674.

Maria Misera Miseranda: OR A brief Relation of the Life and Death of an
Unfortunate young Maid in the County of Desmond in Ireland.
IN the most Western parts of the Kingdom of Ireland, where the County of
Desmond opposes its tripple head to the surging Ocean, there is situate upon
the banks of a slender Torrent near Dingle Bay, a very magnificent Castle,
known by the name of Kerbre; and hard by the same another fair Manor House,
which for its convenient opportunity of Sea, and various recreations by Land,
dilated on the one side into spacious Fields, and pleasant rising Hillocks, and
bounded on the other with gay Medows, fresh Springs, and solitary Groves; has
for these many years been honored with the Habitation of an Ancient, and right
Noble Family; whose Name, the sadness of the subsequent Story gave me
sufficient cause to conceal. The Heir now living was in the eighteenth year of
his Age contracted to a young Maid in the same County, who did so well answer
her Bridegroom in Quality, and Comeliness, that they were not unjustly
accounted, The most happy and Lovely Pair in all those parts. But these were
only the Preludiums of that happiness, which was consummated in their Nuptial
bed; whither, although in modesty I dare not follow them; yet does the event
sufficiently declare that there also was nothing wanting in either party,
whereby to advance and Crown their long expected Bliss. For the full space of
five months had scarce past beyond the Wedding Day, when sweet Helena by the
unusual vicissitudes of Blushes, and Paleness in her Cheeks, and sudden Qualms
in her Stomach gave evident tokens that of a Virgin she was made a Mother.

Joyful news this, we need not doubt, both to her Friends, and especially her
dear Husband, who from so fair a Wife could not but expect a more than ordinary
Child: and so indeed it was; for when the long expected hour was come; Behold,
a Daughter came laughing into the world; A Babe of such admirable Form and
Features, as might easily presage her future advancement to the highest seat in
Loves Empire. The Resemblance and Idea of both Parents were plainly seen in
this little Model; but so sweetly interwoven one with another, that you would
have thought Nature, like some skilful Painter, had pourtrayed the chiefest
excellencies of them both into one Copy of the Daughter: and lest,
notwithstanding, she should seem too sparing in her blessings, added an
extraordinary, and unheard of Ornament to the upper part of her Breast; in the
middle of which was the picture of a fresh Primrose so lively drawn, that at a
very small distance it seemed natural. 'Twere in vain here in dull words to
attempt an essay of that joy, which this Creature brought into the world with
it; and therefore I leave it rather to the Rhetoric of a pure-thinking mind,
abundantly more capacious of so large a subject.

The eighth day of her age was celebrated with a huge confluence of Kinsfolks,
and Acquaintance for the giving of her a Name; which, after the Roman Ceremony,
was, in a Church dedicated to St. Mary, very solemnly performed: and because
that Saint is reputed amongst the Catholics, as the glory of all her Sex; what
other name so fit to adorn this Babe, which promised so fair an advance to her
nature. Hereafter therefore let her be called Mary, Lovely, and Happy Mary in
the first of her days, although much more miserable in the end.

As for her Education, it was every way worthy her own person, and defective in
nothing whereby to perfect the Blessings of Nature by the accomplishment of
Art. For the years of her Infancy being expired under her Mothers care, she was
then removed to the Court of Rome, where she continued under the Inspection of
a very Noble Personage for eight years together. In which time it is a wonder
how admirable she grew in all those Endowments which adorn the Female Sex: For
beside her great knowledge in three or four several Tongues, History, and
Philosophy, she played excellently upon many Musical Instruments; and yet of
all these none so sweet as the undulations of her Seraphick Voice, which to
hear and admire were things unseperably united: She Danced with an incomparable
Majesty, and huge-taking gesture; and discoursed in as eloquent a Style as most
Romances. In short, there was nothing desirable, which was not in an eminent
degree in this Virgin: and yet above all was the excellency of her Person,
which by the fourteenth year of her Age was arrived at a perfection beyound the
ken of a vulgar imagination.

There you might behold the sweet Strokes, and Harmonious Composure of most
Lovely Features, gilded over with an Incomperable Beauty without, and garnished
with a meek Spirit; Virgin Modesty, most virteous, and capacious Soul within:
There you might feast the Eye without weariness, the Ear without dullness, and
the Touch, I am sure, without repenting: None that ever saw her, could have
desired a better; and whosoever could heartily content himself with a worse,
knew not the extent of his own happiness.

But the sweet Lady was totally ignorant of all these; and she, who at her
first entrance into Rome knew none more than her self, nor was beknown of any;
does now know none less, although beknown of all.

Now amongst those many which were Suitors to her in their thoughts, the first
which made his open address was one Don Antonio, Heir to a Senator, of great
Wealth, and Quality; Who approaching near to do his Devoir to her in a Salute,
was cast into such an ecstasy by the splendor of her Countenance, forced him
rudely to retreat without the Libation of her Sweet Lips. This did not a little
discompose the Lady, and made her ask him very sincerely, whether any thing
about her had done him harm? But as soon as he had with tears in his eyes
related the cause; and bowing at her feet disclosed his Passion for her: She
then smiling, said; I hope, Sir, you are more tender of your Honor than to
stoop so low as me beneath your own deserts: and I assure you my Ambition is
not large enough to entertain such large proffers. My Equal shall be my
Bridegroom when ever I enter that holy State; and therefore I entreat you
desist from this enterprise, which may justly defame you, and can never please
me.

The Young Man had heard enough to stop the Current of his Rhetoric, and
thefore gazing a while upon her with a ghastly countenance, he departed the
Room, replying never a word; only 'twas thought by the working of his breast,
he would have spoken, but could not. Nor had the Horned Racer of the Night
surveyed the Heavens once round before another ventures Shipwreck upon the very
same Seas: For a brisk young Merchant, who had been some years absent from the
City, chancing to espy her at a Procession, fell into a desperate and
impatient fit of Love for her, which made him, after the Ceremony ended, betake
himself fortwith to her Lodgings, where he accosted the surprised Lady in this
manner.

Eairest of Creatures! I beseech you pardon my boldness in this sudden assault
of your Virgin Modesty; and if I be guilty of any blame, lay it not on me, but
the God of Love, whose Vassel and Messenger I now am. I am come to challenge a
Heart, which I believe you have innocently, and ignorantly robbed me of; and
because it is impossible for you to restore it again, excuse me if I lay claim
to yours in exchange of it: Madam, I know you will think your self a loser by
the bargain, and I am ready on my knees to confess it; But yet I pray take pity
on me, and your own Honor, which now lies at stake: For by those Immortal
Powers, that rule this raging Flame within by Breast, If you deny my Suit, then
in that very moment shall this very Sword free me from your Tyranny, and my
Body which falls in your presence, shall stain your spotless name, at least
with a suspicion of Murder and Cruelty.

Whether he intended to proceed any farther, and make a Relation of his
Pedigree, and Fortune, I cannot tell: But here perceiving the tears to shower
from the Lady's eyes, he made a pause, and stood some while in expectation of
an Answer; which, as soon as she had recovered her self from the oppression of
amazement, she returned in these, or the like terms.

SIR,
I Much wonder that so unworthy a Creature as I should be the Object of so
ardent a Passion; as you pretend: But if so I be, yet let me entreat you to
free me from the Imputation of being Woed, and won at the first Attempt.
Besides, your Love may hap to die in as short a time as it first sprang up;
which if it does, will render you miserable in your Petition, and me as
unfortunate in my Grant. I pray therefore be not overhasty in things of so
great concern, and let time prove the constancy of your Love.


This, although it came short of a real assent, yet because it was no flat
denial, was as much as could be expected from a Virgin Modesty at the first
Address; and therefore the Young Gallant, after a small tarry, departed in
tolerable satisfaction, yet promising her another Visit the next day. His
absence was no sooner enjoyed, but the lovely Mary begins to employ her
Imagination in some Project whereby to acquit her self from the unreasonable
requests of this fond Lover; for as yet the Charms of Cupid had not reconciled
her thoughts to a Wedded Life: and to deny, or suspend his hopes a second time,
she foresaw was a matter of desperate consequence: She therefore calling both
her Waiting Gentlewomen, made them conscious of her unhappy condition; and
seeing there was no other remedy, resolved, if opportunity served, to acquit
her self of Rome. It was in the dusk of the Evening she went down to the River,
where finding an English Ship, which was to pass by the Coasts of Ireland, she
imbarqued in the same, bidding adieu to the Walls of Rome, and her Lovesick
Gallant. We must now follow her to the Irish shore, where we shall find her
Parents in a strange transportation, and fit of joy, with the sight of their
fair Daughter, and yet jealous of somewhat by reason of her unexpected return;
the cause of which when she had related, did at once give them a sufficient
Testimonial of her Virtue, and the high esteem she had merited at Rome: And
therefore now they sit down in a full fruition of their happiness, admiring
those rare Accomplishments which adorned the person of their only Child. But
she that had so cunningly escaped the Suits of the Roman Citizens, had only
exchanged them for those of her own Country: and therefore no sooner was her
Name posted into the Neighboring parts, but a young Irish Lord dispatches a
Letter to her Father, in this wise:

SIR,
THe loud sounding Trumpet of your Daughters Fame, has blown in my Breast a
Flame so far beyond expression, that I shall not here attempt it. My humble
Petition is, that you would grant me the Honor of Access to her Person, and
Deign to call me Son; which Title, as I presume, is no dishonor to your self,
so can I promise it to be the Consummation of my greatest happiness.

Yours, Ophon.


This news was too joyful to admit any delay of Answer; and therefore being
delivered to the Father of this Lady; was presently seconded with this Reply.

My Lord,
I Greatly fear that the Fame of my Daughter surpasses what she indeed is, and
so deludes your Lordships Passion with a vain and ill-grounded expectation: But
if your Honor will so far condescend as to make trial by a Visit, I will
ascertain you the utmost of my Ability in a Welcome Entertainment; and shall
for ever think my self a great Debtor to Heaven, if it has decreed to make her
so happy in a Husband, and me in a Son: Until which time I subscribe my self

Your most Humble Servant.


These Lines being presented to the Lord, incited him with all convenient speed
to visit his Mistress, whom now with a Presagious Joy he guessed to be his own;
and therefore he, with a very Noble Attendance, did upon the thirteenth day
alter this Message, present himself before the Gates of his Mistresses Father;
by whom being received with much Ceremony and Joy, he was forthwith conducted
to the presence of the Lovely Mary: He found her reading, with tears in her
eyes, Sir Philip Sidney's Romance, concerning the Unfortunate Lovers Argalus
and Parthenia: But being surprised by the entrance of an unknown Person, she
shut up her Book; and composing her countenance as well as she could, began to
approach the Lord, as it were in expectation of somewhat he had to say to her:
The Lord had, without doubt, digested his thoughts into good Rhetoric
beforehand; but being now as it were in a Diliquium, by reason not only of the
unexpected grief he found her in, but also by the superexcellency of her
Person, so far surpassing the Voice of Fame. He stood for a while Statue-like,
void of all speech and motion, till at last the Rapture of his Soul forcing way
through the indisposed Organs of his body, he thus bespake his Fair Mistress.

Most Incomparable Lady!
IF I have interrupted your Virgin Meditations with a rude and unexpected
Assault, pray let the urgency of my Errand Apologize for me: Be it known to you
then, Fair Mistress, I am by Birth a Lord, and Heir to no mean Fortune: I have
lived these eighteen years, from my Nativity, without either knowledge or
desire of your Sex, until within these few days of your arrival into Ireland,
wherein the exuberance of your Fame, together with the secret whisper of Love
's Deity, has enthralled me to you. My first Apply was to your Honored Father,
whom I find well contented to call me Son: Be but you as willing to call me
Husband, and my Happiness is as great as Ambition would have it.


To all this the Beautiful Lady made little answer, only urgeing the meanness
of her Estate and Birth to his Splendid Fortune; and moreover, her dislike to a
married life. But the Lord was resolved not to desist by these excuses, and
therefore reinforces his Addresses with new Arguments, as also did her Father,
who pleaded against her from the Topic of Duty.

Now whilst these Love Affairs were suspended betwixt consent and denial, it
happened that an English Ship, being split upon the Sands in the Western Ocean,
near the aforesaid County of Desmond, there was one, and only one person
escaped with life, whom indeed for the comeliness of his Person, and (as
afterward appeared) the supereminency of his Parts, one might well have thought
to be Brother to Fair Mary.

This Man escaping naked to shore, and destitute of all Friends and
Acquaintance, was forced by the Laws of Necessity (which others say have none)
to implore the charity of several persons, as he passed the Country, for his
subsistence. Amongst others, he happened to call at the House of Mary's Father;
where being noted by her, as one whose Person was as well admirable to the eye,
as his discourse to the ear, was through her Mediation taken into the service
of her Father.

And now that Heart, which was before Canon-proof against Cupid's Assailants,
begins at last to faint in its Engagement: For the Beauteous Lady had scarce
consumed the space of three months in eying and observing her shipwrackt
Servant, but she began to disclose her Passion to him by several Tokens, which
any Suitor would have presently understood: But alas.! the adverseness of his
Fortune, together with the humble conceit of his own worthiness, had rendered
him as dull in the Intrigues of Love, as Mary was before; and therefore seeing
her Father by this time began to grow impatient of Denial in the Lords Suit,
she resolved to lay aside her Maiden Modesty, and turn plain Suitor to the
Beloved Stranger. For the doing of which, she took this occasion: Walking in
the dusk of the Evening, where he was to pass by, she iet fall her Glove in the
Path, as she saw him come, and so with her Handkerchief at her eyes passed away
in a solitary posture.

The young man coming to her to present her what she had lost, and seeing her
in so melancholy a temper, told her, He was sorry to see her so, and wished it
were in his power to serve her. At which words the Lady, no longer able to
repress her Passion, did with an extraordinary fervency loose her Tongue into
this Rhetoric:

Dearest Sir; And are you willing to serve me, then know it is you alone are
able to do it; for of all the men I e're beheld, you only are he that I can and
must Love, and it is you alone that must either make me a happy Bride, or leave
me a miserable Maid.

So was about to proceed, but that the Man, now almost mad with Joy, stopped
the current of her words by the interposition of his lips. Long was it before
their speech returned, but when it did, 'twas not long before they were made
each others by a sacred Vow.

And now the next concerns were how to get beyond the holy rite of Marriage,
and after that, where to make their abode: at last it is resolved, that Loving
Mary taking her Jewels and other most costly things along with her, should that
night quit her Fathers house, and so accompany her dearest Beloved into
Northumberland in England, his Native Country. Where, although his Parents were
but mean, yet he hoped, by the help of other good Friends, to get a very
comfortable subsistence.

This she did accordingly, leaping out at a very high Window into his arms: But
O the unfortunate success of this Heroic Act! For the noise, though little,
being overheard by her Father, excited him forthwith to look out at his
Casement, where, by the light of the Moon, he might easily descry the matter;
And therefore without delay he persues them with a naked Sword in his hand, to
the aforementioned neighboring Bay, where they had intended to take a Boat, and
waft themselves over into the County of Kerry. The loving Pair had scarce taken
Boat, when they saw him approach in a direful manner, threatening no less than
present death to his Servant; and although they made what speed their fear and
amazement would let them, yet he was soon by their side with another Boat,
which made his Daughter leave the Oar, and turn her Prayer against the edge of
his Sword: But his Passion was deaf to all entreaties, and therefore, as soon
as ever he was within reach, sheathed his Sword in the bowels of the unarmed
young Lover.

Mary stood ready in expectation of the same fall, and willing to accompany her
Love into another Country (as before she had promised) but as soon as she
understood that her Father meant her the injury of Life, and a Wife for the
Lord (who was now at home in his Bed) she clasped about the waste of her now
dead Lover, and crying out aloud, O stay for me, threw both him and her self
into the arms of the merciless Waves.

You will expect here I should make an end concerning our two Lovers, but the
Waters are not willing it should be so, and therefore next day they brought
them ashore, embracing each other, as is aforesaid. Which when the Father and
the Lord saw, Then all their Passions were melted into that one of Grief, and
as the last token of Pity, they gave them a very noble Burial in one Tomb, that
Death might not part asunder, what Life had joined together.

FINIS.

