A Brief ENQUIRY INTO LEAGUES AND CONFEDERACIES Made betwixt PRINCES and
NATIONS, With the Nature of their OBLIGATION.

Composed in the Year 1673. when England and France were Confederates in a
Common War against Holland. And England made a separate Peace with Holland,
leaving France Engaged in the War.

By Sr. P. M.

LONDON, Printed for J. Tonson at the Judges Head in Chancery Lane. 1682.

A brief Enquiry into Leagues and Confederacies made betwixt Princes and
Nations, with the Nature of their Obligation.
THat which gives the formal obligation to all Contracts both public and
private, those betwixt Princes and Governments, and those betwixt particular
Persons, is the will or assent of the Persons contracting. And what the mind or
meaning and intention of those Persons was at the time of their contracting,
that, and no more, is the Subject matter contained in the contract. I add those
words no more, because in matters of Pact and Promise, as no Man is obliged to
what he never assented, so no Man can assent to what he never intended.

But these Acts of the will and mind of Men are intrinsic, secret, and not
known, till manifested and declared by some outward sign, such as words, which
of all others are the most natural and proper signification of our inward
sentiments. Now a Man having signified his meaning by his words, and thereby
also testified his assent thereto, the obligation of his Will becomes extended
to comprehend, not his intrinsic meaning only, but his words also. And he is
bound to the true and just performance of them, as they are the declarative
testimony made by himself, of his invisible, and otherwise unknown intention.

And least we should still be in the dark, concerning the meaning of the very
words themselves, Reason dictates, that in matters of Contract they ought to be
given, and taken also (without manifest cause to the contrary,) in their most
plain and simple sense, according to their popular use, and received Propriety.
For Contracts and Covenants transfer a Right from one Man to another, and if
every Man were left at liberty in his own cause, and to his own advantage,
either to Substitute or Suborn what tacit meaning he pleases, though never so
repugnant to his words; or to affix what Sense he will upon his words, though
never so disagreeing to his otherways signified intention; these, and either of
these, if admitted, would subvert the faith of all Contracts. Things stipulated
betwixt Man and Man would be under loose uncertainties; no Man's Right could be
known, and Controversies would be endles^ Things destructive to humane Society,
and which introduce Confusion into the Moral World.

But still it is true elso, that a man is obliged to no more, than what his will
and intention was to oblige himself unto; nor do his words super induce any
new obligation upon him, but only declare a former arising from his inward
assent, and consequently extend that former Obligation to what is now declared.
And have no power to alter his secret meaning but only to testify it. And are
not to be considered as disjoind from it, but conjoind with it. And if a man
does not rightly express what he truly means, he is unhappy therein, and it may
involv him in trouble and inconvenience. Quid? verbis satis hoc cantum erat?
minime. Quae res igitur valuit? Voluntas. Quae si tacitis nobis intelligi
posset verbis omnino non uteremur, quia non potest, verba reperta, sunt, non
quae impedirent sed quae indicarent voluntatem. Cic. Orat. prc A. Caec.
Yet if by the most probable conjectures it can be found, that his true meaning
was different from what his words seemingly import, equity will relieve him, by
preferring his meaning before his words. Nay if the meaning of men in their
mutual Pacts and Stipulations could certainly be known without words, the
superaddition of words would be wholly useless and superfluous.

Therefore in the Interpretation of all contracts, that which primarily and
principally is to be regarded in case any doubt arises, is, what the mind of
intention of the Contractors was. And this must be collected from all the
probable signs and indications not only of words whither spoken or written, but
of other rational Conjectures, fetched from their several Topics of Precedent
Causes, concurring Circumstances, necessary Consequents or effects and the
like. And where there is no Reason to the contrary, nothing of absurdity that
would follow, or which admitted would render the Contract useless, we ought to
stand to the Propriety of the words; yet still with this difference, that in
matters odious they ought to be restrained to their narrowest signification, in
matters favorable enlarged to their full latitude, in both according as the
Nature of the thing, and the Equity of the case shall direct. But never to be
extended to things unlawful, impossible, contrary and repugnant, absurd and
irrational. What Is unlawful a man ought not to will, and if he docs, his Act
morally considered is a nullity, and so not obligatory. What Is impossible he
cannot perform, and so in vain to will it. Contraries he cannot will at the
same time because repugnant. And it is to be presumed, that a man of Reason will
not will what is irrational.

It was a manifest Caption and Cavil in the Romans, who being to diviee the
Ships betwixt them and Antiochus by equal shares, cut every Ship into two equal
parts. Dimidia part Navium.
For half the Ships, according to the usual Propriety of the words, is not the
half of every Ship cut asunder, but half of their entire number, with respect
first had to their goodness and dimensions.

It was not said, Non inferat, but non generent bellum.
After the second Punic War it was Covenanted by League, that the Carthagenians
should not have or wage War with any without leave of the Roman People. The
word War is generical and partible into the two Species of invasiv and
defensiv. The Question is, whether in this case it shall be extended to both
Species, or restrained only to Invasiv. Here it is to be considered that the
subject matter of the Question is of a thing odious and burdensome, viz. the
Diminution of Liberty, both Civil and Natural. For Nature allows every man a
Right of defending himself, by repelling force with force, and if every man,
then much more a Politic Society. The Equity of their case directs us to
believe that the Carthagenians would not renounce so necessary a Right. The
propriety of the word War is salv'd well enough by restraining it to the
Principal Species of War, viz. Invasive, which carries with it a greater
ostentation of power than a Defensive. Thus in a matter Odious, the Equity of
the Case directing, and the Propriety of the Words having or Waging War
allowing, they shall be construed, only to restrain the Carthagenians from any
Hostile Aggression or Invasion of others, but not from the necessary Defense of
themselves when attaqu'd by an Enemy.

But suppose the words of the said League had been to forbid the Carthagenians
the furnishing or relieving any Enemy of the Roman People with Arms. Here the
word Arms is likewise general, and may be divided into Offensive and Defensive.
The Question is, whither in this case it shall be taken generally to comprehend
all Arms, or restrictivly to Arms offensiv only, which are the nobler sort of
Arms, and sometimes the Nobler species is taken for the whole Genus, as in the
former Case of War. If we proceed by the former method we shall find, that the
matter of the Question is of a thing Favorable and Benificial, viz., the
hindering the Relief of an Enemy. That the intentional Equity of the Case is to
debar an Enemy from all Instruments of Hostility, not only those whose proper
use is to hurt as Swords, Bows, Javelins, etc. but those also whose proper use
is to repel all Hostile hurt, such, as Shields, Helmets, Coats of Maile or what
else were the use of that Age. But so as not to extend the words beyond the
Subject matter of Arms, to Clothes, Victuals and the like, for such are not
Arms, and though they repel Hurt as cold and Hunger, yet it is not Hostile him.
And we find also that the propriety of the words best agrees here with their
largest Acceptance. It Is clear therefore that in this Case the releiving of an
Enemy with Arms, shall be understood Contrary to what in the former, not
restrictively to Arms offensive only, but extensively so as to Comprehend all
Arms whatsoever.

All Leagues and Confederacies properly so called, made and contracted betwixt
Princes and Nations, are but the Deductions and Political Results of natural
justice and Wisdom as they are particularly applicable to the present
Emergencies of State. Justice Examins their Principles, Wisdom their Ends. So
that if two or more Princes Confederate together against a Third, whom tehy
Declare their Common Enemy, And the War so declared be in its Nature Manifestly
unjust, this is an ill grounded War through defect of the Principle, and is
rather a Combination then a League, Liga^a ligando.
for every League both in name and nature implies a Tie or obligation, But no
Prince is tied to be unjust. Suppose then the War to be as to its Principle,
just, and so the League initially good, yet if by the necessary Concomitants
and Consequents thereof it be found that in the Event it will certainly involv
one of the Confederates in apparent ruin and destructtion, This if continued is
an ill advised War, and the obligation to it ceases through defect of the End.
For no Prince is bound to destroy himself. And the proper and adequate end of
all Leagues and Alliances betwixt Princes and Governments is the safety and
benefit of each others Crown and People.

The French King declared England Principal in the War against Holland.
If there be Principal and Accessory in a War, and the Principal be satisfied as
to the terms and conditions of Peace offered, the other Prince who is but the
Accessory ought to acquiesce, But if both be Principals, the one is free to
pursue his Right though the other desists.

A Prince cannot oblige himself to continue a War during the pleasure of his
Confederate or which is all one, not to make a Peace without the others
consent. When I say he cannot, I mean not any Civil Impotency or defect of
power on the part of the Prince, but a moral impossibility or repugnancy on the
part of the thing. And if a Treaty be couched in such like terms, they are
either merely insignificant, or must admit of some equitable construction to
make them reducible to a practical sense. For otherwise according to the rigor
of the Letter such Words would oblige a Prince to continue an unreasonable an
untimely a calamitous War, only to gratify the Ambition, will, or humor of
another. And this will be to tie a Prince to do what he is already tied not to
do, which is a Moral Contradiction.

But put Case the Treaty obliges both Princes to continue the War by a
Conjunction of forces till both may obtain reasonable Conditions from their
Common Enemy. In this Case each Prince shall have the Judgment not only of his
own but of the others conditions also, so far forth as they relate to the
continuance or discontinuance of the War on his part, else upon pretext that
his Conditions are not reasonable, the one may everlastingly Opiniastre the War
and Consequently engage the other in it during his single pleasure.

All Leagues and Contracts as well with Princes as with private Persons are
ever mutual and reciprocal, and are always made betwixt two parties at fewest,
and where there are but two in the contract, if one of them departs from it,
it is no longer a contract. Now a Prince by the non performance of every material
point contained in the League or Treaty violats the Faith thereof and departs
from the League it self. And this non performance on the part of the one Prince
does not operate by way of investing in the other a power or moral faculty of
breaking or nonperforming with him in a matter of the like nature; for then it
would tantamount to this, because one is false to me therefore I may be false
to him. But it operates by way of annulling and avoiding the whole League, as
having no longer any obligation in it. It becomes a mere canceld Bond, and is
so far from being, an agreement that in the issue and effects it proves a
Disagreement,

No Prince is bound by any League to perish singly or in company with another,
and the safety welfare and prosperity of his People are his Primary obligation.
First in Time and first in Dignity, to which all Treaties and Transactions with
foreign Princes are but secondary and subservient, neither can any of them be
pleaded to evacuate that original and fundamental obligation. And though
private Persons may in several Instances contract to their own great Hurt and
Damage, and still be bound up thereby, yet it is otherwise with Princes in their
public and politic capacities because of the Conjugate Interest of Prince and
People. Forasmuch as a Prince cannot greatly hurt himself without hurting them
to the preservation of whom, and to the procuring of whose good and benefit, he
is already preingaged In which sense it is infallibly true, Actus Posterior non
praejudicat priori.

Princes, in their making Leagues and confederacies each with other, take their
measures from the Consideration of the present posture and condition of their
Affairs in the whole complex of them both at home and abroad. If the same
reasons and inducements remain, which first moved them to enter into the
League, not to persist in it would be levity at least, and if conjoind with a
design of decieving and hurting another no less then perfidy. But if a new
Scene of affairs opens quite different from the former, if unexpected Accidents
fall out which Chang the reason of the Case, such, as if either of the
Confederates could have had the foreknowledg of, He would never have entered
into the League. here the cause of it ceases. The foundation fails. The Prince
is to consult the present conjuncture, to take other measures suited and
adapted to the now State of things. For to debar a Prince from accommodating
his Councils to new and unforeseen Emergencies. is equally absurd, as to oblige
a mariner not to shift his sails according to the variation of the Winds. A
Prince thinks it just and reasonable under his present circumstances to enter
into a Society of Arms with another, and be Confederate with him in a common
War. The Condition of his Affairs afterward changes, and as then considered,
renders the War unreasonable, His people fall into distempers at home, his Arms
more requisite elsewhere. The continuation of the War followed with a train of
fatal Consequences at first not so easily discoverable. In this Case the Prince
needs none to dispense or absolv him, if any other could do it besides the
Person contracted with, from the Tie and Bond of his Confederacy. He was never
obliged under these Circumstances, nothing of this case was included in the
League, and therefore tacitly excepted; the then State and condition of his
Affairs, which was the moving and leading cause to his consenting to it, is now
quite different and become another thing, and the former motivs to a War are
now changed into more powerful arguments for a Peace.

It Is the same in all pacts and promises betwixt private persons; they are all
subject to the tacit condition of Things abiding in the same state, Not as if
humane Affairs could long abide without chang, but it is meant only of things
relating to the Pact or Promise, such as contributed to the Being of it, and
without which implied it had not been made.

Omnia esse dedebent eadem quae fuerunt came promitterem, ut promittantis fidem
teneas. Quie quid m^tatur libertatem facit de iutegro consulende and meam fidem
liberat. Sen. de Benet. lib. 4. cap. 35.
For Example, I promise my friend I will relieve him as long as I live and never
suffer him to want. But I was then in the possession of a plentiful fortune, am
now reduced to penury, so that what I have, barely suffices my own necessities.
Here my promise binds me not, Nature teaching and Charity permitting to prefer
my self. Perhaps my friend becomes a Criminal to the State, and by Law, though
a subsequent one, I am forbid to relieve him. Here my Duty to the Government
forecludes my promise. Or if an Usurper forbids me under Capital Penalties,
though I owe him no duty of Obedience, yet self-preservation acquits me. Nor
can it be supposed that I meant to oblige my self to supply another wants,
with the loss or imminent hazard of my own life. Perhaps I promised to a
friend, and he afterward turns my enemy, and what I intended for his good he
perverts to my hurt, here I may justly retract my abused benefit. Infinite
Cases may be framed, wherein the chang of things shall change the Reason, and
consequently the Obligation of a Promise. And though when I promised, I did not
caution expressly against such Accidents and Events, under which I would be
understood not to be bound, because I could not know nor foresee them all; yet
common and universal Reason shall be pleaded in aid of the weakness of my
private understanding. For bare words ought not to be extended to overruled the
reason of things, but on the contrary, the reason of things ought to regulate
the interpretation of words. And all Stipulations and contracts consist as well
of what is rationally implied as what is verbally expressed.

But if Common Reason and equity be justly pleaded in benefit of a private
Person where his Life and Fortune lie at Stake, how much more shall it be in
the Case of a Prince, where the Conservation of a Community is concerned. And
if unforeseen Accidents fall out in the ordinary Occurrences of humane Life,
how much oftener in the Case of a War, that Grand Scene of Vicissitudes and
mutability.

The case of the Gibeonites recorded in Sacred History, who by Surreption and
not without a fraudulent Lie, obtained a League, wherein they yielded their
Persons Slaves and Bondmen to Redeem their Lives, will, if duly examined make
nothing toward the invalidating of what is before affirmed, as may to his
saitsfaction be seen by him who has the leisure to consult Grotius in his 2d,
Book de Jure Belli ac Pacis Cap. 13. Paragr. 4.

England is Confederate with France, in a War against Holland, and France at
the same time makes War against Spain, who is an Allie of England.
In Case two Princes be Confederates in a War against a third, and one of them
by Hostile Provocations Occasionally arising from this War, or by Voluntary
design Engages himself in a new War against a fourth Prince, who is a Friend
and Allie of the other Confederate, to the Multiplication still of more Wars by
a Superfaetation. In this Case the state of Affairs is quite altered from what
it was when the League was first entered into, and that other Consederate will
labor under a double disadvantage, For first, the Forces of his Confederate
will by this new War be distracted and divided, and consequently more of the
burden and danger of the War devolved upon him. 2dly. The assistance which he
gives his Confederate, and which is intended for maintenance of the War against
a Common Enemy, will either wholly or in part be diverted to a War against his
own Allie; and by this means shall with one hand Fight against his Enemy, and
with the other against his Friend. And in Case the Conservation of the Amity of
that Allie be of great use to him and his People, and his true Interest
complicated therewith, he shall now become Engaged in an unnatural War against
himself.

But put the Case still Stronger. Suppose it was cautioned in the Treaty of the
League, that if the War which the two Confederates were to make against a third
Prince or State should occasion a new War against one of those Confederate from
a fourth Prince, that in such Case both the said Confederates should still
assist each other in the Prosecution of the War, and moreover declare that
fourth Prince or State their Common Enemy. Here an unforeseen Accident or
unexpected change cannot be pleaded, because this new War is not only supposed
but provided against by express Covenant.

To this I answer two ways. First if one of the Confederates has already a
League and Alliance with that fourth Prince, against whom this new War is to be
undertaken, and no violation of the League on the part of that Prince, that
Proviso how express soever is absolutely Void. For no Prince is obliged in
compliance with his Word to a new Confederate to break his Faith with an old
One, and where Contracts prove repugnant one to another, the first stands good,
the second is a nullity.

If it be said there has been a violation of the League on the part of that
Prince by his giving Assistance to an Enemy. As in the Case now before us,
Spain assists Holland with whom England is at War. To this will be answered
Spain assists not Holland against England, but against France. And never did
any League or Treaty forbid a Prince, or can forbid him to assist his Friend,
against his own, and his Friend's Common Enemy, for this were utterly to
subvert the fundamental Principels and Maxims of all Political Prudence and
Reason.

But Secondly, though this Accident of a new War arising with another Prince
was supposed, yet many others as weighty as that may fall out wholly
unforeseen, for it is not possible for humane understanding to Enumerate all
future Contingencies. Peradventure the disposition of a Prince's Affairs at
home, the temper of his People, some important Considerations of a private
nature and not sit to be Published, may render a peace Absolutely Necessary, of
which the Prince is the sole Judge. And if upon serious and mature thoughts he
finds his Inducements. Real not Feigned, Weighty not Frivolous, not Levity or
Inconstancy in the Case, but Necessity, and such a one as he suffers under, not
sought for by him to palliate a fraud. If upon such Circumstances he Treats a
Peace exclusive of his Confederate, who upon notice given him, refuses to be
Included, especially if just and honorable Conditions be offered him from his
Enemy, the adequate End of all just Arms, and which when rejected may make a
War Originally just become unjust, I say in so doing the Faith and Honor of
the Prince remain unblemished. Nor is it any more Imputation to him then to the
Master of a Ship Bound upon a Voyage, though it requires haft, not to put out
to Sea when the Wind is contrary, or to put back to Port when the Storm arises.

For no supposed Covenants, Stipulations or Conditions may be admitted to
interpose betwixt the safety and welfare of a Prince or People, all such are
directly contrary to the Intention of the Contractors and the End of the
Contract; And are nothing but Words depraved and distorted from their genuine
meaning by the Artifice of them, who would either preserve or aggrandise
themselves by another Ruin.

And as no humane understanding can Enumerate all future Accidents, so no
finite being can engage its self against all future Invents, This is a task
only for Omniscience and Omnipotence for an infinitely extended Wisdom, which
overtakes Futurities, and for a Power Commensurate to that Wisdom

The Honor of a Prince, which is his moral Conscience, is too Nice and Delicat
a thing for the ungentle touch of a private hand. And it is difficult to give a
particular solution to all the Phenomenon without an exact knowledge of the
Original Treaties, with their Relatives, Dependencies and Circumstances,
wherein the Honor of the Prince is supposed to be concernd. But this may be
confidently affirmed, if one Prince shall measure the obligation of his Leagues
and Treaties with foreign Nations by the Standard of his own Interest, and no
longer abide by them then they abide that test; And in so doing justify himself
by the Common Practice and Usage of the most Civilized Nations in all ages,
whilst the other is tied up to all the niceties and punctilios of Words
heightened by an Interessed Casuist, this scrupulous Prince will be subjected to
mighty disadvantages, and be fast bound when the other is lose. Now that the
Practice and usage of Nations has been such is a plentiful Topic in History,
and a larg Field to expatiate in, It may suffice in this place slightly to
touch some few Instances.

See Thuan. and Cambd. Ann.
Henry the Fourth of France made a League offensive and defensive with Queen
Elizabeth of England and the States Genesis of the United Provinces, with Express
Covenants that no one should make Peace with Spain without Consent of both the
others.

The Treaty was solemnly ratified at Paris with many Vows and Protestations
made by the King in the presence of the Earl of Shrewsbury the English
Ambassador, and repeated in sundry Letters under his own hand to the Queen; to
whom he also owed a great debt of gratitude for many signal kindnesses, and
seasonable supplies of Men and Moneys. Yet afterward finding his People tired
and exhausted with continual Wars which had lasted Forty Years, and having good
Conditions offered him from Philip of Spain, he signifies to the Queen and
States his disposition to a Peace. And though secretary Cecil from hence, and
Barnevelt from the States, were sent expressly to him to confirm him in the
League, who spared not to press home upon him the Faith thereof, and that not
without some sharp expostulations. Yet that King excused himself by the
importunity of his Affairs, protesting, that his refusal of a Peace with Spain
would involv him in Commotions at home. That the Law of Nature preferred self
preservation. That the Kingly office willed his Peoples good should be the
supreme Law. That Christian Duty: required the sparing of Christian Blood. And
so concluded a separate Treaty at Vervins and left the Queen and the States to
prosecute their War against Spain.

In the Year 1635, began the open rupture of the Peace made at Vervins, and War
was solemnly proclaimed betwixt the two Crowns of France and Spain. From which
time sundry Treaties were made betwixt France and the States General for
carrying on a Common War against Spain their Common Enemy, with defenses of the
one to make a separate Treaty without comprehension of the other. Yet the
States Genesis awakened at length to discern, that the Lower the Spanish Scale was
depressed, the higher that of France would be lifted; And that whiles they
enlarged their Border upon the Spanish Netherlands, They fought themselves the
nearer to France. And that as it was necessary for them on the one side to
maintain Banks for securing their low Countries against Inundations of the Sea.
so it was as needful for them on the other side to preserve a Spanish Barriere
in Flanders, interpofed betwixt them and the Impetuous overflowing torrent of a
French Power. They at last embraced the Honorable and Advantages Conditions
tendered them, and Concluded a Peace with Spain. Which though France resented,
and Monsieur Servient the French Plenipotentiary at Munster could tell them,
That though he had but one eye, he could see that one day they would Repent it.
Yet the States thought themselves out of Pupillage, and Capable to Judge their
own Concerns in the last resort. Nor did they think it reasonable that France
should be the sole Arbitrator of Peace and War, not only for themselves, but
for their Allies also. They did nod exclude France from the Peace, but France
would not be Included. And they conceived the French King had no more reason to
formalise against them, for Concluding a separate Peace, then the States had to
be offended with Him, for carrying on a separate War, which, continued near
twelv Years longer, down to the Treaty at the Pirenees in the Year 1659, Both
had equal Right of Judging and of Choosing what they Judged their proper
Interest And Qui jure suo utitur nemini facit Injuriam.

Frederic the third of Denmark being confederated with the Pole and
Brandenburger against Sueden under Strict defenses of entering into a separate
Treaty without the inclusion of the other Allies, yet the Suedish King having
made that Miraculous March over the Frozen Seas into Zeland, the Dane impelled
by the Necessity of his affairs, Concluded that memorable Treaty at Roschild,
which under the Mediation of England and France, saved Denmark. And his Father
Christiern the fourth, had done the like in the Year 1629, when worsted by the
Imperialists, after he had Confederated with the Princes of Saxony Pomeren and
Mecklenburgh. In both which Cases there was a force put, and a-Moral Necessity,
which resolved into this, Quicquid Cogit excusat.

But what shall we say to the aforementiond Treaty at the Pirenees, where
France Covenanted by Article to abandon Portugal and send them no more succors
of Moneys, Men, Munition, etc. contrary to former Conventions with that Crown,
and that upon no Cogency of their Affairs, for they were then in a Flourishing
Condition, but in exchang for several advantageous Concessions from Spain, of
which when France was in Possession, that Article was soon superseded.

But this is nothing to my purpose, Neither am I Willing to enlarge further,
because I did not design a full Tract but only a Brief and Modest Enquiry.

FINIS.

