AN ACCOUNT OF THE Unjust Proceedings, IN Some Matters of Difference, BETWEEN
Mr. William Collins and Isaac Marlow; BY Several Persons who pretend upon plain
Evidence, to acquit the One, and to give their Judgment against the Other.
THere being a Written Paper brought by a Friend, and left with me for a short
time, wherein some Persons had assumed the Liberty of passing Judgment against
me: And being other ways informed, that Mr. Benjamin Keach had printed two or
three single Papers of the same Matter, relating in part to the same Difference
between Mr. Collins and me, and that this Printed Paper was designed to be
joined to another Paper, which I believe to be the same I first mentioned;
because I have also heard, that that Paper was intended to be Printed; and
having sent to Mr. Keach in my own Name, and other-ways endeavored to get the
sight of one of his Papers, but cannot do it, it being pretended that they were
not Corrected; and perceiving by the fewness of the Number aforesaid that I
hear are Printed, that they are not designed to be made very Public, but
rather to be Privately used to serve a present Interest; from which Clandestine
Method of Proceeding, and the Reflections of the Written Paper, it being, as I
am informed, read in the Presence of too great a Number of Persons to have the
Contents thereof concealed, and since given forth to Mr. Collins, I have no
better way as I know of, to defend my Name and Reputation from being wronged,
than for Truth's sake, least that should suffer with me, to give some Public
Notice of this Matter; to the End that if any Persons have ought to say, for
which they think I am blameworthy, it may fairly stand the open Trial of all
Sober Christians in our Profession, that will take the Pains to look into it,
which is a more just Way, than to Rob me secretly of the Equity and Reputation
of my Cause. And not knowing but this Paper may happen to come to the Sight of
some Persons, that are unacquainted with the first Occasion of our Present
Differences, I shall briefly Premise some things for their better In formation.

There having risen some Persons who first troubled the Baptized Churches with
Challenges of Disputes, Preaching and Printing for the common Way of Set-Form
Singing, in the Public Worship of God, I and others thought it our Duty, for
the preservation of the Peace of the Churches, on their Settled Constitution, to
improve our Talents, in defense of the Truth against that Humane Innovation,
which through the Blessing of God we have done with good Success, Clear
Confutation, and the Public Overthrow of their Cause, at last from the
Confessions of their own Pens, notwithstanding their Unfair and Dishonest
Dealings and Baseness in particular against me, as may be seen in my Printed
Books, referring to them: And I find the Spirit of Persecution is still
endeavoring to draw a Cloud over my Public Testimony against the Erroneous
Principles and Dishonest Practices of my Antagonists, as will appear in the
following Narration.

And to proceed, having considered the aforesaid Written Paper left with me, I
returned by the same Hand to the Authors of it, a Paper signifying, That if
they would send me that Paper Witnessed, or Signed, or any other Paper of the
same Nature, I would return them some brief Observations in Answer to it, in
Order to prevent the Public Mischief of their Printing of it, which I thought
might fall (not on me) but on themselves and others: And having managed Matters
with them, so as to prevent that Mischief, unless they will act like Men
casting off all Common Prudence, as well as Justice and Equity, in our present
Difference, I shall present the Reader with my Answer to a Paper they sent me,
Testimonially subscribed unto by several Persons, which Paper differs but
little from the first, that contained all the Matter in their last Paper herein
answered. And to the End my Paper sent them in Answer to theirs may be the
better distinguished by the Reader, from what I have here added, I have caused
it to be printed in a different Letter, as immediately follows.

The First Thing in that Paper which I shall here take Notice of, is, what I
find therein concerning my Charging Mr. William Collins with a false
Translation of a piece of Latin, at the End of Mr. Benjamin Keach's Breach
Repaired, and with doing of it with a Design to decieve his Unlearned Reader.
To which they say, That to this Charge, the Matter appeared plainly before
them, that the Translation aforesaid was altered at the Press, from what it was
in Mr. Collins his Copy, but without the Knowledge, Privity, or Consent of Mr.
Collins, and they acquit him of the aforesaid Charge.

To which I briefly Answer, That they do not tell us who altered the
Translation they speak of at the Press, nor on what Evidence they acquit Mr.
Collins of it: Nay, although since I received their aforesaid Paper, I sent a
Letter by several Brethren, that desired them to let me know who was the Author
of that false Translation, (as appears to them) in Order to return my Answer to
that particular; yet they, or those of them that were then together, refused to
tell us who was the Cause thereof, which gives me ground to suspect, that they
themselves fear the plain Evidence they pretend to, cannot bear the Trial of my
Answer; and therefore I have reason still to impute that false Translation to
Mr. Collins, and none else.

Secondly, They tell us, that Mr. Collins caused a Letter to be immediately
sent to me by a Porter, who returned, and declared to Mr. William Collins, and
Mr. Keach, that he delivered it into my own Hand, and soon afterward a Book,
with the Translation corrected, which they say I acknowledged I received.

Answer, The Corrected Book that I acknowledged I received, was only the same
that I sent my Brother, Mr. Luke Leader, to Mr. Keach's for. And as to the
Business of the Porter, I never heard that such a Porter could be produced; and
I leave it to the Judgment of all impartial Christians, whether there is any
Reason to credit Mr. Keach and Mr. Collins in their own Cause, who are in an
Evil Confederacy against my Sincere Testimony in my last Book to the contrary,
till they have given Christian Satisfaction for the Wrong they have done me and
others in Print, by their unjust Dealings, which are so fastened upon them, and
plainly proved against them already in several Prints, that they have not been
able to clear themselves of the Guilt thereof; some of which things, relating
to Mr. Collins, are not so much as named in my Accusers Paper; so that their
Attempt to clear Mr. Collins is but in part, and they fail of this, to their
great Shame.

Thirdly, They say, that Mr. William Collins published this Expression, That at
the Assembly, to the best of his Remembrance, Mr. Marlow had nothing to Answer
for himself. And that in my last Book I published they affirm, that I said,
it is a contrived Lie of Mr. Collins, so to charge me that I answered nothing
for my self. And they farther say, That upon Examination of this Matter, some
of the Elders, who were present at the Assembly, do very well remember, that
Mr. Marlow answered nothing to the Charge of Mr. Collins. And whereas Mr.
Collins expressed himself modestly, that to the best of his Remembrance, Mr.
Marlow made no defense: From all which (say they) we conclude it is very
injurious and unjust, for Mr. Marlow to accuse Mr. Collins of a contrived Lie,
and we do justly acquit him of the same, a Lie being the Character of a Man of
a very corrupt Conscience, and a Contrived Lie the worst of that kind of Evil.

Answer 1. They do not tell us who those Elders are, that they say do very well
remember, that at the Assembly I answered nothing to the Charge of Mr. Collins;
and therefore we may justly question the Truth of what they say, considering
that in my last Book there is the Public Testimony of some of the most
Honorable Elders in our Association, and other Credible Witnesses, who
testify against Mr. Collins's false accusation of my being self condemned, and
who also say, that I did strongly perssist in my own Vindication in that
Assembly.

2. That positive Affirmation of theirs, that I said it is a contrived Lie of
Mr. Collins so to charge me, that I answered nothing for myself is a base
Untruth, and such a wicked Accusation, as no Honest Heathen, Turk or Jew, in
their right Senses, would against the Light of Nature, dare to utter from the
sight of any of my Books, as they have done. For those Words of Mr. Collins,
(at the End of Mr. Allen's Vindication) That I had to the best of his
Remembrance nothing to say in my own Defense, though they were testified against
under the Hands of several Credible Witnesses in my last Book, yet they were
not at all charged by me, or any of my Witnesses, on Mr. Collins as a Lie, or
as any Evil, but in my last Book, Entitled, A Clear Confutation of Mr. Richard
Allen, page 39. I have showed (and its there confirmed by five The five
Witnesses against Mr. Collins, are, Mr. William Kiffin, Pastor, Mr. Robert
Steed, Pastor, Mr. John Scot, Pastor, Mr. Hugh Smith, Minister, and Mr. Luke
Leader.
Credible Witnesses) that Mr. Collins's Assertion, that I was self-condemned at
the Assembly, is a Contrived Lie, which principal matter of Fact there charged
and proved against Mr. Collins, my unjust Judges have taken no Notice of at all
in their Paper, but instead thereof they have in an evil Confederacy falsely
accused me with another thing, viz. That I said it is a Contrived Lie of Mr.
Collins, so to charge me, that I answered nothing for my self: For which false
and wicked Accusation, those Judges ought to manifest true Repentance, before
either their Words or Writings will deserve the least Reputation among the Sons
of Men.

3. The Authors of the Paper I am here answering, (if it be true as they say)
do clear me of the self-condemnation, which Mr. Collins contrived a Lie to
accuse me with: For if it be true, that several Elders do very well remember,
that at the Assembly I answered nothing to the Charge of Mr. Collins, then it is
evident, that I uttered nothing like self condemnation; and if Silence be
self-condemning, we may equally affirm, that our Savior condemned himself,
(when he was silent before the High Priest, and said nothing to the Accusation
of those false Witnesses that rose up against him) which for any to say of
Christ is Blasphemy, Mark 14.57, to 61, or 62. So that those Judges, in what
they say to clear Mr. Collins of his Lie, have (I suppose it is unawares)
cleared me of his false Accusation, and fastened his Lie upon him, if what they
say of the Elders be true.

Isaac Marlow.


Having thus recited my Answer, which I sent them on the 3d. of May, 1697. I
shall here proceed (in order to take some farther Notice of several things in
their Paper) to recite Mr. Collins's Paragraph in the last leaf of Mr. Keach's
Breach repaired, wherein the false Translation of the Latin is, and shall make
some Brief Observations on it, and produce some new Evidence to fasten the
false Translation on Mr. Collins, whose Paragraph immediately follows.

The Author which Mr. M. cites out of Marlorate, on Mat. 26.30. pretends it is
uncertain with what Words they praised God; that is, whether it was with the
common Passover Hymn, or some other of Christ's own, which might be more
suitable to the Occasion; and whether they Sang this Praise, or Spoke it
Simply, the following words of the Author not being well rendered by Mr. Timme,
I shall set down, they are these, Graecum verbum laudem quidem, maxim quae Deo
debetur, includit, non autem necessario evincit, quod cecinerint; i. e. The
Greek Word indeed includes Praise, chiefly that which is due to God, but
undoubtedly it does evince that they Sang: I. From the Genuine Signification of
the Origininal Word. And, 2. From the Current of Learned Men, who go this Way.

Thus the Latin was falsely Englished; for it should be as it was Corrected by
them, viz. But it does not necessarily evince that they sang, which is the same
in seuce as my Author Mr. Timme reads it, viz. But it does not thereupon follow
that they did Sing it. Now as to the Correction that was made, (after this
Abuse was taken Notice of abroad) the whole Paragraph was not taken away, as it
ought to have been, neither was the former part of it at all altered, which
discovers the Design of Mr. Collins to deceive his Unlearned Reader with the
false Translation of the Latin, as plainly appears from the Paragraph;

1. Because Mr. Collins finds fault with Mr. Timme's Translation; for
pretending it is uncertain whether they sang that Praise, or spoke it simply,
and then in Contradiction to him he asserts from the Latin, that Undoubtedly it
does evince that they sang, which false Translation agrees with Mr. Collins's
former Contradiction of Mr. Timme in the Paragraph.

2. Because for Mr. Collins to tell us, that Mr. Timme had not well rendered
Marlorate's Latin, when he had rendered his true Sense, he must needs do it on
purpose to deceive his Unlearned Reader with his false Translation of it; for
otherwise seeing Mr. Timme had done it in the right Sense, there was no need at
all for Mr. Collins to write that Paragraph, or any thing else against him.

3. It Is plain, that the Word [not] was left out on purpose to deceive his
Unlearned Reader, because there is no Reason to believe, that Mr. Collins did
design positively to affirm from Marlorate's Latin, that Christ and his
Disciples did not sing the Hymn after Supper, or that he translated the Latin
to give an Undoubted Testimony to overthrow his own Cause, but that he made
that false Translation to make his Unlearned Reader believe, that undoubtedly
they did sing, when he knew in his Conscience that the Latin leaves it
undetermined, saying only, That it does not necessarily evince (or show) that
they sang, Mat. 26.30.

4. It appears, that Mr. Collins wrote that Paragraph, on purpose to make that
false Translation, otherwise the Paragraph as afterward corrected is a plain
Contradiction to it self: For he in the former part of it, that was never
altered, as I hinted before, finds fault with Mr. Timme's Translation, for
pretending it is uncertain whether Christ and his Disciples sang, and then Mr.
Collins tells us in his false Translation, that they did undoubtedly or
certainly sing; and he in the latter part of it, as Corrected, makes it
uncertain whether they sang or no, and so contradicts his former Words. And
therefore seeing the Paragraph, as Corrected, is not Sense, but a plain
Contradiction of it self, and that the False Translation of the Latin renders
the Paragraph true English, Coherent, Agreeing, and good Sense, and that there
is no reason to think Mr. Collins did write the former part against Mr. Timme's
Translation, to confirm its true Sense, as Corrected afterward in the same
Paragraph, but that he wrote it as uncorrected, to oppose our Author's Evidence
of the Simple Signification of the Greek Word Hymneo, to Praise: It must then
follow, that Mr. Collins could have no other End in writing against Mr. Timme's
true Sense, but to deceive his Unlearned Reader. And seeing Mr. Collins both in
Converse and Print, has so owned himself as the Author of that Paragraph, that
he cannot impute the Writing of it to any other Person, he cannot any ways
clear himself of that false Translation of the Latin.

5. Mr. Collins appears to be Author of that False Translation, from the
Account the Printer has given of it to clear himself to two or three Credible
Witnesses, who have lately given me their Testimony in writing, signed with
their own Hands, that when they asked the Printer, who made the English
contrary to Mr. Timme's Translation of Marlorate's Latin, he said, that he did
think, that Mr. Keach had said some time since, as if they two had done it by
Agreement; but, said he, I know not of any thing more, then that I agreed to
Print it as he ordered it, for we do not use to alter Copies, except it be to
rectify the Words, and make them good English, if they are not so, but to
print them according to the Mind of the Author. And the Printer's Son told them
to this Effect, that he did not Correct it, nor Compose it, as he remembered,
but he was Confident of this, that Mr. Keach finding as he thought, that the
English put down by Mr. William Collins did not suit his Design, altered it
himself, and said, he did not doubt but Mr. Keach would own it, because he did
acknowledge it in a Paper he had lately printed at their House, wherein to
clear Mr. Collins he took it upon himself, and he did not remember above two of
them Papers printed.

Thus you see what the Printers have said: My Observations follow:

1. That although the Printer thinks, that Mr. Keach had said, as if they two had
door the false Translation contrary to Marlorate's Latin, laying the Fault on
the Printer as well as on himself, yet we see how the Printer clears himself
from printing it otherways than according to Order. And,

2. That the false Translation is imputed as it seems in Mr. Keach's Paper to
him alone. Now seeing I cannot obtain the sight of his Paper, I have reason to
believe that he suspects it to be so slight a thing, as that it cannot bear the
Trial of my Answer, or that Mr. Keach has so worded the Contents thereof, as
that he can play fast and loose with the Matter to help Mr. Collins and himself
too, when and where he pleases it should serve either Interest. However,
seeing Mr. Keach has concealed the sight of his Paper from me, notwithstanding
(after I was satisfied they were printed) I sent a Friend with a Letter under
my Hand on purpose to himself for it: And considering that I also sent some
Friends with a Letter of Request, or Desire, under my own Hand, to know of my
unjust Judges, who was the Author of the false Translation, and they also
refused to tell me who the Author of it was, to their Appearance, I have
therefore no reason to impute that wilful Abuse, viz. the false Translation, to
any other than Mr. Collins, who (excepting what pertains to that) has owned
that Paragraph in Print, and otherways as the Author of it.

6. It appears that Mr. Collins was the Author of that false Translation, for
it is not rational to believe, that Mr. Keach without the Agreement of Mr.
Collins would dare to make so great an Alteration in the Translation, as to put
the Word [undoubtedly] into the English, when he might have served his Design
with only leaving out the Word [not] and have excused it with the Pretense of
an accidental Blot in the Copy, that covered it from the Printer, or otherways
concealed his Fault from Mr. Collins, without hazarding the Favor of his
Friendship, by abusing his Translation with putting in the Word undoubtedly
(instead of the right Words) which shows not only that the Faise Translation
was made on purpose to deceive, but also that it is not likely Mr. Keach with
so great an Alteration, asserting the Current of Learned Men for it, made that
false Translation without the Agreement of Mr. Collins to it, or rather, if
they did it by Agreement, then (from what has been proved from the former part
of Mr. Collins's Paragraph) it is plain that their Agreement was only Mr.
Keach's Consent and Approbation of the false Translation, which Mr. Collins had
made and contrived to deceive his Unlearned Reader with, among whom those Books
were likely most to be dispersed.

7. It appears, that Mr. Collins had a Design in Writing that Paper, wherein
the false Translation is, to abuse some of my Authors, or knew that he had done
it from the Title that is on his Paper, viz. Some Reflections on Mr. Marlow 's
undue Citations of several Learned Men: For, considering that neither Mr.
Collins, nor any others, have been ever able to show that I have falsely cited
any one Author, or to manifest that I have added to them any more than their
due; it is therefore evident from the Title Mr. Collins has given, or Consented
to, by suffering it to remain on that Paper, that he designed to abuse some of
my Authors, or knew that he had done it, under Pretense that I had not duly
cited them; otherwise he would have thought the Title to be a wrong Title, and
should not have let it pass into the the World.

8. It appears, that Mr. Collins was the Author of that false Translation, from
the Testimony of a Letter I have now by me, Written and Signed with Mr. Keach's
Name, by his own Hand, which Letter is in my Narrative of the Rise, Occasion,
and Management of the Controversy of Singing: Printed about five years ago,
at the End of my Reply to Mr. Keach's Breach Repaired.

For, in a Letter I sent Mr. Keach, which is also Printed in the aforesaid
Narrative, I excepted against Mr. William Collins, for dealing so
disingenuously with me, at the End of Mr. Keach's Book, and I only there
mentioned in particular his Dealing so unfairly by my Author Mr. Timme, (the
very Case in hand of the false Translation) to which Mr. Keach in his Letter
returned me this Answer, in these Words, viz. Brother Marlow, I have received
yours of the 20th. of this Month, and in Answer thereunto, I reply to your
Exception against Mr. William Collins: That which is contained in that wrote by
him, is not matter of difference between you and I, therefore that I am not
concerned with in choosing him and the Rest; viz. that he choose to meet
together with others chosen by me, to inspect into Mr. Keach's Abuses in his
Book, which I had before complained of. Now seeing Mr. Collins's unfair Dealing
with Mr. Timme, which was about the False Translation, is said by Mr. Keach (in
answer to that particular) not to be matter of Difference between him and me;
and that he also tells us, he is not concerned with that contained in that
wrote by Mr. Collins, viz with that unfair Dealing with Mr. Timme and
Marlorate's Latin in Mr. Collins's Paper, it is very plain that Mr. Keach has
there cleared himself of the false Translation, and fixed it on Mr. William
Collins, as the Author of it.

In the next place, as to the Correction which is talked so much of in Defense
of Mr. Collins, and that he sent a Letter by a Porter to me, I have this to
say, that before I had read Mr. Keach's Breach repaired quite through, I first
heard of the false Translation, neither from Mr. Keach nor from Mr. Collins,
but from the Noise that was spread abroad of it by others; and before I had
seen it corrected in any Book, my Brother, Mr. Luke Leader, brought me the
Correction in Writing, from a Book Mr. Keach showed him, and my Brother wrote
it with his own Hand, and it still remains in my Uncorrected Book, (which to my
best remembrance Mr. Keach gave me) and after this I desired my Brother to
bring me a corrected Book from Mr. Keach, who took down several of those Boks
from off his Shelf, before he could find one of them corrected, which was the
first I saw of them, and I believe I never saw above one more Corrected.
Moreover, some time after they were pretended to be corrected, I enquired for
one of those Books at Mr. Keach's Booksellers, and at another place where they
were to be sold, the one offered me one of those Books uncorrected, and the
other told me he had none so altered, and that he knew nothing of it. Besides,
no longer ago than in the Months of June and July, 1696. it is testified to me,
and I can show it, that two of those Books were bought at Mr. Keach's, or of
his Daughters, that sold them in their Shop, both of which are uncorrected.

So that I believe the Correction was made but of a very few, only at first to
blind my Eyes, that I should not give any Public Notice of that Abuse. And as
to the Letter they say was brought me by a Porter, about the Correction of that
false Translation, I shall further Answer, as I did before in my last Book,
Entitled, A Clear Confutation of Mr. Richard Allen, etc. page 37. That I have
not the least knowledge of any such Letter that was sent me, or came to my
Hands from Mr. Collins, or any other Person whatsoever, concerning that Matter,
(and I here add) or that I ever heard the least mention of any such Letter or
Porter, till last Summer, after Dr. Russel's Animadversions on Mr. Allen 's
Essay was Published, wherein he took Notice of Mr. Collins's false Translation,
which was about five years after it was pretended that Mr. Collins sent that
Letter: But if he had sent me an hundred Letters, to signify his Correction,
they could not clear him of his first design, to abuse his Unlearned Reader
with his false Translation of the Latin.

Moreover, my false Accnsers in the beginning of their Paper say, That Having
seen a Book lately Printed and Published by Mr. Isaac Marlow, -- Wherein there
are very scandalous and false Reflections upon him, ( viz. Mr. William Collins)
the Elder of the Church, which render him unworthy to be a Member with them,
much more their Pastor; and whereas there is no Remedy in a Church Way against
the said Mr. Marlow, he being at present no Member in any of the Baptized
Churches in and about this City, or elsewhere, We hold it our Duty -- to put
the Matter of Fact, as it appears upon Evidence before us, with our Opinion of
it, in Writing, that our Reverend Brother ( viz. Mr. William Collins) may make
use of it for the clearing of his Innocence, as he shall see cause; and that we
may bear our Testimony against the Proceedings of Mr. Marlow, as scandalous,
and tending to the Disturbance of the Peace of Churches, and that all Persons
that are in our Communion may mark him as such.

Answer 1. We may plainly see what Adversaries my false Accusers are to common
Justice and Equity, when it pinches one of their Singing-Party, for they count
it a Disturbance to the Peace of Churches, for me to complain of the Public
Wrong committed by Mr. Collins; and they are so averse to the Authority of
Jesus Christ in his Church, that although before they sent me their Paper herein
answered, in a Paper I sent to them in Answer to their Minds, by two
Messengers, that I should bring the matter of Difference between Mr. Collins
and me to a hearing before them, I gave them my Opinion, viz. That seeing they
concerned themselves, that the matter of Difference should not lie as it did,
Mr. Collins's Church, whose proper business it is, should be rather moved to
look into it, yet notwithstanding this, they would not desist from their
Arbitrary Proceedings against me. Nor have they given me the least Answer to
another Paper I sent them on May the 24th. 1697. wherein I signified, that I
heard they had given forth their Paper to Mr. Collins, and that I expected
Satisfaction from them for it.

2. Observe, how they are for setting their Mark upon me, so Publicly, that
all Persons in their Communion may take Notice of me, as such as they represent
me to be; but seeing my Charge of a contrived Lie is confirmed against Mr.
Collins, in my last Book, by the Testimony of such Worthy and Credible
Witnesses as Mr. William Kiffin, Pastor, Mr. Robert Steed, Pastor, Mr. John
Scot, Pastor, Mr. Hugh Smith, Minister, and Mr. Luke Leader; and considering
that the farther matter of Fact in difference between him and me is published
in Print, I hope our People know me so well, as to distinguish me by my true
Marks from Mr. Collins and his Confederates: And surely their Time had been
better spent in humbling themselves for their Iniquities, and in wipeing the
black Mark of their Paper from off themselves by true Repentance, instead of
giving it forth, as I heard they did, to Mr. Collins, since I sent them my
before-recited Answer to it.

3. I desire it may be noted, what a persecuting Spirit is like to follow me,
if I should join my self to any Church, and how troublesome my Adversaries
would be to the Peace and Union of any People that should receive me into
Communion; seeing they would seek their Remedy, as they call it, or rather
their Revenge against me by them: For it is rational to expect no better Dealing
from them, than their false Testimony already given, or instead of that false
Accusation in their Paper, some other piece of Forgery, that would pass a
Church easier with their pressing Influence, to sway the People to a wrong
Judgment against me, to blemish my Testimony for Truth and Righteousness: And
had those Singers power suitable to their Wills, I believe I should quickly
feel the Smart of it, for my Faithfulness to the pure Interest of the Baptized
Churches, and for Reproving them for their Iniquity.

4. As to what they say in their Paper of my being at present no Member in any
of the Baptized Churches, I shall farther Answer, That I believe they cannot
but know, that I was lately a Member of a Baptized Church here in London, and
that they, or some of them, have seen my Printed Case of Separation from it,
which was never yet answered, nor the Truth thereof, as I know of, at all
denied by the Church, or any Member of it. And were there any particular matter
concerning my Proceedings, for which I could be justly blamed, I believe I
should, e're now, have heard enough of it in Print; but the Lord has so
directed my Steps, as to shut the Mouths of all Men in Public, whatever
private Insinuations they use against me. And though I am not again joined to any
People, it is not because I cannot find in this City a Baptized Church in
Gospel Order, that as a Church, I could have Communion with at the Lords Table,
if it were not for the Corruption of some Singing-members in their Fellowship,
who bar my Conscience from their Communion.

5. As to what my Unjust Judges also say in their Paper, that my Reflections on
Mr. Collins, in my Book lately Published, render him unworthy to be a Member of
the Church, much more their Pastor, I shall only return this Answer, that
seeing my Reflections are so just and true, that neither he nor his Friends are
able to clear him of any one of them; it then follows from the Judgment of his
own Friends, and my Adversaries, that he is unworthy to be either a Pastor or
Member of the Church; and I believe so too, while he is under his present
Circumstances of Sin. And I likewise believe the same of his Fellow-Singers,
the Authors of the aforesaid Paper, who are also unworthy of Church Communion,
'till they have manifested true Repentance for their unjust Judgment, false
Accusation, and Forged Lie against me deceitfully, to cover Mr. Collins's Lie:
And whoever reads the Controversy of Singing from first to last, they may
plainly see that with the Bringing among our Churches the false Worship of
Common Set-form Singing, there has appeared in it is Defense such a Dishonest
Spirit of Deceit and Lying, as ought to be abhorred, and counted unworthy of
the Society of all sober Men, and is a plain Mark of an apostatizing Spirit
from true Religion, A Lie being (as my false Accusers say in their Paper) the
Character of a Man of a very corrupt Conscience, and a Contrived Lie the worst
of that kind of Evil.

To Conclude, I have showed in my last Book, (called A Clear Confutation, etc.)
not only how Mr. Collins has abused the Translation of the Latin of Augustine
Marlorate, who was a Reformed Minister, and Faithful Martyr of Jesus Christ,
but also how he has abused the Learned and Worthy Mr. Ainsworth, who in his
Annotations and Translation of the Psalms of David, has eight several times
given the Signification of the Greek Word Hymnos, to be Simply Praise, and in
no one place as I can find, has translated it a Song of Praise, and yet Mr.
Collins in his aforesaid printed Paper, has the Confidence to say, that Mr.
Ainsworth on Psalm the 3d. Intends nothing less than a Song of Praise; though Mr.
Ainsworth has there said no more on the Signification of the Word, Hymnos, than
Tehilla, in Gr. Hymnos, a Hymn or Praise. Besides, Mr. Collins in the same
Paper, at the End of Mr. Keach's Breach Repaired, in Answer to me on Psalm
78.63. has cited Jun. and Trem. thus, Non Epithalamio celebratae sunt, i. e.
were not Honored with a Wedding-Song: But this is a Wrong to those Authors,
for Junius and Tremellius in their Latin Bible translates the Text thus,
Juvenes ejus absumeret ignis, and Virgins ejus non laudarentur; that is, The
fire consumed his Young Men, and his Virgins were not Praised: So that
considering how apt Mr. Collins is to misrepresent and abuse Authors, See my
Clear Confutation, P. 7, 8, 43.
and his wronging the first Baptized Churches, contrary to their Printed
Confession of Faith; which testifies against his Public Slander of them, and
his Commendation of Mr. Allen's Cheat, about the Hebrew Rhyme and Meter, and
his contrived Lie against me, which is justly so termed, from his Design to
deceive with it, and from his deliberate doing of it, by Writing his Contrived
Deceit, and giving of it forth to Print: I think therefore we have no Reason to
Credit his Words or Writings, 'till he has manifested Sincere Repentance for
those Evils.

Moreover, I have also showed in my last Book, (Entitled, A Clear Confutation
of Mr. Richard Allen, and his five Commendators, from their own Confessions)
what a Pernicious Popish Error Mr. William Collins and his Companions have
broached in Print among our Churches; viz. That Christian Churches have liberty
to Order such Accidental Modes and Circumstances of Divine Worship, as are not
particularly prescribed in the Word, as they shall judge most for Edification:
Which strikes at a Foundation Principle, and tends to the Ruin of ours, and
the Protestants Reformation more in General; it being, as I have proved in my
aforesaid Confutation, opposite to the Principle of our first Reformers from
Popery, and is contrary to the Presbiterians, Independants, and Baptists
Confessions of Faith, Article 1. and Art. 21, 22. To which last is Mr. William
Collins's Name: So that he is Apostatizing in Spirit, from a
Foundation-Principle of the Protestant Reformation: And let the Reader judge
from what I have said, whether it be not from Moral Honesty too.

I shall only add, That as I never had any Difference with Mr. Collins, in any
other matters than of Religion; so my Conscience bears me Witness, that I have
not thus discovered his Iniquity, from any Prejudice against him, but that the
Truth he has endeavored to stifle by his Deceit, may be made manifest; and to
discourage him and his Confederates, (and others hereafter) from defending
their Errors by such Foul and Mischievous Ways, which if they were not laid
open, and made Examplary, to deter others, no sober Christian would be able to
appear publicly for the Truth he professes, though it be never so violently
assaulted, without the hazard of his Honest Reputation, his being tired with
the Increase of Charge in printing, and of such a Labyrinth of Difficulties, as
but few are able to pass through; which I hope the Lord in his due time will
deliver me from, and discover to our Churches, and make them sensible of the
base Confederacy of my Adversaries, and their Treachery, against the Baptized
Interest in this Nation, more and more.

Isaac Marlow.
London, July 2. 1697.
Bar ye are Forgers of Lies, ye are all Physicians of no Value, Job 13.4. The
Proud have forged a Lie against me, Psalm. 119.69. Deliver my Soul, O Lord, from
Lying Lips, and from a Deceitful Tongue, Psalm. 120.2. I hate and abhor Lying,
but thy Law do I love, Psalm. 119.163. Lie non one to another, Col. 3.9. Thou
shall not bear false Witness against thy Neighbor, Exodus 20.16. A false
Witness that speaks Lies God hates, Prove. 6.19. A false Witness shall not be
unpunished, and he that speaks Lies shall not escape, Prove. 19.5. The Mouth
of them that speak Lies shall be stopped, Psalm. 63.11. Thou shall not hate thy
Brother in thine Heart, thou shall in any wise rebuke thy Neighbor, and not
suffer sin upon him, Lev. 19.17. Ye shall do not Unrighteousness in Judgment,
thou shall not respect the Person of the Poor, nor honor the Person of the
Mighty, Lev. 19.15. Now we command you Brethren, in the Name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that ye withdraw your selves from every Brother that walks
disorderly, and not after the Tradition which be received of us, 2 These. 3.6.
He that covers his sins, shall not prosper; but whosoever confesses and
forsakes them, shall have Mercy, Prove. 28.13.
FINIS.

