The EIGHTH and LAST Volume OF LETTERS Writ by a Turkish Spy, Who lived Five
and Forty Years, Undiscovered at PARIS: Giving an Impartial Account to the
Divan at Constantinople, of the most Remarkable Transactions of Europe; And
discovering several Intrigues and Secrets of the Christian Courts (especially
of that of France) continued from the Year 1673, to the Year 1682.

Written Originally in Arabic, Translated into Italian, and from thence into
English, by the Translator of the First Volume.

LONDON: Printed by J. R. for I. Hindmarsh and R. Sare, at the Golden Ball in
Cornhil, and at Grays-Inn-Gate in Holborn, 1694.

Where Perfect Sets may be had.

Mahmut the Turkish Spy
Aetatis suae 72.



TO THE READER.
AT Length, after tedious Expectation, you have this long wished for Work
brought to an End. There remains nothing now, but to answer a few Objections,
which may be made against the Contents of some Letters in all these Volumes,
and particularly in the Two Last: As also, to give you an Account of what this
Last Volume contains of Remarkable, more than was mentioned in the Preface to
the Seventh: Some Things being therein omitted through Haste and Forgetfulness.

As to the Objections; Some People, more precise than they need to be, find
Fault with our Arabian, for the seeming Lewdness of his Sentiments, and profane
Expressions of God and his Works; saying, That he writes more like a Disciple
of Carneades and Epicurus, than of Mahomet; who taught his Followers to Think
and Speak with profound Veneration of the Godhead, and of all Saints and
Prophets. They add, That in some of his Letters he seems to Banter all
Religion; whilst in others, he appears like a Hypocrite, extravagantly Devout
and Zealous, even to the Height of Enthusiasm and Divine Madness.

In Answer to this; It Is desired, That these Gentlemen will please to consider,
That our Author, tho a professed Mohammedan, yet is a Man endu'd with Sense and
Reason, which he had much improved by Reading of Histories, by the Studies of
Natural, Moral, and Political Things, and by his own Experimental Observations
in the World. That therefore, when he seems to descant with an unwarrantable
Libertinism, profanely Glancing with a Religious Kind of Wantonness on Divine
Matters; it ought not to be taken so much for his own proper direct Thoughts,
as the Result of other Men's Errors, and the Epidemical Mistakes and
Superstitions which have infected the World. So that he rather hints at what
may be said by Way of Inference from the Groundless Opinions of men; than to
assert any Thing positively himself in Dishonor of the Deity, or True
Religion. And he banters the Abuses that are every where found in the Service
of God, not the Service it self. In a Word, he appears, in all his Letters, a
Deist rather than an Atheist; as some would represent him. And it is well
enough known, to those who Travel in Turkey, and Converse with Men of Sense
there, That there are Abundance of Deists among the Mahometans, as well as
among us Christians: And our Arabian demonstrates, that he is one of these, in
those very Letters, or Periods of Letters, where they tax him with Hypocrisy
and Extravagant Devotion. For, being as it were, absorp'd and swallowed up in
the profound Contemplation of the Divine Majesty, it is no wonder, that he
breaks forth into Raptures of Love, and Ecstasies of Admiration; his Thoughts
being all over irradiated with the Incomprehensible and Eternal Splendors. And
it is these transcendent Elevations of the Soul, which are the Cause of that
Contempt and low Esteem he shows toward the flat and insipid Notions and Idea's
which the Generality of Men have of the Creator of All Things. It Is this
provokes him to mock and deride the Vanity of Human Traditions and Ceremonies,
the ridiculous Pomp and Pageantry of External Religion, which is apt to exhaust
the Vitals of true Genuine Piety, Devotion, and Virtue.

Others are, or may be offended, at his Historical Letters of the Four
Monarchies; alleging, that these are foreign to his Business, as an Agent
incognito for the Grand Signior. The same Fault they find with his
Descriptions, Characters, and Histories of the present Commonwealths in Europe:
His Province being to watch the Motions, Counsels, and Transactions of the
Living, and not to rehearse the Facts and Exploits of the Dead.

In Answer to this; It ought to be considered, That tho the Primary Design of
the Ottoman Port in sending this Arabian to Paris, was, to penetrate into the
Secrets of our Christian Princes and States, and to return constant
Intelligence thereof to the Divan; yet this did not hinder, but that he might
hold a Correspondence with his Private Friends in Turkey, and send them
frequent Letters on what Subjects he pleased, or as he thought would most
oblige them. Much less could he be excused from obeying the Orders he expressly
received from the Mufti, or any other Principal Minister of State, who should
require him, at his Hours of Leisure, to transcribe either Ancient or Modern
Histories; or to draw Collections out of the most Eminent Greek and Roman
Authors; knowing him to be skilled in those Obsolete Languages; and that such
Books were rare among the Turks, by reason that Printing is forbid throughout
the Ottoman Empire. Therefore he could do no less, in Duty and Common Civility,
than Oblige the Mufti with an Abstract of the Four Monarchies, which he himself
had offered of his own Accord; and likewise gratify the Expectations of Hamet
the Secretary of State, who desired to be informed of the Governments, Laws,
Religion, Customs, Manners, and Characters of us Europeans; which our Arabian
performed as well as he could, during his Life: And had he lived longer, there
is no Doubt but he would have proceeded in Describing England, Denmark,
Swedeland, Russia, Poland, Hungary, and all the other Countries which he had
not touched upon. But it seems, he was snatched away by some sudden and
surprising Fate, tho not altogether unforeseen. For he all along intimates,
that he had some Presages of being made a Sacrifice; especially, when he heard
of the sudden Death, or Disappearance at least, of his Correspondent, Nathan
Ben Saddi, the Jew at Vienna. For then he plainly tells his Friend Oglou in a
Letter, that he suspected he was made a way by an Order from the Port, and that
he expected to be served so himself in a little Time. And it is possible it
might be so; it being usual with the Turkish Court, thus to reward the Merits
of their most faithful Ministers, and crown all their Services with Martyrdom
to the State.

As to what this last Volume contains more than was expressed in the Preface to
the Seventh. Here you have an Account of the horrid Poisoning Trade that was
practiced in France, in the Year 1681 and 1682; as also some Remarks on our
Popish Plot; on the Great Comet that appeared about that Time; with a
particular Abstract of the Life, and an Account of the Barbarous Murder of Dr.
Sharp, Archbishop of St. Andrews, and Primate of Scotland. He also touches upon
the Persecution of the Huguenots in France.

But that which ought to be most taken notice of, is, a Letter of his to Nathan
Ben Saddi; wherein he highly extols the Journal of Carcoa, Nathan's Predecessor
in that Post: Which Journal, the Translator of these Volumes understanding to
be in the Hands of the Italian who first found our Arabian's Papers, and with
whom he has since contracted a Correspondence; he has endeavored to prevail
with him to communicate it to the Publisher hereof. Wherein if he shall be so
Happy as to succeed, he will in due Time transmit it to the World in our
Mother Tongue, to the Satisfaction and Benefit of the Public.

Reader, Farewell; and envy not the Industrious.

A TABLE OF THE LETTERS and Matters contained in this Volume.
VOL. VIII.
BOOK I.
LETTER I. MAhmut the Arabian at Paris, to Mehemet an Exiled Eunuch, at Grand
Caire in Egypt. Page 1. He discovers to him his Excessive Melancholy on the
Account of a Woman.

II. To the Selictar Aga, or Sword Bearer to the Sultan. Page 4 Of the French
Conquests in Lorrain, Alsace, Brabant, Flanders, Catalonia, and other Parts.
With an Account of a famous Victory obtained by Marshall Turenne over the
Imperialists near Strasburgh.

III. To Mirmadolin, Santone of the Vale of Sidon. Page 7 A Philosophical
Discourse of Purity, Abstinence from Pleasures, Vigilance, etc.

IV. To Ali, Bassa. Page 13 Of the Spanish War; the Taking of diverse Towns by
the French. The Treason of the Chevalier de Rohan and others detected and
punished; and by that Means the Dutch Invasion prevented.

V. To Cara Hali, Physician to the Grand Signior. Page 18 Of the Universal and
Platonic Love, with which Mahmut always finds Himself affected.

VI. To Kerker Hassan, Bassa. Page 23 He complains of Infirmities and Old Age,
desiring to be recalled from his Post at Paris.

VII. To Ali Rustan Begh, Serasquier in Dalmatia. Page 28 Of a Challenge sent
from the Prince Palatine of the Rhine to Marshall Turenne, and the Mareschal's
Answer. Of private Duels.

VIII. To the same. Page 33 Of the famous Battle of Senef.

IX. To Mehemet, an exiled Eunuch at Alcaire in Egypt. A Melancholy Letter, on
the Score of Human Ignorance aad Errors.

X. To the Kaimacham. Page 42 Of the Arrival of Deputies from the Senate of
Messina in Sicily to the French King, requesting his Protection. Of the Affairs
of that Island. Of the Duke of Vivonne, Maresch. Feuillade, and Prince of Conde.

XI. To the Vizir Bassa, at Constantinople. Page 48 He acquaints him with the
Remarkable Justice of Mustapha Zari, a Turk, to Monsieur Vaubrun, a Frenchman,
and his Partner.

XII. To Ibrahim Eli Zeid, Hadgi, Effendi, Preacher to the Seraglio. Page 53 Of
a reputed Miracle wrought publicly at Paris, by St. Genevieve, Patroness of
that City. Of the Force of Religious Mysteries and Ceremonies.


BOOK II.
LETTER I. TO Dgnet Oglou. Page 61 Of the Darkness of Human Knowledge in this
Life.

II. To Hamet, Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire. Page 64
He acquaints him with the Death of Maresch. Turenne; with some Remarkable
Passages of his Life, and a few of his Sayings.

III. To the Kaimacham. Page 70 He re-capitulates several Events omitted in his
former Letters of that Year. A remarkable Story of the Loss of Treves. Of the
French King's Inclination to Peace.

IV. To Abdel Melec Muly Omar, President of the College of Sciences at Fez.
Page 75 He entertains him with a Panegyric of the Eternal Wisdom; in a
singular Style.

V. To the Captain Bassa. Page 81 He informs him of Two or Three Sea Fights
between the French, Hollanders, and Spaniards; in one of which, the Dutch
Admiral De Ruiter was killed.

VI. To the Sage of Sages, the Mysterious Eremite, the Great Mohammed of Mount
Uriel, in Arabia. Page 80 He acquaints him of the Change of his Opinion
concerning the Eternity of the World, as to its present Form.

VII. To Pesteli Hali, his Brother, Master of the Customs, and Superintendent
of the Arsenal, at Constantinople. Page 90 Of the Taking of Philipsburgh from
the French by the Confederate Princes and States: With a short History of that
Town.

VIII. To Sephat Abercromil, Vanni, Effendi, Preacher to the Sultan. Page 92 Of
the Progress which the Molonists or Quietists had then made in Europe.

IX. To Mirmadolin, Santone of the Vale of Sidon. Page 97 This Letter is a Kind
of Rhapsody, in Praise of God, of Mahomet, Hali, Mecca, Medina, and the Alcoran.

X. To the Kaimacham. Page 103 Of the Taking of Valenciennes, Cambray, and St.
Omers by the French. An Abstract of History concerning Cambray.

XI. To Hamet, Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire. Page
108 Of the Love of Women; and the different Manner this Passion discovers it
self in People of various Nations, Ages, Qualities, Fortunes, and Constitutions.

XII. To the Captain Bassa. Page 116 Of a Victory obtained at Sea by the
French. Of the Taking the Isle of Tabago from the Hollanders in America. From
whence he takes Occasion to discourse of Magellanica, or the Southern Unknown
World.

XIII. To Dgnet Oglou. Page 120 Of the General Superstition, and Religious
Easiness of Mankind.

XIV. To Kerker Hassan, Bassa. Page 125 Of the Surrender of Friburg to the
French.


BOOK III.
LETTER I. TO the Wisest of the Wise, the most Venerable Mufti. Page 127 He
presents him with a short Abstract of the Macedonian Empire, and some
particular Passages in the Life of Alexander the Great.

II. To Musu Abu'l Yahyan, Professor of Philosophy at Fez. Page 142 He proceeds
in the Description of Constantinople, which he begun in a former Letter.

III. To Kerker Hassan, Bassa. Page 149 Of the Taking of Ghaunt, Ypres,
Puicerda, and other Places, by the French. Of several Victories obtained by
them in Germany.

IV. To Dalimalched, the Widow of Pesteli Hali, his Brother, Master of the
Customs, etc. Page 152 He condoles the Death of her Husband, in a Triumphant
Style, being assured that he is gone to Paradise: And expostulates with her
about her Carriage to him in his Life.

V. To Hamet, Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire. Page 156
He describes the Netherlands.

VI. To the Same. Page 163 He gives him an Account of Switzerland.

VII. To Dgnet Oglou, at Damascus. Page 170 He rallies him for the Choice of
that City; yet congratulates his Happiness, in being a Husbandman. Several
Examples of Great Men, who have abandoned all their Honors for that Manner of
Life.

VIII. To Achmet Cupriogli, the most Exalted and Sage Vizir Azem. Page 176 Of a
general Peace in Christendom.

IX. To Mehemet, an Exiled Eunuch, at Alcaire in Egypt. Page 180 He relates a
strange Thing that happened to him one Night in his Chamber; viz. An
Apparition, or Spectre, on which he makes Remarks.

X. To the Cadilesquer of Romeli. Page 189 He informs him of the Murder of the
Archbishop of St. Andrews in Scotland. With some Historical Remarks on the
Scotch Privileges in France.

XI. To Hebatolla Mir Argun, Superior of the Derviches at Cogni in Natolia.
Page 197 A Panegyric on the Messiah.

XII. To Kerker Hassan, Bassa. Page 202 He gives him a Character of Charles II.
King of England. Glances upon the Popish Plot; And proves that some part of
America was Planted by the Welsh.

XIII. To the most Magnanimous and Invincible Vizir Azem. Page 207 Of a Match
between the King of Spain, and the Daughter of France; also of another in
Agitation between the Dauphin of France and the Duke of Bavaria's Sister.

XIV. To the Venerable Mufti. Page 212 He begins his Epitome of the Roman
History, which he formerly promised.

XV. To William Vospel, a Recluse of Austria. Page 219 He gives him a short
Account of his Religion.

XVI. To Murat, Bassa. Page 224 Of the Marriage of the Dauphin of France with
the Princess Anne Marie Victory, Sister to the Duke of Bavaria.


BOOK IV.
LETTER I. TO Hamet, Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire.
Page 227 He gives him an Account of Geneva; with a short History of the War of
this Republic with the Dukes of Savoy.

II. To Achmet, Bassa. Page 234 Of the French Huguenots, and the Methods which
the King took at that Time to Convert them.

III. To the Venerable Mufti. Page 240 He proceeds in the Roman History, to the
Abolishing the Kingly Government.

IV. To Orchan Cabet, Student in the Sciences, and Pensioner to the Sultan.
Page 248 He entertains him with a Discourse of the Soul, and its Separate State
after Death. From whence he falls into a pleasant Vein of Bantering.

V. To Hamet, Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire. Page 257
He gives him an Account of the Republic of Venice; with the Manner of Electing
their Doge or Duke.

VI. To Osman Adrooneth. Page 268 He informs him of a New Comet appearing in
Europe: From whence he Discourses of Comets in General, and of the great
Uncertainty there is among Astronomers.

VII. To the Venerable Mufti. Page 278 He continues the Roman History to the
Decline of that Empire.

VIII. To Dgnet Oglou. Page 288 He acquaints him with a Quarrel he had in the
Midst of Wine and Mirth, with a French Priest, on the Account of Astrology and
Comets.

IX. To Hamet, Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire. Page
293 He discourses of Candia and Genoua.

X. To Dgnet Oglou. Page 302 Of the Vanity and Deceitfulness of Astrology.

XI. To Ibro Kalphaser, Effendi, a Man of Letters at Constantinople. Page 313
He congratulates his Honor, in being chosen by the Mufti, to oversee the
defign'd Universal History of the World, sends him a Box of Manuscripts, with a
Model of the whole Work.

XII. To the Wisest of the Wise, the Key of the Treasures of Knowledge, the
Venerable Mufti. Page 323 He accuses the Chronolngy of the Jews and Christians:
Discourses of the Egyptian, Assyrian, Indian, and Chinese Records; asserting,
That the Deluge of Noah was not Universal.

XIII. To Cara Hali, Physician in Ordinary to the Grand Signior. Page 330 He
acquaints him with his Maladies and Infirmities, begging his Advice and Help.

XIV. To Abdel Melec Muli Omar, President of the College of Sciences at Fez.
Page 336 Of the Causes of the different Color in Blacks and Whites: He proves,
that they cannot both be the Descendants of Adam, but of a different Species.
Of a Ship found in a Mine in Switzerland, fifty Fathom deep; and of a
Whirl-Pool in Moscovy forty Miles in Compass, which swallows up Ships, and
whatever else comes near it.

XV. To the Kaimacham. Page 342 Of the Discovery of a vast Number of Sorcerers
and Magicians in France; with the Diabolical Arts practiced by them in
poisoning, bewitching, etc. With the King of France's Method of punishing them.

XVI. To Nathan Ben Saddi, a Jew at Vienna. Page 348 Of the Apprehensions he is
in, because of a Letter from him writ by another Hand. Of Count Tecli, and the
Hungarian League. He highly extols Carcoa's Journal.

XVII. To the Kaimacham. Page 352 He tells him, that he sent a particular
Messenger to Vienna with a Letter to Nathan Ben Saddi, and that he was not to
be found: With his Jealousies thereupon.

XVIII. To Dgnet Oglou. Page 355 He tells him plainly, that he fears Nathan Ben
Saddi is made away by some Order from the Port; and that if so, he himself is
likely to be made a Sacrifice after the same Manner: And therefore desires him
to be Watchful on his Account, and Pry into the Secrets of the Divan.


LETTERS Writ by A Spy at PARIS.
VOL. VIII.
BOOK I.
LETTER I.
Mahmut the Arabian at Paris, to Mehemet, an Exiled Eunuch, at Grand Caire in
Egypt.
WHether it be an Effect of thy Melancholy Letter, or of my own ugly
Constitution, I know not; but I am lately grown very Desperate, and resolved
upon Death. I am tired with whatsoever I have yet enjoyed in this World; and I
expect no greater satisfaction, should I live a Thousand Years. Every Pleasure
appears but the same in different Forms; and they all agree, in leaving us
afflicted with the same or greater Pain than they found us in: Which is a
sufficient Argument to a Man of Spirit, that he ought to die, in pursuit of his
own Ease.

We walk here on Earth in an Enchanted Circle of Shadows and Mockeries: Our
whole Life is full of Vanity and Mistake. Every Man's Fortune is but a
Repetition of Ixion's: We court Clouds instead of Divinities; and our most
charming Fruitions consist in Emptiness.

Indeed, all this Visible World is but a Mighty Pageant, a Pompous Emblem, a
Gaudy Type of that Invisible Region which is the Mother of Spirits. Oh! that it
were lawful for a Mortal, to release his Soul from its long irksom Exile here
Below, and send it Home to its Native Country, the Kingdom of Divine Ideas!
Then would I soon launch forth into the unknown Abyss. But we must be resigned,
and not think much to bear our several Destinies; and patiently wait for the
appointed Hour of Transmigration: For it is in vain to think of hastening or
delaying our Fate. Besides, for ought we know, the next Station may be worse
than this: Every thing is full of Mysterious Darkness. And therefore, prithee
Mehemet, let thou and I lay aside all fruitless Care and Sadness; be as merry
as will consist with the Wisdom of a Man; and when thou find this black
Distemper approaching thee, run away from it, and shelter thy self in good
Company. Arm thy self with Wine and Music against the sullen Demon of
Melancholy. But I counsel thee, to avoid Women, for they will but increase thy
Malady.

It Is one of that Sex has given me this fit of Grief, a Woman that I have loved
too much: But she is Ungrateful, False and Cruel; she takes a singular delight
in cheating me with false shows of Love and Friendship; and then in undeceiving
me again. The same Tongue which at some times will drop soft kind obliging
Words, at another Season shall utter nothing but Contempts, Defiances and
Scorns.

Thou will wonder that a Man of my Age should be concerned with any Passion for
Women. I tell thee, My Friend, it is impossible for me to banish from my Heart,
and Affection which has possessed it for above these Thirty Years. The Love of
that Sex is riveted in our Nature, and our Blood must first grow Cold and be
congealed by Death, before this Flame can be extinguished: Nay, many times it
is more fervent, though of a short duration in our Latest Hours than in our
Prime. As when the Oil which feeds a Lamp is almost spent, the startled Flame
begins to rouse it self, and burn afresh, as if 'twou'd fain subsist a little
longer, tho on the very Dregs of its accustomed Fuel; it crackles and flashes
with greater Noise and Luster than before; but presently expires. So does this
Amorous Fire, when we are nearest to our Dissolution, begin to trouble us most,
and makes our Soul to blaze with Fevers of Desire and Grief, knowing its Period
is near.

Mehemet, Let thou and I keep our Affections for the Beautiful and Constant
Daughters of Paradise, who will never cast an Eye on any Man beside their own.
Doubtless, this is part of Supreme Felicity.

Paris, 14th. of the 10th. Moon, of the Year 1673.
LETTER II.
To the Selictar Aga, or Sword Bearer to the Sultan.
THis has been a Terrible Campaign to the Germans and their Confederates: For
when they first took the Field in the Spring, their Forces amounted to Sixty
Thousand Men, but now at the breaking up, and going to their Winter Quarters,
they could not number above Twenty Thousand. So that they have lost Two Parts
in Three of their Army. Whilst the French prosper and are victorious; taking
their Towns and Castles, subduing whole Provinces to the Obedience of this
Invincible Monarch, and extending his Conquests far and wide through the
Franche-Compte, Lorrain, Alsace, Brabant, Flanders, Catalonia, and even to the
Isles of the Sea.

I have formerly given an Account to the Ministers of the Port, of all the most
Remarkable Actions performed in these several Quarters; there remains only a
late famous Victory gained by the Marshall de Turenne, near Strasbourg, of
which I cannot give thee the Particulars, neither is it very Material. But, in
brief I shall acquaint thee, that through the Connivance of the Elector of
Mayence, and the Citizens of Strasbourg, the Confederate Forces, amounting to
Forty Thousand Men, got passage over the Rhine, and had like to have surpised
the French, who were not above Twenty Five Thousand strong. But the Vigilance
and good Conduct of Monsieur Turenne, prevented their Design, and turned the
Fortune of War to his own side. This Wise General considering the unequal
Numbers of his Enemies, did not think it fit to engage his whole Army at once
with theirs, lest he should be oppressed with their Multitude, being almost
double in number to his. But he fought them by Detachments, setting upon them
in their March: And this succeeded very fortunately, for he was in possession
of the most advantageous Posts and Passes of the Country. He lined the Hedges
with some of his Men, who galled the Enemies as they marched along the Roads.
He planted others on the Declive of Hills, under the Covert of Thickets which
grew on each side of deep Ways, through which the Enemy must pass; these
annoyed them sorely from their shady Heights, whilst some attacked them in the
Front. Thus by gradual Skirmishes, he cut off many Thousands, and straw'd the
Roads with Dead Bodies: 'Till the Confederates perceiving how they were
embarass'd on all Hands, took the Advantage of a certain Wood, where they
retrenched themselves, and stood in their own defense a long time. But the
French at length forced them from this shelter, and then began a formal Battle,
which proved bloody to the Imperialists: For they had above Three Thousand of
their Men killed upon the Spot, besides those that were wounded and taken
Prisoners. They lost also Ten Pieces of their Cannon, and the Ground was
covered with Cuirasses, Halberds, Pikes, Muskets, Swords, and all sorts of
Arms, which the Confederates left behind in their precipitate Retreat by Night.
For so general a Consternation had seized the Minds of the Soldiery, that all
the Rhetoric of the Officers was not sufficient to stop their Flight. In this
Battle the Marshall de Turenne had his Horse killed under him by a Musket
Shot, but he received no Hurt himself.

He is a Fortunate and Wise General, knowing how to serve himself of all
Opportunities and Advantages of Time, Place, and other Circumstances which
offer themselves to a Man's Consideration in time of War. He never attacques an
Enemy, without being sure of getting the Victory, or at least of retiring
securely and honorably from the Combat. The French use to say, That if the
Prince of Conde had an Alloy of Turenne 's Earth in his Temper, and Turenne had
the Prince of Conde 's Fire, there would not be Two such other Generals in the
whole World.

Serene Aga, Nature has dispensed her Gifts in thrifty Parcels: Every Man has
his Genial Excellency; and it is rare to find one whose Faults do not
counterpoise his Perfections. May Heaven turn the right Scale for thee and me.

Paris, 2d. of the 1st. Moon, of the Year 1674.
LETTER III.
To Mirmadolin, Santone of the Vale of Sidon.
NOW I will indulge sacred Thoughts, and follow the Motions of Wisdom; I will
obey the Inspirations of my better Genius, and discourse of things not sit for
Vulgar Ears. I will not cast my Holy things to Dogs, nor expose that which is
precious to the Feet of Swine. Let the Smith labor at his Anvil, and Hammer
the Metal into what Form he pleases; his Eye is wasted with the perpetual
Vapor of the Fire; and as to Intellectual things, he is stark Blind. So is the
Carpenter who works in Timber, and hews away the Knobs and Roughnesses with his
Axe; he saws it into Planks, and afterward smooths it with his Plane; he marks
out his Work with Line and Plummet, and measures it with Rule and Compass; he
fits one Piece to another, and when all is polished and prepared to his Mind,
he joins them together in a Frame, and rejoices in the success of his Industry
and Skill.

These and all other Mechanics bend their Mind to their Work; that is the
scope of their Ambition; and when they have done, they eat and drink the fruit
of their Labors. They study not the Sayings of Famous Men, nor penetrate into
the Mysteries of Dark Parables; they have no Inclination to seek out the wisdom
of the Ancients, or to meditate on the Instructions of Sages. Therefore with
such as these I will not converse, or talk of the way of Perfection: Nor yet
with Wrestlers, Fencers or Soldiers: I have as little hopes to prevail on
Mariners, Lawyers and Courtiers, or on any that are entangled in Worldly
Affairs. But I address my self to a Good and knowing Man, who understands
himself, and what his Business is in this World; who comprehends the force of
the Chains which entangle his Soul in this Mortal Life, and is instructed in
the Method of disingaging himself. To such an one I speak, and not to others,
who lie snoring in their Lethargy, and will not be waked.

Certainly it is as impossible, that one and the same Rule of Life, should fit
the various Tempers and Conditions of Men, as that one and the same course
should be taken, effectually to dispose a Man to Sleep, and violently to keep
him Awake. For he that would sleep out his whole Life, if any be so sottish, it
behooves him to procure a constant supply of things which create Sleep. Whereas
he that designs to be Vigilant and Active, must furnish himself with such
things as chase away Sleep, and incline to Watchfulness. The former therefore
ought to give himself up to Gluttony, Drunkenness and Surfeiting: He should
have a dark House, a soft and large Bed: And should use all manner of
Applications that cause Drowsiness; as Soporiferous Perfumes, Potions, etc.
Whereas the latter ought to be always Sober, to Drink moderately, and Eat a
slender Diet; to have a light House, a serene Air a sense of Pain, a straight
and hard Bed, little sitted for Man's Repose.

But whether we Mortals are in a Place where we ought perpetually to be upon
our Watch; or whether our whole Life ought to be but one Night of Sleep, is
known only to such as thee, who have discovered the Prestigious Magic of the
Body, and how the Soul is enchanted in this World; who have found out the
Native Activity of the Mind, and how it comes to be ^tupified by the hidden
Opiates that lie lurking in the Flesh.

Holy Santone, whilst we are in this World of Shadows, we are perfect Exiles,
banished from our Native Country, which is the World of Real Substances: The
more we are drenched in Matter, the farther do we straggle from Home, wandering
in foreign Deserts of Enchanted Ground, where we converse with none but empty
Specter, Fairies, Demons, Elfs, and cheating Apparitions. For all that is in
this Outward World, is but a false Delusion, the Mimickry of Nature; a heap of
Shadows reversed and tinctured with a faint Projection from the World of Light.

Knowing therefore these things, let us make haste to return to our Native
Seats again; let us divest our selves of the strange Habits we have taken up by
Imitation in this our Pilgrimage, and Purge our Minds of all the Ill Qualities
we have Imbibed on Earth: Let us cast off corrupt Affections, Appetites and
Inclinations, with every vain and false Opinion. When we are freed from all
these Weights, our Souls will easily mount aloft, their Wings never flagging,
'till they perch upon the Trees of Paradise. What is more Generous than the
Mind of Man, when once awakened from the Slumbers of this Mortal Life? How it
despises these Terrene Enjoyments, and only pants and thirsts for the Supreme
Delights Above! As Iron turns it self, and makes its Amorous Approaches to the
Magnet; so is the Soul attracted by the Original Essence which is its Source
and Center.

There are Two Species of Chains which tie the Soul down to this Earth, and
cause her to grow dull and torpid, as if she were inebriated with deadly
Poison, forgetting her very Native Faculty of Contemplation. These are Pleasure
and Pain, of which our Sense is the Author, with the Prepossessions,
Fantasies, Opinions, Memories and Appetites which accompany our Sense. These
hurry and precipitate the Soul down from her proper Mansion, and alienate her
from the Love of the only true Substantial Being: Therefore we ought to abstain
from Sensible Things as much as in us lies; and shun all Objects that stir up
Irregular Appetites, and produce Absurdities in our Reason.

How many strange Affections flow from our Taste, binding fast the Soul with a
double Cord; whilst the high Relish and Gust of Savoury Meats, ensnare her in
the Palate as in a Net. and the load of indigested Crudities weighs and sinks
her down into the Belly, where she is kept as in a Dungeon, till Sacred
Abstinence releases her again?

The Sense of Touch does often draw the Unwary Soul forth from her Fastnesses
within, trepanning her with soft Allurements and sly Promises of Pleasure to
take the Air of the Body. Thus having got her into the open Field, an Ambuscade
of Lusts, Concupiscences, Perturbations, Fears, Cares, Love, Joy, Grief, and
other Passions rush upon her on a sudden, and take her Captive. How necessary
therefore is it to be always on our Guard, and not to lull our selves in
dangerous Security? Nor ought we to be rash and foolhardy, in venturing on a
Combat; where it is better to decline it, lest instead of victory, we betray the
weakness of our Arms, and Want of Proper Conduct.

O Perfect Man! Thou see these things in clearer Light than I; it is not to
inform thee, that I write, but to confirm my self, whilst I collect my
scattered Thoughts and put 'em into Order. If thou shall vouchsafe to send me
thy Conceptions on this Subject, I will revere the blessed Dispatch, as tho it
were an Oracle.

In the mean while, may Heaven regard thy Innocent Life, and still protect thee
from the Casualties that threaten all of Mortal Race. May thy Prayers be heard,
and thy Good Works rewarded. Finally, may thy End be like that of Enoch, who
never saw Death, but was translated alive to Paradise.

Paris, 9th. of the 2d. Moon, of the Year 1674.
LETTER IV.
To Ali, Bassa.
IT is evident, That the French Arms are destined not to rust: One Provocation
or other always keeps them in Action. The Neighboring Princes and States take
their Turns to affront and injure this Monarch, and sometimes they set upon him
all together. Surely, they Envy and Fear the rising Fortune of France, and
therefore strive by Stratagems and Force to check its Growth.

There having been several Acts of Hostility done by the Governor of the
Spanish Netherlands, without any Hopes of a fair Redress, this King found
himself obliged to declare open War against Spain.

This was done very lately, and at the same time the Duke de Navailles was sent
with an Army into Flanders; where he soon took the Town and Castle of
Aubespine; the Towns of Pesme and Mornais; the Castle of Oigny, with the Towns
of Gray and Vezont.

This last is a Place of considerable Importance, being called the Gate of
Lorrain, and the Postern of the Franche Comte. Whereby this Monarch is become
actual Master of the Baillage of Amont, which comprehends above Five Hundred
Villages.

The Spaniards seeing him thus Successful, and that they could not by open
Resistance stop the course of his Victories, took another Method, and sought to
undermine him by Plots, and Confederacies with some of his Subjects.

They had agreed with the Chevalier de Rohan, to settle on him a Pension of
Eight Thousand Livres a Year, and to present him out of Hand, with Five
Thousand Pistoles, if he would put them in Possession of Quillebeuf, a strong
Place in the Province of Normandy.

The Chevalier de Rohan had made himself and them believe, that it was in his
Power with much Ease to perform this: But he was mistaken. Some of his Friends
say, he never thought of accomplishing his Bargain, his Credit being too small
in that Place; and that he only aimed to repair his Fortune, by cheating the
Spaniards of their Five Thousand Pistoles. However, the Plot was discovered to
the French King, who has his Spies in all Corners of the Kingdom. The
unfortunate Chevalier was seized, and brought to the Bastille, and being
convicted of Treason, was condemned to lose his Head, which was accordingly
Executed.

The Marquis of Villars, and the Sieur de Pereau, suffered the same Punishment,
as Accomplices in the Treason. Another French Lord of the Party, was Killed in
defending himself against those who were ordered to arrest him. These had
undertaken to deliver other Places of Strength into the Hands of the Hollanders
who first begun the War.

Had their Conspiracy taken Effect, it would have been no difficult matter to
corrupt other Grandees with the Spanish Gold, and so a Third Part of France
might have been sold for a Price not allowable in the Mereats of Kings. For it
seems the Hollanders and Spaniards, were upon the Point of making their
Descents in Normandy and Bretagne, being invited thereto by the large Promises
of the Persons before-named, and their Confederates, who made them believe,
that a great Part of the Nobility and Gentry of those Provinces would come over
to them, as soon as they saw them Landed; and there was no need to fear any
opposition from the Vulgar, who are bound to follow the Fortune of their Lords.
Besides they are always desirous of Novelty and Change.

There is nothing so Abject, Poor and Contemptible, as the Peasantry of France,
who labor only for others, whilst they can hardly get Bread for themselves out
of all their Toil. In a word, they are absolute Slaves to them whose Tenants
they are, and whose Lands they farm. They are not more oppressed by the Public
Taxes and Gabels, than they are by the Private Impositions of their Country
Lords, beside the unreasonable Demands of the Priests. These Sufferings dispose
them to wish for any Revolution in the Government, from which they might hope
to receive gentler Usage.

'Twas this partly which encouraged the Hollanders and Spaniards to think of
invading France: Otherwise, they had only been upon the Defensive. This King
has to do with a great many Potent Enemies. The Emperor holds him play on the
Rhine; the Duke of Lorrain gives him Diversion in his New Conquests on that
side. The King of Spain puts him to a great Expense of Men and Money in
Flanders. The Hollanders infest him by Sea, and would do by Land, if they knew
which way. Yet this Monarch copes with 'em all; baffles their Plots and
Intrigues, foils their Arms, daily gains Ground; and by a continued Series of
Conquests, makes it apparent, that his is the only flourishing Fortune in the
West.

The King of Sweden had made certain Proposals of Peace between the Emperor,
the King of France, the King of Spain, the States of Holland, and some of the
Electoral Princes. In order to which, he offered himself to become a Mediator
between them. He sent his Ambassadors accordingly, to a Place agreed upon by
all Parties, as the most convenient for Conferences of this Nature. So did all
the other Princes and States concerned in the Wat. But it seems there was a
gross Affront put upon Guillaume de Furstemberg, Plenipotentiary to the Elector
of Cologne, by the Marquis de Grana, Ambassador to the Emperor.

This was deeply resented at the French Court, as being a Notorious Breach of
the Law of Nations; and the King published a Manifesto, wherein he charged the
Emperor with giving Order for this Insult; declaring also, that unless due
Satisfaction were made, he would withdraw his Ambassadors from the Place of
Conference, and seek Justice with Sword in Hand.

He complained to the King of Swedeland of this Violence, and entered into a
close and strict League with him. Gustavus presently recalls his Ambassadors
from the public Meeting, commanding them to protest against the Action of the
Marquis de Grana, as a Violation of the Civil Laws. The French King has done
the same, and all Things seem to portend a general Distraction in Europe.

Those of the Roman Church fight against one another, as well as they combine
against the Protestants, whom they esteem as the Common Enemy, and have little
beter Regard for them, than we Moselmans have for the Persian Kysilbaschi, whom
we execrate as abominable Heretics. One sort of Protestants also cabal against
another; the Lutherans hate and persecute the Calvanists; which the Latter
return with equal Animosity. These Infidels are caught in the Devil's Snare,
where they bite and devour one another. They are in egregious Darkness, tossed
about in the Tempest of Errors. They are surrounded with Enchantments: Their
Guides are Sorcerers and Magicians: Hell has a Hand in all their Devices.

O ye True Believers, lift up your Heads! For the Hour is approaching, wherein
the Ancient Prophecies must be fulfilled; That the Dragon of the East, shall
wage War with the Eagle of the West, and shall devour him Whole with all his
Feathers. Woe be to thee O Land of Japhet, in the Year 1700 of the Christians
Style.

Mighty Bassa, thou who have not numbered half my Years, may live to see
these Things come to pass. As for me, I am hastening to the Spirits of my
Fathers, to a Region of Silence, and Eternal Retirement, to a Place where all
the Vanities of this Earth shall be forgotten.

In the Mean Time, live thou to be a Witness of the Grand Revolution which will
astonish all the World.

Paris, 7th. of the 3d. Moon, of the Year 1674.
LETTER V.
To Cara Hali, Physician to the Grand Signior.
PRaise be to God, from whom alone proceed Health, Long Life, and Immortal
Happiness: In the whole Family of Fevers, I never was much subject to any,
except it were that of Love. This indeed is become Habitual to me; it is grown a
perfect Hectic; surely it is more than Second Nature. I feel something in the
very Roots of my Essence, prompting me to Eternal Softnesses, wild melting Fits
of fresh Platonic tender Passions. Nothing can provoke my Hatred, but an
Obdurate Surly-temper'd Fellow, who being the Offspring of some Bloody Butcher,
Poulterer, or Greasy Cook, his very Face portends a present Massacre; and all
his Words breath nothing else but a continued Train of Cruel Wrongs, and
Violences against the Innocent. Pity to him, sounds like the News of Famine, to
a Starving Man. But if you would make him smile, and put him in good Humor, tell
him how he may get an Estate, by oppressing the Fatherless and Widows; or
increase his Wealth, by ruining whole Families. Tell him how he may overreach
some Silly Credulous Young Heir, or outwit his Neighbor in a Bargain. He
cherishes a Spider in his Brain, and his Heart is full of Webs. To such a
Temper as this, I cannot be reconciled; there is an Innate Antipathy, an
Immortal Contrariety in our Souls. My Spirit is daunted, and retreats within me
at the sight of such an one: A Languor and Faintness seizes my Limbs. I am like
one that has touched a Torpedo.

Surely, there is no Species of Four-footed Beasts, of Birds, of Fish, of
Insects, Reptiles or any other living Things, whose Nature is not found in Man.
How exactly agreeable to the Fox are some Men's Tempers? Whilst others are
perfect Bears in Human Shape. Here you shall meet a Crocodile, who seeks with
feigned Tears to entrap you to your Ruin: There a sly Serpent creeps and winds
himself into your Affections; and when he is well-warm'd with Favors, on a
sudden he will bite and sting you to Death. Tigers, Lions, Leopards, Panthers,
Wolves, and all the Monstrous Generations of Africa, may be seen Masquerading
in the Forms of Men. And it is not hard for an observing Mind to see their
Natural Complexion, through the borrowed Vizard. The Physiognomy of Vice and
Virtue, are easily distinguished. There are some secret Characters in every
Face, which speak the Nature of the Person. So does Platonic Love, with Eagle
Eyes soon trace the Signatures of what is Amiable in the Soul. We read the
hidden Qualities of Men at the first Glance; and hence are lasting Friendships
often contracted. I love my Friends without Reserve; and because those are very
few among our Mortal Race, I contract Familiarities with the Harmless Animals:
I study like a Lover to oblige and win their Hearts, by all the tender Offices
I can perform. I bear with Patience their wild froward Tricks, till constant
Perseverance vanquishes their stubborn Humors: Then when we once begin to
understand each other aright, they make me a Thousand sweet Returns of
Gratitude according to their Kind. When I am Melancholy, they will soon divert me
with one pretty Trick or other, as if they were sensible of my Pain.

But because my Love is large and strong, still seeking to dilate it self,
though still recoyling from the degenerate Race of Men; I go into the Fields
and Woods, and make my silent Court unto the Trees and Flowers, and sometimes I
converse in Raillery with Eccho's. I languish on the Banks of Crystal Streams,
and pine away for an old Mossy Rock. The Oak enflames me with a Sacred Passion,
when I behold her Venerable Bulk and Shade. I could almost turn Druid for her
sake, and take my Residence up for ever in her hollow Trunk; where the Kind
Genii of the Air would visit me, and tell me Things to come, instructing me in
all the Mysteries of Nature; for I Am in Love even with those Invisible Beings;
and often tell my Passion to 'em in the Woods, or on some Mountain, where the
Courteous Winds transport my Words, and waft their secret Answers back again.
Then is my Soul snatched up in Sacred Ecstasies, because The Immortals
condescend to talk with me. I often fall into a Trance, and wake not till the
Sun is got half way into the other Hemisphere. Then I resolve to pass away the
Night in this sweet Solitude.

Had I the Tongues, or Pens of Cicero and Demosthenes, I could not to the Life
express the Pleasures that I feel at such a Time, when free and undisturbed I
can for several Hours behold the Motions of the Moon and Stars. Oh God! What
Thoughts, what Contemplations rise within my Breast? My Ravished Soul is ready
to break Prison for Joy, when it is inspired with certain Demonstrations of the
World's Eternity. Methinks at such a Time, I hear the Noise and Bustle of the
Worlds Above: Methinks I see the Active, Busy Tenants of the Moon and Stars,
trudging about their daily Business, even like us Mortals here Below. Then it is
I nauseate the narrow Principles of Ignorant, Superstitious Men; I hate to
think of ever returning to the City again, there to profane my Reason with the
vain Discourse of Self-conceited Fools and Idiots. I am cloyed with Life, and
wish to die amidst these charming Speculations. Thus do I pass the Time away,
till fair Aurora ushers in the Rosy-finger'd Morn. Then I begin to reflect on
my Duty as a Moselman, and Slave to the Grand Signior. I haste to wash my self
in the next Stream, and cheerfully prostrate my self upon the Ground, adoring
the Eternal Source of all Things. After which, abundantly satisfied with these
Nocturnal Pleasures, I return to the City and to my Business; considering, That
I were not wholly born for Contemplation.

Learned Hali, I wish thee consummate Happiness in this Life, and fortunate
Transmigrations after Death; praying also, that I may merit one Day to enjoy
thy Company in Paradise, where we may discourse these Things more at large, and
in a clearer Light than what this Earth affords. Adieu.

Paris, 2d. of the 5th. Moon, of the Year 1674.
LETTER VI.
To Kerker Hassan, Bassa.
TO what Purpose am I kept longer in Paris? Why do the Ministers of the Port,
put the Grand Signior to a needless Expense, in maintaining here an Old
Superannuated Slave, not worth his daily Bread? And yet, God knows, I eat not
much, neither can I taste any Pleasure in that little I eat. My Refections are
like the Entertainments of Magical Tables, where the Eye is deluded with a fair
show of various Delicacies, but the Stomach is not satisfied with any real
Food, nor the Body strengthened by any substantial Nourishment. Only the
languishing Imagination feeds on Fantastic Dishes, mere Shadows, and
Enchanted Resemblances of Solid Meat; while the Man is ready to faint for
Hunger. So I seem to my self to Eat and Drink, but it is with so little gust at
present, and I receive so little benefit from it afterward, that all appears
no more than a Visionary Feast, or a Collation in a Dream.

I have now passed the Grand Climacter of Human Life, being entered into the
Sixty Fourth Year of my Age. My Senses droop, and all the Faculties of my Soul
and Body decay apace. My Bones are weary of supporting their accustomed Burden.
My Sinew; and Muscles refuse to perform the Offices of Motion, at least their
Vigor is much slackened and impaired. In a Word, the Infirmities of my Body
have ranked me under a new Predicament; I am become a Threefooted Animal, being
forced to walk with a Staff, to prevent the necessity of Metamorphosing my
Hands to Feet, and crawling on all Four.

Judge now, Illustrious Arab, after what I have said, whether I am fitting to
do the Grand Signior service in this Station. As for the Intrigues of the
Court, I am quite tired of them. Besides here are now no more Richlieu's and
Mazarini's in Being, with whom I might insinuate on the score of Skill in
translating Greek, Sclavonick, Arabic, and other Eastern Languages. Osmin the
Dwarf is also Dead, from whom I used to learn many Secrets. Fate has also
snatched away several Courtiers with whom I had intimate Converse. Add to this,
that Eliachim grows Old and Crazy, who was once as my Right Hand: So prompt and
dextrous in any Business of Difficulty; Faithful also as my own Heart, which
never was tainted with the least Symptom of Disloyalty. So that all things
considered, I cannot see what the Sublime Ministers can propose in retaining me
at Paris.

I do not desire as formerly, to travel into India, or any other Region of the
East: I do not so much as Covet to see my own Native Country, for which I have
had such passionate Longings. No, every Place will be Arabia to me, where I may
rest from Businesses of State, and shut up my latter Days in Quietness. It is
Time for me to bid Adieu to the Active Life, and betake my self wholly to
Contemplation. I would fain abandon not only the actual Vanities of this fading
World, but the very remembrance and thoughts of them. My Mind is nauseated with
the Idea's of past Folly, which Men falsely call Pleasure: And I find no gust in
any thing but the Meditation of Death, and the unknown State of departed Souls.
All other Things are uncertain Toys, and empty Trifles. But that great change,
which no Mortal has ever yet escaped, is stable, permanent, and fixed by
Destiny. Fate has set the Period, which winds up the Epoch of every Man's Life
in this visible State, and begins a new Hejira, whereof we have no Computation;
in regard we have no Correspondence with that unknown World: Neither are there
any certain Histories extant, which can rightly inform us. The Flight of the
Soul from the Body begins the Mysterious Date; but where or when it will end,
is not known to us that stay behind. This therefore alone is worthy of an Old
Man's Thoughts, how to prepare himself for Death, since he cannot protract the
Term of his Life, beyond the Moment allotted by Heaven. Neither can he be
assured what will become of him afterward.

Think not, Serene Bassa, that I am going to lay a Train for the Reputation of
a Saint, or would set up all on a sudden for an extraordinary Pious Man. No,
there is nothing of that in it. I hate the rigid Hypocrisy of forced Penance;
and the Religious Lunacy of those, who never think they do enough to atone for
their Sins, unless they outdo Humanity it self in their cruel Mortifications.
These are Monsters in all good Divinity, and their Example is not to be
followed.

What I aim at in this Discourse is, That as according to the Order of Nature,
and Will of Destiny, we are born Men, so we should take care to Live and Die.
And if we have suffered the former part of our Life to elapse without due
Reflection on so important a Truth; it is but Reason, that when we approach near
the Grave; when all our Senses, Faculties and Members do the part of King
Philip's Page, putting us daily and hourly in Mind of our Mortality: It Is but
Reason, I say, that then we should begin to recollect our selves, and to think
whereabouts we are; that we may not be surprised by the Inevitable Decree of
Fate, when it comes to be put in Execution; nor die less than our selves.

Besides there is another advantage in being thus prepared for the last things;
since it equally arms us against all intermediate Calamities, supposing we
should live longer than we reckon. He that can boldly stare Death in the Face,
will not easily turn his Back upon any Misfortune of this Inconstant Life. But
receiving all things with an even Temper, renders himself happy in the midst of
Troubles, Losses, Disgraces, Pains, Sicknesses, and other Casualties which
assault all that live on Earth.

Magnificent Bassa, all that I have said, is but a Prologue to my main purpose,
which is to desire thy Mediation with the First Vizier, that I may be recalled
from an Employment wherein I cannot be so serviceable as I have been; and which
at the same Time, by imposing on me a Thousand Cares, takes from me the
possibility of preparing as I ought to do, for that Transmigration, which in a
little Time I must pass through.

In a Word, Right Noble Kerker, I desire the Privilege to end my Days in
Constantinople, among the Moselmans, under the Venerable Shade of Mosks and
Minarets, consecrated to the Service and Honor of the Eternal Unity. Let me
not have worse Usage than the ancient Roman Soldiers had, who when they had
served in the Wars such a certain number of Years, were discharged with an
Honorable Pension.

This is all the Favor I request, who have served the Grand Signior faithfully
and with Success these Eight and Thirty Years, in a Country of Infidels. But if
my Superiors shall determine otherwise, I am resigned to their Pleasure, and to
the Will of Destiny.

Paris, 22d. of the 6th. Moon, of the Year 1674.
LETTER VII.
To Ali Rustan Begh, Serasquier in Dalmatia.
THou shall hear how a famous Christian General, the Marshall de Turenne,
deported himself, when he was lately challenged to a single Combat, by the
Prince Palatine of the Rhine.

It seems, this later has been a great Sufferer by the present War between
France and the Confederate Princes; for his Country lying near the Rhine was
exposed to both Parties, and the French first entered it.

There were some English Troops in the French Army, who had conceived an
Implacable Revenge against the Subjects of the Palatine, in regard many of
their Comrades had been barbarously handled by them. Wherefore they made great
Devastation wherever they came; burnt Five and Twenty great Villages to the
Ground, and Five small Cities. In a word, they quite ruined in Fifteen Days
Time, the whole Country, which is esteemed the most pleasant and agreeable Part
of Europe.

This put the Elector all in Choler, and he wrote a sharp Letter to the
Marshall Turenne, threatening him in a furious Manner, and bidding him choose
the Place, where he might fight with him in single Duel. But the Sage Marshall
retaining his usual Moderation, and not at all moved at the Palatines, Letter,
answered it in these or the like Terms; That the Proceedings of the English
Regiments were without his Order or Approbation; That he was infinitely
troubled at the Violences which had been committed; and that the chief Anthors
had been punished: Nevertheless, he could not but Declare, That the cruel
Treatment which the English had met with, had so exasperated their Companions,
that it was no wonder to see them execute their Revenge even on the very
Inanimate Things. And that in the first heat and transport of their Fury, they
had not leisure to examine who were guilty and who not. He added likewise, That
if the Post which the King his Master had appointed him, would permit him to
accept of his Challenge, he would not refuse it, counting it an Honor to
measure his Arms with those of so Illustrious a Prince: But that as things
were, he desired to be excused.

In former Days such an Answer as this, would have been taken for an Argument
of Cowardice, in a Man professing Arms. There was nothing more common among
these Infidels, than to decide their private Controversies, Grudges and
Quarrels by the Sword; and their Laws allowed it. If any Man had accused
another wronfully, or had done him any other injury, he did not run presently
to the Cadi's or Lawyers for Redress, but had Recourse to his Arms: And
whosoever got the Victory, his Cause was pronounced just. But since the
Commerce which has been established between the Moselmans and the Nazarens,
these later have learned to forsake so impious a Practice, being ashamed that
the Followers of Mahomet, whom they call Infidels, should outstrip them in the
Peaceableness of their Temper, a Virtue so earnestly recommended to the
Practice of all Christians by Jesus the Son of Mary. Besides, they have found
the inconvenience of these private Combats, and they are generally forbidden
now in most Countries of Europe. This is owing to the Examples of the
Moselmans, whose Anger against each other scarce ever proceeds to contumelious
Words, much less to Blows, or any Attempt upon Life. For when a Dispute arises
between Two True Believers, and they become never so little passionate
thereupon, it is but for a Third Person, one of the Faithful, to interpose
himself, and reproach them with violating the Laws of the Prophet, and the
Honor of their Profession, and they immediately are made Friends again. Such
Magic there is in the Force of these Words; Fie, Fie! What? Moselmans, and
Quarrel? The usual Reprimand of the Bystanders. Which is an evident Argument,
That our Holy Religion has a greater Influence on the Hearts and Consciences of
those that profess it, than has that of the Nazarens. For whilst these pretend
to believe and honor the Messiah as their Lawgiver, they disobey him in their
daily Practice, and so give the Lie to their Faith, discovering that it has no
Efficacy on their Morals. Doubltless, the Messiah was Holy, Chaste, Peaceable,
Humble and Harmless. But it is rare to find any of these Virtues among his
Followers. He bid them return Good for Evil, Blessings for Curses, and to
suffer all Injuries patiently, after his Example; but they invert the Order of
his Precepts, and read them backward, as they say Witches do the Paster-noster.

When Judas came to Seize him in the Garden of Gethsemani, with a Train of
Officers and Ruffians, one of Jesus's Retinue drew his Whinnier, and cur off an
Ear from the Servant of the High Priest. But the Son of Mary was so far from
commending his Zeal in this, that he bid him put up his Sword, telling him
withal, That whosoever draws the Sword, shall perish by the Sword. At the same
Time, he restored the Fellows Ear again by a Miracle.

Magnanimous Serasquier, what I have said, entrenches not on the Right of
Lawful War in Defense of ones Country, or of the Volume brought down from
Heaven. The Sacred Combat was ever allowed of by God and Man.

Thou art now engaged in this Cause against Infidels: Fight generously, and
Vanquish. But enter not into private Duels with any Man, though he be a Prince,
without the Grand Signior's Consent. For the Safety of his Royal Person depends
upon the Preservation of his Faithful, Valiant, and Wise Generals.

Paris, 25th. of the 8th. Moon, of the Year 1674.
LETTER VIII.
To the same.
I Will now give thee a brief Account of the Famous Battle of Senef, which
makes a great noise in Europe, and is reckoned one of the most terrible that
has been fought in these Parts for many Ages. For it will not be amiss to let
thee know the Particular Circumstances of this Combat, the good Conduct of the
French Generals, as also their Oversights and Errors: That thou may make a
right use of such Examples, in the Difficulties which may environ thee through
the Chance of War.

On the Ninth of this Instant Moon, the Confederate Forces amounting to Sixty
Thousand Men, marched with their Left Wing to a Place called Arken, and their
Right to the Forest of Busseray, where they encamped, having before them a
Village called Senef, situated in Brabant. They tarried there on the Tenth Day,
and next Morning parted from thence, Marching in Three Lines, counting the
Baggage for One. Whilst the Prince de Vaudemont commanded a Body of Six
Thousand Spanish Horse, to cover their March, and to skirmish with the French,
if there should be occasion, 'till the whole Army were in Order.

As soon as the Prince of Conde was advertised of these Motions, he was
resolved to take Advantage of their necessity, and to attack them, before they
could possibly get together into a Body capable of sustaining the Shock of the
French Army, which was closely embattel'd. To this End he caused one Part of
the Army with Four Pieces of Cannon, to pass the River of Pilton, where
unsuspected, they might observe the Enemies Motions. Another part he posted in
a deep Valley, where the Confederates could not perceive them: And that nothing
might be wanting to his full Information of their Advances, he caused the
Marshall of the Camp, with a considerable Detachment, to gain a certain Hill,
from whence lying under the Covert of thick Woods, he might attend every Step
of the Enemy, without being discovered himself.

When the Prince had made all those Preparations, he sent the Marquess de
Rannes, and the Chevalier de Tilladet, with the Dragoons under their Command,
to assault the Confederates not far from Senef. This was performed with so much
Vigor, that they drove them into the Village, with no little Slaughter of the
Spaniards: But not satisfied with this, they attacqu'd them in the Village it
self; and after a long and bloody Conflict, the French beat 'em thence also,
pursuing them into the Plain; till at last both the whole Armies were engaged
pell-mell. Then was the Fight Cruel and Fierce, the Officers of both sides
behaving themselves with surpassing Bravery, and the Soldiers not shrinking
from their Valiant Leaders. But Fortune favored the French, who before they
quitted the Plain, became Masters of all the Hollanders Baggage, Ammunition,
Powder and Money which they brought with them to pay the Army. Then the Prince
of Conde chased them into the Village of Dufay, where the Confederates
retrenched themselves under the Covert of a Castle, and a strong Church. But
that Active General would not suffer them to rest long there; he set upon them
on all Hands so furiously, that they were forced to abandon the Place, and
enter the Plain the Second Time. The Battle had now lasted Five Hours, and
great was the Slaughter on both Sides. The French took almost Four Thousand
Prisoners, and killed as many upon the Spot, besides those that they left
wounded. Which so weakened and discouraged the Confederates, That the next Day
they retired, and left the French Masters of the Field.

Now I will tell thee, That had the Prince of Conde been contented with his
First Victory at Senef, he had saved abundance of French Blood. For, in that
Fight, the Confederates lost above Two Thousand Men, and the French scarce a
Hundred. But the Fieryness of his Temper, carried him beyond his Judgment, to
pursue them into difficult Places. So that in the winding up of the Matter,
though the Victory was his, it cost him above Fifteen Hundred Lives of his
Soldiers, which might have been as well spared, and his Honor remained the
same.

Valiant Serasquier, I send thee this Narrative, as a Chart by which to steer
thy Course in the like Emergencies; advising thee to temper thy Courage with
sage Conduct and Prudence, and not to sacrifice thy Men to a Rash Caprice of
Martial Phrensy.

Paris, 12th. of the 9th. Moon, of the Year 1674.
LETTER IX.
To Mehemet, an Exiled Eunuch, at Al-Cairo in Egypt.
HOw changeable is the state of Mortals; how inconstant our Thoughts, Passions,
Words and Actions! We are never fixed long on any thing. If we are invited to
cast Anchor a while in some calm and serene Season, whilst we furl the Sails of
Human Care and Anxiety; if we are permitted to careen and recruit our
Weather-beaten Spirits, enjoying some short interval of Rest and Ease; the
Indulgence soon expires, and we are forced to weigh and hoist with double
Diligence, lest we incur a Wreck. The Tempests raised by our Evil Stars, blow
hard upon us; we run adrift, and are tossed up and down on the Billows of Human
Misery, without any approved Pilot, Chart or Compass to direct us in the
uncertain Road of Life. We float at Random, in a Sea of perpetual Hazards and
Difficulties.

O Mehemet! I will not now, as once formerly I did, wish my self in one of the
Egyptian Pyramids, or court the Society of Ghosts and Demons: I will not take
Sanctuary in those Superannuated Prisons of Royal Souls; nor seek Diversion
among the Dead. Not the black Masquerades of Cheop's Sepulcher, danced each
Night by Antique Shadows, or wildest Measures of Hobgoblins in the Galleries of
that horrid Pile, could now relieve my Melancholy, or ease my Phrentick Pain:
Because the Entertainment is too narrow, close and stale for such a Soul as
mine. I would fain ramble through an Infinite Space, planted each Stage with
Seminaries of new Idea's, uncouth Forms, and strange Chimeras. I would see the
Essence of all Beings that I have already seen, reversed, turned upside down,
or inside out, or any way transformed, so as I might not know 'em again. I
would have all the Elements change their Qualities; the Fire to lose its Innate
Heat, and Water to expunge its Moisture; the Earth take Fire, and blow it self
up into the Ninth Sphere, whilst the Air shall condense and crush it self into
a Solid Globe, producing a new Race of Minerals, Vegetables, and Living
Creatures, which our Old Purblind World never saw before. I would have flying
Trees, and Birds whose outspread Claws take Rooting in the Air, and grow like
Baucis and Philemon; their Wings to Branches turned, their Feathers into
Leaves. Besides a Thousand Kinds of Monsters more than ever Ovid spoke of in
his Metamorphosis.

After all this, I would go up and view the Orbs above, restore the Rotten
Corruptible Heavens, pull all the Bulls and Bears, the Scorpions, Lions,
Centaurs, and other antiquated Beasts out of the Sky; make the New Star of
Cassiopaeia pay a Swinging Fine, for her damned late unmannerly Appearance in
the Senate of the Stars.

Then would I set up an Inquisition for the Comets, to know from whence they
are, and what their Business is, among the Orbs above. I would examine all the
Constellations, and know the meaning of their Names, and ill-shap'd Figures.
And then I Would trace the Milky Way, mounting directly to the Holiest Heavens of
all.

There perhaps I should begin to be Modest and Sober, considering that it is
the Presence Chamber of the Omnipotent. I would not broach Sedition, nor talk
Factiously before the King of all Things. But behaving my self like a Courtier
during the Public Audience, I would afterward retire, and scamper through the
Endless Fields, beyond the Coelum Empyraeum; where I would either find out new
Worlds, or Room for them. Nothing should confine my Search, less than Infinity.
Is not our Sense, Fansy and Reason without Bounds? Are not these Parts of the
Universe? And has God made any Part greater than the Whole? This is a
Contradiction in Nature. He has given us Faculties, which, if rightly used,
cannot err. Our Conceptions are squared to his Eternal Model of the World, if
we do not debauch our own Thoughts, or suffer 'em to be corrupted by others. He
is the Primitive and Original Reason, the Everlasting Common Sensorium of
Nature, in whom, and by whom we all see that we have Eyes; hear that we have
Ears; smell that we have Noses; taste that we have a Tongue; and feel that we
are all over full of Sensible Spirits.

Oh God! thy Praises are without Beginning or End: Thou art an Eternal Circle
of Wonders and Miracles. Thou surpassest all our Sublimest Thoughts; no Words
can decypher the Skirts of thy Garment. On thee Infinite Worlds have rested
from Eternal Ages. Thou art no Niggard of thy Gifts. Why should Infinite
Goodness and Bounty be traduced by Infidels? They say the World is but so many
Thousand Years Old, perhaps Five or Six. It is a damned Blasphemy, thus slily
to Calumniate the Omnipotent, and to say by Craft he was not so early Gracious
as he might have been. What should ail the Eternal, that he was not in a
Condition to produce the World before? Or was he in a sullen Humor, that he
should suffer a lapse of Indeterminate Ages, before he would display his
Attributes?

Oh, No! Suffer not this Doctrine to take Root in thy Soul, My Dear Mehmet, but
Remember, there is no Envy in the Deity. Doubtless he was as Good, Powerful,
Just, and Wise, from all Eternity, as at Moses's Hour of the Creation, or as he
is now, and ever will be World without End; Amen: As the Nazareens have in
their Prayers.

My Mehmet, let us shake off the Prejudices of Education, with all the
Prepossessions and False Dogma's of our Early Years, and adhere to firm Reason,
and the Inspirations that are from beyond the Visible Frame.

Take this as my last Adieu, for I am just Equipping for the Unknown Eternal
Voyage.

Paris, 5th. of the 11th. Moon, of the Year 1674.
LETTER X.
To the Kaimacham.
THe Affairs of France seem to be in a very flourishing Condition. This
Invincible Monarch not only conquers Cities and Provinces by Force, but some
yield to him voluntarily, courting his Protection.

Here are arrived Deputies from the Senate of Messina in Sicily, to desire the
King to free that City and People from the Yoke of Spanish Tyranny, and to
number them among his Subjects. They are received without much Ceremony on the
part of this Court; which affects to appear Stately and Reserved at such a
Juncture. However, there is no point of Humanity or Hospitable Usage neglected
toward these Strangers. In a word, they are entertained as Friends of a lower
Degree; and they esteem this a sufficient Happiness,

It seems the Spanish Government was very Severe and Cruel; laying
insupportable Taxes on the Inhabitants, and fleecing them of their Silver and
Gold by a Thousand Tricks and Inventions of State. It was a Crime to grow Rich,
and no less to be so Poor as to deny the Payment of the Gabels. The one put a
Man in danger of the Inquisition; the other exposed him to the Galleys, or some
worse Slavery in the Mines of Peru. On whomsoever the Viceroy or his Officers
cast an ill Eye, that Person was sure to be ruined, if he did not make his
Escape, or present his Enemy with the Value perhaps of half his Wealth; and he
must take it as a Favor too, that they would compound at such easy Rates.
For, these greedy Harpies are seldom contented with less than all a Man has.

Infinite other Oppressions the People suffered under, which at last so wearied
their Patience, that they began to Cabal and form Conspiracies against the
Viceroy: And it was not only the Vulgar that thus sought after Liberty, but the
chief of the Citizens, and some of the Senators.

These all unanimously agreed to treat underhand with the French King, to
represent to him their Grievances, with the present state of the whole Island:
For they had heard the Fame and Character of his Person and Government: And
they were well satisfied they could not submit to a better or more generous
Master than him. The King undertakes to rescue them from the Spanish Bondage,
provided they would assist him with what Succors they could spare, and
instruct his Officers in those Things which would facilitate the Reduction of
the Isle.

He sent Forces accordingly at the Beginning of the Year, under the Command of
the Chevalier de Valbelle, who acquitted himself very successfully, having
performed many Considerable Exploits, and taken several Towns, Castles, and
other strong Places from the Spaniards.

The Senate of Messina being encouraged by these prosperous Beginnings, thought
it high Time actually to surrender themselves up to the French King: And it is
on this Errand the Deputies are come.

The King being informed that the Chevalier de Valbelle wanted greater Forces
to Conquer the Places which remain in the Spaniards Hands, immediately gave
Orders for a certain Number of Vessels to be Fitted and Manned under the
Command of the Duke of Vivonne. He gave a Commission also to the Marquis de
Velavoir, with a considerable Army of Men; ordering him to make all speed for
Sicily, and to join the Chevalier de Valbelle, or to act separately as occasion
offered.

They say, the Duke of Vivonne will set Sail with his Fleet about the Beginning
of the First Moon: He is esteemed a good Soldier, though some of the Grandees
and Peers of the Realm envy him, in regard he was raised to the High Dignities
he possesses, through the Mediation of his Sister, Madam de Montespan, one of
the King's Concubines: For, he was before only Count of Vivonne; but now he is
Duke, Peer and Marshall of France, as also Admiral of the Mediterranean
Galleys.

The Prince of Conde, once in Company with some of the Grandees, and making a
Comparison between the Mareschals Feuillade and Vivonne, he said, that
Feuillade got his Honor by the Sword, and Vivonne by the Scabbard, reflecting
thereby on his Sister.

It was not the First Time that Prince used the Liberty of his Tongue in
affronting People; he was always daring and bold in such Cases. When he was
Young, and traveling through Picardy, he was to pass by a certain Convent or
Religious House on the Road, where the Superior with all his Derviches came
out to meet him, and to pay him the Ceremonies and Acknowledgments due to his
Quality. The Superior was making a long Elaborate Harangue, in Compliment to
the Prince, when he all in Frolic called aloud to know what a Clock it was.
The poor Derviches striving who should most readily satisfy him, cried out all
together, It is Midday, My Lord; when he made them this wild Answer, Then get
you all gone, and make an end of your Speech to the Devil by Midnight; for I Will
hear no more of your Long-winded Flattery.

Thou will say, This was an odd sort of Expression in a Prince: But it must be
imputed to the Fieryness of his Constitution, which in his Youth spurred him on
to a Thousand Extravagancies. He corrected these in Time, and instead of such
vain Pranks and Flashes of his Sparkling Nature, he grew inflamed with Noble
Ardours for his King and Country. He was commonly called the French Lion and
Mars, being esteemed the Boldest Man in the Kingdom. Marshall Turenne, who was
no Stranger to his Genius, used to say, That since the Brave Horatius Curtius,
there never was a Man born of Woman so full of Fire and Spirit as the Prince of
Conde.

Yet, which is more to be admired, that Two such Qualities should meet in the
same Genius, he is a great Statesman, as well as a Valiant Soldier. He has a
prodigious Aim at the Good or Ill Success of Enterprises. And his Counsels are
generally Fortunate.

As these Accomplishments have rendered him beloved by the Generality of the
French Nation; so his Inconstancy and siding with different Factions, have made
him suspected both by the Court and the Parliaments. All Sides are shy of him,
and reserved in their Addresses. Tho he has done Services enough one would
think, to efface the Memory of his former Failings; yet the Civilities he
receives from the King, are only the faint Sprinklings of Court-Holy-Water. So
hard a Thing it is for an Eminent Person to recover the Esteem which he has
once lost by making false Steps.

This Monarch is observed to be very Constant to those he Loves, never putting
to Death any of his Favorites, tho he has often caused them to be Arrested. He
is very Affable, and of no difficult Access: Civil and Courteous to the Poorest
People, returning the Salutes of his Subjects with much Condescension. He is
Amorous also, and indulges that soft Passion in the midst of all his glorious
Enterprises. He had once Three Mistresses together, one whereof was of Vulgar
Parentage, the other was a Noble-Woman, and the Third a Nun. Which occasioned
this Jest to be put on him; That he went about to unite the Three Estates, and
fasten them to the Interest of the Crown.

Among the other Diversions of this great Prince, he takes a particular
Pleasure in Magnificent Buildings. And his new Palace at Versailles is esteemed
one of the Wonders of the World, for Beauty and Art. As soon as it was
finished, a certain Poet presented the King with this Distich,

Non Orbis Gentem, non Vrbem Gens habet ulla
Vrbsve Domum, Dominum nec Domus ulla parem.
Sage Minister, these Infidels flatter themselves with a wrong Idea of their
own Grandeur; not considering the Invincible Osmans are by Destiny exalted
above all other Nations; and that no City is comparable to Constantinople for
Beauty and Riches; nor any Palace so Magnificent as the Seraglio, which is the
Seat of the Great Sultan, Lord of Asia, Africa, and Europe; Arbitrator of the
whole Earth.

Paris, 17th. of the 12th Moon, of the Year 1674.
LETTER XI.
To the Vizir Bassa, at Constantinople.
I am Acquainted with a French Merchant in this City, who often trades to
Constantinople, Smyrna, Aleppo, and other Cities of the Levant. He knows
nothing of me or my Business at Paris, farther than other People, who take me
for a Native of Moldavia, and one whom the Desire of Knowledge has brought
hither, where the Sciences have taken up their Residence. Besides, they may
imagine, that the Hopes of Preferment in the Church, were one Inducement to my
Traveling thus far from the Place of my Nativity. Since I have all along
professed my self a Student and Candidate of the Priesthood; and it is
generally known how familiar I have been with Cardinal Richlieu, and his
Successor Mazarini. Whatever their Thoughts be, thou may assure thy self,
that in the Main, I have taken Care to conceal my True Circumstances, and the
Affairs of the Grand Signior entrusted to my Charge. But to come to the
Business.

The Merchant of whom I speak, is called Monsieur de Vaubrun; a Man of Generous
Extraction, and by his Industry he has acquired a considerable Wealth. This
Person not long since, came from Constantinople, and has made it his Business,
ever since his Return, to extol the singular Morality and Justice of the
Mussulmans. In all Comapnies wherever he comes, it is usual with him to say,
The Turks are perfect Saints in Comparison with us. And to confirm his
Assertion, he relates many pretty Passages of Things happening whilst he
resided at the Imperial City; all in Honor of the True Believers. Which has
drawn upon him no small Hatred, Envy and Persecution from the Priests, and
their more bigoted Followers. However, he shrinks not from his Word, but
stoutly Maintains the Truth of his Assertions. And some Men of Sense who have
heard the Stories he tells, and the Elegant Account he gives of our Religion
and Morals, cannot forbear crying out, They are almost proselyted to the
Mohammedan Faith.

Among the rest, he recounts an Extraordinary Occurrence, which happened to
himself at his parting from Constantinople; which I thought it worth while to
acquaint thee with, in regard it is much taken notice of in Raris by all that
hear it; and conduces not a little to raise in the French, an higher Esteem of
the Mussulmans and our Holy-Faith, than they were wont to have.

It seems Monsieur de Vaubrun had enter^d into a strict Parnership with
Mustapha Zari, a Native of Turcomania, dwelling at Constantinople, and trading
in Silks Their mutual Traffic and Correspondence held for the space of Four
Years; at the end of which, the Frenchman being called Home to his Native
Country, by Letters from some of his Friends, to take Possession of an Estate
newly fallen to him by the Death of an Uncle, he gave his Partner notice of it,
telling him his Resolution was fixed to depart very speedily from the Port, and
take his Voyage for France; at the same Time desiring, that the Accounts
between them might be settled. Which was done accordingly; and in casting them
up, it was agreed upon by both, that this Monsieur Vaubrun remained indebted
Nine Hundred Zequins to Mustapha Zari. There was no Contention in the Case:
Monsieur very readily gave him Five Bags Sealed, and desired him to tell the
Money. No, replied Mustapha, We have dealt together thus long, and I have found
you an honest Man; God forbid that I should mistrust my Friend at our last
parting.

This was done the Day before Monsieur de Vaubrun was to take his Leave of
Constantinople; for he had Hired Horses to Travel by Land to Smyrna, his
Business so requiring. Therefore both Parties being well satisfied, they bid
Adieu to each other, wishing mutual Happiness. The next Day Monsieur de Vaubrun
took Horse for Smyrna, having dispatched all his Affairs at the Imperial Port.

It so happened, That as soon as he was gone, Mustapha had occasion to pay a
Thousand Five Hundred Zequins to a Merchant of Holland. Wherefore having newly
received those Five Bags from his Partner, he with them, made up the Sum due to
the Dutchman, saying withal, That he had not told the Money in those Five Bags,
in regard he took them on the Credit of a very worthy and honest Man, who had
been his Partner. But the Jealous Christian would not show so much Generosity;
for he presently broke up the Seals in the presence of Mustapha; and having
told over the Money, said 'twas all right, and was very fairly putting it up
again. But Mustapha, who had a quick Eye, and being well versed in telling of
Money, perceived there was a great Overplus above Nine Hundred Zequins.
Wherefore he bid the Dutchman hold his Hand, till he had told the Bags over
himself; for he suspected there was some mistake. The Nazarene durst not deny a
True Believer this Privilege, under the Grand Signior's Protection, whatever
he would have done in his own Country. So that when Mustapha had run the Money
over, he found Eleven Hundred and Fifty Zequins in Bags by themselves, and gave
the rest to the Hollander. In a word, having dispatched that Payment, he sent
an Express away immediately with the Two Hundred and Fifty Zequins to Monsieur
de Vaubrun, who he knew was to tarry some Days at a Town on the Road, about
Twenty Leagues from Constantinople, commanding the Courier to deliver him this
Message in writing. My Friend, God forbid that I should detain any Thing beyond
my Right, or deal with thee as a certain Frank would have done by me: For, thou
know that I took the Money on thy Credit without telling it, but being to
pay it away this Day to a Dutch Merchant, he not having the same Faith, would
tell it; and finding these Two Hundred and Fifty Zequins over and above the Sum
supposed to be in the Bags, yet would have smuggl'd them in his Dutch
Conscience, had not I discerned his Fraud, and prevented him. I send them to
thee as thy Right, supposing 'twas some oversight. God prohibites all Injustice.

This Relation I had from Monsieur de Vaubrun's own Mouth: And I tell thee, it
makes a great noise in Paris. I leave it to thy Mature Resolves, whether that
honest Mussulman deserves not some particular and public Honor to be done
him, who by such a rare Action of Justice, has raised a Noble Character of the
Mussulmans among the Infidels.

Most Illustrious and Serene Bassa, I pray the Almighty and All good God, to
have thee in his Holy Protection, and augment thy Virtues and Felicities.

Paris, 11th. of the 3d. Moon, of the Year 1675.
LETTER XII.
To Ibrahim Eli Zeid, Hadgi, Effendi, Preacher to the Seraglio.
HEre has happened something of Late, which the Priests magnify as an Apparent
Miracle; whilst, for ought I know, it is only a pure Effect of Nature.

Thou art not to learn, that the Nazarens have their Saints in great
Veneration: That they invoke then in their Necessities, set up their Images and
Pictures in Temples to be adored: That they preserve their Bones, Ashes, Hair,
Garments, or any Thing that deserves the Name of a Sacred Relic? That they
enshrine these in Coffins, Urns, Chests, and other Vessels of Gold and Silver,
adorned with Precious Stones: That they place them in their Moscks, as in
Sanctuaries; sometimes under their Altars, at other Times upon them: Some in
particular Oratories or Chapels, others in the Choire* That they carry them in
Procession in Times of Public Calamity, and on certain Festivals; thinking by
this means to pacify the Wrath of Heaven, and draw down the Divine Benediction.
Thou art not ignorant also, That they believe the Saints are Guardians of
certain Kingdoms, Provinces, Cities, Families, and even of Private Persons.

Hence St. Denis is esteemed the Patron of France; St. James of Spain; St.
George of England; and so of other Nations. Each City also has its peculiar
Guardian Saint. Hence St. Anthony is accounted the Patron of Padua; St. Mark of
Venice; and, to come to the Purpose, St. Genevieve is adored by the Citizens of
Paris, as the Patroness of this Place.

There is a Beautiful Temple built in Honor of her, on the Highest Ground in
the City, which also is called by her Name, the Mountain of St. Genevieve. On
the Decline of this, there is a Fountain of Delicate Water, which is called,
the Fountain of St. Genevieve.

They attribute many Miracles to this Female-Saint, some of which she performed
in her Lifetime, others after her Death, if we may believe what the Priests
affirm, and what is Recorded in the History of her Life, in the Annals of
Paris, and the Archives of the Convent belonging to her Temple. For there is a
certain number of Dorviches, of the chief Nobility in Paris, who consecrate
themselves for ever to a Religious Life, in Honor of this Virgin.

They meet Twice a Day in the Choire of the Church, all arrayed in long Robes
of white Linen, where they chant aloud the Praises of St. Genevieve. As often
they assemble, at different Hours in a private Chapel in their Cloy stere, to
perform the like Devotions. Those who are chosen into this Order, are all
Persons of Sweet and Lovely Countenances, graceful Demeanor, and learned
Education. One shall not see so much Regularity, Order, and devout Modesty, in
any Church in Paris, as appears in this, at the Time of Celebrating their
Divine Mysteries. Yet, for ought I know, all this may be but Hypocrisy and
pious Artifice, to attract the greater Reverence from the People, who are
present at their Ceremonies. I my self was astonished once, when being there, I
saw a Beautiful Youth approach the Altar with a Golden Censer, hanging at a
Chain which he held in one Hand; whilst with the other he wasted the Rich
Perfume toward the Statues, which stood on high behind the Altar. He had the
very Signature of Virtue in his Face. Besides, a certain Luster that seemed to
spring all on a sudden into his Eyes and Cheeks, discovering some inward
Rapture of his Soul. Methought he looked like one of the Pages of Eden, as they
are described in the Holy Alcoran.

I protest it was impossible for me to fix my Eyes upon him, and not to feel
the Passions of Platonic Love. He deported himself with a Grace which cannot
be expressed.

Afterward I contracted an intimate Familiarity with him on the account of
Arabic, which he learns of me. He is a Person of excellent natural Abilities*
and well versed in Languages, and all manner of Divine and Human Learning.

Pardon this Digression, Venerable Hadgi, in regard I could not forbear
mentioning a Person of whom I have a great deal more to say, than can well be
comprised in one Letter. Hereafter I will communicate a farther Account of him,
whilst I now return to the Church of St. Genevieve. In the upper part of the
Choire, Four Fillars of Jasper, with Four Golden Images of Angels on the Tops,
support the Shrine of this Saint, wherein lies enclosed all that remains of her
Body. Several Wax Tapers burn before it Day and Night. The Devouter sort of
People kneel and kiss the Pillars which sustain the admirable Relics. They
bring their Linen and other Vestments to the Priest, who is appointed for this
Office. He fastens them in the Cleft of a long Pole, and then raises that End
up to the Shrine, which is very near as high as the Roof of the Church. He
touches the Shrine with the Linen, etc. and having done so, he takes it down
again; when pronouncing a Benediction on it, in the Name of the Saint, he
restores it to the Party whose it is.

They believe that Linen or any Thing else belonging to the Body, being so
touched and blessed, has Power to chase away Maladies, to preserve them from
Dangers, to ease Women in Childbirth, and to make them prosper in all Things.
So profound is the Attach which they have for this famous Saint. But whether
there be any* Thing more in it than Superstition and Bigotry, God only knows.
However the Inhabitants of Paris, esteem this Shrine, as the Trojans did their
Palladium, and the Romans their Ancile, which fell from Heaven, as Numa
Pompilius made them believe.

When the City is threatened with any Public Calamity, this Shrine is taken
down with Abundance of Pomp and Solemnity, and carried in Procession through
the Streets; thinking thereby to divert the Vengeance of Heaven, and appease
the Anger of the Omnipotent.

Such was the Case here lately: There having fallen such an Overplus of
continual Rains, as threatened to destroy all the Corn and Herbage, with the
Fruits of the Earth; besides the Damage had been already done to Innumerable
Persons in their Houses and Goods by the vast Innundations.

This occasioned a Decree to come out for the taking down the Body of St.
Genevieve? and carrying it in Solemn Procession to the Temple of Nostre Dame:
Which was accordingly performed on the 17th. of this Moon. In the Procession
were seen all the Religious Orders in this City, both of Men and Women; the
Parliament of Paris, the Chamber of Accounts; the Court of Aides; the Court of
Moneys, with the whole Body of the Citizens.

But no sooner was the Shrine of St. Genevieve brought into the open Air, when
the Rain ceased, the Clouds dispersed, and the Sky became Serene and Clear: And
so it has continued over since.

The Priests will have this to be an Effect of Sr. Genevieve's Intercession
with God for the Province and City committed to her Patronage. And the People
are willing enough to believe it. If this Shrine be as efficacious in causing
Rain, when there is a Drought, as the Inhabitants of Paris affirm, it may nor
unfitly be compared to the Lapis Manalis of the Ancient Romans. This was a
certain great Stone, which in Time of Excessive Dryness, the Romans used to
draw into the City with vast Ropes, by the Gate Capena, whilst the Priests of
the God Mars, danced before it, and all the Vestals left the Sacred Fire, to
follow the Procession. They drew the Stone to the Temple of the Goddess Flora,
where they strewn upon it a Handful of withered Flowers and Herbs. Then
immediately it began to Rain, and they let the Stone lie there, as a Memorial
before the Temple of the Goddess, till they had enough of that sort of Weather,
to secure the Growth and Maturity of the Vegetables; and then they drew it back
again in the same manner as before, only each Vestal now carried some of the
Sacred Fire in an Earthen Vessel, whereas before they carried none.

Whether there be any real Efficacy in those Religious Ceremonies, or no, is
not in my Power to determine: But it is certain, that every Nation consides much
in the Mysteries taught them by their Priests. The Force of Education prevails
on most Men even to old Age; in regard they think it an Impiety to examine or
question the Traditions of their Fathers, especially when Heaven it self
confirms their Implicit Faith, by seeming to regard and answer their Religious
Addresses, in so peculiar a Manner as these forementioned Instances describe.

Sage Effendi, Tell me whether it be Heresy to affirm, That God has sent
Prophets into all Nations, each furnished with Instructions and Doctrines
agreeable to the Genius of the People whom they were to teach? And that he is
not displeased at the various Rites and Ceremonies by which every distinct
Region and Climate adore his Divine Unity?

Satisfy me in this, and then thou shall be more than Apollo in my Esteem; for,
I am full of Doubts.

Paris, 10th. of the 6th. Moon, of the Year 1675.
LETTERS Writ by A Spy at PARIS.
VOL. VIII.
BOOK II.
LETTER I.
To Dgnet Oglou.
SOmetimes I could wish my self without a Spleen, it overwhelms me in such deep
Melancholies: Yet when I consider the same Vital is a necessary Instrument of
Mirth and Laughter, I reverse that Wish again. Not that I am fond of a Levity
which makes us resemble Apes, rather than Men; tho the Philosophers say the
contrary. But I correct my Partial Thoughts, which would lay the fault on my
Body, when my Mind^ is chiefly to Blame For, he that is Master o^ his Reason,
r^ed ^ot fall into either Extreme, to be always a grinning like Democritus, or
howling with Heraclitus. Resignation and Tranquillity are the Golden Mean. And
he that steps over this Line, on one side or other, falls into the same Vanity
which he bemoans or ridicules in the rest of Mortals.

I have studied to know this World, and the Nature of all Things, but am never
the Wiser, after so many Years of search. I have perused many Books, and
conversed with more Men, yet none of them all can inform me of a certainty,
what I am my self. How then should I be able to comprenend the Essences of
Other Things? Henceforth, I Will lay aside this Inquisitive Folly, and be
careless, till Death shall either quite extinguish so troublesome a Passion, or
fully satisfy it with new Discoveries.

In that separate Stare, I hope to see in open Light, the Naked Forms of
Things, without the Interposition of a Veil or Gless, to thicken and dusk the
Prospect. Whereas, in this Life, we are fain to peep into the World through the
close Windows of our Senses; which are so o'rlaid and darkened with the Dust
our Passions raise, besides the Natural Dullness of their Composition, That we
are fain to run from Panel to Panel, and use the Optics of Philosophy to
help our Sight. Yet, after all, we still are purblind, and so are like to be
during this Mortal Life. But when once this Prison of ours shall be demolished
by a Tempest of Misfortune, or by some sudden Disaster; or it shall moulder
away through Sickness, Age, and Native Weakness, thus crumbling to its
primitive Dust; then shall the Soul expand it self, and fly at large in the
open Firmament of Wisdom, Light, and Science.

My Dgnet, Let thou and I be content to bear the Inconveniences of these
Earthly Cages for a while; and in a little Time we shall be consigned over to
Eternal Liberty. I designed to have said more; but I ^ell thee I Am too
Melancholy. Therefore Adieu for the Present.

Paris, 19th. of the 8th. Moon, of the Year 1675.
LETTER II.
To Hamet, Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire.
IT is above Ten Years ago since I gave thee an Account of the Renowned
Marshall de Turenne: Wherein I did not pretend his complete History, or
present thee with his full Character; but only to inform thee of some
remarkable Passages in his Life, and to draw an imperfect Idea of his Virtues.
Which though they were very great, yet were not sufficient to skreen him from
the Chance of War, and the Stroke of a Violent Death.

On the Six and Twentieth of the Moon of July, this great General, having given
all necessary Orders for a Battle, with the Imperialists in Alsatia, was
surveying a certain raised Ground near Strasbourg, on which he designed to
plant a Battery; when a Cannon Shot from the Town, guided by Fate more than by
the Gunners Aim or Skill, came grazing along on the Earth, and in its Carcer
gave this Hero a Mortal Blow on the Breast, of which he instantly died,
without speaking a Word.

There was an Officer of the Artillery in his Company, who spied the Course of
the Bullet at a Distance, and happily started out of the Way. He reports, that
Monsieur Turenne saw the same, but whether out of the Greatness of his Spirit,
which would not suffer him to appear timorous of Death, or whether his extreme
Thoughtfulness on the approaching Battle, kept him from providing for his own
Safety; it is certain he stood Immovable, and sustained the Fatal Stroke which
cost him his Life.

The Court of France laments his Death, with extraordinary Demonstrations of
Sorrow: And so does all the Kingdom. Indeed they have Reason: France having
never sent into the Field a Man more accomplished with all the Virtues and
Heroic Qualities requisite in a great General.

They relate Two or Three remarkable Passages of his Life, which either
happened since I wrote my former Letter to thee about him; or at least they
came not to my knowledge at that Time.

One was a little after his Brother the Duke of Bouillon's Death, when he was
seen to weep very affectionately, tho he endeavored to hide his Passion from
the Observation of others. Which was taken notice of as an Argument of his
Compassionate Temper; and that all the Blood which had been spilt in his sight,
and under his Conduct, had not diminished his Natural Tenderness and Humanity.

He was sincerely Modest, without giving the World any occasion to judge, that
he only affected to appear so. For when any of his Friends or Creatures would
run into Hyperboles, in extolling his Actions, he would not by a feigned
Humility, and denying all they said, lay a Train for greater Flatteries; but he
so discreetly moderated his Answers, that at the same Time he appeared sensible
of his True Merit, without the least Symptom of Arrogance or Vainglory.

So when some Lords came to condole the Loss of his Brother, that they might
comfort him, they turned the Discourse to a Panegyric on himself, highly
extolling the whole Series of his Heroic Performances. But looking on them
with a steadfast Gravity, and fetching a deep Sigh, he replied* It is the
Opinion of the World, that I am something versed in the Affairs of War: It
would he an Ungrateful Presumption to oppose the Public Sentiment. But, I can
assure you, there is nothing more certain, than that much of my Knowledge in
this kind, is owing to my Deceased Brother, who by Rules taught me many
advantageous Improvements of Martial Discipline. And I learned not a little
from his own Exemplary Conduct.

Another Remark they make, is on the Liberality of this General, and his
Contempt of Riches: For he really impoverished himself to reward and gratify
his Friends. It being a Word very common in his Mouth, That he would love on
the King's Pay, and his Friends should live on his Estate. Yet he was but a
Younger Brother. Which made his Wife often say, That were it not for the King's
Money, her Husband entertained such a Retinue of Noble Beggars about him, That
she feared both he and she must in a little Time, take up the same Trade, and
turn Mendicants themselves.

It is credibly reported of this great Man, that he set his Heart so little on
Money, as not to know one Piece of Coin from another, nor their different Value
in Exchange.

Once he was heard to say these words, to some of the Nobles who were
discoursing on Wealth, I wonder, said he, what pleasure Me^ can take in
hoarding up great Heaps of Money: For my Part if at the End of the Year, I
should find in my Coffers, a great Treasure of Gold left, it would Nauseate me
as much, as if just when I had made a full Dinner, I should be forced to sit
still, and glut my self by eating of the same Dishes over again.

And that which is most to be admired is, That even in his Old Age, to which
Avarice is so Natural, his Purse was always open, and he gave away his Money as
Liberally, as in his Youth. So that when he was Dead, they could find no more
than Five Hundred Crowns in his Keeping. Besides, he died much in Debt, which
he Contracted on the Armies Account, that they should not want their pay in due
Season. But, it is said the King either has discharged these Debts or will do it
in a little Time,

He was a Man of no great Presence either for Tallness or graceful Features;
being of an ordinary Size, and heavy Countenance. With a Mein and Air more like
a Citizen or Mechanic, than a Soldier. Which justifies the old Proverb, That
the Face is not always the True Index of the Heart. For all the World knows,
that, he was a Man of Great Resolution and Bravery.

They attribute many of his Victories to his Regular and Sage Conduct; others
to his Fortune; whilst they cannot deny, That some were owing entirely to the
Force of his Invincible Courage.

It were easy to relate many Instances of this kind. But, I will not tire thy
Patience. My Letter is already stretched beyond its designed Limits; yet it
comes far short of reaching the Character of this Prince. However it would be
Invidious not to inform thee of all I know concerning him, worth Observation.

In the Time of the Civil Wars, after he had abandoned the Party of the
Malcontents, and was made General of one of the King's Armies, he gave an
admirable proof of his undaunted Valor. For, when he had but Three Thousand
Five Hundred Men with him, and those in a manner hemmed in by Fourteen Thousand
of the Rebels; so that there was but one Pass left, whereby he might escape,
and he was strongly pressed to make use of that advantage: No, says he, I will
not any longer live to see my Sovereign shut out of his own Cities; Orleans
barred her Gates against him, even whilst the King's Forces were entire, before
they had received any Loss or Defeat, and can we expect they will any where be
more favorable to him, when they shall behold us flying from our Victorious
Enemies? No: This Fatal Day shall either put a Check to their Success, or give
a Period to my Life. And the Event answered his Expectation. For he entered
into Battle with the Prince of Conde, and routed all his Forces. Ever since
which, he has done the French King so many eminent Services, as Amply made
Amends for his Two Years Revolt.

He is now gone to the other World, not as to a Campaign, but to Celebrate an
Eternal Triumph among the Famous Heroes of the Earth. The King has in Honor of
his Merits, caused his Body to be buried in the Temple of St. Denis, where all
the Blood Royal of France is reposited. Showing in this, how little difference
he makes between him that sits on the Throne, and him that well supports it.

Illustrious Hamet, I pray Heaven inspire the Sultan to reward thee and all his
Faithful Ministers, and Valiant Generals, with particular Honors,
proportionate to every Man's distinct Merits, and Services. Adieu.

Paris, 4th. of the 9th. Moon, of the Year 1675.
LETTER III.
To the Kaimacham.
THere happen many remarkable Events in a year, which I cannot presently
transmit an Account of, for want of Timely Intelligence. My Letters are often
finished and sealed, and sometimes sent away before I hear of the Taking of
such a City, or Strong Hold; of this Victory on the French side, or that
Success on the Part of their Enemies, the Germans, Spaniards, and Hollanders.
And I do not think it worth while to trouble the Ministers of the Port with an
After-Dispatch, only to inform them of some Siege, Battle, or other petty
Occurrence, as often as they come to my knowledge. Choosing rather to recapitulate
in one Letter, at the end of the year, all such Passages as were omitted
before, That so my Intelligence however dis-joynted and parcel'd out into
Fragments, may yet at last be set together again, and made entire.

Thus the taking of Bellegand in Roussillon from the Spaniards, by the
Marshall de Schomberg, was not a matter of that Importance as to deserve a
particular Letter on Purpose to keep Time with the Action. Yet it is convenient
to insert it in this Summary of Transactions omitted in my former Letters; That
so the Ottoman Register may not be imperfect and defective. This Fortress was
taken about Midsummer, after an Entrenchment of Seven Days.

But Fortune though she seems to have declared in Favor of the French Arms,
yet to show her Inconstancy, sometimes turns her Smiles to Frowns, and seems
for a While to leave them in the Lurch.

On the 11th. of the 8th. Moon, there happened an Accident at Treves, which
occasioned the Loss of that Town to the Confederate Enemies of France, and a
little clouded the Glory of the Marshall de Crequi's Arms, who had hitherto
Fought Successfully, and gained the Reputation of a very Wise and Prudent
General.

It seems the Governor of Treves, whom they call the Sieur Vignory had Orders
to come out of the Town that very Day, and join the Marshall de Crequi with
Five Thousand Men of the Garrison, to put in Execution some Design they had
upon the Confederate Forces, which lay not far off. The Governor in Compliance
with the Order, was Marching his Men over a Bridge, when his Horse suddenly
starting at the Discharge of a Pistol fell with his Rider into the Ditch, where
they both perished. Now this unfortunate Gentleman not having discovered his
Secret Order to any Person Living; his Lieutenant being ignorant of the Design,
and troubled at this unhappy Accident, caused the Five Thousand Men to March
back again into the Town. In the mean time the Marshall de Crejui in vain
expected the coming of these Recruits, and finding himself too weak, to resist
the more numerous Troops of his Enemies, was forced to give Way, whilst they
advanced to besiege the Town, the main Thing which he aimed to prevent. In this
Straight he had nothing else to do but to throw himself with his Forces into
the Town, that so his Presence might supply the Dead Governors Place, till the
King's Pleasure were known. He defended the Place with much Resolution and
Bravery: But by the Treachery of a certain Captain belonging to the Garrison,
it was at length taken, after Abundance of Bloodshed. This Traitors Name was
Bosejourdan; he held a private Correspondence with the Enemy, informed them of
the Disadvantages the Town lay under; corrupted several of the Garrison, and
did all Things that might facilitate the Reduction of the Place. For which he
was deservedly hanged, having been delivered into the Hands of the French, by
those; who, though they made use of the Treason, yet could not but abhor the
Traitor.

The Imperialists took Courage upon this Success, and began to think, That
since the Death of Marshall Turenne, Fortune had abandoned the Interest of
France, and entered into the Confederacy with them. Hereupon Count Montecueuli
on the 20th of the 8th Moon invested Haguenau, a strong Place in the Hands of
the French. But the Appreach of the Prince of Conde soon made him raise the
Siege. Since which there has been little of Action on either Side, save the
taking of Thuin, a Town situated on the Sambre, and which commands all the
Country between that River and the Mouse. It was surrendered to the French
about the Beginning of the 11th. Moon, on Condition that the Privileges of the
Inhabitants should be preserved, and that they should not be forced to maintain
the King's Garrison.

There have been lately some Seditions in the Provinces of Bretagne and
Guienne, said to be secretly abetted by the Parliaments of Bourdeaux and
Rennes. For which the King has signified his Displeasure by removing those
Assemblies to other Places, after having inflicted severe and exemplary
Punishments on the Ringleaders of the Tumults.

And now this Monarch seems to be weary of the Fatigues of War, having
published a Manifesto, wherein he complains of the Injury done to Prince
William of Furstemberg, Plenipotentiary from the Bishop of Cologne; Declares
that he had reason to show his Resentments of an Affront given to his Allie,
contrary to the Law of Nature; that nevertheless he had labored for the
general Peace of Christendom: And was now in the same Inclination. On which
Account he sent the Sieur Colbert Master of the Requests, and the Count d'
Avaux to Nimeguen there to assist at the Conferences of Peace.

Some say this Propension to Peace is the Effect of a Vow the King made, when
he was lately afflicted with a violent Fever. Be it how it will, the Captains
and Soldiers on all Sides are agreed to cease from Acts of Hostility, during
this cold Season: finding it much more comfortable to wallow in Beds of Down,
than to lief abroad in the Snow; and to lay close Siege to a good Fire, than to
campaign it in Trenches full of Water and Ice.

Illustrious Minister, I pray God make thee happy all the Four Seasons of the
Year; but especially to give thee his Winters Blessing, a Warm House, an
agreeable Bedfellow; Plenty of the Gifts of Ceres and Bacchus, a Merry Heart,
and a Good Stomach.

Paris, 7th. of the 12th. Moon, of the Year 1675.
LETTER IV.
To Abdel Melec Muli Omar, President of the Coll. of Sciences at Fez.
THY Packet came just now to my Hands, in an Hour of Felicities, under a Noble
and Propitious Asterism. The Constellations Above smile on Mahmut at this
Season. A Thousand soft and Serene Pleasures distill upon my Soul; a Pearl of
Heavenly Dew sits on every blooming Thought. My Heart is like a Garden in the
Mornings of an Autumn-Solstice, fresh and fragrant, though drooping for Age.

I have spent the Spring and Summer of my Life, in Error, Ignorance and Vanity.
It Is Time that I should provide for the Winter of my Age, a Stock of Solid
Wisdom and Virtue. And Heaven to show its Love and Care of Mortals, inspired
he with the Generous Thoughts of assisting me once more by thy sage
Instructions. Thy Dispatch contains such a Scheme of Philosoph: and Reason, as
never can be refuted. Thou act the Apollo of the Age.

Glory be to God, Majestic, Living and Strong, Eternal Father and Sourse of
Lights, Fountain of Intellectual Perfections, Original Treasury of Reason; with
whom remain from Everlasting Ages, the Idea's of all Things past, present and
to come; the Patterns of Things visible and invisible, the Exemplars of every
Thing that has had, shall, or can have Existence in the Universe. Blessed be
the Wood and Breath of God, the Spirit of Life and Understanding, which in the
determined Periods of Time, enters into Holy Souls, making them the Favorites
of the Most High, and Prophets.

That Spirit descends sometimes and on some Persons, like a gentle Shower in
Harvest; but on thee it pours down like the Rivers from Paradise, in Vast and
Mighty Cataracts. Wisdom overflows thy Soul, as the Nile: The Streams thereof
are strong and rapid as the Currents of Tygris and Euphrates; Rich, and
inebriating as the Waters of Jordan; thy Mind is covered with a Deluge of
Science.

O! Immarcessible Wisdom! Blessed is the Man that has thee for his Portion in
this Life. The Gold has no Value or Beauty when compared with thee: The Diamond
and Saphir sad and look dull; and the choicest Pearls of the Orient lose their
Luster in thy Presence. Doubtless, Wisdom shines for ever, and is
incorruptible. It is a pure resplendent Essence flowing from the Eternal Glory;
a sincere Emanation from the Divine Nature; The Spotless Mirror of God,
wherein he beholds his own Immortal Excollencies. It is Ten Thousand Times more
serene than the Light it self, brigher than the Sun, purer than the Sky, and
more sparkling than all the Host of the Stars. The Glittering Crowd of Angels
are edlips'd in her Presence, and all the Radiant Orders of the Blessed Above,
serve but as Foils to set forth her Superlative and all-penetrating
Coruscations.

God brought her forth from the Womb of his Unfathomable Depths, she sprang
from the Treasures which cannot be exhausted. In the Morning of the World, she
ronz'd the benumbed Chaos with her efficacious Beams. Her Energy gave Life and
Form to the confused and dark Abyss. She shines from one Extremity of the
Universe to another, illuminating Infinite Spaces. She is a refulgent Circle of
Light, whose Center is every where, but whose Circumference is not to be found.

Ask those who pitch their Pavilions above all Worlds, the outlying Camps of
the Omnipotent, who guard the Frontiers of the Blisful Regions, and walk the
Rounds of our Remotest Heaven, the Coelum Empyraeum; to fire its Beacons on the
Discovery of any foreign Invasion threatened by some New Vpstart Republic of
Beings, hatched in the cold and frozen Climates of the Endless Expanse: Ask
those, I say, whether they ever could trace the Eternal Wisdom in her Flights?
Or find the Solitary Haunts of Everlasting Reason? They may pursue the glorious
Chase, over the Untrack'd Wastes of the Unlimitted, Unformed First Matter, as
well as through the Fenced Fields and Parks, the enclosed Land-mark'd Grounds
of this known World: But all in vain. There is no catching what is Infinite.
The Wings of all created Fancies are too short and weak. The Cherubims
themselves and Seraphims are far too flow, to seize so swift a Prey. Wisdom is
wild as Chance, concealed as Nature, yet fixed as Destiny.

She dwells beyond the Highest Heavens; her Throne is inaccessible; yet she
fills all Things with her Presence. She sought for a Place of Repose on Earth
among the Sons of Men. She traversed the Nations by Land, and visited the Isles
of the Sea. She descended into the Abysses below, and made her Scrutiny in the
Horrid Caverns of the Clobe. At length she found Rest in Abraham; and pitched
her Habitation in Ismael: Because it was so determined of old, from Sempiternal
Ages, and recorded in the Archives of Fate. She was established in Mecca, the
Birthplace of the Prophet, and her Power is rooted in Medina Telnabi, the
place of his Burial. The Holy Cities are ennobl'd by her Presence, and she
shines in the midst of an Honorable Race, an Offspring born to Glory, a
Renowned People, a Sanctified Pregeny; a Generation of Worthies; a Family of
Hero's, a Lineage whereon rest the Favors and Smiles of the Omnipotent.

Oh Arabia! Well may thou be called the Happy, since in thee is the Seat of
the Eternal Sapience. Go Mourn, ye Mountains of Judaea! and all ye desolated
Valleys of Palestine: For the Dew and the Rain have forsaken you. Your Soil
languishes for want of Moisture, and your Glebe is dried up. Your Trees wither
and fade; neither does the Ground bring forth any Grass or Flowers. The
Pastures are become like a Wilderness, overrun with Briars and Thorns, and your
Arable Fields, are as the Lybian Wastes, barren and unprofitable. The Land that
was once called Holy, is now become Execrable, a Habitation of Satyrs and
Damons: Because Wisdom has translated her Residence from Sion, and the Angels
have Decamped from the Climate of Jerusalem.

Rejoice, O Regions bordering on the East of the Red Sea! For with you is a
Great Light, even the Law brought down from Heaven, and the Glory of the Most
High overshadows you.

Wisdom is exalted in Arabia; she lifts up her Head above the Top of Mount of
Vriel: She flourishes like the Palm Tree, and spreads her Boughs as the
Terebinth: Many Nations rest under the Shadow of her widespread Branches: Her
Ways are Uniform and Beautiful, like an Alley of Cypresses; and all her Paths
are sweet as a Garden of Cinnamon, Myrrh, and Roses. Her Fruit feeds the East
and the South; her Salutiferous Leaves are scattered from India, to the Land of
the Moors, where thou dwell. Her fragrant Odor is diffused from Pole to
Pole.

She is the Mother of Science and Virtue; in her Custody are the Springs of
Life and Health, of Honor and Riches: She has in her Treasures locked up
Innumerable Kinds of Felicities, which she plentifully pours forth on them that
obey her Inspirations. She appears cheerfully to them that wait upon her; and
no Man ever departed from her Presence, but he fell into Sadness. For, a
certain enlivening Influence flows from her Countenance; a Man is ravished with
her Conversation. Her Breath is sweeter than Ambrosia, or the Vapor of Eastern
Incense. Her Thoughts are fragrant, as the Aromatic Exhalations of Nardus,
Onyx, and Stacte. All Words are too short to express her Praises, neither is
there any Style or Language that can describe her Incomparable Worth. Therefore
with Reverence I desist from saying any more at this Time, on so sublime a
Subject; lest whilst I am prolonging the Panegyric of Wisdom, I proclaim my
own Folly, to a Sage who is familiar with her, and best knows her Character.

In the mean Time, Vouchsafe to accept of these Lines, as a Testimony of the
profound Veneration I have for thee who art known through all Africa, and other
Parts of the World, to be One of the First Rank among Wisdom's Favorites.

Adieu, Great Lamp of Mauritania, and believe, That Mahmut is no Flatterer.

Paris, 19th. of the 3d. Moon, of the Year 1676.
LETTER V.
To the Captain Bassa.
IF I write often to the Bassa's of the Land, I do not forget the Duty I owe to
him of the Sea. Only that Element has not been the Stage of so many Remarkable
Actions as the other: There are no Forts, Castles, or strong Cities, built upon
the Waves: No settled Camps, or formal Sieges, unless it be upon the Frozen
Seas, within or near the Artick Circle. And there they only imitate the Trade
of War to exercise their Youth.

However, on the other Parts of the Ocean, there are flying Campagnes, Battles
en Passant; and this Year has afforded some Marine Engagements between the
French, Hollanders, and Spaniards, not altogether unworthy of thy Knowledge.

On the 8th. of the 1 st. Moon, there happened a Naval Fight between the Sieur
de Quesne, Lieutenant General of the French Fleets, and de Ruiter Vice Admiral
of the Dutch. Wherein the later suffered considerable Damage. But far greater
was their Loss on the 22d. of the 4th. Moon following; when the famous de
Ruiter was killed, and several of the Dutch Ships Sunk, Burnt, and taken, Yet,
that which makes the greatest Noise, was a Battle fought on the 2d. of this
present Moon, between the Marshall de Vivonne, Commander of the French Fleet,
on the Coast of Sicily, and the United Naval Forces of Spain and Holland.

I have a Particular Account of this Combat; and because I know thou delightest
in Relations of this Nature, I will acquaint thee in short, how they first
encountered each other, and what Methods the French used to gain a glorious
Victory over Two Fleets, much more numerous in Ships than their own.

It was not far from the Old dangerous Straight between Charybdis and Scylla,
where the Duke de Vivonne descried the Hostile Navies making toward the Place
where he lay with his Fleet at Anchor. The Alarm was quickly given, and all
Hands to the Cable: As soon as they had weighed, they made all the Sail they
could toward the Enemy. The Spaniards and Hollanders had Tewenty Seven Ships of
War, Nineteen Galleys, and Four Fire Ships. The French had but Nineteen Ships
of War, Seven Galleys, and Five Fire Ships. These got the Wind of their
Enemies, and attacqu'd them so fiercely, that they drove several of their
Capital Vessels on those dangerous Rocks and Sands, where they were lost; and
they burnt Thirteen more of their Best Ships, among which were the Admiral of
Spain, and the Vice Admiral of Holland.

I cease to say more of this remarkable Fight, save that it is esteemed only
Second to the Famous Battle of Lepanto.

Prince of the Sea, I wish thee equal Success, when ever thou fightest against
the Enemies of God and his Prophet.

Paris, 14th. of the 6th. Moon, of the Year 1676.
LETTER VI.
To the Sage of Sages, the Mysterious Eremite, the Great Mohammed, of Mount
Uriel, in Arabia.
THere is no Man in this Mortal Life, who has not changed his Opinions one Time
or other. And whether it be an Argument of Wisdom or Folly, Knowledge or
Ignorance, to be thus Mutable in our Thoughts; we find few tenacious in their
Old Age, of the Notions they entertained in their Youth.

We have some Natural and Proleptick Idens born with us; others imposed upon us
by our Parents, Nurses and Tutors. Our Infant Fancies are tender, flexible, and
receptive of any Impressions; like Gold that yields to every Stamp and Coin, of
a new Sovereign. So in the Mint of Human Conversation, our Thoughts are molded
and formed, by each prevailing Genius that keeps us Company. Nay, a New Book
that we have an Inclination for, shall quite obliterate all that before was
current Reason with us, and transform our Faculties into another Figure. So
true it is, That Mankind delights in Novelty.

Whether it be an Effect of this General Weakness in Human Nature, or of my own
particular Inconstancy; or in fine, of more correct and mature Consideration, I
will not determine. But this I am sure of, That I cannot think now of several
things, as I have done formerly, without offering great Violence to my present
Reason. I am as apt now to suspect my self of Dotage at these Years, as other
Men are inclined to flatter themselves into a Conceit of their own Wisdom, and
to boast of it to others at the same Age. However, it appears evident to me,
That every Man's Experience perfects his Speculations: And he who trafficks in
the Mart of Philosophy on the Stock of his own Discoveries, is in a fairer Way
to improve himself, than a Man that trades altogether on the Credit of other
Men's Conceptions.

The latter is but Wisdom's Factor, or he may be called, a Brother in the
Sciences, or a Banquier of other Men's Imaginations; He frequents the Common
Exchange or Burse of Learning; reads the Books of the Ancients; converses with
the Wits, and most accomplished Spirits of the present Age. Yet after all, he
has but a Retail Profit. Nor shall he ever have better, so long as he dares not
venture something of his own

Whereas the former is a Rich Substantial Merchant, dealing on his own Bottom.
He ventures on the wide Ocean of the Worlds peevish censorious Humor; runs the
Hazard of Shipwreck, and Corsairs. The Winds and Storms of human Malice do not
fright him; nor all the Rocks of Superstition established by the Laws of
Nations. No Sands or Shelves, or any undermining private Interest, can baulk
his Courage; whilst he has the Gales of Truth, and Tide of Primitive Reason on
his side. For then he knows the Common Fortune will be his Pilot, and steer him
safe through all.

From what I have said, thou will expect some new refined Thesis to drop from
my Pen, some very solid Dogma to be broached, after such a tedious Praelude.
But I tell thee plainly, I hardly know what I Am to write next, save only that I
have some general Notions different from what I had before, concerning the
Eternity of the World.

It was formerly my Opinion, and I passed it upon all my Friends; That not only
the Matter of the World is everlasting, but its present Form also. But now I
believe the contrary, on more rational Grounds. It is not so perfect as I
esteemed it, Every Year of my Life convinces me of its Decaying State. It
manifestly droops and crumbles away. Therefore by proportion of Argument, we
ought to conclude, It is corruptible in its first Principles, and consequently
had a Beginning, and shall have an End.

I do not believe it shall be annihilated, or reduced to nothing; Nature abhors
that Thought: But it shall be changed, metamorphos'd, and transformed. Vna dies
dabit exitio, One Day shall consign it to Ruin, as Lucretius says; and the same
shall give it a brighter Form than ever it had; when the Earth shall become
pure Crystal, and the Stars shall outshine the Sun; and the Sun himself shall
be dissolved into his Eternal Principles of Light. The Philosophers who have
spoke of the Last Day, agree that the World shall be calcined by Fire;
especially those of the East and South: for they positively assert, That when
the moisture of the Universe shall be exhausted and spent [The Elements will
pour forth Flames] says Hermes Trismegistus, (...). Scribitur in Fatis, etc.
[a Treasury of Fire] says Sophocles. And Ovid asserts, That the Seas shall be
dried up, and all the Firmament shall appear like a Furnace. Heaven and Earth
shall be mingled Pell-mell together. The Greeks say, The World shall boil up
and scum off its Impurities, (...) with a Noise like that of a Tempest, or a
Woirlwind. The Italians express it otherwise, by the Sound a Clock makes just
before it strikes the Hour; for it moves in an even and regular Course, and has
a steady Pulse till then; but when the last Minute is expired, the Wheels rush
all together with a louder Noise: So shall the Orbs above, and these inferior
Elements, when their Course is done, break all their Harmony, and with confused
Cracks and Ratlings disgorge their Essences into the Lap of their eternal
Chaos, there to be renewed and changed again into far nobler Forms, although
the original Substance still remains the same; for I believe the first Matter
to be unchangeable and eternal, without Beginning or End. But there have passed
many Millions of Ages, in the Production of such an infinite Variety of Forms.
Perhaps the Grounds of Astrology are true, and that there were of old certain
Periods of Time affixed, first for the Product of the Heavenly Signs and
Constellations, then for the Planets, and afterward for the Nativity of all
the other Beings below the Moon. But Moses, the Lawgiver and chief
Philosopher of the Jews, is of a contrary Judgment; for he says, The Vegetables
had Existence before the Stars. And so one does not know what to think among
'em all. For ought I know, any Man's Reason might be received with as much
Applause as that of Moses, who should assert, That there are certain Horses
formed of the purest Light, galloping up and down the infinite Expanse for an
indeterminate Series of Ages, the Dust of whose Feet first raised the Elements
out of Nothing, and then their Hoofs striking against the original Flints of
Nature, begat the Sparks which shall set the World a-fire at last. And God
knows whether the late Conflagration at the Imperial City was not owing to a
Scratch of one of those Horses Nails, though they are pleased to lay it on the
Giaurs and Kysilbaschi.

By my Soul, I believe all Things proceed from eternal Chance. All that we
admire so much in the World, is a mere Higgle-de-Piggledy of Things which may
be or may not be, only they are; and so we must not quarrel with any Thing that
has Existence. We behold the Sun, Moon, and Stars, over our Heads; they give us
their successive Light by Night and Day. We trample upon the Earth under our
Feet, and sail on the open Sea, to which we can give no great Trust. At the
same time we know not the Natures of these different Beings: The Sun may be but
an eternal Carbuncle for ought we know, and the Moon but a crested Saphir; the
rest of the Planets but the Refractions of these bright Essences, and all the
Fixed Stars but so many Splinters of the eternal Torch which lights the World.
And after all the rest, this Earth whereon we tread, may be but a Wart or Mole,
a little silly Excrescence, or superfluous Tumor of the Elements, if not a
Gangrene in Nature.

Oh Mohammed! I have said too much to a Man of thy abstruse Speculations, but
thou will pardon one that speaks with Faith and Sincerity.

Let me put in one Word more with thee, Oh Chief of the Solitaries, Trince of
the Sylvans, Glory of Arabia, Thou Hidden one of the East, Thou Phoenix of all
Generations! No Body was born for himself, No Body is Wise at all Times. And
this is a particular Season wherein the Grand Signior's Service requires me to
be, as it were, a little foolishly merry. Therefore, begging thy Pardonn and
Prayers, I bid thee Adieu.

Paris, 13th. of the 8th. Moon, of the Year 1676.
LETTER VII.
To Pesteli Hali, his Brother, Master of the Customs, and Superintendent of the
Arsenal at Constantinople.
IT will do thee no hurt to carry the following News to Hamet Reis Effendi. I
entrench on the Post's Time, and my own Health, it being very late in the
Night, on purpose that the Ministers of the Port may have the earliest Account
of the Taking of Philipsbourg from the French by the Confederate Princes and
States.

This is a Town of great Importance, and very strong. The Spaniards became
Masters of it in the Year 1633, through the Treachery of the Governor. Next
Year following the Suedes put it again in the French King's Hands: but that
Monarch not being able to repair its Fortifications, by reason of the Winter,
it was surprised by the Imperialists on the 23d of the first Moon 1635; in
whose Hands, it remained till the Year 1644; when in the 9th Moon it was taken
by the Duke Enguyen, now Prince of Conde, after he had routed the Duke of
Bavaria at Friburgh. The French have had it in Possession ever since that time,
till about four Days ago it was Surrendered, upon Conditions, to the
Imperialists, who had blocked it up above a Year, and formally Besieged it four
Moons.

It is a Loss which this Court resents with no small Grief, Philipsbourg being
a Town of more Value than twenty others in those Parts. The French have taken
Conde, Bouchain, and Air, but they do not think these an equivalent Reprizal;
neither can this Campaign last long enough to give them an Opportunity of
seeking farther Satisfaction.

Brother, I must conclude abruptly, because the Post tarries. God have thee in
his Keeping, and preserve thee from the Snares and malicious Ambuscades of
Devils, who are let loose from their Infernal Dens to range above ground, from
this Hour, to the Crowing of the Cocks.

Paris, 12th of the 9th Moon of the Year 1676.
LETTER VIII.
To Sephat Abercromil, Vanni, Effendi, Preacher to the Sultan.
ABout five Years ago I sent thee a Dispatch, containing an Account of the kind
Reception thy Doctrins found in Europe, and of the swift Progress they made in
Converting the honester sort of Nazarenes. I also acquainted thee with the
Opposition that was made against the Writings of Francis Malevella, by the
Jesuits and Dominicans. Now I shall inform thee farther of the prodigious
Advances this Sacred Institution of Life his made in Italy, France, and Spain,
with Germany, and other Regions in the West.

There is an eminent Man in Rome, whom they call Father Petrucci, a Person of
great Learning, and conspicuous Knowledge. His Piety indeed has been by him
industriously concealed, as much as lay in's Power: But yet his most recluse
good Works took Air, and all Men of Integrity conceive a Veneration for him. He
having read the Works of Malevella, grew enamored of so sublime a System of
spiritual Rules; and wrote to all his Friends by way of Recommendation of the
Author and his Subject. Those Letters afterward were put in Print, and it is
not to be expressed, what powerful Influence they had on all impartial Readers.
He published also many learned Treatises, in the Defense and Praise of a
Contemplative Life. And the Reputation of this refined Theology daily
increased, and spread abroad in every Corner of the Christian World.

Among the rest of learned Proselytes, a certain Spanish Priest, and Doctor of
the Christian Law, whom they call Michael de Molino, appeared upon the Stage;
and the last Year published a comprehensive Treatise of Mystical Religion. The
Book was approved and Licensed by the Archbishop of Rheggio, by the General of
the Franciscans, an Officer of the Inquisition, and by Martin de Esparsa, an
eminent Jesuit belonging to the same Court, and Professor of Theology at Rome.
The Press had no sooner delivered this mysterious Treatise to the World, but
every body caught it up. So that the first Edition being soon dispersed in
Rome, Ferrara, Naples, and other Cities of Italy, it was necessary to start a
new Impression of so acceptable a Thing, that the remaining Provinces, States,
and Principalities, might not want their share of so divine a Copy; That Spain
might be reformed by one of her own Natives; and Generous France forgetting her
Aversions, might not disdain the sage Instructions of a hated Spaniard. In a
word, Molino's Book is had in second Veneration with the Gospel. His Friendship
is coveted by the greatest Men in Rome; especially the Secular Clergy are
ambitious to confirm the Honors, Dignities, and Benefices they already possess
in the Church, by gaining the Favor of his Acquaintance. They consult him as an
Oracle in knotty Problems of Divinity; and many Cardinals court his
Correspondence, not valuing their Rank in the Red List of Ecclesiastical
Princes, unless they are also enrolled in the happy Number of Molino's Friends;
such are Carpegna, Azolini, Cassanta, Odescalchi, and the French Cardinal
D'Estrees.

This last is famous for his Learning and Accomplishments, being Educated in
the Sorbonne, and a Familiar of Monsieur De Lumay a great Reformer of Errors in
the Doctrine and Discipline of the Roman Church. Being thus predispos'd to favor
any one who would expose himself to stem the Torrent of Corruptions, the Tide
of vain and superstitious Practices, advancing daily higher and higher, and
threatening to overflow the Banks of solid Piety, sincere Devotion, and all
Moral Virtue, the Generous Cardinal appeared the public Patron of Molino, and
in private they had many Conferences. The Spaniard laid aside his Native
Jealousy of Foreigners, and the Frenchman mortified his Pique against that
Nation. They both conversed with openness of Heart, and unreserved Freedom.

The Cardinal also, after this, brought him acquainted with several Eminent Men
in France, between whom and Molino was held a strict Intelligence. The new
Pope, who was before called Cardinal Odescalchi, has given him an Apartment in
his own Palace, and done him many other Honors. In a word, he is grown so
considerable, that the greatest part of Nazarenes look upon him as a Prophet
sint from God.

I take Complacency to see Mahometanism thus masquerade it in the Heart of
Christendom; and the most refined Draught of our Religion copied in the Lives
and Practices of the most Excellent among the Nazarenes. It Is a fair Sign,
methinks, that by degrees they will enquire a little farther, and with more
Humility, into our Sacred Law; that they will not stumble at Circumcision.
Washing, and other Purifications and Ceremonies appointed by the Prophet; since
they are all performed in Honor of the eternal Unity, and not to Images or
Pictures. However at least, such pious and contemplative Men as these, will, by
a necessary Consequence, raise up a secret Faction for us, and qualify the
bitter Zeal and Spite which Christians generally bear against the True
Believers. For the Followers of Malevella, Petrucci, and Molino, are already
branded, and distinguished from the rest of the Nazarenes, by the odious Names
of Heretics, which is next door to the more opprobrious Title of Infidels, the
best and kindest Epithet they can afford the faithful Mussulmans.

To sum up all in brief, they reckon a hundred thousand of this new Sect in
Italy, as many more in France and Spain, and not much fewer in Germany; besides
Poland, Hungary, and other Regions. So that if an Army of Mussulmans should
appear on the Italian Shore with Vanni Effendi at the Head of them, and
Declarations should be spread about, containing that you aim at nothing but to
propagate the Truth, and to protect the injured Molinists or Quietists, (for so
they Nickname this contemplative Sect) they would all rise, and fly to the
Mahometa^ Standard, as formerly the Malcontents of Italy did to the Asylum of
Romulus. God's Will be done.

Paris, 2d of the 12th Moon, of the Year 1676.
LETTER IX.
To Mirmadolin, Santone of the Vale of Sidon.
BLessed are they who honor the Virtues of Holy Men, and strive to imitate
their Examples. The Infidels count them mad, whom the great Lord of all things
has inspired with his Love, which is the Spirit or Breath of the Omnipotent,
giving Life to all Things. Their Souls are snatched away in sacred Ecstasies;
they are carried to the bright shining Worlds, born up on the Wings of a Wind
from Paradise. They behold mavelous Things, and the Wonders of the Sky:
Wafted from Star to Star, they are ravished with the Sight of so many radiant
Splendors, and expire in Transports of Divine Pleasure, when they consider the
beautiful Economy of the Universe.

O Ariel! Chief of the Choirs above; who set-test the Tunes of the Spheres, and
art Master of the eternal Music; who taughtest Sultan David to play on the
Harp, and learned him the Songs of Paradise: Send down some Azur'd
Messenger, some purpl'd Post from Eden, to inspire my Soul with divine
Harmonies, whilst I celebrate the Praises of Alla, the First and the Last,
whose Glory is expanded through the infinite Abyss, and enlightens endless
Spaces. The whole Universe is full of his Majesty, but the Place of his
Retirement is above the Heaven of Heavens. There he keeps his Court, guarded by
seventy times seven Millions of Angels; who always stand on their Watch, to
prevent the Invasions of Orosinades, the Prince of Darkness, the Root and
Source of all Evil.

God came from Heaven in the Days of Moses, with an Army not to be numbered:
Michael was his Standard Bearer, whose Chariot was a Carbuncle of Paradise.
They marched through the Milky Way, and made their Descent on the Rock of the
Desert Sina. The Artillery of the Celestial Host was Thunder and Lightning:
They were encompassed with thick Clouds of Smoke. The World was affrighted at
the dreadful. Noise, and Orosmades durst not appear, to abide the Batrel, but
fled into the Caverns of the Earth with all his Legions, where they are barred
up to the Day of Judgment. They often strive to break loose, which occasions
horrid Earthquakes: But the Chain which binds them is fastened to the Throne of
God. He keeps the Keys of those Infernal Prisons, and bars up all the Avenues
of Hell. There Darkness, Horror, and Pain, have taken up their Residence for
ever. One Abyss supplies another with eternal Floods of Confusion and Misery.
But above the Surface of the Earth, he has established Light, Liberty, Joy and
Peace to them that revolt not from his Love and Obedience.

God came from Arval, and the Holy One was seen to fly from the Thickets of
Schair in the East. He bent his Course toward the Red Sea, and pitched his
Tents in the Meridian of Mecca. On that Day the Kebla was turned toward the
South; and the Faces of the Faithful, in time of Prayer, regarded the House of
Abrahim, the square Temple, and the Place appointed by Dostiny for the Tomb of
the Prophet. Then Medina Telnabi became bright and illustrious: The Glory of
Jerusalem faded and was eclipsed at the Dawning Splendour of this New
Sanctuary, a City ennobled by the Presence of Deputies from Heaven, even
Gabriel and Israphiel, who came down to visit the determined Place of the
Prophet's Rest.

They brought with them, Rules and Models of Divine Architecture, that the
Dormitory of the Messenger of God might be majestic and glorious. They
disclosed their Errand to Zaphid and Al Kepher, two cunning Artificers in the
City, and showed them the Celestial Pattern of the Sepulcher. These kept secret
the Matter, till the Time was accomplished which the Angels ejoin'd them. Then
they declared themselves, and undertook the Building of a Fabric, which has
rendered Medina famous throughout the World.

Oh, Medina Telnabi! how sweet is thy Name among the Mussulmans? The Roads of
Asia and Africa are covered with the Caravans of such as bring Presents unto
thee; the Devout Pilgrims who travel from far to kiss the Pavement of the
Temple, where the Bones of our divine Lawgiver is reposited.

I saw the Elephants and Dromedaries of the East, with Joy bow down and crouch
to the Earth, whilst Sacred Burdens were laid on their Backs; the Camels also
of the South; of Egypt, and the Land of Moors. They performed the Sacred
Pilgrimage with Humility and Resignation: They Fasted 4, 5, 10, or 14 Days,
each as they were able, in Token of their Devotion and Thankfulness; in that
they were permitted the Honor of visiting the Holy Region, and the Sepulcher
of him who taught the Dumb Beasts the Discipline of Wisdom, and the Way to
Paradise.

Ever since that Time, the Animal Generations have instructed each other in the
Precepts of the Prophet who could neither Write nor Read. In their
Mute-Language they perform, Morning and Evening, the appointed Oraisons, and
Preach to their Young Ones by Inarticulate Sounds, the Doctrins of Faith, clear
and intelligible.

Oh Mahumed! Every Letter of thy mysterious Name is full of Benediction and
Praise. Each Syllable is compounded of Secrets not to be revealed till the
Consummation of all Things. Thou art a Treasury of Wonders which cannot be
exhausted or valued.

I heard the Eastern Wind record thy Praises on a Flute, whilst gentle Zephyrs
blew soft Vocal Harmonies, wherein were often celebrated the glorious Names of
Mahomet and Hali. To these, Great Boreas joined in Consort with his
Deep-lung'd-Organ; sweetened in Counter-Tenor by the Southern Wind. They
Whistled, Sung, and Played in Parts, till all the Younger Sons of Aeolus came
in to fill the Choir. Then was the Music loud and shrill: It awakened all the
Woods and Forests on the Earth. The Trees and all the Vegetable Race, struck up
in Union with the Winds; the Birds put in their cheerful Notes; the Streams and
Rivers murmured grateful Airs: the Sea raised up her Billows to the Clouds,
whilst Jovial Tritons founded high Levets of the Marine, answered in Verse by
rumbling Timbrels of the Sky. There was an universal Joy and Rant: Nature her
self was in a Frolic, and kept Holiday.

Why did the most High decamp from Arval, and the Eternal remove his Residence
from Schair in the East? Why did he cause his Armies to lie down in the South,
and his Pavilions to cover the Regions of Mecca? Doubtless, he did all this in
Honor of the Law which he sent from Heaven, and of the Birthplace of his
Favorite, that all Nations might know and confess, That there is but one God,
and Mahomet his Apostle. The Beasts of the Earth acknowledge this; the Fowls
also of the Air, and the Fish of the Sea. The Elements and Inanimate Beings are
sensible of a Joy which they cannot express, and the Universe is all dissolved
in Rapture, whilst it lies stretched out at large, unfolded into endless
Skirts, and rests for ever on the All-propping Unity.

Mirmadolin, I am part of the Universe, and therefore cannot but be touched
with a Sense of the Bliss which at certain Seasons transports the Whole. Thou
who art always in a Divine Ecstasy, wilt not wonder at the short Enthusiasins
of thy Slave Mahmut, who covets nothing more ambitiously, than to imitate thy
blameless Life.

Farewell, in God; for we cannot be out of him, so long as we are in our selves.

Paris, 17th. of the 2d. Moon, of the Year 1677.
LETTER X.
To the Kaimacham.
THE French are resolved to make bold Essorts this Campaign, to repair the Loss
of Philipsburg, which was taken from them last Year. The King is impatient of
any Check given to the Progress of his Arms, and spares neither Men nor Money to
keep up the Reputation and Fame of a Conqueror. And if this Character (grown
familiar to him, as it were by Prescription, after a long and almost
uninterrupted Series of Victories) happened at any Time to be lessens by some
unsuccessful Attempt upon the Enemy, he cannot be at Rest till he has recovered
it again by such renowned Exploits, as may be answerable to the Greatness of
his Soul, and the Formidable Puissance of his Sword, known to all Europe.

He has many and great Armies in Pay; and whether it be an Effect of his
Fortune, or his Judgment, it is observed, that he is always blessed with the
Ablest Generals in Christendom.

The First Thing he enterpriz'd was the Siege of Valenciennes, a City seated on
the Frontiers of the Spanish Netherlands; a very important Place, and
considerable for us Commerce; inhabited also by a Stout, Warlike People; and of
very difficult Access, by reason of a certain River, with whose Waters they can
at Pleasure drown all the Country round about. It was invested by the Duke of
Luxemburg on the 28th of the 2d Moon, and formally besieged on the 4th of the
3d. On the 17th there was a General Assault given, and the French entered the
Town; which so terrified the Inhabitants, that they threw themselves upon the
King's Mercy. He accepted their Submissions, and so put a Stop to the common
Violence in such Cases.

Another Time this had been enough to have Crowned a whole Campaign, and
satisfied the Ambition of the French Generals; but now, the Remembrance of last
Year's Loss and Disgrace, spurs them on to New Revenges: And to convince the
World that this Monarch is not easily to be daunted, but that he is jealous of
his Glory, he has, since the Taking of Valenciennes, besieged two Strong
Cities, Cambray and St. Omers.

The Former of these, is esteemed one of the strongest Places in all Flanders;
it is situated on the River Escaut, and was the Ancient Patrimony of the French
Crown, ever since the Reign of Clodion II. King of France, who made himself
Master of it in the Year 445 of the Christians Hegira. Afterward it fell to
the Share of Charles the Bald, in the Year 843; and in the Year 870, it became
the Occasion of a War between the Kings of France, the Emperors, and the Counts
of Flanders. In which Contest, one of the Baldwins got it, and left it to his
Son. But Charles V. over-reached him; and, by Means of the Bishop's
Correspondence, took Possession of the Place. He put a Strong Garrison in it,
and built a Citadel which rendered the Town almost Impregnable. In process of
Time it fell into the Hands of the Duke of Alanson, Brother to Henry III. when
he was made Count of Flanders, in the Year 1582. But in the Year 1595. the
Spaniards took it, and have held it ever since, till the 6th of the 4th Moon of
this present Year; when the Gates were set open, to let in the French Troops;
and the 17th, the Citadel was surrendered upon Articles.

As for St. Omers, it is a Great City, and well fortified; having on One Side
the River Aa, with its Marshes; and on the Other, being defended by a Castle,
flanked with good Bastions, and encompassed with an extreme broad and deep
Ditch. About the Beginning of this Moon it was invested by the French King's
Forces, and within three or four Days it was formally Besieged, but not gained
without a Bloody Combat, fought between the French and the Prince of Orange,
who came with a Considerable Army, designing to throw Succors into the Place.
I will not trouble thee, by Reciting all the Particulars of the Fight; only be
assured, that the French got the Victory, put the Others to Flight, remained
Masters of the Field, took Thirteen Pieces of Cannon, Seventeen Standards, all
the Enemy's Baggage, and almost Three Thousand Prisoners.

The Stage of this great Action was a Place called Mont-Cassel, not far from
St. Omers: A Spot of Ground observed to have once before been Propitious to the
French Arms, when Philip of Valois fought there with the Spaniards, and gave
'em an entire Defeat. He was rec. kon'd the Valiantest Prince of that Age.

The Inhabitants of St. Omers hearing of the Defeat that was given to the
Prince of Orange, were in so great a Consternation, that in few Days they
voluntarily surrendered to the French King.

Illustrious Kaimacham, this Puissant Mcnarch takes such Wise Methods, as thou will say, cannot fail in the Ordinary Course of War, to bring him Success. He
is an Excellent Play Master; and never gives Occasion for his Soldiers to Repine
or Murmur for want of their Daily Allowance, nor puts them upon impatient
Expectations of their Arrears. On the Contrary, He is very Munificent and
Liberal to all Men of Merit: And the meanest Soldier, who signalizes himself by
any Notable Exploit, or Action of Bravery, is sure to be distinguished from the
Rest by some Royal Reward in Money, if he be not advanced to the Dignity of a
Commander: And sometimes they are honored with both. This Conduct makes his
Men fight like Lions, each being Emulous of his Fellows, and all freely
hazarding their Lives, to gain their Master's Esteem; counting that the most
Glorious Post, which is most exposed to Danger.

He is severe to those Provinces and Towns which refuse to submit to his Arms,
and full of Clemency to such as willingly embrace his Government.

In a Word, His Donatives and Largesses to his own; his Condescensions, and the
Immunities he gives to others; together with the Exactness of his Justice to
all, to facilitate the Progress of his Arms; increase his Conquests, and render
him the Greatest Prince in the Western Parts.

Sage Minister, I kiss the Hem of thy Vest, and with Humble Obeisances retire
from thy Presence.

Paris, 29th. of the 4th. Moon, of the Year 1677.
LETTER XI.
To Hamet, Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire.
THE Love of Women is Natural to our Sex; and there is no Man, who, at one Time
or other, has not felt the Warmths of this Amorous Passion. But, it is strange
to observe, after what a different Manner this Flame discovers it self in
People of Various Nations, Ages, Qualities, Fortunes and Constitutions. Young
Men are Lascivious and Ardent in their Love: Old Men Ridiculous, and Formal.
The Poor Man studies to please his Mistress by Abject Submissions, and Humble
Obsequiousness. The Rich strives to, win her by Munificent Gifts and Presents.
The Vulgar make their Court by Feasting the Coy Damsel, and Regaling her with
Junkets and Wine. The Noble entertain her with Plays, Masquerades, Ballets, and
other Pompous Divertisements.

The Ingenious Italian sets upon his Mistress with a kind of Polished
Wantonness; not making Romantic, Whining Addresses; but, with a Refined
Impudence, his Eyes, his Hands, his Tongue, and all his Actions, soon make her
sensible where his Pain lies. He celebrates her Praises in Verse, and hires
Music to Serenade her. Finally, He never leaves till he Gains her, or Revenges
himself on his Rival, by Sending him, out of the World: And on her, by Turning
all his Compliments into Curses and Slanders. But if he gets her, he shuts her
up for ever, and makes her Chamber her Prison.

The Headstrong Spaniard, burning with Desire, and impatient of Delay, stung
with Restless Concupiscence, behaves himself like a Madman: He stamps, stares,
and raves; walks furiously backward and forward, rolls his Eyes after a hideous
Manner; he starts, stands still, lais his Hand upon his Sword, looks up to
Heaven, invokes the Saints, talks to himself, threatens the Dissolution of all
Things, if he be balk'd of his Love. In this Humor he runs to his Mistress,
falls at her Feet, makes Doleful and Passionate Complaints, throws himself upon
her Mercy, adores her, and does all Things which are proper for a Desperate
Lover. If by this Means he enjoy her, he soon grows weary of her, and either
kills her, or prostitutes her secretly for Gold. But if he cannot obtain her,
then he macerates and torments himself, and is resolved to Die.

Different from both these is the Wanton Frenchman, who courts his Mistress
after a Jolly Fashion, with Songs, Dances, Music and Jests. He is all Life and
Mirth when in her Company, and abounds with a Thousand Sorts of Comical
Humors. If he gets her, after a little Time the Fickle Spark is cloyed, and
Falls in Love with Another. If he fail of his Purpose, he is not much
Concerned; for all his Love was but Counterfeit: Yet he makes a Show of
Discontent, he threatens, and sputters at her for a While; but this
Tongue-Tempest is soon laid, and a new Face produces a Calm.

But the Phlegmatic German is very hard to be kindled up to this Passion, and
then needs a great deal of Art to blow him into a Flame. He is Cold and Wary,
Thoughtful and Slow, Provident and Dull: Yet, when once touched with this
Affection, he is very Liberal of his Gifts, which is the Masterpiece of his
Courtship. If he obtains his Mistress, he soon returns to his Primitive
Frigidity: And if he be frustrated, he is but where he was; far from Killing
himself for a Peevish Female.

The Frenchman professes more Love than he has: The German endeavors to hide
the Fervor of his Passion: The Spaniard persuades himself, that he is Beloved
by his Mistress; Whilst the Italian takes the nearest Course to be Beloved by
her in Reality. The Frenchman loves a Pleasant, Witty Maid, though she be
Deformed: The Spaniard prefers Beauty to Wit and Good Humor: The Italian is
for a Female of a Timorous Spirit: Whilst the German adores a Virago. The
Frenchman, by his Wandering Loves, of a Wise Man becomes a Fool; and exchanges
his Health, for a Thousand Maladies: The German having profusely spent all in
Amorous Liberalities, at length, from a Fool, tho late, becomes a Wife Man: The
Spaniard undertakes. Heroic Enterprises, to please his Mistress: Whilst the
Italian despises Honor, and every Thing else, that he may enjoy her.

Certainly the Greatest Men in the World have been subject to this Soft
Passion: And have sacrificed their Reputation, Glory and Virtue, with their
very Reason, to the Regards of Love. How ensnared was Mithridates, in Pontus,
by a Beautiful Woman? How did Hannibal* suffer his Courage to be Enervated with
the Luxuries of Capua? So Hercules of Old, left the Glorious Toils of War, and
suffered his Arms to Rust, for the sake of his Iole. So Ulysses was Captivated
by Circe; Achilles, by Briseis; and Caesar, by Cleopatra. And thou know,
that our Annals record strange Things of the Amors of our Glorious Monarchs.

There is no Nation free from the Sentiments of Love: Yet every Age and Region
vary in their Conduct toward Women. Here in the West, they are all for
Intriguing and Gallantry. They accuse the Mussulmans for having more Wives than
one, and for Keeping as many Concubines as they please; whilst they themselves
have their Wives almost in Common, and Lie with every Wench that comes in their
Way. Adultery passes with 'em for Good Breeding, and Fornication is esteemed as
Innocent an Action as Eating and Drinking: Whereas thou know, among the True
Believers, these Crimes are punished with Death. Promiscuous Copulation was
forbid by Moses, Jesus, and Mahomet; and, in General, by all the Prophets. It
is a sufficient Indulgence, That every Man may Marry four Wives, and enjoy as
many other Women as he either Takes Captives from the Enemy in Wars, or
purchases with his Money. But these Infidels had rather follow the Sentiments of
the Old Heathen Lawgivers, and the Examples of Idolatrous Nations, than obey
God and his Messengers. They applaud Solon, the Great Lawgiver of the
Athenians, calling him a Wise Man, as he was plonounc'd by the Delphick Oracle;
and a Generous Patriot, for procuring Harlots to accompany the Youths of the
City, and building a Temple to Venus out of the Money they got by Prostituting
themselves.

It Is certain, Whores were much esteemed in those Days, among the Graecians:
For the Magistrates built them Public Houses on purpose, and free for all
Comers: They also made Laws, to protect them from Injuries. And so great was
the Veneration that Besotted People had for them, that when Perses invaded
Greece, the Harlots of Corinth undertook to intercede for their Country, in the
Temple of Venus. Nay, whatsoever Extraordinary Favor they had to ask of that
Goddess, it was done by the Mediation of the Whores. And there seems some
Reason on their Side, since Venus her self was Translated to Heaven, and made a
Goddess, for being the Greatest Whore and Bawd that ever lived. She first
taught the Cyprian Women to prostiture their Bodies for Gain.

What a Work did Aspasia make, who filled all Greece with Whores? For the Love
of her, and her Wenches, it was, that Pericles begun the Peloponesian War, that
lasted so many Years, and is so much talked of in Ancient History. There were
also Learned Whores; as, Sappho, the Mistress of Phaon, Sempronia, Leaena, and
Leontium: Who wrote publicly in Vindication of their Lewd Practice, and
inveighed against Marriage. There were also Noble Whores; as, Rhodope, who
built one of the Egyptian Pyramids with the Money given her by the King. Thais
the Corinthian, who was so surpassing Beautiful, that she scorned to Lie with
any but Kings and Princes. But Messalina, the Wife of Claudius Caesar, exceeded
them all in the Salaciousness of her Temper. I will not omit to mention Joan,
Queen of Naples, who caused her First Husband to be hanged because he could not
satisfle her Lust. His Name was Andrew, Son to Elizabeth, Quen of Hungary. Her
Second Husband, to repair the Fault of the First, so wasted his Strength in the
Conjugal Embraces, that in a little Time he killed himself. Her Third Husband
was James King of Majorca, whom she Beheaded for Lying with another Woman. Her
Fourth and Last Spouse was Otho Duke of Brunswick: He lived to see her hanged
in the same Place where her First Husband had, by her Order, suffered the same
Fate. This was the Revenge of Charles Prince of Dyrachium, Cousin-German to
Andrew beforementioned. This Lascivious Queen would have the Company of Ten or
Twelve Young Men, one after another, the same Night.

What shall I say of Semiram is, Empress of the Assyrians? Of Pasiphae, Wife to
Minos King of Crete; or of an Hundred other Royal Whores? When it is
observable, that the most Illustrious Heroes on Earth have sprung from
Adulterous Beds. Witness Hercules, Alexander, Clodoveus King of the Franks,
Theodoric the Goth, William the Norman, Raymir of Arragon; and many more, too
tedious to be recited. Nay, few Kings or Princes are born of Lawful Mothers.

Doubtless, the Infidel Nations live in great Corruption of Manners; they
confound and blend together Divine and Profane Maxims; from whence result
Monstrous and Abominable Practices, and a General Uncleanness of Life in all
Things. But the Chaste Followers of Mahomet have all Customs in Abomination,
that desile the Soul, and rob it of its Native Purity. We obey the Traditions
of Abrahim, Ismael, and the rest of the Holy Line; who never touched any Women,
but their own Lawful Wives and Concubines; resting contented with this
Indulgence of the Omnipotent. We put in Practice the Law brought down from
Heaven, and the Precepts of the Prophet; which forbid all Adultery, Fornication
and Incest. We preserve in our Veins the Pure and Unpolluted Blood of our
Fathers, and transmit the same to our Children, and the Posterity to come; That
the Promises made to Abrahim, the Glorious Patriarch of the East, may not be
disanull'd by the Sins of his Offspring; but may be verified till the Day when
the Moon shall be cancelled in the Heavens, and all the Stars be blotted out.

Oh Sage Hamet* We are of a Sacred Lineage, an Illustrious Pedigree. Our
Progenitors were the Favorites of Heaven, and Lords of the Earth, by the
Special Benediction of God. The Light of the Eternal shines upon the Ottoman
House, and is reflected from thence on all the Empire. I pray Heaven, that we
may not forfeit these Privileges by our own Folly, and cause an ill Report to
be whispered of us among the Angels, Saints and Prophets, and throughout the
Precincts of Paradise.

I consign thee to the Custody of God and thy Guardian-Genius; wishing thee all
manner of Enjoyments that may consist with Purity and Innocence.

Paris, 7th. of the 5th. Moon, of the Year 1677.
LETTER XII.
To the Captain Bassa.
BY Ships newly arrived from America, Advice is brought to this Court of a
signal Defeat given to a Squadron of Dutch Ships in those Parts, and of the
Taking the Isle Tabago by the French. This Exploit was performed under the
Conduct of the Count D'Estrees, an Admiral of rising Fame here in the West.

But, in my Opinion, the French magnify this Emerprize beyond its true Value:
for they lost as many Ships and Men as the Hollanders; and all the Gain they
can boast of is, a Place which will cost them more to Defend than it is really
worth.

I wonder this potent Monarch does not rather set out a Fleet of Ships well
Manned, and provided of all Necessaries, to make some Discoveries in that vast
Tract of Land, called by Geographers, the Southern Unknown World. It runs along
from East to West, between the Tropic of Capricorn, and the Antartick Circle;
taking up the whole Southern Temperate Zone, or at least the greatest part of
it. There have been many fabulous Relations of that distant Part of the Globe.
Some of the Ancients mentioned it, and modern Writers have uttered various
Conjectures about it. One will have it to be the Original Paradise of Adam and
Eve. Another supposes it to be the Place whither the Ten Tribes of Israelites
retired, that were carried away Captives by Salmanassar, King of Assyria. Which
has occasioned so many Disputes and Controversies between different Historians.

Be it how it will, the delightful Situation of that Quarter, has given perhaps
Encouragement for such kind of Thoughts: which I should think, were also
Invitation sufficient to draw thither the Arms of some magnanimous Prince;
besides the pure Novelty of the Design, and the Glory of making a Descent and
Conquest, where no Mortals of our known World had ever set Foot before: Surely
they are not afraid that it is enchanted Ground, or that they shall encounter
an Army of Devils at their first Landing; that they shall be trepanned into
hidden Snares of Magic, or be surprised by some Infernal Ambush. What fatal
Timorousness, what panick Suspicion is it that renders Potentates of the Earth
thus ingloriously prudent, and wretchedly cautious, to spare their Men, their
Ships, and Money, when so noble an Undertaking seems to challenge their Courage,
and awaken their utmost Resolution, to combat a few Difficulties, which being
once vanquished, Eternal Honor and Renown follow?

What Discouragements, Lets, and Obstacles, did not the brave Columbus meet
with, when he sought the Assistance of several Princes and States, to set him
out to Sea, that he might discover the then unknown Western World? How coldly
was his Project entertained at Genoua, his own Native Country? and at last,
after long waiting, utterly rejected? No better Reception found he in the Court
of England, though a Nation claiming the first Rank among Seafaring People.
What Fatigues did he not undergo in traveling up and down by Sea and Land from
one Kingdom and Country to another? Neither rested he, till he had accomplished
his Desire, and procured Vessels, Men, and Money, from the King of Spain, to
carry on his Enterprise.

Yet he had no other Ground to believe there was any Unknown Continent beyond
the Atlantic Sea, save his own Conjecture, started from the Observations he
had made on the Course of the Sun, and the Inequality of the known part of the
Earth, compared with the vast Body of Waters which must be supposed necessary
to make up an entire Globe, if there were not some Unknown Land extant to
supply their Room, and prevent a Vacuum in Nature. For he considered, that
though this unequal ballancing of the Globe might pass Muster in the School of
Natural Philosophy, yet it could not answer the strict Scrutiny of the
Mathematics: But that there must be an even Counterpoise of Earth and Water,
to keep this Ball fast in its Vortex, and regular in its Circulation. So that
this Great Man, built all his well-pitch'd and happy Design upon a bare
Geometrical Speculation: whereas there is evident Matter of Fact, the Testimony
of many Authentic Eyewitnesses to prove, that there is such a Land as what I
have been speaking of, and all that ever passed the Megellanick Streights must
have seen it if they were not blind.

I counsel thee therefore, Mighty Bassa, to represent these Things effectually
to the Grand Signior: It will be no Disgrace if he hearken not to thy
Proposals. Show him the Easiness of the Undertaking, if a small Fleet be fitted
up and sent by Way of the Red Sea, to make Discoveries toward the South. Let
them be well Manned and Victuall'd; provided also with all sorts of Arms and
Ammunition in order to a Descent; with Materials and Instruments to raise a
Fortress, if there be Occasion. It Is a thousand to one, if the Inhabitants of
those Unknown Regions have ever found out the Use of Guns; which will be a
prodigious Advantage on our Side. The very Thunder of the Mussulman Artillery,
will terrify them into Obedience. They will either Surrender, as to Gods; or
fly, as from Devils, leaving all the Maritime Coasts to the Invaders
Possession. Where Colonies of True Believers may be soon planted and
established, to the Glory of God and his Prophet, and the Eternal Exaltation of
the Ottoman Empire.

Great Commander of the Marine, I desire thee to pardon the Liberty I take in
this Discourse; and to esteem what I have said, only as the humble Suggestions
of an honest Slave, who is zealous for his Master's Honor, the Glory of the
Osman House, and the general Good of Mankind.

Paris, 14th. of the 6th. Moon, of the Year 1677.
LETTER XIII.
To Dgnet Oglou.
I Am convinced by long and manifold Experience, That God and the World, and
every Thing appear to Man in what Figure he pleases. We may make our own
Optics, though the Generality of Men take up with those which are prepared for
them by their Fathers and Tutors. We use the Prejudices and Prepossessions of
Education, as the Spaniards wear their Spectacles, even at Dinner Time, for
Fashions sake, Young and Old, that they may appear Grave and Regular. We adhere
to the Opinions we received in our Infancy, with a partial Stiffness and Pride,
that we may not seem to call in question the Wisdom of our Ancestors, or appear
wavering or inconstant our Selves. So the Christian Gallants swallow down whole
Dozens of venomous Oysters, without saying Grace; only because it is the mode:
Though they will not venture on a Crust of wholesome Bread, without conjuring a
Blessing on it, by making the Sign of the Cross, and squinting two or three
magical Glances at Heaven, seconded by Hocus-Pocus-Whispers, to complete the
Charm.

But let thou and I be more rational in our Principles and Practice. There is
no God that will be banter'd with vain Mummery, or by Music be melodiously
wheadl'd out of his Eternal Reason; no Incense can be of Proof to Nose the
Sense of the Omniscient, nor the most elegant Words delude him, who is perfect
in Knowledge. He takes no Delight in the pompous Addresses of the Great, nor is
he to be moved by the multitude of Solemn Ceremonies. All that he requires of
Man is, a Heart conform to the Divine Will, and Actions void of Offense.

But the Lawgivers and Governors of Nations observing, That there was a
certain Religious Fear and Reverence of some Divine Power, as it were planted
in the Natures of all Men; and considering that this might be improved, with
good Management, to the Advantage and Interest of the Commonwealth; they
invented set Forms of Discipline, and exterior Offices of Worship, which they
termed Holy Rites and Mysteries. These they fortified with severe Laws and
Sanctions, inflicting grievous Penalties on the Contemners of the Public
Service performed to the Gods. So Hermes Trismegistus first taught the
Egyptians; Melissus the Foster-Father of Jupiter, instructed the Inhabitants of
Crete; Faunus and Janus, the Latins; Numa Pompilius, the Romans; Orpheus, the
Grecians; or, as some say, Cadmus the Son of Agenor, first instructed that
Nation in the Solemnities which were counted Divine, and which he himself
learned in Phoenicia. He instituted the Consecration of Images and Statues, the
Burning of Incense, the Building of Temples and Altars, with the Hymns,
Sacrifices, and other magnificent Rites, by which they honored the Powers
Above.

Now that all this Religious Pageantry was established only for the Ends of
Policy and State, is evident from hence, That the Chief Magistrates took the
Liberty of making what Gods they pleased; and of increasing or diminishing
their Number at Discretion. So that in Process of Time there were reckoned no
less than Thirty Thousand Gods in the Roman Catalogue, though at first their
Calendar could show but Twenty Five Divinities. But when once they had found
out a way to distinguish these Divinities into several Classes or Ranks,
terming some Gods of the Greater Nations, others of the Lesser; having also
their Tutelar Genii, their Demigods, their Rural and Household Gods, etc. there
was no limiting the crafty Devices of the Priests and Rulers in imposing; or
the Superstition of the credulous People in believing and adoring an infinite
Rabble of New, Young, and Unheard Of Divinities.

They took also the same Freedom to change and alter the established Rites and
Ceremonies; sometimes abolishing the old and Primitive Institutions, and
superinducing new ones in their stead; or at least adding to the Heap of
insignificant Ceremonies, in every Age, some mysterious Novelty, which might
please the People, and fasten them in a devouter Obedience and Veneration of
their Pious Guides and Leaders.

Hence sprung the Dedication of Temples, Fanes, Chapels, Oratories, and certain
Days in the Year to the Service of particular Gods; hence arose the Invention
and Use of so many sorts of Vessels of Silver and Gold, and other Materials in
their Sacrifices; of Lights, Flowers, and Perfumes; of Music, Pictures, and
other Decorations; besides the Rich and Majestic Vestments of the Priests,
their grave and composed Carriage, Looks and Gestures: All designed purely to
catch the rude and unpolished Multitude in the Snares of Priestcraft; to
strike their unwary Minds with an Awe and profound Attach for Religion; that so
being once made thus flexible, they might warp them to what Bent they pleased,
and for ever lead 'em in a blind implicit Admiration of they knew not what.

It Is certain, that Religion has this Effect on the Vulgar, to make them more
Obedient to their Governors, Just to one another, and Zealous for the Public
Welfare: I mean the Religion allowed by the State: For, where the Subjects dare
to make Innovations and Schisms, to set up new Sects and Parties; the greater
Zeal each Faction has for their own* Way of Worship, the more cruel and
tragical Disorders are generally committed. So fatal a Thing is it to be
Opinionative in Religion, to invade the Priests Prerogative, and to disturb the
quiet Stream of Traditions running in the Channel of Public Faith from one
Generation to another.

My Dear Gnet, let Thou and I shun the devout Superstition of Bigots, and the
wanton* Profaneness of Libertines and Atheists, adoring One God with sincere
Faith, and a Reason void of Error: Let us also keep our Lives free from all
Injustice and Vice, which will be of more Comfort to us than if we had
sacrificed every Day a thousand Bulls.

Paris, 25th. of the 9th. Moon, of the Year 1677.
LETTER XIV.
To Kerker Hassan, Bassa.
THE Subject of most Men's Discourse at present in this City, is the Taking of
Friburgh by the French. This is a City of Germany, whereof I made frequent
mention in my Letters when I first came to Paris. It is situated on a certain
Height near a small River, and is encompassed with two Walls. Strengthened also
by a Citadel, four Bastions, and other Fortifications. The Emperor has likewise
a strong Garrison in it.

On the 10th of this Moon the Marshall de Crequy Besieged it, and pressed it
with such vigorous Assaults, and continual Batteries, That the Governor found
himself obliged to Surrender it on the 17th, when the Marshall took Possession
of it in the Name of the French King.

The Imperialists cannot boast of equal Success when they Besiege Towns or
Fortresses in the Hands of the French. For not long before this, the Prince of
Orange, General of the Confederate Armies in Flanders, undertook the Siege of
Charleroy, a Place of Strength in those Parts. But the Want of Provisions,
together with the stout Resistance of the Inhabitants, and the Duke of
Luxemburgh's Approach with the French Army, forced him to decamp and retire.

The Duke of Luxemburgh is a valiant and sage General, in high Esteem with the
French: But his Enemies say, he is a Magician, and deals with the Devil,
because of the good Success which generally crowns all his Enterprises; So
impossible it is for a Man of extraordinary Virtues, and Heroic Endowments, to
escape without Envy and scandalous Aspersions. It Is as natural for the Vulgar
to inveigh against Generous Souls, as it is for Dogs to bark at the Moon. Yet
that Planet appears impassible; and not being moved at the Snarles of invidious
Animals, keeps on her Heavenly Course, in Majesty and Silence. So do Souls that
are truly Noble, contemn the Censures of the Inferior Part of Men, and never
stop till they arrive at the Meridian and Zenith of Perfection.

Most Serene and Illustrious Arab, thou art a lively Example of this, and I
dare say no more, lest I offend thy Modesty. May perpetual Benediction and
Glory crown thy Years that are yet to come.

Paris, 29th of the 11th Moon, of the Year 1677.
LETTERS Writ by A Spy at PARIS.
VOL. VIII.
BOOK III.
LETTER I.
To the Wisest of the Wise, the most Venerable Mufti.
I Obey thy Commands without the least Demur: And now proceed to write of the
Macedonian Empire. I remember a Dispatch of mine to thy Venerable Predecessor
of Sacred Memory, wherein I touched upon some Passages of the Life of that
Heroic and Magnanimous Prophet, Alexander the Great. But now I will inform
thee more at large concerning his Birth, Education, and Renowned Performances.

Alexander, as the Greeks and Latins call him, with all the Nations of the
West; or Scander, Ascander, and Zulkarnek, according to the Style of the
Arabians, Persians, Indians, Tartars, and other People of the East, was born in
the CVIth Olympiad; 398 Years after the Building of Rome, and in the Year of
the World 3628, on the 6th Day of the Moon Loo, or Hecatombaeon, according to
the Style of the Grecians. The same Night was the Temple of Diana at Ephesus
set on Fire. And on the same Day two Eagles came and pearch'd on the Top of his
Fathers House, where they sat all the Day; which was taken as an Omen of the
Double Empire he was to have over Europe and Asia.

Philip King of Macedon and Husband to Olympias, was the Reputed Father of
Alexander, as she was his Known Mother. But some Historians say, That a certain
Magician called Nectanebus, by his Enchantments disguising himself in the Form
of Jupiter Ammon, lay with Olympias, and begot Alexander. Others affirm, That
Olympias her self confessed to Philip, That Alexander was not his Son, but that
she had conceived him of a prodigious great Serpent. Whence it came to pass,
That Philip himself, a little before his Death, openly declared, That Alexander
was not his Son. And for the same Reason, he divorced Olympias, as an
Adultress, by her own Confession.

These Reports were so common at that Time, That Alexander afterward hearing
the Story of his supposed Serpentine Genealogy, and that other of Nectanebus in
the Masquerade of a God: When he marched through Egypt, took Advantage of the
latter, to impose upon the Credulity and Superstition of his Soldiers. For
being to pass by the Temple of Jupiter Ammon, he made a Halt to visit the
Oracle. But he had privately sent before some of his Trusty Friends to acquaint
the Priests with his Design, and to tell them what manner of Words and Address
they should use to him as he entered the Temple, in the Hearing of his
Followers.

Having thus prepared those Holy Cheats, he with much Ceremony and seeming
Devotion made his Approaches to the Temple. As soon as he set his Foot within
the Portico, the Seniors of the Priests met him in their Pontifical Robes, with
Censers in their Hands, and thus saluted him; All Hail, Son of Jupiter Ammon.
Alexander being pleased at this, asked them farther, If all his Fathers
Murderers were punished; or, If any yet survived? To which it was answered, O
Son of the Immortal Gods! Thy Father cannot be murdered or dye. As for King
Philip, his Blood is fully revenged on them that had a Hand in shedding it.
Then he added another Question concerning his future Success. To which the
Oracle replied, The Victory shall be thine in all Battles; Thou shall become
Lord of all the East. The same Mouth also gave in Charge to the Retinue of
Alexander, That they should adore him not as a King, but as a God. Returning
from thence, he built Alexandria, calling it after his own Name.

I have not observed a due Method in relating this Story so soon; whilst I was
but representing the Newborn Hero in his Cradle. But I did it to convince
thee, That the various Opinions concerning Alexander's Father, are not the
Fictions of Wanton Writers, but such as Employed the Care and Diligence of
Alexander himself to improve them to his own Interest, and his Mothers Honor:
For it was accounted a Glorious Thing, to be Impregnate by a God.

To return therefore to the Infant-Prophet; He grew apace, and discovered early
Signs of a prodigious Wit and Courage. At the Age of fifteen Years, he was
committed to the Care and Tutelage of Aristotle, under whom he studied the
Sciences five Years; and then his Father Philip being murdered, he succeeded in
the Throne. The same Year also, Darius Codomanus obtained the Empire of Persia.
Against whom Alexander, with the Common Consent of almost all Greece, prepared
to go with a well-disciplin'd Army, that he might carry on the War which his
Father had begun. Only the Lacedaemonians, Thebans, and Athenians thwarted his
Design; being corrupted by Demosthenes the Orator, who for that purpose had
received vast Sums of Gold from Darius. But Alexander soon reduced these
Factious States and Kingdoms to their Duty; utterly destroying the City of
Thebes, with the Slaughter of 90000 of the Citizens, besides 30000 Captives.
This was executed on the 15th of the Moon Boedromion, in the 2d Year of the
CXIth Olympiad. He only spared the Host of Philip his Father, when he was left
as a Pledge in that City, whose House was left untouched, as also that of
Pindar's Posterity.

From thence passing the Hellespont, he marched into Asia, in the Year of the
World 3650; and in the 3d Year of his Reign. He had in his Army 30000 Foot and
4500 Horse. As soon as he set Foot on the Ground of Asia, he made the Royal
Corban and Vows for Victory. Then he darted a Javelin into the Earth, in Token
of Defiance. After which, when he came to Troy, he performed certain Holy Rites
and Mysteries at the Tombs of Defunct Heroes, who fell in the Trojan War. When
these Ceremonies were accomplished, he marched directly against the Persians,
who were in Number 600000 Fighting Men. I will not tire thee with all the
Particularities that happened in their March. Suffice it to say, That Alexander
with his Handful of Macedonians, after many Victories obtained of the Persians,
at length quite Routed the Army of Darius, and took Possession of that Once
Formidable Empire.

But there are some remarkable Passages in this Expedition, which deserve to be
remembered: As, his wonderful Continence and Humanity toward the Mother, Wife
and Daughters of Darius; whom he entertained in his Camp after they fell into
his Hands, rather as the Kindred of some Beloved Friend, than of a Professed
Enemy. The Story also of his loosing the Gordian Knot, is not unworthy thy
Knowledge.

It seems, in former Times one Gordius, as he Plough'd the Fields, was
surrounded with a Flight of Birds of all Kinds. Being troubled at this, he left
his Work, and hasted to the next City, there to enquire of the Augurs, what the
Meaning of this should be. As he entered the Gate of the City, he met a Virgin
of Incomparable Beauty, of whom he asked, Where he might find the most Skilful
Sage, with whom he might consult about a Matter of some Importance. Then he
told the Inquisitive Damsel, what had happened to him in the Field. As soon as
she heard this, being well versed in these Mysterious and Prophetic Sciences,
she told him, That he should be made a King. And to confirm him in the Belief
of what she said, she promised to become his Wife, that so she might be Partner
of his Future Happiness. In a Word, they were Married; and soon after, there
arose a Strife among the Phrygians, which was like to prove of dangerous
Consequence. Therefore the People Consulted the Oracle, What was to be done in
this Case, to prevent the public Desolation? It was answered, That the only
Remedy for these Discords was, to choose them a King. And when they asked, What
Person they should choose to this Dignity? It was answered again, That they
should Elect that Man for their King, whom they first met with a Wagon, as they
wont thence to the Temple of Jupiter. Gordius proved the Man, and they obeyed
the Oracle, saluting him as their Sovereign. Gordius, as a Memorial of this
Event, set up his Wain in the Temple of Jupiter, consecrating it to the Royal
Majesty.

After him his Son Midas Reigned, who filled Phrygia with Religious
Observations. Whence arose the Common Oracle, That whosoever should loose the
Knot of the Thongs in the Wagon of Gordius, should obtain the Empire of all
Asia.

Alexander hearing this, and being spurred on by Ambition, Besieges Gordia; and
having taken the City, makes haste to the Temple of Jupiter, where he
understood the Wagon was laid up. As soon as he saw it, he tried to find out
the Ends of the Thongs, that so he might loose the Knot. But perceiving that it
was impossible to come at them without using Violence, he interpreted the
Oracle in the Sense of a Soldier, and cut the outermost Foldings of the Knot
with his Sword. Upon which all the Ends of the Thongs appeared, and so he
easily performed the Fatal Task.

Yet this Heroic Prophet, as he had Great Virtues, so had he no Less Vices. He
was very cruel to his Nearest Relations and Friends; Killing Caranus his
Brother by a Stepmother; Clitus his old dear Friend; Parmenio, Philotas,
Aryntas, Attalus, Eurylochus, Pausanias, and many other Macedonian Princes,
some of which were of his own Blood. Add to this, his barbarous Usage of
Calisthenes the Philosopher, who was brought up with him under Aristotle. This
poor Unfortunate Man refusing to flatter the King's Pride in calling him a God;
so disgusted Alexander, that feigning himself very Angry, he charged him with
being Accessory to the Plots and Conspiracies that were formed against him.
Then he caused all his Limbs to be mangled and chopped, after an inhuman
Fashion. He commanded also his Ears, Nose, and Lips, to be cut off; which not
only gave the Poor Wretch infinite Torment, but also rendered him a most
Deformed and Miserable Spectacle to others. And to complete his Revenge, he
caused him in this Doleful Plight to be shut up in a Cage with a Dog, and so to
be carried about, to the Terror of others.

Then Lysimachus, one of Alexander's Generals, and a Disciple of Calisthenes,
taking Pity on so Great a Sage, who suffered all this barbarous Usage, not for
any real Crime that he had committed, but only for using that Freedom in his
Words and Actions which becomes a Philosopher, gave him Poison, to rid him at
once of so many horrid Calamities.

But Alexander took this so heinously, That he commanded Lysimachus to be
thrown to a very fierce Lion. As soon as the Furious Beast saw him, he Roared
and Paw'd the Ground for Joy, and ran upon him with an impetuous Force. But
Lysimachus not losing his Courage, wrapped his Hand in his Mantle, and thrust it
down the Lion's Throat; where laying fast hold of his Tongue, he pulled it out
by the Roots, and left the Lion for dead.

When this was told the King, he admiring the Invincible Virtue of the Man, not
only forgav^ him this Offense, but had him in Higher Esteem all his Life
afterward.

We must not omit that Memorable Action of Alexander, when stomaching the
Surrender of Sidon to his Victorious Arms, in that it was delivered up by the
People, against the Will of Strato their King; the Conqueror pronouncing Strato
unworthy of the Crown, bid Hephestion place him in the Throne, whom the
Sidonians should approve as Strato's Successor. Hephestion willing to prefer to
that Dignity a Noble Young Sidonian, who was his Favorite, offered him the
Crown. But the Generous Youth refused the Honor; alleging, that it was
against the Laws of his Country, for any Man to Reign who was not of the Royal
Blood. Hephestion admiring the Greatness of his Soul, said, God increase your
Virtues and Graces, Illustrious Friend, who are the first that ever understood
how much more Magnanimous it is to despise than to accept a Crown. Be it
therefore in your Power to bestow the Kingdom on any Man of the Royal Blood
whom you think fit for so great a Charge. Then he pitched upon one Abdolonymus,
a poor Gardener in the Suburbs of Sidon; who was of the Race of Sidonian Kings,
but through extreme Poverty was grown obscure, and forced to take up that
Employment to get his Bread. Hephestion approved the Choice: And this Noble
Youth, with some of his Friends, immediately went with the Royal Robes and
Ensigns of Majesty to look out Abdolonymus, whom they sound Weeding his Garden
in a very dirty squalid Condition. Saluting him therefore King in the Name of
Alexander the Great, they Washed and Anointed him with Precious Oils of the
East; and having put on the Robes of Sovereign Majesty, they Conducted him to
the Conqueror: Who among other Discourses, asked him, How he was able so
patiently to endure that extreme Poverty which had hitherto been his Lot? To
which he replied, I wish I may endure the Burden of a Crown with the same Ease.
These Hands served the Necessities of Life, and my Wants were answerable to my
Possessions, even none at all. Alexander perceiving by this Answer, the
Greatness of his Spirit, gave him all the Royal Furniture of Strato, with much
of the Persian Booty, and added all the Countries round about Sidon to his
Government.

Much about the same Time, Alexander going to Jerusalem, was met by Jaddus the
High Priest in his Pontifical Habit. Who falling at the Conqueror's Feet, to
implore Favor and Mercy for his City and People; Alexander raised him up, and
embracing him in his Arms, Bid him fear nothing, for that God had appeared to
him in Macedonia, in the same Figure and Form as the High Priest made,
exhorting him, to carry on the Persian War, and promising him certain Victory.
After this, the High Priest conducted him into the City and Temple, where he
Sacrificed and made Corban. He also gave the Jews many ample Privileges.

There is one Thing more in the Life of Alexander, which because it has
something very singular in it, I will insert in this Dispatch.

After the Conquest of Persia, as Alexander was marching forward, that he might
extend his Empire through all the East; Thalestris, Queen of the Amazons,
hearing of his Fame, took a Journey of five and twenty Days, through many
populous Nations, attended only by three hundred Women, and came to his Camp,
courting the Honor of his Bed. For she had conceived an insatiable Desire of
having a Child by Him, whom all the East proclaimed the Greatest Hero in the
World. Alexander granted her Request; and when she had enjoyed his Company
thirteen Days, she departed well satisfied to her own Country, promising, that
if she brought forth a Male, she would send him to his Father, according to the
manner of the Amazons; but if a Female, she would keep it her self.

From hence Alexander marched against Bessus, who had murdered Darius, and
caused himself to be proclaimed King of Persia by the Name of Artaxerxes.
Having overcome him, and punished his Treasons, he proceeded, and subdued all
the Regions running along the Foot of Mount Cancasus. In fine, he extended his
Conquests to the utmost Borders of India, even to the Oriental Sea; where he
took Shipping and returned to Babylon, partly by Sea and partly by Land. An
Astrologer of great Reputation met him by the way, and dissuaded him by all the
Arguments he could use, from entering the City; assuring him, that Place would
be Fatal to his Person. But though Alexander made some Demur at first, and
seemed to credit the Words of the Sage; yet being overruled by the Counsel of
Anaxarchus the Philosopher, he entered Babylon, where he died; some say of
Poison; others affirm, that he surfeited himself with too much Wine. This was
in the 33d Year of his Life, and the 12th of his Reign.

There was a deep and melancholy Silence throughout Babylon, whon once it was
known, That the Conqueror of the World was dead. Every one was possessed with
various Thoughts and Cares, according to their different Affections and
Interests. The Macedonians inwardly rejoiced, as if they were now rid of some
great and formidable Enemy; cursing his Severity and restless Temper, which had
exposed them to so many Toils and Perils of War. Besides, the Princes flattered
themselves with a prospect of enjoying every one his Share in so vast an
Empire. And the private Soldiers had their Eyes intently fixed hn the Immense
Treasures of Gold, which Alexander left behind him, and which they hoped to
share among them. For there were at that time Fifty Thousand Talents in Bank;
and Three Hundred Thousand coming in yearly by way of Tribute and Custom.

On the other side, the Conquered Nations would not at first give Credit to the
Report of those, who carried the News of Alexander's Fate. For they thought he
must needs be Immortal, whom they had always found Invincible. But when
Couriers upon Couriers had removed their Incredulity, bringing Fresh Expresses
from Babylon; they Mourned for him, not with bare Outward Ceremonies, as for an
Enemy that had subdued 'em; but with Real Sorrow, as for a Father that had
protected and cherished 'em.

More especially, the Grief of Darius's Mother was remarkable; who, tho she had
lost Eighty of her Brethren, with their Father, all cruelty Murdered by Ochus,
tho she had lost Darius, the only surviving of seven Sons; and was her self
cast down from the Height of Majesty, to the Abject State of a Captive; yet she
bore all with an Even Mind, till Alexander's Death; whose Indulgence alone
whilst living, had supported her under so many grievous Calamities. But as soon
as he had forsaken the Earth, she grew weary of tarrying any longer on it too.
Not that she esteemed an Enemy above her Father, Brethren and her Son; but
because she had experienced in him whom she dreaded as an Enemy, the Goodness
and Piety, the Modesty and Regatd of all these Relations.

This Great Monarch being Dead, and not having appointed a Successor, there
arose almost as many Kings, as there were Governors of Provinces, and Leaders
in the Army. Hence sprang Innumerable Confusions, Wars and Disorders in the
Empire. There were Tumults and Insurrections in Greece, especially at Athens;
where the Citizens under the Conduct of Leosthenes their Captain, invited the
Rest of the Grecians to assert their Liberty by taking Arms. Nor was there less
stirs in Asia and Egypt. Every where Men's Minds were unsettled, and desirous of
Novelty. Ptolomy had Egypt for his Share of the Cantoniz'd Empire. There he
established himself and his Posterity by the Name of Kings. Seleucus took
possession of Babylon and Syria, with the same Title. Cassander Reigned over
Macedon and Greece. Antigonus governed Asia, and Lysimachus Thrace. But as
Antigonus soon lost his Empire, being overcome and killed in a Battle by
Ptolomy and his Confederates: So did the rest either in their own Persons, or
in their Posterity, yield to the prevailing Fortune of their Enemies; Till at
length all these shattered Remains of the Macedonian Empire, became Provinces
of the Roman. Of which I will say something in my next.

In the mean while, I triumph to think that the Ottoman Empire now, is become
more Formidable, Large and Victorious, than all that went before it. May God
increase the Felicities and Honors of True Believers, till the Day of the
Final Metamorphosis.

Paris, 12th. of the 4th. Moon, of the Year 1678.
LETTER II.
To Musu Abul Yahyan, Professor of Philosophy at Fez.
I Received thy Venerable Dispatch with great Satisfaction, and am glad to find
thou art so far from being tired with what I have already said concerning
Constantinople, that thou challengest me with a Promise I formerly made thee,
of giving thee a farther Account of what I have observed there most remarkable.

In describing this Imperial City, I have imitated the Painters, who when they
would draw a Beauty to the Life, do not go Arithmetically to work, or observe
any Order in their rough Draughts. But following the Conduct of a wild and
strong Fancy, they dash their Pencil here and there, as that Volatile Faculty
inspires 'em; regarding only the Symmetry of the Picture, without preferring
one Part to another, or being curious in delineating every little Singularity.
So I in pourtraying this Queen of Cities, this superlative Beauty of the whole
Earth, draw my Strokes at Random; not designing to present thee with an
Anatomy-Lecture over her, or to unveil all her interior Secrets: But only to
give thee a transient View of those Parts which appear most Eminent, and
attract the Eyes of all Travelers. And this I do not perform all at once
('twere too great a Task) but even like them, by Fits and Starts, as I find my
Opportunities.

I have hitherto presented thee with a Prospect of very magnificent and curious
Objects; as Temples, Mosques, Aqueducts, Columns, Obelisks, Bazars, etc. Now
prepare thine Eyes for an Entertainment of another Nature. I will show thee
Things, though perhaps not so illustrious to outward Appearance, or strutting
with Royal Grandeur, yet sufficiently Great and Splendid to perpetuate the
Memory of the Founders, and to convey their Fame to all Generations. Things
also of public Use and Service; Designs of Charity, Policy, and generous
Wisdom; Undertakings of a Noble and Heroic Character, as thou will perceive by
the following Account.

No Traveller can survey the Streets of Constantinople, and not have his Eyes
arrested here and there by most capacious and ample Carvansera's where all
distressed Foreigners, and such as are destitute of a more convenient Lodging,
may in any of these find a Shelter and Sanctuary from the Injuries of open Air,
from Night-Robbers, and other Inconveniences. These Carvansera's are in number
Three Hundred and Three, built at the Expenses of Ottoman Princes and Bassa's.

There are also in this City Ninety Hospitals, where the Poor are nourished,
and the Sick attended with extraordinary Piety and Care.

Besides all these, there are Five Colleges, where the Sciences are publicly
professed and taught, and where a certain Number of Young Men are educated and
maintained at the Grand Signior's Cost, being constant Stipendaries to the
Sultan. There are many such Colleges scattered up and down Caramania, Natolia,
and throughout Greece and the Lesser Asia. So that the Number of Students in
these Countries is computed to be above Nine Thousand; not reckoning those in
Arabia, Syria, and Egypt, where flourish innumerable Seminaries of Divine and
Human Wisdom.

But to return to Constantinople, the next Thing worthy of Observation is the
Serayan, or House of Equipages, where are made all sorts of Trappings for
Horses, especially Saddles of immense Cost, and admirable Workmanship. This
Place is also environed with high Walls, and shut in with strong Gates. There
cannot be a more agreeable Sight to such as take Pleasure in Horses and Riding,
than to see Four Thousand Men here daily at Work in their Shops, each striving
to excel the rest in the Curiosity of his Artifice. You shall see one busy in
spangling a Saddle with great Oriental Pearls, and Unions intermixed, for some
Arabian Horse, belonging, perhaps, to the Vizir Azem. Another fitting a Curb or
Bit of the purest Gold to a Bridle of most precious Russian Leather; some adorn
their Trappings with choice Phrygian Work, others with Diamonds, Rubies, and
the most costly Jewels of the East. In a Word, there is so illustrious a
Variety of these Accoutrements, that the Eye is astonished at the sight of
them: And I have heard many Travelers acknowledge, That the like is not to be
seen in any City of the World beside Constantinople. I know not what may be in
your Cities of Morocco and Fez, in regard the Moors are great Cavaliers.

There are, moreover, two other Places in the City, encompassed with peculiar
Walls. In these the Jainzaries are posted, who are the Guards du Corpse to the
Grand Signior. They are under the Command of Decurions, without whose Leave no
Janizary dare set a Foot out of the Place.

Next is the Arsenal of the City, built on the Seashore, containing a Hundred
and Eighty Arches, under which are very elegant Portico's or Piazza's, where
People walk. There are above Forty Thousand Men daily at Work in this Arsenal;
and Eighty great Galleys lie there always in Readiness for any sudden
Expedition.

Besides, there is another in the Suburbs, wherein there always lie a Hundred
and Fifty great Galleys on the Stocks; and Sixty, fitted up with all
Necessaries, constantly lie in the Water.

The Granaries or Storehouses for Corn present themselves next. They are built
in a Corner of the City toward Pera, where the Walls are far stronger than in
any other Part, and the Gates are of Iron. Here is always laid up an immense
Quantity of Wheat and Barley, as also of other Grain, as if it were to serve for
many Years. Yet it is changed for new Corn every Three Years. They say, That in
the Reign of Amurat III. there was an incredible Abundance of Millet found
there, whose Virtue was much admired, in that it had lain there Eighty Years
sound and free from any Corruption.

I have purposely omitted to speak of the two Royal Serails, since the least of
them will require a large Letter by it self, to be described exactly. Only this
I will say in short, That the least is a French League in Circuit, or Three
Italian Miles; and the biggest, wherein the Grand Signior dwells is a League
and two Thirds or Five Italian Miles. The former is called Eschy Saray, or the
Old Palace; the latter is named Bryuch Saray, or the Great Serail. If thou
desire a farther and more particular Description of these Royal Courts, I
will send it thee in future Dispatches. For, it will be too large for one.

In the mean Time I must not forget the Mosch of Jub, where our Sultans receive
the Sword when they first come to the Crown. This is a Building of great
Antiquity, seated in the farthest Angle of the City near the Haven. Over
against it are the Sultan's Stables, having very fair Gardens adjoin'd to them.
Not far from thence is the Topana, or Gun-Yard, where there lies a vast Number
of Brass Pieces of Ordnance without Carriages. Of which some are turned
directly against the Haven.

As you pass from this Place, it is impossible to avoid the sight of a Pillar,
which shoots up from the Top of a Rock at some distance from the City. This
Column is all of White Marble, and was erected by Cn. Pompey as a Monument of
his Victory over Mithridates the King of Pontus. On this side of the City there
is nothing hardly to be seen for eight Miles together, but Houses built for
Pleasure and Delight, with most beautiful Groves and Gardens.

Over against the City stands Pera, an Arm of the Sea coming between them. This
Suburb or Borough is inhabited chiefly by Graecians and Western Franks.

Round about this Suburb are many pretty Country Houses, Farms, and Granges,
most deliciously seated in the midst of high Tufts of Trees, with Green Fields,
and Crystal Streams adjoining to them. Where the Ambassadors of Foreign Princes
make their Abode sometimes.

I will not carry thee from hence to Scutari, though a great and stately
Village, within the Liberty also of the Imperial City. I will not detain thee
with the Singularities of the Thracian Chersonesus, or drill thee along to
Calipolis; though this were the first Town in Europe, which Amurat took in the
Year 1363. My Design is altogether at Constantinople. Therefore having surveyed
Pera, which is also called Galata, let us cross the Water, and return again to
the Mother-City; that we may know what manner of Government there is in it, and
how the Laws are executed.

The Chief Magistrate is called Stambol-Cadisi, or Judge of Constantinople.
Before him are pleaded all Causes, both Criminal and Civil. He has four
Deputies under him, who separately govern the four chief Precincts of the City.
There is likewise an Officer, called Sabassi, whose Business is to take
Cognizance of every ones Crime that is seized in the Streets or Houses, and to
refer it to the Supreme Vizir. He has also four Deputies under him, and all Men
are bound to assist him in Case of Difficulty.

The Common Prison of Constantinople is divided into two Parts, the Upper and
the Lower. The Upper is only for Civil Offenses, and has an airy Green Court in
the middle of it, with a Fountain continually spouting up Water; which
something diminishes the Squalidness of the Place. The Lower is for Capital
Crimes, and is a very sink of Horror and Loathsomnes.

Flower of Philosophers, I pray God who gave us our Senses, always grant 'em
agreeable Objects, and defend us from all noisome Scents, especially from the
Pestilential Fumes of Hell, which, they say, at certain Times transpire through
the Chinks and Crannies of the Earth, infecting this upper World with
deplorable Contagions. May the Odours of Paradise refresh us for ever, O
Sensible Musu.

Paris, 19th. of the 4th. Moon, of the Year 1678.
LETTER III.
To Kerker Hassan, Bassa.
EVery Year the French gain Ground of their Enemies: They make prosperous
Campaigns, and always come off Conquerors.

In the Beginning of the 3d Moon the King caused Ghaunt to be Besieged by the
Marshall d' Humiers. This City is the Capital of all Flanders, and is divided
into several Quarters or Isles; so is the Country round about it, by certain
Rivers and Channels, which render it of extreme difficult Access, and spoils
all Communication. It is one of the greatest Cities in Europe, and is defended
by a Counterscarp, a large Ditch, good Ramparts, and many Bastions. The
Inhabitants boast that it was Founded by Julius Caesar. They have been able to
raise an Army of Fifty Thousand Men among themselves, whenever they have been
inclined to Revolt from their Sovereign. Yet they could not hold out above Ten
Days against the present Arms of France; but seeing the Vigor with which they
were attacked on all sides, and despairing of any Succors, they Surrendered on
Articles.

Next to this, the City of Ypres was Surrendered to them on the 25th of the
same Moon, after a Siege of Eight Days. This is another considerable City in
Flanders.

Nor have the French Arms been Unsuccessful in Catalonia under the Command of
the Duke de Navailles. This General having Taken Puicerda the Capital City of
that Province, and a Place of great Strength, being seated on the Top of the
Pyrenean Mountains, and defended by a Castle built on a Rock. The Prince of
Conde won it in the Year 1654. But it was afterward restored to the Spaniards
again by the Treaty of the Pyrene's; who Fortified it anew with all the Modern
Forms. This City has under its Command above Eighty Villages, and draws
Contributions from all the Province of Cerdaigne. It secures the Possession of
Roussillon, covers the Frontiers of Languedoc, and is esteemed second only to
Barcelona, of all the Cities in these Parts.

From Germany and the Provinces bordering on the Rhine, Fame transports hither
successive Relations of Battles fought between the French and the Imperialists,
wherein the former always get the Victory. The Marshall de Crequy engaged with
him first near Grotzinghen, where the Prince of Baden and Forty Officers of
Note were Wounded on the Enemies side: The Count of Liqueville, a Commander
under the Duke of Lorrain, with many others, were Taken Prisoners: The French
Took from them a great Number of Standards, Killed Abundance of their Men, and
in fine, remained Masters of the Field.

No less Advantage had they in the 7th Moon, on the Plains of Rheinsfeldt, near
the River Rhine. Where they Killed above 800 Imperialists upon the Spot; and
the Bridge of Rheinsfeldt was so crammed with Dead Bodies, that they served as
a Barrier to stop the French from pursuing their Victory to the Gates of the
City.

The Marshall de Crequy also defeated a Body of 6000 Horse and Dragoons,
Commanded by the Duke of Lorrain, near to Offembourg, which was followed by the
Taking of Ortambourg Castle, and the Fort of Kell, which the Marshall razed to
the Ground. He Took also the Fort of Zolhauslen; and encountering the Duke of
Lorrain near a Place called Lauterbourg, he set upon him, and Killed 400 of his
Men as they were passing a Bridge of the Rhine, and Took 300 Prisoners.

If they go on at this Rate Year after Year, it will be difficult to set the
Limits of their continually growing Empire. Only we need not fear that they
will ever be able to justle the Faithful Osmans out of the Patrimony appointed
them by Destiny.

Serene Minister, the Crescent out-shines the Cross, the Alcoran supersedes the
Bible, and all Things yield to the Invincible Arms of True Believers.

Paris, 19th. of the 8th. Moon, of the Year 1678.
LETTER IV.
To Dalimalched, the Widow of Pesteli Hali, his Brother, Master of the Customs,
and Superintendent of the Arsenal at Constantinople.
THou may be assured it is no Complement, when I tell thee I condole thy
Loss. He that is Dead was my Brother as well as thy Husband. And the Friendship
which was between us united us more closely than did our Blood. We never
thought any Thing too much to perform in the Service of each other, provided it
did not entrench upon our Honor, but we greedily snatched every Opportunity of
demonstrating our mutual Affections.

He is gone to infinite Joys, to a Place of Refreshment, where he banquets on
the Reversion of his Good Works in this Life: He revels at large, and without
Contradiction, or murmuring of Women, in full Bowls of the Ambrosia of
Paradise. No peevish Female interrupts his Joy, or turns his Smiles to Frowns
by her unworthy Carriage. He lies stretched out at Ease upon the Crimson Beds
of Eden, with Pages waiting on him, whose Eyes are like the polished Pearl.
Each bears a Golden Goblet crusted with Saphires in his Hand, full charged with
Wine, which Mortal Kings would give their Kingdoms for. Those Heavenly Youths
perform their Parts with admirable Grace and dutiful Exactness. They wait the
Minute of their Lords Desire. With humble Resignation the fair Cupids stand
encompassing his Bed, each being emulous of the rest, all striving with an
agreeable Generosity who shall serve their Master first, and with the greatest
Promptness.

When Pesteli pleases to divert himself with Women, it is but to wish, and one
more Fair than ever Apelles drew, presents her self, chaste as Diana, yet as
kind as Venus. No coy Demurs protract the Enjoyment of his Wish, nor is there
the least Sign of Impudence to pall it. But in perfect Love they meet each
other, and unite their Hearts: And so they pass their Time, in constant
unrepented Bliss.

He traverses the pleasant Walks of Eden, and sits him down upon the Banks of
her Immortal Rivers: Rivers that stream with Wine, and Milk, and Honey. Under
the Shade of happy Trees he lies upon the Flowery Green, in the Caresses of some
lovely Daughter of Paradise. Whilst Aromatic Winds inspire him with Diviner
Passions than Endymion felt in the Embraces of Diana. Oh happy State of
separate Souls that part from Earth in Purity! Their Pleasures know no Bounds
or End!

For, what I Have said is only Emblematical, describing in sensible short
Figures, those Raptures and transcendent Joys, which cannot otherwise be
expressed. Whatever elevated Fancy can conceive of Bliss, is all by infinite
Odds surpassed in the Enjoyments of the Happy Souls Above. There is no Number,
Weight, or Measure, of their Eternal and Superlative Felicities. They pass from
Joy to Joy, and sport in endless Circles of Beatitude. O Region ever to be
desired! O Gardens of Incomparable Beauty! where the Liberal Monarch of the
Universe regales the wearied Souls of Mortals with Banquets of Inestimable
Price, and Vnmatch'd Delicacy, after their toilsome Pilgrimage on Earth.

If Pesteli could hear, I would congratulate his Happiness, instead of
Condoling thy Misfortune, in losing such a Husband. He has escaped the
Shipwracks of this Lower World; this Sea of Grief and Tragedies. He Is got safe
into the Harbor of Eternal Rest, the Port of Peace, and Landed on the Strand
of the Omnipotents Serail, where Guards of Angels waited on him to the Throne
of Allah, with Ten Thousand Thousand Flambeau's burning in the Walks of Eden.

But, tell me, Dalimalched, were not you something in the Fault, that the
Generous Pesteli left us both so soon? Did you not fret and teize his Highborn
Soul with Words which might have well been spared to a Man of so quick Sense?
Doubtless he needed not your fuming Lectures, and more silent Discipline of
Powts. If he committed Faults, (as, who does not?) he soon was Sensible without
a Reprimand. There was no Occasion to keep him half a Moon in Paroxysms of
Melancholy and Grief. This was too hard a Penance for his Spirit to bear. But,
you Women have Ways by your Selves, unintelligible to our Sex. Your Windings
and Turnings are intricate as those of Serpents. Daedalus himself, were he now
alive, though once the Glory of Labyrinth-Makers, yet would be puzzled to trace
your Sex, in all your secret, wild, unknown Meanders. Ye are all the very
changeable Things of the Earth. No body knows what to make of ye.

Dalimalched, I tell thee, A Woman never commands a Man, unless he be a Fool,
but by her Obedience; that way she wins his Heart, and makes a thorough
Conquest of his Affections. She wheadles him out of his Sovereignty by cunning
Complaisance and proper Capitulations, or at least, by this Method, she saves
her self. She will not thwart him in the Torrent of his Passion, but meekly
yields to the mighty Stream, and will not suffer her Tongue to move but in the
Eddy of his Wrath.

In a Word, A good Woman consults her Husband's Pleasure in all Things: And if
thou have done so, the World has nothing to say to thee. But if otherwise, I
advise thee to remain a Widow, lest the next Man that marries thee, should
revenge the Injuries my Brother received at thy Hands: For, this is one Way of
Taming Shrews.

Paris, 27th. of the 10th. Moon, of the Year 1678.
LETTER V.
To Hamet, Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire.
I Hope thou will pardon me, most Illustrious Minister, that I have thus long
delayed to give thee a farther Account of the States of Europe: But now I will
proceed; and, according to thy Command, begin where I left off.

Having already discoursed of Germany, I will descend into the Netherlands:
Which is as Natural, as for a Man that has Surveyed the Upper Town of Buda, or
any other City seated like that, to fall into the Lower. For so the Netherlands
seem to be a Kind of Outlying Borough, near the Suburb, to the German Empire.

They are called the Netherlands, by Reason of their Low Situation, near the
Sea: Which makes the Country appear like a Marish, or Moor. They contain
Seventeen Provinces; Ten whereof are under the Jurisdiction of the King of
Spain: The other Seven make up a Distinct and Independent Republic, among
themselves.

The Circumference of the Seventeen Provinces, is a Thousand Italian Miles: And
within that Compass, there are Two Hundred Walled Towns and Cities; an Hundred
and Fifty other Places, which enjoy the same Privileges and Power as the
Former: And there are Six Thousand Villages.

In the Time of Julius Caesar, this Tract of Ground was called Belgick-Gaul by
the Romans. It was Inhabited by a Warlike People, impatient of Servitude, and
Stout Assertors of their Native Liberty; as the same Caesar found by
Experience, when he Warred among them. Nay, and since that Time, the Mussulmans
themselves have felt their Valor. Witness the Famous Expedition of Godfrey of
Bullen, to recover the Holy Land, out of the Hands of the Saracens: And that
other of Baldwin the Fleming. who made himself Master of Constantinople, and
the Grecian Empire.

The Ancient Romans used to say, That the Gauls fought for their Liberty; the
Germans for Booty; and the Dutch for Glory and Honor. Hence it came to pass,
that the Roman Emperors in those Days, had always a Select Guard about their
Persons, chosen out of these Provinces, Also the Hollanders and Frizlanders
were called the Friends and Associates of the Romans.

But, though these Provinces formerly had each a distinct Sovereign, with a
Peculiar Government, and Laws; yet, afterward, they were all reduced under the
Dominion of the Dukes of Burgundy: From whom, they devolved to the Archdukes
of Austria; and last of all, to the Kings of Spain; who claim a Title to Ten of
them at this Day: But the King of France has Possession of a Great Part. As for
the other Seven, they are quite Emancipated, and Free. It being an established
Maxim with them, That the Longest Sword gives the Best Title to a Government.
And, for ought I see, this Principle is practiced throughout the World.

The Inhabitants of the Netherlands are generally Tall, and Strong-body'd
People; Comely, Civil, Open-hearted, Courteous, Prompt and Laborious: More
addicted to Wine, than to Women: Equally forgetful of Benefits, and Injuries:
Great Musicians, Expert Seamen, Cunning Merchants, Accurate Painters, and very
Ingenious in all Arts. They are not Jealous of their Women, as most other
Nations are; but suffer them to Walk abroad openly, and Converse with Men in
the Streets. Neither will any of these Females refuse an Invitation to a Bottle
of Wine. As soon as you come into any House, the Daughter of the Family meets
you, with a Bottle of Wine, or other Strong Beverage, in her Hand, and drinks
it off to you: And if you do not very readily answer, and pledge her, it passes
for a Sign of Rudeness, and Ill Manners.

These People are very Rich, by Reason of their Merchandise and Traffic with
other Nations; for they Export the Product of their Soil, and their own
Manufactures; Vending or Exchanging them, at a Prodigious Advantage, in the
Remotest Regions of the Earth.

They have very strong Forts and Castles up and down the Country; with Cities
which are, in a Manner, Inexpugnable. As for the Religion of the Netherlanders;
The Ten Provinces which are subject to the King of Spain, or France, are called
Catholics. The other Seven represent the Celebrated Tower of Babel, where the
Languages were first Confounded, as Moses relates: For, such is the Hotch-potch
and Gallimaufrey of Religions tolerated in Amsterdam, Leyden, and other Cities
of Holland; and, in General, throughout all the Seven United States. Neither
have they much more Regularity and Order in other Matters. Wonder not therefore
if my Pen observes no Method in Treating of a Country, which is the very
Emblem, Proverb, and Center of Ataxy and Confusion. However, I will now begin
to make more Particular Distinctions, than in the Former Part of my Letter.

Zeland has a bad Air, especially in the Summer time, when the Sun exhales
Stinking and Infectious Vapors from the Lakes and Pools, of which there is a
great Number in that Province: Yet it has an Excellent Soil, abounding with
Wheat, and other Corn; also with good Pasturage, for Sheep and Cattle. There is
little more to be said of this Province.

Holland has this Observable in it, That frequently the Earth trembles there,
under the Burden of Coaches, Wagons, Horses, etc. Which is an Argument, that
the Ground is hollow underneath, and full of Caverns. To confirm this Opinion,
they say, That a Cow once falling into a Gap or Chasm in the Earth, was found
dead three Days afterward in the Sea, being known to the Owner to be the same.
Hence a Part of Holland, in the Language of the Country, is called Waterland:
Which, at first Hearing, sounds like a Contradiction: But they mean by it, a
Land situated in the Waters. For, so, indeed, the whole Province appears to be
divided into small Islands, by Innumerable Canals, Lakes and Pools, that every
where expose themselves to your Eye. This Province deserves most properly, of
all the Rest, the Appellation of Netherland; it being sunk so very low, that,
in many Places, the Sea rises higher than it: Which compels the Hollanders to
fortify their Shores with High and Strong Banks; which, with great Cost, they
continually keep repaired.

They have but little Corn, or Fruit, of their own Growth; being supplied with
those Things from Germany, Poland, and other Countries. But there is an Immense
Quantity of Grass, to nourish Millions of Sheep, Oxen, and Horses. And, what I
have said of these two Provinces, may be, in some Degree, applied to all the
Rest, Frizland only excepted; which is more Fertile of Corn, yields Abundance
of Pulse and Salt, and is well clothed with Woods.

As to the Manners of these People: The Zelanders are of a Ready Wit,
Provident, and Subtle: Of Stature, generally very tall; as will appear by a
Woman of this Province, whom William Count of Holland sent to the Nuptials of
Charles the Fair, King of France. She was of so vast an Height and Bulk, that
the French looked like Pigmies, or Dwarfs, in Comparison of her. And such was
her Strength, that She could lift from the Ground a Beam, and carry it on her
Shoulders, which Eight Laboring Men could hardly stir.

It Is observed of Geldres, That it was the First of these Provinces, which
submitted to the Rising Fortune of the Roman Empire: And again, The First that
shook off the Yoke, when that Empire was in its Wane.

In Vtrecht there are Abundance of Nobles; who are more Soft and Polite in
their Conversation, than the Rest of the Hollanders. The Women of Quality there
go Veiled.

The Public Affairs of all these Provinces, are managed by those whom they
call the States General of the United Provinces. These are a Convention, or
Assembly, of the Chief Nobles, Principal Magistrates, and most Eminent Citizens
in every Province.

Courteous Effendi, These are the Chief Things which I know of the United
Provinces, unless thou would have me write their Complete History: Which
would be too tedious for Letters. Accept of my Labors, which, though Mean, yet
are Voluntary, Cheerful, and done at a Jerk.

Paris, 4th. of the 12th. Moon, of the Year 1678.
LETTER VI. To the same.
Thou will say, I Am all upon the Extremes. In my last I dragged thee through
the most Dirty, Nasty, Abject Valley of all the Earth. I mean Holland, with the
rest of the United Provinces. Now I Am going to lead thee out of those Fenny
Bogs, and give thee a Breathing up the Salubrious Hills and Mountains of
Helvetia or Swisserland. It Is true, this cannot be done without a considerable
Leap over many Provinces of Germany, Part of Lorrain and Alsace. But, having
spoken formerly of the Empire, and from thence in my next, by a kind of Natural
Descent, fallen into the Low Countries; the Consideration of their Form of
Government, put me in mind of the other Republics in Europe. Among which, that
of Switzerland lying next to the United States, I chose to make it the Subject
of this Letter, designing to give thee an Account of Venice, Genoua, Lucca, and
the Rest in Order.

Know then, that Helvetia or Swisserland was once a Province of Germany, but
now it is a Commonwealth subsisting by it self, and not subject to any Foreign
Power. It is divided into Thirteen Cantons or Provinces. I will not trouble
thee with the Names of each Districh, or with their several Characters. The
whole Country in general looks like a great Bunch of Rocks and Mountains,
separated by small but very pleasant Valleys. And though the Mountains seem
rough, yet their Tops and Brows flourish no less with all sorts of Trees and
Herbage, than the fairest Plains. The Inhabitants nourish abundance of Sheep on
them, besides Goats, Hinds, Horses, with many other Kinds of Beasts. For there
is great Plenty of Animals in this Country, both Wild and Tame. The Air is
piercing and serene; the Soil though not of it self fertile, yet is made so by
Industry of the Inhabitants. In some Parts they have Vineyards which produce a
Grape of wonderful Delicacy: The Wine of which is much esteemed in those Parts.
The Lakes also and Rivers abound with Fish of all sorts. Neither is there any
Scarcity of Fowls, or of any Thing else, which immediately serves the
Necessities of Human Life. Only Things tending to Luxury, and other Kinds of
Wantonness, are not to be found in this Happy Region. It is a second Scythia or
Tartary. And indeed the Inhabitants of Swisserland are thought to come out of
those more Northern Regions.

They have ever been Famous for their invincible Constancy and Valor in War.
Julius Caesar himself was afraid of them, and built a Wall to hinder them from
going into France or Gaul; when he remembered that L. Cassius a Roman Consul
was Vanquished by them, and his whole Army routed. Some Authors affirm, that in
the Times of Old, the Inhabitants of the North of Europe, were so prodigiously
multiplied, that some of them were forced to seek new Seats. Wherefore rushing
through Germany and passing the Rhine, they were met by the Gauls, whom they
Overcame and Defeated. Upon which News the Neighboring Nations being
terrified, sent Ambassadors to them, desiring Peace. The Conquerors replied,
They came not to wage War, or disturb the Peace of Mankind: That they only
sought a Place to live in quietly, where they might manure the Ground, without
hurting any Body. Then Helvetia was granted to them, where their Posterity live
to this Day.

As to the Manners of the Modern Swiss, they answer exactly the ancient
Character; being wholly addicted to War; hardy to bear all Inconveniences of
Hunger, Thirst, Cold, and other Afflictions of Nature, Providence, Destiny, or
Chance. A little Money serves their Turn to defray the Expenses of eating;
their Diet being very plain and ordinary, consisting chiefly of Milk and
Cheese. If they are chargeable in any Thing, it is in Wine and other strong
Liquors. For you shall find but mean and squalid Houses and contemptible
Furniture; and they wear Garments answerable to the Rest: But they are given to
Drinking above Measure. They will consume whole Days and Nights successively,
without Intermission, in their drunken Debauches. Nor can any Friendship be
contracted among them, but over their Cups. For, he who drinks most, and is
most Frolicksome and Debonaire, he is taken for a Man of Integrity. Whereas he
that seems timorous of his Health, or makes any frivolous Excuses, is looked
upon as a sneaking Fellow, not worthy of such good Company. Nay, sometimes
their Madness grows to that height, as to set a Dagger to his Threat, who
refuses to pledge in his Turn.

And yet after all this Reproach, it must be confessed, That these People are
very Prudent and Circumspect, both in their Private and Public Affairs. For,
notwithstanding the Pleasure they take in liberal Compotations, yet every Man,
when the Frolic is over, is intent on his Business, using double Industry and
Diligence, to make good the Expenses of his last Vanity. They Work to Drink,
and Drink that they may better Work again. So in the Public, it is evident,
that they are not defective in Policy, since they have been able for so many
Centuries of Years, to maintain their Union, and Confederated Liberties,
against so many Princes, who have endeavored to bring them under a Foreign
Yoke: And not only so, but such is the Singularity of their Conduct, that the
most mighty Monarchs in Europe are glad to enter into a League with them, and
send Yearly vast Sums of Money.

Thou will not, after what I have said, expect to find in Swisserland the
Riches of Arabia and Babylon; nor the rest of the Luxious and Magnificent
Superfluities of the East. The Situation of the Country, and Nature of the
Soil, denies these glittering Vanities. It is sufficient that it brings forth
enough to Nourish the Inhabitants.

They fear no Foreign Invasion, both on the Account of this National Poverty,
and the Inaccessible Heights of the Alps, with which they are on all sides
environed as by a Wall. Add to this, the invincible Resolution of the People,
who abhor and fear Subjection more than Death it self. So that no Prince in
Europe dares, or thinks it worth his while to carry a War into this Country;
knowing, that if he should conquer it, the Revenues, with all the Spoil of his
newgotten Possessions, would not counterbalance the Expenses of one short
Campaign. Besides their Union is so strict and close, that it is almost
impossible to break or dissolve it. Then, they have some very strong Cities,
Castles, Forts, and other Places of Defense, which would give no small
Diversion and Encumbrance to him who should undertake such an Expedition. In
fine, such are their Circumstances, That all the Courts round about them, think
it safer to court this untameable Nation, than to threaten or huff them.

I will relate to thee a Story by way of Instance or Example. From whence thou
may comprehend more clearly the Humor of this People.

In former Times, as I have already said, Swisserland was a Province of the
German Empire, or at least reputed so. And there were certain Prefects or
Governors set over them by Caesar, on succeeding another. Some of these, for
their Insolence, were driven out of the Nation; others were killed by Reason of
their Tyrannous and cruel Practices. Among the rest, one of these Governors,
being disgusted at a certain Swiss, commanded him to be York'd with Oxen that
drew Burdens in a Cart. But when neither by fair nor foul Means they could
force him to this vile Condescension, he commanded his Eyes to be put out.
Which was done accordingly. This was murmured at: But being the first Essay of
his Cruel Disposition, they winked at it.

A while after, the same Governor commanded a Woman, in her Husband's Absence,
to prepare a hot Bath for him. Which when the chaste Matron refused to perform,
till her Husband came home, he struck her dead with an Axe. This also, though
heightning the Choler of the Swiss, was passed by, in Meditation of future
Revenge.

At last he grew so foolishly proud and imperious, that walking one Day in the
Streets of the City, he stuck his Cane in the Ground, and placed his Turbant or
Bonnet thereon; commanding all that passed by to give Honor to it. Which when
a certain honest Swiss refused to do, he commanded him to strike off an Apple
from his Son's Head with a Short from his Cross-bow. The good Father for a long
Time refused thus to hazard his Son's Life. But being overcome by the Tyrant's
importunate Menaces, he rather ventured to trust to Providence the Life of his
Son, than to Sacrifice both that and his own to the Implacable Malice of a
Barbarian. So he shot, and hit the Apple off without touching his Son's Head.
The Governor seeing this, and taking notice that he brought two Arrows with
him, asked him the Reason of it. To whom the Swiss answered, If I had shot
amiss and hurt my Son with the first Arrow, I was resolved to have pierced thy
Heart with the second. Upon this, all the People gave a Shout, and running
together, seized upon the Governor, and tore him to Pieces. Neither would they
ever afterward endure or admit any Man into their Cities, from the Emperor,
unless he came in the Quality of an Ambassador.

Serene Minister, if these Memoirs are in the least acceptable to thee, it is
but to command, and thou shall find I have a Stock not easy to be exhausted.

Adieu, adieu, for the present. May the Curtains of God's Pavilion be unfurled
about us, to skreen us from the Injuries of Demons who hunt by Night for
Mortals: For, it is now their Hour.

Paris, 6th. of the 2d. Moon, of the Year 1679.
LETTER VII.
To Dgnet Oglou, at Damascus.
I Could hardly believe my own Eyes, when I first read thy Letter, and
understood that thou art turned Husbandman at last, and settled in a Place the
most delectable on Earth, the very Center and Rendezvous of all Pleasures, and
whatsoever is agreeable to Mortals. Thou art a wary Man, resolved to be sure of
one Paradise at least, though it be by Mortgaging thy Title to the other. Thou will not suffer God Almighty to go upon Tick with thee, nor trust all his
Promises for Heaven in Reversion. Yet I cannot discommend thy Cautiousness. We
know not what shall befall us after Death; and therefore Nature prompts us to
secure to our Selves some share of Happiness in this Life, and to antedate the
Uncertainties of a Future Bliss, by carving out our own Heaven on this side the
Grave. However, I wish thou may not surfeit on thy present Enjoyments, and
so render thy Soul incapable of the Voyage to Eternal Beatitude. I tell thee,
My Dgnet, thou art a bold Man to venture on a Place by Choice which the
Messenger of God purposely shunned as the most dangerous on Earth. But I would
not discourage thee. That City was then in the Hands of Infidels, a Seat of
Profanation and Idolatry; now it is sanctified by the Presence of True
Believers, by the Preaching of the Law brought down from Heaven, and by the
Moschs of perfect Holiness.

As for the Manner of Life thou have made Choice of, I highly applaud it, as
the most Primitive, Innocent, Delightful, and Happy above all others. Many
great Princes and Kings have exchanged the Toilsome Glory and Royal Fatigues of
Empire, for the sweet Tranquillity and Ease of a Country Farm, and wholesome
Exercises of Agriculture. Thus Dioclesian a Roman Emperor quitted his Throne
for the sake of a Private Life; and those Hands which had been accustomed to
weild the Scepter, became at last voluntarily familiar with the Spade, the
Plough, and the Harrow. So the Grand Cyrus, Monarch of the Persians, used to
boast of the Gardens planted and sowed with his own Hands. And it is certain,
that the Fabii, the Lentuli, the Cicero's the Piso's, with many of the Noblest
Families in Ancient Rome, derived their Names from those Kind of Vegetables
which they signify, and which their Fathers took Delight in Planting.

How many Great Authors have writ in Praise of Husbandry? Attalus and
Archelaus, Two Kings, extolled it: Xenophon and Mago, two Generals, patronized
it, and Oppian the Poet celebrates it in Verse. Besides Cato, Varro, Pliny,
Columella, Virgil, and many others. Some have placed Supreme Felicity in this
kind of Life. Virgil pronounces Husbandmen Fortunate, and Horace calls them
Blessed. Hence it was, that the Delphick Oracle declared a certain Man named
Aglaus to be the happiest of all Mortals, because he was busied in Nothing but
manuring and cultivating a little Farm, never molesting himself with vain Cares
or Passions, nor increasing the Miseries of Human Life by tampering with
foreign and unnecessary Pleasures, which though full of Blandishments and sweet
in the Front, yet carry a Sting in their Tail, embittering all our Joys.

Thou art situated in the most pleasant Suburb of Damascus; for I have surveyed
that City, and all its Precincts, with no small Curiosity. The House is
encompassed with lovely Gardens and Meadows. It was formerly the Seat of Abul
Mecharib the famous Shepherd, who took Sanctuary there from the Persecution of
Ismael Beglerbegh of Diarbehir.

Thou know the Story, and I need say no more, than to wish thee as good
Fortune in possessing that rich Spot of Ground, as he had, who, as it is
recorded in the Register of Damascus, died worth a Hundred Purses of Gold, most
of it got by the Increase of his Cattle in those Lucky Fields.

For my part, I cannot pretend to Skill in these Things; but it appears to me
like a good Omen, that thy Predecessor was so prosperous in that Farm. I advise
thee to take his Measures, and stock thy Ground with Sheep, Oxen, Camels,
Horses, and other Animals of Profit. Think no Scorn, to follow an Employment
ennobled by the Examples of Romulus and Rhemus, the first Founders of the Roman
Empire; of Paris the Son of Priamus; of Anchises the Father of Aeneas; of
Endymion the beloved of Diana, who were all Herdsmen or Shepherds. So was
Polyphemus and Argus. So was Apollo, who tended the Flocks of Admetus King of
Thessaly. What shall I say of Mercury the first Inventer of Hautboy, and Prince
of Shepherds, and of Proteus another Divinity? Was not Abrahim, the Father of
Mussulmans, a Herdsman, and Moses the Prophet familiar with God, and David the
Prince of Poets? In a Word, my Friend, the most illustrious Heroes among the
ancient Greeks, Romans, and other Nations, were all Keepers of Sheep, Goats,
Oxen, etc. as the Arabians are at this Day with the Tartars, and other Nations
of the East.

Doubtless, the Rural Life, as it is the most Ancient, so it affords the
sincerest Pleasures, and most unrepented Joys in Nature; provided a Man enjoys
it with Innocence and Justice. But, I would have thee avoid the common
Temptations to which this Kind of Life is more exposed than any other; that is,
Hunting and Fowling. These are really detestable Exercises, Tragical Sports,
and altogether inhuman. It is a Labor unworthy of Men to watch from Day to
Day, and and one Night after another, the Haunts of our Fellow-Animals, that we
may destroy them. It is a cruel Pleasure that must be maintained at the Expense
of so much Innocent Blood; and a barbarous Triumph, to insult over a poor
mangled Hare, or Hind, after you have harassed them up and down the Country for
many Hours together, with an Army of Dogs and Men.

It Is recorded, that the Thebans were the first Inventers of this unhappy
Sport; a Nation infamous for Deceit, Thefts, Perjuries, Murders, and Incests:
From whom it passed to the Phrygians, a People not less wicked, but more
foolish and easy, light and credulous; and for that Reason they were despised
by the Athenians and Lacedaemonians at first: However, those graver Nations in a
little Time learned the Trade of Hunting of them: So infectious is the Company
and very Neighborhood of ill Men; so prevalent the Examples of such as are
bold to lead the Way in new Paths of Vice.

By the God whom I adore, My Dgnet, it appears to me so foolish a Pastime, an
Exercise so unbecoming the Majesty of a Rational Spirit, to run Yawling with a
Parcel of Hounds, perhaps a whole Day together, after some Timorous Animal,
that I wonder Men are not ashamed to practice it, especially Great Men and
Princes; who should excel others in the Justice and Clemency of their Nature;
yet these are most guilty of Rapine, Injuries, and Spoil.

My Dear Friend, imitate not their pernicious Examples, but tread in the Steps
of Just and Holy Men, whom the Birds and Beasts would obey at a Nod, because
they could not smell the least Odor of Evil in them. How many Prophets have
been fed by Ravens, Hinds, Cats, and other Animals? Nay, the very Serpents and
Dragons of the Desert, with the Amphibious Monsters of Egypt, have quitted
their Native Venom to serve an Innocent Man; and when Omar the Cailiph was hard
pursued by a Troop of Egyptian Idolaters, even to the Banks of the Nile, he
commanded a Crocodile, which he spied in the River, to come and Ferry him over
on his Back; and the Pious Beast was Obedient to his Word. Doubtless this was a
singular Grace in the Dumb Creature; and he was translated to Paradise, if our
Doctors say true.

Dgnet, I bid thee Adieu, and wish thee a plentiful Harvest; which is the most
seasonable Prayer I can make for thee at this time of the Year.

Paris, 14th. of the 2d. Moon, of the Year 1679.
LETTER VIII.
To Achmet Cupriogli, the Most Exalted and Sage Vizir Azem.
THE Face of Affairs here in the West is now quite changed. A General Peace is
established between the Nazarene Princes and States. France, which a while ago
was at Mortal Jarrs with the Hollanders, Spain, and the German Empire, is
lately reconciled to them; whilst new Friendships and Alliances have banished
all Thoughts of former Enmities and Feuds. This Year commences a Civil Jubilee
in Europe.

There has been a Treaty of Peace in Agitation at Nimeguen, and Conferences
held about it any Time these Four or Five Years; whereof I formerly gave a Hint
in one of my Letters to the Port. The Conclusion of it is owing to the Powerful
Mediation of the King of Great Britain, who is made Guarantee of the Articles:
And the Submissive Addresses of the Bishop of Strasburg to the King of France,
contributed not a little to the Universal Agreement. For, this Great Monarch is
slow in his Advances toward an Accommodation with those who have injured Him or
his Allies. He affects to imitate the stately Reservedness of the Eastern
Princes, thinking His Majesty would be violated, should he condescend too soon,
and on too easy Terms, to the Proposals of his Neighbors. He has learned this
from the Maxims of the Sublime Port, the Refuge of Mankind, whose Arms are ever
open to receive and embrace all that sue for the Grand Signior's Friendship and
Protection, in a Way not entrenching on the Glory of the Ottoman House, a
Family destined to Subdue the World.

This Temper of the French King is so well known and observed in these Paris,
that he has got a new Character by it, both among Foreigners and those of his
own Nation. For they spare not to call him The most Christian Turk, by way of
Mockery; and this is the Satirical Style even of his Subjects in their
Seditious Cabals, when they are a little warmed with Wine, and each Man as
Great as a King himself, in his own Conceit.

By the swift Flashes of Lightning, which cause the Heart to pant, and dazzle
the Eyes of Mortals; by the astonishing Noise of Thunder, which raises the
Vapors of the Spleen, and fills us with Hypocondriack Dread, I swear, the King
of France is a great Hero, and deserves the Honor which these Infidels have
unfeignedly done him, in lik'ning him to the undoubted Arbiter of the Earth. He
really determines the Differences and Quarrels of a great Part of it. And
though he be a Christian in Profession, and styled, The Eldest Son of the
Church; yet he is no Enemy to the Followers of Mahomet, who vouchsafe him their
Friendship. Thou know he is the most Primitive Allie of the Ottoman Empire,
among the Western Princes of the Law of Jesus. He has established a more remote
Friendship, for the sake of Commerce, and spreading his Renown, with the Grand
Mogul, and the King of Persia. His Fame strikes all the East with Admiration
and Respect: For they have heard of his continual Victories and successful
Exploits even to the utmost Borders of the Continent. Yet the same Fortune
procures him only the Spite and Envy of the Princes in the West.

However, they are glad to dissemble their Malice at this Juncture, and enter
into an Agreement with him, almost upon his own Terms.

The Treaty between France and Holland was published in this City on the 1st of
the 10th Moon, the Year precedent. Now to assure the World that there is a
perfect Amity and Peace, the Dutch have sent their Ambassadors Extraordinary to
acknowledge, That the King has preferred the Repose of Christendom to the Glory
which his Victorious Arms acquired him; and that the United States of the
Low Countries being the first who have felt the Effects of his Generosity, they
thought themselves obliged to prevent others in the Earliness of their
Application. Yesterday was also published the Peace between France and the
Emperor.

I take my Conge, most Magnanimous Vizir, and Friend of France, in the humblest
Posture of Adoration; wishing thee Honor, Riches, and Pleasures, which shall
have no End.

Paris, 27th. of the 4th. Moon, of the Year 1679.
LETTER IX.
To Mehmet, an Exiled Eunuch, at Al-Caire in Egypt.
THere are certain Critical Periods in our Lives, whether ordained by Fate, or
falling out in an Eternal Circulation of Chances, I am not able to determine.
But this I perceive, That at such Seasons, something very strange and unusual
happens to us, above, or beside, the Ordinary Course of Nature; or, at least,
appearing so to me. I will not pretend to Unravel the Web of Destiny; or
describe the Incomprehensible Fineness of that Artifice, which has framed the
Worlds. I will not undertake to discover the Secrets of God, the Mysteries of
Nature, and those Things which are, under a Seal, shut up from Mortals, in
Inscrutable Darkness. I will not, by a Vain Presumption, and Impious Arrogance,
claim to my self the Right of Omniscience, and dive into other Men's
Constitutions and Thoughts. Suffice it, that I comprehend my own.

Thou know, My Mehmet, that I have been a Man of many Circumstances, subject
to Various Changes and Vicissitudes in this Mortal State. My Life has been
Alternately Checkered with Good and Evil. Virtue and Vice have had their Turns
in the Series of my Actions: Prosperity and Adversity in the Course of my
Years. And I would fain find out the Man that can, with Truth, boast the
Contrary. Doubtless, we are all born to the Adventures which happen in the
Pellmell of Human Conversation. Fates-Errant encounter one another: Sometimes
they are Agreeable, and Complaisant: At other Seasons they will Clash and Tilt,
break Lances, draw Swords; and all the Weapons of Nature's Pride and Fury shall
be used in mere Defense of Idiosyncrasies, Conceits, Antipathies,
Self-Interest, Preservation; or any Thing, but what is Generous and Good.

O Horrid State of Men! A Life to be deplored, beyond the Salvage Course of
Lions, Tigers, Wolves, and other Beasts of Prey; who always, in Extremest
Hunger, spare their Proper Species! Yet Man, in Perfect Wantonness, devours his
Brother, and glories in his Cruelty and Injustice.

As for me, I have not been guilty of any of these Black Crimes, which make a
Riot in the Tranquillity of the Soul, disturb its Peace, darken its Light, and
cover it with a Cloud of Guilty, Desperate Thoughts. No: If I have been Enemy
to any Body, it has been to my self. The very Beasts cannot challeng me with
Oppression, or any Barbarous Usage: Much less would I torment One Individual of
our Humane Race. But I have had my Frailties, as well as other Men; and there is
all can be said of it. Thou art acquainted with my Temper; and no Body knows
any worse. It Is true, I have had to do with Abundance of People in my
Lifetime. I have Bull'd it, Lyon'd, Lamb'd, and sometimes Fox'd it in the
World. I have always pursued the Chase of Nature. Come Life, come Death, I have
made no Baulks in the Appointments of Fate; or ever put the Eternal Destiny to
a Stand. I never halted, boggl'd, or framed a Stumble, at a Generous and Noble
Action, a Bold and God-like Enterprise. But, from my Cradle, I disdained and
cherished Infant-Abhorrences for an Inhuman, Barbarous, Perfidious, Cowardly
Thought.

Indeed, I have been too great a Lover of Good Company; too easy, flexible,
and free in drinking Wine, and other Inebriating Liquors; whose Use is taught
from Heaven, and is the Genuine Product of Eternal Reason. But the Excess is,
sure, derived from Hell, the Seat of Everlasting Evil, Vanity, and Error. And
yet, to whom, or to what Cause, or Principles, shall I ascribe the many
Extravagances of this Kind, that I have committed? I! that have suffered the
Thaws of a Thousand Putrid Fevers; let all my Radical, Essential, Necessary
Juices and Humors, (though never so well and firmly Congealed, by the Force of
an Excellent and Happy Constitution of Body) melt and dissolve away, in Horrid
Fluxes, Sweats, etc. rather than baulk my Friends, or the Grand Signior's
Cause; Rather than Sneak away from Boon Companions, in a Principle of Sordid
Prudence! To speak all, I am no Starter from the Juice of the Grape, when it is
handed to me by Men of Sense, and a Good Humor: Especially, when it is to
serve my Sovereign. And I know not how to perform that Service better, at some
Times, than by giving Nature an Escapade, as the French call it, from the too
Severe Restraints of Constant Sobriety. I was not sent to Paris, that I should
lead the Life of an Hadgi; But to dive into the Secrets of the Infidels: Which
a Man cannot do better, than over a Glass of Generous Wine: For, that unlocks
the Cabinets of the Heart, and reveals all Secrets.

I tell thee plainly, Mehmet; I drink Wine liberally, and frequently; finding
no Devil in the Quality of it, but only in the Excess. And such a Devil
appeared to me last Week, in the Night Time. I had Carous'd it, like a German,
for some whole Days together, in Order to the Carrying on an Intrigue of
Moment: Yet I found my self no Ways disordered; neither could any Body else
perceive, by one false Step in my Carriage, that I was more than Civilly and
Cheerfully Elevated.

It was the Hottest Season of all the Year; which prompted me, and Those that
kept me Company, to Regale our selves after the most Refreshing Manner we could
invent. Our Drink was an Artificial Mixture of the Wine, Water, the Juice of
Limons, Odoriferous and Cephalic Herbs, Fruits, and whatsoever else could
render it Cooling and Delicious to the Palate; Medicinal to the Brain, Heart,
and Stomach.

I will not detain thee in Impatience, with any more Particularities. Only, I
thought it necessary to acquaint thee with the Method of my Drinking; that thou
may form the more Accurate Judgment on the Consequence, which I am going to
relate.

It was in the Evening of the Day dedicated to Saturn by the Gentiles, (which
is the same as Jews Sabbath:) Our Drinking ended the Day before, and I, in a
very Melancholy Humor, went to Bed. I slept till Midnight profoundly; but
then awaking, I was surpised with the Apparition of an Old Man, much
resembling my self. He seemed to look very Studious, and full of Care; sitting
in a Chair, and leaning on the Table, in just such an Habit as I wear, with
such a Beard, and every Thing that can be called my True Portraicture. I lay
Musing, and Gazing, for the Space of about Twenty Minutes, on this Amazing
Object. I mustered up all that little Philosophy I am Master of, to consider
the Nature of the Phantasm. I argued with my self, summoned all my Reason,
Sub-poena'd my Senses, sat up in the Bed, took my Polvita, reached my Head as
far as I could, without Tumbling out of the Bed; and the more I roused my self,
the plainer did this Familiar Figure of my self appear, by the Light of a Lamp,
which always burns in my Chamber.

Yet, being Naturally Incredulous of the Common Stories of Ghosts, Apparitions,
Hobgoblins, etc. I still suspected, that I was either, all this while, in a
Dream; or, at least, if awake, that my Imagination was Vitiated, and Imposed
upon. Wherefore, to satisfy my self more thoroughly. I jumped out of the Bed.
No sooner had my Feet touched the Floor of the Chamber, but a Sacred Horror
possessed my Nerves: I trembled at the now more Apparent Vision. However,
resuming Courage, and resigning my self to God, I went forward, and approached
so near the Uncouth Spectre, that it was within the Reach of my Hand, which I
stretched forth, to touch it; thinking this Way to undeceive my self. But, O my
Mehmet! No Tongue, nor Pen, can ever express the Dreadful Metamorphosis I saw.
For, instead of the same Face which I saw before, my Eyes were now accosted
with the Dreadful Countenance of a Lion, gnashing his Teeth, and darting
perfect Sparks of Fire from his Looks; besides the Horrid Twirling of his Head,
and Manly Beard; with all the other Natural Motions of that Animal, in its
Fierceness.

I know not what would have become of me, if a Good-natured Ape had not come in
to my Relief; who peeped and grinn'd upon me, over the Lyon's Shoulders. Nay,
thought I, if you are so Merry in such Company, I will not disturb you, Good
Mr. Ape! And so I fairly took my Leave, turned my Back, and went to Bed again.

It is my Nature, not to be afraid, or shrink from the Imagination of a Ghost,
or Spectre, or what you please to call it. (For, I am satisfied, there is no
more than Pure Imagination in it.) But, I retired in Complaisance to my own
Fancy, which, I perciev'd, was upon the Creative Frolic. Had I stood still,
perhaps a Dragon had started next, or some more Dreadful Animal. Or, it is
possible, I had been terrified with an Herd of Lynxes, Leopards, Tigers, Bears,
and whatsoever else is Salvage and Morose in Nature. For, I tell thee, I was
then in a Condition, to paint the Walls with any Figure, which should rise
within my Overheated Brains.

At such a Time, there are Emissions from the Eyes, forcible as the Pencils of
a Limner. A Man's Fermented Optic Nerves will draw the Portraicture of Saints,
or Devils, or any Thing that can be named, except the Everlasting SOVRCE of All
Things.

HE, indeed, is altogether Ineffable; who cannot be expressed by Tongue, or
Pen, or by any other Way, but Humble Negatives. There runs a Silent Fountain by
the Door of his Tremendous and Inviolate Secess: Of which the Castrate Angel
drinks, at a certain Set, Appointed Seasons; and then the Universe is all
Inebriated with the Reversion of his Cup. For, it is the Ceremony of the Court
Above, that he should leave no Snuffs, or Supernaculums behind him; but scatter
'em abroad, to treat the Thirsty World below. Blessed is the Man, who has a
Share in this Celestial Compotation.

Pardon me, for thus Digressing in Perfect Piety. For, we ought not to Name the
High and Holy ONE, without Additional Reverences.

In short, I lay but the Space of Half an Hour, gazing on this Odd Kind of
Apparion, which had now resumed my Physiognomy again. At last it vanished all
on a Sudden, whilst my Eyes were intently fixed upon it. It is impossible to
express exactly, the Manner how it disappeared. But, according to the Best
Idea, and Properest Form of Words I have, it seemed to be dispersed, just as a
Smoke or Vapor is Resolved or Rarefied into the Purer Air. Or, as the Moon's
Pale Light, which shines within your Chamber, is unawares extinguished, in
Appearance, by some Intervening Cloud. So did this Spectre fade, and melt away.

If thou will have my Judgment in this Case, I think there was Nothing in it,
but the Pure Force and Energy of my Over-agitated Spirits; which darted the
Impression of their own Idea's on the next Solid Body, that was within the
Sphere of their Activity. The Air it self, at such a Time, is more than
ordinarily Flexible, and Ductile: It yields by Sympathy, and is conformable to
the Transient Image. It helps to patch up the Defects, and Ragged Forms of our
Frail Fancies. Millions of Atoms run to relieve the Weakened, Half-spent Efflux
of their Attractive and Magnetic Kindred-Particles. Pell-mell they rush
together, yet fall into their Proper Ranks; without Disorder, or Confusion.
Every one stops a Gap, prevents a Vacuum; and so the Abortive Figure is
completed. Nature is sometimes pleased, thus to divert her self with Strange
Chimaera's. Even so this World of Ours was formed, if we may believe
Democritus, and Epicurus.

Thou and I, my Dear Mehmet, are but Two Different Lumps of Particles; Tacked,
and Stitched, and Glew'd together, by the Bird-lime of Chance.

I wish, when that Glue shall be dissolved, we may scamper at Large, in the
Endless Element of Light.

Paris, 3d. of the 7th. Moon, of the Year 1679.
LETTER X.
To the Cadilesquer of Romeli.
MY Mind is at this Time in an Astral Disposition, as they call it, Tender and
Receptive of any Impressions. I am like a young Libertine newly converted from
his lewd Courses and Impiety; whose Heart, a devout Compunction and Remorse of
Sin, has softened, opened, and as it were dissolved like Wax: So that it
becomes equally capable of any new Stamp, whether of Vice or Virtue. Thus
pliable and ductile am I at present, through a kind of Fatal Supineness or
Inactivity of Spirit, which takes from me the Power of forming one substantial,
lively Thought of my own, or exerting any strong and laborious Act of Reason;
yet at the same Time lays me open to the Invasion of all Foreign Idea's, and
exposes me to be taken Captive by every bold Argument, or sly Ambush of Human
Sophistry. In a Word, I am of a sudden so weak and unmortified, that I dare not
enter the Field of Religious Controversies, or so much as stand and behold the
Battle between the different Sects that are perpetually disputing against one
another in the World; lest a random Shot from one Party or other should reach
my unguarded Soul, and give my Intellect a Mortal Wound.

Forbearing therefore to enlarge in giving thee a particular Account of all the
Nice Differences that are of late Years sprung up among these Western Infidels,
in matters of Opinion and Church Discipline; I will only inform thee in short,
That those who first Revolted from the Bishop of Rome, still retained an
Inviolable Attach and Dutiful Reverence for their own National Bishops;
submitting to their Conduct, and owning them as Fathers and Guides of their
Respective Churches.

But as there is no End of Divisions, when once the Unity of a People is
broken, which is the only Cement that fastens all Societies; so this first
Separation from the Roman Episcopacy, soon begat another from all Episcopacy in
general, through most of the Reformed or Protestant Nations in Europe.
Especially in Scotland, the Theater of many Bickerings and Animosities on this
Account, of bloody Combats and Civil Wars; and finally, now in this Year, the
Stage of a Barbarous Murder committed on the Person of the Chief Mufti or
Archbishop of that Nation.

He was a Man of an Accurate and Extraordinary Spirit, and in his very Youth
gave early Marks of a refined Genius, in Sciences; to which he brought no small
Reputation and Honor, through the Vastness of his Abilities, his profound
Judgment, and dexterous Sagacity in all Things that he undertook.

This is the Character given him by those of his Nation resident here in Paris,
of whom there are always great Numbers; and the Kings of France were formerly
never without a select Guard of Scots about their Persons: Which Custom had
been observed ever since the Reigns of Charles the Great, and of Achaius King
of the Scots; between whom this was agreed upon in a Solemn League, and was
observed through the Reigns of One and Forty Kings of France, and Six and Forty
of Scotland. The Scots also used to send 'em Auxiliary Forces in Time of War.
Nay so great Affection and so-constant the Fidelity of that People to the
French, that when at one Time a War has threatened France, they have drawn it
into their own Country, have suffered the Loss of Ten Thousand Men in one
Battle, and seen their King taken Captive: At another Time, fighting for the
French against the English, though inhabiting the same Island with themselves,
they have had Fourteen Thousand of their Soldiers, with their King, killed upon
the Spot.

And that Nothing might be wanting to confirm and establish the Friendship of
Nations; it was customary to make reciprocal Marriages one with another, that
so the French and Scotch Blood might be mutually mixed in both Countries.

Thus Lewis XI. when he was Dauphin of France married Margaret the Daughter of
James I. King of Scotland. At which Time, the Grandees and Courtiers of France,
in Imitation of the Dauphin's Example, (such is the ^orce of French
Complaisance) married above a Hundred and Forty Scotch Ladies of Illustrious
Birth and Quality; among whom were Two Sisters of the Scotch Queen; one
becoming Wife to the Duke of Little Bretagne; the other to the Count of
Flanders. The Scotch Nobility on the other Hand, married many French Ladies of
great Extraction, transporting them to Scotland, where they settled and bore
Children.

The Kings of France being moved with Gratitude for the frequent Aids and Good
Offices they received from the Scots; as also regarding the Losses which the
Scots had sustained in their Quarrels, and the strict Affinities that were made
between the Princes, Nobles, and other People of both Nations; resolved to
testify to the World, how acceptable this Obsequiousness of the Scots was to
them, by Honoring them with Benefits and Privileges above all other Nations.

Therefore some of the Scotch Grandees were made: Great Constables of France;
which is the greatest Office and Dignity in the Kingdom, next to that of the
Sovereignty it self. Others were made Marshals, Dukes, and Peers of France,
Generals of the French Armies, Viceroys of Tributary Provinces and Kingdoms.
All the Scots in general were had in high Honor and Esteem at the French
Court, and enjoyed the same Rights and Immunities as the very Natives
themselves, by the special Grant of Henry II. But with this Condition, that
they should persevere in their Fidelity and Friendship to the French: And that
the French who dwelt in any Part of Scotland should enjoy the same Rights and
Privileges as the Natives of the Country. The Parliament of Paris subscribed to
this Grant; and it was confirmed by Henry IV. about the year 1599.

Likewise Charles XI. confirmed to the Scotch Merchants all those Privileges
and Immunities which their Ancestors had enjoyed. That they should be free from
all Exactions, Imposts and Customs which are usually paid for Merchandises.

As to the Original Rise of the Scotch Guards about the French King's Person; I
will tell thee as briefly as I can.

Louis who acquired the Title of Saint, for Warring in Person against the
Mussulmans; when he marched toward Palestine, appointed Four and Twenty Scotch
Soldiers to have the Guard of his Person Night and Day. Charles V. augmented
their Number to Seventy Six; yet still reserving this Honor for the First Four
and Twenty, That they should have the Command of the Rest.

Thus the Custody of the King's Body remained with the Scots for the space of
Seventy Years, and upwards. But Charles VII. being willing to oblige the
French, appointed a Guard of them to be about his Person, under one Standard;
Lewis X. added another Standard; and Francis I. adjoined a Third: Yet without
entrenching on the Prerogatives of the Twenty Four Scots, which they still
enjoyed by Right of Antiquity and Prescription; as also by the Sanction of St.
Louis, for whom the French profess a great Veneration. These Twenty Four Scots
kept the Keys of the Royal Palace after Sunset. They alone guarded the King
when he was in the Temple at Mass. They alone carried the King, when the Laws
of the Land, and the Ceremonies of State required him to be carried on Men's
Shoulders. They guarded the Ships, when the King went by Water. And to them
were the Keys of every Town deliverd, through which the King passed in his
Travels by Land, with many other singular Honors.

But after the Death of Henry II. when the Eurl of Montgomery, the last
Commander of the Scotch Guards was removed from his Office, and a French
Officer placed over them in his stead; that Command always fell into the Hands
of Frenchmen, who by degrees substituting those of their own Nation in the
Room of the Scots who died, it came to pass at length, that there remained but
a very few Scots in the Guards, and those were bereft of all their ancient
Privileges.

Pardon this tedious Digression, Great Patriarch of the Faithful, since it
contains some curious Memoirs in it, and I naturally fell into it by speaking
of the Scots who are very Numerous in Paris to this Day; and from whom I
learned the foregoing Character of their Murdered Archbishop, who was the Prime
Patriarch of all the Land; his Ordinary Title being, Archbishop of St. Andrews.

This great and highest Ecclesiastical Dignity was given him by the present
King of England, at his Return from a Twelve Years Exile, as a Debt to his
Great Abilities, and a Reward of his Merits and Services, in laboring might
and main to effect the King's Restoration.

From the Moment that he acquired this Honor, such as were equally Enemies to
the Government of King's and Bishops, persecuted him with Slanders and
Invectives. The Streets swarmed with Libels against him and Men's Tongues were
as busy as their Pens in Railing at him, because he was resolved to endeavor
his utmost, that Episcopacy might be restored in Scotland, as it was in
England; though it had been subverted in both Nations, during the Usurpation of
Oliver the Tyrant. 'Twas, this drew upon him the Malice and Revenge of the
Seditious; and they spared not in Public to threaten his Death. Nay some Years
before he was murdered, one of these Furioso's shot at him in the open Streets
of Edinburgh, but missed him. Then the Seditious published Libels, wherein they
gloried in the Attempt, and were only sorry that it took not Effect. They also
Prophesied, that he should die a Violent Death; and it was easy for them to
presage this, which they were resolved to execute themselves.

Accordingly in the 3d. and 4th. Moons of this Year, they were ready to give
the Fatal Blow, but his Watchfulness prevented them. However on the 3d. of the
Moon of May, as he was Traveling with his Eldest Daughter in his Coach, with
Two or Three Servants attending him, he was set upon at Midday by Nine of
these Religious Ruffians; who having first wounded his beloved Daughter, to
enhaunce his dying Grief; then hacked and hewed him in a Butcherly and
Barbarous Manner, till at length they left him Dead on the Spot.

Venerable Cadilesquer, I pray God defend thee from Popular Envy, Malice, and
Revenge; from the Wounds given by the Pens of Libellers, and the Tongues of the
Spightful. But above all, I pray Heaven Guard thee from being Massacred by
Religious Assassines, and Bloody Zealots.

Paris, 17th. of the 9th. Moon, of the Year 1679.
LETTER XI.
To Hebatolla Mir Argun. Superior of the Derviches at Cogni in Natolia.
DOubltess, there never was any Creature formed of Flesh and Blood, comparable
to the Messiah: No Mortal like the Son of Mary, Jesus was replenished with all
the Natural Excellencies and Perfections of the Universe.

I am not so profane or presumptuous, as to think or say any Thing in Contempt
of Mahomot; though I take the Liberty to Celebrate the high Praises of the WORD
incarnate, the Firstborn and most Illustrious of all Beings, on this Side the
Eternal Father. The Holy Ghost it self comes behind him.

When the Everlasting Intellect had, from Indeterminate Ages, lain dreaming on
the soft and downy Bed of CHAOS, or the First Matter: In the Grand Cabin of
uncircumcised Darkness, and envelop'd with the shady Curtains of Old, Old
NIGHT: When he had tumbled, tossed and rolled from side to side: When he had
stretched his Endless Limbs for Ease, to seek one Corner of the Infinite
Expanse, where he might abate the Sempiternal Heat of Love. At last, he fixed
his Foot upon the cool Idea of this World of ours.

Then sprang the WORD, from the allfertile WOMB. The Melancholy sad Abyss
rejoiced; for, in the WORD was Light and Life; which darting through the
Eternal Heap of Sluggish and unactive MATTER, with Divine Chemistry first drew,
an Extract of the purest Parts, which formed the Firmament. Next, rose the Sun,
the Moon and Stars; and then the grosser Elements, with all their different
Productions.

These are the Generations of the Universe; when God made the Heavens and the
Earth, and the Angels started out of the Grand Energy, like Volatile Spirits
from Balneo Mariae.

All things Visible and Invisible proceed from the WORD, and the most excellent
of created Beings owe their Original to HIM that was the only Instrument by
which the Eternal Architect contrived and flamed this vast Machine, so
Incomprehensible and Glorious.

O Hebatolla! Who can enough admire this mighty Product of the Eternal MIND?
And yet the greatest and most Excellent Theater of Beings, is hid from Mortal
Eyes. Therefore leaving those high and lofty Speculations, let us descend to
the WORD Incarnate, or the BREATH of God walking and conversing on Earth with
Men in the Humble Disguise of Flesh and Blood. The same was the Messiah of the
Christians, as the Alcoran in several Places assures us. And the Christian
Gospel of the Eagle confirms it, where it says, In the Beginning was the WORD,
and the WORD was with God, etc. and the WORD became Flesh, and pitched his Tent
among us.

Doubtless he was conceived of the Virgin Mary, by that Smell of a Rose which
the Angel Gabriel brought to her from Paradise. For, he was not begot by the
Will of Man, or through the Lust of Concupiscence; but by a sudden Infusion of
the Divine Virtue. The Power of the Omnipotent overshadow'd, surpised, and
ravished the Holy Maid in a Transport of Joy; she took the Flower from the Hand
of Gabriel, which she had no sooner smelt to, but she was ready to dissolve and
faint away in an Ecstasy of Love. But the Angel Cherished her with comfortable
Words, and she became resigned to the Will of the All-merciful and Gracious.

At the End of Nine Months Jesus was Born of her, not after the Manner of other
Children. For, as the Book of Mysterious Secrets tells us, He came forth from
between her Breasts, wrapped up in a Mantle of Aromatic Roses.

The Daughters of Paradise came down and waited on the Virgin Mother at the
Hour of her unspeakable Childbirth. They took the Holy Infant in their Arms,
and over the Vesture of his Nativity, they put on Garments brought from Eden:
Robes of their own Handywork. And then they fed him with the Wine and Milk of
Paradise. After they had performed what was Necessary to the Infant-Messias,
and his Immaculate Mother, the Heavenly Maids returned to their Blissful Seats
above, And sent down Ariel with a Choir of Angels to declare the Birth of Jesus
to this World below, and to celebrate the high Praises of God. They were seen
in the apper Regions of the Air, by certain Shepherds who watched their Flocks
by Night. Their Voices were also heard from afar, chanting aloud the Hymns of
Eden, and the Select Anthems of Paradise. Great was the astonishment to those
rude and ignorant Mortals; their Eyes were dazzled at the Luster of the Heavenly
Troop, and their Ears were Ravished with the Superlative Sweetness of the
Music. Those that were upon the Roads of Judoea, the Caravans of Arabia, Syria
and Egypt: The Travelers from Damascus, Tire and Sidon, saw the Surprising
Vision, they were equally seized with Wonder and Joy. They heard the Harmonious
Tongues of Angels, warbling forth Immortal Melodies. Then their Hearts melted
within them, and they prostrated themselves on the Earth, and praised the most
High, the King of all Things.

The Fame of such extraordinary Events soon spread through the Adjacent
Regions, and to the utmost Borders of the South. The Magi of Persia made a
Pilgrimage to Bethlehem, to Visit the Infant-Messias. They fell down at the
Feet of the Holy Babe, presenting him with Gifts, Gold, Incense and Myrrh.

Thus Jesus grew up, increasing in Wisdom, Knowledge and Virtue.

I will not run over the History of his Life, having done that already in one
of my former Letters to thee. All that I aim at in this Dispatch, is to
testify the Profound Veneration I have for that Most Holy Prophet, who was no
other than the BREATH and WORD of God Incarnate. It becomes all Good Mussulmans
to speak of him with Honor and Reverence; for he is seated on High, and in
Paradise where are the Approaches to God.

O Hebatolla! pray for Mahmiu, that the Entanglements of this Mortal Life may
not hinder him from seeing with Jesus and Mahomet, in the Kingdoms of
Everlasting Bliss.

Paris, 15th. of the 10th. Moon, of the Year 1679.
LETTER XII.
To Kerker Hassan, Bassa.
THou requirest an Account of the present State of England, with a Character of
their King. In regard there are various Rumors among the Merchants at the
Imperial City, of certain Commotions and Rebellious Essays of Malcontents in
that Island.

The Name of the King who reigns there at present is Charles II. Eldest Son of
Char. I. and Heir Apparent of the British Crowns. For, his Empire consists of
Three Kingdoms, which he has in actual Possession; besides many vast
Territories and Dominions in America; not to insist on his Titular Claim to the
Realm of France.

He is a Prince of great Wit and Policy; nor of less Courage, where a just
Occasion requires the Discovery of that Virtue. He underwent innumerable
Hardships and Misfortunes, during his Twelve Years Exile from his Native
Throne, forced to fly into Foreign Countries, by a prevailing Faction of
Rebels, Tyrants, and Usurpers. Of Humor, Debonaire and Amorous; much addicted
to Wine and Women; munificent in his Gifts and Rewards to Persons of Merit, and
to those who have the Happiness to please him in his Recreations; especially to
his Concubines, who are most of them. Nobly extracted. By these Females he has
had several Sons, who are all Dukes and Peers of the Realm. He is in Peace with
all the World Abroad, except the Moors in Sally. Yet this Prince cannot be
called Happy, in that he is harassed at Home by Domestic Seditions, Factions,
Plots, and Conspiracies of his own Subjects.

Here is a Report, That the Roman Catholics of that Nation have lately
attempted to take away the Life of this Monarch: Whilst others say, this
Accusation is forged by their Enemies, to render them Odious: And that to this
End, they have suborned False Witnesses to Swear against them. One does not
know what to believe among so many contrary Rumors. Neither does it much
concern us that are Mussulmans, whether Party of these Infidels be Right or
Wrong.

This Prince, as I have said before, has several Nations under his Dominion,
and it is thought, he scarce knows the just Extent of his Territories in
America. There is a Region in that Continent, inhabited by a People whom they
call Tuscorara's and Doegs. Their Language is the same as is spoken by the
British or Welsh; A Nation that formerly possessed all the Island of Great
Britain, but were by Degrees driven out of it into a Mountainous Corner, of the
Island, where their Pos^^^ity remain to this Day.

Those Tuscorara's and Doegs of America, are thought to descend from them,
being the Posterity of such as followed the Fortune of one Madoc a British
Prince; who, about Five or Six Hundred Years ago being discontented at Home,
resolved to seek Adventures Abroad. Wherefore being provided with Ships, Men,
and all other Necessaries, he made a Voyage toward the West, over the Atlantic
Ocean, not knowing what would be the Event of his Undertaking. However, the
Meon had scarce Twice completed Her Voyage through the Zodiac, when an End
was put to His on the Sea, by Landing in America; where he planted a Colony of
Britains, and then returned to his Native Country. But soon after he put to Sea
again, and sailed directly to the same Place. What became of him afterward is
not certainly known. But the Inhabitants of that Province have a Tradition,
That he lived to a Great Age, and saw his People multiplied to many Thousands,
before he died, For in the Second Voyage he carried over British Women with him
for the Sake of Posterity. They show his Tomb to this Day; with Beads,
Crucifixes and other Relics.

It is certain, That when the Spaniards first Conquered Mexico, they were
surpised to hear the Inhabitants discourse of a Strange People that formerly
came thither in Corraughs, who taught them the Knowledge of God, and of
Immortality; instructed them also in Virtue and Morality, and prescribed Holy
Rites and Ceremonies of Religion. It Is remarkable also, what an Indian King
said to a Spaniard; viz. That in foregoing Ages, a strange People arrived there
by Sea to whom his Ancestors gave Hospitable Entertainment; in regard they
found them Men of Wit and Courage, endued also with many other Excellencies:
But he could give no Account of their Original or Name. And Montezuma, Emperor
of Mexico, told Fernando Cortez, the Spanish King's Ambassador, and General in
those Parts, That his own Ancestors landed there as Strangers, being Conducted
by a certain Great Man, who tarried there a while, and then departed, having
left a considerable Number of his Followers behind him. After a Year, he
returned again with a greater Company; and that from Him the Emperors of Mexico
derive their Pedigree, and his Subjects from the Rest. The British Language is
so prevalent here, that the very Towns, Bridges, Beasts, Birds, Rivers, Hills,
etc. are called by British or Welsh Names. And a certain Inhabitant of
Virginia, (a Place Subject to the King of Great Britain) straggling not long
ago into the Wilderness, by Chance, fell amongst a People, who, according to
some Law or Custom of theirs, condemned him to Death: When he in the Hearing of
them, made his Prayer to God in the British Tongue; upon which he was Released.

Who can tell the Various Transmigrations of Mortals on Earth, or trace out the
True Originals of any People? The whole Globe has suffered diverse Changes; and
every particular- Nation has had its Metempsycosis. What grows Obsolete and
Antiquated in One Country, becomes a New Discovery in Another. The Houses of
the Living are built on the Bones of the Dead. Children lay the Foundation of
their Grandeur, in the Ruin of their Fathers. And the Generations to come, will
practice this Chimistry on Our Relics, that are now Living: They will extract
their Fortune out of our Ashes.

By the White Stone which Adam brought with him out of Paradise, and which fell
by Inheritance to Abraham, Ismael, and his Offspring for ever; That Stone which
at this Day lies under the Mosch at Mecca, and grows Black by the Touch of
Sinners; I swear, the Arabians are an Aboriginal People, a Nation Established
from all Antiquity: a stayed Race; not canted up and down, hither and thither,
by every Caprice of Fortune.

Wherefore be assured, Noble Arab, That besides my particular Obligations, I
honor thee for the sake of thy Descent, thy Purified Blood, and Pacifick
Temper. Wishing for nothing more Ardently, than the Happiness of kissing the
Border of thy Vest in this Life, or at least of seeing thee in the Paradise of
Perpetual Rest, from whence there are no farther Transmigrations.

Paris, 2d. of the 11th. Moon, of the Year 1679.
LETTER XIII.
To the Most Magnanimous and Invincible Vizir Azem.
IN the 4th Moon of this Year I sent thee an Account of the Treaties concluded
and published between France and the Hollanders, as also of a Peace established
with the German Empire. Now I shall acquaint thee, That a like Agreement is
published with Spain. The two haughty Monarchs seem perfectly reconciled; and
to convince the World that they are so really, the King of Spain has Married
this King's Daughter.

The Marquis los Baibases made his Public Entry into Paris on the 11th of the
6th Moon, in Quality of Ambassador Extraordinary from the Catholic King; and
his chief Business was, To testify the sincere Joy and Satisfaction his Master
took in the Hopes he had of seeing a lasting Peace settled, not only between
these two Crowns, but also throughout Europe; That so the Christian Princes,
whose Arms had been hitherto employed against one another, to the general
Detriment of Christendom, might now be United against the Common Enemy, by
which he meant the Faithful Osmans. In order to this, he desired that the
Daughter of France might be given to his Master in Marriage, as in Confirmation
of the Peace between them.

This was soon granted him, and the New* was no sooner arrived at Madrid, but
the Spanish King expressed a more than common Complacency, causing their TE
DEVM to be publicly sung to give God Thanks for so great a Happiness. The
Streets of Madrid were illuminated also with all manner of Fireworks; but the
Ceremony of Betrothing was not performed till the 8th Moon. It was done at
Fountainbleau, the Court being there at that Time, and the Marquis de los
Balbases was the King of Spain's Proxy. After which Time, Mademoiselle, as they
called her before, held her Rank at Court as the Queen of Spain. And in that
Quality She received the Complements and Addresses of the Archbishop of Paris,
at the Head of His Chapter; as also of the Parliament, the Chamber of Accounts
the Court of Aids, the Court of Moneys, the University; and so of the Great
Council, and the French Academy. Now this Great Princess is gone toward Spain
to take Possession of Her New Royalty; which is no better than a splendid
Servitude, or glorious Imprisonment during her Life. For the Laws and Customs
concerning Women are as severely observed in the Court of Spain, as in any Part
of that Country; and the Queen her self is no more exempted from keeping them,
than the meanest of Her Subjects. There are certain set Hours, out of which she
cannot see so much as the King himself. For his Time is parcell'd out, and
divided between the Service of the Public, and of his own Personal
Necessities; the Affairs of State, of Religion, and of Nature. So that the
Queen must be altogether shut up from the Sight of Men, unless it be when any
Ambassador has Audience of her, or when She goes to Church, or to see the
Public Sport of Bull-baiting, with such like Spectacles; or lastly, when Her
Confessor comes to visit Her. At other Times She is only a Companion of Women,
a mere Reclufe, chamber'd up in her own Melancholy Apartment, without the
Liberty of ranging the Palace. Whereas in France the Women converse with Men,
and go abroad when they please, with an unrestrained Freedom. They discourse of
State-Matters, and of Religion; they undertake to Censure both Civil and Canon
Laws, correct Philosophy, and reform the Morals of the Ancients: In a Word, the
French Ladies take a particular Pride in appearing very Learned and Knowing, as
if they had been educated in the Academies. They also go a Hunting, Hawking,
Fishing, and Fowling, even as the Men. There is hardly any Game or Exercise,
Study or Recreation, which is not common to both Sexes. Whereas the Spanish
Females are kept in Ignorance, and have no more Liberty than Captives. Only, as
I said, the Queen is permitted to see the Bull-baitings, but it must be in
Company with her Husband as well as other Ladies.

This celebrated Sport of Baiting or Coursing the Bull is so well known to
thee, who have been an Eyewitness of it at Tunis, and other Cities of Barbary,
that I need say no more of it but to observe, That the Spaniards first learned
it from the Moors, when those Africans dwelt among them, having Conquered that
Kingdom.

But to return to the Servile Life which the Queens of Spain lead; They are
obliged to go to Bed at a certain precise Stroke of the Clock every Night, with
this only Difference, That it is an Hour later in Summer than in Winter.
Besides Her, there is no other Married Woman suffered to lie in the King's
Palace; so that the Queen is attended only by Virgins or Widows. Neither can
She her self ever Marry again after the King's Death. And so naturally Jealous
are the Spaniards of their Wives, That if the Queen fall into any Disaster, by
Chance or Conspiracy, as to be thrown down by her Gennet, even to the breaking
of Her Limbs, and Hazard of Her Life, none of her Pages, or any other Man
whatsoever, dares to lift her up, or any other Way assist her, nay, not so much
as by stopping the Horse, if he should drag her in the Stirrup. Judge now,
Magnificent Vizir, whether it be not a desirable Thing for a French Princess to
be made Queen of Spain? A Princess bred up in a Court abounding with all sorts
of Gentilesses, Gallantines, and Delightful Liberties; must needs think her
self in a Monastery or some worse Place of Confinement, after she has been but
a Day or Two in the Court of Spain. But Reasons of State supersede all these
Inconveniences. It Is the peculiar Unhappiness of the Princes here in the West,
that they Marry for Interest more than for Love.

There is another Match going forward between the Dauphine of France, and the
Princess Ann Marie Victoire, Sister to the Duke of Bavaria. These Infidels are
Uniting their scattered Strengths and Interests. It looks as if they had some
Secret Design against the True Believers.

Illustrious Prince of the Princes, who serve the Grand Signior, I pray that
the Empire of the Faithful may be Exalted, and stand firm till the Angel of the
Cave sound his Trumpet.

Paris, 10th of the 12th Moon of the Year 1679.
LETTER XIV.
To the Venerable Mufti.
THat I may give thee a clearer Idea of Rome's Original, it is necessary to
step farther Backward in Antiquity; and cast our Eyes on the Ruins of Troy, set
on Fire by the Greeks, and laid in Ashes, after a War of Ten Years, to Revenge
the Rape of Helena, Wife to Menelaus, whom Paris the Trojan Prince and Guest to
Menelaus, carried away with him by Force.

From the deplorable Flames of Troy, Antenor and Aeneas escaped, and got to
Sea: The Former being forced by Distress of Weather on that Part of Italy which
is now under the Dominion of Venice, where he built Padua: The Latter came with
a Fleet of Two and Twenty Ships to Latium, now called Campagna di Roma, and St.
Peter's Patrimony, being the Estate of the Church.

At that Time Latinus the Son of Faunus, or as some say, of Hercules, Reigned
in Latium, before whom there had been but Four Kings in the Country. Those were
Janus, Saturnus, Picus, and Faunus. Whilst Janus Reigned, Saturn being expelled
by his Son Jupiter, fled to Italy; where being Hospitably received, he built a
Castle, calling it after his own Name Saturnia. At length he obtained the
Kingdom of Latium; which he left to his Son Picus, and he to Faunus.

In his Time Evander sailed out of Arcadia, and came to Italy, Sixty Years
before the Destruction of Troy. He built a Town called Pallantium, where
afterward Rome was built. Much about the same Time, the Pelagians went out of
Thessaly into Epirus and Dodona first; and then passing over into Italy, joined
themselves with the Aboriginal Arcadians; who were got thither before them.
These united their Forces, and expelled the Sicilians from the Country: Who
passing over to Trinacria, or the Island of Three capes, gave to it the Name of
Sicilia, which it retains to this Day. When Evander had been Five Years in
Italy, Hercules, with a Company of Greeks, Landing on the same Shore, was
kindly entertained by him.

At length the Kingdom of Latium fell to Latinus, in whose Reign Aeneas came
thither; and having entered into a League with Latinus, married his Daughter
Lavinia: From whose Name he called a Town which he built in those parts,
Lavinium. Then Turnus King of the Rutuli, being angry that Latinus had given
his Daughter to a Stranger rather than to him, who was a Native, and to whom
she was before berroth'd, invaded his Country. But the Rutuli were overcome in
Battle, and both Turnus and Latinus lost their Lives: So that the Kingdom fell
to Aeneas. But he enjoyed it not long: For the Rutuli, at Three Years End came
against him under the Conduct of Mezentius, King of the Tyrrhenians, now called
Toscans. And Aeneas being killed in the Battle, his Son Ascanius took
possession of the Kingdom. He having made Peace with Mecentius, and quelled the
Rest of his Enemies; built a City which he called Long Alba, the 30th. Year
from the Building of Lavinium. In this City of Long Alba, there Reigned after
Ascanius Fourteen Kings, even to the Time of Romulus, and the Foundations of
Rome. The Fourteenth of these Kings was Amulius, who over-reached his Brother
Numitor, to whom the Kingdom belonged by Right of Primogeniture. And to be
secure of all Things, he made Sylvia, the only Daughter of Numitor, a Vestal;
that he might have no Fear of Numitor's Posterity. Yet Sylvia was got with
Child by Somebody, and brought forth Twins, who were called Romulus and Remus.
These were exposed to the wide World by the Command of King Amulius; and were
privately Nourished by Faustulus, till they came of Years. Then being informed
of their Birth and Extraction, with the true State of Things, they slew
Amulius, and restored their Grandfather Numitor to his Kingdom. In the Second
Year or whose Reign, Romulus built the City of Rome.

In the Eighteenth Year of his Age, Romulus was saluted King, when he had
killed his Brother Remus for leaping in Contempt over the Ditch he had made
round the City. Thus he Consecrated the Fortifications of the City with his own
Blood, But all this while Remulus had Built but the Shadow of a City, since
there were no Inhabitants to People and Defend it. However, he quickly pitched
upon a Method to supply this Defect. There was a Grove hard by, which he made a
Sanctuary for all Persons in Distress, and who were willing to make their
Fortunes upon Hazard. This was proclaimed in the Neighboring Regions: And an
Innumerable Multitude of Criminals, Debtors and Malcontents flocked thirher
from all Parts; besides Shepherds and other Persons, who only through a Natural
Inconstancy sought a Change of Life. So that there was a Gallimaufry of Trojans
who came over with Aeneas; of Arcadians who followed Evander; and of several
other Nations; besides the Natives of Toscany and Latium. Out of these, as out
of so many Elements, Romulus extracted the Body of a Commonwealth. But he
confider'd withal, that this New Republic could not subsist beyond the Age and
Lives of those Men who formed it; They being without Hopes of Posterity, as
having no Women among them To provide for this Inconvenience, they treated with
the Bordering People about Marriages: Which being denied them, they had
Recourse to Stratagems and Violence. They invited the Sabines and other
Neighbors, to come and see some Plays which they promised to exhibit in Honor
of Neptime.

The Bait took; and Multitudes of both Sexes, especially the Younger Sort,
thronged thither to be Spectators of the Roman Novelties. When on a sudden a
certain Signal being given, the Romans leaped from their Places, and rushing
among the Strangers, every Man seized the Female that best pleased him, or that
first came to Hand, and made her his Wife.

This was the Cause of speedy Wars: End the Neighboring People, who had been
thus robbed of their Women, took up Arms to revenge the Injury. But they were
^outed, put to Flight, and one of their Towns laid? Waste. The Romans also took
Rich Spo^s from them, which they Consecrated to their Gods.

In the mean Time, the City of Rome was delivered into the Hands of the
Sabines, by Tarpeia a Virgin: Who, as some say, was corrupted with Gold by
Tatius, the Captain of the Sabines: Whilst others affirm. That she did it
innocently, and with a Design to save the City, instead of betraying it. For
she asked as a Reward of her supposed Treason, the Shields of the Sabines;
thinking that being thus in part disarmed, they might easily be overcome by the
Romans. But they sensible of her Stratagem, promised what she demanded; and
performed it accordingly; but in such a manner, as plainly discovered their
Revenge of an Injury, rather than their Gratitude for a Kindness: For they
threw their Sheilds so thick upon her, that they pressed her to Death.

Then entering the City Pell-mell, there commenced a Furious Battle between the
Romans and the Sabines. The Streets flowed with Blood, till the Wives of the
Romans, for whose Sake this War began, came tearing their Hair; and running
between the Two Armies, at length brought them to a Truce, and Agreement. Then
a Solemn League was made between Romulus and Tatius. And, what is more
Wonderful; the Sabines, leaving their Native Seats, came, with all their
Wealth, to live in Rome; communicating Part of their Riches to their
Sons-in-Law, by Way of Dowry.

The Forces of the Romans being thus increased, by the Accession of the
Sabines, Romulus applied himself to the Public Administration, with all Care
and Policy. He appointed the Youth to be always in Arms, on Horseback; that
they might be constantly upon their Guard, and ready equipped against the
Surprises of War: That the Chief Council of the Commonwealth should consist of
the Seniors; who were called Fathers for their Authority, and Senators for
their Age.

Affairs being thus disposed, One Day, when there was a Full Senate, Romulus
being present, was on a sudden taken from their Sight. Some think he was
Murdered by Conspiracy, and cut into Small Pieces by the Senators: Others say,
he was Poisoned. But the General Report was, that he was Deified. Julius
Proculus was the Author of this; who taking Notice that there arose a Violent
Tempest at the same Instant that Romulus disappeared, and that the Sun was just
then Eclipsed, insinuated to the People, that Romulus was become a God. Nay, he
took an Oath, That he saw him in a much more August Form, than whilst he was a
Mortal: And that Romulus commanded them to Adore him for a God; affirming, that
he was called Quirinus in Heaven; and assuring them, that Rome should conquer
the Whole Earth.

Numa Pompilius succeeded Romulus, being invited to the Kingdom by the Romans,
who had a Veneration for him on the Bare Fame of his Sanctity and Religion. He
raught them Holy Rites and Ceremonies, with whatsoever pertain'd to the Worship
of the Immortal Gods. He divided the Year into Twelve Months, and appointed the
Holy Days. He ordained the Pontifs, Augurs, Salii, with other Ranks of Priests.
He gave them the Ancilia and Palladium, which came down from Heaven: And he
instituted the Vestal Fire. In a Word, He persuaded them, that whatsoever he
taught them, he received from the Goddess Aegeria. And this wrought so
Efficaciously on the Minds of the Rude and Ignorant People, that they came, at
Length, to Govern that Empire with Justice and Religion, which they got by
Robbery and Oppression.

Prince of the Mufti's, I will reserve the Rest of the Roman History for
another Dispatch.

Paris, 9th. of the 2d. Moon, of the Year 1680.
LETTER XV.
To William Vospel, a Recluse of Austria.
THY Last Letter appears Magisterial and Peremptory, like a Summons from the
Inquisition. Thou requirest an Account of my Faith, and what Idea I have of
Religion; suspecting that I am inclined to Heresy. This proceeds from the
Freedom I formerly took, in Discoursing against the Pope's Infallibility, the
Newly Canonized Saints, and the Doctrine of No Salvation out of the Roman
Church. I see, thy Zeal makes thee Peevish, and Morose. Indeed, it is a Grace
that soon turns sour, if it be not kept in a Clean Heart, and a Temperate Air,
free from the Vapors of Superstition. However, I am willing to satisfy thy
Demand, as well as I can; and transmit My Soul to thee in Effigy.

Though we cannot Pourtray Negatives, yet every Picture has its Backside,
whereon the Cunning Painter may draw the Reverse of his First Design; or, at
least, the Spectator's Imagination may supply the Painter's Office, and form
Idea's quite contrary to the Original Piece. That thou may therefore the
better comprehend what I am, in Point of Religion and Faith, I will first
represent what I am not.

Conceive then, that I am no Narrow-Soul'd Jew, who confines Salvation to the
Lineage of Jacob; and lays an Hereditary Claim to Heaven, because, for the
Wickedness of his Execrable Race, he is not allowed to possess a Foot of Land
on Earth: Who, to strengthen his Title, produces the Scheme of his Genealogy;
proving that he descended, in a Right Line, from one of those Parricides, who
murdered the Messiah: And, for that Reason, avouches, that Paradise is entailed
to him; among the rest of his Brethren, on the Score of his Forefathers Merit.

Neither am I a Christian-Hypocrite, who mocks himself, and All that see him,
with his Empty Formalities: Who constantly calls upon Jesus every Morning, to
sanctify his Resolution of Sinning against God before Night. Who tires out the
Patience of the Saints and Angels, with the Crambe of his Vain Repetitions. His
Ave Maria's, Ora pro Nobis's, and the rest of his Religious Jargon. Who goes to
Church, that he may get the Whip-hand of the Devil; and, meeting him on Holy
Ground, may whisper Treason against God Almighty, over his Beads, or his
Prayer Book; as the Germans do against the Emperor, over their Bottles, sub
Rosa, without any Observators, or Tell-tales.

I am no Worshipper of Images, Pictures, Old, Rotten, Worm-eaten Bits of Wood,
or other Pretended Relics of Christ, and his Saints. I cannot be persuaded,
that God is well pleased to see me make a Fool of my self, and Trot up and down
in Pilgrimage, to Honor Five or Six Sham-Heads of St. John the Baptist; for,
in so many several Places do they pretend to show that one Sacred Relick, which
cannot be Multiplied. Neither can I believe the Miraculous Vegetation, and
Constant Growth of the Cross; which they pretend to show Whole and Entire at
Caesarea, whilst it is exhibited also in Millions of Pieces, throughout
Christendom. So that there is scarce a Christian Gentleman of any Quality, in
Europe, Asia, Africa, or America, who does not boast his Share of this
Wonderful Relick. If all which Pieces were put together, they would, probably,
make a Thousand such Crosses, as that which is kept in Palestine, for the
supposed True Cross whereon Jesus suffered Death; and yet, they are all said to
be cut off from That. Indeed, Father William, I have no Great Stomach to
swallow down these Great Wooden Fables: The very Chips are enough to choke me.
But then comes the Milk of the Blessed Virgin to my Relief, with which I may
rinse my Unbelieving Throat, almost in every Parish, or Monastic Church, I
come at. For, I dare say, there is more of this to be found in such Places, than
an Hungarian Cow would give in Seven Years together. But it Curdles in my
Stomach, and makes me Sick. The very Idea of these Child-Absurdities, is as
Operative as the Draught of an Antimonial-Cup.

It would be too tedious to turn up all the Negative Side of my Religion; and
explain, in an Hundred more Particulars, what I am not: Let us now therefore
reverse the Tablet, and see what I positively am.

And here I am at a Loss for a Compendious Title, or Name, to give my self,
saving that of a Christian: For, I know not to what more Particular Predicament
I belong. As for the Distinguishing Characteristicks of Papist, Protestant,
Lutheran, Calvinist, Socinian, etc. I esteem 'em no otherwise, than the Brands
of so many Religious Factions in the Church. And the Particular Title of
Roman Catholic, looks like a Soloecism in Common Sense. I would therefore be
taken for a Christian, who neither makes Parties, nor sides with any. But,
honoring Jesus as our Common Lord and Master, I endeavor to obey his Laws
peaceably, and like a Loyal Subject.

I lay for a Foundation of all my Practice toward Men, this Golden Rule, which
He gave us; Not to do that to Another, which I would not have done to my Self.
Upon this Basis is built the whole Fabric of Human Justice. I endeavor to
regulate my own Passions, and to bear with those of Others: To be angry with my
self, for the least Peccadillo; but to frame Excuses for the Errors and
Offenses which my Neighbor commits. Here rises the Superstructure of all
Virtues, supported by Patience, Hope, and Faith; cemented by Charity, Meekness,
and Temperance; and adorned all over with Good Works.

In a Word, Father William; The Sum and Substance of my Religion consists in
these few Rules: To Fear God, Serve my King, Honor and Obey my Parents, Love
my Friends, and To do Justice to all Men: Without troubling my self about Empty
Formalities, and Needless Ceremonies: Or being concerned, in what Nation,
Climate, or Society of Christians I live; Since God regards not one Man more
than another, for these Exterior Differences.

Reverend Monk, Adieu: And, from what I have said, conclude me a Catholic in
the Properest Sense.

Paris, 26th. of the 2d. Moon, of the Year 1680.
LETTER XVI.
To Murat Bassa.
THey are extremely Merry here in Paris, Nothing but Dancing, Singing, Roaring,
Drinking, Ringing of Bells, making of Bonfires, and other Illuminations,
Shooting of Guns, Flirting about Squibs, Crackers, Serpents, Rockets, and all
manner of Gunpowder Compositions. If it should hold but Two Hours longer, I
believe they would be in Danger of running all Mad. This is the Hour of
Midnight, and yet they are in the Height of their Jollity, which is not
customary in these Western Parts, tho no Wonder in the East. I wish there were
an Army of Ottomans near us; I Would give 'em the Signal, and show them the Way,
when and how to enter the Town, and take Possession of the Richest City in
France: For they suspect Nothing, and the very Guards themselves are all drunk.
'Twere an easy Thing to Surprise 'em, and take 'em Napping. But there is a
Time and a Chance for all Things under the Moon: And this is their lucky Season.

Would thou know the Occasion of all this Joy and Security? It Is double; Of
one Side the News comes rolling from Spain of the New Queen found there; and on
the other Hand, they are transported with the Marriage of Monseigneur, the
Dauphine of France, with the Princess Ann Marie Victoire, Sister to the Duke of
Bavaria.

I mentioned the Advances were made in Order to this Match, the latter End of
the foregoing Year. The same was completed in all its Ceremonies on this very
Day.

The French King parted from Versailles about the beginning of this Moon, with
the Dauphin, his Son, to meet the Princess. Their first Interview was at a
Place called Vitry. As soon as the Dauphiness (for so we must call her now) saw
the King alight from his Horse, she leaped out of her Coach, and threw her self
upon her Knees. But he soon raised and embraced her with Royal Caresses,
expressing the mighty Joy he felt at this first Sight of her, on whom rested
the Hopes of France, for Heirs to the Crown. Then he presented the Dauphin to
Her, who also was not wanting on his Part to discover the Sentiments he had for
a Princess of so great Birth, Merits, Wit and Virtue.

The Queen did not see her Daughter-in-law till they came to Chalons; and there
she caressed her with all Tenderness imaginable, in outward Appearance. But God
knows what is in the Hearts of these Royal Souls, or how long their Friendship
may last.

The Ceremony of the Espousals was performed at that Town, Yesterday, by the
Cardinal of Bouillon, Grand Almoner of France, in the Chapel of the Bishop's
Palace: And to Day, as I have said, he finished the whole Business in the
Temple of the Virgin Mary, the Chief Cathedral of this City; in the Presence of
the King and Queen, with diverse Lords and Ladies of the Court. There were other
Bishops to assist him, whose Titles I have forgot: But I think they were of
Or^^ans and Condom. This last makes a considerable Figure in the Kingdom, and
is created First Almoner to Madam the Dauphiness. He appears very Zealous in
Converting the Huguenots; and I have a great deal more to say of him, than I
have Time to Write now.

Assure thy self, That I cherish a profound Respect for thee; and that as I
never was, so I never will be defective or tardy in sending thee thy Proportion
of Western Intelligence: For I must divide it among the Bassa's and other
Ministers of the Port.

Rest contented with thy Share, and in the Name of God Farewell.

Paris, 8th. of the 3d. Moon, of the Year 1680.
LETTERS Writ by A Spy at PARIS.
VOL. VIII.
BOOK IV.
LETTER I.
To Hamet, Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire.
BY the Mosch of Sultan Jub, I swear, these petty Republics of the Franks are
not worth a Mussulman's Thought. However, to satisfy thy Curious and
Inquisitive Genius, I will say something of each, as briefly and compendiously
as I can.

In my Two last, I discoursed of the United Netherlands, and the Swiss Cantons.
Now I will ferry thee, over the Leman Lake, and Land thee in Geneva, the
Mother. Nurse, and Center of the Calvinists. These are a sort of Protestants,
dissenting from the Opinions of Luther and his Associates; who was the First
Author of what they call the Reformation here in Europe.

The City of Geneva is very Ancient; and was not Young in the Time of Julius
Caesar, as appears by his Commentaries; where he makes mention of its being
seated on the River Rhosne, just at the Entrance of the Leman Lake. It stands
very pleasantly, and has a fertile Soil round about it; where Ceres strives to
outdo Bacchus in her Liberalities. For though there be very good Vineyards in
these Parts, yet not in so great Plenty, as to match the Abundance of Corn,
Pulse, Hay, Oats, Melons, and all manner of Herbs and Fruits that the Climate
usually bears.

The Air is pure and wholesome; the Winters not so cold as in Germany, nor the
Summers so hot as in some Parts of France.

The People are generally Corpulent, Morose, Inhospitable to Strangers,
especially to those of the Roman Church, whom they always suspect as Spies.
They are very Frugal. Continent, and Sober. And above all Things, they affect a
singular Gravity in their Carriage and Garb.

As for Riches, they can boast but little; and were it not for their. Art in
making Silks, and printing Books, of which infinite Quantities and Numbers are
Exported to other Nations, this Commonwealth could not support its own Charges.

Indeed their Military Strength is considerable for Bigness of the Place: the
City being fenced by Nature, as well as Art, with impregnable Fortifications.
They keep an exquisite Watch on the Walls; and at the Gates: Neither can any
Foreigner have Entrance or Lodging there, without undergoing a severe Scrutiny.
They have a Magazine in the City, furnished with all sorts of Arms, and with
every Thing that is necessary to sustain a long Siege. Add to this, the
Friendship and Patronage of the French Kings, who have for many Years sheltered
this little Republic from the Invasions and Encroachments of the Dukes of
Savoy, who claim a Title to it.

There were formerly Three Forts near the Town, in the Possession of the
Savoyards, which much annoyed the Inhabitants, and threatened the Ruin of the
City it self with the Shot of great Brass Ordnance, which were placed there for
that Purpose. But Henry IV. of France Took it from the Duke of Savoy, and
Demolished it in the Year 1600. He also caused another to be pulled down, which
equally endamag'd the Opposite side of the City. And a Third the Inhabitants
themselves laid Even with the Ground, being aided by the French.

If thou would know, by what Title the Dukes of Savoy pretend a Right to
Geneva; I Will tell thee in few Words. In former Times, there was a Feud between
the Counts of Geneva, and her Bishops, about the Government, each claiming it
as his Due. At length a certain Bishop procured the Principality of Geneva,
from Frederic I. Emperor of Germany. This occasioned a Civil War between him
and the Count of Geneva, which lasting many Years, and consuming the Money and
Forces of the Town; the Inhabitants, with the Consent of the Bishop, implored
the Protection of the Count of Savoy. He raised an Army, and marched against
the Count of Geneva; taking many Towns and Fortresses from him, which belonged
to the Republic. Then he advanced with the Army near to the Walls of Geneva,
more like an Enemy than a Friend to the Bishop and People. For not content with
his new Conquests, he demanded as much Money as would quit the Charges he had
been at in this Expedition. The Bishop represented to him, That he ought to be
content with those Places he had won, and that they should be acknowledged
Feudatories of Savoy. But this did not satisfy the greedy Count, who
threatened the City, if they would not reimburse him with Money. The
Inhabitants being poor, and fearing worse Consequences, should they provoke
this Prince too far, at last agreed with him, That he should possess as much
Rights in the City, as the Counts of Geneva had done before this War begun. And
this was done by way of Pledge or Mortgage. The Savoyard therefore entering the
City with his Forces, oppressed the Inhabitants with cruel Tyranny. So that
being provoked to desperate Courses, they conspired together, and chose rather
to call back the Count of Geneva to his Native Possession, from which he had
been violently cast out by the Usurping Bishop, than to submit to a Foreign
Jurisdiction, which began so early to afflict them with insupportable
Calamities.

But this, instead of a Remedy, proved an Aggravation of their Misfortunes. For
the Count of Geneva, coming against him of Savoy, with some Forces, was
overcome in Battle, and so Geneva was reduced to greater Streights than before.
For the Savoyards entering the Houses of the Citizens, drew the Conspirators
from their lurking Holes, and killed them, committing a Thousand other
Insolences against the Inhabitants. Nor did this cease, till the whole Race of
the Counts of Geneva was quite extinct. Then Amadeus, the Count of Savoy,
finding that still the Bishop of Geneva gave him as much Trouble as the Counts
had done before, obtained of the Emperor Charles IV. to be made Vicar of the
Empire in his Provinces; thinking by the Greatness of this Title and Authority
to suppress, the Power of the Bishop. But the Ecclesiastic Prince so strongly
opposed the Secular, That he maintained his own Jurisdiction, and the Liberty
of the People, till the Time of Amadeus VIII. who was his Successor, and the
First who was created Duke of Savoy, being afterward Elected to the Papacy,
which he enjoyed by the Name of Felix. Before his Assumption to this Height of
Ecclesiastic Dignity, he had obtained of Pope Martin, the Jurisdiction of
Geneva in Temporal Matters. But he found as much trouble in it, as his
Predecessors had done before. And so have all his Successors, to this very Day.
For, though they boast of the Title, yet they have no more Authority in the
Town than the King of Bantam.

This City is governed by a Syndick and Twenty Five Senators, who meet every
Day to consult about the Affairs of the Commonwealth, and to decide all Causes,
whether Criminal or Civil.

It is their Chief Interest to hold a good Correspondence with France, without
whose Protection they would suffer many Injuries. Therefore the better sort, as
it were by way of Flattery and Complaisance, dress themselves after the French
Fashions, and make use of that Language, though imperfectly, in all their
Letters, and Conversation. But the Vernacular is the same with that of Savoy.

Accomplished Minister, in Regard thou complainest of the Length of my Letters,
I will hereafter be more concise; and refresh thee often with Brief Accounts of
the States in Europe, yet remaining to be spoke of.

In the mean time, think of doing poor Mahmut some kind Office in the Divan:
For I am macerated with Zeal, Care, Sickness, and Old Age. Surely I cannot live
much longer, or rather, I shall not be much longer a-dying. For this Mortal
Life is but Death in Masquerade.

Paris, 4th. of the 6th. Moon, of the Year 1680.
LETTER II.
To Achmet Bassa.
SOme Maxims of State or Religion, which you please, for they are much one,
have moved the King of France to publish a Decree, which they call a
Regulation. Whereby he restrains the Huguenots from certain Liberties and
Privileges which they enjoyed before.

If thou would know the Character of these Huguenots, I will give it thee as
well as I can: not perfect and full, thou may swear, but true as far as it
goes.

In the first Place, therefore, it is necessary for thee to know, That about
Two Hundred Years past, a certain Friar, or Dewick in our Style, named Martin
Luther, being offended at his Lord and Master the Pope, or Bishop of Rome, set
up for himself, as the only Preacher, Doctor, Reformer, and Apostle of that
Age. He drew Abundance of People after him, and not a few Princes and Nobles.
The known scandalous Vices of the Roman Clergy on one side, and the Epidemical
Inclination which Mortals have for Novelty on the other, facilitated his
Innovation. He grew famous in Wirtemberg, Ausburgh, and other Parts of Germany,
where he lived. In a Word, his New Doctrines were like an Earthquake to the
whole Empire. He staggered many Wise and Honest Men, and overthrew whole
Thousands of Fools and Knaves.

Among the Rest of the Last Gange, one Calvin embraced Luther's Tenants, a very
Learned Man, and of great Abilities; but very partial, revengeful, and austere
in his Humor. At first he was very Zealous and Uniform in all Things,
according to the Model of his Vpstart Master. But upon some Dispute between
them, he takes Snuff, flings off the Yoke, and revolts from his New Director.
There have been several such Hotheaded Sparks since that Time, every one
aspiring at the Character of an Apostle or Prophet: Zwinglius, Oecolampadius,
Melancthon, Bucer, Beza, and a Rabble of other New Lights and Saviors of the
World.

Now the Huguenots, as I am informed, are the Disciples of Calvin; so is the
Commonwealth of Geneva; with some Parts of Suisserland, Holland, and the
Country of the Grisons. As for England, Swedeland, Denmark, Norway, Saxony,
Brandenburg, and Hess-Cassel, they are all Lutherans. Saving that the English,
whom I first mentioned, have made Twelve several Alterations in their Religion,
since the Days of Luther.

It is observable of that Nation, that they are flexible, and receptive of any
Foreign Impression. The French say, The English would as soon embrace
Mahometanism as any other Religion, could ye but once get the length of their
Foot. (This is an English Adage.) It Is certain they are a very Mutable,
Inconstant, Rebellious People. They surfeit on the Plenty which Nature has
given 'em. Which makes them still uneasy, discontented, and delicate. They
spew out their own Happiness, to ease the Stomach of that intemperate Nation,
and prepare it for Foreign Sham-Banquets of Magicians. Of Old they were Brave,
and steadfast to their Principles: Then their Renown was spread far and wide.
When a Baronet of England (as it is recorded in the Histories of France, which
must be impartial in this Point) killed Five and Twenty Frenchmen, among whom
were Two Marquises, Four Knights, and Nine Nobles of the Lesser Order.

But now they have quite lost their ancient Fame and Valor. They are corrupted
with a thousand Debaucheries. They are as fickle as the Wind, and as moveable
as the Dust it raises in the Streets. In fine, They are nothing at all, but the
Obloquy and Scorn of other Nations.

But to return to the French Huguenots, and Calvin their Master. I was once
acquainted with a very ancient Dervich or Friar, when I first came to Paris,
who confidently affirmed, That he had often heard his own Father say, That
Calvin, in his Presence, once thrust his Right Hand into the Fire, wishing it
had been burned to Ashes when it directed his Pen in writing against the Real
Presence of the Body of Jesus the Messiah, in the Sacrament of the Altar. But
since he had writ that fatal Treatise, he could do no less in Honor than
defend it to the last. And yet this is one of the Cardinal and most important
Points in Controversy between the Catholics and the Huguenots; whereon the
whole Body of Religion depends, and turns to the Right Hand or to the Left. So
that in the main, the Huguenots have no other Ground for their Separation from
the Roman Church, than the confessed Obstinacy of their Ringleader. And I tell
thee plainly, they are the Disciples of his Humor, as well as of his Doctrins.
There is not such a pertinacious sort of People living; so singular, partial,
self conceited, wilful and incorrigible. We must always except out of this
Character, some of the Gentry, most of the Nobles, and all the Beaux Esprits of
that Profession, as they call 'em; that is, the Men of Sense. For, they despise
the Bigotry of their Brethren, and go to their Public Assemblies, rather in
Complaisance to their Parents, Friends, and Kindred, or for the sake of
Interest, than out of any real Regards for a Religion of so young a Date, so
mean and contemptible a Figure, and which is shut up within such narrow Limits.

They are, in short, so bad, or at least grown so odious at the Court, That the
King is quite Angry with 'em, and resolved to extirpate them and their
New-fangl'd Heresy, out of the Nation. In order to this, he proceeds
gradually, like a Politician; being not willing to tempt them to a general
Revolt, by provoking the whole Party at once, and rendering 'em desperate. No,
no, he is cunninger than to draw a Civil War upon himself and his Kingdom, by
giving so loud an Alarm, to a People who are very Rich, Potent, and whose
Interest is much interwoven with that of the Catholics. I believe, to speak
modestly, they are able to keep Fifty Thousand Men of Arms in Pay, as they can
contrive the Business among themselves. Therefore knowing, that though the
Preachers all profess the same Religion, yet every one is not so zealous as
another in defending and propagating it; he has made such a Politic Decree, as
only touches those particular Mollahs (or Ministers as they call them here) who
are convicted of Proselyting any Catholic to their Heresy. Whereby also is
threatened to the Catholics themselves who shall forsake the Religion of their
Fathers; perpetual Banishment, the Loss of their Right Hand, which was lifted
up in their Abjuration, and other grievous Penalties.

In the mean Time, the Bishops and inferior Priests are very industrious to
confirm the Catholics in their Native Faith and Obedience, and to Convert the
Huguenots from their supposed Errors. I call them supposed Errors, because it
is much one to us that are Mussulmans and Followers of Mahomet, whether one
Party of the Nazarenes, be in the right of it, or the other. Only we must regard
the Interest of the Ottoman Empire. They are all equally Heretics and
Infidels, so long as they are Enemies to the Messenger of God, the Seal of the
Prophets.

He that is the most Vigorous, and takes the greatest Pains in Converting the
Huguenots, is the Bishop of Meaux; a Man of prodigious Eloquence, Sense, and
Wit. This Age does not afford his Equal, in the Perfections of the Mind and
Intellect: He is profoundly Learned, a Man of Universal Reading, skilful in
most Languages: an Oracle in Philosophy, Astronomy, and the other Sciences of
Nature. He is the Laureat among the Poets, the Crown of Orators; the very
Encylopoedia of Human Knowledge.

It Is true, he is very zealous for the Authority and infallible Veracity of the
Roman Church. But, he asserts these Things with so much Grace and Moderation;
with such a Masculine Reason, and with all the Symptoms of a Sincere Piety;
That I who regard no one Sect of the Franks more than another, cannot but
admire the Natural Abilities and Perfections of his Soul. He Is Learned as Abdel
Melec, Muli Omar at Fez; Pious, as Hebatolla Mir Argun, at Cogni in Natolia;
Abstinent, as Mohammed, in Arabia; Holy, as the abstracted Mirmadoline, Santone
of the Vale of Sidon. A Man every Ways accomplished, and inspired with Divine
Munificences.

O Great Bassa, accuse me not for this Eulogy of a Christian. But let Thou and
I, and all True Believers, profit by the best Examples, wherever, or in
whatsoever Religion we find 'em, whether they be Giaurs or Mussulmans.

Paris, 13th of the 8th Moon, of the Year 1680,
LETTER III.
To the Venerable Mufti.
SO long as thou do not complain of my too frequent Letters, I shall not
murmur at the Pains of writing them. It Is a Pleasure thus to revolve the
Histories of past Ages. And whilst I with my own Hand consign them to Paper,
they adhere the faster to my Memory. I should not be sorry, if I were to spend
the Remainder of my Days in Epitomizing all the Authentic Records and Memoirs
that are extant in the World. Such an Exercise would be a constant Relief of
Melancholy by lighting Abundance of Flambeaux and Lamps in the Soul, to
disperse the Mists and Darkness which naturally make it sad. I ended my last
Letter with the Reign of Numa Pompilius over the Romans. Who, as if he had made
the Kingdom Hereditary only to Men of Virtue, was no sooner dead, but the
People elected Tullus Hostilius for their King; in Consideration of his
excellent Endowments and Merits.

He instructed the Romans in a more perfect Military Discipline, and improved
the Art of War. So that having trained up the Youth to a wonderful Promptness
and Skill in Arms, he ventured to send a Defiance to the Albans, and invade
their Territories, the they were a stout People, and who had Lorded it a long
Time in Italy. But, when many Battles had been Fought between them, with equal
Damage to both sides; at length to put an End to the War, and make the Losses
of the Vanquished more Compendious, they mutually agreed to decide the Victory
by a Combat of Three Brothers on one side, against as many on the other. Those
on the Roman part were called, Horatii; the Alban Brothers Curiatii.

The Fight was Fair and Dubious, and had an Admirable Event: For all the Three
Curiatii were Wounded, and Two of the Horatii Killed. So that it seemed
difficult to determine which had the Advantage; One sound and untouched Roman,
or Three faint and weakened Albans: However, the surviving Horatius not
presuming too much on his own Strength against such an Unequal Number of
Enemies, added Policy to his Courage, and made use of this Stratagem:

He counterfeited a Flight, that so he might separate his Adversaries, and
Engage with them Singly, one after another, according as they overtook him. His
Plot took, and he Vanquished all Three. But he sullied his Victory with the
Blood of his Sister; whom at his return he killed, because she met him not with
Joy and Triumph, but with Grief and Tears for the Loss of her Spouse, who was
one of the Three Alban-Brethren. He was called in question for the Bloody Fact:
But his Merit superseded his Crime; and the Fact which would at another time
have cost him his Head, now served but to Augment his Glory.

Not long after this, there broke out a War between the Romans and the
Fidenates, a People of Latium, or Toscany. The Albans, according to their late
League, were obliged to Aid the Romans in their Wars. Wherefore they sent
Auxiliary Forces, under the Command of Metius Tufetius. But this Captain proved
Treacherous: For, just as the Two Armies were going to enter into Battle, he
withdrew his Albans to the Top of an Hill; where they stood Neuters, to behold
the Fortune of the Fight, that so they might join the Strongest Party. Which,
when Tullus perceived, he politiokly cried out, with a Loud Voice, in the
Hearing of both Armies, That Metius had done this by his Command. Then the
Romans took Courage; and their Enemies being struck with Terror, were soon
Routed, and Overcome. After which, the Roman King caused the Traitor Metius
Tufetius to be tied with Cords to Two Chariots, and torn in Pieces by Wild
Horses. He also ruined, and quite demolished Alba; not looking on that City
now, as the Parent, but the Rival of Rome. However, he first transported to
Rome all the Riches of Alba, with the Inhabitants; that so that City might not
seem to perish, but only to remove its Situation, and be Incorporated with Rome.

Ancus Marcius succeeded Tullus Hostilius, being the Grandchild of Numa, by his
Daughter. He inherited his Qualities also as well as his Blood. He encompassed
the City with Walls, and joined the Banks of Tyber, which ran through the
Middle of it, with a Bridge. He likewise built the Port Ostia, just by the
Mouth of the River, where it flows into the Sea; planting there a Colony of
Romans, as if he had then Presaged what afterward came to pass; That the
Merchandises of the World should be brought in thither, as into the Maritime
Storehouse of the City destined to conquer all Things.

Him succeeded Tarquinius, afterward surnamed Priscus. He was of Foreign
Extraction, yet obtained the Sovereignty by his Elegance and Wit. For, being
the Son of Lucumo; a Corinthian, who abandoned his Country, and fled into
Toscany, where he was made King; this Tarquinius, polishing his Greek Nature
with Italian Arts, insinuated so far with the Romans, that they chose him for
their King. He augmented the Number of Senators, and added Three Hundred
Soldiers to the Troops that were already established: Which was all he durst
do, in Regard Attius Navius, an Augur, in High Request among the Romans, had
forbid any greater Number to be added. These Augurs were a sort of Diviners,
who foretold Things to come, from the Chirping, Flying, Feeding, and other
Actions of Birds. Tarquinius, one Day, asked this Attius Navius, Whether the
Thing could possibly be done, which he had then thought upon? The Augur
consulting his Art, answered, It might be done. Then said the King, I was
considering, whether I could cut this Whet-stone with a Razor. Yes you may;
replied Attius. And the King did it. From that Time, the College of Augurs,
first Founded by Romulus, was had in Sacred Esteem by the Romans. I should have
called them the Triumvirate of Augurs; for, there were but Three at first, one
out of every Tribe. But Servius Tullius, the next King, added a Fourth. These
were all Nobles. But afterward, they were increased to Nine; and last of all,
to Fifteen, in the Dictatorship of Silla.

To return to Tarquinius: He was no less prosperous in War, than in Peace; for
he subdued Twelve Cities of the Toscans, with the Territories belonging to
them. He invented Robes, and Ensigns of State; the Ivory-Seats of Chariots,
wherein the Senators were carried to the Council; the Gold-Rings, and
Magnificent Horse-Trappings, which were given to the Roman Knights, as Badges
of Honor: Also, the Purple and Scarlet-Robes; the Triumphal Chariot of Gold;
the Painted Phrygian Robe, worn by a Victorious General, when he celebrated a
Triumph: With many other Ornaments, and Public Decorations, to set forth the
Majesty and Grandeur of the Roman State.

Tarquinius being mortally wounded his Wife Tanaquil persuaded the People, that
all was well with him; that his Wounds were not dangerous; that he was only
laid in a Slumber, and that in a little Time they should fee him Well again: In
the Mean while, she said, it was his Will and Pleasure, that they should obey
Servius Tullius, a Favorite of hers; who would administer Justice, and govern
the People wisely, during the King's Illness.

This Servius Tullius was the Son of a Prince in Latium; who being killed in a
Battle with the Romans, his Wife was carried Captive to Rome; and being
presented to Queen Tanaquil, lived free from Servitude, under her Protection:
And, being with Child, was delivered of Servius Tullius, in Tanaquil's Palace.
The Queen stook a Singular Fancy to the Noble Infant, and gave him Royal
Education; presaging, from a Flame which she saw environing his Head, that he
would be a Famous Man in Time. 'Twas for this Reason, she persuaded the People
to receive him as the King's Substitute, or Deputy, for a While: Not doubting,
but that after they had tasted the Sweetness of his Government, and the Death
of Tarquin should be known, they would easily submit to him, as Tarquin's
Successor. Her Stratagem had its desired Effect: For, Servius Tullius improved
his Time so well in pleasing the People, that the Kingdom, which he obtained by
Craft, was acknowledged by all, as due to his Merits and Virtues. He first
brought the People of Rome under an Assessment, whereby every Man's Estate was
valued: He divided them into Classes, Wards, and Colleges. And the Commonwealth
was brought into such Order, by the Exquisite Policy of this Wise King, that
the Difference of every Man's Patrimony, Dignity, Age, Trade, and Office, was
Registered in Public Tables; Which rendered the Economy of this Great State
as regular and easy, as that of a Private Family, or House.

The Last of all the Kings; was Tarquinius, Surnamed The Proud, for the Morose
and Disdainful Haughtiness of his Temper. He married the Daughter of Servius
Tullius, in Hopes of Succeeding in the Kingdom. But he not having Patience to
wait for the Natural Death of his Father-in-Law* hired Ruffians to Murder him,
and then seized upon the Kingdom by Violence, Neither did he govern the State
with less Wickedness and Cruelty, than that by which he obtained it: For, he
denied Burial to his Murdered Father-in-Law; Saying, That he deserved not
Better Usage than Romulus, who perished without a Sepulcher. He also slew the
Chiefs of the Nobles, whom he suspected to be of Servius's Interest. And his
Wife Tullia was as bad as he: For, as soon as she had saluted her Husband by
the Title of King, she caused her self to be driven in a Chariot, over the Dead
Carcass of her Father. Both of them exercised Great Cruelty, and massacred many
of the Senators* But the Pride of Tarquin was intolerable to all. Till, at
Length, when he had spent enough of his Rage at Home, he turned it against his
Foreign Enemies Abroad; and took many Strong Towns in Latium. However,
Notwithstanding all his Vices, he gave the World this Proof of his Piety; That,
put of the Spoils which he took from his Enemies, he raised Money, and finished
therewith the Temple of Jupiter in the Capitol, which his Father, Tarquinius
Priscus, had begun. The Story says, That, as they were Laying the Foundations
of this Temple, they found the Head of a Man; which they interpreted as a Good
Omen, That Rome should be the Seat of a Vast Empire, and Mistress of the whole
Earth; as it afterward came to pass.

The People of Rome bore with the Pride of Tarquin, but would not bear with the
Lust and Tyranny of his Sons; one of which ravished Lucretia, a Woman of
Admirable Beauty and Virtue. The Chaste Matron expiated the Disgrace, by
Stabbing her self: And, as she breathed her Last, she charged Brutus and
Collatinus, Two Princes, to revenge her Cause. Wherefore they stirred up the
People to assert their Liberty, and abrogate the Kingly Government: Which was
as readily done, as mentioned. And here was an End put to the Tyranny of Kings.

In my Next I will relate the Increase and Progress of the Roman State, under
the Government of Consuls, and Emperors: Which will comprehend the most
Memorable Events of Peace and War, even to the Catastrophe of the Empire.

Paris, 22d of the 9th Moon, of the Year 1680.
LETTER IV.
To Orchan Cabet, Student in the Sciences, and Pensioner to the Sultan.
ABout the Soul: That Is the Thought I Am upon. That Is the World I Am going to
write. Whether it shall, after the grand Divorce from the Body, go to Heaven or
Hell (as they are commonly represented) or whether it shall not rather be more
happily or miserably disposed of: Or, if less, yet at least in a more
proportionate Order of Eternal Justice. Methinks, I taste and feel the Original
Meaning of the Word Nemesis. Which, though it pass for Primitive Greek among
the most Learned of the Western Scholars, yet I can prove it to be a Phoenician
Derivative from the Chinese. And I can demonstrate likewise, That it is full of
Mysteries.

Every Syllable of it, is Sacred and Mysterious, as the Mrne Mean, Tekel
Vpharsin, of Beltschatzar. Numeravit, Numeravit, Appendit, Divisit. That Is the
Sense of it. So are Words become the Eternal Mind.

The very Letters which compose Words (I should have said the Syllables first,
in good Manners) are all the Products of the Mathematics; I mean, of the
Original Science; not of those paultry Fragments, Scraps, and Offals, that are
taught in Schools and Academies: Such as the Elements of Euclid, the Rudiments
of Algebra, Benazer, Ki-flud, or any other Learned Pen. There Is something more
within the Verge of Human Science, than what has been divulged hitherto in the
World; or at least, more than what is now extant, and has escaped the Ruin of
Fires, Floods, Earthquakes, and the Jaws of all-devouring Time.

Learned Orchan, I will not be prolix: but answer me one Question about the
Soul. Can thou believe the Stories of the Priest's concerning Purgatory,
Hell, and the two other Limbo's? Have thou Faith enough to swallow the
ridiculous Figments of the Book entitled Speculum Exemplorum; a Tract so highly
celebrated and magnified among the Superititious Nazarenes of the Roman Church?
Believe me, these Doctrins are the pure Effects of Anthropomorphism, or the
Religion of those who represent God under the Form of a Mortal Man. For they,
poor Souls, are so incapable of rising above this gross and Earthly Thought,
that they even presume to draw and paint the Effigies of the Eternal Divinity,
which has no Figure or Resemblance. They pourtray him like a very Old Man, with
Gray Hairs on his Head and Beard; and then they set the Idol up in Temples, to
be adored. The rude and ignorant Vulgar dare not contradict their Guides, whom
they revere as Oracles. They bow before the sacred Vanity, paying Divine
Honors to the Work of Human Art. Thus Superstition and Error spread abroad,
and take firm Root in the World. From hence the duller Part of Men derive their
Notions of Man's Soul.

They cannot conceive how it should subsist after Death, without just such a
Body of Flesh and Blood, as it has in this Life: And yet they contradict that
very Opinion, by asserting, that it cannot have such a Body till the General
Resurrection; whilst at the same time they assert, That it shall enjoy all the
Pleasures, or suffer all the Pains, which none but Corporeal Beings are capable
of. Doubtless, the Infidels are involved in a Labyrinth of Heresies.

We Mortals know not the State of Departed Souls; whether they go upwards, or
downwards; to the East or West, North or South. We are wholly ignorant of the
Climates wherein the Blessed and the Damned are separately disposed of. Perhaps
the Doctrine of Transmigration, taught by Pythagoras, Empedocles, and all the
Eastern Indians, may be true: From which Bolief, few* Mussulmans do diffent. Or
it may be, we shall, as the Gentile Poets wrote mysteriously, fall into Lethe's
Lake, into the Region of Forgetfulness, where we shall be, as though we'd never
been. This is the Souls unactive State, if any such there be in Nature for an
Incorporeal, Spirit. And then the Millenaries or Chiliasts among the Christians
may be much in the Right on it, who taught the Sleep of the Soul until the
Resurrection. Indeed, in my Opinion, this Life it self, wherein we think our
selves so much Awake; to Hear, See, Taste, Smell, Feel, and Revel in the
Pleasures of the Universe; is but a Dream or Trance: A grand Deliquium of the
Soul: The Universal Apoplexy of Human Nature. For the true Genuine Life is only
to be found Above, in the pure Regions of the Air, or more refined Skies: or if
not there, at least and lowest Rate, in the superlative Heights beyond the
Stars, remote from narrow and polluted Matter, where perfect Essences do bask
Eternally in the Grand Halo of the Godhead; or shroud and cool themselves
under the mady Trees of Paradise, whose Roots spring from the deep Abysses of
Eternity; and are washed by Springs and Streams warbling along the verdant
Banks of sweet Chioschs, and elegant Borders of the Groves in Eden.

Such are the Pleasures, which God, the Fauntain of Munificence, is pleased to
treat his Creatures with. He studies to Regale his Favorites, with infinite
Beatitudes.

There are in Paradise, Rivers, broad and long as the Danube, Volga, Niger,
Nilus, or any other noted Current upon Earth. Their Streams run all with Honey,
Wine, and Milk, or more delicious Liquors, if any such there be.

They are not deep, that timorous Men need fear to Drown themselves; yet deep
enough for foreign Earthly Souls to swim in Everlasting Pleasures. Moreover,
thou know the Saying of the Prophet; That we shall have Women there, whose
Beauty no Painters Art can e're express; who shall not, glance a Look upon
another Man beside their own. Women, whose Beauty shall exceed the Luster of
Diamonds, Rubies, Hyacinths, and whatsoever is precious in the East.

He promises likewise, That we shall be stretched out at perfect Ease, on
stately Beds, under Pavilions of Magnifick Structure. Where Pages fair and
beautiful as Pearls, shall wait upon us; whilst Gentle Zephirs fan the ambient
Air, with their Immortal Breezes, making a soft and grateful Sound among the
Leaves and Boughs of those tall Verdant Copses, Woods, and Thickets, which are
planted here and there throughout the Fields of Paradise.

O Orchan! by all these Allegories we are to understand the Supreme Felicity of
Virtuous Souls, who die in Faith and Love. This is a certain Rule; That,
whatsoever is pleasant and agreeable to any Good Man upon Earth, shall be
either superlatively augmented in Specie, or improved by an infinitely more
pleasant Change in Heaven. So that no Man that dies well, can possibly be
balked of his Fill of Happiness.

Shall I discourse frankly and after the manner of Friends? I think, when
Atropos has done her Business and ours, when she has cut the Thread of Earthly
Life; Our Souls will then awake as from a tedious Slumber mixed of Joys and
Griefs, of Fears and Hopes, Pleasures and Pains. And we shall soon experiment
the Truth of all our anxious Forecasts. Every Man shall be disposed of,
according to his Rank in the Heraldry of Fate. I will not presume to calculate
particularly, where or how: Only in general, this is my Faith. That there are
Paradises of all Sorts and Degrees prepared with exquisite Proportion for the
various Kinds of Men: And Hell's as accurately fitted and equally adjusted, for
the Punishment of the Wicked, to whatsoever Class or Order. For it appears to
me a grand Soloecism, a perfect Blunder in Divinity and Reason, to assert or
imagine, That as soon as the Breath is out of the Body, our Souls must either
swiftly post through all the Elements and Orbs Above, and in a Moments Time be
seated in the Coelum Empyraeum; or else must tumble headlong, in an instant,
to the lowest Hell. Methinks, if I were to go upwards, I would tarry by the
Way, and divert my self awhile in the upper Region of Serene and Balmy Air;
there to Converse with courteous Demons, and perhaps with Souls of Gentile Old
Philosophers and Poets. I would enquire at least for Orpheus, Homer, Virgil,
Ovid, and Lucretius; for Pindar, Epictetus, and by the bye for Sappho. I should
be ambitious also to see or hear of Pythagoras, Plato, Plotinus, Porphyry, and
some other of the Grecian Sages. Neither would I forget the Name of any
renowned Wise Man of past Ages; for I think the Earth has born but few of late,
that deserve to be mentioned. But above all, I should be diligent and curious
to find out the Thrice-great Hermes, Father of Wisdom and Science. It Is Ten to
One, but I should visit Horace, and ask for a Bottle of his Beloved Campaign
Muscadine, if he has any there.

When I had thus refreshed my self in the Paradises of this Sublunary World, I
would take my Conge, and travel to the Orb of the Moon. I would kiss the Hand
of Menarchus, who rules all the Inhabitants of that Planet. If I found him in a
good Humor, I would humbly beg his Pardon, and intercede for the silly
Arcadians, who boasted, That their Country was Older than the Moon. I would
represent their Case as favorably as I could; putting him in Mind, That they
were only a Company of poor ignorant Shepherds, who first broached that
Blasphemous Libel; and that their Nation is quite extinct on Earth: therefore
they are not worthy of his farther Revenge or Anger; since every Arcadian who
had asserted this in his Lifetime, has for his Penance, been forced to dig in
the Mines of the Moon, from the Hour of his Death. Perhaps these poor Fellows
might fare the better for my Apology: Who knows? But, if I sound that my
Request was granted, and these unfortunate Arcadians being released from the
Sub-Cynthian Dungeons, were permitted to return to Earth again; I would charge
them to have a Case how they affronted such a Potent Neighbor next Time.

Having done so good a Work, I would slip through the Orb of Mercury as nimbly
as I could, lest that cunning Thief should: steal the Teeth out of my Head. And
just paying my Respects to Lady Venus en passant, I would shut my Eyes, and
glide in a Trice through the scorching Sphere of the Sun. As for Mars, Jupiter,
and Saturn, I have nothing to do with 'em. But what Work would I make with the
Beasts and Monsters of the 8th Sphere? I Would certainly fleece the Aries.
Ram, and make the Taurus.
Bull run mad. If I passed by the Gemini.
Twins in Pity, I Would eat the Cancer.
Crab for a Viaticum. The Shell I Would throw to the Leo.
Lion to stop his Mouth, lest he should serve me in the same manner. But what a
confounded Stop and Pause should I make when I came to the Virgin? Virgo.
What Qualms of Love should I have? Till weighing her in the Balance of Reason,
Libra.
I should find her too light. And should rather venture on the Scorpion:
Scorpio.
But I Would first charm him with the Mysterious Versicle of the Alcoran: And to
make sure of him, I Would pray for Noah and all his Posterity, according to the Old
Rule of the Arabians: And then I might safely pass by, without being stung. Had
rash Phaeton been acquainted with these Secrets, when he drove the Chariot of
the Sun so madly, he might have rid over the Scorpion, without danger of
Burning the World. Neither had he been Thunderstruck by Jupiter, and Drowned in
the River Po, nor his poor Sisters been turned into Poplars. However, as he
fell out of the Coach-Box, he dropped his Turbant on the Frontiers of Sagitary;
Sagittarius.
which I would take up to shield from the Shafts of that spightful Archer. As
for Capricorn, Capricornus.
he is a good harmless Monster; and any Body may pass by him without Danger.
Then I Would quench my Thirst with Aquarins, Aquarius.
after eating the Crab; and so prepare for another Banquet on Pisces. Pisces.


If thou think, I am too much in jest with the Heavenly Signs, I tell thee
there is nothing in Nature more Ridieulous than these Fictitious Forms and
Names assigned them by the Ancient Poets.

However, my Soul begins to be tired with thus pursuing those Beasts of the
Sky. So I Will put an End to the Chase, wishing thee and my self a good Repose:
For it is above an Hour past Midnight. Adien.

Paris, 17th. of the 10th. Moon, of the Year 1680.
LETTER V.
To Hamet, Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire.
IF thou will turn over the Register of the Empire, thou will find some of my
Letters, wherein I have described the City of Venice, according to the Best
Information I had from Adonai, a Jew, Residing there as a Private Agent for the
Grand Signior. Therefore, avoiding all Particularities concerning the
Incredible Magnificence of the Palaces, Temples, Bridges, Colleges, and other
Public Buildings; where nothing is to be seen, but Marble, Jasper, Porphyry,
Silver, Gold, and other Precious Ornaments, which every where dazzle the Eyes
of Strangers: I will only take Notice of such Things relating to this City and
Republic, as I formerly omitted.

The Venetians possess several most Ample, Rich, and Flourishing Cities in
Italy; besides Abundance of Smaller Towns, Castles, and Fortresses. The Names
of those Cities which are of Chiefest Note, are, Bergamo, Crema, Brixia,
Verona, Trent, Aquileia, Vicenza, Padua, and Terviso. As for the Towns, they
are too many to insert in a Letter.

Toward the North of their City, they are Masters of almost all Friuli; with
Istria, which is the Utmost Province of Italy, on that Side. They are also
Lords of the Greatest Part of Dalmatia, with the Isles belonging to it. In the
Mouth of the Adriatic Sea, they possess Corfu, Cephalonia, Zante, Cerigo; with
many more of Less Note. Not to speak of Candia, so well known to the Mussulmans.

From all these Territories, the Republic has a Yearly Income of Two Millions
in Gold: Which is not treasured up for any long Time, but is employed in the
Public Expenses; as, in Maintaining Military Forces, by Sea and Land; in
Building and Rigging up their Fleets; in Raising and Repairing Forts and
Castles: in Paying the Stipends of Magistrates, and Public Ministers; with
other Expenses, too tedious to be named.

They have other Ways to raise Money in Extraordinary Cases; as, in Time of War,
or the like. For, then they double or treble the Taxes, Tithes, and Imposts.
And All are liable to answer the Demands of the Republic; the Noble, as well
as the Vulgar. Neither do they seem unwilling, when the Extreme Necessities of
the State require it. But, if this be not sufficient to defray the Public
Charges; then the Magistrates, and Public Ministers, are obliged to wait for
their Salaries and Stipends, till the Commonwealth is in a Condition to pay
them. They also, at such a Time, are used to sell the Places of Great Trust and
Honor to the Nobles; who, at other Times, enjoy them Gratis, as a Reward of
their Merits.

If all this will not do the Business, and they find themselves reduced to
great Extremities; then they borrow of Private Persons, such Sums as they want,
on the Public Faith. And if any Wealthy Citizen refuse, or appear unwilling to
lend his Money, they use Fored and Violence; Seizing his Goods, whether
Moveable, or Immovable, and sell them for Ready Money. At the same Time, the
Republic declares her self a Debtor to these Men; and pawns her Faith to pay
them, with Interest, after a certain Number of Years, or when the War is
finished, according as she is able. And that which is most admirable is, that
all this is done without the least Tumult or Sedition, or any Exterior Symptoms
of Discontent. Nay, This People are so prompt and ready to assist the State in
such Exigencies, that it is common for many of the Nobles, and Wealthy
Citizens, to make a Voluntary Tender of their Money to the Senate: And, Some
will sell their Plate, of their own Accord; with all their Wives Jewels, and
other Ornaments; turning them into Money, for the Service of the Commonwealth.

Besides, Not only the Inhabitants of Venice contribute thus to the Public
Treasury, but also the other Cities and Towns under their Jurisdiction; each
according to their Ability. Therefore it matters not much, whether the
Republic have any Bank of Money by her, or no; since her Private Subjects are
rich enough, and she can make use of their Wealth, without any Difficulty, or
Ill Consequences, whenever she has Occasion.

As for the Strength, and Military Forces of the Venetians, it may be said,
That there is scarce a Prince in Europe, who has Better and Larger
Fortifications than this Republic. To defend which, and all her other
Possessions, she makes use of the Inhabitants; every Province being obliged to
furnish so many Thousand Soldiers, as are sufficient to fill the Garrisons, and
guard the Country from Foreign Invasion. Thus, in the Province of Lombardy
alone, there are Twenty Five Thousand, Foot kept constantly in Arms. Besides
these, in Time of War they raise Extraordinary Armies, both in their own
Territories, and in Germany, or among the Swiss-Cantons: From which Last, they
generally have an Aid of Thirty or Five and Thirty Thousand Mercenaries: Who
are partly bestowed on Board their Fleet, and partly in their Forts and
Castles; whilst some of them guard the Bridges, and other Passes of the
Country. As for the Cavalry of this Commonwealth, it is very small and
inconsiderable for their Number: But being, most of them the Sons of Nobles,
they are valued for their Blood; which inspires them with Heroic Resolution
and Bravery.

When they are to wage War by Land, they usually invite some Foreign, Petty
Prince, to be Generalissimo of their Armies: Him they endear with most Ample
Gifts and Honors; giving him Two Senators for his Colleagues, Men who have been
Signally Faithful and Serviceable to the Commonwealth. These are called
Proveditori, or Supervisors-General. Without whose Consent, and Approbation,
this Generalissimo cannot Give Battle, or do any Thing else of Moment, from
which the Commonwealth may receive Profit, or Damage.

I forbear to speak of the Arsenal of Venice which is one of the Wonders of the
World; in regard I have already given a Description of it to the Ministers of
the Port in one of my former Letters, which thou will find Registered.

Illustrious Scribe, I aim at Brevity in all my Dispatches, that I may not
weary our thy Patience: But sometimes my Subject carries me beyond my Limits;
otherwise I should be forced to conclude some of my Letters in the midst of a
Relation, which in my Opinion looks like a Botch.

Therefore to avoid this Solecism, I must not close up my Dispatch till I have
given thee an Account what Rites and Ceremonies are used in Electing the Dukes
of Venice. Which take as follows:

The Day of Election being appointed, all the Venetian Senators that are Thirty
Years of Age, meet together in the Palace, where the Gates being shut, an Vrn
or Chest is placed in the Middle of the Assembly. Into which are thrown as many
little Balls, as there be Senators present. These Balls are of Two Colors:
For, Thirty of them are Gilt, the Rest are White. Every one of the Senators
takes a Ball out of the Vrn. Those who get the Thirty Gilt Ones are carried
into another Conclave; whilst those who have the White Ones, remain in the same
Place. In the Second Conclave is also placed an Vrn, into which Thirty Balls
are cast. Among which Nine are Gilt, the Rest White. Those who get the Nine
Gilt ones, name Forty Men, who are called, Electors of the First Election.
These Forty Men, throw into the Urn Forty Balls; of which Twelve are Gilt, the
Rest White. Those who get the Twelve Gilt Balls, are called, Electors of the
Second Election: For they name Five and Twenty other Men. These Five and
Twenty, throw into the Vrn Five and Twenty Balls, of which Nine are Gilt, and
they who get them are called Electors of the Third Election. For these name One
and Forty Men, in whose Power it is to Create a Duke or Prince of the
Republic. And they do it after this manner:

They choose from among themselves Three Senators more Venerable than the Rest,
whom they call the Chiefs of the Congregation, and Two Secretaries. Then there
remain Six and Thirty, who give in their Votes after this manner:

The Three Chiefs sit in so many Seats, more eminent than the Rest: Then the
Secretaries call the Six and Thirty others in Order before them, where every
one Throws into a Box, in Presence of the Chiefs, a little piece of Wood, on
which is written the Name of him whom he would have to be Duke. Then every one
of the Six and Thirty, retires to his Place: Whilst the Secretaries read the
Schedules before the Chiefs. And as many as they find there named for Dukes, so
many new Schedules do they make. These are thrown promiscuously into a Cap, or
Bonnet; from whence after a shake or Two, to mingle 'em, they are drawn out,
and laid in order on a Table. But before they draw 'em all out, the First
Schedule is read; and he whose Name is written on it, is bid to go into the
next Conclave. Then the Chiefs of the Congregation, as they are called, ask the
Rest, If any Body there can object against the Election of this Man? For if
they can, and he does not give a Satisfactory Answer, he is excluded from all
Possibility of being Duke. But if he acquits himself well, he is acknowledged,
and has the Ducal Crown put on his Head. The present Duke of Venice is the
Hundred and ****** inclusively from Paulutius Anafestus, the First that ever
had that Honor; being Elected in the City Heraclea, in the Year 697 of the
Christians Hejira.

The Venetians are in all their Actions very Grave, using few Words, especially
when they are at Table. If they are not so lively and inventive as some other
People of Italy, yet they perform all Things with mature Deliberation and
Judgment; which is the Cause, Than their Affairs for the most part succeed very
happily.

The Italians have a Common Byword current among them, That the Venetians are
Magnificent, Crafty, and Discreet; Those of Verona, are studious and faithful;
Those of Padua, light and fickle; those of Vicenza, revengeful. Again they say,
the Venetians bring Money; Terviso, Swords; and Brixia, Pioneers to the Wars.
And that the Venetians are good Seamen; the Paduans, good Horsemen; and those
of Bergamo, excellent at an Ambush.

Of the Women they have another Proverb. That those of Crema are fraudulent;
they of Vicenza, constant; they of Venice, proud and insolent; they of Werona,
gracious; those of Brixia, diligent: Those of Terviso, jealous; and those of
Bergamo, crafty. They say likewise, that Bergamo has many Slanderers; Padua,
many good Soldiers; Vicenza many Counts; and Brixia, many obdurate Misers.

Courteous Minister, thou will bear, I hope, with my tediousness in discoursing
of this Great Republic. Which cannot be handled in a few Words.

As to the Manner of their Government, it is admirably mild and gentle, wise
and just, seeking Peace, but not refusing War, when they have a just
Provocation. It is worthy of any Man's Consideration, how this Commonwealth has
stood firm and unshaken for above Twelve Hundred Years, amidst so many Cruel
Wars, and Potent Enemies; so that her Subjects, if they be compared with
others, may be said to enjoy the Golden Age, since they live in continual Ease
and Tranquillity, increasing daily in Riches, Honors, and every kind of
Prosperity.

This is to be ascribed in the First Place, to the most excellent Laws and
Rules of Policy left them by Men of singular Prudence and Wisdom, who had they
lived in the Times of the Ancient Greeks, might well have been listed among the
most famous Philosophers and Lawgivers.

The Duke, in the Gravity of his Port, the Splendour of his Robes, and the
Magnificence of his Palace, seems to exhibit the Majesty of an Emperor. And
yet he has no more Authority, than any one of the Senators, who created him.
For, he has but one Vote in the Senate, as all the Nobles have. Only it lies
upon him to give Audience to Foreign Ambassadors, in the Name of the Senare. He
can do nothing without the Consent of the Senate either in Peace or War. The
Senate first decrees, and he confirms their Edicts. Which are also published in
his Name. It is lawful for him to go into all the Courts of Justice, and
Public Tribunals, where he may pass his Verdict in any dubious Case, yet so as
any of the Senators may contradict him if they please.

The Form of Government therefore in this Republic appears to be an
Aristocracy, or the Government of a Few; not the Richest or the most Powerful,
but the Wisest and the Best, such as by a long Series of Faithful Services,
have merited well of the Commonwealth.

These make up the College or Council of Ten, which being joined with Fifteen
others, and Six Counselors, the Duke being President, has Power of
Deliberating and Decreeing Things tending to the Safety of the Commonwealth;
neither can these Decrees be repealed. This is properly the Divan or
Privy Council. There is besides this a Council or Diet of Two Hundred and
Twenty Five Citizens, who are properly called Senators, and very much resemble
those of Ancient Rome. For none is permitted to enter this Senate, but Nobles,
or the Sons of such. They must also be above Five and Twenty Years of Age. The
Third and last Senate consists of Two Thousand Five Hundred Men. But in regard
a great part of these have some Offices and Honors abroad, there seldom meet
above a Thousand Six Hundred, when the House is fullest.

These meet once every Week, that is, on the First Day, as also on some of
their more solemn Festivals. Here Magistrates are created, and Public Offices
distributed with admirable Order. From hence are chosen the Two Hundred and
Twenty Five, who make up the foregoing Senate, as being the most prudent,
expert, and conversant in the Affairs of State. These decide all Controversies
of greater Moment. As the Affairs of Peace and War, the Care of fortifying
their Cities and Castles, of creating Generals and Captains, of sending
Embaffies to Foreign Princes: Here also are read all the Letters, Dispatches,
and Expresses, which are addressed to the Republic from other Parts. In a
word, whatsoever is of more material Consideration, is handled in this Senate.

Impartial Effendi, thou will not condemn me as an Infidel, or an Enemy of the
Mussulmans, in that I represent to thee in its true Colors, the present State
of Venice. If we ought to give the Devil his due, as the Christians say, In
God's Name, let us not rob Men of theirs, though they be our Enemies.

Magnificent and Learned Hamet, Adieu for this Time.

Paris, 4th. of the 11th. Moon, of the Year 1680.
LETTER VI.
To Osman Adrooneth, Astrologer in Ordinary to the Sultan.
THE Inhabitants of these Western Parts are in a great and general
Consternation, at the Appearance of a New Comet, or Blazing-Star. It rises much
about the Time the Sun Sets, and in the same Quarter of the Heavens. The Body
of it looks no bigger than a Star of the First Magnitude, from whence springs a
Pyramid of Light, extending it self to the Cusp of the Mid-heaven, where its
Cone seems to terminate.

The Superstitious call it the Sword of God, because of its Form, being not
much unlike an Old Two-edged Rapier. I am sure it does not resemble a Turkish
Cymeter, for those thou know are Oblique in their Figure, and this is
Straight.

They are full of Melancholy Presages, and the Astrologers themselves give out,
That this Comet portends dreadful Calamities to Europe, which may not discover
themselves, perhaps these many Years; Nay they affirm, That this Generation
shall be quite extinct, before the Effects of this Tremendous Apparition shall
seize on Earth.

I have a great Veneration for the Science of the Stars, and even for Judicial
Astrology, though I cannot pretend to any Skill in any of them. I have studied
them both till I was weary, being discouraged by the Difference of Men's
Opinions, and the Uncertainty of their Conclusions in matters of so remote,
sublime, and mysterious a Nature. Besides, I fainted under the Burden of such
vast Speculations, whilst I found my self still wandering not only in the
Blindness of my own proper Intellect, but also in the General Darkness of Human
Reason.

I considered the Birthplace of these Sciences, which all will confess to be
the East. And there I found the Chaldaeans differing from the Gymnosophists of
India: These again contradicting my Countrymen, the Arabians. To pass from
thence into Africa. I perceived the Egyptians were of one Sentiment, the
Ethiopians of another, and the Moors of a Third. Neither could I discern any
Agreement between the Greeks and Romans. As for the Jews they clash'd with all.

Plato, Proclus, Aristotle, Averroes, and many other Sages, assert there are
but Eight Spheres. Yet Hermes Trismegistus, with some of the Persian Magi
adds a Ninth. So did Azarchel the Moor, and his Countryman Tebith, Of the
same Opinion was Albert the Great. Whilst there are some who tax these with
making a Decimation in the Orbs, and taking a Tyth from Heaven; for they assert
the Number of the Spheres to be Ten.

They not only thus differ from one another, but through that Inconstancy which
is inseparable from the Minds of Mortals, they vary even from themselves. One
Day of one Opinion, the next of a contrary. So Alphonsus one which asserted
Nine Spheres, and a sew Years after retrenched himself to Eight. This is a
Vanity from which the greatest and most Eminent Writers in the World have not
been free. Indeed, this Mutability of Opinion is Natural to all Men. As if our
Minds were subject to the Laws of Generation and Corruption, like our Bodies,
or as if there were a continual Flux and Reflux of our Thoughts, as there is of
our Corporeal Atoms.

These Authors not only vary about the Number of the Celestial Orbs, but also
concerning their Motion, especially that of the Eighth, which is called the
Sphere of the fixed Stars. For, the Chaldaeans and Egyptians held, it had but
one Motion, others affirmed it had no more. The Talmudists assign it two,
whilst some modern Astronomers among the Christians are more liberal, and allow
it Three distinct Motions. One, of Trepidation, as they call it: And this is
its own proper Course; which it performs, they say in Seven Thousand Years. A
Second of Gyration, which it derives from the Ninth Sphere, as one Wheel is
rolled about by another. And this Circuit according to their Opinion is not
finished in less than Forty Nine Thousand Years. And if that be true, we must
not expect the Dissolution of the World before that Term is expired. For it
would be Impious to Suppose, That the Eternal Architect, having made this
Sphere for a Circuit of so long a Duration, would stop it before its Race were
fully run; much less in the midst of its Cavern; or by that Time it had
accomplished a Sixth Part of its Revolution; as the Jews and Christians
believe. The Third Motion of this Sphere; is called Rapid and Diurnal; for
which they say, it is obliged to the Tenth Orb, or Primum Mobile.

Then again they differ in the Measure of the Time they allow for the Motion of
the Fixed Stars. One will have them to spend a Hundred Years in Traveling One
Degree. Another brings them to this Station, in Sixty Six Years. A Third, in
Seventy Five; a Fourth, in Seventy Eight. The Jews, in Seventy; the Christians,
in Eighty; whilst the Indians go beyond them all; asserting that there are Two
Stars in the Eighth Sphore, Diametrically opposite to each other; which do not
supply each others Place in the Zodiac, in less than a Hundred and Forty Four
Thousand Years. They affirm also, that there are many Motions of the Spheres
above; which are yet unknown to Mortals.

If this be so, there may be, for ought we know, other Stars and Bodies also,
to which these Motions may agree, though we cannot discern either the one or
the other, because of the Superlative Vastness of the Height, and the
Imperfection of Human Art. Of this Opinion were Alpetrag, Phavorinus the
Philosopher, and others.

By all that I have said, I do not pretend to instruct thee in Things whereof
thou were Ignorant. I know thee, by general Fame, and the Character of Men of
Judgment, to be an Accomplished Master in this Mysterious Science. But I
reflect thus on the Inconstancy and Doubtfulness of Men's Reason in these
Matters, as an Introduction to the Liberty I will take, of telling thee once
again my own Thoughts concerning Comets; which first suggested the Trouble I
now give thee in this Letter, as I did once before, on the like Occasion.

Suffer me to be a little Prolix and Tedious; for these Speculations are
Strong, and not handled with Ease; or in a few words, I would fain see the
Astronomer that has been in Heaven, and can give me an Account, what is the
True Motion of the Planet Mars; or that has discovered the exact Ingress of the
Sun into the Equinoctial Points. Let him also reveal to me the Nature of the
Galaxy; and what Substances, or Qualities they are, which compose the Milk y
Way. These are Subjects which have puzzled all Antiquity: And the Wisest of
these Modern Times, are as much to seek as their Fathers. O Fatal Darkness of
this Mortal State! What Mists of Ignorance and Error are our Minds envelop'd
with? We are perpetually bewildered in a Labyrinth and Circle of Scepticisims
and Ambiguities. The Sun by Day discloses to us the outward Features and
Lineaments of these Lower Elements: The Moon and Stars are not backward to show
us the Face of the Heavens by Night: Unless sometimes the Envious Spirits of
the Air draw a Veil of thick black Clouds before the Lovely Pichire, and leave
us all in Darkness. But Fate has hidden from us the Interior Pars of Heaven
and Earth, and all the other Beings in the Universe.

Among the Rest, I cannot but conceive, we are strangely mistaken in the Nature
of these Comets. For if they are only certain Heaps of Inflamable Matter,
kindled in the Air by the Force of the Sunbeams, or by some other Influence of
Nature, how come they to have so Regular and Distinct a Motion of their own?
How come they to Rise and Set at certain Hours every Day and Night, varying
only as the Heavenly Bodies do, in appearing earlier or later, one Day than
another, according to the Successive Alteration of the Four Seasons of the
Year, that so they may pass like them, through all the Signs of the Zodiac? If
the Earth moves, and these Comets be in the Air, they must needs be carried
round with the Motion of the Whole Vortex. But it is apparent to Human Sight,
That they are not thus whirled round with the Atmosphere, but have a distinct,
and sometimes a quite contrary Motion. They are Statick, Direct, and
Retrograde, like the Planets; which is almost a Demonstration, That their Seat
is in the Heavens; at least above the Intersecting Orb of the Moon. And if so,
I should be glad to have an Account of their Generation and Original. For, the
Substance of the Heavens being Immutable, and not Subject to any Change or
Corruption, it is Impossible, That any New Posthumous Being can be generated
there. There may, I believe, in every Age, be disclosed and uncabineted, some
Glittering Forms in the Heavens, which before lay hid, and locked up in the
Treasures of the most High. But they are as Old as the World it self. That Is my
Creed. Let other Men think what they please.

If I could wonder at any Thing, it would be at the mistaken Piety of those,
who to avoid the Charybdis of Atheism, which attributes all Things to Nature or
Chance; fall into the Scylla of Fanaticisin and Religious Dotage. Whilst they
vainly assert, that every New Alteration in the World, is an Effect of God's
Immediate Creative Power. Not a Child is conceived, but God then and there
creates a Soul for it. Not a Plague, Fire, Pestilence, or any other Common
Calamity happens, but they must disturb the Rest of the Eternal Deity, and make
him have a particular Chief Hand in the Conspiracy. So of Comets, they presage
Tremendous Things, as if God had immediately created them, to warn this Lower
World of some approaching Judgments. Whereas, according to the dictates of more
Impartial Reason, they are the products of his first Fiat, when he made the
Universe. Only he has reserved the Revelation of them, to certain Periods of
Time. But, these sort of People Affront God really, for Fear of Affronting him.
They injure his Goodness, to save his Omnipotence; and by a Back-blow they
strike at both, in defense of his supposed Arbitrary-Will. Let not my Soul sit
down in their Cabal; nor my Mind listen to the Secrets of their Divinity.

O Sage Osman! I believe that all things flow from God by an Emanation without
Beginning, and Subsist on him by a Dependence which shall know no End. With him
the Causes of all Fleeting and Decaying Things, have a permanent Stability. In
him reside Immutable Springs, of whatsoever is subject to Change. In his
Eternal Essence do live the Principles and Models of all Beings; but he is no
daily Labourer. It Is a Grand Contempt of the Divine Majesty, thus to invade the
Rest and Sabbatism of the Most High, who dwells for ever in Infinite and
Eternal Solitude and Bliss: To make him the Drudge of his Creatures, who has
Ten Thousand Thousand Myriads of Angels to Execute his Will.

Undoubtedly he has contrived the Universe with such Ineffable Art, That his
whole Pleasure is performed by Second Causes. This Infinite Machine is full of
Wheels, and has an Eternal Motion; whereof he is the Original Spring. If I may
descend to so low a Comparison, observe but the Course of a Miller; when once
he has turned the Cog of his Mill, he has no more to do, but stand still and
look on: The Work goes forward of it self, without any more of his Labor, till
he Stop it. So the Supreme Artist, when he had once set the Primum Mobile
a-going, had no more to do, but to enjoy himself in Eternal Beatitude.

It is an Indignity to the Omnipotent God, to say or think, he was not able to
make a World as perfect as a Mortal Man can frame the Imagination of. Now I
think it is very easy to conceive, That as a Hand-Mill, which continually
requires the Attendance of some body to keep it in Motion, has less of Artifice
in it, than a Water, or a Windmill, which go of themselves: So a World, that
must always have its Maker Slaving and Drudging, Toyling and Moyling at the
Product of every Individual Generation and Corruption; of every New Event, or
what appears to us to be so, is not so Excellent and Perfect, as one that can
perform its own Task by the Necessary Force which one contiguous Atom has upon
another; like Wheels upon Wheels.

To conclude all, Undoubtedly the Works of God are most perfect, and full of
Wisdom. He made all Things from Eternity, and they Obey his Law. He has
appointed the Times and Seasons of Good and Evil. The Symptoms whereof appear
to Mankind in Various Manners: In Dreams and Visions by Night; in Ominous
Accidents by Day; in Prophecies, and General Whispers; in Apparitions,
Specter, and Monstrous Forms; in Heaven, and all the Elements: Finally, in
Comets.

But, Oh Learned Adrooneth! Does it therefore follow, that these Signs, these
Apparitions, these Comets, etc. are freshly created for the sake of Mankind?
Are not various Ends and Uses of all Things? Are there not the Fixed Stars, and
the Planets, according to their different Configurations and Aspects, Signs of
Good and Evil, as well as Comets; and are not the Stars as Old as the World?
Why may not the Comets be so too, though they are revealed at certain Stated
Periods of Time?

There Is one Comprehensive Reason for all, in that double Query; and I Will say
no more to the Sage Adrooneth, for whom a Word is Satis.

I pray Heaven divert from thee the Influence of Evil Stars; and that whilst
thou Contemplatest their Order, Motion, and Efficacy, thou may not tumble
into a Ditch, 'as did Anaximenes, and Thales the Milesian, Astrologer Adieu.

Paris, 9th. of the 2d. Moon, of the Year 1681.
LETTER VII.
To the Mufti.
THE People of Rome having established the Government of Kings, transferred the
Sovereignty on Brutus and Collatinus; the Champions of their Liberty, altering
both their Right and Title: For they called them Consuls, not Kings: And
ordained that their Power should last but a Year; which being expired, new ones
were elected in their Stead. And the Reason why they had Two, was, that if one
proved guilty of Evil-Administration, Injustice or Tyranny; The other having
Equal Power might curb him, and rectify the public Affairs. They were also
called Consuls; to put them in mind that they were to do nothing Arbitrarily,
but in all Things of Importance, to Consult their Fellow-Citizens.

So great was the Joy of the Romans, upon this Recovery of their Freedom; that
they could scarce believe it was true. But as it usually falls out in any
surprising Happiness, all seemed as a Dream. And so inveterate was their
Aversion for Kings; that they expelled Collatinus from the City, only because
he was Nephew to Tarquin the Proud; whose Name also he bore. Valerius Publicol^
was substituted in his Stead: A Man singularly devoted to the public Good. He
owned himself the Creature of the People, and gave Power of Appealing, from him
to them. And, lest he might offend them by the Lofty Building of his House;
which also standing on a Rock, seemed strong as a Castle; he pulld down the
Upper Stories, and made it level with Ordinary Houses.

Brutus's Colleague, was no less studious, than he, to gain the Favor of the
Citizens; even with the Destruction and Slaughter of his own Children. For,
When he perceived his Sons Conspiring to restore the Abrogated Monarchy, he
brought them forth into the Forum, or Marketplace; and having caused them to
be scourged with Rods, he beheaded them: Thus demonstrating, That as a Parent
of the People, he Adopted them in the Room of his Persidious Children.

The Romans being from this Time made perfectly Free; first took up Arms in
Defense of their New-gotten Liberty, against the Neighboring Kings: Next, for
the Bounds of their Dominions: Then for their Confederates: And last of all,
for Glory and Empire: Being on every Side invaded and molested by the Adjacent
People. For, they had no Territories within the Walls of their City: So that
they were no sooner out of the Gates, but they were exposed to the Toscans and
Latins; between whom the City was seated, as it were in the Middle. Therefore
resolving to enlarge their Territories, they took one City and Province after
another, till at length they became Masters of all Italy.

Their First Expedition was against Porsena, King of the Toscans; who took the
Field with a great Army; having the Tarquins along with him, whom he undertook
to reestablish in the Throne of their Fathers. He made fierce and resolute
Advances, possessing himself of the Hill Janiculum, and the Avenues of the
City; where he besieged them close, and pressed them with Famine. Yet, the
Romans sustained all with Admirable Bravery: And their stout Resistance had
this Effect, that at length Porsena, when he had almost vanquished them, made a
League of Peace. He was chiefly moved to this by those Prodigies and Miracles
of Roman Fortitude; Horatius Cocles, Mutius Scaevola, and Clelia. The First of
which, when he was not able alone to keep off the unequal Throng of his
Enemies, every where crowding on him; at length broke down the Bridge, and swam
cross the Tyber with his Weapons in Hand. The Second attempting to kill Porsena
in his own Camp; When by Mistake, he had instead of the King, stabbed his
Vizir, or Secretary; and for that Fact was seized: He thrust his Right Hand,
that was guilty of the Error, into the Fire: Saying with a Menacing Voice,
Think not thy self the safer. O King, because thou have escaped my Hand, since
there yet remain. Three Hundred Romans, who have all sworn to make the same
Attempt. Porsena trembled, and was astonished at the Boldness of the Man;
whilst Mutius stood still, undaunted, with his Hand broiling in the Fire, as a
Demonstration of his invincible Constancy, and of the Truth of what he
affirmed: Thus did those Two Famous Men behave themselves. And as if a Glorious
Envy had fermented the Virtue of the Female Sex: A certain Noble Virgin, called
Clelia, who was given in Hostage to King Porsena, escaped her Guards by Night;
and mounting a Horse which she found in the Way, swam over the Tyber on him.
Porsena, as if he were terrifyed at the Fortune and stupendous Resolution of
the Romans; consented to a Peace: But the Latins would not let them rest so:
For they also attempted to restore the Tarquins; not so much in Love to them,
as out of Spite to the Inhabitants of Rome; being desirous to see that People,
at least subjugated at Home, who Lorded i^ so Abroad. There was a Bloody Fight
between 'em; and the Fame goes, That Two Gods, Castor and Pollux, were present
on white Horses, as Spectators of the Combat. Wherefore, after the Romans had
gotten the Victory, they built a Temple to these Warlike Deities; as a Stipend
or Reward to their Champions. And thus far they fought for Liberty; which
having successfully asserted and established, they were involved in Fresh Wars,
about the Confines of their Dominion.

It would be too tedious to rehearse the various Battles and Encounters between
them and the Neighboring Nations; wherein at last they always got the Victory,
and extended the Limits of their Empire far and wide. Such also, and so
prodigious were the Actions, Exploits and hardy Performances of this stout
People, that when King Pyrrhus considered it, he brake forth into this
Exclamation: How easy, were it, said he, to obtain the Empire of the World,
were Pyrrhus King of the Romans; or the Romans Soldiers to Pyrrhus!

Yet as fast as this Victorious People enlarged their Territories Abroad; so
did their Seditions and Tumults increase at Home; raised by the Ambition of
some, and the Discontent of others; 'till at length they had entirely subdued
all Italy to their Obdience: In which Enterprise they spent Five Hundred Years,
before they brought it to Perfection.

Then, like a Fire which devours all the Wood it meets in its Way, till its
Fury be stopped by the Intercourse of some River; so the Romans ceased not to
conquer to the very Shores of Italy. But, when they considered Sicily, as a
most Rich and plentiful Island; only rent, as it were, by some Injurious Stroke
of Time, or Fate, or Chance, from their Continent; they resolved to unite these
again by Arms and War, which could not be joined together by Bridges, or Peers.
And a very favorable Opportunity presented it self to them for this Purpose;
whilst the Confederated People of Messina, the Chief Mart of that Island,
complained of the Tyranny practiced by the Carthaginians.

At that Time Rome and Carthage were Aemulous of each other: Both equally
Rivals for Sicily, and the Empire of the World. Therefore under a Mask of
helping their Friends and Allies, the Romans betook themselves to the Sea; but
with Real Designs to Enrich themselves with Booty; and adding this Island to
their Empire: Whilst the Carthaginians appeared like Open Enemies and Pirates,
without any Disguise. These having lost their Fleets in various Conflicts,
their Fate yielding to that of Rome; the Romans made Sicily a Tributary
Province, and then reduced Sardinia and Corsica. Thus having expelled the
Carthaginians out of all the Islands of the Mediterranean Sea, there remained
Nothing for them to Conquer on that Side, but Africa it self: Where also they
Landed, and took above Three Hundred Places of Strength, in a short Time.
Though they were stoutly opposed, not only by Men, but also by Monsters. For a
certain Stupendous Great Serpent, a Hundred and Twenty Foot in Length, Annoyed
their Camp very much, near the River Bragada; as if this Dreadful Beast had
come into the World on purpose to be the Champion of its Native Country, and
Defend or Revenge Oppressed Africa. But Regulus, whose Victorious Arms, neither
Men, nor Monsters, nor Fate could hitherto resist; made no Stop, till he came
with his Army before the Walls of Carthage it self, the Root of all this War.
Here Fortune began to fall off from him, and prove his Enemy: Yet so as only to
give an Occasion for the Roman Virtue to appear more Illustrious. For though by
the Good Conduct of Xantippus the Lacedemonian General, Thirty-Thousand Romans
were killed in one Fight, and Regulus himself taken Prisoner: Yet so great a
Misfortune could not make him lose himself, or sink into any Passion beneath
the Constancy and Fortitude of an Invincible Hero. The Carthaginians sent him
as their Ambassador to the Senate of Rome, to propose a Peace, and the
Exchange of Captives. But he was of a contrary Sentiment, and dissuaded the
Senators from hearkening to any such Overtures: Choosing rather bravely to
return to his Former Captivity, there to be Crucified; than be Instrumental in
Word or Deed to the least Dishonor or Disadvantage of his Country: So that
though Vanquished, he yet seemed to Triumph over his Conquerours. And his
lamented Fate had this Influence on the Romans, that it made them prosecute the
War with more Fierceness and Ardour, to Revenge the Blood of Regulus, than in
Hopes of Conquest. So deep are the Impressions of Love, which a Good General
Living, or Dead, makes in the Hearts of his Soldiers. Thus the War was renewed
again in Sicily, wherein the Romans came off Conquerours: And as an Evidence of
the Greatness of their Victory, they showed an Hundred and Twenty Elephants
taken from the Enemy in the Field. Which would have been a Great Prey, had they
been taken in Hunting; but now served only as a Trophy of a more Expensive
Conquest. This Victory was obtained in the Consulship of Metellus: Which was
followed by a Terrible Overthrow at Sea, in that of Appius Claudius: When the
Romans seemed not so much overcome by their Enemies, as by the Profaneness of
their General, or the Divine Vengeance. For he consulting the Augurs before he
began the Engagement; Chickens were let out of their Coops, to observe the
wished for Tripudiation of the Corn they were to feed on. But when the
Oraculous Birds would not taste a Grain; the General disgusted at the Fatal
Omen, Commanded them to be drowned in the Sea: Saying with an Impious Jest:
Since they will not Eat, let them Drink their Fill. In the same Place was the
Roman Navy Sunk and Destroyed.

There were many such Encounters as these between them, for the space of Four
and Twenty Years and upwards; even till the Consulship of Lutatius Catulus;
when the Enemy seemed not to advance with a Fleet of Ships, well Manned and
Rigged with all Necessaries; but all Carthage appeared upon the Sea, with the
Woods and Forests round about it. This proved its Ruin. For they were too heavy
for Service: Whereas the Roman Navy was Light and Expeditious, like a Moving
Camp in the Sea. In a Word, they set upon the Carthaginians so furiously, and
shattered their Vessels with such Speed, That all the Sea between Sardinia and
Sicily, was with the Dismal Wrecks. And this Victory was so Great, That they
had no farther Thoughts of Sailing to Africa, and Rasing the Walls of their
Enemies; that being counted Needless, since Carthage was now extinguished in
the Sea.

After this War was finished, the Romans enjoyed a Short Rest, as it were to
Breath themselves. And as a Demonstration of Peace, the Temple of Janus was
shut, it having been constantly open before from the Reign of Numa Pompilius.
And this Distinction was the Public Emblem of Peace or War.

Thou will not have Patience to read their Wars with the Ligurians, Gauls,
Illyrians, Macedonians, Syrians, Germans, Spaniards; and in Fine, with the most
Potent Nations on Earth. 'Twill be as Irksome to be detained with a Rehearsal
of their Domestic Seditions, and Changes of Government. Suffice it to say,
That this People grew Worse by the Increase of their Empire: And after they had
subverted Carthage, Corinth, Numantia, and other Famous Cities of Europe, Asia,
and Africa: After they had subdued Gaul, Thrace, Cilicia, Cappadocia, Armenia,
Britain, and many other most Rich and Opulent Provinces abroad; they began to
make Wars among themselves; their Former Virtues turned into Vices: The
Seditions, Conspiracies and Emulations of the Triumviri; the Tribunes: Of
Catiline, Marius, Sylla, Antony, Pompey, and a Thousand other Popular
Commotions; helped toward the Confusion of this Empire; which seemed to be the
Support of all Things.

Most Divine of the Successors of the Prophets; This Vast Empire, is now become
but as a shattered Skeleton of Ancient Rome: And most of the Exterior Members,
are fallen to the Share of the All-Conquering Ottomans. God perpetuate the
Victories of True Believers; and yet grant, that their Conquests, may not
out-last their Virtues.

Paris, 8th. of the 3d. Moon, of the Year 1681.
LETTER VIII.
To Dgnet Oglou.
I Am as waggish as a Fanizary that has newly received his Aspers. There Is more
Satyr in me at this Time than there was in Juvenal and Persius: And yet it is
only the Dregs of what I Have vented on some learned Bigots here in Paris, with
whom I have been drinking these Two or Three Hours. I tell thee plainly; I put
off the Mussulman for a while, and took my Glasses Frankly, or like a Nazarene.

The Discourse we were upon was Astrology and the Nature of Comets, etc. But
God tumble me headlong into the Lap of Tagot, if ever I heard such Blockheads,
Dunces, Fools, Sots: I know not what to call them properly. Zounds! How can
Human Reason be so debauched? How can Man become such an Insensible Piece of
Stuff, to think as they do? They made me Blush for Shame, or Anger: They made
me sorry that I was a Man; to be ranked in the same List with 'em. However, I
suppressed my boiling Choler; I bit my Lips and Nails, and did every thing that
Patience could suggest: (For I use to be a very Boon Companion in my Wine:) But
at length, as it is the Fate of all Disputers, we grew too hot: There was such a
Tempest of Words and Passionate Expressions; that we could hardly find a Grain
of Sense. At last we fell from Words to Blows; and I, though Old and Crazy,
held up my Head as well as I could.

Thou will believe, at this Age, I have no great Strength: But, I tell thee, my
Courage is the same as when I was but Five and Twenty: I cannot flinch from
provoking Dangers; and when I am thoroughly inflamed with Wrath, Death it self
appears to me in the same Figure which Painters give it; a mere naked Skeleton;
which I have more Reason to pity, than fear: If I am afraid of any thing, it
is, of breaking its Bones, and spoiling its Shape, in the Clash of my Fury. So
tender am I even of Death it self; the Obdurate and Inexorable Destroyer of all
Mankind.

One of the Company that was a Priest, and sat right over against me at the
Table, threw his Four-Corner'd Cap at my Head, whilst his next Neighbor
checked him for his Insolence. But he was 'full of Fat, and empty of Reason or
Civility: A great Hulking Fellow, that makes a Figure like the Statue of
Pont-Ginello, at Catanea in Sicily; only he is a little Taller: But he has a
swinging Tun of a Carcass.

After he had abused me thus; he swore, If he had the Chalice of the Altar in
his Hand, he would do the same thing: Nay, if he had the consecrated Wine in it, he
would turn the Blood of Christ into Poison, as he could turn Wine into Blood,
to be revenged of me.

There was, by good Chance, an Armenian or Two in the Company (not any of
Solyman's Gang) who took him up upon his Menace. They challenged him severely
to answer his Words before the Archbishop of Paris: But the Cunning Priest had
more Wit in his Anger. When he began to reflect on the bad Consequences of a
Summons; he crouch'd, wheadl'd, and fawned like a Spaniel. So fearful are they
of a Spiritual Court, which is almost as bad in France, as the Inquisition in
Spain.

Then there was a Captain, an Old Miles Emeritus, a Pensioner, who having not
drank such a Quantity of Wine many a Day, took my Part; because he sat on my
Side of the Table (for he never saw me before in his Life Time, as I know of.)
However, the Old Gentleman showed himself stout; and demonstrated that he would
stand a Push for Souls. But, there was no Body would oppose him, save my self:
And I did it in Verbo Clerici; not Manu or Ense Militis, God knows. I prayed
the Good Old Man to be pacifyed: I laid my Right Hand to my Breast, and heaved
both that and the other joined, to Heaven. I invocated all the Patriarchs and
Prophets; I bawled at the Saints and Angels; I summoned God Almighty himself to
appear in my Vindication. But nothing would do, save right-down Fighting.

To it we went, Pell-Mel: The Fellows on the other Side of the Table were
eager: Nothing would satisfy them but Blood: Their Rapiers were drawn; and
they were upon their Pass: When I started up, and cried our aloud; Gentlemen,
it is the wrong Minute for ye to fight in; Mars is in the 8th. House, in
Conjunction with Saturn, and in Quartile with the Sun; a very Malevolent
Aspect: Upon this, they grew all madder than before. Damn that Astrologer, says
one; Curse upon his Stomach, says another; till at last they all fell foul upon
me; only my Side-Captain stood up stiffly for me. I did what became a Man; but
it is to his Bravery I owe my Life. For, one of the Opposite Sparks, made a full
Pass at my Breast, which the Noble Old Captain parry'd, with a sudden Shoot of
his Arm athwart, and a Dexterity which I can never admire enough.

I, that had neither Sword, nor Skill in the Science of Fencing, thought it my
Part to expose my Body between my seeming Friends and Enemies, since all the
Occasion of this Quarrel was on my Account, as an Astrologer. I leaped upon the
Table, and seized upon the Sword of my Captains Antagonist. I smiled upon him
at the same Time, and convinced him that I was not in Anger. I twisted it out
of his Hands with a complaisant Violence: And then the Strife was appeased.
For, 'twas not he that began the Quarrel, any more than my Old Captain; but the
Priest was wholly in the Fault; who, straggling out of his Sphere, pretended to
set up for an Astrologer; and tell us Things that would not square with Reason.

My Dgnet, thou know me, and all my Inclinations: Thou art sensible, that I
cannot stoop to the Magisterial Dictates of Error; nor the Bold Impositions of
Ignorance: Let 'em approach as near as they will to Truth on the Backside, they
are the further off from attaining it: And so let thou and I enjoy our selves
in perfect Tranquillity.

Paris, 17th of the 5th Moon, of the Year 1681.
LETTER IX.
To Hamet, Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire.
HAving in my last spoken of the present State of Venice; wherein I omitted
Nothing that I thought worth thy Observation: I should now in Order touch upon
Candin or Crete, the most considerable Island that the Venetians, not long ago,
had under their Obedience. But since by the Fate of War, it is fallen into the
Hands of the Victorious Osmans; I will say but very little of it, and pass to
the other Republics of Europe.

There is no Doubt, but since the Conquest of Candia by the Mussulmans: The
Imperial City abounds with Geographical Descriptions; Natural, Moral, and
Political Observations on it. But, perhaps they are wanting in the History of
that Famous Island: In Regard the Books of the Gentiles, are not much Read by
the True Believers. And it is from these only, we can Collect the Ancient
Memoirs of the Nations, which were once in their own Possession.

This Island was once called Crete, and said to be the Nursery of Jupiter, as
also his Sepulcher. It obtained likewise the Title of Hecatompolis, because of
the Hundred Cities that were in it. And some called it the Island of the
Archers, in Regard the Inhabitants being taught from their Infancy to handle
the Scythian Bow, grew so expert in that Exercise, that they surpassed all
other Nations.

The Lacedaemonians, Athenians, and other Renowned Commonwealths of Greece,
received their Laws from Men Born in this Island, as Plato and Pliny testify.
And yet Epimenides, one of their own Poets, gives them a bad Character, when he
says, (...).

They were much addicted also to all kinds of Sorcery and Enchantments. A
Fraudulent Race of People, Covetous, Greedy, Idle, and Ignorant of ingenious
Arts and Sciences.

Yet notwithstanding this, they were so powerful of Old, That they could, as
with a Bridle, Curb all Greece. During the Reign of one of their Kings, whose
Name was Cydon, came up the Use of Pyrrhick Measures; which the Youth being
Armed Cap-a-Pe, danced with great Labor and Sweat. And the Inhabitants have
all along been so tenacious of this Custom, That it is observed to this Day
among the Rustic Candiots, on their Holy Days. For at such Times, the Youth of
the Island meet together, Armed with a Bow in one Hand, and a Naked Sword in
the other, with a Quiver of Arrows hanging at their Backs. And thus they will
Dance indefatigably in the Heat of Summer, even at Noonday; when the Sun
scorches all Things with Insupportable Fervors.

In Process of Time, this Island became subject to the Grecian Empire: And as
such, fell into the Hands of Baldwin, Count of Flanders and Emperor of
Constantinople: Who gave it to the Marquis of Montferrat; by whom it was sold
to the Venetians in the Year 1194, for an Incredible Sum of Money. And that
Republic has held it ever since, till it was lately taken from them by the
Invincible Ottomans.

It is worth Remarks; That Candia, the Chief City of this Isle (called Castro
and Candax, by the Greeks) is a Place of that prodigious Strength, that it
sustained a Bloccade of 22 Years; from 1645 to 1667: And after that, a Siege of
2 Years; from 1667 to 1669: In which Space of Time, it is thought, 600000
Mussulmans lost their Lives before it.

The next Republic, in Order, is that of Genoua; a City whose Power and Empire
was far greater in former Times, than it is at present. For, they extended
their Dominions even to the Black Sea; where Tanais that parts Europe from
Asia, pours her Waters into the Palus Maeotis. Here they possessed the City
Theodosia, or Caffa; as it is called at this Day. They also made themselves
Masters of Cyprus, Lesbos, Chios; with other Islands in the Archipelago; and
even of Pera it self, that Magnificent Adjunct to the Imperial City.

Yet, from the Beginning, they were Feudatories of the Roman Empire, till the
Year 600 of the Christians Hejira. For then Lotharis King of the Lombards, took
the City by Force, and plundered it. But when after some Years it had recovered
its Pristine Glory again; Charles I. and his Son Pepin, Kings of Italy, and
their Successors the Kings of France, bore Rule there for almost a Hundred
Years, placing Governors in the City, who bore the Title of Counts of Genoua.
And when afterward the Saracens had subdued Corsica; Ademarus, then Count of
Genoua, Armed out a Fleet of Galleys, invaded the Island; and having defeated
the True Believers, took Possession of it, and reduced it under the
Jurisdiction of Genoua; whose Power at this Time, was very great by Sea.

After the Dominion of Charles the Great, his Posterity was by degrees so
diminished, that at length it became in a manner quite Extinct; the more Potent
among the Citizens took Turns to Usurp the Government, and exercise a Tyranny
over the Inhabitants: Which so exasperated them, that they often submitted
themselves to Foreign Princes. But finding still as great Inconveniences in
this Dependence on Strangers; at last, following the Example of the Venetians,
they chose to themselves a Duke, in the Year 1337. of the Christians Hejira.
Him they sent with a Fleet to Conquer Cyprus: Which he accomplished with good
Success. For, having taken the King and Queen of the Country Captives, he
imprisoned them, till they agreed with him for a Yearly Tribute to be paid to
the Republic of Genoua; and then he restored them to their Native Possession;
reserving only Famagusta, the Chief City of the Island, to himself.

He entered also into a War with the Venetians; but being overcome in Battle,
at his Return, he was Deposed from the Ducal Office, and thrown into Prison;
another being Chosen in his Place. This was more Fortunate than his
Predecessor, against the Enemy; doing them many Injuries; but at length, was
killed in Battle.

Then the Genouese Elected another Duke; who going to Constantinople, performed
such Eminent Services to the Emperor in his Wars, that he gave him the Island
Mitylene; which the Genouese held till the Year 1354.

After this, they Created one to Rule over them under the Title of Prince, in
the Year 1381. But not liking his Government, they threw themselves upon the
Protection of Charles VII. King of France; who sent thither his Deputy. Being
soon weary of the French Government, they joined themselves to the Duke of
Milan; under whose Patronage they lived, till the Year 1435. and then
Abdicating him, they Created a Duke of their own again. This raised Factions in
the City; whilst some adhered to the French Interest, and others espoused the
Duke of Milan's Cause: At last they fell again under the Power of the French;
whom they obeyed, till Andreas D'Oria having quelled the Seditions, and
pacified the Contentions of the Freggi and Torni; Two prevailing Factions in
the City, one consisting of the Nobles, the other of the Commons, he
Established that Liberty in the Commonwealth of Geneua, which she has enjoyed
ever since, till of late some new Troubles have been given 'em by the Kings of
France and Spain.

As to the Original of the Genouese, it is uncertain. Strabo, and others are of
Opinion. That this Nation descended from the Greeks: Whilst Thucydides derives
them from the Sicilians. They were called Ligurians by the People of Rome. And
Florus mentions a certain Race of Ligurians, who dwelt in the Dens and Caves of
Mountains, being a very Fierce and Warlike People.

But now adays, the Genouese are a very Polite and Civilized People; of a
Lively and Subtle Wit, especially in Merchandising, by which they greatly
enrich themselves. They are also exceeding Industrious, shunning no Labor or
Danger for the Sake of Gain. They appear Studious of those Things which tend to
the Good of the Commonwealth; yet are extremely Fickle and Inconstant, given to
Faction, and desirous of Novelty: As is manifest by what I have before related
of them. Which occasioned a certain King of France, when one of his Lords told
him, That the Genouese were about to throw themselves on his Patronage, Answer,
not without some Indignation, That they might go to the Devil for Protection:
for I, says he, will have nothing to do with Men, who are more unstedfast than
the Waves of the Sea.

This Inconstancy never appeared more plainly, than in the late Conspiracy of
Raggi and Torn; which had like to have proved of Fatal Consequence. As to
Vachero and Balbi, they were like the Dog in Aesop's Fables; who lost the Bone,
to catch at its Shadow in the Water: So these Sea- Myrmidons, were not content
with the Strong Party which they had made in the City, but must needs go to
Corrupt the Navy too; which ruined all their Design: For the Plot was
discovered by one of the Sea-Captains. This Commonwealth has been afflicted
with many Wars and Plagues: But none of either Sort ever threatened it with so
much Desolation, as the Last: The One having almost exhausted their Treasury;
and the Other as near emptied the City of its Inhabitants. As for the First
Misfortune, the Scarcity of Money, the knew quickly how to remedy it; being
perfect Chemists, and Masters of the Philosopher's Stone, if there be any such
Thing in Nature. But whether there be or not, this is certain, That the
Genouese are Old Doctors at garbling, transmuting, and adulterating of Metals.
And the Ottoman Empire has experienced it; to the great Damage of our Merchants
at Constantinople, Smyrna, Aleppo, and other Ports, where the Genouese did put
off their Base Coin, to the Value of some Millions. But this Cheat may cost
them dear one time or other.

The Genouese appear at present more Inclinable to Merchandise than to War.
However, it must be confessed, that this Commonwealth has brought forth Valiant
and Expert Soldiers; as is evident from the Families of the Doria's, Spinola's,
and others, who have proved Famous Genorals, and Leaders of Armies in several
Parts of Europe.

Of such as these has Genoua more Cause to boast, than of any Strong Forts,
Castles, or fenced Cities within her Dominions in Italy. Nay, the Chief City,
Genoua it self, trusts more in the King of Spain's Protection, than in her own
Strength. That Monarch is indebted to the Genouese-Merchants Eighteen Millions
of Gold, besides the Interest of * * * * Years. For this Bill was given in to
him in the Year 1600. of the Christians Hejira. By this thou may guess at
the Riches of this Commonwealth.

As to the Manner of their Government, it differs not much from that of Venice:
The Supreme Power being in the Hands of the Senate, who Elect a Duke every Two
Years by Lot, out of Four Men who are proposed as worthy of that High Office.
No Man can propose any Thing to the Senate, but the Duke himself: Who lives in
a Public Palace, during the Two Years of his Government; and has a Guard of
Five Hundred Germans about his House and Person.

It would be Superfluous to trouble thee with an Account of their Judicial
Courts, the Manner of Electing the Senators, and other Public Magistrates;
with the rest of their peculiar Politics. Besides, I believe thou art almost
cloyed with the Length of this Letter. Wherefore begging thee to put the best
Construction on my Endeavors, I bid thee Adieu.

Paris, 17th. of the 8th. Moon, of the Year 1681.
LETTER X.
To Dgnet Oglou.
I Formerly sent a Letter to the Sage Osman Odrooneth, Astrologer in Ordinary
to the Grand Signior; Wherein I informed him of a Comet or Blazing-Star, which
then newly appeared in the Heavens. I took an Occasion in that Dispatch, to
venture my Thoughts concerning the Nature of these Amazing Phoenomena, which so
astonish the Minds of Mortals, and puzzle the Ablest Philosophers to discover
the Origin. From this Discourse, I past insensibly into a more General One,
concerning the Stars. I said what I thought was proper to One of his
Profession; being unwilling to offend by too much Boldness, a Man esteemed the
Most Learned and Accomplished in that Science, of this Age. For, though I give
little Credit to Judicial Astrology, as it is practiced now Adays; yet it would
have been an Incivility to express so much to one that lives by it; and who,
for his Eminent Skill therein, is honored with the Grand Signior's Friendship,
and a Noble Pension. But, with thee, I will take the more Freedom; in Respect
of that intimate Familiarity that has been always between us.

That the Heavenly Bodies have an Influx on this Lower World; is an Article,
the General Sense of all Mankind gives Testimony to; whilst every Morning we
rejoice to see that Glorious Orb of Light, the Sun, imprint the Eastern Skies
and Clouds, with his Refreshing Rays; he gilds the Frontiers of the Horizon,
and decks the Tops of Mountains with a cheerful Brightness. The Earth, the Air
and Seas, participate of the Virtue of his Beams: It Is He gives Life to Plants
and Animals: He renovates the Elements, and every Sublunary Being.

So, when he takes his Conge every Evening of our Hemisphere; he still affords
us Light, though but at Second-Hand: Whilst he in Person, makes his Progress to
the Western Continent, to cheer and recreate by his Presence, the Remote and
Solitary Borders of America; Fair Cynthia is his Proxy here, attended on by
other Planets, waiting in their Turns, and a whole Hemisphere of Fixed Stars.

These shine by Night, for other Ends, no doubt, than merely to light the
Shepherds as they watch their harmless Flocks; or serve as Flambeaux to the
wandering Traveller: Yet this is comfortable in our Elementary Darkness. The
Mariner rejoices, when in the Mighty Waste of unknown Seas, he makes a Lottery
of his Fortune, and trusts his Soul and Body to a rotten Skiff; where Slavery
and Freedom, Life and Death are equal Chances. When he struggles with Impetuous
Winds, and Boisterous Waves, threatened on all Hands by the Bedlam Fury of the
Sea: I say, he is glad at such a Time, to have the Light his Friend, though it
be but the faint Glimmering of the Stars; that he may see the Perils that
encompass him, and use the properest Means to avoid them. How is his Heart
revived, if in the dreadful Storm, he spies but one poor Chink or Cranny in the
Close Gloomy Clouds, through which the Azure Sky can show it self? And then
some Prosperous Constellation to appear amidst that Checquer-Work of this Low
Orb, and those Above; makes him take Courage and defy the Powers of Aeolus and
Neptune: He challenges the Rocks and Sands to hurt him; and mocks the Fatal
Apparitions of Castor and Pollux.

Yet these and many more Inferior Uses, were not all for which the Stars were
made. They have befides, undoubtedly, some Dominion, Influence and Power on
Earth; and all the Beings dwelling on it. Wherever they cast their Rays,
there is some Material Emanation felt; An Efflux full of hidden Magic. They
dart on Men and other Animals; on Plants and other Minerals; on every Thing
that is Compounded of the Elements, and does reside within the Sphere of their
Activity: Each darts, I say, its own Peculiar Force and Virtue. It Is probable,
that every Nation, Tribe and Family; each Climate, Province, Spot and Corner of
the Earth, have their Particular Stars. So have the different Species of all
Sublunary Things, and every Individual Being. But how to determine their
Influence particularly, by Divination, by Calculating Nativities, erecting
Horoscopes, and other Schemes of Astrology; to foretell Things to come; to
avoid Prognosticated Evils; and engross all happy Events; to predict other Men's
Fates, whilst we are ignorant of our own, etc. is a thing which appears to me
beyond the Power of Human Reason, and a Science built on Sand.

For, who has numbered the Stars, or visited the Places of their different
Situation? Who has understood their various Qualities, Engagements, Asterisms,
and Obligation? their Ties to one another, and their Obedience to the Laws of
the Universe? O that Mortal Man should presume to dive thus far; even, into the
Heavenly Arcana, the Cabinet-Secrets of God Allmighty! Will he be Wiser than
Ptolomy, Cassander, Eudoxus, Archelaus, Hoychilax, Halicarnassaeus and many
others, most expert Mathematicians, and Men of a profound Judgment; who have
confessed, that after all their Search in this Science, they find it impossible
to make any certain Conclusion from the Configurations Above; in Regard of the
Innumerable Multiplicity of Causes cooperating with them, to which we are
wholly Strangers: besides those things which oppose or favor the Influence of
the Stars among our selves, and with which we are very familiar; as the Force
of Blood, Customs, Traditions, Manners, Education, Prejudice, Prepossession,
Place and Time; Empire and Subjection; Diet and Discipline: Finally, the
Freedom of Mind, or its Servitude. All which, they say, the Stars cannot
compel, but only dispose and incline.

Moreover, they who have prescribed the Rules of Judicial Astrology, differ so
extremely in one and the same Subject; That there is no Encouragement for a
Thinking Man, to hope ever to make a True Judgment by their Rules, unless he be
Divinely inspired within, and have a certain Natural Instinct which suggests to
him the Knowledge of Future Things. Or, he is possessed by some Presaging
Demon; whose Whispers direct him what Judgment to choose, among the many that
may be made upon the Sight of a Scheme, according to the Variety of Rules that
have been given. And this is the Opinion of the Learned Hali, my Countryman,
who has had many Followers: So that after all, this boasted Science will rather
deserve the Name of Sortilogy, than Astrology; whilst all its Dictates depend
on pure Conjecture, or the Extempore Affections of the Mind; or which is worst
of all, on the Afflatus of Busy, Interessed Spirits, Genii, or Demons of the
Air, who have some Design of their own to pursue, and make Men their Tools to
execute it.

Undoubtedly, they both deceive others, and are deceived themselves; who
practice this Vain Art, for the Sake of Filthy Lucre. For, if there was any
thing of Truth in it; how came they to fail so often, and so egregiously in
their Predictions? Or, why do they always couch their Prognostications in such
Ambiguous Terms; that like the Delphick Oracle, may be taken in which Sense you
please, and applied to any Nation, Prince, Time, or Person; as the Astrologer
shall please to comment, after something of what he has said at random may have
happened? For from that infinite Variety of Stars and Aspects, it is very easy
for a Bold Sophister in this Art, to cull out such for his Turn, as shall be
proper to convince Ignorant People, that he was in the Right when he promised
them Long Life, Health, Honors, Riches, Children, Friends, Power, Victory, the
Enjoyment of their Loves, and such like; or threatened the quite contrary; even
just as they fall out. But, if at any Time they were caught in an apparent
Falsehood, then they either complement a Man into a good Opinion of them, by
telling him, A Wise Man has Dominion over the Stars; or they insult over him by
a Thousand Conrempts of his supposed Folly; which, they say, resisted the
Influence of the Stars, and hindered their good Effect. Yet, these Sort of
People are in Chiefest Request among the Princes and Potentates of the Earth;
especlally in the East, where there is nothing to be done either in Peace or
War, without first consulting the Astrologer. Though really there is not a more
unprofitable, not to say a more pestilent Race of Men in a Commonwealth.

Cornelius Tacitus, a grave Author, complained of 'em in Old Time: So did
Varro, with other Sincere Writers. And it was a Custom in Alexandria formerly,
for Astrologers to pay a certain Tribute, which they called Fools-pence,
because it was taken from the Gain which the Astrologers made by their own
Ingenious Folly, and the Credulous Dotage of their Admirers.

My Dgnet, if our Lives and Fortunes depend upon the Stars, what Reason have we
to be afraid of any Thing? Why are we solicitous, and full of Needless Cares?
Let us leave all Things to God: And the Heavens, which cannot err, nor
transgress the Decrees of Fate; will be our Guarantees till Death. But if our
Lives and Fortunes are altogether Independent of the Celestial Bodies, let us
bid Goodnight to Astrology, as the Vainest Ape, or Mimick of a Science, that
ever Buffoon'd the World.

'Twas said of Old by the Sages of Chaldaea, That God had committed the
Disposal of Days to Moses, and of Hours to Jesus the Son of Mary; but, That he
had reserved the Moments to himself, and his last Favorite. Let us therefore
every Minute of our Lives wait on him, the Father of all things, with an entire
Resignation.

But, there is a sort of Puny-Spirited Men, so timorous and void of True Faith,
That they will rather believe any Thing, though the most Incongruous Fictions
of Hobgoblins, Ghosts, etc. than the Dictates of Solid Reason. They tremble at
the Report of Things which have no Existence in Nature; and whose very Idea is
full of Impossibilities and Contradictions. Yet they will stand the Brunt of
Truth with Brazen Foreheads, and resist the Dint of Rational Arguments, like so
many Colossus's. Hence it comes to pass, That whereas one Lie is apt to take
away the Reputation of any Honest Man, so that he shall not be believed when he
speaks true; On the contrary here in our Case, if an Astrologer in his
Random-Predictions, by mere Chance hits upon remarkable Truth, it procures him
Credit for all the Lies that ever he has, or can be guilty of. Impertinent and
preposterous sort of Fellows; who, whilst they pretend to know, and foretell
Future Things, are ignorant of that which is Past, or Present; and when they
are impudently asserting their Familiarity with the Houses of the Twelve Signs
in the Zodiac, know not what is done in their own Homes, and Beds: As this
Epigram says:

Astra tibi aethereo pandunt sese omnia Vati;
Omnibus and quae sint Fata futura monent.
Omnibus ast Vxor, quod se tua publicat, id te
Astra, licet videant Omnia, nulla monent.
But that which appears most strange is, That they ascribe the very Gift of
Prophecy to the Stars; also the Origin of Religions, the Secrets of
Conscience; the Power of working Miracles, and Casting out Devils; the Efficacy
of Prayers, and even our Immortal Happiness or Misery after this Life. Thus
they assert, That when Gemini is the Ascendant, and in Conjunction with Saturn
and Mercury under Aquarius, in the Ninth House, a Prophet is Born at that Time.
And therefore Jesus the Messiah was endu'd with so many Matchless Gifts and
Abilities, because he had Saturn in his Configuration with Gemini.

Thus they distribute the Various Sects of Religion that are on Earth, into
their distinct Classes, according to the different Asterisms Above; Jupiter
being supposed the General Patron of all Religion. Upon this Ground, they
ascribe the Religion of the Jews to Jupiter and Saturn; of the Chaldaeans, to
Jupiter and Mars; of the Egyptians, to Jupiter and the Sun; of the Arabians, to
Jupiter and Venus; of the Christians, to Jupiter and Mercury: And that Religion
or Irreligion of Antichrist, which is to come, they ascribe to Jupiter and the
Moon. They say also, that Moses prescribed the Observation of the Sabbath,
from Astrological Grounds; it being dedicated to Saturn. They ascribe the
Deluge to the Influence of the Stars; and the Law given on Mount Sinai, is in
their Divinity owing to the same Original. They attribute the Conception of
Jesus the Son of Mary, to Venus; and his supposed Death to Mars. They affirm,
that the Messiah himself was the greatest Astrologer of his Time: That he made
a particular Choice of Hours, wherein to work his Miracles, and to pass through
the Streets of Jerusalem, without receiving Damage from the Jews. Which made
him once say to his Disciples, Are there not Twelve Hours in a Day? when they
warned him not to go into the City on such a Day for fear of the People.

They add, That whosoever has Mars happily placed in the Ninth House, at his
Nativity, shall have Power to Expel Demons from the possessed; And whosoever
has the Moon with Jupiter in Conjunction with the Dragons Head, in the Zenith,
and shall pray to God, whatsoever he desires shall be granted: And that
Immortal Felicity depends on Jupiter and Saturn, if they be happily posited in
Leo. For, whosoever has this Configuration, his Soul after Death being freed
from Infinite Streights and Perils, shall ascend to its Original and Native
Seat, the Region of Endless Liberty and Bliss.

All this may be true, for ought I know; but till I have a Demonstration for
it, I shall desire to suspend my Belief. In the mean while, this is my Faith,
That all Things depend on Everlasting Destiny. Whether the Stars be Instruments
in Executing the Eternal Decrees or no, it matters not much. All sublunary
Beings must obey the Law that cannot be revoked.

Then suffer not thy self, Dear Friend, to be dismayed, or over-anxious at any
Thing that happens in this Mortal Life: But practice that Ode of Horace,

Aequam memento rebus in arduis
Servare Mentem: non secus in bonis
Ab insolenti temperatam
Loetitia, Moriture, etc.
Finally, My Dgnet, be moved at Nothing. Adieu.

Paris, 5th. of the 11th. Moon, of the Year 1681.
LETTER XI.
To Ibro Kalphaser, Effendi, a Man of Letters at Constantinople.
I Congratulate the Honor thou have, in being made Supervisor of that Noble
Work; an Universal History of the World. I wish thee and the other Undertakers,
a Whole Hegyra of Happiness; whose Date may commence with the Finishing this
Illustrious Volume.

The Mufti has ordered me to address to thee such farther Instructions as are
necessary to render the History complete; that nothing either of Substance or
Ornament may be wanting.

I formerly sent that Patriarch of the Faithful, a Scheme, or Model of the
Whole Work, which I drew up in the Best Manner I could for the Time that was
allowed me. Now I send thee one more ample and correct; it is enclosed in the
Box which comes with this: Wherein thou will also find a large Catalogue of
Historians; containing almost all that have written the Affairs of Kingdoms and
Empires, since the Beginning of the World; With their particular Characters;
that thou may distinguish such as are worthy of Credit, from the Authors of
Figments. Neither art thou to wonder, that I have in these Papers, given thee
Cautions how to use, even some of those whom we esteem of greatest Integrity
and Reputation. For, though they scorned to broach Fables, or transmit Romances
to Posterity; yet they were Flesh and Blood as well as other Men; and many
times their Interest or Passions biased their Judgment, and drew their Pens
into Cabal with a Party. Thus Herodotus himself, though otherwise a Man of
approved Veracity; yet, when he relates the Wars of the Athenians, appears too
partial to his darling Countrymen; and lets those Passages escape his Pen in
their Favor, which are contradicted by Plutarch and other more disinteressed
Writers, and for which he is particularly reproached by Plutarch, in a Treatise
of his, entitled [ Of the Malice of Herodotus.]

Therefore, in Cases of this Nature, thou art not to confide wholly in any one
Author, whom thou have Reason to suspect guilty of Fiction in History; or
supinely pass thy Sentiments into those of another, without examining whether
his Relations be true or false: But having so great a Throng of Testimonies,
reserve the last Appeal to thy self, and let thy own Judgment be the Tribunal,
where every ones Sentence is finally determined.

Thus much may serve for a Direction, as to the Matter of the History. What
concerns the several Periods of Time, wherein Things were done; Authors cannot
with such Reason, be supposed designedly Faulty, as mistaken in their
Chronology; and those chiefly, who wrote in later Times; and seem only to have
collected and transcribed out of others, what was for their Turn. And, thou will have Reason, to be particularly circumspect, in what thou take on the
Credit of Diodorus Siculus, Pliny, Paterculus, and some others; who seem to
have been too Precipitate in fixing the Terms and Periods of Time, requisite to
the Illustrating their Histories, without making a due Comparison of the
several Epocha's in Use among the Precedent Historians; from whom they borrow
their Light.

In Order therefore, to the rendering this Universal History, the most correct
and free from Error of any yet extant; to the Eternal Honor of the Mussulmans,
and Advantage of all Mankind: It will be necessary for thee to have a Right
Notion of all the different Hegyra's or Comptuation of Years, used by diverse
Nations, from the First Invention of Records to this Day. These I have named in
short, at the Tops of the Columes to which they belong, in the Scheme I have
sent in the Box. Now I will explain their Meaning to thee, and show which are
of most Import in this Work, and which not.

To begin then with that Era which is commonly taken for a Series of the Years
of the World, or a Computation from the supposed Origin of Time: Thou ought
to observe, that this is most disputable and uncertain of all other Epocha's,
in Regard it is impossible to adjust the different Accounts of the Jews,
Grecians, Romans, Egyptians, Arabians, Persians, and other Nations; not to
mention the almost Eternal Chronologies of the Chinese and Indians, which
extend many Millions of Years beyond the supposed Time of the World's Creation.

Wishing thee therefore, in this Point, to adhere to those Epocha's which are
most commonly received in the East, we will pass to Noah's Flood; wherein thou
must expect no other Light, save what is derived from Moses and the Hebrew
Doctors. Which has occasioned many to confound this Deluge, with those of
Deucalion and Ogyges, mentioned by Ovid; and other Gentile Writers. And indeed,
it may well start a Scruple in a Mind not over credulous; how it came to pass,
that this Universal Deluge of Noah (supposing it to be such) was recorded by no
other Nation on Earth, save only by the Jews? As if it had not equally
concerned all Mankind, to transmit to Posterity, the exact Time of so General a
Depopulation of our Race, made by Water. But so far are we from finding any
such Memoirs, that there are no Footsteps to be traced of the bare Matter of
Fact; or any Mention made of a Flood, save those of Ogyges and Deucalion.
Whence proceeded this Neglect in the Writers of Asia? What Interest,
Prepossession or Prejudice, could bias the Phoenician Antiquaries, tho Persian
Magi, the Chaldean Sages, the Indian Gymnosophists, or the Bonzi's of China,
from Registring such an Inundation, as (if the Story be true) swept away all
the Race of Adam from the Face of the Earth, except Eight Persons? Or, shall we
suppose that those Eight Persons combined together to conceal so great a
Catastrophe of Human Nature from their Posterity, making their Children
believe, that they were the First Mortals that ever lived on Earth? If so, how
come the Posterity of Sem to be favored with the First Discovery of the Truth?
And those of Japhet and Cham, to remain ignorant of their Fathers Deliverance
from the All destroying Deluge?

It has been usual with the Learned Nazarenes of late, to cry down the Writings
of Manethon the Egyptian, Berosus the Chaldean, Philo the Jew; with
Metasthenes, Annianus, and other Authors of Antiquity; because they have
delivered Relations which thwart the Errors of these Modern Writers: On the
same Score they contemn the Persian Antiquaries and Poets, with all the Records
of the East, as Fabulous and not worthy of Credit, because they have been more
careful than other Nations; especially than those in the West, to conserve the
History of the First Ages of the World entire, and free from Corruption. But,
with what Face will any Rational Man fasten this Calumny on Pristine Egypt;
that she was the Mother of Fables and Ignorance, which all the World knows to
have been the sole Nurse and Seminary of Science and Truth? Could not she
inform her self aright in the History of the World, who first taught the Use of
Letters to other Nations? Where was there any Monument of Antiquity that came
not out of Egypt? Or what Learning, that was not first derived from the City
of the Sun? Moses himself, that renowned Lawgiver of the Israelites, had his
Education at the Feet of the Egyptian Philosophers; and the whole System of
his Laws, is but a partial Epitome of their Statutes; which, by Adding,
Diminishing, and Altering, he fitted to the peculiar Tradition and Customs of
the Offspring of Jacob. And, why may we not suppose he did the same in the
Historical Part of his Books? Particularly so far as tended to beget Faith and
Reverence in his Readers, to the Sanctity of that which he celebrates under the
Title of the Holy Line: In which Noah was the Janus with Two Faces; one looking
backward, on the Old World; the other forward, regarding the Future Ages of the
New?

I speak with Freedom, and after the Manner of the Scepticks, believing that
the Boldest Disquisitions, even in Things which are of Divine Assurance, are
the best Means to establish the Truth. Let it not pass therefore, for an
Argument of Infidelity or Atheism (which some are pleased to lay to my Charge)
in that I strive to recover the lost Antiquities of the World, out of the Ruins
of Time and Ignorance: And, that to this End, I even call in Question those
Records, which being fathered on Moses, pass for Divine Oracles; which contain
Passages repugnant to Human Reason; and appear infinitely more Fabulous than
those, which for their Sake, are condemned as such, by the Superstitious
Nazarenes.

In all this I have not contradicted the Alcoran, which confirms the Scriptures
of the Old Testament; but declares at the same Time, that the Devil has
inserted many Errors into them: It Is only against these Errors I dispute,
adoring the Truth wherever I find it; though it were written in Parchment, made
of the Skin of an Infidel; which thou know, is as great an Abomination as
the Flesh of a Hog.

But, to return to Noah's Flood, or that of Ogyges or Deucalion's, which thou will; (for as the First is an Epoch of the Jews, so the Two Latter are
remarkable Aera's to the Gentiles) thou will do well in using all Three, and
leave the Scrutiny to others; for 'twill involve them in a Labyrinth of Knotty
Disputes.

The Next Epoch among the Gentiles, is taken from the Burning of Ida; whereby
Men occasionally found out the Way to melt Iron, and form it to their Necessary
Uses; and the next to that, is the Translation of Ganymede: Then the Building
of Troy: After that, the Expedition of Jason to get the Golden Fleece: And 45
Years after that, begins the great Epoch of the Grecians; the First Olympiad
instituted by Hercules: Next succeed the Olympiads of Iphitus. I should have
mentioned the Jewish Epoch; which begins with their Departure out of Egypt.
But, in Regard this is only used by the Writers of that Nation, thou will not
find it of any great Import. The Years of Nabonasser are of general
Observation: So is the Epoch from the Building of Rome: The Era of Alexander
the Great, is used by my Countrymen, the Arabian Writers. The Capitoline Games
is an Era, mentioned by some Roman Authors, but not of General Remark.

These are all that are of any Note in Ancient History; for as to the Augustan
Years, or those reckoned from the Battle of Actium, they continued not long,
and are but sparingly mentioned in History: But I had almost forgot the
Calippick Periods, which must not be omitted; and therefore I have placed them
at the Top of a Column in the Scheme: They commence from the Famous Battle
between Alexander and Darius at Arbela; wherein the Persians received a Total
Defeat.

As to more Modern History, thou will have Occasion to use the Christian Era,
the Hegyra of the Arabians, and the Persian Epoch. Thou must also observe the
Difference in the Julian and Gregorian Acounts; The Epoch of Dioclesian; the
Spanish Era: And above all Things, both in the Epocha's of the Ancient and
Modern History; thou must have a Special Regard to the Different Times of Year,
wherein each Distinct Era begins. For, they do not all commence in One and the
same Moon, but vary their Dates from the Beginning of the Year to the End. The
Want of due Care therefore in this Point, would breed a great Confusion in an
Universal History; and would render its Chronology Intricate and Obseure.

Follow the most Ancient Authorities, and be not discouraged at the Captious
Remarks of Modern Writers: For they grope in the Dark; and having set up to
themselves certain suppositious Landmarks, whereby to measure the Age of the
World, they Quarrel with the Ancient Sages for saying, It Is of longer Standing.
As if those, who are but of Yesterday, knew better the Extent of Time
backwards, than such as lived above Two Thousand Years Ago. Thus they retrench
the Primitive Successions of the Assyrian Monarchy; because they are dated
before their Jewish Epoch of Noah's Flood: And in the same Manner they deal
with the Egyptians and Indians of the East; because those Kingdoms were in
Being, long before the Time these Upstarts have set for the Beginning of the
World.

But, be not thou Partial to the Truth, nor Swear to the Words of such as have
Narrow Conceits of God and his Works: Doubtless, he is Omnipotent and Eternal;
and it is no Heresy to Affirm, That the Universe, both in Extent of Time and
Place, is Adaequate to those Incomprehensible Characters of its Architect.

Paris, 14th. of the. 12th. Moon, of the Year 1681.
LETTER XII.
To the Wisest of the Wise, the Key of the Treasures of Knowledge, the
Venerable Mufti.
I Have obeyed the Orders of thy Sanctity, in Writing to Ibro Kalphaser
Effendi, the Student. I have dispatched to him all the Necessary Instructions
he seems to want; together with a more Ample and Accurate Scheme of the Work,
to which thou have appointed him. When the Translators shall have procured the
Books I have named in a Catalogue, there will be nothing more wanting, but the
Compilers Care in delivering a Correct Chronology. Wherein it will be necessary
to deviate from the Nazarene and Jewish Historians; who seem to have curtailed
the Age of the World, and represented it infinitely Younger than it is, in the
Records of the most Ancient and unsuspected Writers.

The Ground of this Error, no Doubt, was partly the Ambition of the Jewish
Nation, to possess a Fame of greatest Antiquity, and to be accounted Older than
other Countries; and partly the Loss of such Monuments and Records, as were
Extant in other Nations before Noah's Flood.

Of all People on the Earth, the Jews seem to have been most Guilty of imposing
on the World an Opinion of their Antiquity, and Aggrandizing their Line above
all the Race of Adam. And from them, the Error is transmitted to the
Christians; who giving a Kind of implicit and blind Faith to the Hebrew
Historians, have confined the Age of the World within the Compass of Six
Thousand Years; whereas, if other Chronologies be true, it may, for ought we
know, be above Six Hundred Thousand Years Old.

The Egyptian Chronicles give us an Account of no less than Seventeen
Successive Dynasties, or Governments in that Nation, before the Jewish and
Christian Epocha's of the Origin of Time. The Assyrians boast of a Race of
Kings long before Noah's Flood; whose Succession continued down to the Reign of
Sardanapalus, without the least Interruption or Vacancy made by any such
Deluge. But the Chinese and Indians exceed all the Rest of the World in the
prodigious Antiquity of their Records. And among the latter, their Brachmans
assert the Age of the World to be little less than Infinite or Eternal. The
Laws and Histories of this Nation, (I speak of the Gentile Indians) are Written
in a Language which is now Antiquated, and has no Affinity with any other
Speech in the World. And the Books that are extant in this Language assert,
that it was the First and Primitive Speech of Mankind. None understand it at
this Day, but the Priests; and such as they Vouchsafe to teach it to, in their
Schools and Colleges. Yet this is the Language wherein are Written the
Histories of their first Kings, the Original of their Government, and the
Fables of the Worlds Immense Antiquity.

Certainly, it would be a Deed worthy of thy Munificence, to procure a
Translation of some of these Records, that so we may no longer be in the Dark,
as to the History of that Renowned Nation. And I could heartily wish, our
Chronology in this Work, might receive some Light from such unquestionable
Monuments.

The Christians declaim against every Thing, that does not suit with their
Tenets. They set up their private Errors as the Standard of Truth; and reject
whatsoever contradicts these, as Fabulous and Heretical. In this they act like
the Giant; who, when his Guests were too short for his Bed, caused them to be
stretched out with Engines; and when they were too long, he cut off their Legs
or Heads, to make 'em fit for their Lodging. So do the Nazarenes deal with
Ancient Writers, and especially with such as extend the Age of the World beyond
their Narrow Epoch; resolving not to admit of any Chronology, which exceeds
the Limits of their own. They Retrench whole Ages, and reduce the indefinite
Measure of past Time to a Span. They esteem the Indians as Fools, easily
imposed on by their Crafty Priests; and all the Records of the East pass with
them for Fables, or the Dreams of Poets. There is no Reason that the
enlightened Mussulmans should be their Apes, and Mock at Oriental History;
since we are Taught from our Cradles, That all Wisdom comes out of the East.

But they will object perhaps, How is it possible, That any Records could be
preserved, of the Times before the Flood, except such as were Saved in Noah's
Ark; since that Universal Inundation, swept away all the Rest of Mankind; and
must needs utterly Efface their Writings and Monuments? To this I Answer, That
they cannot prove this Inundation to be Universal: Not even out of their own
Scriptures; which I have narrowly examined in this Point, and find the Deluge
Limited to that Part of the Earth, which was Inhabited at that Time. Which
Verbal Limitation Supposes, that the whole Globe was neither Inhabited, nor
Drowned; or else they must allow a Tautology in the Scriptures.

Besides, it is evident from what the Bible says, concerning Noah's Preaching
an Hundred and Twenty Years before the Flood, that this was but a particular
Deluge, inflicted as a Punishment on that obdurate and impenitent Nation where
he lived, and who derided the Warnings of the Prophet. For it cannot be
supposed, That Noah wandered up and down over the Face of the Whole Earth, to
Preach every where, and warn all Mankind of the approaching Calamity. And
'twould seem Partial in God, to send him to Preach to one People only, and let
the rest of the World die in Ignorance. Either therefore there were no more
People in the World, than those of his own Nation; or at least, there were no
more to be drowned. He was employed in Building the Ark, during the Time that
he Preached; and the Alcoran makes mention of the Water that boiled in Noah's
Pot; which are convincing Arguments, that he went not out of his own Country;
unless we will suppose he carried the Ark, and his Pot along with him; one of
which is impossible, the other ridiculous; and both of them full of Absurdities.

Add to this, that it was impossible for Noah and his Three Sons, to Build an
Ark so big, as to contain all the Species of Clean Beasts and Birds by
Fourteens; and the Unclean by Fours; and to have Room enough to lay up
Provision sufficient to Nourish his Family, with such an Infinite Number of
Living Creatures: Some of which would multiply upon him every Moon; others, in
a little more Time; and all of them within the Year that they were confined to
the Ark: For so long did the Flood last.

It is evident then, that it was but a Particular Deluge; and that the Ark was
made only large enough to contain the Species of Beasts and Birds peculiar to
that Country. For if it were otherwise, another Difficulty will start, How all
the Innumerable Kinds of Beasts could Transport themselves from the Islands,
and Remote Regions, to the Ark; and from thence, back again to the Places from
whence they came; after the Flood was abated, and dried up?

A great deal more might be said; but this is sufficient to render it very
Probable, if not to Demonstrate, that this was no more than a particular
Deluge, by which God was resolved to Exterminate the Infidels out of that Land:
Even as he has inflicted Judgments as Terrible on other Nations; destroying
them by Lightning, or Vehement Winds, or by Armies of Wild Beasts; as the
Alcoran often intimates. Other Histories speak of. Whole Cities in Africa, with
all their Inhabitants, turned into Stone, in one Nights Time, as a Punishment
of their Wallowing in that Vice; whose very Imagination creates a Horror in
Chaste Souls.

Supposing therefore, that only Armenia, or the Adjacent Countries, were
overwhelmed in this Deluge; it will be easy to suggest, that the other
Nations, such as Egypt, China, and the Indies, might retain their Chronologies
incorrupt, from the Original Source of Time.

It is of great Importance to True History, that this point should be thoroughly
examined, and the Extent of the Flood adjusted. For, if it could be apparently
made out, that Noah's Flood was but such another as those of Ogyges and
Deucalion; all the Mists which darken Antiquity, would Vanish. The whole
Firmament of Chronology would become Clear and Serene; and we should Walk in
the Light of the Primitive Ages, without being dazzled, or forced to Wink.

Methinks, I behold this Light glimmering from afar like Aurora, the Cheerful
Harbinger of Approaching Day. Methinks I see the Splendor of Historical Truth
rising from the Orient, and Gilding the Tops of those Mountains; which the
Ignorance and Superstition of some, the Pride and Ambition of others, have
raised to hinder our Prospect of the far extended Ages of the Primitive World.
And without Rapture or Hyperbole, I dare be bold to presage, That a little more
Knowledge in the Indian Language and Histories, will bring those Things to
Light, which have been hid for many Thousands of Years, from the greatest Part
of Mankind.

Go on then, thou Sacred Patron of History; Go on to encourage this
Unparalleled Work! Send Messengers to the Indies; Men of Learning and
Prudence: Let them Court the Brachmans with the Promises of Inestimable
Rewards. Let them try to win those Renowned Philosophers, to come with their
Books to the Sanctuary of the World; that so this Universal History, may
Transcend all that have been Written before it; and that the Proud Contemners
of the Mussulmans, may have this Proverb Common among themselves, when they
would assert any Thing seriously, to say, It is as true as an Orable, or as the
Chronology of those who Believe the Alcoran. Great Light of the Faithful, Adieu.

Paris, 14th. of the 12th. Moon, of the Year 1681.
LETTER XIII.
To Cara Hali, Physician in Ordidinary to the Grand Signior.
I Am now arrived to a Great Age, and have rubbed through many Fatigues in my
Lifetime. I have stood the Brunt of a Thousand Perils, and undergone much
Hardship. Pains and Afflictions have invaded me in Body and Soul. Labor
Persecution and Grief, have been the Portion of my past Years. Now I would fain
Live at Ease, if 'twere possible.

Therefore I have Recourse to thee, my Old Friend, who have often afforded me
thy Counsel in Time of Need. I do not Address for Fashion sake, or to discover
the Vast Esteem I have for a Physician, whose Skilful Prescriptions have so
often saved my Life. No, No: I Am really in Want of thy Aid; and no Man but thy
self can Cure me.

It is not easy for me to define my Distemper, since it is Heterogeneous, and
complicated of many different Maladies. However, it is fit that thou should
be informed of the particular Symptoms, and the Causes, as far as I can guess
at 'em: And I can do no less, than make thee in Part my Confessor.

Methinks I feel the Reversion of my Youthful Vanities, Inherit the Entail of
my past Pleasures; which is certainly nothing but Pain and Torment. Those
Agonies which I laughed at in other Men, are now fallen to my own Share. The
Comedies of my Greener Years, are become the Sensible Tragedies of my
Weather-beaten Age. Whilst I Sweat, Frown, and make a Thousand Grimaces at the
Anguish given me by the Gout, Stone, Strangury, Cholick, Cramp, and other Acute
Diseases, which Excruciate me by Turns: I think the Divine Nemesis has
appointed some Devil, for an Inquisitor and Tormenter of every Bone, Vein,
Artery, Nerve, Muscle, and Gut in my Body. Surely, I Am laid in the First Pickle
of Nature's Wrath: I wish it may be the Last. For I do not in the least covet
her Ill Will.

Then I have my Successive Intervals of Dropsies, Asthma's, Dysenteries,
Fevers, Consumptions; and God knows how many more Species of Sickness. Yet
sometimes I am as seemingly well in Health, as Marogli Zudistan, the Old Aga
that lived just by the Obelisk in the Hippodrom, who ran away from his Father
in his Youth, and served Seventeen Years in the Wars of Persia; lived till he
was Eighty and Nine Years Old; yet never was let Blood, took Physic, or was
Sick in all his Life.

I protest, it is hard for me to guess at my own Constitution, or to find out
the Originals of those different Habits in my Body. Yet I have a feeling Sense
of that my self, which I cannot express to another.

Sometimes I think there is some Native and Radical Venom in my Body, derived
from the Influence of Malignant Stars, that had the Dominion at my Birth;
though how, or why it should be so, I am altogether Ignorant. Neither can any
Astrologer, with all his Schemes and Heavenly Figures, convince me which of the
Constellations or Planets did me the Fatal Injury. I give no Credit to their
Antiquated Tales of Trines, Conjunctions, Oppositions, Quartiles, and the Rest
of their Egyptian Jargon. I believe there may be someting True and Sacred at
the Bottom of Astrology; but it is covered with a Heap of Rubbish, Rules and
Observations. And they that take most Pains, dig deepest, and make the
Narrowest Search into the Ruins of that Noble Science, shall for one genuine
Pearl, find a Thousand Counterfeits; for one Truth, a Thousand Errors. It fares
with Astrology, as it does with Religion; which is Cantonized into Innumerable
Sects and Factions; each positively asserting, that they have the only
Incorrupt Laws of God: Whereas, if you make a Strict Scrutiny, you shall find a
very little Sincere Piety, but Abundance of Profaneness, Hypocrisy, and
Superstition.

Well, let it be how it will, whether the Stars have any Hand in the Plot of
Human Events or no; whether Saturn or Mars be Malevolent or Benign Planets, it
matters not much: No more does it to hear what they prate of all the Various
Aspects and Configurations of the other Stars. This I am sure of, That I endure
a great many Pains; which, let them be derived from Above or Below, are very
troublesome.

It Is possible, that all, or most Distempers which afflict Human Bodies in so
many different Kinds, may be but the Effects of One Original Indisposition, or
Artaxy, in our Animal Spirits; or some Hereditary Contagion in our Blood, or
Seminal Pests in our Humors; which Proteus-like, appears in different Forms;
Masquerading it up and down our Bodies in the Disguise of Fevers, Agues,
Phthisicks, Coughs, Consumptions, Rheumatisms, Pleurisies, and a Thousand more.
Or, perhaps our Vitals are not sound: Some Fall, or Knock, or other Accident in
our Infancy, might put us out of Frame: Or the Debaucheries of Youth may leave
their Sting behind them, to chastise our Riper Years, and teach us Wisdom
before it is too late.

I tell thee in short; all my Maladies, as I conjecture, owe their Original to
an Illtemper'd Spleen, and Vitiated Hypocondria. This, as I said before, I can
easily feel within my self, but can hardly express the Manner how it comes to
pass, with that Accuracy as is requisite to make another sensible of it: Only
in General Terms, I suppose it has made me extremely Melancholy at some Times;
and as excessively Merry and Froliksom at others; Both which Passions, thou
know, have an ill Influence on the Heart, Midriff, Pericardium, Liver, and
Lungs. This I have found by frequent and long Experience, though I will not
undertake to describe the Mechanic Operation of these Contiguous Vitals one
upon another: Especially to thee, who art the most Accomplished and Gurious
Anatomist of this Age. Suffice it to say, that I have perceived within my self,
the Violent and Forcible Contraction or Dilatation, Heating or Cooling of any
of these Interior Principal Parts; to be very pernicious to my Health; having
an immediate Influx on all the Rest, and so on the Blood, wherein is contained
the very Essence of this Mortal Life.

My Dear Physician, Our Bodies are perfect Machines, and subject to the like
Mischances. If but a Straw, a Pin, or any such Diminutive Triffle, get between
the Wheels of a Watch, it is presently disordered in its Motion. The whole Frame
of the Artificial Mechanism, is either at a Stand, or goes too slow, or fast;
or at least, very unevenly. So the Smallest Irregular Passion, in any of the
Chief Members of our Bodies, disturbs and violates the Peace of all the Rest;
it spoils their Harmony, and makes them jarr; just like a Viol, when some
blundering Hand has new-turn'd the Pegs, after a skilful Musician had put the
Instrument in Tune.

Besides, there is a strange Chain of Consequences without. Our Passions hurt
not our selves only, but others; and we receive again the Revenge of the Damage
we gave. For, there is an Eternal Circulation of Justice in the World. The
Whole Universe is but a Piece of Clock-Work, where one Motion begets Another to
Infinity, and one Stop in the Meanest Wheel would put all the Rest to an equal
Stand. We Mortals are Parts of this Grand Mechanism; and have our Particular
Shares in the Disasters that happen to the Whole. I, for my Part, by many
casual Jolts of Misfortune; the designed Bruises of Enemies, and the corroding
Teeth of Time am almost worn our: If thou will by thy Skill restore me again,
and put me in Frame, the Praise will be thy own: Otherwise, the First Artist
must even take me to Pieces, dissolve this Useless Mass; and when I am thus
reduced to my Original Element, he may new-mold my Ductile Substance, and
hammer it to what Fashion and End he pleases.

Only I beg of him, rather to make me any Four-Footed Beast, than a Spaniard, a
Dutchman, or a Jew, among Men: For these are the Scandals of Human Race.

Paris, 2d. of the 3d. Moon, of the Year 1682.
LETTER XIV.
To Abdel Melec Muli Omar, President of the College of Sciences at Fez.
I Have had to do lately with Men pretending to Astrology: Persons of many
Words and ostentous Expressions, but of little Sense, and less Knowledge, even
in the very Science they boast of. I can compare them to none more properly,
than to those Travelers, who visit Foreign Countries, that they may come home
laden with Romances and Fables; with Trifling Remarks and Jejune Observations,
to make a crackling Noise among the Vulgar; whilst Wise Men laugh at their
Folly, in that after all their Extravagant Rambles Abroad, they are not able to
give a Rational Account of any Thing to the purpose; and are perfectly
Strangers to the Place of their own Nativity. So these pretended Star-Gazers,
whilst they boast of being familiarly acquainted with all the Regions of the
Sky; can draw Maps, Charts, and Figures of the Remote Heavens, delineate the
Houses of the Zodiac, the Course of the Signs, the Governments, Laws, and
Influences of the Planets and Constellations; are ignorant of their own
Domestic Region, this Globe whereon they dwell. They know not the Things with
which they are daily conversant; much less can they penetrate into the Secrets
of the Earth, or discover the Things that are under their Feet.

Wherefore turning my Back on these vain Sciolists, I approach with Reverence
to Thee, who art accomplished in the Mysteries of those Worlds Above, and this
below. I have two Difficulties upon my Mind, which I beseech thee to solve. The
first is concerning the Original of the Blacks or Negroes; the other about the
Flux and Reflux of the Sea.

I was in Company not long ago with an Eminent Physician of Paris, a Person of
great Abilities, a Searching Spirit, and very Curious in his Natural
Observations. Among other Subjects which we discoursed of, we fell at length
upon the Grand Division of Mankind into Blacks and Whites. Which carried us so
far, as to enquire into the Causes of this Difference in their Color; whether
it proceeded from the Various Heat and Influence of the Sun, or from the Diverse
Qualities of the Climates wherein they live; or finally, from some Specific
Properties in themselves, in the Natural Frame and Constitution of their Bodies.

He was of Opinion, That if Adam were White, all his Children must be so too;
if Black, all his Posterity must be of the same Color. Therefore, by
Consequence, either the Blacks or the Whites are not the Descendents of Adam.
This he endeavored to prove by many plausible Arguments; but he insisted
chiefly on one Experiment he had seen made, when present at the Dissection of a
dead Negro. For he affirmed, That between the Outward and Inward Skin of the
Corpse, was found a Kind of Vascular Plexus, spread over the whole Body like a
Web or Net, which was filled with a Juice as Black as Ink; from whence he
concluded, the Outward Skin received its Tincture. And in regard there is no
such Web or Net to be found under the Skin of a White Man, it served to him as
an Argument, That they were Two different Species or Races of Men, from the
very First Original of Mortals; Nature having given the One Kind an Inward as
well as an Outward Characteristick to distinguish them from the Other, in this
diverse Organization of their Bodies.

I must confess, it has been my Opinion a long Time, That the Negroes or
Blacks, owe their Color to a far higher and more ancient Original, than to the
Curse which Noah pronounced on Cham and all his Posterity, as is commonly
believed. And I could even grant them to be of a different Race from that of
Adam: For it is no new Thing with me, to conceive, That Mankind had a different
Original from that which is Recorded in the Book that goes under Moses's Name.
And I dare be bold to say, That that Book [of Genesis] was either not penned by
Moses; or if it were, that it has been much corrupted in Aftertimes; and that
at present there is not any known True Copy of it in the World. For how can we
Father so many Incongruities, as are to be found in that Book, on the Holy
Prophet? Or if he were really the Author of such Contradictions and
Absurdities, how can we believe him, without forfeiting our Sense. God gave us
our Reason to be a Lamp and a Prop, to light and support us as we walk through
the Dark and Uncertain Wilderness of this Mortal Life; not as an Ignis Fatuus
to misguide us, or a Reed of Egypt, which deceives him that leans on it, and
causes him to fall. He has squared our Faculties to the Works of Eternity. Our
Native Idea's of Things are exact and true, till adulterated by the false
Strokes of Education, Superstition, and Foreign Error. Thus in my Infancy, I
remember, I could not conceive any Limits to the Extent of Space, not any
Beginning to the Age of the World. And I have retained the same Notion of
Infinite and Eternal Matter ever since, even to these Gray Hairs. So of the
Original of Mankind, I believe not the narrow and partial Genealogies of the
Jews, who only strove to exalt themselves and their own Lineage above all the
Nations on Earth besides,

For ought I know, there were as many Original Protoplasts of Mortals, as there
are different Nations, speaking various Radical and Maternal Languages; obeying
several Forms of Government, and practicing distinct Maxims and Principles. Or,
it is possible, the East produced One sort of Men, the West Another; whilst the
North and the South brought forth an equal Variety. Who knows the Force of the
Constellations and Heavens Above; or the hidden Virtues which exhale from the
Depths Below? These may differ as the Climates do: And the first Indigence of
the Earth, might all be marked with the Various Affections, Passions and
Dispositions of Her their Common Parent; even as Children are nowadays
stigmatized with the Lust of a teeming Mother.

Oh that it were possible with Theseus to descend into the Bowels of this
Globe, and come up alive and safe again! That we might dive into the Abysses
below, and visit the Caverns of perpetual Darkness! That we might creep along
by the Roots of the ancient Mountains, or through the Channels of Mines, a
Thousand Miles beneath the Surface! There would I seek for the Fountains of
hidden Waters, which run to and fro in the Veins of the Earth; I would find out
the Subterranean Seas, Lakes, and Rivers, which feed our Upper Ocean with its
Briny Floods. And perhaps there I should discover the True Cause of the Flux
and Reflux of the Sea, which has so puzzled all Philosophy.

Tell me, Thou Sage of Sages, Can all the Fountains, Rivulets, mighty Channels,
Lakes and Seas, which we see on the Superficies, be constantly supplied only by
Showers from Heaven, which in some Places fall very sparingly or not at all?
Could the constant Regular Tides and Ebbs be still maintained by the uncertain
fickle Rains and Snows? Or is there not an Eternal Circulation of Waters through
the various Hollownesses of the Earth?

In a Mine at Bern in Switzerland, about 230 Years ago, there was found a whole
Ship 50 Fathom deep, with all its Tackle, and the dead Bodies of many Seamen:
I ask, How that Ship came there?

Who can give me an Account of the many Whirl-Pools, Vorago's and Charybdis's,
there are in diverse Seas? There is one in the North of the World, not far from
Moscovy, Forty Miles in Compass, which when the Tide comes in, swallows up all
the Sea with an insupportable Noise, above that of Thunder, with Ships, Fish,
and whatsoever else comes within that Fatal Stream; then at the Ebb it throws
them up again with equal Fury. Doubtless, there are innumerable such Devouring
Jaws of the Earth, under the various Bottoms of the Sea. And I will never
trouble my self any farther for the Solution of this Grand Scruple, which cost
the Stagyrite his Life.

Venerable Sage, Tell me thy Opinion of these Things; for I could bring
Instances enough to write a Volume on this Subject. But I am brief with thee,
who can not improve by any Thing I can say; who write this as one that begs
Instruction, and not to teach or inform an Oracle.

Paris, 20th. of the 5th. Moon, of the Year 1682.
LETTER XV.
To the Kaimacham.
HERE IS a Race of Infidels newly started in France; who, if they be let alone,
may, for ought I know, in Time depopulate not only this Kingdom, but the whole
Earth. A Society of Miscreants, Sorcerers, Magicians, Witches, and I know not
what. They secretly steal Children away from their Parents, and offer them in
Sacrifice to Demons. Their Blood they save to compound horrible Poisons and
execrable Enchantments. The Bread of Paris and other Cities, is become like the
Fruit of the Tree Zacon, which overshadows the Center of Hell; full of deadly
Venom. The Fountains of once living and refreshing Waters, are now tainted with
the Contagion of Styx, Phlegeton, and Cocytus. There is no Safety in eating or
drinking. Men choose to perish by Hunger or Thirst, rather than taste the very
Fruits of the Earth. They undergo a Voluntary Famine in the midst of Infinite
Plenty. And whilst there is an Affluence of all things, which use to support
our Mortal Life, People complain of Scarcity, and die for Want of wholesome
Food.

In the mean While, no Body can tell the meaning of it; but a diligent Enquiry
is made; Some are arrested on Suspicion, others are convicted by undeniable
Evidence, yet will confess nothing: They prove 'em guilty in Matter of Fact,
and put 'em to more than the common Tortures, but can extort not a Syllable
from 'em, which shall discover their Accomplices, or reveal the bottom Secret
of this Nefandous Practice.

Arise! Arise! Arise! Medea, Circ^, Aesculapius, or some other Powers more
expert in Nature's hidden Force: Arise, I say, and prop the fainting Relics
of Human Race. New Deaths invade the World: Men speak* seem stout; they walk
the Streets, are merry, brisk and gay; and yet in the Height of Laughter, down
they drop and die. This is very strange; but more so it is, that even after
Death, when they are Cold, their Cha^s remain still distorted in the same
Comical Figure, not much unlike the Statue of the Satyr, which stands behind
the G^^^ of the Women's Apartment in the Ser^^^.

I have indeed read of a Fruit, which whosoever tastes, will die I aughing: And
of the Torpedo, which if any Man touch, though with a Staff or Pole in his
Hand, immediately it benums him, and takes away his Sense of Feeling: But I
always ascribed these Stories to the Romantic Humor of Pliny, or at least, of
those from whom he collected the pleasant Paragraph of his Natural History.
But, now I Am convinced, that it is possible these things may be true.

In a Word, I tell thee plainly, that were it not for honest Eliachim the Jew,
poor Mahmut must starve himself. For, I would rather die weeping and famishing,
deploring and lamenting the Miseries of Human Life, than pass to Orcus in an
Artificial Good Humor, only framed by the Force of Poisons and Charms, but
Eilachim and all the Jews are singular in their Diet: They take Care not to be
polluted by Abominable Infidels: They will not eat the Bread of the Christians,
nor taste of their Flesh. The Law of Moses for bids it, and they are very
curious in observing it: They have their Corn-Merchants, Millers, Bakers,
Butchers, Poulterers, and Fish-mongers by themselves; Their Fruiterers also,
and such as serve 'em with Water, Wine, or any other Beverage: They will not
easily be cheated of their Lives, through the Complaisance of what they call
Good Nature: Neither French nor Dutch, Italians or Spaniards, shall impose upon
them: They eat and drink more nicely (I speak of the better Sorts) than the
Infidel Kings of the Earth.

Herein lies my Safety amidst the Common Danger: I never eat or drink of late,
but at E^^^chi^'s House. For, I dare not; so well grounded are the Fears of
Poison, in the Society of Nazarenes at this Time in Paris.

By the God of my Fathers, and my God, I would not willingly go down to the
Shades, in a Vehicle of Aia mal^, Xerim, or any other subtle Eastern Opiate.
I Would rather fairly stand the Fate of a Bullet, Dagger, Sword, or any Thing that
with Candor threatens us aboveboard. But, to be sneakingly undermined,
circumvented, etc. goes against the Grane, by the Wounds of Mahomet, which he
received before the Holy Flight.

O Ali, Ali! This Oath brings thy Fame to my Remembrane, who durst stand
against the Sword of Ali, when he was in his Wrath? Ali, the True Successor of
the Prophet!

Do not take me for a Kysilbasch^, Heretic, Infidel, etc. For, I am of an
untainted Race, a True Believer, a Mussulman in all Senses: But I hate
Phanaticism, and factious Bigotry: Though we hate the Persians, and pursue 'em
as Incorrigible Heretics, may we not love and honor the Cail^^h whom they
follow? So we are professed Enemies to the Christians, and yet we reverence
Jesus the Son of Mary, the Christians Messiah.

But to return to the French, the King has erected a Kind of Inquisition-Court,
which is called the Chamber of Poisons. Here all Persons suspected of these
Diabolical Practices, are examined, and put to the Torture. Also Millers,
Bakers, Butchers, Fruiterers, Vintners, and other Trades which sell any thing
to eat or drink* are sworn in this Chamber, and undergo a severe Scrutiny. So
do all Physicians, Druggists, and Apothecaries. ^dicts are daily published,
whereby all Persons pretending to a Spirit of Divination, etc. are commanded
forthwith to depart the Kingdom, under the Penalty of Death. It is ordered
also, that whosoever has abused any Sentence of the Written Law, in making of
Enchantments, Spells, Charms, or any Thing beside or beyond the Force of
Nature, shall be severely punished. The same Edict forbids all Use of Poisons,
unless, they be such as are Ingredients of wholesome Medicines, and help to
compound those Physical Preparations which are necessary to conserve the Life
of Men. And that even these shall not be sold to any Person whatsoever, but
only to those who by their Art and Profession are obliged to make use of them.
Abundance of Care is taken both by the State and the Church, by Public
Magistrates and Private Persons, to discover the Authors of these Inhuman
Tragedies, and to prevent the like for the Future. Every Man's Eye is upon his
Neighbor, and they of the same House are jealous, one of another. The Father
suspects and narrowly watches the Motions of his Son, and the Mother will not
trust the Daughter of her Delight. Children are wary of their Parents, and one
Brother or Sister dares not eat or drink any thing prepared by another: Neither
the Ties, nor even the Sacred, Bonds of Friendship it self, are sufficient to
conquer Men's Fears and Apprehensions of being poisoned.

In the mean while, the Inhabitants have felt a terrible Blow from the French
Arms. For the King of France having received some A^^^ont from those Corsairs,
gave Orders to the Sieur Die Quesne. Lieutenant, General of his Naval Forces,
to go and Bombard their City, which was performed accordingly, in the Beginning
of the 9th. Moon: And that Bld Warrior threw so many Bombs into the Town, that
he ruined a considerable Part of it, overthrew the Principal Mosque, and killed
many Thousands of Men: Which obliged the Algerines to become humble Supplicants
for Peace: And it was granted them on certain Conditions, advantageous enough
for France.

This Monarch is wholly addicted to War, in which also he is no less expert
than he is in Matters of State! And he loves to see his Subjects follow his
Example. To this End, he has lately established Two Seminaries; One in the
Citadel of Tournay; the Other in that of Metz, where a certain Number of
Cadets or Younger Brothers, who can prove themselves descended of Noble Blood,
are educated at the King's Charge, and taught the Method and Art of
Fortifications, with other Exercises of Military Discipline.

This is a great Encouragement to the young Gentry and Nobles, and fills 'em
with Glorious Emulations, every one being ambitious to excel another in these
Heroic Arts. And the King will never want for able Soldiers, to serve him in
any Station at Home or Abroad.

Illustrious Kaimacham, this is all the News I can at present send thee. May
God protect thee and all the True Faithful from the ^ly Attempts of Magicians,
Witches, and Poisoners. As for me, I know not how long I shall escape their
Snares. But I Will be as cunning as I can. Sage Minister, Adieu.

Paris, 4th. of the 7th. Moon, of the Year 1682.
LETTER XVI.
To Nathan Ben Saddi, a Jew at Vienna.
I Received a Dispatch Yesterday, signed with thy Name; but not writ by thy own
Hand, nor in thy accustomed Style; and yet there is no mention made of
Sickness, a broken Arm, or any other Misfortune which might hinder thee from
penning it thy self; which fills me with Abundance of Doubts and Scruples. If
the Palsy, or any other Disease, has taken from thee the Use of thy Limbs, I
hope it has not deprived thee of thy Reason: That Faculty would have prompted
thee to explain this Mysterious Way of Correspondence, by the same Hand which
wrote the Letter. I know not what to think of it. 'Twas very odd, thus to leave
me in the Dark, and thou can not blame me, If in this Obscurity, I stumble
upon Suspicious Thoughts. I am not Jealous of thy Fideli^y; though such a
Conduct as this would make a Man fear, the worst. But I rather apprehend the
Effect of thy Credulity and Negligence. In a Word, I am afraid, lest some
prying busy-Body has got a Glimpse of our Secret Business, and mutual
Intelligence, and so put this Trick upon me in thy Name, to see what Answer I
will make; which they may think easy to do, by intercepting the Letters which
are addressed to thee by the Post. To prevent which, I send this by a Private
Messenger. We cannot be too cautious in such Cases; where one false Step
betrays all, and lays our Designs open to the World.

I conjure thee to be very plain and particular in thy next; satisfy me in all
things. For, I am very anxious at present: My Mind is full of Thorns and
Briars: I shall not write to any of the Sublime Ministers, till I have thy
Answer by the same Messenger I send. Therefore dispatch him with Expedition.

As to Count Tecli's Business, if this Information be really thy own, and not
sent by some sly Interloper; I like the Project well enough; and will
communicate it to the Grand V^^ir, or the Kaimacham, without taking Notice of
thy Overlight in putting me to this Fright and Trouble. The Count has a good
Character among the French, who are no Friends to the House of Aust^ia, or
Ennemies to the Grand Signior. This is certain, New Spirits must be raised, in
the Room of those who are taken away. For, Conspiracies of this Nature must not
be given over, upon every. Discouragement. Care must be taken, that the
Hungarian Faction be constantly supplied with fresh and active Heads, like the
Hydra, as fast as the Old ones are cut off. And I know not where they could
have pitched upon a more likely Man than Count Tecli: He comes of a good
Parentage, and his Ancestors were all along Patriots, and Sticklers for their
Country Liberties. They ever opposed the Tyrannous Encroachments of the House
of Austria.

Carcoa's Journal relates many remarkable Passages of the Tecli's; whose
Castle, he says, was the usual Rendezvous of all the Malecontent Lords in those
Parts, who were weary of the German Yoke. There they caball'd and held their
Private Consults: There they hatched their Plots against the Emperor. I read
this Journal daily, finding no small Pleasure in it, and Abundance of Profit.
For, it contains Select Memoirs of diverse curious Transactions and Events, that
happened both in Public and Private during his Residence at Vienna. And I take
the greater Delight in reading him, because his Style is very short, yet
comprehensive; familiar also and free, without Impertinences or Solecisms: He
gives one not the Fatigue of dwelling long upon a Period, to hammer out the
Sense of Attentive Study. But he couches his Words like a. Train of Gunpowder,
which is no sooner lighted at one. End, but in an Instant the other catches the
Flame: So you can hardly cast your Eyes on. Three Words at the* Beginning of a
Paragraph or Sentence in Carcoa's Journal, but you anticipate his Scope in all
the Rest. This argues a great Se^^^ity of Spirit in the Author: and An Elegance
not to be met with, but in a Mind void of Clouds. Besides, he relates no
Trivial Matters, or Tales fit only for Women and Boys: But he treats altogether
of Weighty and Important Affairs; Intriegues of State; Remarkable Strokes of
War; Subtle Overtures of Peace: Which he gracefully intermixes with Parallels
of History; with Characters and Descriptions of Countries and their
Inhabitants: And finally, with Philosophical, Moral and Political Remarks: All
very agreeable and pleasant.

Nathan, I counsel thee to imitate his Example, and leave some Memorial behind
thee of thy Industry and Virtue. To this End apply thy self at Spare Hours to
reading, but be sure use Caution in the Choice of Books; else it is but Time
misspent. Be curious in Searching out the most excellent Treatises: For vain
and trifling Subjects, are fit only for the Fire. Have a special Regard to the
Credit of such Historians as fall in your Way; bestow not a Moment on those
that are not Authentic; left Old Time call thee to an Account for the Waste.
Then accustom thy Pen to make Epitomes, Abstracts and Collections out of what
thou read, and learn to be nice and cleanly in thy Language: A squalid Style
turns the Stomach of a Reader; whereas Polite Expressions, whet his Appetite,
and cause him to devour whole. Volumes with a Gust.

After all, I bid thee farewell, and advise thee not to neglect the Grand
Signior's Business, but mind the main Chance.

Paris, 5th. of the 8th. Moon, of the Year 1682.
LETTER XVII.
To the Kaimacham.
I Shall now acquaint thee with an Accident, which extremely surpised me, when
I first heard of it, and has still left me in Confusion. About Seven Weeks are
past since I received a Letter, dated as from Vienna; which Nathan Ben Saddi
subscribed, but I presently perceived it was not his own Handwriting; which
made me very uneasy and full of Careful Thoughts. For, it contained Matters of
Importance, Secrets of the Hungarian League, with a Particular Project relating
to Count Tecli, a great Lord in that Country.

I considered, that if the Letter were writ with Nathan's Knowledge, and by his
Order; he could not be so forgetful, as not to bid the Scribe, whoever he was,
give me an Account of the Reasons which hindered him from Writing to me himself.
For, he must needs imagine, I should be troubled, and in no small Astonishment,
to find Matters of that dangerous Consequence, addressed to me in an unknown
Hand, under his Name. Or else I thought, he took me for a Man that made no
Reflections on things. I knew not well what to conclude, amidst so many
probable Uncertainties.

However, I was resolved to act more securely, and with greater Caution on my
Side, in Order to a Right Information in this Mystery. Wherefore, not daring to
trust the Posts, I dispatched away a Private Courier to Vienna, One in whom I
can confide, with ample Instructions, and a Letter to Nathan Ben Saddi:
Wherein, among other Things, I desired him to tell me the Meaning of this
Conduct.

My Messenger is honestly and safely returned again to Paris, but no Nathan Ben
Saddi to be heard of. All the Account he could learn of him, was, that about
Eight: Weeks ago he went out of his House, with a Stranger, who pretended
Business with him at the Burse or Exchange: But neither he nor the Stranger
have been seen or heard of since; only they said, that a Day or Two after
Nathan was missing, there was the Dead Body of a Man seen floating in an Eddy
of the Danube, hard by the Bridge; but the Face was so mangled and disfigured
with Wounds and Slashes, that it was impossible for any to distinguish, or
discern who it was. Yet, Nathan's Friends were apt to suspect it was he
himself, and that he had been privately murdered and afterward thrown into the
River.

This is the Substance of what my Messenger could learn of him: And he was
forced to use Abundance of Caution in Enquiring so far; lest by being less
reserved, he might have brought himself into Trouble, run the Hazard of being
put to the Torture, and discovering what I entrusted him with, besides other
Inconveniences.

Praise be to God, he escaped all Scrutiny, and is come back safe with my
Letter. But what is become of that Jew, God knows. Perhaps some of his own
Nation have made him away privately, to prevent his turning Mussulman: For, he
was unsettled in his Religion; and if amidst his waverings, he seemed to have
any Particular Bias stronger than Ordinary, it was that which inclined him to
the Faith of True Believers. And if he perished on this Account, we ought to
esteem him as a Martyr of God and his Prophet. But, I must confess, I that well
knew the Shallowness and Inconstancy of Nathan's Temper, with the Superstitious
Attach which he ever had for his Rabbi's, have hardly Faith or Charity enough
to believe, his Zeal for the Alcoran would carry him to Martyrdom. Neither can
I forbear thinking, there is something worse in it.

But all this which seems so strange to me, may be well known to the Ministers
of the August Port, by whose Order perhaps he has received a Secret Death, as a
Chastisement of some Crimes they have found him guilty of; and which they could
not inflict openly in a Country of Enemies and Infidels Or, it may be, he has
privately withdrawn himself, to prevent such a Punishment; being conscious that
he deserved it. Be it how it pleases God, and my Superiors, I humbly crave
Advice and Instructions about the Ordering my Bills and other Matters. Sage
Kaimacham, Adieu.

Paris, 6th. of the 11th. Moon, of the Year 1682.
LETTER XVIII.
To Dgnet Oglou.
THIS comes to thy Hands by the same Post with one to the Kaimacham; therefore
I pray thee be quick in executing the Contents of it. I have not One Friend in
the Seraill' whom I dare trust with such a Secret: Thou art my only Refuge at a
Juncture which requires Fidelity, Prudence, and a dexterous Conduct in diving
and searching into a certain Mystery, which, for ought I know, may concern my
Life.

To tell thee in short, Nathan Ben Saddi, the Sultan's Agent Incognito at
Vienna, a Jew by Descent and Religion, is, I fear, privately murdered by some
Order from the Divan. But, for what Reasons I know not, unless it were in
Compliance with the Old Maxims of the (...) Port, which seldom suffer any Slave
to go to his Sepulcher in Peace, who has served the Grand Signior many Years in
any eminent Station. He has been missed at Vienna these Eight Weeks, and within
a Day or two after his First Absence, the Body of a Dead Man was found floating
on the Danube, but so disfigured with Wounds, as it could not possibly be known
who he was; which gives me the greater Suspicion that it was he. And if so, I
may expect to be served so my self in a little Time. For my Turn is next.

Therefore, if thou have any Love or Friendship for me, be watchful on my
Behalf: Attend the Whispers of the Court, and observe the Language of those who
discourse with their Fingers Ends. The Cast of the Eye many Times discovers the
Secret Sentiments of the Heart: So does a Shrug of the Shoulder, a Pout of the
Lip, or any other Artificial Gesture. They are all Significant and expressive
of what Affections and Thoughts we harbor within. Thou know how to act the
Mute upon Occasion, as well as any in the Seraill'. I conjure thee to use great
Dexterity, and no less Expedition in unravelling this Secret. Feign to know
something more than thou do, that so thou may really learn what I would
have thee know concerning Nathan's Fate, and mine too, if possible. Let no cold
Indifference make thee neglect this due Care of thy Friend's Interest and Life.
We were born to serve one another with mutual Zeal and Fidelity. The good
Offices thou do me, are but lent to be repaid again with others, whenever
Opportunity presents it self. But these Arguments are superfluous; thou need
no Spurs to do a Generous Action. I know thou love me and wilt be active at
this Juncture on my Account.

In full and entire Confidence of this, I take my Repose under the Shadow of
the Divine Mercy; begging of God, to afford thee a Shelter in Time of Peril;
and that when thou and I have weathered all the Tempests of this Mortal Life,
we may triumphantly enter the Port of Paradise, and enjoy one another in
Eternal Felicity.

Paris, 6th. of the 11th. Moon, of the Year 1682.
FINIS.
BOOKS Written by Sir Roger L'Estrange, and Printed for J. Hindmarsh and R.
Sare.
1. FAbles of Aesop and other Eminent Mythologists, with Morals and
Reflections, Folio. 2. Senean's Morals, by way of Abstract, the Fifth Edition,
Octavo. 3. Select Colloquies out of Erasmus Roterodamus; pleasantly
representing several Superstitious Levities that were crept into the Church of
Rome in his Days; the Second Impression corrected and amended, with the
Addition of Two Colloquies to the former, Octavo. 4. Tully's Offices in Three
Books, turned out of Latin into English; the Fourth Edition corrected, Twelves.
5. A Guide to Eternity, extracted out of the Writings of the Holy Fathers and
Ancient Philosophers; written originally in Latin, by John Bona, and now done
into English; the Third Edition.
The Genuine Epistles of the Apostolical Fathers, by William Wake, D.D.


