Fair Warnings TO A Careless World: In the Pious LETTER WRITTEN By the Right
Honorable JAMES Earl of MARLEBURGH, a little before his Death; TO The Right
Honorable, Sir HVGH POLLARD, Comptroller of his Maties Household. WITH The LAST
WORDS of CXL. and upwards, of the most Learned and Honorable person^ of
England, and other parts o^ the world.

London, Printed for Samuel Speed at the Rainbow in Fleet Street. 1665.

To the Right Honorable, Sir HVGH POLLARD, Comptroller of his Maties Household.
Right Honorable,
WHat influence our Saviors injunction to Penitents, (When thou art converted,
confirm thy brethren) had on our honorable Convert's generous Soul, appears
from these words subjoyned to the Noblest Retractation that ever was made since
that of S t Augustines [And as many of my friends besides as you will; or any
else that desire it. I pray grant this request.] What power the great
obligation of friendship, and the greater of doing good, had on your Honors
Goodness, appears by the numerous Copies you were pleased to communicate: with
no less design I am sure, and I hope with no less success then the Reformation
of a sinful Nation, to gratify the Curiosity of some persons therein, the
Piety of others, and the general Wish of all, becoming impossible by
transcription (a way by reason of the Carelessness of some transcribers, and the
Knavery of others, not so exact as the Paper it self, or its Author deserves)
is endeavored by Printing; in either of which capacities what good soever it
may do, (and it promises with Gods blessing not a little) together with these
other Papers of the same tendencie, which demonstrate that men of all qualities
whatsoever, when they reflect seriously on themselves, and the state of things
without them, in their last and best thoughts conclude, that it is man's great
interest to be seriously and strictly religious, shall redound to your Honors
account, in that day wherein they that convert sinners from the error of their
ways, shall shine as the Stars for ever. I am

Your most humble servant, HENRY SMITH.

FAIR WARNINGS TO A Careless World.
A Letter from the Right Honble James Earl of Marleburgh, a little before his
death in the Battle at Sea, on the coast of Holland; To the Right Honorable
Sir Hugh Pollard, Comptroller of his Majesty's Household.
SIR,
I Believe the goodness of your nature, and the friendship you have always born
me, will receive with kindness this last office of your friend. I am in health
enough of body, and (through the mercy of God in Jesus Christ) well disposed in
mind. This I premise, that you may be satisfied that what I write proceeds not
from any phantasing terror of mind, but from a sober resolution of what
concerns my self, and earnest desire to do you more good after my death, then
mine Example (God of his mercy pardon the badness of it) in my lifetime may do
you harm. I will not speak ought of the vanity of this world; your own age and
experience will save that labor: But there is a certain thing that goes up
and down the world, called Religion, dressed and pretended phantastically, and
to purposes bad enough, which yet by such evil dealing loses not its being:
The great good God has not left it without a witness, more or less, sooner or
later, in every man's bosom, to direct us in the pursuit of it, and for the
avoiding of those inextricable disquisitions and entanglements our own frail
Reasons would perplex us withal. God in his infinite mercy has given us his
holy Word, in which as there are many things hard to be understood: so there is
enough plain and easy, to quiet our minds, and direct us concerning our
future being. I confess to God and you, I have been a great neglecter and (I
fear) despiser of it: (God of his infinite mercy pardon me the dreadful fault.)
But when I retired my self from the noise and deceitful vanity of the world, I
found no true comfort in any other resolution, then what I had from thence: I
commend from the bottom of my heart the same to your (I hope) happy use. Dear
Sir Hugh, let us be more generous then to believe we die as the beasts that
perish; but with a Christian, manly, brave resolution, look to what is eternal.
I will not trouble you farther. The only great God, and holy God, Father, Son
and holy Ghost, direct you to an happy end of your life, and send us a joyful
resurrection. So prays old James, near the coast of Holland.

Your true friend, MARLEBURGH.
April 24. 1665. I beseech you commend my love to all mine acquaintance;
particularly, I pray you that my Cousin Glascock may have a sight of this
Letter, and as many of my friends besides as you will, or any else that desire
it.

I pray grant this my request.



King CHARLES the First
HAd that sense of Religion upon his spirit, as that the one act of passing the
Bill for the Earl of Strafford's death, and the other to the prejudice of the
Churches of England and Scotland, troubled him as long as he lived, and brought
him not only to vow as he did before the most Reverend Father in God G. Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, to do Penance for them; but also to a resolution
never to allow the least thing, though it was but the little Assemblies
Catechism, against his conscience. And when it was told him his death was
resolved on, he said, I have done what I could to save my life, without losing
my soul, and sinning against my conscience. Gods will be done.

Sir WALTER RAWLEIGH
AT the meeting usually held with the Virtuosi in the Tower, discoursing of
Happiness, urged, that it was not only a freedom from Diseases and pains of
the body, but from anxiety and vexation of spirit; not only to enjoy the
pleasures of Sense, but peace of Conscience, and inward tranquillity; to be so,
not for a little while, but as long as may be, and, if it be possible, for
ever. And this happiness, so suitable to the immortality of our souls, and the
eternal state we must live in, is only to be met with in Religion.

Mr HOWARD,
Afterward the Learned Earl of Northampton, being troubled with Atheistical
suggestions, put them all off this way, viz. If I could give any account how I
my self, or any thing else, had a being without God; how there came so uniform
and so constant a consent of mankind, of all ages, tempers and educations,
(otherwise differing so much in their apprehensions) about the being of God,
the immortality of the soul, and Religion; in which they could not likely
either deceive so many, or being so many could not be deceived. And when it was
urged that Religion was a State-policie to keep men in awe; he replied, That he
would believe it; but that the greatest Politicians have sooner or later felt
the power of Religion in the grievous lashes of their consciences, and
dreadfulness of their apprehension about that state wherein they must live for
ever.

DAN. HEINSIUS,
A Master (as Seldom expresses it, tam severiorum quam amoeniorum Literarum,
History-professor of Leyden, Secretary and Bibliothecary of the same
University, and appointed Notary of the Synod of Dort, said at last, Alas, as
to humane Learning, I may use Solomon's expressions, That which is crooked
cannot be made strait.

We may understand it several ways. First, all our Knowledge, by reason of man's
corruption, is but a crooked, ragged, impedite Knowledge; and for that reason,
a vexation to the mind: for Rectitude is full of beauty, and Crookedness of
deformity. In man's Creation, his Understanding should have walked in the strait
path of Truth, should have had a distinct view of Causes and Effects in their
immediate successions: but now, sin has mingled such Confusion with things,
that the Mind is fain to take many crooked and vast compasses for a little
uncertain knowledge. Secondly, the weakness of all natural knowledge is seen in
this, that we cannot any way either prevent or correct the crookedness of the
smallest things, much less to make a man solidly or substantially happy.
Thirdly, That which is crooked cannot be made strait. It is impossible for a
man, by the exactest knowledge of natural things, to make the nature of a man,
which by sin is departed from its primitive rectitude, strait again; to repair
that image of God, which is so much distorted: when they knew God, they
glorified him not as God, they became vain in their imaginations, and their
foolish heart was darkened: It Is the Apostle's speech of the wisest Heathen,
Aristotle, the most rational Heathen man that the world knows of, in his
Doctrine confesses the disability of moral Knowledge to rectify the
intemperance of Nature; and made it good in his Practice: for he used a common
Strumpet to satisfy his lust. Seneca likewise, the exactest Stoic that we
meet with, then whom never any man writ more divinely for the contempt of the
world, was the richest Usurer that ever we read of in ancient Stories; though
that were a sin discovered and condemned by the Heathen themselves.

A second ground of vexation from Knowledge, is the defects and imperfections
of it: that which is wanting cannot be numbered. There are many thousand
Conclusions in Nature, which the inquisitive judgment is not able to pierce
into, nor resolve into their just Principles: nay, the more a man knows, the
less discovery he makes into the things he knows.

Thirdly, in much wisdom is much grief; and he that increases knowledge,
increases sorrow. In Civil wisdom, the more able a man is, the more service is
cast upon him: and the more business he runs through, the less enjoyment he has
of time or liberty. His eminence loads him with envy, jealousy, observation,
suspicion; forces him oftentimes upon unwelcome compliances, upon colors and
inventions, to palliate unjust counsels, and stop the clamours of gainsaying
Conscience; fills him with fears of miscarriage and disgrace, with projects of
humor and plausibility, with restless thoughts how to discover, prevent,
conceal, accommodate the adversaries or his own affairs: in one word, is very
apt to make him a stranger to God and his own soul. In other Learning, let a
man but consider, first, the confusion, uncertainty, involvedness, perplexity
of Causes and Effects, by man's sin. Secondly, the pains of body, the travel of
the mind, the sweat of the brain, and tugging and plucking of the
understanding, the very drudgery of the soul, to break through that confusion
and her own difficulties. Thirdly, the many invincible doubts and errors which
will still blemish our brightest notions. Fourthly, the great charges which the
very instruments and furniture of Learning puts men to. Fifthly, the general
disrespect which (when all is done) it finds in the world; great men scorning
it as Pedantry, ordinary men unable to take notice of it, and great Scholars
are fain to make up a Theater amongst themselves. Sixthly, the insufficiency
thereof to make up what is amiss in our nature, the malignant property it has
to put sin into armor, to contemn the simplicity and purity of Gods Word. And
lastly, the near approach thereof unto its own period; the same death that
attends us, being ready also to bury all our Learning in the grave with us.
These, and infinite the like considerations, must needs mingle much sorrow with
the choicest Learning.

Methinks I could bid the world farewell, and immure my self among my Books, and
look forth no more, (were it a lawful course) but shut the doors upon me, and
(as in the lap of Eternity) among those divine souls employ my self in sweet
content, and pity the rich and great ones that know not this happiness. Sure
then it is a high delight indeed, which in the true lap of Eternity is enjoyed!

Cardinal MAZARINE
HAving made Religion wholly subservient to the Secular interest, amassed to
his own interest and person all the Treasure and Interest of Europe, and
managed the Crown of France for several years together; discoursed one day with
a Sorbonne-Doctor concerning the immortality of the soul, and a man's eternal
estate; and then wept, repeating that Emperors saying, Animula vagula
blandula, quae abibis in loca? O my poor soul, whither will thou go?
Immediately calling for his Confessor, and requiring him to deal freely with
him, and vowing ten hours of the day for Devotion, seven for Rest, four for
Repasts, and but three for Business: saying one day to the Queen Mother, Madam,
your favors undid me: were I to live again, I would be a Capuchin rather then
a Courtier.

Cardinal RICHLIEU,
AFter he had given law to all Europe many years together, confessed to P. du
Moulin, that being forced upon many irregularities in his lifetime by that
which they call Reason of State, could not tell how to satisfy his Conscience
for several things, and therefore had many temptations to doubt and dis-believe
a God, another world, and the immortality of the soul; and by that distrust, to
relieve his aching heart: but in vain; so strong (he said) was the notion of God
on his soul, so clear the impression of him upon the frame of the world, so
unanimous the consent of mankind, so powerful the convictions of his
conscience, that he could not but taste the power of the world to come; and so
live as one that must die, and so die as one that must live for ever. And being
asked one day why he was so sad: he answered, Monsieur, Monsieur, the soul is a
serious thing; it must be either sad here for a moment, or be sad for ever.

ARISTOTLE
A While pleased himself with the worlds eternity: but going off the world,
that notion could not secure him from the trouble and fear of a God; for on his
deathbed he said, Ensentium, miserere mei.

SENECA,
THe greatest Courtier and richest Subject of his time in the world, was
sometimes dubious as to the future condition of his soul; yet could tell his
dear Lucilius with what pleasure he could think of it: Miraris hominem ad deos
ire? Deus ad homines venit nulla sine Deo men's bona, etc.

Et hoc habet argumentum divinitatis, quod illum divina delectant, nec ut
alienis interest, sed ut suis: i.e. The soul has that argument of its
divinity, that it is most pleased with divine speculations, and conversed with
them as with matters that nearly concerned it: and when it has once viewed the
dimensions of the heavens, contemnit domicilii prioris angustias.

Sir CHRISTOPHER HATTON,
A Little before his Death, advised his Relations to be serious in the search
after the will of God in his holy Word: For (said he) it is deservedly
accounted a piece of excellent Knowledge, to understand the Law of the Land,
and the Customs of a Man's Country; how much more to know the Statures of
Heaven, and the Laws of Eternity, those immutable and eternal Laws of Justice
and Righteousness! to know the will and pleasure of the Great Monarch and
Universal King of the World! I have seen an end of all Perfection; but thy
Commandments, O God, are exceeding broad.

Whatever other Knowledge a man may be endued withal, could he by a vast and an
imperious Mind, and a Heart as large as the Sand upon the Seashore, command
all the Knowledge of Art and Nature, of Words and Things; could he attain a
Mastery in all Languages, and sound the depth of all Arts and Sciences; could
he discourse the Interest of all States, the Intrigues of all Courts, the
Reason of all Civil Laws and Constitutions, and give an Account of all
Histories; and yet not know the Author of his Being, and the Preserver of his
Life, his Sovereign and his Judge; his surest Refuge in trouble; his best
Friend, or worst Enemy; the Support of his Life, and the Hope of his Death; his
future Happiness, and his Portion for ever: does but sapienter descendere in
infernum, with a great deal of wisdom go down to Hell.

FRANCIS JUNIUS,
A Gentile and an Ingenious Person, as he was reading Tully de Legibus, fell
into a persuasion nihil curare Deum, nec sui, nec alieni; till in a Tumult in
Lions, the Lord wonderfully delivered him from imminent death, so that he was
compelled to acknowledge a Divine Providence therein: And his Father hearing
the dangerous ways that his Son was misled into, sent for him home, where he
carefully and holily instructed him, and caused him to read over the New
Testament; of which himself writ thus: Novum Testamentum aperio, exhibet se
mihi adspectis primo augustissimum illud caput, In principio erat Verbum, etc.
When I opened the New Testament, I first light upon John's first Chapter, In
the beginning was the Word, etc. I read part of the Chapter, and was suddenly
convinced that the Divinity of the Argument, and the Majesty and Authority of
the Writing, did exceedingly excel all the Eloquence of Humane Writings: My
Body trembled, my Mind was astonished, and I was so affected all that day, that
I knew not where and what I was. Thou wast mindful of me, O my God, according
to the multitude of thy Mercies; and calledst home thy lost Sheep into thy
Fold. And as Justin Martyr of old, so he of late, professed, That the power of
Godliness in a plain simple Christ, wrought so upon him, that he could not but
take up a strict and a serious Life.

The Earl of LEICESTER
IN Q Elizabeth's days, though allowing himself in some things very
inconsistent with Religion, came at last to this Resolution; That Man differed
not from Beasts so much in Reason, as in Religion: and that Religion was the
higest Reason; nothing being more rational, than for the supreme Truth to be
believed, the highest Good to be embraced, the first Cause and almighty Maker
of all things to be owned and feared; and for those who were made by God, and
live wholly upon him, to improve all for him, and live wholly to him: Agreeable
to the Apostle, Give up your Souls and Bodies unto him, which is your
reasonable Service.

SOLOMON
KEpt his wisdom: he pursued such manly and noble delights, as might not
vitiate, but rather improve his intellectuals. Eccles. 2.1, 2, 3. I said in my
heart, Go to now, I will prove thee with mirth, therefore enjoy pleasure: and
behold, this also is vanity. I said of laughter, It is mad; and of mirth, What
does it? I sought in my heart to give my self unto wine, (yet acquainting mine
heart with wisdom) and to lay hold on folly, till I might see what was that
good for the sons of men, which they should do under the heaven all the days of
their life.

Again, his wisdom was furnished with variety of subjects to enquire into: he
had magnificence and provisions suitable to the greatness of his Royal mind:
sumptuous and delicate Diet, under the name of wine, verse. 3. stately Edifices,
verse. 4. Vineyards and Orchards; yea, very Paradises as large as Woods, verse.
5, 6. Fish Ponds and great Waters; multitudes of Attendants and Retinue of all
sexes: mighty herds of Cattle of all kinds, verse. 7. great Treasures of Silver
and Gold: all kinds of Music, vocal and instrumental.

Further, Solomon exceeded in all these things all that ever went before him.
Verse. 9.

Moreover, as he had the most abundant, so likewise the most free, undisturbed,
unbated enjoyment of them all; he withheld not his heart from any: there was no
mixture of sickness, of war, or any intercurrent difficulties, to corrupt their
sweetness, or blunt the taste of them.

Here are as great preparations as the heart of man can expect, to make an
universal survey of those delights which are in the creature: and yet at last,
upon an impartial enquiry into all his most magnificent works, the conclusion
is, they are but vanity, and vexation of spirit, verse. 11. Which vexation he
further explains,

1. By the necessary divorce which was to come between him and them: he was to
leave all, verse. 18.

2. By his disability so to dispose of them, as that after him they might
remain in that manner as he had ordered them, verse. 19.

3. By the effects that these and the like considerations wrought in him: they
were so far from giving real satisfaction, as that, First, he hated all his
works: for there is nothing that makes one hate more eagerly, then
disappointment in that which a man expected. When Amnon found what little
satisfaction his exorbitant lust received in ravishing his sister Tamar, he as
fiercely hated her as he desired her before. Secondly, he despaired of finding
any good in them, because they beget nothing but travel, drudgery, and unquiet
thoughts.

Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter: Fear God, and keep his
commandments; for this is the whole duty of man. For God shall bring every work
to judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be
evil.

Saint POLYCARP,
WHen persuaded to swear by the Fortune of Caesar, and blaspheme or renounce
his Savior, said, Fourscore and six years have I served Christ; neither has
he ever offended me in any thing: I have lived by him, I will live to him.

Bishop USHER,
THat most learned and knowing Prelate, after his indefatigable pains as a
Christian, a Scholar, a Prelate, and a Preacher, went out of the World with
this Prayer; Lord, forgive me my sins of Omission; and desired to die as Mr.
Perkins did, imploring the Mercy and Favor of God.

My Lord BACON,
THat understood the World and himself as well as any man in Europe, would say,
That a little smattering in Philosophy might tempt a man to be an Atheist, but
a through study of it would bring him back to be Religious: And after variety
of Fortunes in the World, breathed ou^ his Soul thus.

Sir JOHN MASON
PRivy Councellor to King Henry the eighth, and King Edward the sixth, whom
some make Secretary of State, setting him a little too high; others Master of
the Requests, placing him as much too low, upon his deathbed called for his
Clerk and Steward, and delivered himself to them to this purpose: I have seen
five Princes, and been Privy-Councellor to four; I have seen the most
remarqueable observables in foreign parts, and been present at most
State-transactions for thirty years together; and I have learned this after so
many years experience, that Seriousness is the greatest Wisdom, Temperance the
best Physic, a good Conscience is the best Estate; and were I to live again, I
would change the Court for a Cloister, my Privy Counselors bustles for an
Hermits retirement, and the whole life I lived in the Palace, for one hours
enjoyment of God in the Chapel: all things else forsake me, besides my God, my
duty, and my prayer.

Sir HENRY WOTTON
AFter his many years study, with great proficiency and applause at the
University; his near relation to the great favorite Robert Earl of Essex, his
Intimacy with the Duke of Tuscany and James the sixth King of Scotland, his
Embassies to Holland, Germany, and Venice; desired to retire, with this Motto,
Tandem didicit animas sapientiores fieri quiescendo; being very ambitious of
the Provostship of Eaton, that he might there enjoy his beloved Study and
devotion; saying often, that the day he put his Surp^ice on, was the happiest
day of his life: That being the utmost happiness a man could attain to (he
said) to be at leisure to be and to do good; Never reflecting on his former
years, but with tears would say, How much time have I to repent of! and how
little to do it in!

Sir THOMAS SMITH
AFter he had many years served Q. Elizabeth as Secretary of State, and done
many good services to the kingdom, particularly to the settling of the
Corne-rate for the Universities, discharged all affairs and attendants a
quarter of a year before he died, sent to his singular good friends, the
Bishops of Winchester and Worcester, entreating them to draw him out of the
word of God the plainest and exactest way of making his peace with God, and
living godly in this present world; adding, that it was great pity men knew
not to what end they were born into this world, until they were ready to go out
of it.

My LORD BACON
WOuld say, toward the later end of his life, that a little smattering in
Philosophy would lead a man to Atheism, but a through insight into it will
lead a man back again to a first cause; and that the first principle of right
reason is Religion; in reference to which, it was the wisest way to live
strictly and severely: for if the opinion of another world be not true, yet the
sweetest life in this world is Piety, Virtue, and Honesty; If it be, there are
none so miserable as the loose, the carnal, and profane Persons, who lived a
dishonorable and a base life in this world, and were like to fall to a most
woeful state in the next.

TERTULLIAN.
COme life, come death, I will worship none but God Almighty. O Lord God
Almighty, receive the soul of thy Servant in peace, who suffers death for thy
Cause and the Gospel.

ORIGIN.
IF my Father stood weeping upon his knees before me, and my Mother hanging on
my neck behind, and all my Brethren, Sisters, Children, and Kinsfolks howling
on every side, to retain me in a sinful life; I would fling my Mother to the
ground, run over my Father, despise all my Kindred, and tread them under my
feet, that I might run to Christ.

I am sailing with the Mariner, through the boisterous Sea, but shortly I
shall be in the haven, etc. Help me with your prayers.

To my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, my Hope and my Salvation, I wholly offer
up my soul and body; I cast my self wholly upon his Mercy and Grace.

Sir THOMAS COVENTRY
ONce hearing some Gallants jesting with Religion, said, that there was no
greater argument of a foolish and inconsiderate person, than profanely to droll
at Religion. It Is a Sign he has no regard of himself, and that he is not
touched with a sense of his own interest, who plays with life and death, and
makes nothing of his soul. To examine severely, and debate seriously the
principles of Religion, is a thing worthy of a wise man: whosoever turns
religion into Raillery, and abuses it with two or three bold jests, renders
not religion but himself ridiculous, in the opinion of all considerate men;
because he sports with his own life: for a good man says, If the principles of
religion were doubtful, yet they concern us so nearly, that we ought to be
serious in the examination of them.

JUSTIN MARTYR.
HEre I stand before God and this honorable Audience, and take him to witness,
that I never willingly and wittingly taught any false doctrine; and therefore
have I a good conscience before God and all good men. I am sure that you and I
shall come before a righteous Judge, before whom I shall be as good a man as
you, (pointing at the Accuser) and I nothing doubt, but that I shall be found
then a true member of Jesus Christ, and be everlastingly saved.

Merciful Father, Father of Heaven, for the Lord Jesus Christ my Saviors sake,
receive my Soul into thy hands.

An Excellent PERSONAGES Sentiments for Religion.
IT may justly seem strange, that true Religion, which contains nothing in it
but what is truly Noble and Generous, most rational, and pleasing to the
spirits of all good men, should yet suffer so much in its esteem in the world,
through those strange and uncouth Vizards it is represented under: some
accounting the life and practice, as it speaks subduing our wills to the will
of God, (which is the substance of all Religion) a thing too low and mean for
their rank and condition in the world; while others pretend a quarrel against
the principles of it, as unsatisfactory to Humane Reason.

Thus Religion suffers, with the Author of it, between two Thieves; and hard it
is to define which is most injurious to it, that which quarrels the principles,
or that which despises the practice of it. And nothing will certainly more
incline to believe that we live in an age of Prodigies, then that there should
be any such in the Christian world, who should count it a piece of Gentility to
despise Religion, and a piece of Reason to be Atheists. For if there be any
such thing in the world as a true hight and magnanimity of spirit; if there be
any reason and depth of judgment; they are not only consistent with, but only
attainable by a true and generous spirit of Religion. But if we look unto that
which the loose and profane world is apt to account the greatest Gallantry, we
shall find it made up of such pitiful ingredients, which any skilful and
rational mind will be ashamed to plead for, much less to mention them in
competition with true goodness and unfeigned piety. For how easy is it to
observe such who are accounted high and gallant spirits, to quarry upon such
mean preys which only tend to satisfy their brutish appetites, or flesh
Revenge with the blood of such who have stood in the way of that airy title,
Honor! or else they are so little apprehensive of the inward worth and
excellency of Humane nature, that they seem to envy the gallantry of
Peacocks, and strive to outvie them in the gayety of their Plumes: such who
are, as Seneca says, Ad similitudinem parietum suorum extrinsecus culti; who
imitate the walls of their houses in the fairness of the outsides, but matter
not the rubbish which is within: the utmost of their ambition is to attain
enervatam foelicitatem qua permadescunt animi, such a felicity as evigorates
the soul by too long steeping: it being the nature of all terrestrial
pleasures, that they do (...), by degrees consuming Reason, by effeminating and
softning the intellectuals.

Must we then appeal to the judgment of Sardanapalus concerning the nature of
Felicity, or enquire of Apicius what Temperance is? or desire that Sybarite to
define Magnanimity, who fainted to see a man at hard labor? Or does now the
conquest of Passions, forgiving of Injuries, doing Good, Self-denial, Humility,
Patience under crosses, which are the real expressions of Piety, speak nothing
more noble and generous then a luxurious, malicious, proud, and impatient
spirit? Is there nothing more becoming and agreeable to the soul of man in
exemplary Piety, and a holy well-ordered conversation, then in the lightness
and vanity (not to say rudeness and debauchery) of those whom the world
accounts the greater Gallants? Is there nothing more graceful and pleasing in
the sweetness, candor, and ingenuity of a truly Christian temper and
disposition, then in the revengeful implacable spirit of such whose Honor
lives and is fed by the blood of their enemies? Is it not more truly honorable
and glorious, to serve that God who commands the world, then to be a slave to
those Passions and Lusts which put men upon continual hard service, and torment
them for it when they have done it? Were there nothing else to commend Religion
to the minds of men, besides that tranquillity and calmness of spirit, that
serene and peaceable temper which follows a good Conscience, wheresoever it
dwells, it were enough to make men welcome that guest which brings such good
entertainment with it. Whereas the amazements, horrors and anxieties of mind
which at one time or other haunt such who prostitute their Consciences to a
violation of the Laws of God, and the Rules of rectified Reason, may be enough
to persuade any rational person, that Impiety is the greatest folly, and
Irreligion madness.

It cannot be then but matter of great pity to consider, that any persons
whose Birth and Education has raised them above the common people of the
world, should be so far their own enemies, as to observe the Fashion more then
the rules of Religion; and to study Complements more then the sacred
Scriptures, which alone are able to make them wise to salvation.

CHARLES the V.
Emperor of Germany, King of Spain, and Lord of the Netherlands, after three
and twenty pitched Fields, six Triumphs, four Kingdoms won, and eight
Principalities added to his Dominions, resigned all these, retired to his
Devotion, had his own Funeral celebrated before his face; and left this
testimony of Christian Religion, That the sincere profession of it had in it
sweets and joys that Courts were strangers to.

Sir FRANCIS WALSINGHAM
TOward the later end of his life grew very melancholy, and writ to the Lord
Chancellor Burleigh to this purpose: We have lived enough to our Country, to
our Fortunes, and to our Sovereign: it is high time we began to live to our
Selves, and to our God. In the multitude of affairs that passed through our
hands, there must be some miscarriages, for which a whole Kingdom cannot make
our peace.

Whereupon some Court-humorists being sent to divert Sir Francis, Ah, said he,
while we laugh, all things are serious round about us: God is serious, when he
preserves us, and has patience toward us; Christ is serious, when he dies
for us; the holy Ghost is serious, when he striveth with us; the holy Scripture
is serious, when it is read before us; Sacraments are serious, when they are
administered to us; the whole Creation is serious, in serving God and us: they
are serious in hell and heaven; and shall a man who has one foot in his grave
jest and laugh?

Don LEWIS de HARO,
AFter he had lived a great while the grand Favorite and Statesman of Spain,
but with too little regard of Religion; growing melancholy, was taken up by a
Wit of Spain for being Priest-ridden, and troubling his head with those notions
of the immortality of the soul, and the state of the other world; he answered
him with Tertullian 's words: Quaedam and Natura nota sunt, ut mortalitas
animae pene plures, ut Deus noster penes omnes. Utar ergo and sententia
Platonis alicujus pronunciantis, Omnis anima est immortalis. Utar and
Conscientia populi contestantis Deum deorum. Utar and reliquis communibus
sensibus, qui Deum judicem praedicant [Deus videt] and Deo commendo, at cum
aiunt [mortuum quod mortuum] and [Vive dum vivis] and post mortem omnia
finiuntur, etiam ipsa tunc meminero and cor vulgi cinerem a Deo deputatuns, and
ipsam sapientiam seculi stultitiam pronunciatam. Tunc si and haereticus ad
vulgi vitia, vel seculi ingenia confugerit, discede dicam, ab Ethnico,
Haeretice.

Count GONDAMAR
WAs as great a Wit and Statesman as ever Europe knew, and took as much
liberty in point of Religion; till declining in years, he would say, as they
say of Anselm, I fear nothing in the World more than Sin: often professing,
that if he saw corporally the horror of sin on the one hand, and the Pains of
Hell on the other, and must necessarily be plunged into the one, he would choose
Hell rather than Sin; yea, That what liberty soever he had taken, he had rather
be torn in pieces by will Horses, than wittingly and willingly commit any Sin.

CALEACIUS CARACCIOLUS
MArquess of Vico, a noble Person, of a great Estate, and as great Relations,
lived a great while in Popery, and at last left his Country, his Estate and
Friends, to profess the Gospel of Jesus Christ: with Moses judging it better to
suffer affliction with the People of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin
for a season; for he had respect unto the recompense of the Reward, and endured
as seeing him who was invisible.

SOCRATES
BEing near his Death, said thus, Magna me spestenet Judices been mihi evenire,
quod mittar ad mortem: necesse est enim ut sit alterum de duobus, ut aut sensus
omnino mors omnes auferat, aut in alium quendam locum ex his locis morte
migretur: quamobrem sive sensus extinguitur, morsque ei somno similis est, qui
nonnunquam etiam sine visis somnorum pacatissimum quietem affert; Dii Boni!
quid lucri est emori, etc. Sin vero sunt quae dicuntur, migrationem esse mortem
in eas oras, quas qui ante e vita excesserunt incolunt: id multo jam beatius
est te cum ab iis qui se judicum numero haberi volunt, evaseris, ad eos venire
qui vere judices appellantur, etc. convenerique eos, qui just and cum fide
vixerint. Haec peregrinatio mediocris vobis videre potest? Ut vero colloqui cum
Orphaeo, Musaeo, Homero, Hesiodo, liceat quanti tandem aestimatis? Equidem
saepe mori si fieri possit, vellem ut ea quae dico, mihi liceret invenire.
Quanta delectatione autem afficeret, etc. Ne vos quidem Judices ii qui me
absolvistis mortem timueritis; nec enim cuiquam bono mali quidquam evenire
potest, nec vivo nec mortuo, nec unquam ejus res a Diis immortalibus
negligenter, etc.

ROBERT Earl of SOMERSET,
UNhappy in his good Nature, would say often, after he had lost the King and
Courts Favor; O the vanity of great Men, who think it to be the chief fruit of
their greatness, to abuse their power insolently, to the ruin of their
Inferiors! not remembering, being blinded by their Passion, that they have a
Superior over them, to make them yield an account of their unjust proceedings,
forcing them to make restitution with interest.

Farewell Riches, welcome Poverty; farewell Life, welcome Death: All that I have,
were it a thousand times more, would I lose, rather than speak one wicked word
against God my Creator. I yield thee most hearty thanks, O my God, for this
Gift of thy Grace, that I can contemn and despise this frail and transitory
World, esteeming the Confession of Christ above all Treasures.

I shall not leave the Fellowship of these holy men with whom I lived in the
fear of God, and with whom I desire to dye, and with whom I trust I shall
obtain the Glory to come.

My Life is in thy hands, O my dear God; let it never be prolonged to the
prejudice of thy Glory: If my paces be few to walk my Journey to Heaven, Lord
give me Grace never to look back.

A little before he died, he cried out horribly, and that often, Oh who will
kill me, and deliver me from these pains I know I suffer for the oppressions I
did to poor men!

Let fire, cross, breaking of bones, quartering of my members, crushing my
bones, and all the torments that man and the devil can invent against me, fall
upon me, so that I may enjoy the Lord Jesus Christ.

Even at his departure, he said, O God the Father of thy beloved Son Jesus
Christ, through whom we have received the knowledge of thee: O God the Creator
of all things, upon thee do I call; thee I confess to be the true God; thee
only do I glorify. O Lord receive me, and make me a companion of the
resurrection of thy Saints, through the merits of our great High Priest, thy
beloved Son Jesus Christ.

The Lord Chancellor EGERTON
USed to say, That to be profane, was the simplest thing in the world: for the
Atheist and profane persons as it were lay a Wager against the serious and
pious man, that there is no God; but upon woeful odds: for he ventures his
everlasting state; the other hazards only the loss of his lusts, (which it is
his interest to be without) or at the most, but some short advantage; and all
the while, is inwardly more contented and happy, and usually more healthful,
and perhaps meets with more respect, and faithfullest friends, and lives in a
more secure and flourishing condition, and freer from the evils and punishments
of this world, then the Atheist does; (however, it is not much that he
ventures) and after this life, if there be no God, is as well as he; but if
there be, is infinitely better, even as much as unspeakable and eternal
happiness is better then extreme and endless misery.

So that (as an excellent person says) if the Arguments for and against a God
were equal, and it were an even Question whether there were one or not; yet the
hazard and danger is so infinitely unequal, that in point of prudence every man
is bound to stick to the safest side of the Question, and make make that his
Hypothesis to live by. For he that acts wisely, and is a thorowly-prudent man,
will be provided in omnem eventum, and will take care to secure the main
chance, whatever happens: but the Atheist, in case things should fall out
contrary to his belief and expectation, he has made no provision in this case.
If, contrary to his confidence, it should prove in the issue that there is a
God, the man is lost and undone for ever. If the Atheist, when he dies, finds
that his soul has only quitted its lodging, and remains after the body; what
a sad surprise will it be, to find himself among a world of spirits entered on
an everlasting and an unchangeable state!

IGNATIUS.
NIhil praestantius est pace bonae conscientiae: There is nothing better then
the peace of a good conscience.

Grace flowing from the blessed Spirit of God, makes the soul like a fountain
whose water is pure, wholesome and clear: for grace beautifieth and cleanses,
and so saves the whole man.

IRENAEUS.
IF thou art backward in Repentance, be forwards in thoughts of Hell, the
burning flames whereof only the tears of a penitent eye can extinguish.

It Is in vain to pray for the remission of sins, without forgiving others: we
must not come to make an atonement with God, before we make an atonement with
our brother.

Nihil prodest verbis proferre virtutem, and factis destruere. To set out
virtue in words, and by deeds to destroy the same, is nothing worth.

CHRYSOSTOM.
TO know thy self is very difficult, yet the ready way to Godliness. As the eye
can see all things but it self, so some can discern all faults but their own.

When gold is proffered to thee, will thou say, I will come to morrow or next
day to take it? No, no; thou art glad of the present possession. Consider, that
that most precious jewel Salvation is proffered to thee daily, yet thou make
no haste to embrace it.

A good clear Conscience should not regard slanderous speeches; nor have they
more power to condemn him, then his own conscience to clear him.

To sacrifice the whole soul and body to the Lord, is the highest service that
we can do unto him.

As a great shower of rain extinguisheth the force of fire; so the meditation
of Gods Word puts out the fire of lust in the heart.

If they go to hell that do not feed the hungry, cloth the naked, etc. what
will become of them, who take away bread from the hungry, and clothes from the
naked? etc. If want of Charity be tormented in hell, what will become of
Covetousness?

God is never absent, though the wicked have him not in their thoughts: where
he is not by favor, he is by punishment and terror.

All things may be shunned, but a man's own heart. Remember, that though God
promises mercy and forgiveness to penitent sinners, yet he does not promise
that they shall have to morrow to repent in.

PLATO,
ILle sublimis apex Philosophorum, and columen Arn. called for his friends
about him, and told them the whole world was out of the way, in that they
understood not, nor regarded the eternal Mind, i. e. God; assuring them, those
men died most comfortably, that had lived most conformably to Right Reason,
sought and adored the first Cause: and his speech failing him, he cried, (...)^
by which we understand he said, God, God: having a little before answered his
friend Aelius, that enquired of him concerning God, and the immortality of the
soul, thus: In omnium animis deorum notionem impressisset ipsa natura; That
Nature it self had stamped an Idea of God upon the minds of men. Cum enim non
instituto aliquo, aut more aut lege sit opinio constituta, manet atque ad unum
omnium firma consensio; intelligi necesse est Deos esse, quoniam insitas eorum,
vel potius innatas cognitiones habemus; de quo autem omnium natura consensit,
id verum esse necesse est: Since the belief of a Deity arose from Custom, nor
was neither enacted by Law, yet is unanimously assented to by all mankind; it
necessarily follows, that there must be a Deity, because the Idea of it is so
natural to us.

If it were thus acknowledged in the Philosophical age of Greece, when men bent
their wits to unsettle the belief of such things as tended to Religion; how
much more might it be esteemed a general Principle of humane Nature in those
elder times, when not so much as one dissenter appeared, that we read of, among
the more ancient Nations?

Now when these common Deities were so much derided by intelligent men, and yet
the order of the world seemed to tell them there was really a God, though those
were none; those who had Philosophical wits, such as Democritus and Epicurus,
set themselves to work, to see if they could solve the Phoenomena of Nature
without a Deity, and therefore asserted the origin of the Universe to be only
by a fortuitous concourse of infinite little particles: but herein they
befooled themselves and their giddy followers, who were glad to be rid of those
anxieties of mind which the thoughts of a Deity and an immortal soul did cause
within them. And though Lucretius in a bravado tells us of his Master, that
when men's minds were sunk under the burden of Religion, Humana ante oculos
foede cum vita jaceret,
In terris oppressa gravi sub Religione:
Primum Graius homo mortalis tollere contra
Est oculos ausus, primusque obsistere c^n^ra.


That Epicurus was the first true Giant who durst encounter the Gods, and, if
we believe him, overthrew them in open field.

Quare Religio pedibus subjecta vicissim
Obteritur, nos exaequat victoria Coelo.
Yet Cotta in Tully reports the issue of this battle quite otherwise: for
although the greatest Triumph in this Victory, had been only to become like
the beasts that perish; yet if we believe Cotta, Epicurus was so far from
gaining any of his beloved ease and pleasure by his sentiments, that never was
Schoolboy more afraid of a Rod, nor did any enemy more dread the Conqueror,
then Epicurus did the thought of a God and death. Nec quenquem vidi qui magis
ea quae timenda, esse negaret, timeret, mortem, dico and Deos. So hard it is
for an Epicurean, even after he has prostituted his conscience, to silence it:
for (whatever there be in the air) there is an Elastical power in Conscience,
that will bear it self up, notwithstanding the weight is laid upon it.

The Earl of STRAFFORD.
O Trust not in man that shall die, nor in the son of man that shall be made as
grass. There is no confidence in Princes: the only thing that stands by a man,
is the blood of Christ, and the testimony of a good Conscience.

Dr DONE,
A Person of as great parts and spirit as any this Nation ever beheld, being
upon his deathbed taking his solemn farewell of his most considerable friends,
left this with them: I repent of all my life, but that part of it I spent in
communion with God, and doing good. That person shall in a dying hour wish
himself not a man, that has not been a good Christian.

Sir SPENCER COMPTON,
CAlling to him such Reverend persons as Bishop Morley and Dr. Earls, he
raised himself upon his pillow, and held out his arms as if he were to embrace
one, saying, Oh my Jesus! And intimating the comforts that then flowed in from
the holy Jesus into his soul. After which holy ecstasie, composing himself to a
calm and serious discourse, he said to the standers by, O be good: O keep close
to the principles of Christian Religion; for that will bring peace at the last.

EDWARD PEITO Esquire.
AFter he had told his Physicians that God had sent him his Summons, it was his
expression, That all the sins of his former life did even kick him in the face;
and that if we do well, now he saw the evil attending well-doing was short, but
the good eternal. If we do ill, the pleasures of doing ill pass away, and the
pain remains.

SALMASIUS,
THat excellent French Scholar, whom the Learned men of his time never
mentioned without such expressions as these, Vir nunquam satis laudatus, nec
temere sine laud nominandus, Gul. Riv. Pref. ad Vindic. Evang. Totius Reipub.
Literariae decus; went out of this World with these words in his mouth, Oh I
have lost a world of Time! Time, that most precious thing in the world, whereof
had I but one year longer, it should be spent in David's Psalms and Paul's
Epistles: Oh Sirs! (said he to those about him) mind the World less, and God
more; all the Learning in the World without Piety, and the true fear of God, is
nothing worth: The Fear of the Lord, that is Wisdom; and to depart from evil,
that is Understanding.

GROTIUS,
THe greatest Scholar that this Age boasted of, after so many Embassies well
performed abroad, and as many Transactions well managed at home; after an exact
survey of all the Hebrew, Greek and Latin Learning; after so many elaborate
Discourses in Divinity, and other parts of Learning; concluded his Life with
this Protestation: That he would give all his Learning and Honor for the plain
Integrity and harmless Innocence of Jean Urick, who was a devout poor man, that
spent eight hours of his time in Prayer, eight in Labor, and but eight in
sleep, and other Necessaries: and this complaint to another, that admired his
astonishing industry; Ah! Vitam perdidi, operose nihil agendo! and this
Direction to a third, that desired him in his great Wisdom and Learning, in
brief to show him what to do, viz. Be serious.

Cardinal WOLSEY.
HAd I served GOD as carefully as I did my Master the KING, he had not thus
forsaken me in my old Age.

Bishop BANCROFT,
MAster of University-Colledge, and Lord Bishop of Oxford, dyed suddenly; and a
little before his Death, would say, Oh how infinitely greater is the comfort of
being good, than of being great! What I gave away, I have; and what I have, I
shall lose: Mark the perfect man, and behold the Upright; for the end of that
man is Peace. That man only has peace at his death, that has answered the
end of his Creation, by glorifying God, and doing good in the World in his life.

WILLIAM Earl of PEMBROKE.
THere is but one Sun in the World, nor but one Righteousness, one Communion of
Saints: If I were the most excellent creature in the world, if I were in
righteousness equal to Abraham, and to Isaac, and Jacob, yet had I reason to
confess my self to be a sinner, and that I could expect no Salvat^on but in the
Righteousness of Jesus Christ; for we all stand in need of Gods Grace. And as
for my Death, I bless God I feel such inward Joy in my Soul, that if I were put
to my Choice, whether to dye or live, I would a thousand times rather choose
death than life, if it may stand with the holy Will of God.

Prince HENRY's last Words.
O Christ, thou art my Redeemer, and I know that thou have redeemed me: I
wholly depend upon thy Providence and Mercy: From the very bottom of my Heart I
commend my Soul into thy Hand.

A Person of Quality waiting on the Prince in his sickness, who had been his
constant Companion at Tennis, and asking him how he did; was answered, Ah Tom!
I in vain wish for that time I lost with thee and others, in vain Recreation.

Now my Soul be glad, for at all the parts of this Prison the Lord has set his
aid to loose thee; Head, Feet, Milt and Liver are failing: Arise therefore, and
shake off thy Fetters; mount from thy Body, and go thy way.

Socrates Critoni vehementer suadenti ut si viam ipse suam negligerat, certe
liberis etiamnum parvulis and Amicis ab ipso pendentibus se servaret incolumem:
liberi, inquit, Deo, qui mihi eos dedit, cujus erunt: Amicos hinc discedens
inveniam, vobis aut similes, aut etiam meliores, ne vestra quidem consuetudine
diu cariturus, quandoquidem vos brevi eodem est is commigraturi. Erasm. Apoth.
1.3. ex Platone, Xenoph.

The Earl of ARUNDEL.
HE lying on his Deathbed, said, My flesh and my heart fails; and his
Ghostly Father added the next words, That God was the strength of his heart,
and his portion for ever; he would never fail him: He answering, All the world
has failed; he will never fail me.

Mr SELDOM,
WHo had comprehended all the Learning and Knowledge that is either among the
Jews, Heathens, or Christians; and suspected by many of too little a regard to
Religion: one afternoon before he died, sent for Bishop Usher and Doctor
Langbaine, and discoursed to them to this purpose: That he had surveyed most
part of the Learning that was among the Sons of Men; that he had in his Study
Books and Papers of most subjects in the World; yet that at that time he could
not recollect any passage out of those infinite Books and Manus^ripts he was
Master of, wherein he could rest his Soul, save of the holy Scriptures; wherein
the most remarkable passage that lay most upon his Spirit, was Tit. 2.11, 12,
13, 14, 15. For the Grace of God that brings salvation, has appeared to all
men; teaching us, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live
soberly, righteously and godly, in this present world; looking for that blessed
hope, and gl^rious appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ;
who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all inquity, and purify
unto himself a peculiar People, zealous of good works: These things speak, and
exhort and rebuke with all authority.

A serious GENTLEMAN'S Discourse of being Religious.
MEn generally stand upon the credit and reputation of their Understandings,
and of all things hate to be accounted Fools, because Folly is so great a
reproach to the Understanding of a man, and so high a reflection upon his
Discretion: But I know no way for men to avoid this imputation, and to bring
off the credit of their Understandings, but by being truly Religious, by
fearing God, and departing from evil: for certainly there is no such imprudent
Person as he that neglects God and his Soul, and is careless and slothful about
his everlasting concernments; because this man acts contrary to his truest
Reason, and best Interest: he neglects his own safety, and is active to procure
his own ruin: he flies from Happiness, and runs away from it as fast as he
can; but pursues Misery, and makes haste to be undone: Hence it is that Solomon
does all along in the Proverbs give the title of Fool to a wicked man, as if it
were his proper name, and the fittest character for him, because he is
eminently such. There is no such fool as the sinning fool, who every time he
sins ventures his Soul, and lays his everlasting interest at the stake; every
time a man provokes God, he does the greatest mischief to himself that can be
imagined: A madman that cuts himself, and tears his own flesh, and dashes his
head against the stones, does not act so unreasonably as a sinner, because he
is not so sensible of what he does: Wickedness is a kind of voluntary Frenzy,
and is a chosen Distraction; and every sinner does wilder and more extravagant
things than any man can do, that is crazed, and beside himself, and out of his
wits; only with this sad difference, That he knows better what he does.

Is that man wise, as to his Body and his Health, who only clothes his hands,
and leaves his whole Body naked? who provides only against the Toothach, and
neglects whole troops of mortal Diseases that are ready to rush in upon him?
Just thus is he who takes care only for this vile Body, but neglects his
precious and immortal Soul; who is very sollicitous to prevent small and
temporal inconveniences, but takes no care to escape the Damnation of Hell.

Is he a wise man as to his temporal Estate, that lays designs only for a day,
without any respect to, or provision for the remaining part of his Life? Just
thus does he that provides for the short time of this Life, but takes no care
at all for Eternity; which is to be wise for a moment, but a fool ever; and to
act as untowardly and as crosly to the reason of things, as can be imagined; to
regard Time as if it were Eternity, and to neglect Eternity as if it were but a
short Time.

Do you think him a wise man who is serious about Trifles, but trifles about
the most serious Matters? Just so is he who pursues the World, and the petty
Interests of it, with all his might, but minds Religion and the weighty
concernments of Eternity, as if he minded them not.

Do you count him prudent, who throws himself overboard, to save his Goods?
Just so does he who to secure any thing in this World, makes shipwreck of his
Conscience, and casts away his Soul.

Is he wise, who is wise in any thing but his proper Profession and Employment,
wise for every body but himself; who is ingenious to contrive his own Misery,
and to do himself a mischief; but is dull and stupid as to the designing of any
real advantage or benefit to himself? Just such is he who troubles himself
with other things, and neglects himself; who is wise to do evil, but to do
good has no understanding.

Is he wise who neglects and disobligeth him who is his best Friend, and can be
his shrewdest Enemy? Just so does every wicked man who neglects and
contemns God, who can save and destroy him.

Is he wise, who in matters of greatest moment and concernment neglects
opportunities never to be retrived; who standing upon the shore, and seeing the
tide making have toward him a pace, and that he has but a few minutes to save
himself, yet will lay himself to sleep there, till the cruel Sea rush in upon
him, and overwhelms him? Just so does he who trifles away this day of Gods
Grace and Patience, and foolishly adjourneth the work of Repentance, and the
Business of Religion, to a dying hour.

FINIS.

