Some short OBSERVATIONS made on a Book newly Published by Mr. Benjamin Keach,
Entitled, The Breach repaired in God's Worship, etc. wherein is contained a
pretended Answer to Isaac Marlow's Brief Discourse concerning Singing in the
Public Worship of God; as also to an APPENDIX, lately published, and thereunto
added.
IT is not without some Sense that there is cause of Mourning for the occasion
that lays me under some necessity of making Remarks of this nature, on Mr.
Keach's Treatise of Singing, that I have given public Birth unto this Paper.
Had it been to preserve my Personal Reputation only, I should have born with
much (as I shall herein be silent wherein I am provoked by his unjust
reflections beyond the perceivance of any, ^y barely reading his Book) rather
than to have taken any such way as this is, which I have no need of, to de^end
my self in any wrong received from any. But as I believe that my keeping
Silence would give the greater Advantage to the spreading of the practice of
that Er^or among our Churches, which is received by some ^ersons whom Mr. Keach
has now openly headed in ^^e public Defense thereof; and that the Truth will
^^ffer, if I give not timely notice of his disingenuous ^ealings with me in
this Concern: So I am ob^ed in love to the Truth of Christ, to present this
fol^^ing Information to you, to prevent your credential receiving of all that
he has taken out of my Book, and cited to you in his own, as my true Sense and
Meaning.

First; I shall take notice of Mr. Benj. Keach's undue Citations and
Misrepresenting of several things publicly to the World, to the great abuse of
my aforesaid Book concerning Singing.

1st. In page 12. the end, and page 13. he says thus. Now this being so, what
is become of Mr. Marlow's Essence of Singing? (who says) what can be more
plain, than that Singing, and other Gifts of the Holy Spirit, have their
Essence in our Spirits, wherein we are capable of worshipping God, without
verbal and vocal Instruments of the Body? These are his very Words. I answer
(says he) some have so smiled at this Expression, that they cannot tell what
he intends by it, unless he would show himself skilful in Chemistry. But since
he meddles with Divine Things, I must confess I am troubled to see such kind of
Words used, that no Body knows what to make of them. And -- are we not as
capable in our Spirits to worship God, in all other Ordinances, without the
verbal or vocal Instruments of the Body, as well as in Singing without Voice,
by your Argument? --. Page 14. you have said more to justify the Quakers silent
Meetings than you are aware of, etc. And page 123. And (says he) I am afraid
you little think of the bitter Consequents of this Attempt of yours, and how
you seem hereby to ridicule (tho not wittingly, I have better Thoughts of you)
the whole of Gospel Ordinances, by turning them into a thing you call Essence,
a Heart-Service only, without the Bodily Organs, and rendering your self to be
but little better in your so doing, than a mere Enthusiast.

Rep. But how grossly I am here misrepresented an^ abused by Mr. K. appears from
what follows page My Words are these, That Spiritual and Vocal Singin^ was used
in the Primitive and Apostolical Church of Christ, is undeniable; and that such
Spiritual Singing is allowed, is freely granted. And after my naming of the
First Head to be treated of, viz. The Essence of Singing in the same Page, etc.
it is said, Tho intelligible Singing for teaching and admonishing others cannot
be without the use of the Organical Instruments of the Voice, yet the Essence
or Being of Singing consists in an inward spiritual Exercise of the Soul or
Mind of Man. And this must be granted: for we all do own that true Prayer may
be made in our Hearts to God without the use of our Voice; otherwise we deny
all worshipping of God in the Church, save only what is done by the Minister,
and exclude the Members of it from adding to, joining with, or having any share
in Divine Worship; and consequently that nothing can be properly called Sin,
that is only in the inward exercise of the Spirit, but that which is so
manifested by Words or Deeds. Page 6. And then I speak of the Essence of Sin
and of Prayer. And afterward in page 8. coming to discourse of the Essence of
Singing, and citing 1 Cor. 14.15. I say, True, this is meant of vocal Prayer
and Singing in the Church; and in this same Page he takes out what he cites
unfairly to brand me with (as justifying the Quakers Silent Meetings, and
turning the whole of Gospel Ordinances into a Heart-Service only: A thing I
never thought of, and am as far from it as he or any others whatsoever:) for I
farther say in the same Page, that tho vocal Joy and Singing may be teaching to
others, yet the speaking to (Gr. in) (according to Pool's Annot. before cited)
your selves viz. in your own Hearts) in Psalms and Hymns, and spiritual Songs,
singing and making Melody in your Heart to the Lord, is Music of an higher
strain, -- in the Ears of God. So that tho in this Section is showed that God
is to be worshipped in our Spirits both in Prayer and Praises, yet it is
evident that there is no ground from hence (nor in any part of my Book) to
think that I should intend an Exclusion of the vocal exercise of any of
Christ's Ordinances in his Church; and therefore this Clamor rather proceeds
from his Passion of Spirit with the badness of his Cause. Moreover, what I have
here said as to the Essence of Spiritual Singing, is secretly confessed by him
in his Answer to Appendix, p. 42. where he says of Singing; And yet (as I have
showed) the Essence of it is not in the Heart, as it is in the Voice. That is,
if I mistake not his Sense, it is not in the Heart, like as it is in the Voice;
so that it has its Essence in the Heart as it is inward and spiritual, and in
the Heart and Voice too as it is inward spiritual and vocal, in which we do
both agree. But because I find so much of his Discourse against me depending on
the parity and likeness of the Essence of Singing to the Essence of Preaching
(and not of Prayer, which he acknowledges may be only inwardly in the Heart,
p. 174.) I shall hear treat something further on it. In page 14. he says, The
Essence of Singing then (if that Word may be admitted) lies no more in our
Spirits, than the Essence of Preaching, etc.

Repl. Not to speak of their Compound, viz. our Spirits, or our Spirits and
Voice with the Spirit and Word of God, I shall briefly say, That there is such
a difference in the significations of the words Singing and Preaching, as will
admit of a difference in their Essences. Singing is a word of a tuning and
musical nature and signification, as you may see by the Latin words that are
put for it, viz. cano, canto, psallo, modulor; see Rider's Dictionary: And
therefore the word Sing is used to signify either an inward and spiritual
musical tuning of the Heart, or an inward and vocal musical tuning of the Heart
and Voice, as the adjunct Matter treated of may demonstrate; and accordingly
the inward and spiritual, or inward spiritual and vocal Singing, have their
Essence. But as the word Preaching is more limited in its signification to
outward Acts; for though the inward Essence of it considered under other names,
as Meditation, Self-speaking, or Self-edifying, 1 Cor. 14.4, 27, 28. may be
only inwardly in our Hearts; yet the Essence of it, as properly considered from
the signification of the Word, cannot be so confined to the inward exercise of
the Spirit, as the more unlimited signification of the word Singing may,
because the word Preach signifies from its Latin words concionor, to preach,
to make a public Oration; Praedicator, a Publisher or open Reporter, a
Praiser, a Preacher; Praedico, to divulge, to report, to publish, to noise
abroad, etc. Rid. Dict. And therefore the proper Essence of Preaching is
inconsistent to the inward exercise of the Heart, without an outward act of
Declaration, which must of necessity be taken into the Essence of Preaching,
without which it cannot possibly be. Now as the more limited word Preaching is
used in the Scriptures for Publication, Isa. 52.7. Romans 10.15. so the more
unlimited word Singing is used and applied in the holy Scriptures to an inward
and spiritual melodious Exercise, as well as to inward and vocal Melody, as in
Ephesians. 6.19. -- Singing and making Melody in your Heart to the Lord. And Job
29.13. I caused the Widows Heart to sing for Joy.

To conclude this Matter; True spiritual vocal and ministerial Singing for
teaching and admonishing others, and spiritual vocal and ministerial Preaching,
are alike in Essence, tho not in degree of Attainment; such Singing being from
an higher enjoyment of God through a fullness of the Spirit: But yet the one,
viz. Singing, is not alike in limitation of Essence to an outward act of
Declaration, but may inwardly subsist in Essence without it: And the other,
viz. Preaching, being limited to an outward Act, cannot exist only inwardly.
What I have here enlarged upon, is to be helpful to remove that heap of Rubbish
which he has covered my Book withal, representing it to the World contrary to
what it is.

2dly. In page 113. he cites 1 Cor. 14.26. out of my Book p. 8. where for want
of these words [nor can,] which I placed before the Text, the Sense seems to
admit of a singing vocally all together, and so to confound the sense of my
Words, in contradiction of that which follows.

3dly. In page 146. he says, Your third Reply, That the Singing that was in
the Temple was extraordinary, and so in the Apostles time.

Repl. But as I have nowhere expressed my self in this manner, so I have
nowhere made the Old-Testament-Temple a Type or Figure of the Apostles Time,
but of the glorious Time of Christ's Kingdom; and have expressly said, that the
first setting up of the Gospel Church is not the Antitype of David's and
Solomon's Temple, but of Moses's Tabernacle, as you may see page 26, 27, 28.

4thly. In page 150. (says he) Your fifth Reply is, to that of Christ's and
his Disciples singing of an Hymn after the Supper, page 29. which (you say)
might be no more than giving of Thanks, or saying Grace.

Reply. But these Words, tho they are put for mine, yet they were never said by
me, neither did I ever determine whether Christ did or did not sing at that
Ordinance: My Words in page 30. are, That Christ, a their Minister, hymned, and
they in their Spirits joined with him, as Acts 4.24 to 32.

5thly. In page 154. he says, But you would not have Old-Testament-Names given
to New-Testament-Things in Singing.

Repl. But there is no such Expression in my whole Book, nor any thing that
imports the same, but my words are these, page 35. No Old-Testament-Names do
prove the nature of New-Testament-Things, as Circumcision, Censer, Incense,
Altar, Sacrifice, Passover, etc. are all things of a different nature in the
Old Testament, to what they are sometimes used for in the New.

6thly. In page 155. says he, The Substance of what you say to this is, That
the Wicked -- in regard they see not their Sins, nor need of a Christ, they
have no cause to sing.

Repl. But my words are these, page 37. And as they have not a true sense of
their Sins, nor see their need of Christ; so they know not that they have cause
to sing his Praise for their Being. It is one thing to say they have no cause
to sing, and a different thing to say they know not that they have cause so to
do.

7thly. In page 157. he says; Object. 2. But, secondly, you say, Every true
Christian, nor the Church of Christ in general, is able to sing Praises to God
in his public Worship, because the greater number of them have not attained to
the Faith of Assurance.

Repl. But my Words are these, page 42. -- Is not capable to sing Praises to
the Lord in his public and [constant] Worship, and have not attained to [a
sufficient] Faith of Assurance. Now for want of the word constant, which is a
material word, on which much of our Controversy does depend. His citation of me
will admit of a different Reply to what my own Words will do. And from page
172, unto the Conclusion in 185. tho he makes several Objections that may be
easily taken for mine, yet I find but one of them that is taken out of my Book
p. 47. cited by him in p. 177.

9thly. In his Answer to my Appendix p. 21. he says, What Authority have you
to say, our Savior and his Disciples did not sing? Or, what reason has any
sober or godly Christian to believe you, if you so boldly affirm it? Therefore
I, upon good Authority, in opposition to what you say, p. 12. that therefore
from the signification of the word Hymnos, there is a good and sacred
Foundation or Warrant for such vocal melodious singing at or after the Lord's
Supper, etc.

Repl. But consider from what I have said in Append. p. 12. whether I am not
wronged in his Charge against me; my Words are these, And therefore there can
be no foundation nor warrant from the word Hymnos for such vocal melodious
singing at or after the Lord's Supper, seeing the Word cannot be any proof
either that Christ did or did not sing at his Institution of that Ordinance;
and in that, as I have premised, God is otherways to be praised than by vocal
singing.

10thly. In his Answer to Append. p. 33. he says, It Is a hard case that Women
should be debarred to speak in any sense, or any ways to break silence in the
Church, as you affirm through a mistake of the Text. 1. For then they must not
ask a Friend how he or she does when in the Congregation. 2. She must not be
suffered to be an Evidence in the Church against any Offender, in the case of
Discipline. 3. Then she must not ask where the Text is, if she comes too late,
etc.

Repl. But consider how these Words which are put for my meaning are
incongruous to what I have said in Append. page 32. The Section begins thus,
That Women should not vocally sing in the Worship of God in his Church, etc.
Note it well, for my Words do express my meaning. And having there cited 1 Cor.
14.34. I farther say, that this Scripture, tho it has such a relation to the
following Verse, as to forbid the Women's asking of any Question in the Church (
as you may see, ver. 35.) during the Worship and Service of God therein; yet it
intends more than barely to restrain them from such a sort of speaking. And p.
33. she must not teach the Man, nor vocally sing. Which Expressions of mine do
clearly show my true meaning to be, that Women are debarred from all vocal
Exercise of any Gift in the Church, and that they should not break their
Silence during the Worship of God therein, according to 1 Cor. 14.34. and 1 Timothy 2.11, 12.

11thly. In his Answer to Append. p. 41. he cites my Words thus out of my
Appendix p. 45. The least exercise of true Grace in our Hearts in Prayer, gives
essence or being to Prayer.

Repl. But my Words are these, gives essence or being to inward spiritual
Prayer: for want of which words [inward spiritual,] my Sense and Meaning there
is greatly darkened, and made subject to wrong Conclusions.

12thly. In Answer to Append. p. 49. Mr. K's Learned Hand (as he calls him)
says, that Ainsworth on Psalm. 3. intends nothing less than a Song of Praise,
which is fitly composed to be sung.

Repl. But this is imposing on Mr. A. that which he does not express, and
rather wrongly applying what he there says of the word Psalmos unto the word
Hymnos, which he renders simply Praise. And though he would also give a dash to
what I have said from Dr. Owen, yet his Evidence stands firm, that Hymnos is
not a limited word to Songs of Praise: for tho the Doctor makes the most of it
to acommodate the word to the Old-Testament-Use in the Temple, as he more fully
expresses himself afterward on Heb. 2.12. yet if he had not allowed its
proper Signification to be simply Praise, his whole Exposition of preaching the
Gospel would have been absurd in contradiction to himself.

13thly. In his Answer to Append. p. 55. his Learned Hand says, the Author (
viz. Mr. Tymme, who translated Marlorate's Exposition on Matthew out of Latin
into English) pretends it is uncertain -- whether they sang this Praise. (viz.
in Matthew. 26.30.) or spoke it simply. The following Words of the Author (viz.
Marlorate) not being well rendered by Mr. Tymme, I shall set down; they are
these, Graecum verbum laudem quidem, maxim quae Deo debetur, non autem
necessario evincit quod cecinerint; i. e. the Greek word indeed includes
Praise, chiefly that which is due to God; but undoubtedly it does evince that
they sang.

Repl. But observe, Reader, the Latin which is here duly cited out of
Marlorate, is not rightly englished, but abused by Mr. Keach's Learned Hand;
for it is thus in English, But it does not necessarily evince that they sang,
agreeing in sense to Mr. Tymme's Translation cited by me in Append. p. 12. But
there being a noise spread abroad of some abuse of this nature, Mr. Keach sent
me another of his Books, wherein this last Leaf was new reprinted, and duly
corrected in the englishing of the Latin, with this Addition, says he, Hence I
infer, that in the opinion of this Author it does probably evince that they did
sing; and to me the Probability seems next to an absolute Certainty. Which is
such a learned Jumble as I have never seen before.

Secondly; I shall now take notice of several of Mr. Keach's
self-Contradictions contained in his aforesaid Book. And,

1. In P. 142. he says. Object. But (say you) there is no Institution for
Women's singing. He answers. No need, it is a Moral Duty. From whence observe,
that for want of an Institution for Women's singing, he lays the whole Stress
and Warrant for it on the Moral Law, or Light of Nature, by which he is
inclined to conclude that Moses and the Children of Israel sung forth the
Praises of God, page 30. But this is wholly overthrown by his own Argument,
page 88. says he, If Christ and his Disciples never practiced nor enjoined on
the Churches any Ordinance or Duty, but they left a sufficient Rule how such
Ordinances or Duties should be performed, and yet Christ and his Disciples did
sing, and enjoined singing of Psalms, etc. on the Churches; then they left a
sufficient Rule how singing of Psalms, etc. should be performed -- otherwise it
would reflect upon his Wisdom and Faithfulness, page 89. So that from his own
arguing we must have something more than the Moral Law, or Light of Nature,
viz. the Rule of Christ for our manner of performing of Gospel Ordinances, and
therefore there being no Institution for Women's Singing, but a Prohibition by
Christ, the Moral Law or Light of Nature cannot warrant their Practice of it.

2. In Page 19. he says from Exodus 32.17. And when Joshua heard the Noise of
the People, as [they shouted] he said unto Moses, There is War in the Camp,
ver. 18. And he said, it is not the Voice of them that shout for Mastery,
neither is it the Voice of them that cry for being overcome; but the Noise of
them that sing, do I hear. They that doubt about what the Act of Singing is, I
desire them to consider this Text well, in which it is to be observed, that
there are several distinct Acts vocally performed by the Tongue, and all
Mankind easily distinguish the one from the other, unless depraved in their
Minds, or under a Delusion and Temptation of Satan.

(1.) There is a shouting Noise of the Tongue, etc. (2.) There is, it appears,
a crying Noise likewise. (3.) There is a preaching Voice, or a Noise made that
way. (4.) A praying or praising Voice. (5.) A singing Voice. And all these
distinct from each other. But when he comes to prove Singing an Ordinance of
God, he shows us, that (crying) saying is singing; as in page 25. when the
Disciples rejoiced and sang (as he says) those Hosannahs to Jesus Christ, Luke
19.38. where in citing the Text he leaves out the first word of the Verse,
viz. [Saying] blessed, etc. and reads it thus, Blessed be the King that comes
in the Name of the Lord; Peace in Heaven, and Glory in the highest; which both
in Matthew and Mark is read, Cried, saying, etc. And in page 26. he says on
this Text, There is no doubt to be made but they sung, although in none of the
three Evangelists it is so called: But, Cried, saying, which before he proved
from Scripture-Evidence to be a distinct vocal Act of the Tongue from the Voice
of Singing. And he also brings other Scriptures of the same nature to prove
Singing, as Luke 2.13. Praising God, and saying, he says in page 42. was
Singing: and page 44. To pass by (says he) the Song of Zacharias and
Elizabeth, and Simeon, how sweetly did Mary sing? in all which places Singing
is not once expressed; nor in the whole 148th Psalm, which is cited ver. 1, 2.
in page 33.

3. In Page 63. he says, They had an extraordinary Gift of Prayer,
extraordinary Gifts to preach and handle a Doctrine, the like in interpreting
and prophesying; so no doubt likewise for singing (see also in his Answer to
Appendix, page 28.) and in page 137. he says, Doubtless what the Apostle did
by an extraordinary Spirit in bringing in a Doctrine and an Interpretation,
etc. is a Rule for us in the ordinary Gifts. But yet in page 142, 143. in
answer to 1 Cor. 14.20, to 34. How is it then, Brethren? when ye come together,
every one of you has a Psalm, has a Doctrine, has a Tongue, etc. That (says
he) which you infer from hence is, that this is the Rule (viz. in the following
Verses) for our Practice, viz. one by one, or one after another, must speak and
exercise their Gifts, and not all together; and so he that has the Gift of the
Psalm, he is singly, or alone, by himself to sing, as in prayer and preaching.
Answ. (says he) The Apostle directs that Church in the Exercise of
extraordinary Gifts -- And now, says he, page 143. let this once and for ever
be noted, and well heeded, viz. That the ordinary way of Administration of all
Gifts, and Performance of all Ordinances in the Churches, must be the Rule for
the extraordinary Gifts, and performance of Ordinances. Which is quite contrary
to what he said before: however, therein he does acknowledge and assert, that
there is but one Rule for both the ordinary and extraordinary Gifts of the holy
Spirit. And therefore seeing he says in page 143, 144. Now as to the Gift of
Teaching, Interpreting, Prophesying, etc. only one was to be the Mouth,
(according to the following Verses;) and, says he, to act contrary to this
Rule is Confusion. It then consequently follows, notwithstanding he makes a
confused Exception of the Psalm, that the ordinary Gifts, yea all the Gifts of
the Spirit, and then must the Psalm also be subject to the order of this Rule
for delivery with a single Voice one by one. And yet in page 145. we find him
saying, What an endless stir is here of one Man's singing alone in the Exercise
of an extraordinary Gift, which cannot be proved by the Wit of Man from the
Text, much less, had it been so, would it have been a Rule to the Churches in
ordinary Administrations of Christ's Ordinances? But these are Confusions,
Confusions! how is he confounded in opposing the Truth?

4. In page 147. he says; For, as Singing, etc. in the glorious time of the
Gospel were all done by an extraordinary Spirit, or by miraculous Gifts; it is
evident therefore extraordinary Gifts -- were not only suited (as you imagine)
to tune their Hearts and Tongues to sing the Praises of God only, but also to
pray, preach, prophesy, etc. (In that he says that [I imagine it] it is a
great Abuse of me, for there is no such thing in my whole Book, as to limit the
extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit to Singing only). But yet in his Answer to
Appendix, p. 26. citing Matthew. 7.22. 1 Cor. 13.1. he says: From whence it
appears that inward Joy and Peace, of which you speak, as the cause of singing
in the Apostles time, did not flow from that extraordinary Gift of the Spirit,
but from the saving Graces of the Spirit; -- 1 Cor. 14.22. extraordinary Gifts
were to convince Unbelievers of the Truth, and not for the Joy and Comfort of
such who did believe. Men that have the Gift of Tongues may be graceless, and
so without Christ, and perish eternally in Hell; therefore the extraordinary
Gift of the Spirit fits not, tunes not the Heart nor Tongue to sing the Praises
of God, which is contrary to what he said before.

In page 173. he makes an Objection. But we have no Command to sing -- either
before or after Sermon, nor any Precedent, etc. His Answer is, We have no
Command to pray -- either before or after Sermon; nor no Precedent that any
Gospel Church did so, etc. And he makes a farther Objection; But we are
commanded to pray always, and that is a very convenient time when the Word of
God is preached, etc. Ephesians. 6.18. He says in answer to it, We are commanded
to rejoice evermore, etc. 1 Thessalonians. 5.16. Phil. 4.4, 6. -- Besides, the Preacher
may pray before he comes out of his Closet, or secretly in his Heart when in
the Pulpit, and answer those general Precepts. -- And is it not as convement a
time when we here of the Excellencies of Jesus Christ, -- to sing and praise
God, as it is a proper Season to pray to God for a Blessing upon the Word?
There is the like parity of Reason for the one as for the other; if any has the
advantage, it is the Ordinance of Singing, for two reasons; the one is a
Precept, the other a Precedent, Psalm. 100. 1. and 95.1, 2. -- Exodus 15.1.
Matthew. 26.30.

Repl. Surely it is now a time for us rather to mourn than to sing, when such
an Essential part of public Gospel Worship is so strongly invaded. What, have
we not a Precept for Prayer before and after Sermon? will he destroy so great
an Ordinance as Prayer is, as not being Essential to the public Ministerial
Worship of God, that he might the more exalt an Human Tradition? Is not that a
sufficient Precept in 2 Timothy 2.1, 14, 15. These things I write unto thee --
that thou might know how thou ought to behave thy self in -- the Church
of the Living God. And what things these are he begins to tell us in ver. 1. I
exhort therefore, that first of all, Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and
giving of Thanks be made for all Men, etc. So that from the plain Word of God
we ought to begin first with Prayer in his Public Worship and Service in his
Church, and those general Commands to pray always with all Prayer. And in every
thing by Prayer and Supplication, with Thanksgiving, to let our Requests be
made known unto God. And to be giving Thanks always for all things, Phil. 4.6.
Ephesians. 6.18. chap. 5.20. are binding on us to pray for the Blessing of God with
his Word, and for the watering of it with his Spirit, together with giving of
Thanks. But to say that the Minister may answer these Texts by praying secretly
in his Heart, when in the Pulpit, or in his Closet, is destructive to his
Official ministration of an essential Ordinance of Christ's public Worship in
the Church, which he unjustly, without the least cause, reflects upon me for,
while he is doing the same himself.

That Mr. Keach's Learned Hand has not been able to suppress the Evidence I
have given of the true Signification of the word Hymneo, to praise, nor to
charge me with any wrong Citations of any thing out of those Authors produced
by me, may without any difficulty plainly appear to all who will read his Book
and mine, which as it has stood his Test who has employed his Learned Pen with
impertinent and undescent Reflections, to buffet the Truth I am pleading for;
so I have no reason to doubt, but that my Cause will stand the trial of others
also. And therefore I do anert, that in Matthew. 20.30. Mark 14.26. Acts 16.25.
Heb. 2.12. The word Sung, nor Sing, is in none of these four Places in the
Greek Tongue, where the word Hymneo to hymn, is used alone without the Addition
of any other word that imports a Singing; which word Hymneo, signifies simply
to praise, and is not confined to Songs of Praise, as I have abundantly showed
in my Appendix from diverse Authors, and from the Evidence of our later Bibles
now in use; in which in the Old Testament, the Heb. word Tehillah, and the Gr.
word Hymnos, are translated simply Praise, without the addition of the word
Sing; and from the testimony of six several old Bibles, five of which are to be
seen in Sion-Colledg, London. The aforesaid four Scriptures having not the word
Sung, nor Sing, are translated simply Praise, Laus, to say Grace: to both which
last Evidences he has made no better reply than to say, that it is of little
importance in clearing the present Controversy.

To conclude, I have here given you a Taste of Mr. K's Book, so far as this
single Sheet would permit me; and do intend, if the Lord please, to answer what
may seem to have greatest Strength in it, lest my Silence should be
misunderstood by any; though to speak my Judgment, it little needs a Reply:
for he having taken no notice of many of my chiefest Arguments, and very
slightly touched on the Borders (and not on the Strength) of many others,
considering also what I have here presented to you, his whole Book may be said
more properly to be a piece of Confusion, and an Abuse of my Book, rather than
any Answer to it.

By Isaac Marlow.

ADVERTISEMENT.
MY Book within mentioned, is Entitled, Prelimited Forms of Praising God,
Vocally sung by all the Church together, proved to be no Gospel-Ordinance. It
is 8 Sheets of Paper, Price 6 d. I have also published a Book, Entitled, A
Treatise of the Holy Trinunity, in two Parts. The first asserteth the Deity of
Jesus Christ and the Holy Spirit in the Unity of Essence with God the Father.
The Second in Defense of the former, answers the chiefest Objections malt
against this Doctrine. By I. M. Price bound 10 d.

London, Printed for the Author, 1691.


