THE SPEECH OF PATRICK Earl of Marchmont, etc.
Lord High Chancellor to the PARLIAMENT OF SCOTLAND, On Tuesday 21. May 1700.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
OUR Sovereign Lord the KING, who has done so great things for this Nation, as
we have good reason ever to rejoice of, and for which we ought to show our
perpetual Gratitude, by a constant Readiness to do His Majesty such Services as
will be acceptable to Him; has so plainly and kindly in His most gracious
Letter, expressed his firm Resolution to make it the chief Design of his Reign,
to do every thing that may tend to the Advantage and Good of His Subjects, that
I need say nothing to persuade you to rest assured of it, and to rely upon it.

The Commissioners Grace, whom his constant Fidelity to His Majesty, Zeal for
the Good of the Country, and His other fit Enduments, have justly Induced the
King to employ in the Great and Important Trust of representing His Majesty's
Royal Person in this Session of Parliament; And who is no doubt upon the
mentioned Considerations most acceptable to us all: Having likeways expressed
to you, His Majesty's good Resolutions and Intentions; It seems not necessary
for me to add to what you have heard upon that Subject.

My part, shall be then earnestly to invite you to the Remembrance and
Consideration of the Great and Eminent Danger this Nation was in, as to all its
most valuable Interests, when it pleased GOD to put it in the Heart of our KING
to appear for our Rescue and Deliverance, likeways of the great Wisdom and
Prudence, Conduct and Courage, which have been eminently shown; The great
Labors, Travels and Pains, which have been undergone and taken, the great and
many Dangers and Hazards which have been encountered by His Majesty, in the
Prosecution of His glorious Undertaking for Rescuing and Establishing our
Religion, Liberties and Laws.

But above all, to invite you to the Remembrance and Consideration of the
wonderful Mercies and Goodness of GOD, who has been pleased to show his favor
to this Nation, in raising up for it so great a Deliverer, and in Countenancing
and Supporting Him, and giving Him so happy a Success in His Enterprises; That
these things which seemed to be next to impossible* are brought to pass to the
unexpressible Joy and Comfort of all good People in the Nation.

An universal Peace did terminat that War wherein most part of the Princes and
States in Europe were deeply concerned and engaged, one of the greatest, most
Bloody and Expensive that ever Europe had seen, and of a long Continuance, though
this Nation and its Interests were all at stake in that war; Yet by the wise
Conduct of our King, we felt it not much: We were in Peace at Home, no Eenemy
to invade our Houses, none to pluck the Morsel from the Mouths of our Children;
Nay, not so much as to drive our Cattle from their pasture, excepting that
short time, when our own unnatural Countrymen, ravaged in, and harased the
North of Scotland to the great prejudice indeed of these honest hearted
Patriots there, who bravely-showed their Zeal and concern for the Support of
the happy Settlement then established.

I hope to see the Time, and t at it is not for distant, when the Parliament of
Scotland will consider the great Losses and Prejudice sustained by their fellow
Subjects; These worthy Persons who then bore the Burden, and endured the Heat
of the Day, and will do it in such a manner, as may convince the Sufferers how
willing they would have been, and are, to partake with them in their Losses, as
well as they do in their benefits and Advantages.

But at this time, it is necessary for us to consider, that though we are at
peace with Foreign Princes and Powers; Yet the Enmity of a Multitude, Natives
of this Kingdom, living in it, and enjoying the Protection of the Government;
Besides these who are Abroad, is not at an end, they are not reconciled, they
are still Designing and Hatching Mischief, and waiting Opportunities to put in
Execution.

We may justly too take notice of the Breach that is beginning among the
Protestant Princes of the North, and of the Warlike Preparations which are made
both for Land and Sea, by other Neigbouring Princes and States, which may at
least lead us to bethink our selves, and to be so far upon our Guard, as to
provide for maintaining that Tranquillity within the Kingdom, which we now enjoy.

The King's Majesty has told you, that he thinks it necessary for that purpose,
that the Forces be provided for; and I am confident that no man who observes
well, and considers justly, will differ from his Majesty's opinion.

My Lords and Gentlemen,

I cannot but tell you, that the penetrating Wisdom of our King, has been so
manifest in the Course of his Reign, as justly claims a great Deference from
you, that the Care he has taken of your most important Interests, and the great
Things he has performed for you, do justly claim an entire Trust, and
Confidence to be lodged in Him, all the Proof of these which He expects at this
time, is what may very well be expected from a Parliament, which all along has
evidenced so much good Affection to Him, and Gratitude toward Him; Let us not
change our way, but with honest and generous Minds, Heartily, Readily and
Unanimously go in to, and join with the Sentiments of our Prince to His
Satisfaction and Comfort, when the doing it will so much tend to our own
Safety, Peace and Advantage: Now is the time, and if we lay not hold upon the
Occasion, we will certainly repent it, and perhaps when it is too late, which I
hope GOD in His Goodness shall prevent, by guiding your Hearts and blessing
your Endeavors.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the King's most Excellent Majesty, Anno Dom. 1700.


