THE Seventh Volume OF LETTERS Writ by a Turkish Spy, Who lived Five and Forty
Years Undiscovered at PARIS: Giving an Impartial Account to the Divan at
Constantinople, of the most Remarkable Transactions of Europe; And discovering
several Intrigues and Secrets of the Christian Courts (especially of that of
France continued from the Year 1667, to the Year 1682.

Written Originally in Arabic, Translated into Italian, and from thence into
English, by the Translator of the First Volume.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Rhodes, at the Star, the corner of Bride-lane, in
Fleet Street, 1694.

Mahmut The Turkish spy Aetais suoe 72
F. H. van. Hove. sculp:


TO THE READER.
IT IS not to be expected, that the World will take it for an Excuse of the
Tedious Delay has been made in publishing the 7th. Volume of the Turkish Spy,
to say. That our Arabian now grows Old and Decrepid; is forced to walk with a
Staff or Crutch, as he himself confesses in one of the following Letters; and
is besides worn out with Sickness and Care; so that he cannot be so expeditious
in Business as he was in his Youth. It may be said, This Apology would be more
proper for the English Translator to make, were he in the same Condition. But
he is in his Prime, in the Flower of his Age, Vigorous and Active; and
therefore might have made more Have, they will say, to oblige the World, and
Gratify the Expectations of those Gentlemen who perpetually dun the Bookseller
for the Rest of this Mahometan's Letters.

It were easy to answer this, by only putting you in mind, That he who
undertakes to lead a slow-footed, short-winded, and weak Person by the Hand,
and conduct him to his Journey's End; must of Necessity keep the same Pace with
his Charge, though he himself were swift as a Stag when alone, and at Liberty,
Besides, that a Man is apt to attract a Contagion from the Company he keeps,
and turn their Ill Qualities into Habits of his own.

But all this is Trifling, and our English Translator is under none of these
Circumstances. To come to the Purpose therefore, Gentlemen, you will commend
our Translator's Wisdom, for not being in such Post-Hast, at this Juncture,
when you reflect, That like a Wise Racer, though he gave a start in the
Beginning, at first setting out; yet he soon slackened his Pace, that he might
make sure of the Goal, remembering the Old English Proverb, The more Have the
worse Speed. Thus he suffered Three Years to slide by him, before he reached
the Second Stage. 2d. Vol.
And though he began to take up his Heels more nimbly afterward, so as to
recover by Degrees, his lost Time and Ground, yet still he did but moderately
jogg on; now springing, then halting as Occasion offered, and as he found his
Strength could hold. At length having but Two Stages more, wonder not, that he
is a little more tedious than Ordinary in this: For, he does it to refresh
himself, and keep his Breath for the last Strain of all, which brings the
Prize: Observing herein the Old Adage, Finis coronat Opus.

As to the Letters contained in this 7th. Volume, there is little to be said
more particular than of those that have gone before. They in General contain a
Miscellany of Historical Transactions, Moral and Philosophical Thoughts,
interspersed here and there with Mohammedan Politics and Divinity.

Only. You will find our Arabian engaged with a certain Jew at Vienna, in
fomenting the Discords of the German Empire; encouraging the Rebels of Hungary,
Croatia, and Mutinous Provinces. You will hear of the Deaths of Count Serini,
Frangipani, and Nadasti, who were all beheaded for being Ringleaders in this
Rebellion.

The next and last Volume has this of singular in it, That it will present you
with the Rise and Preferment of Count Teckeli, who has made so much a Noise in
the World. It relates many of his Public Actions, and not a few of his Secret
Intrigues. In fine, it discovers the Train that was laid to blow up all Europe
into the Flame of Open War, and Universal Hostility, which to this Day consumes
the Lives and Estates of so many Thousand Christians, impoverishes and lays
wast whole Nations, and it is to be feared will end in letting in the Turks once
more upon us, to our final Ruin and Confusion; since those Infidels never take
greater Advantage to Invade and Conquer the Dominions of Christians, than when
they find us involved in Domestic Wars one with another.

A TABLE OF THE LETTERS and Matters contained in this Volume.
VOL. VII.
BOOK I.
LETTER I. MAhmut the Arabian at Paris, to Mirmadolin, Holy Santone of the Vale
of Sidon. 1 He complains of the Miseries and Sadnesses of his Life, and wishes
himself even fairly out of the World.

II. To the Kaimacham. 6 Of a Peace between the English and Dutch. Of the Birth
of the Young Princess of France. Of the Frollicks and Humors used in this time
of Universal Rejoycings.

III. To Dgnet Oglou. 10 He discourses of the Birth, Life and Death of Jesus
the Son of Mary.

IV. To Asis Bassa. 19 He takes Courage at the News of the Grand Signior's
besieging of Candia.

V. To Hasnadar Bassa, Chief Treasurer to the Sultan. 22 He complains of the
Slackness of the Ministers of the Port, in answering his Dispatches; and
Relates some of the Misfortunes that at this Time befell him.

VI. To Nathan Saddi, a Jew at Vienna. 27 He continues to lament the Disasters
that the Malice of Men loaded him with. His Confinement in the Bastile. His
Resolulution of Baffling the Efforts of Spite and Envy.

VII. To the Venerable Mufti. 30 He craves his Advice, how to behave himself in
case of being discovered. He reflects upon the Sad and Unaccountable Degeneracy
of Mankind: Gives little Hints of some that designed to Ruin his Credit at the
Port.

VIII. To Cara Hali, Physician in the Grand Signior. 36 He diverts him with the
Relation of a Monstrous Child born in the Low Countries.

IX. To Nathan Ben Haddi, a Jew at Vienna. 41 He persuades him to foment the
Discontents of Hungary.

X. To the most Sublime, and Magnificent of the Mussulman Bassa's, Achmat, the
Visir Azem. 46 He discourses of the Advantages may be taken from the
Distractions in Hungary.

XI. To the Selictar Aga, or Sword Bearer to the Sultan. 49 Of the Deaths of
the Queen of Poland, and Pope Alexander VII. Of the French Successes in
Flanders.

XII. To Dgnet Oglou. 51 Of an Encounter he had with Daria, his former Mistress.

XIII. To Pesteli Hali, his Brother, Master of the Customs* and Superintendant
of the Royal Arsenal* at Constantinople. 57 Several Remarks on Women, out of
the Hebrew Rabbi's and others.

XIV. To the same. 65 Of Solyman's Treachery, and the base Trick he put upon
Fatima, Daughter to Ufeph, Mahmut's Vnele.

XV. To the Mufti's Vicar. 71 He acquaints him that the Cardinal's have Elected
Clement IX. to be Pope in the Room of Alexander VII. deceased. Comparisons
between the Popes and the Ancient Roman Pontiffs. Of the Pope's Great Power,
Strength and Authority.

XVI. To Nathan Ben Saddi, a Jew at Vienna. 76 Of the Conversion of Sabbati
Sevi to the Mohammedan Faith.

XVII. To Dgnet Oglou. 85 He informs him that Daria is deceitful, and how by
mere Accident he found out 'twas her Husband, who would have Stabbed him in the
Streets one Night, whom therefore he killed.

XVIII. To the Kaimacham. 89 Of the Arrival of the Cardinal Duke of Vendome at
the French Court, in Quality of Legate de Latere from the Pope. Of the
Alterations in Portugal.

XIX. To Abdel Melec Muli Omar, President of the College of Sciences at Fez. 92
He thanks him for his New System of the Heavens; extols its Accuracy; and
incites him to make some Corrections of Geography.

XX. To Osman Adraoeneth Astrologer to the Sultan at Adrianople. 98 He
discourses of Ptolomy's and Copernicus's System.

XXI. To the Venerable Mufti, Principal Support of Learning, and True Science.
104 He humbly Recommends, That a Complets History of the World should be
collected out of the most Ancient and Sincere Writers, and digested into Annals
from the Beginning of Time, down to the Reign of the present Emperor.


BOOK II.
LETTER I. TO Mehemet, an exiled Eunuch at Alcair in Egypt. 113 He Sympathizes
with his Sufferings, and advises him not to si^k under the frightful Idea's of
Melancholy.

II. To Mohammed, the Illustrious Eremit of Mount Vriel in Arabia the Happy.
121 He opposes Aristotle, and the Peripateticks, who asserts, That Virtue
consists in Mediocrity: Expresses his Aspirations after a solitary and
abstinent Life.

III. To Hamet, Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire. 129 Of
the present State of the German Empire, with Characters of the People. The
strange Epitaph of Frederick, Brother-in Law to the Emperor Sigismund, written
with his own Hand, on his Deathbed.

IV. To Nathan Ben Saddi, a Jew at Vienna. 134 He reproves the Methods of the
Malcontents in attempting to poison the Emperor, and set the Palace on Fire.
Exhorts him to be moderate and Neutral. Of the Counts Serini, Frangipani and
Tatembach.

V. To Pesteli Hali, his Brother, Master of the Grand Signior's Customs at
Constantinople. 138 He acquaints him with the Marriage of Oucoumiche his
Mother; and Eliachim the Jew; as also with her sudden Death.

VI. To Hamer, Reis* Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire. 141 Of
the German Wealth, and Plenty, both Natural and acquired by foreign Traffic.

VII. To Hebatolla, Mir Argun, Superior of the Convent of Derviches at Cogni,
in Natolia. 145 He presents him with a full Relation of the Life of St. John
Baptist, and explains the Meaning of the World Locust.

VIII. To Hamet, Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire. 155
He gives an Account of the great Preparations the Christians were making for
the Relief of Candy. Of a Triple League: And of the Birth of the Infanta of
Portugal. With a farther Description of Italy.

IX. To Hamet, Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire. 159 Of
Don John of Austria's being made Governor of the Low Countries. The Grounds of
Nitard's juggling with him. His Character.

X. To Hebatolla, Mir Argun, Superior of the Convent of Derviches at Cogni in
Natolia. 162 He acquaints him with the King of Poland's Religious Retreat from
the World; and of his being made Abbot of the Abbey of St. Germains, near Paris.

XII. To Vseph, Bassa. 169 Of the Deaths of the Cardinal Duke of Vendome, a
Duchess of the same Title, and Henrietra Maria, late Queen of Great Britain,
and Dowager of Charles I. Of the Arrival of the King of Poland, and Prince of
Toscany, at the French Court.

XIII. To the Kaimacham. 173 Of the Arrival of Solomon Ismael Mutafaraca, with
Expresses from the Grand Signior to the King of France. Solyman's Character,
and Praise. Of a Plague at Soissons, and an Earthquake in Sicily.


BOOK III.
LETTER I. TO Mehemet, an Exiled Eunuch, at Alcaire in Egypt. page 181 He
persuades him not to be Melancholy. Advises him to travel.

II. To the Same. 186 He pursues the same Discourse, earnestly pressing him to
leave Egypt, and survey the Rest of Africa.

III. To the Mufti, Venerable Patron of Learning and Knowledge. 190 He presents
him with an Historical Epitome of the Assyrian, Babylonian and Persian
Monarchies.

IV. To Mirmadolin, Santone of the Vale of Sidon. 201 He discourses of the
Vanity and Insufficiency of exterior Religion. Of Spiritual Abdication from
the World.

V. To the Selictar Aga, or Sword Bearer to the Sultan. 204 He entertains him
with the Description of an Excellent Play acted before the King and Queen of
France, during the Carnaval. Of a Peace concluded between France and Algiers.
Of the Conquest of Lorrain.

VI. To Isouf, his Kinsman, a Merchant at Astracan. 208 He disswades him from
his Melancholy Resolution of turning Eremit, Faquir, or Dervich. Of Ilch Read
Hu, the Indian Philosopher, and his Mysterious Habitation.

VII. To the Chiaux Bassa. 216 Of the Arrival of an Ambassador at the French
Court from the King of Arder in Africa.

VIII. To Mohammed, the Illustrious Solitary of Mount Vriel, in Arabia. 220 He
asserts and endeavors to prove; That the Brutes are endu'd with a Species of
Reason and Knowledge.

IX. To Zeidi Alamanzi, a Merchant at Venice. 225 Being informed that Zeidi is
commanded to travel through Italy, he gives him good Counsel in Order thereto.

X. To Dgnet Oglou. 231 Of a Strange and Unaccountable Accident which happened
to Mahmut on his Sickbed.

XI. To Sephat Abercromil, Vanni Effendi, Preacher to the Sultan. 236 Of the
Quietists, and the General Entertainment their Doctrine finds in Europe. Mahmut
seems highly to favor it; and affirm^ ^as recommended by all Religions in the
World.

XII. To Cara Hali, Physician to the Grand Signior. 242 He asserts the
Immortality of the Soul: from which Discourse he makes a Digression, and treats
Allegorically of Natural Things.

XIII. To the Mufti. 249 He presents him with a Continuation of Remarkable
Passages during the Persian Monarchy. A Memorable Saying of Darius on his
Deathbed.


BOOK IV.
LETTER I. TO Pesteli Hali, his Brother, Master of the Customs, and
Superintendent of the Arsenal at Constantinople. page 261 He advises him not to
be discouraged by Reason of his Son's Amorous Temper, his keeping Company with
foreign Merchants, and Travelers. And tells him a Story of a Father's
Extraordinary Contrivance to reclaim a Prodigal Son.

II. To Codarafrad Cheick, a Man of the Law. 268 Of a Huguenot that assasinated
a Priest as he was saying Mass in the Church of Nostre Dame at Paris; and of
his Punishment.

III. To Dgnet Oglou. 272 Of the Roman Casuists. Of Mohammedan Hypocrites. Of
Interior Devotion and Piety.

IV. To the Kaimacham. 281 Of a League between the Kings of England and France,
who both proclaim Open War against the Dutch. The Story of John de Wit. The
Description of a Royal Entertainment at Chantilly by Night.

V. To Cara Hali, Physician to the Grand Signior. 286 Of Magic, Physic, and
Theology. A pleasant Story of a Peruvian Slave. Of Famous Mathematicians. Of
the Superstition of the Female Sex.

VI. To Orchan Cabet, Student in the Sciences, and Pensioner to the Grand
Signior. 292 He endeavors by Rational Arguments to convince him, that the
Alcoran is of Divine Original.

VII. To Hamet, Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire. 296 Of
the King of France's Conquests in the Low Countries. Of the Death of the Duke
of Longueville.

VIII. To William Vospel, a Recluse of Austria. 301 Of the Difference and
Contrariety between the Practice of the Primitive Christians, and those of the
present Age.

IX. To Codarafrad Cheick, a Man of the Law. 308 Of the Wandering Jew at
Astracan. His Sermons and Prophecies. How the Turks shall overrun and conquer
the greatest Part of Europe in the Year 1700. That England shall become the
Sanctuary of distressed Christians. Of a certain Holy English Man, who shall be
made Chief Patriarch of all the Christians. and shall have his Seat in
Jerusalem, etc,

XIII. To Hamet, Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire. 315
Several Memoirs of Cardinal Richlieu.

XIV. To Musu Abu'l Yahyan, Professor of Philosophy at Fez. 323 A Panegyric on
Africa.

XV. To the Same. 326 He describes Constantinople, with an Account of its Name
and Original; and the Conquest of it by Mahomet II.

XVI. To Hamet, Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire. 336 Of
the German Strength and Policies.

XVII. To Cara Hali, Physician to the Grand Signior. 343 Of his Grief and
Melancholy; and the Pleasure he takes in writing to his Friend.

XVIII. To Musu Abu'l Yahyan, Professor of Philosophy, at Fez. 348 He gives him
a farther Description of Constantinople.


LETTERS Writ by A Spy at PARIS.
VOL. VII. BOOK I.
LETTER I. Mahmut the Arabian at Paris, to Mirmadolin, Holy Santone of the Vale
of Sidon.
WHY was I made a Man, to endure these Cruel Agonies, of which no other Species
of known Beings can possibly be Capable? Or why, at least, was I particularly
Formed of such a Constitution, as to attract the Evils which are scattered up
and down the World, and Piecemeal dropped on the Nativities of other Mortal
Men; whilst I alone am made the Common Sink of Humane Misery? Surely my partial
Horoscope Monopoliz'd the most envenomed Aspects of the Stars, without
partaking of the least Benign and Favorable Glance. The Planets had laid up
an Ancient deep Reserve of Fatal Influences, which they poured out at large
upon the very Moment of my Birth. Nor could the Careful Midwife with all her
Skill and Charms, defend my tender, ductile, reeking Body, from the Invisible
Cataracts which flowed upon me from all the Envious Signs and Constellations in
Heaven.

My whole Life has been but One continued Tragedy, wherein the Various Change
of Scenes has not relieved me from the Least Real Evil hid behind, but only
amuz'd my Sense with some New Pageantry, some Fair Idea of Honor, Pleasure or
Profit; When before the ACT was done, I found my self cajoled, and overwhelmed
in Fresh Calamities; Misfortunes which I never dreamed of.

Oh! that the Omnipotent, when from Eternal silent Thought, he drew the Idea's
of every Species, and every Individual Being, which he designed for Actual
Existence in the World, had Formed me for a Tree, an Herb, a Blade of Grass, a
Stone, a Mushroom, or any Insensible Thing, Incapable of Pleasure or Pain, of
Grief or Joy or other Passions, which hourly thus torment our Humane Race; I
had been then a Happy Neuter to all false Shows of Happiness, and Real Sense of
Misery. Oh! that I Would been an Oak, a Beech, a Palm, or Cypress of the Forest:
For then, if Vegetables have any Feeling of their own State, I should be only
touched with secret Pleasure, when the Gentle Winds should play among my
Amorous Branches, and teach my wanton Leaves, to dance the Measures of Young
Harmless Love; Or when I felt the seasonable Rain distilling on my withered
Bark, and from thence sliding to my thirsty Roots; Or when Great Phoebus prints
warm vigorous Kisses on my Cheeks and Neck. But if this be too proud a Thought,
I wish I Would only been some Humble Shrub, some Pigmy Plant, some Vegetable Dwarf,
a Page unto the Mighty Trees, subsisting on the Drops and Fragments of their
larger Banquets, meekly cringing at their Feet; whilst I stood safe and free
from Storms, under the Shade of their extended Boughs, in Happy low Obscurity.

When I pass through the Fields, and see the Harmless Sheep browzing upon the
tender Grass, and hear them bleating to their wanton Lambs, I cannot choose but
envy them a Life so void of Care and Pain. They range and sport at large in
Flowery Meadows, near some Crystal Stream, or take the Pastures of the
Mountains: Whilst Cheerful Shepherds tune their Pipes, and sing in Praise of
Amaryllis, Daphne, Sylvia, or some other Nymph; and watchful Dogs lie scouting
on the Plain, to give the Alarm, and chase away sly Wolves, and other Ravenous
Beasts.

After I Have let my Envy fix it self a while on these, a warbling Melody from
neighboring Groves diverts my Melancholy Thoughts, and turns 'em to new
Objects. Then I lament my Fate, in that I was not made a Nightingale, a Thrush,
a Lark, or any of the Feathered Quire, who with sweet cheerful Notes salute
Aurora and the Rising Sun, and chirp all Day the Praises of that Source of
Warmth and Life, who vests the Earth in Green Attire, who decks the Trees with
Verdant Leaves, and fills the World with Light. They chirp and fly from Tree to
Tree, from Bough to Bough, rejoicing in the Beams that dart and glide among the
moving Shades of Branches rocked by Winds. Their Thoughts are taken up in
building Nests, wherein to hatch their Young and shelter 'em from Injuries.
They have no Plots nor Politic Tricks, to undermine each other; but pass away
their Time in Innocent Security, and Harmless Pleasures.

Methinks, the Worms and little Reptiles of the Earth, are happier far than I.
They crawl and creep about in Hollow Trees, in Clefts of Rocks and Crannies of
the Ground, to hunt for Food and for Divertisement. They live at Ease, without
being racked by supernumerary Cares and Fears. And if some Ruder Foot of Man or
Beast, shall trample them by Chance to Death, or more malicious Hand with Stone
or other Weapon shall wilfully bereave them of their Life, it is done so
suddenly that they have no Sense of Pain: Whereas my Life's a constant
Martyrdom; a long continued Series of Torments.

I do not complain of the Distempers and Maladies which afflict my Body; though
those are sometimes so violent as to make me wish for Death, that so I might be
at Ease: But it is the fretting Anguish of my Mind, that forces all these Sighs
and Exolamations from me. I am embarass'd in the World: Snares compass me round
about: My own Good Nature has betrayed me: Those of my Blood conspire against
me; they hunt me up and down like a Partridge in the Wood; they closely pursue
my Life. The Kindnesses that I have sown, spring up in Blades of bitter
Ingratitude and Perfidy. My Seminaries bring forth Aconite and stinking Weeds,
instead of pleasant Flowers and wholesome Fruits. Tagot has set his Foot in all
my Works. That sly interloping Spirit, hates to see any good Thing prosper, or
come to Perfection: He steals behind us in all our Ways; and as fast as we
weave any Web of Virtue, he secretly unravels it, or deforms the Work with
intermixing some Threads of Vice. I am weary of striving against the Current of
my Fate. Oh! that I were as though I had never been! That my Soul were drenched
in Lethe's Forgetful Waters, where all Past Things are buried in Eternal
Oblivion! Then would my Anguish be at an End; Whereas I am now rolled about
upon a Wheel of Miseries.

Holy Santone, when thou shall read this, pity me; and amidst thy Divine
Ejaculations, dart up Mahmut's Soul to Paradise, on the Point of a strong
Thought, that so at least I may have a Moments Respite from my Constant Sadness.

Paris, 27th. of the 2d. Moon, of the Year 1667.
LETTER II. To the Kaimacham.
THere is now some Probability of a Peace between the English and the Dutch:
Which will also reconcile this Crown to that of Great Britain; Since the King
of France engaged in this War, only on the Account of the Dutch, his Allies.
The Advances toward this Accommodation, took their Rise from the Alliance
lately concluded between the States of the United Provinces, the King of
Denmark, the Duke of Brandenburgh, and the Princes of Brunswick. The King of
England protests against the Dutch, as the First Aggressors, in that they had
taken above Two Hundred of his Merchant-ships, before he offered the least Act
of Hostility. Which the States seeming to acknowledge, desire the King to
appoint some Neutral Place of Treaty with them and their Allies, in Order to a
Peace, the Security of Navigation, and the Establishment of Commerce for the
future.

Here is great Joy for the Birth of a young Princess, of whom the Queen was
delivered on the 2d. of the Moon of Jannary. She is called God's New Years Gift
to France: In regard, the First Day of that Moon begins the Year with the
Christians. And it is common among them to send mutual Gifts and Presents to one
another at that Time, which they call, New Years Gifts. And so it seems, God
Almighty has appeared very Modisn and Complaisant, in thus timing the Nativity
of the Royal Babe: For which they express their Thanks in Revelling, Dancing,
Ballads, and a Thousand other Vanities. And these Divertisements continue to
this Time, it being the Nazarenes Carnaval; a Season consecrated to Sport and
Mirth, to Liberty, Buffoonry, and all Manner of Comical and Ridiculous
Apishness.

During this Time, you shall see an Infinite Variety of odd Humors, and
mimical Actions in the open Streets, according to every Man's particular
Fancy. Here you shall meet with one dressed half in the French and half in the
Spanish Fashion. On the left side of his Head hangs dangling down a long thick
curled Peruke, which reaches to his Breast; whilst on the Right you see nothing
but his own Hair, crop'd close to his Ears. A long Mustach as black as Jet,
graces the Right Side of his upper Lip; whilst on the Left, he is Beardless as
a Boy of Seven Years Old. And so from head to Foot, he wears two contrary
Garbs. One walks about with Gloves upon his Feet, and Shoes upon his Hands:
Another wears his Breeches like a Mantle on his Shoulders. Here comes a Stately
Coach, jogging along with grave slow Pace, and drawn by Six fair Horses, as if
some Prince or Cardinal were in it; when behold there is nothing but a silly Ass
puts forth his giddy Head, with flapping Ears, half drunk with the jolting,
unaccustomed Motion. Sometimes he brays aloud, and then the Rabble fall
alaughing. A Thousand other Fopperies there are, not worth thy Knowledge: For,
both the Noble and the Vulgar are all upon the Frolic at this Time, and
indulge their wanton Phancies to the Height. But it is a fatal Season for the
poor Cats; few of which escape the Multitude, whose peculiar Pastime it is to
toss these Creatures in a Blanket till they are dead; or else to tie them Two
and Two together by the Tails, and then they will bite and scratch one another to
Death. The Cocks also are generally great Martyrs during the Carnaval; the
Rabble have a Hundred Cruel Ways to murder them in Sport. All their Devices are
Inhumane and Bloody. They did not learn these profane Courses from Jesus, or
any of the Prophets or Apostles of God: But they are the Relics of Gentile
Vanity, in the Beginning connived at by the Priests, the easier to retain their
Proselytes in Obedience; who would rather have parted with their New Religion,
than with their Old Barbarous Customs. And thus the Pagan Fooleries were handed
down to the Posterity of the Primitive Christians, and were adopted into the
Family of Church Traditions: And Men are not more zealous for the Gospel it
self, than for these Ridiculous Prophanations of it: So dangerous a Thing it is
for Governors, by a Criminal Indulgence, to permit their Subjects any Liberty
which interferes with the Fundamental Principles of the Law: For, such a
Dispensation once granted, passes into a Precedent, which in Process of Time,
becomes of equal Force with the Law it self. And by such preposterous Methods
of winning and retaining Converts, Christianity arrived to the height of
corruption it is now infected with.

Sage Minister, it was for this Reason God raised up our Holy Prophet, and gave
him a new Law, with Power to reform and chastise the Infidels. He planted the
Undefiled Faith with Scymeter in Hand; not palliating or encouraging the
smallest Vicious Practice; but subduing all Things by the Dint of Reason or the
keen Edge of the Sword. God hasten his Return; for the Prevarications of this
Age require it.

Paris, 27th. of the 2d. Moon, of the Year 1667.
LETTER III. To Dgnet Oglou.
I Believe thou have not forgot the Observations we used to make, on the
Religion of the Christians, when we were Slaves together in Sicily. How
Ridiculous some of their Practices appeared to us, and yet what a Sanctity was
manifest in others? How much we approved the Majesty of their Public Worship,
the Solemnity of their High-Mass, the Gravity of their Processions? And yet how
great was our Disgust, when we considered that all these Honors were performed
to Figures and Statues of Stone, Wood, Silver, Gold, or other Materials, the
Creatures of the Painter or Carver?

We scanned their Doctrines also, which we learned from their Priests and
Books, and descanted variously on them, as they were more or less conform to
the Truth, and to the Volume brought down from Heaven. In a Word, we praised
the Good, and censured what was Evil in their Faith and Manners, or at least,
what we thought to be so; for herein we followed the Dictates of our Education.

But now in our Riper Years, if we should call over our former Thoughts,
perhaps we should be of a different Judgment, and find Matter to condemn even
in our own past Censures: For whatever we might then think of the Nazarenes;
upon a maturer search, I cannot find them to be altogether such gross Idolaters
and Infidels, as we and all Mussulmans are apt to believe.

That which gives me the greatest Scandal is, That their Doctors entertain some
Unwarrantable Speculations about Three Subsistences in One Essence, and are too
venturous in their Thoughts concerning the Eternal Generation of the WORD, and
Emanation of the BREATH, by which they say, All Things were Created, and are
conserved in their Beings. They teach a Doctrine Repugnant to the Alcoran, when
they say, That God has a Companion Equal to Himself.

As to the Incarnation of Jesus the Son of Mary, the Nazarenes assert nothing
but what is suitable to the Alcoran, which teaches us, That he is the WORD of
God. In the History of his Life, they indeed come short of the Mussulmans:
There being not the least mention made, in the whole Book of the Gospel, of
many Passages in his Infancy and tender Years, wherewith the Alcoran, with
other Holy Books and Traditions of the Ancients, acquaints the True Believers.
The Messenger of God tells us, That Jesus spoke in his Cradle, resolved Doubts,
cleared up Mistakes, and preached the Unity of the Divine Essence. Other
Writings also inform us, That while he was Young, he formed the Figures of
diverse Birds and Beasts, of Clay and his own Spittle, and having breathed on
them, they became Living Creatures, and prostrated themselves at his Feet. They
relate also, That he made a Pigeon, which flew up and down through diverse
Regions, and brought him News of whatever was done in the Courts of Foreign
Princes; and that from the Day of his Birth, to that of his Translation, Twelve
Angels waited on him, and brought him down Food from Paradise. Of these Things
the Christians are ignorant, and of many other Passages. So that in the whole,
it is Evident, that the Mussulmans have a more Particular Relation of the Life
of Jesus, than the Christians themselves have, since we recount those Miracles
and other Actions of his, whereof the Gospel is silent.

But then, on the other Side, they believe Things concerning his Death, whereof
neither the Alcoran, nor any other of our Writings or Traditions make any
Mention, unless it be to confute the Error of the Nazarenes in that Point. I
have heard the Arguments of their Learned Doctors, and comparing them with our
Objections, I know not well what to conclude.

They insist much on the Public Signs and Wonders, that fell out at the Time
of the supposed Crucifixion of the Messiah; The Rending of Rocks, opening of
Graves, Resurrection of many Dead, and the Preternatural Eclipse of the Sua,
when the Moon was in Sight in the other Part of the Horizon at the same Moment:
Which made a great Philosopher then in Egypt, cry out, Either the Frame of the
World is dissolved, or the God of Nature suffers.

They tell a Story also of a certain Ship, that was on that very Day sailing in
the Archipelago; and that as they passed by certain Rocks, the Mariners heard a
Voice calling, Thamus, Thamus, very often and loud. Now there being one of that
Name on Board the Vessel, he answered to his Name: Upon which the Voice said,
When thou come to the Island of the Palodes, proclaim it aloud, That the
Great Pan is Dead Which he did accordingly, and there followed a horrible
howling and roaring from the Shore of that Island. This Passage was afterward
made known to the Senate of Rome, who thereupon, at the Instance of some Noble
Romans, sent to enquire in the Provinces, Whether any Remarkable Person had
died on that Day; and they were informed, That the Jews had on the same Day put
to Death Jesus the Son of Mary. And Tiberius the Emperor, on the Credit of
this Passage, being also informed of the Miracles which Jesus wrought among the
Jews, conceiving an immediate Veneration for so Divine a Person, caused his
Statue to be set up in the Capitol, and would have had him numbered among the
Gods; but in this he was opposed by the Senate, because they had before
decreed, That no new Deities should be added to the Calendar.

In these Things I rely on the Account which the Christians give of the Death
of Jesus, though they bring Authorities also and Testimonies of their very
Enemies, and inveterate Persecutors, the Gentiles; who therefore one would
think, cannot be suspected of Partiality. In a word, I know not what to think
of these Things. For, if it be true, that Jesus died on the Cross for the Sins
of the World, as the Christians believe, and that there is no other Way to be
saved, but by believing this; then in what a sad Condition are all the Jews and
Mussulmans, the one glorying in having murdered the Savior of the World, and
the Other not believing that he was murdered? The First seem to merit most of
Men; since, though the Act was Cruel in it self, yet according to this
Doctrine, it brought Salvation to all our Race: And therefore there were a sort
of Christians, in Former Times, who worshipped the Serpent that tempted Eve,
because according to their Faith, that Temptation was the first Step to
Mankind's Happiness, after Adam's Fall; And they placed Judas (who betrayed
Jesus to the Jews) among the Saints, for having been so particular an
Instrument in the World's Redemption.

If Jesus be the Savior of Men, it is absolutely necessary to believe in him.
But whether he be, or be not, the Faith of the Christians in that Point cannot
hurt them, since our Holy Prophet himself has taught us, That Christians shall
be saved, as well as the Mussulmans: Whereas the Christians say, it is
impossible for any to be saved, who follow the Law of Mahomet. So that they
have our own Grant for their Salvation, which they deny to us. This is a great
Advantage on their Side, in the Controversy betwixt us.

For my Part, I tell thee ingenuously, were I convinced that Jesus was the Son
of God, and that he suffered Death for the Sake of Men I could readily embrace
most of the other Tenets of Christianity without Scruple. I should not be
frighted at their Invocation of Saints, since it is the same as we our selves
practice; nor would their Images and Pictures startle my Faith; I should look
upon these and a Thousand more, as things indifferent in themselves, and only
made Lawful or Unlawful, by the Sanction of Divine Authority.

I should be most puzzled to know what Church to fix in, among so many, all
pretending to the Right Way. I have examined their Different Opinions, and find
Reason or something very like it, on all Sides. I admire the Abstinence of the
Greeks, Armenians, and generally of all the Eastern Christians; yet their
Ignorance distastes me. I honor the Learning and Politeness of the Roman
Church, and could almost vail to their Pretensions of Antiquity, Universality,
and Incorrupt Doctrine; but I am highly scandalized at their Licentiousness,
Pride, and Cruetly. There is much to be argued for the Cophti's, Abyssines,
Melchites, the Christians of St. John, and other Churches; but more to be said
against them. In fine, if I were to turn Christian, I should be in a
Wilderness, not knowing which Path to take, for Fear of missing the Right.

In the State therefore wherein I am, I will think Honorably of Jesus, as also
of Mary his Mother, who at her daily Return from the Temple, found a Thousand
Sorts of Flowers in her Oratory. I will not speak Evil of any Person that has
the Character of a Saint; but in general will desire the Intercession of all
that are near to God: It Is ten to one, if some of them do not vouchsafe to pray
for me. But whether they do, or not, God hears me, and observes my Devotion;
and if he please, my Petitions shall be granted. As for the Rest, I will
endeavor, in all Things, to do as I would be done to, keeping my Conscience
free from Stain, that so I may die in Peace; and what becomes of me afterward,
it is in vain to be sollicitous, since the Decrees of Fate are Irreversible.

Tell me now, my Friend, whether these Thoughts and Resolves be not more
agreeable to Humanity, than to be a Furious Bigot for I know not what? Is that
a commendable Zeal for Religion, which under Pretense of defending the Truth,
sticks not to assert a Thousand Lies? Or that a laudable Charity for Souls,
which in Order to their Salvation, takes infinite Pains to set the World
together by the Ears, and embroil Mankind in perpetual Wars? What else do those
Disturbers of Humane Race, who not content with the Limits which the Fortune of
their Birth has set them, invade the Peaceable Possessions of their Neighbors,
commit all Sorts of Violences, Rapines, and Outrages; and all this under
Pretext of Reforming the Manners of Men, introducing Purity of Religion, and
fulfilling the Will of Heaven? As if it were a Mark of a Divine Commission, to
be barbarously Unjust, Perfidious and Salvage; and that the Height of Piety,
consisted in shedding Humane Blood!

For my Part, I cannot approve of these Practices, and therefore think it safer
to stand aloof from all Religions thus Cruelly established, than by entering
into their Inhumane Secrets, and swearing to their Sanguine Articles,
incorporate my self with professed Murderers, under the Notion of being a Good
Man.

Happy are those Innocent Nations in the East, who from their First
Progenitors, have kept Inviolate the Law of Nature: Who never have defiled
themselves with the Blood of Men or Beasts; but every one contenting himself
with his Native Home-stall, and the Fruits of his own Land, makes no
Encroachments on those that dwell near him, nor butchers the Harmless Animals,
to gratify his Ill-nurtur'd Appetite. These sit under the Shade of their own
Trees, and bathe themselves in the adjoining Streams: They go in Peace to the
Houses of their Rural-Gods, and present 'em with Flowers, Rice, Fruits and such
as the Ground brings forth: They never dream of Foreign Conquests, nor are
troubled with Domestic Broils, but lead their Lives in a perpetual
Tranquillity, and Innocence. All that they desire of Heaven, is the Continuance
of those harmless Delights they at present enjoy. As for the tumultuary
Pleasures of other Mortals, they have 'em in Contempt. This is an Umbrage of
the Felicity we are promised in Paradise, where the Sound of the Drum and the
Trumpet shall not be heard, and the Instruments of War shall be of no Use.

If thou chargest me with Inconstancy in my Opinions, I neither deny it nor am
ashamed: It being better to change ones Thoughts every Day, than to be fixed in
Error all ones Life. This to a Friend.

Paris, 18th. of the 3rd. Moon, of the Year 1667.
LETTER IV. To Afis, Bassa.
THE Warriors and Mechanics, Statesmen and Fiddlers, Courtiers and Husbandmen,
Students and Chimney-Sweepers, are all taken up in discoursing of the mighty
Preparations, the Grand Signior is making to besiege Candia. They talk of
Fifteen Thousand Pioneers, who are at work in Order to this grand Undertaking;
and that the City is blocked up by an Army of Sixty Thousand Men; That they
have been raising Batteries round about it ever since the Moon of December; and
that the Sultan is resolved to win this Important Place, though he hazard half
the Ottoman Empire.

This is refreshing News to Mahmut, who has heard Nothing but Improsperous
Stories of the Mussulman Arms these many Years. Now I begin to lift up my Head,
and take Courage, when the Empire of True Believers makes some Noise and Figure
in the World: Whereas, my heart perpetually drooped before. I was like one
among the Dead.

It was but last Year, when the Nazarenes could boast, that notwithstanding all
the Menaces and Preparations of the Grand Signior, yet the Venetians were the
First in Field by Land, and appeared Earliest with their Fleet at Sea, doing
wonderful Things in Dalmatia, and blocking up Canea in the Isle of Candy: Now,
it is to be hoped, they will change their Note, and begin to consider what a
Formidable Force they have provoked against them, even the Puissance of all
Asia, Men of War from their Nativities, an Army of select and chosen Soldiers,
Undaunted Hero's, Sons of Thunder, Magnanimous, Invincible, and destined to
vanquish the Uncircumcised Nations.

My Heart is revived within me, at the Contemplation of sure and certain
Victories, attending this glorious Expedition. My Spirits are dilated with Joy;
I celebrate a Dunalma in my Breast. I am like an Arabian Horse, that foams,
curvetts, and paws the Ground in Fierceness, when he hears the Sound of the
Trumpet warning to Battle. His Eyes sparkle with Martial Fury, a Smoke goes out
of his Nostrils, he lifts up the Voice of his Courage, his Rider can hardly
restrain him. So am I all in Transport at these good Tidings: I can hardly
contain my self within the Compass of Moderation. As Old as I am, I feel a
Youthful Vigor stirring in my Veins. Methinks, I long to be in the Heat of the
Sacred Combat, in the thickest Clouds of Gunpowder-Smoak, to stand the Shock of
Showers of Bullets, or with my Scymeter in hand to hew my Way to Immortal
Honor and Felicity: For, those who die in this Cause, go straight to Paradise.
But, I must be contented with this tame, humble Post, and serve the Grand
Signior in the Manner prescribed by my Superiors. I tell thee, it is no small
Mortification for an Active Spirit, to be thus confined. But, Resignation
becomes every good Mussulman; and I willingly Sacrifice my Passions, to the
Pleasure of the Grandees of the Port, and the Interest of the Ottoman Empire.

Here I sit, like a Fox in his Den, watching the Motions of the Infidels: If
any thing occurrs worthy of Notice, out I bolt upon it, and make it my Prey,
and send it as a Present to the August Ministers. I write to all by Turns, and
therefore none has Reason to take Exceptions.

If thou would know what they are doing here in the Court of France; They are
mustering the King 's Troops; they are revelling and feasting at Versailles,
the King's new Palace, where the Princes exercise themselves with the Noble
Discipline, which they call, Running in Squadrons. Whilst Thousands of People
flock daily to Versailles, from Paris and all the Adjacent Countries round
about, partly to be Spectators of these Royal Paftimes, and partly to behold
that Gorgeous Fabric, which is esteemed the Fairest and most Magnificent in
the World.

Serene Bassa, this Monarch has a vast Genius: Whatsoever he undertakes, he
accomplishes; and all his Performances are surprizingly Great. He has a deep
Forecast, and seldom fails in his Judgment of what will probably come to pass.
He is happily made, born, and brought up. A Prince, one would think, designed
by Fate for the Empire of the West.

Renowned Afis, I kiss the Hem of thy Illustrious Robe, and with a profound
Obeisance bid thee Adieu.

Paris, the 20th. of the 4th. Moon, of the Year 1667.
LETTER V. To Hasnadar Bassi, Chief Treasurer to the Sultan.
I AM convinced, it is now Time for me to be resolute, bold and assured in my
own Conduct: For it is in vain to ask Counsel of the Sublime Ministers. I have
addressed my self at certain Seasons to them on that Account, ever since I came
first to Paris: But not one of them has vouchsafed me an Answer, or given me
any particular Instructions how to deport my self in an Emergent Peril of
Discovery: Whether I should own my self an Agent for the Grand Signior, or deny
it: Whether I should boldly stand the Brunt of all Events, or fly to Artifices
and Evasions: Whether I should persist in acting the Moldavian, and continue to
personate a Christian Student, an Ecclesiastic Candidate under the feigned
Name of Titus; or frankly tell them, I Am a Mussulman, an Arab, and secret Slave
of the Sultan.

I ought to have been certify'd in these Cases; and not left at Random to
guess, at this vast Distance, the Pleasure of my Superiors. But since it is
their Will thus to make Trial of my Fidelity, Prudence and Skill, in warding
off the Assaults of Common Chance, Misfortune, and the Attempts of sly
designing Men; I Will be as cunning as I can, without embarassing my Peace with
constant Panick Fears and Apprehensions of I know not what. No vain Endeavors
to avoid the fixed Decrees of Fate, shall make me change my Lodging, or fly
from every menacing Contingency. I Will rather trust to Providence and present
Courage, the Justice of my Cause and Native Innocence, leaving the Event to
Destiny.

By what I have said, thou will perceive I am in some Trouble; and I can assure
thee, thou art not mistaken. I Am hatter'd, hunted up and down, and persecuted
worse than the Foxes, Hares and Hinds near Adrianople. I Am an Old Man, and yet
they envy me the Happiness of a Natural Death; they would not have me go down
to the Grave in Peace. I have been imprisoned, threatened, dogged up and down
the Streets, assassinated in the Dark, had my Chamber searched, my Letters in
Danger of being seized, with those of the Supreme Ministers. I have run the
Risque of a Discovery, by meeting causually an Infidel, whose Slave I once was
at Palermo in Sicily. I have been undermined by Mussulmans as well as
Nazarenes; by Strangers, and by Solomon my Cousin. Yet in all these Perils I
have acquitted my self Faithfully, come off with Success, and saved the Honor
of my Sovereign; which is the only Thing for which I am sollicitous. But for
ought I know, my Care may prove in Vain, and the Evils which I have so long
fortunately escaped, may now surprise and ruin me. As to my self I care not
what becomes of me; and if the Secrets of my Commission be revealed, let the
Ministers of the Port answer for that, who would never give me the least
Direction.

About Two or Three Years ago, I was forced to remove from my Old Lodgings,
where I had resided ever since my First coming to Paris. The Dangers that then
assaulted me, drove me to this House where I still am, in a very obscure Place,
by the Wall of the City. Yet even hither am I pursued by watchful Enemies: New
Hazards threaten me on all Hands. But I Am resolved to fly no more, unless it be
into the City-Ditch, where I can find Admittance through my Landlord's Cellar.
There is a private Passage, dug perhaps in Elder Times, during some Siege, to
serve the straight Necessities of those who then possessed this House. It is so
cunningly contrived, that Human Wit can never discover it, unless by Chance, or
by Direction of those that know it. The Ditch is dry, the Door of the House
always locked; and my Trusty Host swears, no body shall come in by Day or
Night, till I have made a safe Retreat. So that if all the Officers in Paris
should come to search, I should have Time to pack up my Papers, and slink away
into my lurking Hole. And if they should by monstrous Accident find the
concealed Avenue, I could soon slip into the Fields, through the Last Postern
in the Wall, and lock them in beyond the possibility of Pursuit: Whilst I took
Care to hide my self afresh, or leave the Country.

This is my Final Resolution, if ever I Am put to an Extremity again. In the
mean Time, I desire thee to make it part of thy Care, that Mahmut shall not
want for Money to carry on the Sultan's Private Affairs without a Baulk. I do
not demand Unreasonable Things: Let me but live, and have enough to defray the
Necessary Expenses of my Service, and that is all I crave. But let my Supplies
be well timed and proportioned, that I may husband my Pension to the best
Advantage: Or else I must always press, and that is a Thing I hate. I have writ
to all the Treasurers that went before thee on the same Account, and with Equal
Boldness. Therefore take not in ill Part what comes from Blunt Sincerity, and
Constant, Full Desires to serve effectually the Grand Signior. It will be very
easy for thee to anticipate Mahmut's Expectations, without exceeding the
Orders thou have received. Money be damned, if we could breathe and serve our
Friends, and carry on the Affairs of Human Life without it. I am an Arab, and
could as freely pass away my Time in harmless Rambles over the Provinces of
Asia; as thus to be confined to Narrow Fretting Circumstances, the only Effects
of too Unshaken, Unregarded and Incorruptible Loyalty.

Wealthy Dispenser of the Ottoman Gold, I ask no Alms, but my appointed Salary.
In sending of which, I desire thee to remember the Old Roman Proverb, which
says, That he gives Twice, who gives in Season.

Paris, 9th. of the 6th. Moon, of the Year 1667.
LETTER VI. To Nathan Ben Saddi, a Jew at Vienna.
I Know not whether I shall live to hear from thee again, or to send thee
another Letter. Age, Sickness, Misfortune, together with the Malice of Men,
have laid a Thousand Snares for my Life; I am, as it were, hunted by Nature,
Providence, Destiny, and Chance, into the very Toils of Death; From whence it
will be very difficult for me to escape. Not to amuse thee, I am in danger of
being discovered, seized, imprisoned; and then thou know, I can expect no
less than to be put to the Torture, and racked with a Thousand Inventions of
Cruelty, That so they may force me to confess, what I am, and what my Business
is in this Kingdom and City, where I have resided so many Years.

I was suspected by Cardinal Richlieu, for a Moselman, as I have Reason to
believe from several convincing Circumstances of that Minister's Carriage to
me, ever since his first Acquaintance with me at Paris. And the same jealousy
caused his Successor, Cardinal Mazarini, to put me into the Bastile, where I
was closely confined, for the Space of Six Moons. And I might have lain there
till this Time, for ought I know, had it not been for the good Conduct and
honest Fidelity of Eliachim. In fine, though I have hitherto escaped Discovery,
yet I cannot flatter my self, that I shall always do so. If they once lay Hold
on me again, they will certainly search me for the Scar of Circumcision; and
then, all the Arguments the Wit of Man can find, will not be of Force, to blind
them any longer, or save me from the Vengeance of the State. They will
certainly put me to a Cruel Death.

However, I Will baffle 'em if I can, and if I once escape, I Will bid Adieu to
Paris, if not to the whole Kingdom: Being resolved not to trust any more to the
deceitful Security of new Lodgings in this City, and a vain Removal from one
Precinct and House to another: For, the very Air of Paris, is fatal to me. I am
never free from Terror, whilst within these Melancholy Walls. The Genius of the
Place, is at Enmity with Mine. Every Thing I cast my Eyes on, seems to lower
and frown upon me; I start at the Voices of Men, going along the Streets, and
discoursing about their own Affairs: And if any one knocks at the Door, I Am
presently upon my Guard, my anxious Soul still laboring with sad Presages of
some Calamity at Hand, ready to rush upon me unawares.

Perhaps, I may go to Lions, where a Stranger may live an Age concealed, and
void of Peril, as in this City. Or, I may take a farther Journey to Marseilles,
Toulon, or any other Seaport Town. Where I will expect new Orders from my
Superiors.

In the mean Time, thou may continue to address thy Letters as before: For
that Course can never fail, let me be where it pleases Heaven. Eliachim will
take Care of all Things. I writ to the Hasnadar-Bassi on the same Account,
desiring fresh Supplies of Money: Which I suppose will come by the Way of
Vienna. If so, I trust to thy Prudence, in ordering my Bills with Speed, and
the usual Cautiousness.

Nathan, Adieu: And whatever becomes of me, live thou long and happily to serve
the Grand Signior.

Paris, the 9th. of the 16th. Moon, of the Year 1667.
LETTER VII. To the Venerable Mufti.
AS the poor injured Labourer, or Slave oppressed by Cruel and Obdurate
Masters; as the Despairing Client, who can find no Justice from the Cheicks,
Cadi's, or Cadilesquers; fly immediately to the Seraill', to make their last
Appeal, and seek Redress from the Great Arbiter of Humane Feuds: So falls poor
Mahmut prostrate at thy Feet, O Sacred Oracle of Mussulmans; begging from thy
Authority, whom no Believer dares to disobey, what I could never yet obtain
from any Minister of State, or Bassa of the Bench: That is, how I must act in
Case I am discovered, or barely suspected, examined, and put to my Oath,
concerning my Business at Paris? Lay thy speedy Commands on those whose Care it
ought to be, that no Intelligence, Advice or Counsel be wanting to me, the
Faithful Agent of the Port, residing here Incognito, a Spy upon the Infidels.
Or, at least, vouchsafe to send me thy Instructions, Rules infallible, Orders
of perfect Wisdom, and Divine Sagacity.

I cannot for the future stand the Brunt of long suspected Casualties; Events
which glimmer from afar, like distant Ignes Fatui, or other Vagrant Meteors of
the Night: For, so Contingencies appear, which are to come, uncertain, and
remote; though sometimes near at Hand; yet with deceitful show, they still
mislead bewildered Mortals in the Dark. So, the tired Traveller in Libyan
Wastes, is tantaliz'd by mocking Rays of Sands, in drifted Heaps, or flying
Bodies, loosely wafted by the Winds; on which the Moon and Stars casting their
Beams, create Refractions like Domestic Lamps or Tapers; and encourage the
disconsolate Man to hope for neighboring Villages or Towns, where he may rest
his weary Limbs, and find an Hospitable Entertainment; secure from Dragons,
Lions, Tigers, or the more Fierce and Cruel Race of Men, who lurk in secret
Places of the affrighting Desert, to rob unwary Strangers, as they pass.

It Is sad, most Holy Patriarch of the Faithful, That Men are thus degenerate,
and transcend the Horrid Nature of the Wildest Beasts! But, sadder still, That
Cities, first designed for Sanctuaries of the Distressed, should become worse
than Deserts, and more Inhospitable than the Purlieu of Dragons, or the
dreadful Haunts of Lynxes, Crocodiles, and other Animals of Prey: That Men
pretending to be Civilized, to live in Community, and Reciprocal Participation
of all Good Offices; Incorporated by the same Laws, for no other End, but to
help, assist and defend one another, against all foreign Enemies; should,
instead of this, prove more Barbarous than Salvages, and more Voracious than
Cannibals, whilst every Citizen preys on his Neighbor, and devours him, whom
he has sworn to protect. They all live by Robbery and Spoil. The Rich and
Potent, fleece those whose Wealth is not sufficient to defend them from
Oppression. Thus are Towns and Cities, from celebrated Refuges of Men, become
the Dens of Thieves, and Cruel Murderers. The whole Earth is stained with the
Blood of the Poor: The Cries of Widows and Orphans pierce the Heavens: The
Generations of Men are corrupted with Fraud, Avarice, Persidy, Ambition, Envy,
and a Thousand other Vices. Brother cannot trust the Son of his own Mother.
Fathers are Unnatural to their Genuine Offspring. Children think the Days
tedious which prolong their Parents Lives. Self-Love teaches a Man to betray
his beloved Friend, for whom he rather ought to lose his Life. An Universal
Defection from Justice, and sound Morality, reigns every where.

But, what is most surprising, is, That even among those who bear the Glorious
Title and Character of the True Faithful Mussulmans, there should be found a
Crew of Miscreants, Villains, and Traitors to God, his Prophet and their
Sovereign. I speak not of such, whose Genial Inclinations tempt them to commit
vulgar Sins, which injure no Man but themselves. I tax not Drunkards,
Gamesters, and those Amorous Persons, who waste their Bodies, Time, Estates,
and sacrifice their Reputation to Voluptuousness. These are but Venial Sins,
and soon washed off, by the appointed Purifications, and Penances. A little
Water, Dust, or Sand, with Fasting and devout Invocation of the Eternal Allah,
cancels these Peccadillo's; they are all put to the Account of Human Frailty:
Such is the Pleasure of Eternal Goodness. But I accuse the blacker Crimes of
those, whom fretting Envy stimulates to persecute their harmless Neighbor; or
base Ingratitude prompts to betray their Friends; or Native Malice teaches to
seek out all Occasions of doing Mischief in the World. A Busy, Restless sort of
Men, buzzing about like Wasps or Hornets, stinging every one they fasten on.
Or, like the Pune's of Paris, a troublesome Kind of Insects, which interrupt
the sweet Repose of Men, creeping upon them in their Beds and slumbers, and
slyly biting them, to suck their Blood.

Such are the Men of whom I now complain; who hatter me from Stratagem to
Stratagem, from one Retrenchment to another: Whose Crime is double, in that
they are Persons of my own Religion; Professors of the Genuine Faith, brought
down from Heaven; Followers of the Prophet, who could neither write nor read;
and Subjects to the Grand Signior.

It Is a long Time, since I had first Occasion to accuse some at the Seraglio,
of private, sly Attempts, to undermine and ruin me, that they might gain my
Post. 'Twill seem Invidious, even in my own Defense, after so many Addresses to
the Ministers of the Port, now to repeat their Names; and discompose thy Sacred
Thoughts with Black Memoirs of Human Malice. It Is not Revenge I seek, but for
the future, how to escape, if not prevent, the like Conspiracies. Nor, is it
for my self alone, I cherish this Unusual Zeal and Care; but for my Master's
Interest and Honor.

I Have served near Thirty Years in this Precarious Station, and never made the
least false Step; or, if I have, 'twas not discerned; which is the same Thing
in Effect. And, I Am very unwilling to miscarry at last, through the Treachery
of my pretended Friends at Constantinople, or for want of full Instructions
from the Imperial Divan.

It Is for this Reason, I presume to address to the Dust of thy Feet, Supreme
Judge of the Faithful, begging the Interposition of thy Paternal Authority, on
my Behalf.

There is one Thing more, which in all Humility I recommend to thy Wisdom and
Sanctity. I have often writ to thy Predecessor on the same Account, beseeching
him to promote the Translation of Histories and other Learned Books out of
Foreign Languages into Turkish or Arabic: That so Knowledge might flourish
among the Mussulmans, and the Infidels might have no more Ground to call us
Barbarous. Let Men skillful in Languages and Sciences be sought for. There are
not wanting such at Constantinople, and in other Parts of the Empire. Let them
be employed in compiling an Universal History of the World, in Turkish; more
ample, true, and correct than any that has gone before it in Greek, Latin, or
any other Language. This will bring Eternal Honor to the Ottoman Empire; and
prove no hard Task to them that shall undertake it; since it will be only a
Choice Collection out of other Authors; a Garland of Flowers culled from the
various Fields of History, and composed together with an Order full of Luster
and Beauty, the whole Work being interwoven with a Chain of Chronological
Years; which will not only give it a Singular Grace, but also be of great
Advantage to the Mussulman Readers.

Successor of the Apostles, remember, That though our Holy Lawgiver could neither
write nor read, yet the succeeding Caliphs encouraged Learning. Benediction on
the Souls of them and their Posterity. So will future Ages bless thy Memory, if
thou vouchsafest to encourage this Glorious Work. And Ithuriel, the Angel of
Science, will make thee his Associate in Paradise.

With profound Submissions I retire from thy Sacred Presence, begging thy
Absolution, and Blessing.

Paris, 9th. of the 6th. Moon, of the Year 1667.
LETTER VIII. To Cara Hali, Physician to the Grand Signior.
AMongst other Dispatches, I could not forget what I owe to the long continued
Friendship which has been between us. Having Leisure therefore before the Post
goes, I will inform thee of a Birth, which has occasioned little Joy to the
Parents, but much Admiration among all that hear of it, and raised learned
Disputes between the Professors of Physic and Surgery.

In the Town of Weerted near Ardenburgh in the Low Countries, a Woman was
lately delivered of a Monstrous Child with Two Heads, Two Necks, Four Arms, and
proportionably all Parts both outward and inward double to the Navil, which
seemed to be the Center of Union between the Two Bodies: For from thence
downwards, there appeared only the Proportion and Shape of One Body, with Two
Thighs, Legs and Feet. The Faces were different; One Squalid and Irregular,
without a Nose or Mouth, except a Kind of Orifice under the Chin; For the Eyes
possessed the Place of the Mouth, and a perfect Masculine Genital took up the
Room of the Nose: The other was fair and made with Symetry, having nothing
extraordinary, saving Two Teeth grown out of the Gums.

This Irregular Production has been curiously dissected by a Famous Anatomist,
who found Two Hearts, Two Stomachs, and the other Vitals all single. What I
have said is attested by Five professed Physicians, who opened this Wonderful
Creature.

There have been many Examples of extraordinary Births, especially in these
Parts of the World. And I have read in a French Author, a Man of Credit, That
in the Year 1592 of the Christians Hegira, a Woman of Alsatia, brought forth at
once an Hundred and Fifty Children, each but Three Inches long.

But what I now shall tell thee, though it be not Remarkable for the Number of
Children, yet has something singular in the Circumstances that attended it.

Irmentrude, the Countess of Altorfe, accused one of her Neighbor's of
Adultery, because she had Three Children at a Birth, saying, She deserved to be
tied up in a Sack, and thrown into the Sea. Next Year the Countess her self was
delivered of Twelve Sons all at a Birth. And touched with Remorse for the
Sentence which she had pronounced against the other Woman; concluding it now a
Just Punishment for her self, sent a Maid with Eleven of these Newborn
Infants, commanding her to drown them in the next River, reserving only one to
be the Heir of his Father's Estate.

Fate had so determined, that her Husband the Earl met the Maid as she was
going to commit this Execrable Villainy: And asking her what she had got in her
Lap, she answered, I am going to drown a few Young Whelps. The Earl being a
great Hunter, and consequently a Lover of Dogs, had a Mind to see whether any
of these Whelps were of a promising Aspect: When to his Astonishment he found
Eleven of Humane Shape, all Living and Perfect, but very small. He pressed the
Maid so far, that she confessed the whole Truth. Whereupon enjoining her
Silence, and Assurance of a good Reward, he caused her to carry them to one of
his Tenants; where being all cherished and laid warm, he disposed of them
afterward in convenient Places, to be nursed and brought up till they came of
Age. Then he sent for them privately to his House, having first apparelled them
in the same Fashion as their Brother was in who dwelt at Home.

As soon as the Countess cast her Eye on them, and observed their Number and
Faces, so exactly resembling him who had been always with her, she wept in a
Passion betwixt Shame and Joy, confessing her former Cruel Intention; and
falling at the Feet of her Lord, he pardoned her. From these Eleven descend the
Family of the Welphs or Guelphs, so Renowned in Germany, and bearing this Name
from the Maid's Answer to the Earl, when she had them in her Lap.

Such strange Productions as these, occasion various Enquiries among the
Philosophers here in the West: Whether Human Souls be Generated like the Bodies
to which they are united, or whether they are Created by the Immediate Power of
God. Assuredly these Infidels are much in the Dark, and shut their Eyes against
the Light of the Oriental Sages. If the Prophets should rise from the Dead,
they would not be able to convince these Vncircumcis'd, That all Things Visible
and Invisible are from Eternity, and that there is Nothing New in the System of
the Universe, except the Various Outward Forms, which change indeed, according
to the Laws of Endless Transmigration, and sometimes according to the Frolicks
of Nature, who loves to mix her Interludes and Antiques, with the established
Senses of every Age.

What I have writ, is to divert thee; But when shall I have an Answer as from
an Old Friend? Let not the Honors of the Serail', make thee forget those with
whom thou have once been familiar. My Dear Hali, be not too much a Courtier.
Thy long Silence and Reservedness forces this Language from me. Shall
Constantinople blot out thy Remembrance of Arabia? Or, the Blast of a Monarch's
Favor, be more Valuable than the Durable Integrity of a Countryman, a Friend?
If the Saltan trusts his Life in thy Hands, do thou not know that a Fit of
Gripes, the Stone, Gout, or any Violent Distemper, will turn all his Confidence
into Jealousy? I tell thee, he will suspect Poison in thy very Looks.

Therefore, continue to be the same Man as thou were formerly; and let not thy
Improvements in Physic, make thee go backward in Morality.

Paris, 23d. of the 6th. Moon, of the Year 1667.
LETTER IX. To Nathan Ben Saddi, a Jew at Vienna.
NOW I see thou art a Man of Business: Thy Mind is cured of its Religious Itch,
and restored to a sound Complexion. Persevere, and be Happy.

Let no vain Scruples of Conscience molest thy Soul, concerning the Peace that
was lately made between the Grand Signior and the Germans. Cares of this Nature
belong to those who sit at the Helm, and direct the Steerage of the State. As
for thee and me, our Part is only to Obey, without enquiring, whether it be
Right or Wrong that we are commanded. Every Thing is Lawful to us, that is
enjoined by our Superiors; And the Public Reason ought to supersede our
Private narrow Sentiments. Whatever Praemunire's we incurr by our Obedience,
the Conscience of the State will be our Bail, our Advocate, and our Ransom.
Therefore, once more, Go on and prosper.

Thou could not have done the Grand Signior a greater Piece of Service, than
by thus happily insinuating thy self with the Hungarian Faction at Vienna: For,
by that Means, thou becomest Master of the Secrets on both Sides; the Janus
that over-looks Two opposite Cabals at once: And so may not only form thy own
Intrigues the better, but also give a clearer Light to the Ministers of the
Sublime Port.

I am displeased to hear of the frequent Conspiracies that have been made
against the Emperor's Person. Not for any Love that I bear to him or the House
of Austria: For, I wish there was not a Branch of that Incestuous Stem left
alive on Earth: But, I never knew such Kind of Plots, if once discovered and
prevented, to take Effect again. Besides, they many Times spoil the main
Design: For, what signifies it, if this Emperor were seized and put to Death,
so long as there is any one of that Tyrannical Race surviving. They are all of
the same Blood and Interest; Educated also in the same Principles and Maxims.
In a Word, they have all but one Game to play; which is, to aggrandize
themselves, and their Posterity for ever. And therefore these Clandestine
Methods of Poison or Assassine, will but make them more watchful, to prevent
all Designs of the like Nature, for the Future.

Remember Nathan, that the Mark which thou art to aim at, is to cherish the
Discontents of Hungary, by all the Arts of a cunning Statesman. Count Peter de
Serini, is a fit Subject to work upon. The Death of his Brother, and his own
Disgrace at the Imperial Court, with the rising Fortune of Montecuculi, have
filled him with Sentiments of Revenge and Envy. He cannot behold Count d'
Aversperg in Possession of Carlestadt, without much Resentment, having with so
great Passion, begged that Government for himself.

If this Prince can but be induced to revolt, many Thousands of the Croats,
Dalmatians, and Sclavonians, will take up Arms under him, which will at once
weaken both the German Empire, and the State of Venice. Besides, the Marriage
of his Daughter with Prince Ragotski, may engage the Transylvanians in his
Party. Count Nadasti also, they say, is not well pleased with the Court, aiming
to be Palatine of Hungary; which has been refused him. This News comes to me
but by Report. If it be true, thou art in the fairer Way to succeed. Such great
Malcontents as these, will puzzle the Ministers of State, and exercise the
Policy of Prince Lobkovitz.

Besides, if Things should not proceed to an open Rupture; yet, thou know,
the Hungarians are offended at the late Peace, which will not fail to put them
upon committing perpetual Acts of Hostility. They stomach it extremely, That
the Town of Newhausel is in the Grand Signior's Hands. And they will be always
on their Guard in the Neighboring Parts, Patroling about, and skirmishing with
our Foragers: Which will afford a good Occasion at any Time for our Sovereign
to break the Peace, whenever it is for his Interest. There are Abundance of
Consequences in such a Case, more than we can think of, or foresee, yet all to
our Advantage. As long as we go the right way to Work, all Things will succeed
well. Make no false Steps, and there is no Danger of stumbling.

Remember still, That thy particular Charge, is to foment a Civil War between
the Court of Vienna, and the Hungarians. It Is no Matter, who gets the better
on it. Let 'em quarrel to Eternity, and destroy one another in God's Name. Then
shall the Mussulman Empire thrive.

Before God, you have a fine Opportunity, ye Factious Comrades: But, beware of
sly Interlopers. Damn the Easiness, and good Nature (falsely so called) of
those, who will admit any Man into their Cabal, provided he puts on a fair
Guise, of one of the Party. Ye cannot be too reserved and close. Do You think, the
Emperor has not his Spies about in every Corner? A Pox of your Stupidity, if
you suffer this brave Design to miscarry for want of looking sharp. Damn ye for
a parcel of Old Threadbare Fools, if after so many Experiences, you don't
furbish up your Wits, and look to your selves. There Is Gottendorf, Railliwits,
Skus, the Knight, Baron Leipsem, Eluard the Hereditary Pretender to the
Marquisate of Thanu, with many others, whom I will not name in this Letter. By
Moses and Mahomet, they are all Rogues, and if you trust 'em too far, they
surely betray you.

Nathan, believe me, I would not write so passionately, were my Life at all
precious. But, I have no other End in protracting the Minute of my
Transmigration, than to exalt, as much as in me lies, the Majesty of the
Ottoman Lineage, and to guard it from Dangers. I am placed here on Purpose, by
Fate: And I Will do my Duty, though the whole World should sputter their Venom
against me.

O Israelite, both thou and I, must shortly leave this Earth; or at least, we
must change the Form of our Earth. We shall never cease to be something; God
knows what.

In the mean Time, be what thou seem to be.

Paris, 23d. of the 6th. Moon, of the Year 1667.
LETTER X. To the Most Sublime, and Magnificent of the Mussulman Bassa's,
Achmet, the Vizir Azem.
MAY Chaplets of Immortal Flowers crown thy Noble Head, Illustrious Cuperli,
strong Prop of the House of Ertogriel; Main Buttress of the Tower of the
Selzuccian Tribe, the Lineage of Ottoman, Heir of the Heirs to Ismael, the
Eldest Son of our Father Abrahim, the Glory of Men and the Beloved of God.

Not the Unmatched Perfumes of Arabia, nor the surprising Odours of the Persian
Incense, which they offered to the Sun; not all the most skilful Compositions
of Eastern Aromaticks put together, are half so sweet, as is thy Glorious Name,
among the Mussulmans.

I received thy Orders with a Reverence second only to that which is due to
the Grand Signior; And will perform them, with a Loyal Alacrity. I perfectly
comprehend thy Design, and the Drift of the Sublime Port. For thou have stated
the Case like an Oracle. 'Twill not be difficult, I believe, to suggest
underhand to the French Court, the Advantage they may make of the present
Distractions in Hungary: For, they are already become the Subject of common
Discourse. Lewis XIV. by encouraging those Malcontents, and supporting their
Cause with private Disbursements of Money, will doubtless facilitate his own
designed Conquests on the Neighbourhoods of the Rhine. For, if the Hungarian
Lords proceed to an open Revolt, and throw themselves under the Sultan's
Protection; the Emperor of Germany will be obliged to turn all his Forces that
Way: Which yet will not be able to withstand the United Armies of the
Hungarians, Croatians, Heyducks, Tartars, and the most Invincible Osmans. So
that by this Means, the Empire will be weakened on both Sides, and in Fatal
Danger of its final Dissolution: Whilst the Strength and Power of the Grand
Signior, and the King of France, his Noble Allie, will daily increase.

Besides, this will put all Europe into Divisions and Parties, according as
their Interests and Affections incline them; some siding with the Emperor,
others with the French King; whilst the Generality will stand Neuters, and
contemplate the Issue of these Wars, without assisting one Side or the other.
Than which, nothing can fall out more Happy or Propitious for the Sacred
Monarchy of the Osmans.

In Obedience to thy Commands, I have written to Nathan Ben Saddi on this
Account: Altogether as from my self, not giving him the least Ground to
conjecture, that I had received an Order from the Port. I frequently take the
Liberty to counsel that honest Jew in many Cases; inviting him to Projects in
General Terms, and to do some Extraordinary Service for the Grand Signior. So
that he will imagine my writing now is only of Course, without suspecting any
Thing else.

I beseech thee to send me all the Instructions that are Needful for me, not
only to carry on this Affair prosperously, but all others relating to the
Port. I will be careful to transmit thy Commands to Nathan Ben Saddi, in such a
Disguise, as he shall not dream they are any other than my own Proposals: Since
thou do not think it fit that the Majesty of the Port, should appear to be
concerned in a Business of this Nature; especially, so soon after the late
Peace, concluded with the Emperor.

It Is an invaluable Honor thou have done me; in trusting to my Conduct an
Intrigue, whose Effects, for ought I know, may reach all the Nations of Europe,
and last till the Day of Doom. Question not my Fidelity, for it is of Proof:
Besides, it many Times tempts a Man to be false, when he knows he is suspected
to be so.

I am Slave of the Slaves of those who stand near the Sultan's Person, and
confess Mohammed to be the Apostle of God. More particularly, I am devoted to
those who have the Honor to serve thee, the Grand Pillar of the Osman Empire.
God perpetuate thy Felicity.

Paris, the 23d. of the 7th. Moon, of the Year 1667.
LETTER XI. To the Selictar Aga, or Sword Bearer to the Sultan.
THese Parts abound in Action at this Time. Couriers run up and down from Court
to Court, with secret Dispatches, and Matters of deep Import. The Death of the
Queen of Poland, and of Pope Alexander VII. occasion this new stirring and
bustling in Europe. She died on the 10th. of the 5th. Moon; He on the 22d.
Every Kingdom and State in the West, have some Interest to make or preserve;
some Design to form, or to carry on; the Success of which many Times depends on
the well managing the Consequences of these great and Fatal Breaches which
Death makes in the Families of Mighty Potentates, Houses of Royal Descent.

The French Court were all dissolved in Joy, for the Marriage of the Duke of
Guize with Mademoiselle d' Alencon; They were in the midst of the Nuptial
Triumphs, and Festival Solemnities, when the Black Expresses came, which soon
turned all their Mirth to Mourning, at least in outward Appearance. For it was
not decent for the Sons to continue longer revelling, when the Great Father lay
Embalmed in Order to his Sepulture. Therefore, to prevent Idleness, the King
thought fit to change the Pastimes of the Court, for more Necessary Business;
and the soft Entertainments of Hymen, for the Rugged Toils of War. He caused
his Armies to march into Flanders, to give his Queen Possession of certain
Estates fallen to her in those Parts. This surpised the Low Countries, who
began to demolish several Places of Strength, that had not sufficient Garrisons
to defend them.

The King was himself in Person at the Head of his Army, which gave immense
Courage to his Soldiers. So that Tournay quickly surrendered to him, on the
24th. of the 6th. Moon; and Doway not many Days after. In the mean while, the
Marshall d' Aumont with another Army, takes Bergue and Furnes near Dunkirk.
Then he besieges Lisle, which was taken also after Seventeen Days; but not
without the King's Presence, who appeared indefatigable, always on Horseback or
in his Coach, going the Rounds, and surveying all the Works. He slept in his
Coach, that Night the Town was taken, on a Bridge not far from Gaunt. They have
also taken Courtray, Oudenarde and Alost. They have defeated the Prince de
Ligne, and the Count de Marcin. In a Word, they have done so many Great Things
this Campaigne, That all Flanders is stupefied, as at a Miracle.

Illustrious Aga, I have in a Sort of Miniature presented thee with the true
Effigies of Western Affairs at this Juncture. Let not my Abruptness displease
thee; since this Epitome describes the Truth as lively, as if I Would filled an Ell
of Parchment up with Words.

Paris, the 2d. of the 8th. Moon, of the Year 1667.
LETTER XII. To Dgnet Oglou.
I Know not whether I have Reason to rejoice or be sad, in my present
Circumstances; so Ambiguous are the Events of Human Life. Even the most
blandishing Gifts of Fortune, and such as we are extremely taken with, many
Times prove like the Trojan Horse, only fair and Gay in outward Appearance;
whilst like that deceitful Engine of the Grecian Craft, they carry an Army of
Hidden Calamities within, which in the midst of our secure Repose, when we
least dream of any Evil, rush upon us from their concealed and unsuspected
Ambuscades, putting us all in Terror and Confusion.

However, since I have had a sufficient share of Trouble, Grief, and
Melancholy; now let other sprightly, cheerful Passions take their Turn, be the
Event how it will. I cannot always bear the Burden of a loaded Spleen, crammed
and puffed up with Melancholy Winds, the Embryo's or Vehicles at least, of
horrid Thoughts, perplexing Cares, and black Despair. Besides, methinks, I have
a fit Occasion to be merry; being by a very pleasant Accident, at once rid of a
great many vain Doubts and Anxieties, (which have disturbed my Peace for these
Three or Four Years) and restored to the charming Conversation of Daria, whom
thou may remember, I so passionately loved, in the Days of my Youth.

Know then, that one Day as I was walking in the Streets, I met that lovely
Greek in Mourning. Surpised above Measure at the Sight of a Person, for whom I
had formerly cherished so great an Esteem; I stood still at First, like one
Thunderstruck. I could not forbear questioning my own Senses, and giving the
Lie to my Eyes, which assured me 'twas she. Neither Age, nor Absence had
effaced her loved Idea from my Memory, or so much changed her Face, but that I
easily called to mind the Object of my Amorous Desires. Yet, my Astonishment
was such at this unthought of Interview, that I had not Resolution enough to
believe my self. And her Amazement seemed no less than mine: Whilst neither of
us had Power to speak, but stood like Fools: Till I ashamed longer to lose my
self in such an effeminate Confusion of Spirit, first broke Silence, not
without some Rapture and Emotion, crying out, "Is it Daria, or her Ghost, I
see? Has Fortune blessed, or mocked me at this Fatal Hour? Or do deluding
Nymphs and Fairies, haunt the Streets of Populous Cities, walking about in
borrowed Forms, and mixing with the Throng of Mortals, to tantalize our softest
Hopes, with a false S^ew of some dear Lover, Friend or Person highly wished
for, never to be enjoyed? It may be true, That Cytherea left her Heaven, (as
Virgil does relate) and in a Tyrian Dress, met the Heroic Offspring of
Anchyses in the Fields, amusing him with a disguized Semblance of Mortality and
Human Race, until her Heavenly Voice discovered that she was a Goddess. So
used Diana to descend in dead of Night, and mix the Slumbers of Endymion with
Immortal Dreams; stealing soft Kisses from the lovely Youth, and whispering
Celestial Words into his Ears, more forcible than the Songs of Orpheus, when
he moved the Trees and Rocks to Passions of Platonic Love. At other Times they
would come down and take the Air of cool Mount Haemus, or the lofty Ida. Thus
Melpomene, Clio, and the Rest of the Sacred Nine, would often visit the
Refreshing Heights of their beloved Parnassus, from whence descending to the
Shady Banks of Helicon, with more than Mortal Voices, would awake and tempt the
wanton Eccho's to strike up, like Unisons, and join in Consort with 'em, whilst
they chant the Praises of some Demi-God or Hero whom they love. But that a
Goddess, Nymph, or Muse did ever frequent the Common Crowd of Mortals in a
City, is not to be credited. Therefore, unless I dream, it is Daria I behold."

My Dgnet, I was running on in higher Ecstafies, at mentioning of her Name, but
that she smiled, and interrupted me with an obliging Reservedness, and said; "
Mahmut, if you are the Man I take you for, and would have my Esteem, be less
passionate, and leave off this wild way of Raillery. We both are past the
Vanities of Youth. Our Years should now retain no Remnant Froths of early
boiling Blood, and Young, Green, Foolish Passions."

I took this only for a Female Banter, an Essay of Woman's Craft, to try the
Sense and Humor of a Man. For, thou know, the greatest Princess loves a
truly passionate Address; though not a puling, whining one. Besides, it is the
Fashion here in France, to use Romantic Forms of Speech, when they make Love.
However, in Regard it was Inconvenient to lose more Time, in the open Street,
by this Sort of Discourse, I invited her to a House, where we might converse
with more Freedom. She accepted the Motion, and I conducted her to the House of
Eliachim the Jew. It Is pleasantly seated on the Banks of the River Seine, and
has a fair Garden belonging to it. Eliachim happened to be abroad, which gave
us a better Opportunity of improving our Time, without the necessary
Interruption of Salutes, Compliments, etc. usual in such a Case. And I had the
command of his House, as though he had been there himself.

It being in the heat of Summer, I led Daria into a little Shady Green Retreat,
in the midst of the Garden, out of the Reach of curious Ears, where, under the
cool refreshing Shelter of a wide-spread Beech, we sat down and called to Mind
our former Acquaintance and Friendship. Daria still retained her Native Modesty
and Prudence. Neither had the external Beauty of her Face suffered any greater
Detriment, than what befalls the fairest Roses, Violets, or other Flowers,
which even in their most decayed Estate, merit the Character of Amiable
Sweetness. However, the Luster of her Wit, and Goodness of her Humor, supplied
all other Defects.

I protest, my Dgnet, it was Impossible for me to see, and not to love again, a
Person, whose Idea once was so Domestic and Familiar to my Soul. And I was the
more animated to make my Court, when she told me, that she was a Widow. 'Twas
easy to forget, or banish from my Thoughts, her former Faithful Treachery, in
acquainting her Husband with my Amor. Love soon removes all puny Obstacles;
it is ready, prompt, and dextrous to find Excuses for the greatest Faults a
Friend can ever commit: Much more ingenious to palliate the Peccadillo's of a
Mistress. This Generous Passion by a peculiar Force extirpates all Revenge, and
blots out the Memoirs of past Unkindnesses. It ever springs and blooms with
fresh Desires, young vigorous Inclinations. Like to the Palm oppressed with
Weights, it higher grows. 'Twou'd fain increase, dilate, and stretch it self to
Immortality. There Is no Consideration, but that of Honor, can pretend to
match, or stand in Competition with the Divine Regards of Love. And yet, the
most exalted Human Glory often vails to this soft Passion. The Conquerours of
the World, suffer themselves to be overcome by Women.

Wonder not therefore, That I who am Flesh and Blood as well as other Men,
could not now defend my self from fair Daria's Charms.

Excuse me in that I cannot now give thee any farther Account of this
Adventure; being interrupted by a Messenger from Eliachim the Jew, who brings
me Word, my Mother is very Sick, and wants my Company Expect another Dispatch
speedily.

Paris, the 15th. of the 10th. Moon, of the Year 1667.
LETTER XIII. To Pesteli Hali, his Brother, Master of the Customs and
Superintendent of the Royal Arsenal at Constantinople.
IT IS written in the Fates, That Man should Once, at least, be vanquished by a
Woman in his Life. But, it is my Chance to be Twice subdued by one of that Fair
Sex. I know not whether I acquainted thee with the Love I formerly bore to
Daria a Beautiful Greek Lady sojourning in Paris. Neither have I at this
Instant an Opportunity to look over the File of my Letters, they being in my
Lodgings, and I at Eliachim's House, where I write this Letter, for the Sake of
a Convenience, which offers it self, of sending thee a small Present of Watches
and Oriental Stones, by a Jew, a Merchant who is just departing for
Constantinople.

However, if thou art curious to know the Circumstances of this Amor I speak
of; Our Friend Oglou can inform thee of it. In the mean Time, suffer me to vent
some of my Thoughts concerning Women, and the Love of them, rooted so deeply in
our Hearts by Nature. None of our Sex could ever escape this gentle Passion, it
being mixed and blended in our very Original Embryo's, and after cherished with
our Mothers Milk. It was the peculiar Mystery of our Nurses, by a Thousand
Female Tricks and Arts of necessary Tenderness, to blow and kindle up the
little Sparks of this Immortal Fire within our Infant Souls; whilst from their
Breasts we sucked and guzzl'd down inebriating Philters and Love-Potions, more
forcible and durable than those the Grecian Maids compound by Magic Rules,
when they would captivate some Lovely Youth within their Snares. Our Blood thus
fed with early Sympathetick Draughts, becomes the Seminary of a Thousand
Amorous Inclinations; General, unformed, and volatile Affections, to that Sex:
Till Time and Opportunity fix our loose Desires, on some particular Maid, whom
Fate or Chance has brought into our View. At the First Glance, she darts from
her enchanting Eyes the perfect Image of her Soul, which penetrates, like
Lightning, our most Interior Faculties. The swift Idea soon transforms us into
its own Similitude; like melted Wax we take the Momentary Impression of a
Figure, which may last as long as we. Or, if we melt again, it is but to receive
some other Stamp of Love. Thus our whole Life passes away in an Enchanted
Circle of Amors.

However, it is the Part of a Wife Man to regulate this Passion, and not suffer
it to degenerate into Dotage. There is much to be said in Praise of Women, and
not a little in their Disparagement. As we are Riddles to our selves, so that
Sex is in a higher Degree, Mysterious, and a Paradox.

'Twou'd be a Kind of Sacrilegious Envy to conceal their Excellencies, and the
Advantages they have of us, in many Regards, whilst our partial Pen shall only
publish their Defects and Infirmities. Some Hebrew Doctors from the Different
Names of Adam and Eve, draw Arguments to prove the Dignity and Perfection of
the Female Sex, in that Adam signifies [Earth] but Eve expresses [Life.] For,
they affirm, that every Name which God imposed on any Thing, describes its
Nature and Qualities, as a Picture represents the Original. Therefore, by how
much, Life is more to be esteemed than Earth, by so much more Excellent, in the
Opinion of these Rabbi's, is Woman than Man.

They go farther also, and from the Affinity between Eve's Name and the Sacred
Name of God, the Ineffable Tetragrammaton, the Cabbalists borrow Proofs in
Confirmation of their Doctrine.

I know not, whether such Critical Observations be of any Moment, or no, in
this Case; Yet, thou know, that all the Eastern Languages are full of hidden
Mysteries; each Word and Letter being impregnated with some Divine or Natural
Secret, beside the common obvious Sense. Thus Al Zerbi, the Holy Mussulman
Doctor says, There Is Magic in the Sacred Name of Jesus, and that whenever it
shall be once pronounced through the Great Tube or Trump of Michael, it shall
cause all the Powers in Heaven, in Earth, and Hell, to bow the Knee. This
Globe, whereon we tread, shall tremble, and all the Elements melt away; the
Firmament shall be snatched up, like to the Motion of an Eastern Antiport,
Veil, or Curtain. The wide-stretch'd Orbs Above, shall warp and roll together,
as a scorched Skin, or Piece of Parchment does before a Fire. So forcible will
be the Energy of that Tremendous WORD by which the Universe was made; when God
designs to rend this Visible World of ours in Pieces, that he may reveal his
Nobler Works, the Worlds Invisible and Eternal. This mighty Frame, on every
Side will bow, and yield, and vanish; not able to support the crowding Train
and Luster of Immortal Glories, Radiant, Bright Essences, descending in a Body
from the High Palaces of God, the Infinite Solitudes and Recesses of the
Omnipotent.

Thou have no Reason to be scandalized at what I write, as if I were a
Christian. Thou see I have a Doctor of the Arabs, for my Author: A True
Believer, and reputed Saint. Besides, if I am worthy to advise thee, let not
the Common Practice of Mussulman Professors in the Imperial City, tempt thee to
despise the Blessed Son of Mary, of whom our Holy Prophet speaks so honorably.
How many Chapters in the Alcoran do celebrate his Praise? I rather counsel thee
to imitate the honest Turcomans, who are esteemed the best of True Believers.
These honor both Jesus and his matchless Virgin Mother. So do the
Chupmessiasi, and all good Mussulmans. As for the Rest, they are either
Superstitious and Morose Fanatics, Profligate Renegades, or Loose, Wild
Libertines, who fear neither God or Man.

And now I Have mentioned that Incomparable Mary, Mother of the Messiah, of whom
the Mighty Alcoran speaks such Venerable Things; it is a fit Occasion to return
from my Digression, and proceed in relating what the Jewish Rabbi's say farther
in Commendation of the Female Sex.

They consider the Order which God, according to the Writing of Moses,
observed in the Creation: viz. That among his Works some are Incorruptible, and
Immortal; others subject to Corruption and Change, and that as he began in the
Noblest Species of the Former, to wit, pure separate Spirits, so he ended in
the Most Illustrious of the latter that is, Woman; the last of all his Works,
and the most Perfect of Compound Beings; for in her are centered and
consummated the Nature of the Heavens, the Earth, Air, Fire and Water, with
Minerals, Plants, and Animals, and whatsoever else was made before her. This is
the Opinion of some Hebrew Writers, who believe, that God having made Eve, and
then surveyed the System of his Works, found nothing more Excellent or Divinely
framed than Woman. Therefore in her he rested and commenced the Sabbath, as if
his Power and Wisdom now were tired and foiled, and that he could not start the
Idea of another Creature, more perfect than her. Or, as if he did not esteem
the Universe it self complete without the last and most accomplished of his
Works. For, they hold, it is absurd to believe, that God would finish such a
prodigious and admirable Task, in any mean or abject Thing. They also
illustrate this by a Similitude, asserting, That the World being as it were an
Entire Circle, it follows by a Necessary Consequence, that it was finished in
that Part, which by the most Intimate Union, couples the First Atome to the
Last.

They endeavor to strengthen this by the Common Principle of Philosophy, which
teaches, That the End is always First in the Intention, and Last in Execution.
Woman therefore being the Last Work of the Creation, it is evident, say they,
that she was the Chief Design and Aim, the Almighty had in building this
Immense Fabric, which he first furnished and adorned with infinite Riches and
Delights, and then introduced her, as into her Own Native, Proper Palace, there
to reign as Absolute Queen over all his Works.

Besides, they take Advantage from the particular Place of her Creation, to
exalt her, in that she was formed in Paradise, among the Angels, whereas Man
was made in the Common Waste among the Brutes. And therefore they say, Women
have this peculiar Privilege, That when they look down from any Eminent Height
or Precipice, they feel no Dizziness or giddy Symptoms in their Head, no Mist
or Dimness in their Eyes, being, as it were, nearer their proper Element, or
lofty Birthplace. Whereas it is common for Men to be troubled with these
Accidents in such a Case.

But the most prevailing Argument they use, is taken from the Stupendous Beauty
of that Sex, which, like the finer Sort of Clouds in Summer, seems to engross
the Splendors of Immortal Light, and so reflect them on the World. How
matchless is a Woman's Form? What dazz'ling Majesty environs her, from Head to
Foot? Gaze on her lovely Countenance without Astonishment; or fix your Eyes on
here is without an Ecstasie; Those Lights which do mislead the Morning Stars, and
cause the Gods to ramble from their Heaven, if what the Ancient Poets say, be
true. So did Apollo for his Daphne, and Jupiter for others of that charming
Sex. Neither need we wonder at this, since the Written Law it self records,
that Angels fell in Love with Admirable Maids of Human Race, and took 'em for
their Wives, or Concubines, from whom the Progeny of Giants came. Thus more
Modern Writers testify, that Incorporeal Spirits and Demons of all Ranks and
Qualities, both Good and Bad, have been enflamed with Ardent Passions for some
Mortal Virgin. Which is no false or vain Opinion, as the Incredulous Part of
Men would fain insinuate, but a known Truth, confirmed by many Experiences.

Indeed, so admirable is the Figure, Voice, and Mien, of a Fair Woman, that he
is wilfully blind, who does not see, whatsoever Beauties the whole World is
capable of, concentered in that Sex. And for this Reason it is, that not only
Man, with Angels, Demons, Genii, Satyrs, and the whole Series of Rational
Beings, admire a Fair Woman; But also the very Brutes are struck with a
profound Amazement at her Sight: With Sighs, and silent Vows, the Animal
Generations pay Homage to her, and adore the stately Idol. Every Thing in
Nature is enamored, and lies prostrate at her Feet. She alone commands the
Universe.

Yet, after all, my Brother, they have their dark side too, like the Rest of
Mixed Beings. They are the Frontier-Passes of the World Above, and that Below:
The Gates of Life and Death; the very Avenues to Heaven, or Hell according as
they are used. Like Fire they will warm and refresh a Man, if he keep at a due
Distance; but, if he approach too near, they will scorch and blister him, if not
consume him quite. Or, like that other Element of Water, they are very good and
serviceable, whilst kept within their Bounds, but let 'em once break down the
Banks of Modesty, they will threaten all with Ruin. In a Word, it is neither safe
to vex 'em in the least, or humor 'em too much. The Excess of Foudness, as
well as the Defect of Natural Love, may equally undo us. Prudent Generosity is
the only Method of making our selves happy in the Enjoyment of this Sex.

Dear Pesteli, let us Reverence our selves, and then we cannot fail of due
Respect from our Wives and Concubines. For, they love a Man that is truly
Masculine and Brave.

Paris, the 15th. of the 10th Moon, of the Year 1667.
LETTER XIV. To the Same.
JUst as I Would finished the other Letter, I was alarmed afresh with new Disoveries
of Solyman's Treachery. That Barbarous Dog, is certainly an Imp of Hell, a
Devil in Human Flesh; an Adventitious Plant, plucked from the Drery Banks of
Phlegeton, or Cocytus, and engrafted in our Noble Stock, on Purpose to ruin
and destroy us. The whole Tribe is bound to curse him with immortal
Execrations. He industriously seeks and studies all Occasions to do Mischief.
His Veins sure stream with fiercest Venoms, rather than with Human Blood. The
Poison of Dragons and Asps is under his Tongue, and the Gall of Crocodiles
within his Lips. His Lungs breath nothing but Infernal Smokes; the Spirit
Negidher times the Systole and Diastole of his Heart; and his whole Body is a
Den of Fiends, as Foul and Black, as those which guard the Throne of the Great
Prince of Darkness.

I could have easily forgiven his sly malicious Attempts upon my Life, and
Honor; his Interloping Tricks and Plots, his Calumnies and Slanders, with all
the Train of his Perfidious Actions: But, that he should abuse the Virtuous
Fatima, Daughter to our Uncle Vseph, is an Injury I cannot put up, or pardon.
That Innocent Lady never deserved such Cruel Unmanly Usage at his Hands. The
Dregs of a Thousand bitter Curses be his Portion to drink in Hell, unless he
repent of this prodigious Baseness, and make Honorable Satisfaction.

Thou will wonder perhaps, what is Solyman's Crime, that fills me with such
Implacable Resentments. Know then, that Fatima's Husband, being called to the
Grand Signior's Service in the Wars of Dalmatia, and for that Reason, forced to
tarry from her above these Fourteen Moons; she entrusted Solomon with an Affair
of grand Importance, a Matter which concerned her Life, Honor, and Welfare in
the World. It seems she had a Quarrel with an old Grecian Hag, who sought to
prostitute her to the Great Cadi of Smyrna, where she lives. This Grandee had
by a strange Accident, seen Fatima in a Bath, frequented only by Women of
Quality. However through some neglect of the Servants, he was not spied
himself, but went away deeply in Love. That Passion, thou know, makes every
Body restless, that is tormented with it. He knew not how to ease himself, but
by communicating his thoughts to the forementioned Grecian Widow, whom he had
often made the Confident of his Amors. The thorow-pac'd Bawd soon promised him
Relief, and that she would accomplish his Desires. However she failed and found
her self mistaken, when she came to tempt the Inviolate Chastity of Fatima.
For, all her glittering Promises, her softest Rhetoric, could never corrupt a
Heart established firm in Virtue.

Mad at her Repulse, she studies how to be revenged, conceiving it not
impossible to bring her Designs about by Violence, since Fair Persuasions would
not do. She frames a Formal Accusation against Fatima before the Cadi, taxing
her with Witchcraft and other Crimes, upon Oath. The Cadi having learned his
Lesson, would not hear the Cause in open Divan; but pretending Indisposition of
Body, caused her to be brought before him in his private Bed chamber. The Greek
had ready by her, several suborned Witnesses, to depose most horrid Things
against the Innocent Woman. When the Cadi professing an entire Respect to
Fatima's Husband, seemed to take Pity on her Circumstances, and waved the
farther Prosecution of the Cause till another Time, keeping Fatima Prisoner in
the mean while in his own Palace.

All this was managed so privately, that no Body in the Town took Notice of it,
save an Acquaintance or Two of the Grecian Widow, and Solomon our worthy
Cousin, who happened to be at Smyrna in this very Juncture, among his other
Rambles.

Persons in Trouble, are willing to fly for Refuge to any Friend, desiring
their Assistance. Fatima, all in Tears at such an unexpected Change of her
Condition, had Leisure and Opportunity to speak to Solomon, conjuring him to go
to certain Intimate Friends of our Family, living in Aleppo, and tell them her
Circumstances. Instead of this, the Faithless Villain goes to her Husband's
Friends at Tripoli, telling them the most shameful and scandalous Things of
Fatima, his Malice could invent; and that by her lewd Courses she had well-nigh
ruined her Husband; producing at the same Time forged Bills and Letters as from
him, whereby he raised a Thousand Zequins, with which the perjured Villain's
gone no Body knows whither, to make his broken Fortunes once again, and lay a
Foundation for new Cheats. Whilst the poor injured Fatima, is forced to bear
the Reproach and Infamy of Things whereof she never was guilty. But, Time I
hope will clear her Innocence, and bring that Cursed Vagabond to Shame.

I counseled him indeed long ago to travel, and see the various Regions of the
Earth. But, I never advised him to load his Soul in such long Voyages with the
Guilt of base Ingratitude, barbarous Malice, Perfidy and other Vices of the
blackest Hue. The smaller Frailties, Stains, and Blemishes of Human Life, are
too great a Burden for a generous Heart to bear without Complaints and Sighs.
He that has but a Spark of Virtue in him, blushes for every Peccadillo he
commits. If, tempted by good Company, or in Hopes to banish Melancholy
Thoughts, he indulge himself a larger Draught of Wine, than what is Ordinary,
and so insensibly boil up his Blood to Irregular Heights and Superfluities,
he is all this while no Body's Foe but his own: He plots no Mischief against his
Friend, Relation, Harmless Neighbor, or Acquaintance. All the Enmity he shows
is to himself, and in his Cups he is not aware of that. For which Reason
afterward, to expiate the Criminal Advances he made to self-Murder; he
willingly scums off the grosser Ebullition of his heated Veins, in penitent
weeping: A Flood of Tears runs from his Eyes, like generous Libations, at the
Foot of the Altar, to pacify the Wrath of God; whilst the lighter Part
evaporates in pious Sighs and Vows. Thus his Pollution vanishes like Smoke, and
he is soon made Clean again. And so in other Vices it is the same, with Men
disposed to Virtue. They endeavor to root out the Evil Habits they are
accustomed to. They try all Ways, and Stratagems to reform themselves. But
wicked Men by Inclination, sin on without Remorse. They never study to retrench
the Evils they commit. Ever propense to Vice, they choose its ways, and court
the Opportunities of doing Impious Things. They Are natively Unjust, and cannot
live at Ease without premeditated Crimes. It is their Element, to be projecting
Mischief. And such a one is Solomon our Cousin.

God inspire him with more Grateful Sentiments toward his Friends, more
Natural and Affectionate to those of his Blood, and a more just Deportment to
all Men: Or else may he be like Cain, who for murdering his Brother was
condemned to be a Vagabond on Earth; and like Zeuli Bazar the Persian, who
falsely accused Hosain the Prophet, and for that Reason was troubled with a
Palsy in his Head as long as he lived.

Paris, 15th. of the 10th. Moon, of the Year 1667.
LETTER XV. To the Mufti's Vicar.
I Sent an Account to the Port of the Death of the late Rumbeg, or Pope, who is
the Great Patriarch of the Nazarenes. Now the Cardinals have chosen another to
succeed him, whom they call Clement IX. A Man of a great Character for Learning
and Piety, and one from whom the Franks expect Glorious Things to be done for
the Public Good of Christendom.

These Popes seem to inherit the Authority and Honor of the Ancient Pontifex
Maximus, or High Priest of the Romans in the Time of Paganism. Nay, they assume
a far more Ample and Uncontrollable Power. For, those Gentile Prelates always
submitted to the Imperial Authority, from which they received Protection, and
Maintenance. But, these Christian Fathers acknowledge no Superior on Earth.
Kings and Emperors do Homage to them, and perform the meanest Services; as to
hold the Basin whilst the Pope washes his hands; to hold the Stirrup, whilst he
mounts, or alights from off his Mule. Sometimes Great Princes lead his Horse by
the Bridle; whilst (...) another Season, they carry him on their Shoulders.
It Is Recorded, that Eumenes, King (...) Pergamus came to Rome, and pulling off
his Turbant, humbly laid it on the Ground before the Senate, confessing he
received his Liberty from them. And Prusias, King of Bithynia, used to style
himself the Roman Senate's Slave, and bow down to the Earth before them. But,
this is nothing to the Reverence which Greatest Monarchs pay the Pope, when
crawling on their Hands and Knees, they kiss the Sandal on his Foot.

He can make and depose Kings at Pleasure, absolve Subjects from their
Allegiance; bind and remit Sins, open and shut the Gates of Paradise, Purgatory
and Hell, or at least he endeavors to make the World believe so.

He has Seventy Cardinals for his Assistants, and Counselors, all equal to
Princes: A Hundred and Thirty Archbishops under his Obedience: A Thousand and
Seventeen Bishops: A Hundred and Forty Four Thousand Monasteries and Religious
Houses: Three Hundred Thousand Parishes obeying his Will, and yielding Homage
to him. So that if he were resolved to carry on some lasting War, he need only
lay an Impost of Six Crowns a Year on every Monastery; and Fifty Two on every
Parish, and it would amount to Sixteen Millions of Crowns yearly Income. And if
out of every Monastery, he chose out Ten Men, he would have an Army of Fourteen
Hundred and Forty Thousand Men: Which is more than any Potentate in the World
can do beside.

Thou will say, it is a Wonder then he does not put this in Practice, and so
wage War with the Grand Signior, who has fleeced him of so many flourishing
Countries formerly under his Obedience.

O Sacred Oracle of the Mussulmans, God has tied up his Hand; he cannot do it.
These are but Empty Speculations, Impracticable Projects, Fantastic
Chimaera's. The mighty Train of his Archbishops, Bishops, Parish Priests, with
Jesuits, Monks and Friars, though never so willing to obey his Orders in such a
Case, yet cannot stir a Foot without the Leave of their Respective Sovereigns.
For, they are dispersed through diverse Kingdoms, States and Principalities,
where they are subject to the Laws and Government in Force. So that unless he
could unite the Hearts of all the Christian Princes one with another, and with
his own, to undertake so grand an Expedition, it is impossible ever to effect
his Will. Each Nation has an Interest of its own to pursue, which makes 'em
deaf to such Proposals as may embarass, if not ruin them. No Peter of the
Desert, rambling up and down from Court to Court, with his Religious Harangue,
will ever again prevail to raise another Crusade. That Zeal is out of Fashion
now in Christendom. Kings in these later Ages, have not half the Attach and
Veneration for the Pope, they had in former Times. When Pope Boniface VIII.
claimed a Temporal Jurisdiction in France; Philip the Fair, being then King,
sent him this short Answer; Let thy Great Sottishness know, That in Temporals
we are subject to none but God alone. And a French Ambassador at Rome, speaking
something boldly to the Pope, the Prelate reproached him, That his Father was
burnt for a Heretic; whereupon the Ambassador gave him such a Box of the Ear,
that he fell down as dead. But it was a tart Message indeed, which the Eastern
Bishops sent to Pope John III. who claimed an Universal Authority over all the
Churches in the World. For, said they, We firmly believe thy Absolute Authority
over thy own Subjects; but we who are not subject to thee, cannot bear thy
Pride, nor are we able to satiate thy Avarice. The Devil be with thee, and God
with us.

In a Word, All Denmark, Swedeland, Norway, Holland, England, Scotland, Geneva,
Ireland, half the Empire, and half Suisserland, are fallen off from their
Obedience to the Pope within these Two Hundred Years. And those Kingdoms and
States which yet continue under the Yoke, are ready to shake it off at every
Turn, when they are never so little gaul'd and vexed. France, Spain and Venice,
often huff the Pope into Compliance with their Demands. Nor dares he to resist,
but winks and puts up all, like an old decrepid Father, for whom his Sons are
grown too strong.

Holy Successor of the Prophet and Messengers of God; Thou art the Infallible
Interpreter of the Law, and Judge of Equity, yet do not arrogate a Power
above thy Commission. The Grana Signior honors thy Wisdom and Sanctity; And
thou obey'st with humble Submission the Imperial Edicts. He is thy Lord, and
thou his Guide and Tutor in the Way to Paradise. May God increase thy
Illuminations with thy Years, and inspire me and all the True Faithful with
sincere Loyalty to our Sovereign, and devout Obedience to thee, without the
least Alloy of Treachery or Superstition.

Paris, 2d. of the 11th. Moon, of the Year 1667.
LETTER XVI. To Nathan Ben Saddi, a Jew at Vienna.
NOW thou see, I am a truer Prophet than thy New Messiah, that Impostor
Sabbati Sevi: And yet, though I Am so in Effect, I do not aspire at the Title. I
claim no Character above that of a Mortal, who has not quite forfeited his
Sense and Reason. However, if thou will yet retain some Veneration for his
Person, show it by imitating his Example, and embrace the Mussulman Faith as he
has done. At least he Outwardly professes it; and had the Honor to do so
first, in Presence of the Sultan. I know not whether thou have heard of this or
no. Thy Brethren perhaps may be unwilling to disperse the News of a Conversion
bringing so much Infamy to all Your Race. It Is possible they are ashamed to own
or publish to the World, the Tidings of their own Egregious Folly, in giving up
their Faith to such a Cheat as this: A Cheat as one would think grown stale and
fetid enough, to make a man that had the smallest Grain of Sense recoil,
considering how often your Fathers have been bubbl'd before by such Upstart
Messiasses, such Spucious Prophets as this.

I commend the Wit of Sabbati Sevi, in that he would not stand the Brunt of the
Grand Signiors Archers, or by a vain Presumption hope for Miracles from Heaven
to skreen his Naked Body from a Shower of Fatal Shafts. Had he been so rash, I
should esteem him the Greatest Miracle of Stupidity that ever was extant on the
Earth. If thou have not been yet informed of these Passages, Fame will quickly
bring them to thy Ears; and then my Letter will not seem obscure. In the mean
Time, assure thy self, he denied his Apostleship, to save his Life, and this
before the Grand Signior, with the Chief Grandees of the Court: Where, at the
same Time, he confessed One God and Mahomet his Messenger. If thou art his
Disciple therefore, thou ought to be steadfast, and tread in his Steps,
giving Glory to the Eternal One who has sent Prophets into all Nations, to lead
Men in the Right Way, as he sent Moses to the House of Israel.

Nathan, suffer no Narrow Principles, no Partial Prejudices to shut up thy Soul
from the bright Splendors of Immortal Truth, which shine on every Man. The
Light of Heaven is not confined to One particular Lineage. It Is Copious, large
and infinite; spreading abroad its Universal Rays, enlightening all the Families
and Nations on Earth.

It Is true, I grant, the Omnipotent first sent Moses with the Written Law to
the Posterity of Isaac. Had they obeyed the Sacred Institutions, it is possible
your Race had now been blessed above the Rest of Men. Perhaps your Fathers
would have stretched their Conquests far and wide to the utmost Limits of the
Land; from India to the Western Shores of Africa, and from the Remote Borders
of the South to Nova Zembla in the Artick Circle. Then devout Princes would
have traveled from the Four Angles of the World, and made long Pilgrimages to
Jerusalem, there to perform their Vows, and offer Sacrifices to the King of
Heaven.

But alas your Ancestors turned Infidels and Idolaters, even at the very Foot
of Mount Sinai, whilst the Tremendous Eccho's of the Thunders yet were in their
Ears. They made themselves a Calf of Gold, and Adored the Idol of their own
Workmanship: So did their Children worship Adonis, Venus, Diana, and almost all
the Rabble of the Gentile Gods, and Goddesses. For which Reason, the Wrath of
Heaven was kindled against that Generation: God rowz'd the Mighty Monarchs of
the East to take up Arms and punish such a Wicked Race of Men. How often was Fair
Jerusalem sacked, and all the Jews destroyed or carried away Captives by
Persians, Medes, Assyrians, or the Kings of Babylon? How many Prophets were
sent to tell 'em of their Errors and reclaim 'em? But the Obdurate Sons of
Jacob stopped their Ears, being resolutely bent on Wickedness; the Measure of
which being once complete, Fate signed the Edict of your Utter Ruin. For then
came Jesus the Son of Mary, the True Messiah, who foretold the Irrevocable
Catastrophe of Jerusalem, which came to pass accordingly in that very Age; When
the Victorious Roman Army laid it all in Ashes, not so much as sparing the
Glorious Temple of Solomon. Ever since which, the Jews have been dispersed
abroad through all the Earth. Each Nation, City, or Province where ye live,
account ye Execrable Fugitives and Vagabonds.

In the mean while, the Fame of Jesus spread abroad; his Heavenly Doctrine,
perfect Life, and Mighty Miracles, subdued the Hearts of Men. Christianity took
Root in the World: It grew, and branched it self throughout the Continent. The
Roman and the Grecian Empires tamely sat down under the Church's Shade within
Three Hundred Years; and quickly after, other Nations fied unto the Sacred
Shelter. But in process of Time this Religion also, like to yours, degenerated
into Error, Superstition, and Idolatry. And then God raised up Mahomet, our
Holy Lawgiver. He sent him down the Book of Glory by the Hand of Gabriel; And
commanded him to teach it to the House of Ismael first, and then to all Men
that were willing to embrace the Undefiled Faith; but to chastise with Fire and
Sword, the Infidels who should oppose his Mission, and resist the Truth.

How soon the Mussulman Law took Place, and gained Ground in Arabia, Persia,
Syria, and the Adjacent Regions of the East? Nothing was able to stand before
the Warlike Troops of True Believers. How Bold and Matchless were the Actions
of the Valiant Hali? How wise the Counsels of Sage Omar, and Abu-Bacre? How
Eloquent and Forcible the Words of the Chaste and Generous Osman? The Prophet
was happy in the Company of all the Holy Caliphs. They fought and conquered all
before them.

Whenever the Heavenly Banner was displayed, Trembling and Horror seized the
Infidels. Showers of successful Arrows straight were sent, against which the
Uncircumcised could not stand; much less could they sustain the near Approach
and dreadful Shock of our Invlncible Cavalry. Their faint Battalions quickly
shrunk and posted from the Field; whilst Ours unmindful of the Spoil, pursued
the Chase, and strewn the ground with slaughtered Carcasses of flying
Miscreants. Conquest attended the True Faithful, whenever they drew their
Swords. Thus for above these Thousand Years has our Religion made its fortunate
Advances on the Earth: And it another Law should be revealed, and some New
Prophet rise to check the farther Growth of Mussulman Faith, and undermine the
Empire of the Faithful; we ought not to reflect on Mahomet for this, as though he
were an Impious Seducer, any more than we do on Moses for your Calamities; or
on Jesus the Son of Mary, for the declining State of Christendom.

It Is not impossible, but that the Omnipotent may have hidden Reserves of
Precepts, yet to be divulged. He has had his various Methods and Dispensations
in all Ages and Parts of the World. Neither is it fit for Mortal Man to limit
the Eternal One, or set him Rules. His Methods are to us Incomprehensible. He
sent Moses, a Man bred up in all the Sciences and Wisdom of the Egyptians. To
Jesus he committed his hidden Power and Knowledge; and the Apostles spoke all
Languages. But Mahomet could neither Write nor Read, and yet thou see his Law
has proselyted many Mighty Kingdoms, States, and Empires. Who knows, but that
in Future Times he will convert the Apostate World by some Dumb Person, who can
neither Hear nor Speak? Or by some Blind Man who could never see? Or it is not
Impossible, but that he may employ some Maid of Admirable Beauty, Gifts and
Learning, in the Mysterious Work. So were the Sybils of Old inspired with
Sacred Wisdom, and Foreknowledge of Things to come. All filled with Inward
Blasts of some Immortal Wind, the pregnant Virgins soon conceived deep
Mysteries of Fate, which they writ down on Leaves of Trees: For they were
Eremits, and Twelve in Number, as Ancient Records say. One of them lived at
Cuma in Italy, where her Cave is shown to Travelers, at this Day. They
foretold what should happen in After ^imes, particularly the Birth of Jesus the
^n of Mary. But they never said a Word (...) Sevi, or of any other Messiah to
come after the First. These Holy Maids were had in great Veneration by the,
Gentiles, who gathered up the scattered Leaves whereon they writ their
Prophecies, and transcribed them carefully on Paper; that so the Sacred Memoirs
might be delivered safe down to Posterity.

By what I have said, Nathan, thou may perceive, That I aim at nothing else,
but to wean thee from the Superstitious fond Conceit of your Nation; and to
make thee sensible, That though God once favored the Jews with Oracles of
Light and Reason, yet they have for many Ages forfeited this Privilege. Since
which he gave the Gospel to Jesus the Son of Mary, the Alcoran to Mahomet, and
at all Times has sent Messengers and Prophets to every Nation and People on
Earth.

There are no Partial Byasses in the Divinity which made the Worlds. He is an
Inexhaustible Abyss of Love, of Light, and Life; Where every Creature drinks
its Fill of Natural Happiness, according to the different Ranks, Capacities and
Desires of Things. He Vests the Sun with an Immortal Robe of Light, the Train
of which is born up by the Moon and Stars.

When Phoebus is upon the Wing by Day, his Garment covers all the Sky; the
Golden Fringes of it dangle to this Globe, and trail along in the Miry Soil, yet
never gather the least Speck of Dirt: They Are dipped and plunged in Rivers,
Lakes, and Seas, without being wet; and yet they drink up all the Ocean, by
Successive Draughts. This Lower World rejoices in the glittering Show; the
Elements, with every Being compounded of them, bask in the welcome Rays. So do
the Planets Above, who take a singular Pride, to fold some Part of the
Illustrious Dress about them. They wrap themselves half up in borrowed Light,
and then like Western Franks, they foot it to and fro', in their beloved Walks
Above; giving the necessary Salutes and Conge's to each other, en Passant, and
to the Sedentary Signs and Fixed Stars, to see if any of them mind their
Courtly Garb and Mien: For they are the Sun's Domestic Pages, the Favorites
of his Serail. At other Seasons they stand still, perhaps to gaze upon
themselves, in Contemplation of the Majestic Figure they make.

So have I seen a proud conceited Spanish Trumpeter, after he would blown a Levet
pretty well, lay down the Silver Instrument with a Disdainful Gravity. His
Cheeks all swollen with enclosed Air, and Soul puffed up with Arrogance, he
struts and curls his Black Mustaches. Then with big Looks surveys himself from
Head to Foot; casting an Eye of Scorn upon the Silent Tube, conscious that he
alone can make it sound so well.

Thou will say I wander in my Discourse, as much as those Heavenly Bodies I Am
speaking of. It Is true, Nathan, our Thoughts are free, and not confined to
Rules and Forms. We easily slip from one Imagination to another. And since I Have
made this Planetary Digression, suffer me now like them to run Retrograde, and
come to the Point from which I roved.

Doubtless, each Individual Being is filled with its Essential Blifs. The Fire
has its Specific Happiness; so has the Air, the Water, and the Earth, with all
the Living Generations on it. And when the Most High distributed the Sons of
Humane Race through all the Various Climates, Zones, and Provinces, he
furnished every Region of the Globe with Gifts and Products, Riches and
Delights Agreeable to the Inhabitants: With this Proviso, That they should live
in Innocence, Justice and according to Reason. From which Eternal Law if any
People swerved, they should forfeit these Privileges, and be subdued if not
extirpated, by some more Virtuous Nation.

From hence sprung all the Revolutions of Mighty Kingdoms and Empires; one
successively supplanting another to this Day. And the Sins of your Nation being
greater, it seems, than those of any other, God has dispersed you over all the
Earth, without suffering you to inherit or possess a Foot of Ground.

If ever therefore Fate designs to restore the Jews again to the Holy Land,
wherein their Fathers lived; never expect it, till your Erroneous Minds, and
Vicious Manners are reformed. For, Palestine was never seated so deliciously,
for Bloody Zealots, Hypocrites and Cruel Usurers to enjoy.

Paris, the 2d. of the 11th. Moon, of the Year 1667.
LETTER XVII. To Dgnet Oglou.
DAria's a Queen, a Gilt, and I Am once more cured of my Dotage. There is no
Trust in Woman's Beauty, Faith, or Wit. They are deceitful as the Fruit of
Asphaltites: They are Perfect Riddles and Paradoxes; and have more Unlucky
Tricks, than crossgrain'd Elfes or Fairies. When a Man overheated by his
Amorous Passion thinks to embrace a Goddess, he meets with Ixion's Fate, and
only hugs a gaudy Cloud or Meteor.

I will not make thee sick with a particular Rehearsal of my second Folly in
being so fond of one who had betrayed me formerly. I Will not repeat the vain
Addresses I made, the Kind obliging Things I spoke, nor her deceitful Answers.
I will not tell thee, how she drilled me on into her Snares, and led me Captive
in an Amorous Circle; Content thy self to know, that I Have been Twice her Cully;
and if ever I am the Third Time, 'twill be my own Fault, as the Italian says.
No, my Dgnet, I Have done with that False Sex. Henceforth for ever I abjure all
Amarous Regards of Women. I Will shun 'em, as I would a Pestilence. I Will either
shut my Eyes, or turn 'em another way at least, whenever I meet a Female. I
will not think of them but with Disdain and Hatred. Finally, I Am off from 'em
to all Intents and Purposes.

However, as the Arabian Proverb says, That Wind blows from an Unlucky Point
of the Compass, which wafts no Good to somebody: So from Daria's False and
Feigned Smiles, I reap some Benefit. I Have learned a Secret, which has rid my
Spirit of a Thousand Cares, Disquiets, and Agonies.

In the Year 1664 of the Christians Hegira, I sent a Letter to the Noble Kerker
Hassan, Bassa, our Countryman; Wherein I informed him of an Assassine made upon
me in the Dark, as I was going to my Lodgings; and how I killed the Ruffian
that attempted on my Life. I told that Generous Grandee, all my Jealousies, and
Conjectures on that Subject; how I suspected some of my Enemies at the Port, to
have a Hand in the Design; or else, that my Sicilian Master was concerned in it.
I knew not well what to conclude. But, now I Am satisfied 'twas Daria's Husband,
who resenting deeply my former Amor with her, which she discovered to him at
large, could never be at Rest, till he saw Paris, where he designed to be the
Executioner of his own Revenge, and lay in wait accordingly for my late
Returning Home: For he was not ignorant of my Lodging. His Wife knew nothing of
his Design, he having pretended other Business at the City. And 'twas from
Accidental Words in her Discourse, that I collected this great Secret. For,
when I asked her of her Husband's Health, she told me, he was killed at such a
Time, by Night, in an Alley of Paris, by whom she never yet could learn. But, I
straight blushed with Consciousness, and took the Hint. I dropped some
Necessary, Careless Queries by Degrees: And all her Answers still confirmed me,
as to Time and Place, with other Circumstances, That he must be the Man I
murdered in my own Defense, so long ago.

I kept this Secret locked up in my Breast; nor could my doting Fondness melt
me into such a soft and easy Temper, as to betray my self to her. But I took
inward Pleasure at the Thoughts of my Deliverance from that sudden violent
Death; and from my After. Cares and Fears, by this Discovery. Henceforward I Will
suspect no Mussulman, though my Enemy. Nor shall I be so fearful of my Sicilian
Master. No Pannick Terrors shall confine me to my Chamber, and make me spend
my Days in fretting and consuming Melancholy. I will not be surpised, when
Strangers knock at the Gate, or when I hear the Blustering Voices of the Parish
Officers below, or the Collectors of the King's Revenues. Yet, these before
were dreadful as the Sultan's Attescheriff, or Fatal Warrant, when he demands a
Bassa's Head. So forcible is Jealousy, and suspended Thoughtfulness; so black
the Influence even of mis-grounded. Apprehension and mistaken Guilt.

My Dgnet, This Mortal Life is a dark Labyrinth of cross Events. Bewildered Man
gropes up and down; he often trips and stumbles at Contingencies; he strays
about in Thorny, Rugged Paths, not knowing where he is, or which Way to turn
himself. Sometimes an Ignis Fatuus with its deceitful Light, mis-guides him
into Miry Places, Fens and Bogs, where he is in Danger of being swallowed up; or
leads him to the Brink of an high Precipice, where if he advance but one Step
more, he is gone beyond Recovery: He falls and dashes himself to pieces, on
under-growing Rocks.

Reason is the only Clew that can conduct us safe, through all the Windings of
the perilous Maze. Heaven grant that thou and I may never let go our Hold of
this so necessary Faculty, until it has conducted us to Paradise.

Paris, the 15th. of the 12th. Moon, of the Year 1667.
LETTER XVIII. To the Kaimacham.
LAst Year I gave thee an Account of the Birth of a young Princess of France.
Now I shall inform thee, That she was baptized on the 21st. of this Moon.
Baptism with the Nazarenes, is Equivalent to our Circumcision: Nay, it is
something more Divine, if we may believe them. They call it the Sacrament of
Initiation, the First Mystery of Christian Faith. But, when it is applied to
Children of Royal Extraction, the Sons or Daughters of Kings. it looks more
like a Ceremony of State, than a Mystery of Religion. However, be it what it
will, it is performed with Abundance of Pomp and Magnificence. And at this
Ceremony it is, that every Christian receives his Name, which is given by the
Godfathers and Godmothers, that is, Persons who stand Sureties for the Child's
Education in the Christian Religion. This Princess was named Maria Theresa, by
the Duchess Dowager of Orleans, and by the Duke of Enguien.

On the same Day the Cardinal Duke of Vendosme had Audience of the King and
Queen, in Quality of Legate de Latere from the Pope. It seems the King of
France had desired the Pope to stand Godfather to the Dauphin; which the good
Prelate accepting, sent this Cardinal as his Deputy and Representative, to
perform the Charge. He is to give the Dauphin his Name. In the mean while, he
stands much upon Punctilio's, requires vast Respects and Submissions from the
French Bishops; and carries himself with as much State, as if he were a God or
an Angel; looking as big, as if he were the Emperor of the Universe. And well
he may, since during his Legation, he has as much Power as the Pope himself;
that Sovereign Prelate, having invested him with all his own Paternal full
Authority; Which he would make the World believe, is greater than that of
Earthly Kings and Emperors. And yet he styles-himself the Servant of the
Servants of God. A fine Piece of Ecclesiastic Hypocrisy! The Ways of these
Infidels are double. Their Practice runs counter to their Profession. They
would fain appear as Saints, when in Effect they are little better than Devils.

There has been a great Alteration lately made in Portugal; the Estates of that
Nation having compelled their King to renounce his Government, and conferr it
on Dom Pedro, his Brother. The Spaniard laughs at this privately, hoping from
their Intestine Animosities to draw Occasions of advancing his own Interest,
and of recovering that Crown again.

Accomplished Minister, There is Nothing New under the Moon; but a perpetual
Circle of the same Events. What we admire at in this Age, as a Novelty, has
been acted over and over in former Times. Peace follows War, and War treads
close upon the Heels of Peace. Faith, Perfidy, Sedition, Obedience, Virtue and
Vice, are the Reciprocal Off spring of each other. There Is nothing fixed or
stable; but the World turns round upon Eternal Vicissitudes.

Paris, 30th. of the 1st. Moon, of the Year 1668.
LETTER XIX. To Abdel Melec, Muli Omar, President of the College of Sciences at
Fez.
I Received thy Invaluable Dispatch, containing Mavelous Things, Revelations
of a Sublime Rank, Mysteries heretofore undiscovered. Yet I was not much
surpised, having all along presaged some Vast Improvement of Learning from thy
accomplished Spirit. O thou Terrestrial Star of the First Magnitude, Chief in
the Constellations of the South!

Glory be to God, who from Infinite Darkness started the Eternal Bright Idea's
of the Universe; and on the Womb of Everlasting Silence, begat the WORD by
which he formed all Things. Doubtless, there is no Blemish in his Works: No
Botches, Knobs, or disproportionable Unevennesses. The World's a perfect Beauty.

Were Ptolomy alive, thy System of the Heavens would put him to the Blush. And
Tycho Brahe would sneak out of his Planetary Frame, by some wild and more than
Eccentrick motion, ashamed that he had been such a Botcher in Astronomy.
Copernicus himself would sink under the Burden of the Moon, which the
overloaded Earth would in Revenge let fall upon him, for his Unnatural Cruelty
to his Aged Mother, in burdening her so long. And all the World would celebrate
thy Praise, who have thus happily rescued Heaven and Earth from their
Embarassments.

Thy Thoughts are high and elevated to the Heaven of Heavens; yet thy Humility
stoops to the Center of the Earth. But, all Mankind would be obliged to thee
afresh, if thou wou'd'st vouchsafe to take the Middle Path, and survey with thy
accustomed Accuracy, the Surface of this Globe, whereon we Mortals tread.
Geography, being already sensible of her Elder Sister's Happiness, in thy
Correction and Amendments of the former Astronomick Schemes; languishes also
for thy Supervisal of her own Defects and Blemishes.

Those that have measured the Earth, cannot agree in stating her Circumference:
And there were few in former Times who did believe the Antipodes. The
Mussulmans of India do assert, that the Earth's supported by Eight Mighty
Elephants: And those of Turkey, say, it rests upon the Horns of a Great Bull. If
either of these Opinions were to be taken in the Literal Sense, 'twou'd put the
dullest Philosopher to Subsannation, or at least a Fit of Laughter. But,
doubtless they are Allegories, under which are veiled some True and Natural
Secrets.

However, let the Globe rest where it will, on Bulls, or Bears, or Elephants;
or Camels, Dromedaries, Horses, or the Back of Atlas, as the Gentiles did
affirm; I would fain know, methinks, how large a Space of Land we have to tread
upon, and what Proportion is allotted to the Sea.

It Is true, we have a Common Notion of Four Quarters of Dry Land, Asia, Africa,
Europe and America. Yet this is quarreled at by those of Later Times, who add
a Fifth which they call Magellanica, or the Southern Unknown Earth. From
Immemorial Times, our Fathers were acquainted with the Three First Divisions or
Precincts of the Globe: But, the Two Last were but of late discovered, since
the Improvement of Navigation, and the Invention of the Compass.

There is a Vulgar Tradition, every where in Vogue, That after Noah's Flood,
Asia fell to the Share of Sem and his Posterity; Afrique to Cham, and Europe to
Japhet. Whether this be true or no, cannot be proved, but is wholly owing to
Conjecture. However, this is certain, That if it were so, there have been
mighty Changes in the Inheritances of Noah's Offspring; and Alterations of
their several Limits: Insomuch, as now they seem to be in Part blended and
mixed together, or at least, shuffl'd from one to another.

Those who lived in the Middle Ages, made but Two Divisions of the Globe; Viz.
Asia and Europe: And in this they also differed: For, some made Africa only a
Province or Part of the Former, persuading themselves that they were Anciently
joined together, tho afterward separated by a violent Irruption of the
Atlantic Sea, by the Streights of Gibralter, which before was a Narrow Isthmus
or Neck of Land; but from the Time that Bank was washed away, the Mediterranean
Sea derived its Origin. Others made Africa a Part of Asia, they being not
absolutely parted by any Sea; though some Egyptian Kings, and Roman Emperors,
attempted to make a Canal between the Mediterranean and Red Sea.

A Third Sort divided the Known Part of the World into Asia, Europe, Africa,
and Egypt. Whilst a Fourth placed Egypt to the Account of Asia, making the
River Nile the Boundary between it and Africa. But this was Incommodious, in
Regard it left that of Egypt on the West of Nile, to Africa. Such was the
Confusion of the Ancient Greek and Roman Geographers.

As for America, it takes its Name from Americus Vesputius, a Florentine, who
made the Second Voyage to discover it. For it was First descried by Christopher
Columbus, a Genouese, in the Year of the Christian Hegyra 1492. by the Order
and at the Charge of Ferdinand, King of Arragon and Castile. This Part of the
World is divided into Two Mighty Empires; the Northern, or that of Mexico; and
the Southern, or that of Peru.

Magellanica, or the Southern Unknown Land, derives its Name from Ferdinand
Magellan, the First that ever discovered it, in the Year 1520. when he sailed
quite round the Globe. About Five and Forty Years afterward, Francis Drake an
Englishman, touched upon the same Coasts; and Twelve Years after him, Thomas
Candish, one of his Countrymen. Likewise Oliver van Noord, a Hollander,
undertook the same Voyage. But none made such Advances in this new Discovery,
as a certain Spaniard, called Ferdinand de Quier.

God knows what strange and unexpected Novelties this Country might afford, if
Men were once acquainted with it. This may be the Sanctuary of the Ten Tribes
of Israelites, which were led away Captives by Salmanassar, King of Assyria.
Or, perhaps, the Inhabitants of this Country, are of another Race than that of
Noah and Adam. We may from them, it is possible, derive new Lights, as to the
Pre-existence of Human Souls. Who knows, but they have Records more Exact and
Ancient, than the Indians and Chinese? Be it how it will, I Am clearly for new
Discoveries. There is a certain Specific Boldness in my Spirit, which prompts
me to invade the pretended Modesty of Nature: I long to furle the Veil, which
hides so many Secrets, and wi^h a Philosophic Confidence, were I in Power, I Would
rumple up the Envious Coverings of such Desirable Wonders.

Oh! that some Godlike Monarch in this Age, would in Royal Bounty equip a Navy,
and man them with the most Expert and Resolute Mariners on Earth, with Vessels
to transport an Army of Land-Soldiers; With Tenders to carry Meat, Drink,
Apparel, and other Necessaries for so vast an Expedition. Surely, the Event
would answer Expectation; the Gains would far transcend the Cost; the Honor
infinitely surpass the Peril; and all our Known Familiar World, would be
obliged by such a fortunate Undertaking.

Sage Omar, it depends on thee to bring this thing to pass. Start but the
Proposal to some Mighty Sovereign; Thy Recommendation will be of Force. Thou will be more than a Columbus, Magellan, or Pizarra. In fine, thou will wind up
the Searches of this Inquisitive Age, and put a Stop to future Scrutinies.

I only hint the Thing; do thou pursue it, and all Generations shall celebrate
thy Fame. God inspire thee with fresh Ardours.

Paris, 7th. of the 3d. Moon, of the Year 1668.
LETTER XX. To Osman Adrooneth, Astrologer to the Sultan, at Adrianople.
OLD Pt^lomy was much out of his Bias; his wild irregular Phansy, drunk with
the Lees of Aristotle's Dark Opinion and Conceit, stumbl'd and fell asleep upon
the Thought of the Earth's being Center to the Universe, and then the Rest of
the World seemed to run round his giddy Head. He often strovo to lift his Heavy
Noddle up, to see whether it were so or not. But the besotting Load of
Prepossession, weighed him down again. He slumber'd, dreamed and snorted loud,
stretched out at large upon the fair Chimaera.

The studious Candidates of Truth and Science, by his Example fell to the same
Riot in Philosophy, and continued the Debauch for many Ages: Till, too much
surfeited and cloyed with such a fulsome Entertainment; bold Tycho Brahe rubs
up his Eyes, and wakes the Company with a new System of the Mighty Frame. Then
all began to start, and rowze, as at some Prodigy. His Heavenly Gim-cracks
pleased the Palate of the Age. His Epicycles, Eccentricks, Perigae's, and
Apogae's, with all the Rest of his gay Whim-whams, were received with General
Applause. Till the more Excellent Copernicus appeared with something Newer
still. And then the Blundering Dane abashed, slipped off the Stage without so
much as taking his Leave.

The Astronomers soon fell in Love, and paid Implicit Adoration to the Idol
which Copernicus set up. And 'twas but Reason; since, they had never seen a
fairer or a juster Scheme of the World before.

Yet every Age improves it self in Knowledge, on the Ruins of the Former. And
thus, what Ptolomy never found out, nor Tycho Brahe or Copernicus could mend or
match, if now they were alive; is very late discovered by the Incomparable
Abdel Melec Muli Omar, President of the College of Sciences at Fez.

The Happy Musu Abu'l Yahyan, Professor of Philosophy there, first started the
Proposal of a Mathematical Experiment. And, laying Heads together, the Primate
of Moresco Doctors, Father of all the African Alfaqui's living, found a true
Demonstration in it.

I have lately received a Dispatch from that Renowned Prelate, with an enclosed
Model of this Planetary Machine. A Copy of which I send thee, drawn by my own
Hand. It represents the Original to a Point. Examine it well and thou will
find, it is much more regular and exact than any of those Antiquated Schemes,
and answers all the Questions of Astronomy, without the least apparent Blunder.
Besides, it has a perfect Symmetry and Proportion in every Part: it makes the
World appear a complete Beauty. Whereas the Frame which Tycho Brahe made, was
all deformed with wild Unevennesses. Nor was the System of Copernicus without a
manifest Botch, in making the small Orb of the Moon alone, to interfere with
that of the Earth: Whilst all the other Planets circulate in their own entire
and solitary Spheres, without an Interloper to disturb 'em.

Besides, he makes the Earth an Atlas to the Moon, whilst this poor weary Globe
is forced, in his Opinion, to drudge yearly round the Zodiac, with the vast
Burden of Diana on its Shoulders.

If it be so, it is no wonder that the Earth so often faints and trembles under
the mighty Load. Henceforth we need not lay the Blame of Earthquakes to
Enceladus, as if the drowzy; snoring Giant, turning his monstrous Bulky Corpse
from one Side to the other, were the Sole Cause of these Convulsions: When
Mortals reel and stagger as they walk upon the Surface; when Trees and
Mountains rock, as in a Cradle, and whole Cities are sometimes swallowed up.

No; let poor Enceladus sleep on, and take what Rest he can in his Infernal
Prison. There was no Danger of his ever stirring again, after he would once been
thoroughly sowc'd in Lethe's all-benumming Streams. Copernicus is only in the
Fault: Whenever we feel these Fatal Heavings of the Globe, 'twas too unmerciful
a Task he imposed upon it, especially in its Old Age.

It would have grumbled in its early Days and sturdy Youth, had it been thus
severely used by Orpheus, Homer, Hermes, Trismegistus, or any other of the
Primitive Sages. But now to be thus roughly handled by an Upstart Infidel in
its declining Years, when Three Parts of its Marrow's decayed, and its once
potent Nerves and Sinews are shrunk, its Liver wasted, and every Vital
dwindling away; almost broke its Heart.

Therefore these African Sages, in Duty to their aged Mother the Earth, have
found a Way to free her from the Burden of the Moon in her decrepid State; and
yet to make the Sun, the Center of the World; adjusting at the same Time, with
accurate Laws, and an Unblemished Order, the Motions, Stations, and various
Postures of the Planets.

This Happy Revelation in Astronomy, is not to be divulged in Public Writings;
lest some Inquisitive Curious Traveller, Ambitious Nazarene or Envious Jew,
should chance to light upon the Sacred Scheme, and boast himself the Inventer
of it.

Let it be only communicated to Learned, Faithful Mussulmans, of the First
Rank: For, such Celestial Mysteries, ought not to be prostituted to the Vulgar.
Tell not the little Jasmir Sgire Rugial of it. For, if thou do, all the Frank
Merchants at Aleppo, soon shall be made privy to the matchless Secret. Be it a
perpetual Arcanum in the Breasts of Sublime Men, exalted Souls; Friends of God,
and little less than Prophets. And be it so, till all the Sages of the East and
South, are first made sensible of it, and able to defend it, against the vain
Attempts of the Uncircumcised Nation. Then let it be promulg'd in Alla's Name
throughout the Globe, to the Eternal Honor of God, and Glory of his Prophet,
who could neither write nor read, yet has Disciples to whom alone the purest
Reformation of the Universe is owing.

Do but survey with an Indifferent Look, the last and loveliest Portraicture
of the World that ever was made by Man. Fix thine admiring Eyes on the Magnifick
Seat and Palace of the Sun. Consider at the same Time the True and equal Forms,
Dimensions, Distances, and mutual Intersections of the Ambient Orbs, without
the smallest Blurt or Blot in all the Eternal Frame. Then tell me thy Opinion;
whether thou can not Calculate Nativities, erect all manner of Schemes, make
Almanacks, tell credulous Men their future Fortunes, appoint the Eclipses of
the Sun and Moon, set Venus and Mercury together by the Ears, or stir up
furious Mars to make a Hurly-Burly in the Heavens and Elements: Or if thou
can not wheedle the sour Curmudgin Saturn, into a soft obliging Humor: Or
fret the Noble Jupiter to Madness, by a damned Conjunction, with his Mortal
Enemy: And a Thousand more Astrological Enterprises. Tell me, I say, whether
thou can not perform all this and more, as well by the enclosed Effigies of
the World; as by the old Threadbare, Weather beaten, Worm-eaten, Italian
Clock-work of Ptolomy; or the later Inventions of Tycho Brahe, and Copernicus.

It will no now longer be a Secret, how those Birds dispose themselves, which
at a certain Time of the Year, are seen to gather in mighty Troops, and fly
directly upward out of Humane Sight: not one of the whole Species being left
behind, or found on any Part of the Earth, until the Moon has rolled full six
Times round the Zodiac: When they return again in equal Companies unto this
Globe, each Species to its Native Region. For the Intelligent Fowls exactly
know the Hour in which the Earth does in its Yearly Circulation intersect the
Neighboring Orb of the Moon, and then they Snatch the Opportunity to quit the
Attractive Atmosphere, and take the Air of that Adjacent Planet.

I have a great deal more to say on this Subject, which I will reserve for
another Letter. In the mean Time, thou Venerable Star-gazer, adieu, and
remember to be private.

Paris, 7th of the 3d Moon, of the Year 1668.
LETTER XXI. To the Venerable Mufti, Principal Support of Learning and true
Science.
THE Orders of thy Sanctity, came like a Message from Heaven, surprising me at
once, with equal Pleasure and Astonishment, Every Line increased my Rapture.
And now I thought, I had no more to wish for in the World, since the Great
Patriarch of the Faithful, had condescended to embrace the Advice of so mean a
Slave as Mahmut. It has been my passionate Desire, to see Knowledge flourish in
the Renowned Ottoman Empire, that the Infidels may no longer reproach us with
Ignorance and Barbarism. This was the Reason, that I so often importuned thy
Predecessor, to encourage the Translation of Histories into the Turkish
Language. Now thou art pleased to begin this Glorious Work, and to honor me,
by requiring my Instructions in the Management of it. Nay, thou have commanded
me, to lay the Foundation of so Illustrious an Enterprise, in presenting thee a
Pattern or Model of this Great Work, containing an Historical Epitome of the
Four Great Monarchies, with a brief Series of the most Remarkable and Famous
Transactions, Changes, and other Events in the World, with Reference to the
Nation and Age wherein they happened.

As to the Advice thou demandest of me, I think it would be for the Honor and
Benefit of the Mussulmans, That a Complete History of the World, should be
collected out of the most Ancient and Sincere Writers, and digested into
Annals, from the very Beginning of Time, down to the Reign of our present
Emperor, the August Sovereign of the Whole Earth: That so, whatsoever has been
done on Earth worthy of Memory, may be ranked in its proper Time and Place; and
we may not grope any longer in the Dark, when we would know, in what Year or
Age any Famous Warrior or Monarch lived or died; or, when any renowned City
was built, besieged, taken, and destroyed, and by whom all these Things were
done: With many other useful Memoirs, in which the Ottomans are now wanting.

In the Beginning of this Work, it will be absolutely necessary, to have
Recourse to the Chronicles of the Indians, Persians and Egyptians, and to the
Writings of Orpheus, Homer, Thales, Zeno, and others of Greece, Phoenicia and
Thrace. For, though the Nazarenes of the West, despise the Authority of these
Authors, and calumniate all for Fables and Romances which was delivered before
the First Olympiad; yet, the more Impartial Inhabitants of the East, whether
Christians or Mussulmans, reject Nothing which has the undoubted Stamp of
Antiquity; but rather seek to unriddle the Mysterious Expressions of the Poets
and Philosophers, who strove industriously to cover all their Knowledge and
Traditions under dark Aenigma's, Figures, and Parables, that so the Divine
Secrets of Antiquity might not be profaned, by the Rude and Unpolished Vulgar.

It was ever the Maxim of some Ancient Sages and Politicians, thus to keep the
People in Ignorance of past Times; the better to assure their Dominion and
Authority over them. They only revealed what was obvious to every Man's Sense,
the manifest and visible Influences of the Heavenly Bodies, the Course of the
Sun, Moon and Stars, the Natures of Plants and Animals, with whatsoever else
was liable to any Man's Eye and Apprehension. But as to the more obstruse and
less. Conspicuous Works of Nature, they were like the Secrets of State, kept
under a Veil.

Yet, there wanted not Men of Wisdom in other Parts of the World, who strove to
unfold all Things, and render Mankind familiar with whatsoever fell under
humane Intellect. Among these, the Indians and Chinese deserve the first
Place, who were never covetous of the Gifts of Nature, but sought to improve
all those of their Nations in the Knowledge of the Arts and Sciences; and
especially, in the System of Ancient History. These People, shut up themselves
from the Rest of the World for many Ages; fearing, lest Commerce might corrupt
the Simplicity of their Primitive Laws and Institutions. Only Alexander the
Great, and before him, Semiramis Queen of the Assyrians, had ever Access to the
Indies in Old Time. And China was never open till of late, when their too
potent Neighbors the Tartars, broke through their famous Wall, and subdued the
whole Empire. And their Business was not with Books, but with Men.

For these Reasons we need not wonder, that the Indian Brachmans and the
Bonzi's of China, deliver an Account of the Origin of the World, and the next
succeeding Ages so far beyond the Epocha's of all other Historians, especially
these in the West.

For Events of later Date, the Compilers of this Work may make Use of such
Historians, as have written the Annals of several Nations since the First
Olympiad.

If thou know not what an Olympiad means, it is the Form of Computation used
in the Ancient Grecian Hegyra, every Olympiad containing Four Years. And the
first of these Olympiads began in the Year of the World 3228. At which Time
Choraebus of Elis, signalized himself-by winning the First Race that ever was
run at the Olympic Games. These Games were celebrated every Olympiad; and all
the Youth of Greece flocked to them, to try their Skill in Running, Wrestling,
and other manly Exercises.

About this Time Historians began to write Partially, and the Truth could
hardly be discerned from the Fabulous Errors with which it was Adulterated.
Yet this rather proceeded from a National Emulation, than from a Design to
corrupt the Ancient Belief. However, thou may give Credit to Thucidydes, who
in the 86th. Olympiad began to write his History of the War in Peloponesus,
between the Lacaedemonians and those of Athens; which War continued One and
Twenty Years, as that Author testifies, who wrote Annals of it from the
Beginning to the End. And among other Remarkable Passages, which he is very
exact in recounting, he mentions a famous Eclipse of the Sun that happened in
the First Year of that War, and was so great that the Stars appeared at Noon
day in the Sky. Plutarch also speaks of this Eclipse, telling us, that
Pericles, Prince of the Athenians, being at Sea when the Sun was thus darkened,
and perceiving the Master of the Vessel in a great Fright, as at some Prodigy;
he threw his Cloak over the Man's Face, and asked him, If he was afraid of
that, or looked upon it as a had Omen? And when the Master answered, No;
Pericles replied, What Difference is there between this Eclipse of the Sun and
that, since both are caused by the Interposition of a Veil between the Sun and
thine Eyes; only that Veil is larger than my Cloak, it being the Moon which
covers that glorious Lamp from our Sight?

Much about the same Time lived Herodotus and Hellanicus, two famous
Historians, Men of Integrity and Credit, and Hypocrates the Renowned Physician
of Athens. These are worthy to be translated into the Turkish Language, as are
also Exnophon and Polybius, who wrote after them. They all, except the last,
lived in the Time of the Persian Monarchy, and therefore are most likely to
deliver down a true Account of the Memorable Events that happened during that
formidable Empire.

As for the Macedonian Monarchy, the most Eminent Writers were Curtius,
Arrianus, Diodorus Siculus; but this last is frequently mistasten in his
Chronology, and therefore ought to be corrected by the Others. Plutarch also
must be consulted, and Josephus the Jew; with Strabo, Appian, Livy, Justin and
Pausanias. For they either serve to illustrate one another, where they treat of
the same Matters, or else the one carries on the Thread of History where the
other left off. And therefore thou need not wonder that I name so many
Authors, since they are worthy of Credit, and absolutely necessary to the
completing an entire History of the World: Whereas there are a Rabble of other
Writers, who are scarce worth the Naming; much less their Authority to be
trusted to, in compiling an Universal History, which is to give a new Luster to
the Ottoman Empire, and raise its Credit in the Learned World.

As for the Roman Empire, it will be necessary to make Use of Josephus,
Tacitus, Suetonius, Philo, Xiphilus, Zonaras, Ammianus Marcellinus, Velleius
Paterculus, Seneca, Florus, Livy and Suidas.

These will be sufficient Materials, with which the Translators, Scribes and
Compilers may accomplish this Illustrious Undertaking; the Encouragement
whereof I again earnestly recommend to thy Liberality and Munificence.

What concerns the Injunction thou have laid on me, to draw a Pattern or Model
of this Great Work, in presenting thee with a Brief Abstract of the Rise and
Fall of the Four Monarchies, with such Memorable Events as will be proper to
direct the Undertakers in the Method of digesting this Universal History; I
will reserve it for another Letter, not having those Books by me which are
requisite to assist me in this Affair.

In the mean Time, I pray Heaven, prosper this Noble Enterprise, and grant that
thou may live the Space of many, Olympiads, to see the Effect of thy Bounty;
When this Universal History being finished, shall instruct the Mussulmans, and
defeat the Calumnies of the Uncircumcised.

Paris, 2d. of the 5th. Moon, of the Year 1668.
The End of the First Book.
LETTERS Writ by A Spy at PARIS.
VOL. VII. BOOK II.
LETTER I. To Mehement, an Exiled Eunuch, at Alcair in Egypt.
THY Sufferings pierce my Heart: I owe thee Pity on the Score of Humane Nature;
and a more Compassion as thou art a Mussulman: But, where is the Tongue or Pen,
that can describe the Sympathy of Friends? Can thou in a desponding Manner
cast thy self upon thy Bed, there to exhale, in Melancholy Sighs, that pungent
Sorrow, which can find no other Vent, unless those Vapors of the Spleen
condense to Showers of Tears? Can thou do this, and I remain Insensible all
the while? No! I in a perfect Echo to thy saddest Groans. And when thou
weep'st, my Heart is not a Stone, that spatters back again the Drops that fall
on it; but it is like Clay, that softens with the Gentle Solemn Distillation.
Believe that I sweat Blood, when thou dissolv'st in Tears. I am not capable of
Moderation toward my Friend. My Love, my Joy, my Grief, and Anger, are all
Excessive, when such a one as thou occasion'st them. It Is equal Pleasure to
live or die, in this Magnetic Point: For, Souls of Friends are perfect
Unisons. Then, if thou have a Spark of Love for Mahmut, do not kill me with thy
sad Complaints. For, whilst I hear, that thou art thus abandoned to Misfortune
and Despasr, how can I live without perpetual Deaths, more Terrible than what
we all must undergo, by the Course of Nature? Do thou delight to make a
Constant Martyr of me?

Thou 'rt bred a Courtier, and so was I: Our Infant Blood was seasoned with the
Grand Signior's. Bread and Salt: We equally imbibed the Manners, Habits,
Customs, Maxims, and the Pride of the Seraill'; with the Pillow, the Milk,
Sorbets, and other Nourishment of our Early Years. Since which we have seen the
various Revolutions of Mighty Kingdoms, States and Empires. We have beheld the
Invincible Emperor of China fall a Victim to the Perfidy of his Slaves, and to
the more propitious Fortune of the Tartars. After another Manner was the Glory
of the British Monarchy eclipsed. But, no foreign Story can match the Barbarous
Massacres of our Majestic Sultans, Mustapha, Osman, and Ibrahim, all within
our Memory.

Oh! Mehemet, we have lived too long, after these Spoils of Royal Blood. How
can we repine at our own Private Losses and Afflictions, whilst we do but sip
the Flat Insipid Relics of those Tragical, sprightly Potions, brewed for the
Palates of the Greatest Princes. Henceforth, let us live, as if we were among
the Dead. Let Us hear, and see, feel, taste, and smell these Outward Objects en
passant, without being sensible what we do or suffer. Let us Anticipate, by a
wise Prevention, the last Stroke of Death, in dying every Moment.

Go to the Pyramids, my Mehemet, or would to God I could go thither for thee;
there to Contemplate the Fate of Humane Glory, the Mock Grandeur of this World.
Consider all the Race of the Egyptian Kings, who built these Costly and
Magnificent Structures, or their Fathers for 'em: Who filled the Hollow Piles
with Silver, Gold and Precious Stones: Whilst, with their Magic Laws, they
listed Legions of Spirits, dwelling in the Air, Fire, Earth and Water, obliging
them to guard the Wealthy Sepulchers: And tell me then, what thou can find
in those superannuated Vaults? Nothing, but Stench and Darkness. Old Time has
filch'd away the slighter Glory's of the Place; and his Younger Brother
Avarice, has plundered all the Rest, which was the more Substantial Part. He
could have done no less in Common good Manners, than take the Leavings of the
Heir; the Elder of the Two. The Great Al Maimun thought to have the Gleanings
of their Harvest; but he found, the Gain would never exceed the Cost.

But, what is become of all the Founders of these Astonishing Fabrics? Look in
the Tomb of Cheops, who is supposed to build the Greatest of the Pyramids; and
thou will find, not the least Relic of his Ashes: Or, if thou should
'twill be Impossible to distinguish them, from the Common Dust of other
Mortals, though his Meanest Slaves: So Mutable is Human Glory; So Inconstant all
the Smiles of Fortune.

Do but reflect on all the Glorious Conquests of Alexander the Great, and on
the Triumphant Entry he made in Babylon, when the Chariot which carried him,
was an Epitome of all the Riches which the Indies could afford; and yet that
Chariot ought to be esteemed but one Degree before his Hearse, which in a very
few Days, with an Obscurity beneath the Merits of so great a Victor, conveyed
him to his Grave.

Consider Caesar, who after Four and Twenty Battles, wherein he always got the
Day, was drawn in a triumphant Chariot to the Capitol, by Forty Elephants; yet
now his Name is hardly thought of.

So Epaminondas thought to outvye the world in his Magnificent Insults; yet all
this Glorious Pageantry ended in Dust and Ashes. Aurelian led the Graces
Captive with Zenobia; yet he himself at last became the Prisoner of Death. The
Pompous Galley of Cleopatra, when she Celebrated the Cilician Triumph, served
but to mend the Poop of Charon's Boat, when she was to be ferry'd to Elyzium.
So the Proud Sesostris, whose Coach was drawn by Four Vanquished Kings, at last
was fain to owe his Uncouth Funeral to Four Sordid Slaves, who stole his Naked
Corpse away from the Designed Revenge of Factious Eunuchs, and buried it in a
Heap of Camel's Dung.

But, where is the Pen or Pencil that will to the Life describe the Unmatched
Cavalcade of Pompey, when by a prosperous Chemistry he had extracted all the
Richest Spirits and Essences of Eastern wealth, to grace his Entry into Rome?

The Front of the Procession dazzled every Eye, with the strange Luster of
Diamonds and Carbuncles mixed in chequer-wise: An Orental Figure, or rather the
Substance of all Asia, in Epitome. Then followed the Image of the Crescent Moon
in massy Gold, with a Train of Mountains of the same Metal, whereon were Woods
of Jet, Vines whose Grapes were entire Saphires, and Animals all of Porphyry,
Grazing on Fields of verdant Amethysts.

To sanctify this Glorious Show, the Golden Images of Jupiter, Mars, and
Pallas, came next in Sight, with Thirty Crowns of Gold, born up by the Chief
Captains of his Army, as if so many Kingdoms were designed for their Rewards.
And because Gods and Goddesses should not want a Temple, Five Hundred Slaves
bore up a Fane, built all of Massy Silver, washed with Gold. And at the Back of
this, appeared the Statue of the Conqueror, on which no Eye could fix, being
crusted over with Hyacinths and Pearls.

Behold, my Mehmet, an Exuberance of Humane Glory: Yet wonder not to see a Man
come after all; a Mortal Man, I say, made Radiant as the Sun, with borrowed
Jewels. And to complete his fading Triumph, read these Letters, all pure
Jaspers, on his Chariot-Wheels: Armenia, Cappadocia, Paphlagonia, Media,
Colchis, Syria, Cilicia, Mesopotamia, Phoenicia, Paelestine, India, and the
Deserts of Arabia. All these were the Conquests of this Triumphant Warrior,
and yet his Destiny Insulted over him. Poor Pompey thou art gone, and all thy
Mighty Territories in the East, are now possessed by Sultan Mahomet our
Glorious Sovereign.

And what need thou and I repine, after we have seen all this? Let Asdrubal
astonish Carthage with the Glory of Four Public Triumphs: Yet that Theater of
his Honor quickly proves the Stage whereon he was degraded, stripped stark
naked, and in Triumph led away by Death. So Marius, after he had been exalted
to the Top of Human Felicity on Earth, was seen all naked lying in a stinking
Ditch.

What is become of Nero's Silver Gallery in the Capitol? Or the pendant Gardens
of Semiramis, which cost no less than Twenty Millions of Gold? Where is now the
Glittering Hall of Atabalipa, King of Peru, whose Pavement was of Saphires? Or
the Gardens of Cyrus, fenced round with Pales of Gold? Or Caesar's Fountains
garnished with Dryads of the same Metal? Where is the Ivory Palace of Melaus,
or the Crystal Louvre of Drusus? All these Things are vanished with their
Founders.

How Wise and Happy then was Saladine, the Great and most Invincible Conqueror
of Asia, who Triumphed over himself; and in his Victorious Return, caused a
Shirt to be carried before him on the Point of a Spear, with this Proclamation:
That after all his Glories, he should carry nothing to the Grave but that poor
Shirt? So Adrian a Roman Emperor, to qualify the excessive Joys of his High
Fortune, Celebrated his own Funeral, and caused his Coffin to be born before
him, when he was to make a Public Cavalcade through Rome. This was a sacred
Triumph, an Heroic Insult over himself and Death.

Let thou and I, my Friend, imitate these sage Examples, and ever have the
Image of Death before our Eyes. Then we shall never mourn, for the vain Trifles
we have lost, or covet what we never enjoyed: But being ever content with what
our Destiny allots us, shall pass our Time away in a Divine Tranquillity.

Mehemet, thou wilt find this to be a Profitable and True Experiment. Try it, and
the Issue will convince thee more than a Thousand Counselors.

Paris, 12th. of the 5th. Moon, of the Year 1668.
LETTER II. To Mohammed, the Illustrious Eremit of Mount Vriel in Arabia the
Happy.
I Lodge in a House near the Wall of Paris, which gives me a daily Opportunity
of surveying out of my Window, the Adjasent Fields: These extend themselves in
a Plain, for the Space of a League, or thereabouts; And then the Eye is
arrested by a long Ridge of Rising Ground, a Row of Hills or Hillocks, not
meriting the Lofty Name of Mountains, yet high enough to put a Valley out of
shape, and make the Horizon crumpback'd.

Those Hills are covered thick with Woods and Groves; amongst whose verdant,
shady Tops, some Stately Palaces lift up their glittering Crests, and make a
Sociable pleasant Figure in those Solitudes.

This Prospect represents so much to the Life, the Valley of Admoim in Arabia,
the Place of my Nativity, that I could as well grasp Coals of Fire with naked
Hand, and not be burnt; as cast my Eye out of my Window, on this lovely
Landscape, and not be inflamed with secret passions for my Native Soil, the
Place where I first drew the Vital Air. It is a perfect Magnet to my Spirit,
wheresoever I am; attracting all my Wishes, Inclinations, and Desires.
Methinks, the Eastern Winds at certain Hours, waft to my ravished Ears, the
Whispers of my Countrymen. Methinks, sometimes I see the Faces of my Kindred,
and their Rural Train; I hear their Voices, and converse familiarly with them,
as though they were present: Such is the Magic of strong Desire and Sympathy. It
steals the Soul away from it self, and with sweet Violence unites it to the
beloved Object, though at never so great a Distance. Thus when my wandering
Thoughts have taken up their Residence for a while in that delicious Vale where
I was born, a far more powerful Magnet, draws 'em to thy Cave; Mysterious
Solitary, Mirror of Virtues, Exemplary Guide of such as consecrate themselves
to God.

Glory to Him that was before All Time, the Father of Eternal Ages. He changes
not, yet is the Source of Indefatigable and unwearied Revolutions. He is the
only Independent, True, and self-Existent Being; The Increated Essence from
whom all other Beings derive their Origin and Conservation. He is the Prop and
Basis of the Universe. He is but One, the Primitive Unity, and cannot be
divided into Fractions; yet every Species, and Individual Being in the World
participates a Share of his Divinity. Immortal Praises exhale from all his
Creatures, and ascend like Clouds of Incense before the Throne of his Adorable
Majesty; or like Vapors which the grateful Earth returns in a hot Summers Day,
by way of acknowledgment, for the Benefits perpetually flowing on her from the
Sun. So all the Elements respire their Thanks to Him that made 'em. The
Firmament expands its self, and bows' down to the Brims of this low Globe: Sun
Moon and Stars, do stoop and kiss the Floor of the Earth in token of profound
Humility and Devotion, to the Immortal Source of Light. Only Ungrateful Man
repays, the Bounty of the Omnipotent with Neglects, Contempts, Affronts, and
Blasphemies. I mean the General Part of Humane Race; excepting always from this
Charge, the Just, the Innocent and Pious. Were it not for such as these, the
Divine Patience would be tired with the continual Prophanations of vain Mortals.

Oh! Venerable Sylvan, thou art the only Pacifick Victim of this sinful Age.
Thy constant Self-denials, Mortifications, Abstinences, and the whole System of
thy Accomplished Sanctity, stop the Wrath of Heaven from falling, in large
Cataracts, on Mankind. When the Eternal Eye beholds thy Virtues, it drops down
Tears of Love and Mercy on the Earth, glad that a Son of Adam yet survives, not
stained with Vice. Thou art the effectual Propitiation, for the Sinful World.
When Storms and Tempests of Impetuous Winds; when Lightning, Thunder, Hail or
Rain disturb the Air, or Earthquakes menace more effectual Tragedies to the
Earth, I think of thee, the Favorite of Heaven and then repose in full
Security: Thy very Idea is my shelter from all evils: I shroud my self under
the Shade of thy Inviolated Beard, over which the Razor never passed. I take
Sanctuary in the Vmbrella of thy Arms, when stretched in fervent Oraisons. Thy
Remembrance is my certain Refuge in Calamity.

I am Impregnated with Sacred Emulations of thy Virtue; I burn with fervent,
passionate Desires to become thy Disciple. I languish to withdraw my self from
this vain World; and from the Contagious Society of Mortals. How Happy is the
Life that is led in quiet Solitude? Where the Soul can feel her self, and being
awakened to a Sense of her Immortal Strength, rouzes and vigorously shakes off
the heavy Clogs of Sleep and Death: Whilst the Divine Afflatus gently breathing
on the Intellect, and fanning the oppressed Sparks of Reason, which lay
smothering under a Heap of Errors, Lusts, Affections, and unlimited Desires;
kindles the Mind into a perfect Flame of Light, which soon consumes the Rubbish
of Bodily Pleasures, dissipates the Smoke and Mists of Pampered Flesh and
Blood, and then a Man becomes all Radiant within, shining with Unclouded
Splendors.

We Mortals seem to be ranked in a Middle State between the Separate Spirits
and Beasts: Our Virtues make us like the Former; our Vices, like the Latter.
For, when a Man has quite subdued his Appetites, and Reason sits Triumphant in
her Throne, he is like an Angel, living above the Rate of his Mortality. He does
not with the Stagyrite place Virtue in a Medium, or rank the Excess of Goodness
in the Predicament of Vice; But makes direct and swift Advances to the Zenith
of Heroic Generosity; scorning to halt or make lame mungrel Capitulations with
himself, as if he were afraid of being too Good.

I would ask a Peripatetick, Whether it be a Virtue or a Vice, in him that
stomaching the Enormous Villainies of Wicked Men, boyls up with an Excessive
Vehement Anger? Or, Whether a Man, can err in loving God too much, or in
conceiving too Violent a Sorrow for his past Offenses? Or who can be too
Thankful for the Favors of Heaven? No: the farther Distance Virtue keeps from
this Cold, Earthly Mediocrity, the brighter is its Splendour. And so on the
other Side, the Greater is the Barbarism, Brutality and Infernal Stamp of Vice,
by how much more Remote it is from this Indifference. In a Word, Virtue and
Vice, are Two Contrary Extremes: So Piety is diametrically opposite to
Profaneness: Intemperance to Sobriety: Fortitude to Cowardice: Incontinence to
Chastity: Avarice to Bounty: Modesty to Impudence: Pride to Humility: Enmity to
Friendship, etc.

Now the Mediums between these Extremes, are Hypocrisy, between Virtue and
Vice: Superstition between Piety and Profaneness: Bashfulness between Modesty
and Impudence, and so of the Rest.

Yet, after all, it is Necessary to observe a Medium in those Things which
pertain to Mortal Life, and to the Perpetuation of Mankind: Such are Meats,
Drinks, Natural Passions of the Body and Mind, proceeding from the alternate
Sense of Pleasure and Pain. So when we are pressed with Hunger and Thirst, we
ought not presently to covet the Plentiful Tables and Superfluous Banquets of
the Great; But rather such a Diet as being easily prepared, may satisfy the
Cravings of our Nature, without nauseating and giving us a Surfeit. To this End
the Divine Providence has scattered up and down the Surface of this Globe, an
Infinite Variety of Roots, Herbs, Fruits, Seeds, with all Sorts of Corn and
Pulse: The Cattle afford us Plenty of Milk; the Bees are no Niggards of their
Honey: the Fountains, Rivers, and Lakes, abound with ever-springing fresh
Supplies of sweet refreshing Water. We also have the Use of Salt, Oil, Wine and
other exhilarating Beverages; That being content with so many Benefits, and
Enjoyments, we might prolong our Lives in this World by Sobriety, as in a most
pleasant Garden or Paradise of Health.

But alas, instead of gratefully acknowledging the Bounty of Heaven, and
pregnant Fertility of the Earth; Instead of sitting mannerly down at the Table
which God has spread and covered for us, with such a Train of Festival
Dainties; we break the Rules of Hospitality; and rushing violently on the
Creatures under his Protection, we kill and slay at Pleasure, turning the
Banquet to a Cruel Massacre: being transformed into a Temper wholly Brutal and
Voracious, we glut our selves with Flesh and Blood of Slaughtered Animals. Oh!
happy he that can content himself with Herbs and other Genuine Products of the
Earth; That sleeps as well in a Solitary Cave, upon a Bed of Moss or Leaves, as
in a Palace on a Couch of Down. He never wants, because he never desires what
is not in his Power. He is not burdened with a Crowd of Servants and Flattering
Retainers; nor his Repose disturbed with early and late Addresses of pretended
Friends, Officious Sycophants, Importunate Petitioners, and other fretting
Business of the World.

Why should I longer then demurr or hesitate; what hinders me from presently
embracing a Course of Life, that promises so much Happiness? A Discipline that
will at once free me from a Thousand Tyrannies of Imperious Lusts and Hostile
Passions? I shall then have no Need of Money, or the Help of cross-grained
Servants. I shall not want a Multitude of Goods, the Needless Pageantry of
superfluous Ornaments, to make a dazzling Figure, and draw the Eyes of People to
a Reverend Admiration. I shall be free from Sottish Drowsiness, and turbulent
Dreams. My Lungs will in my Sleep respire the Air with Ease: whilst gentle
Slumbers, mixed with happy Visions, shall transportt my Soul to Unknown Worlds.
No Fevers, Gouts or Dysenteries shall invade my Health: Nor magisterical
Menaces of Empericks bespeak my certain Death; unless I Will patiently submit to
all the needless Tortures they are contriving for me, and tamely swallow down
their newinvented Poisons, and be racked to Death in Hopes of Ease and Life.
From all which horrid Circumstances, a slender, innocent Diet, not stained with
Blood of any Animal, will set me free.

Holy Eremite, the Idea I have of this Manner of Life makes a profound and
durable Impression on my Soul. I am ravished with the Sentiments of Plato and
Pythagoras, and resolutely bent to undergo the Discipline of their Philosophy.
I Will first endeavor to rid my self of vain Affections, Habits, and profane
Negotiations of the Earth: I Will gradually die to all Concupiscence and Bodily
Pleasure; that so I may by Equal Steps revive to the Contemplation of Celestial
Things. Then being free from every Spot and Stain contracted in the Days of my
Security and Carelessness; my Thoughts and Works will be Acceptable to God: Who
in Return, will certainly infuse into my defecate Mind, a Secret Virtue, the
Magic of this Visible World; which purifying my Soul yet farther, will prepare
it for the last and highest Gift of the Eternal Bounty to our Race whilst in
this Life: To wit, a Power of doing Supernatural Things, and of Foretelling
Events to come.

Do thou but pray it may be so, and all the Powers of Hell can never prevail
against me: For, thou have the Ear of the Omnipotent.

Paris, 3d. of the 8th. Moon, of the Year 1668.
LETTER III. To Hamet Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire.
IN this Time of Wars with Nazarenes, when the Ottoman Fury is rowz'd and
provoked by Infidels: it will not be amiss to expose the Nakedness of Europe,
to the Supreme Divan, which is on Earth the Close Committee of the Court Above.

I chose to address my Letter to thee in Compliance with thy former Orders,
wherein thou seemedst passionately desirous to know the Present State of
Christendom. God give thee a perpetual Serenity; Scribe of the Scribes: May
thou never be troubled with a Running Eye, a shaking Hand, or the Toothach. As
for me, I Am a perfect Magazine of Diseases; a walking Hospital; The School of
Aesculapius. Where the Necessary God has Scope to vent his Skill on all the
various kinds of Maladies, which afflict our mortal Race: Gouts, Fevers,
Cramps, and Horrid Dysenteries, are as Common with me as my daily Diet.

However, amidst all these Afflictions, I serve the Grand Signior and my
Friends with a cordial Alacrity; Never grudging to Sacrifice my Ease and Health
to the Interest of True Believers.

The Face of Europe is much changed since the Decline of the Roman Empire, and
the Usurpations of the Popes. That once Mighty Monarchy, is now shrunk into a
very narrow Compass, being shut up within the Confines of Germany, which
formerly was but a Province of the Ancient Empire. All Italy is revolted. So
are the Suisses, and the United States of the Low Countries. The Hans-Towns
which in Times past paid Homage to the Emperor, have now shaken off the Yoke,
and are become Independent Commonwealths. Transylvania plays fast and loose
with him, according as their Interest requires. Livonia laughs at his Menaces,
as appears by the Answer they sent to Charles V. when he demanded their
Submissions, and that they would return to their Native Allegiance, otherwise
threatening them with Fire and Sword. For, all the Reply they made, was, That
they knew the Emperor's Horse would be foundered, before he could reach the
Frontiers of their Country.

It Is a General Observation, that since the Reign of Rodolph I. above Two
Hundred Principalities and States have fallen off from the Empire. And those
that yet continue in their Obedience, I mean, the Electoral Princes, claim so
many Privileges; stand so much upon Punctilio's and Prerogatives, that there
remains now little more of the Imperial Majesty and Power, save the bare Title
and Outward Pomp. It is Remarkable, That within these Three Hundred Years, no
less than Nine German Emperors have been Murdered, and many more have been
deposed and banished. To sum up all in a few Words, If we survey the present
State of the German Empire accurately, if we pry narrowly into its true
circumstances, we shall find, that after all the Clatter of his Noisy Titles,
the Emperor can call nothing properly his own, but his Hereditary Estate in
Austria, which is hardly equivalent to the Territories of some Lords whom he
calls his Vassals.

The Germans in general are a Rude Unpolished People, greedy of Novelties;
Inconstant, Rash, Perfidious, and very Phlegmatic; much addicted to unnatural
Lusts and Incestuous Copulations. It is recorded of Barbara, the Empress, Wife
to Sigismund, another Messalina, that after her Husbands Death, her Confessor
advising her to reform her Manners, and live more chastely like the Turtle, she
answered, If I must imitate the Life of Birds, why not of a Sparrow, as well as
a Turtle? Her Brother Frederick was much such another: For at Ninety Years of
Age, he murdered his Wife for the Sake of a Strumpet: And being advised to
repent and think of his Grave; He said, I am now studying my Epitaph, which I
design shall be comprised in these Words: This is my Way to Hell; I know not
what I shall find there: What I have left behind me I know. I abounded in all
Delights, whereof I carry nothing with me: Neither my dainty Meats or pleasant
Wines, or whatsoever my Insatiable Luxury exhausted.

Drunkenness is said to be the Original Sin of Germany, from whence it spread
it self into other Countries. They give this Character of a German, "That he is
an Animal which drinks more than he can carry: A Tun that contains more than he
can vent: And that he understands more than he can express." They tell a Story
of Four Old Saxons, who at one Sitting, drank as many Healths as they could
make up Years amongst them, which amounted to Three Hundred. And it is Recorded
of a certain German Count, That he used to make his Children, whilst yet
Infants, drink lustily, to prove whether they were of his own begetting or no:
For, if they grew Sick after it, he presently concluded them to be Bastards:
But if they could bear the Debauch well, he cherished 'em as his own True
Offspring. In a Word, thou may have the same Idea of the Germans at this
Day, as Solomon the Magnificent had in his Time, who used to say, "I slight the
Germans above all other People of Europe, because they are always at discord
among themselves, nor can they ever be united any more than my Fingers and
Toes. They cannot endure Labor; and are the Excessiv'st Gluttons and Drunkards
in the World; They always maintain a Regiment of Whores in their Camp. Their
Generals take more Pride in their Feathers, than in their Military Arms."

In a Word, the German is so overrun with all Kinds of Vice, that he wants
nothing to make him a Complete Devil, but only a little Tincture of the Italian
Qualities, according to the Proverb, Tudesco Italianato, e un Diabolo
Incarnato; A German Italianiz'd, is a Devil Incarnate.

It Is certain, the French have so weakened 'em on one Hand, and the Swedes on
the other; that considering the frequent Troubles they meet with from the
Hungarians, Bohemians, and other Tributary Nations, besides the Intestine Feuds
of the Electoral Princes; we need not fear the blunted Talons of the Eagle,
which are scarce strong enough to support her tottering State, or prop her from
falling into Ruin: So far is she from being able to offend her Neighbors,
that she never makes War her Choice, or takes the Field but by Compulsion, in
her own Defense.

Illustrious Hamet, I pray God inspire the Victorious Osmans with Prophetic
Courage and Resolution; and the Final Conquest of Germany will soon be the
Prize of True Believers.

Paris, 5th. of the 10th. Moon, of the Year 1668.
LETTER IV. To Nathan Ben Saddi, a Jew at Vienna.
THE Friendship that has been contracted between thee and me, ever since it was
thy Fortune to serve the Grand Signior in that Station, obliges us both to
mutual Sincerity. Besides, the Duty and Allegiance we owe our Sovereign,
requires Plain-dealing between us. We ought to shun Flattery, as the Bane of
all Friendly Engagements, the Pest of the Courts of Princes; and the General
Contagion which infects chiefly the most Effeminate Part of Mankind. Such as
are these Western Nazarenes; who abound in a Thousand little Complaisances, and
false Civilities; thus suffering their own Integrity to be corrupted; their
Virtue and Fastness of Spirit, to be surpised and debauched; whilst their
Friends, by these means, not seldom run on Precipices, and fall into Inevitable
Ruin. In a Word, they betray one another and themselves, out of pretended Good
Nature.

By what I have said, thou will comprehend, That I do not reprove thee out of
Spite, Envy, Malice or an affected Gravity; when I tell thee, that you took
wrong Measures, in endeavoring to set the Emperor's Palace on Fire: Or to
poison him at his Dinner. I told thee once before, That these preposterous
Methods, will never take Effect. Besides, they will do the Grand Signior no
Service.

Though thou art seemingly engaged in the Cause of the Malcontents, remember,
that thy Business is different from theirs. What signifies it to thee, whether
the Hungarians have their Liberties, Rights and Privileges granted them, or no?
Or what Reason have thou to espouse the Interest of the Evangelicks, rather
than that of the Catholics, any farther than as an Umbrage to cover the
greater Designs thou have in Hand, as an Agent Incognito for the Grand Signior.
Let the Jesuits pursue their own Game, and the Protestants theirs. Stand thou
Neuter in the Main, and rather endeavor to keep both Parties in a
Counterpoise, than to turn the Scales for either. For, the Sultan will gain by
the Divisions of the Nazarenes, let the Case go how it will between themselves.
Besides, there are Catholics engaged in the Faction, as well as Protestants.
It Is rather a Civil Quarrel, than a Religious one. The Nobles and Gentry of
Hungary and Transylvania, are concerned for their Estates, more than for their
Churches. They see, the Imperial Court wants Money, and it is a Crime for an
Hungarian to be Rich. Those that have the Supreme Power, in these Cases, will
find Reason enough to condemn a Wealthy Lord, whether he be guilty or not.

It Is this puts them upon Caballing and entering into Confederacies, that so
they may consult the Means of their own Safety, and be in a Posture to defend
themselves.

I perceive the Count de Serini has made another Address, for the Government of
Carolstadt, and been repulsed: Joseph, Earl of Haberstein, and Knight of Malta,
being appointed to succeed the Count d' Aversperg in that Honor. Which is an
evident Sign, That the Emperor has no good Opinion of Serini, notwithstanding
all his Former good Services. And this is enough to alienate a Man of his great
Courage and Merits.

Count Frangipani also has his particular Discontents: So has Tatembach, with
many other Potent Lords of Hungary and Croatia. Indeed, the whole Body of those
Nations are disobliged, and almost wearied out with the continual Oppressions
of the Germans.

Nathan, thou will find it no hard Matter, to bring 'em to a Necessity of
putting themselves under the Grand Signior's Protection. It Is thy part to
cherish their Discontents. As for the Imperial Court, thou may perceive, they
are resolved to mortify these People, and to take from them all Opportunities
and the very Capacity of Rebelling, by not suffering the Natives of Hungary and
Croatia, to possess any Office of Command.

Every Party pursues its own Interest, and so must we ours. Self-preservation
is the Root of all Mutual Society and Justice. Take Case of thy self, thy
Friends, and the Cause thou art engaged in, and then thou need'st not fear any
Qualms of Conscience. In fine, I counsel thee to put in Practice the Advice of
one of thy own Rabbi's, Jesus Ben Syrach; Be not over just.

Paris, 17th. of the 11th. Moons, of the Year 1668.
LETTER V. To Pesteli Hali, his Brother, Master of the Grand Signior's Customs
at Constantinople.
PRepare thy self for surprising News, and receive it with a Moderation
becoming a Man. Oucoumiche our Mother is dead. One and the same Night lodged
her in the Apartments of Hymen, and the Chambers of Death. Before the Days of
the Nuptial Solemnities were over, the Mournful Rites of her Funeral Commenced:
She made but one Remove from her Marriage Bed, to the Grave.

If thou wonderest, that a Woman of her Age, being Seventy Five Years Old; and
having already had Two Husbands, should marry a Third; Know, that it was not
Dotage, but Discretion which prompted her to take this Course. The Integrity,
Wisdom, and prudent Conduct of Eliachim the Jew, had charmed her Affections
long ago, and improved her Acquaintance with him, into a strict and virtuous
Friendship. As a Mother, she owed him Respect and Love, for his constant
Fidelity to me: And on her own Account, she could not but entertain Sentiments
of Esteem and Gratitude for a Man, who had been so nicely careful to preserve
her Person and Honor from Injury and Violence, ever since she came to Paris.
For, he alone, among the many Myriads of People inhabiting this City, was the
only Confident, both of her Secrets and mine. In a Word, these Regards, with
some others of Piety, Zeal, and Good Nature, made her willing to become his
Wife, who in all Things had performed the Part of a Friend, and a Person of
Honor.

Besides all this, it was really her Interest, thus to dispose of her later
Days in a Foreign Country, where she knew no body but Eliachim and me. As for
me, she considered that my Life was not only subject to the same Casualties
with other Mortals, and that I might be snatched away by a Thousand Deaths; but
that my Station here was very Precarious, and I might be suddenly recalled by
my Superiors to Constantinople, or at least be removed to some other Post,
whither she could not accompany me, being Incapable of bearing, at these Years,
the Hardships and Fatigues of Travel: That after my Departure, she should be
neglected, contemned, and abandoned by all, but those who would desire her
Death, for the Sake of her Money and Jewels.

In these Circumstances, to remain a Widow, professing the Faith of Mahomet,
and believing the Alcoran, in a Region and City swarming with Infidels; would
have been but an uncomfortable as well as a dangerous Condition. Wherefore
having had Experience of Eliachim's Virtue, and incorrupt Manners, he also
making Addresses of Love to her, and giving her Encouragement to hope, that he
would become a Mussulman; she yielded at last to the Thoughts of taking him for
her Husband, and they were married on the 7th. of this Moon, in a private
Synagogue of the Jews: For, they are not allowed a Public One in this City, as
they are in many other Cities of Europe.

My Mother appeared neither too dejectedly sad, nor profusely merry, during the
Nuptial Feast. But comporting her self with a cheerful Reservedness, seemed to
have her Thoughts rather fixed on something else, than the vain Ceremonies,
Noise, and Mirth of the Company. It looks as if her Prophetic Soul was
sensible of its approaching Release: For, to be Brief, she was found Dead in
her Bed next Morning.

Brother, she is now in her Sepulcher, at Rest from all the Toils of Humane
Life. Let not this News affect thee with fruitless Melancholy; since Death is
the Common Fate of all Mortals. Rather advance the Bliss of our deceased
Parent, with devout Oraisons for her Soul; Remembering, that ever long, we shall
be in the same Condition. For though Man, like a Moth, be passionately enamored
with the Light of this World; though he flutter and dance about it for a while,
basking in the Splendour and Warmth of his good Fortune; yet at length he is
consumed by the very Flame, which gave him Nourishment, and falls a Victim to
his own Pleasure.

Paris, 9th. of the 1st. Moon, of the Year 1669.
LETTER VI. To Hamet Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire.
I Sent thee a Letter some Days ago, wherein I exposed the General Nakedness,
Imbecility, and languishing State of the German Empire in this Age. My
Dispatch abounded with Characters of their Vices: It described exactly the
present Eclipse of Ancient Imperial Majesty, Power and Strength, the Revolt of
many Principalities and States, the Feuds and Discord of those that yet remain
in Obedience, and pay a seeming Homage to Caesar; with many other Things, which
being well considered, may for the Future prevent, or at least, diminish that
Consternation and Panick Terror, which uses to seize the Hearts of Mussulmans,
when we are in War with the Emperor.

Now as a farther Incentive and Encouragement to take up Arms against the
Infidels; as a Spur to certain Victory and Conquest, I will unlock the
Treasures of the Country, without taking Notice of the Inhabitants. And, since
nothing more excites the Resolution and Valor of Military Men, than the Hopes
of Plunder, and passing away a Campaign in Plenty of all necessary Comforts. I
will give thee a true Account of the Natural Dowry of these Regions, the Riches
of the Soil, and the Wealth, which Commerce with other Nations, together with
the Spoils of former Wars, the Industry of the People, and the Benevolence of
Fortune have added to their Store.

Germany abounds in Generous Wines, and those more lasting than any other in
Europe. The Rhenish Wines will keep above Fifty Years. The Wines of the Neckar
are wholesome, and clear as Water from the Rock: Those of Franconia are strong
and operative: The Austrian Grape is sweet and luscious. Several Roman
Emperors have preferred the Fruits of the German Vintage, to those of Italy
and Greece. And such is the superabundant Plenty of Vineyards, that at a Place
called Stutgard, there is a Proverb current, That they have more Wine than
Water. If our Janissaries knew this, they would be for an Expedition into
Germany. Nay they temper their Mortar with Wine in some Places, and slack their
Lime with it.

They have strong Beverages also made of Barley, Wheat, and other Grain, which
they transport from Brumswick, Breslaw, Delph, Dantzick, Lubeck, and other
Places, to most Countries in the North and West of Europe. They likewise make a
Sort of Wine of Honey, as strong and Sweet as the Wine of Candy.

There is abundance of Frankincense and Myrrh in Moravia, of Saffron in
Austria, of Licorice in Franconia, of Madder for Dyers in Silesia, of Amber in
Thuringia.

There are Innumerable Orchards full of all delectable Fruits, the Fields stand
thick with Corn, the Pastures are thronged with Cattle, and they have a Breed
of the stoutest Horses in the World. They have Timber enough to serve all the
Nations in the World for Shipping. But that which is most inviting is, the
Variety of Mines of Gold, Silver, Copper, Lead, Tin and Iron. Before America
was discovered, Germany was the Peru and Potosi of all Europe. They have also
Plenty of Marble as bright as Crystal.

Besides their Native and Domestic Riches, they have mightily improved their
Stock, by Foreign Commerce; exchanging their Superfluities for things more
precious and of greater Value: Which in a constant Course of Bartering, brings
into the German Coffers many Hundred Millions of Crowns in a Year. In a Word,
their Cities are so Rich, that when they have been pillaged by an Enemy, the
booty of one City, has been valued at Two Millions of Crowns, in ready Money,
besides Plate and Jewels. The Common Soldiers have made Hilts for their Swords
and Daggers of Gold and Silver; nay, some would have their very Helmets of the
same Metals. Public Gaming Tables have been set up in the Streets, and it has
been Common for a private Trooper to win or lose Five or Ten Thousand Crowns at
a Time. This would be rare Sport for our Janissaries and Spahi's.

I tell thee, Serene Minister, considering the Immense Wealth of Germany, and
the Degeneracy of its Inhabitants; Providence seems to invite our Arms to make
a Conquest of those Fertile Regions, and take from the Vncircumcis'd the Goods
which surfeit them. They abuse the Gifts of Nature, and Fortune, by employing
them to the Ends of Vice; whereas the True Believers were they once possessed
of them, would turn them to Virtuous Purposes, the Public Advantage, the
Increase of the Empire, Glory of God, and Propagation of the Faith Undefiled.

Paris, of 13th. the 4th. Moon, of the Year 1669.
LETTER VII. To Hebatolla Mir Argun, Superior of the Convent of Derviches at
Cogni in Natolia.
'TWas with a Specific Kind of Joy, not easy to be desin'd, that I received
thy Venerable Dispatch. I perused the Welcome Orders therein contained with a
Delight not in the least Inferior to his, who being abandoned to Distress and
miserable Poverty, has, by good Luck, discovered a hidden Wealthy Treasure: For
so my Spirit is ravished, to find in this degenerate Age, a Rich Reserve of
Piety and Devotion to the Ancient Prophets of God.

I Am glad to hear the Character of John the Baptist, which I sent thee
formerly, was so well accepted by thee, and all the Religious under thy Charge,
That thou vouchsafest only to accuse the shortness of the Relation, desiring a
more particular Account of that Prophet's Manner of living, especially of his
Abstinences, and what may be the most proper Interpretation of the Grecian
Word (...), mentioned in the History of his Life?

Praise be to God, who has inspired thee with this Critical Regard to one of
his most Holy Messengers. I revere thy Learned Soul, and that accomplished
Intellect, which is ever busy, prying into Weighty and Important Matters. I
honor thy Impartial Mind, which scruples not to pay the Attach that is due to a
Saint, though of the Christian Calendar. If we should reject all that the
Followers of Jesus do, we should neither Fast, Pray, give Alms, or perform any
other Good Works. Therefore in this, thou art an Exemplary Pattern to the
Rigid, Superstitious Sort of Mussulman Phanaticks, who bear an endless Grudge
against all those that are not of their Narrow Faith, and Dark Opinion.

Glory be to God, with whom the WORD was present from the Dawning of Eternal
Light, before the Morning of his Works had peeped over the Mountains of the
Ancient Chaos, or penetrated the Dark Abyss, and Misty Vale of Nothing, and
painted the Tops of the Creation, the Highest Ranks of Beings, with Splendors
of the Early Day. Before the Sun had drank the Immortal Halo in, and spong'd up
all the Visible Beams to squeeze them out again upon the Moon, the Stars, and
on this Lower World. That WORD remains for Ever, and at a determined Hour
became Incarnate, in the Person of Jesus the Son of Mary, as the Holy Alcoran
informs us.

In those Days John the Baptist went into the Wilderness, and preached
Repentance to the Jews foretelling the near Approach of the Messiah. The Sacred
Hero made a Cave his Residence; and at first, to wean his Body from all
Softness, he wore a Vest or Shirt of Camel's Hair, which was girt about him
with a Belt made of that Painful and Religious Creatures Skin, to put him in
Mind, that he was born for Holy Labors, Toils, and Mortifications. He had no
Table spread with far-fetched costly Dainties; no Dishes crammed with bloody
and large Inventories of Birds, Four-footed Beasts, and Fish. His Diet was
Simple, Cheap, and Innocent; easy to be got in every Wood or Field, without
the Detriment of his Fellow-Animals. For he either contented himself with a
Repast on Honey, which he found in Hollow Trees; or on a Kind of Manna, a sweet
Dew falling on their Leaves, and there condensed by Heavenly Influence: Or else
it was a kind of luscious Moisture, which he sucked from certain Plants,
perhaps not much unlike our Sugarcanes: For thus Interpreters do differ about
the Words (...). Whatever it was, we may conclude it to be some slender, light
and easy Nourishment. And when this Diet failed him, or his Stomach required a
little more Variety, he banqueted on what the Graecians call (...). Some will
have these to be a Kind of Locusts or Grass-hoppers, a Meat indulged the Jews
by Moses in the Law. The Syrians also counted them a Dainty; so did the Ancient
Parthians, as Aristotle and Pliny tell us. And my Countrymen, the Arabians,
eat of them to this Day. Others are of Opinion, that these (...) were a sort of
little Shellfish, such as Crabs, Crawfish, or Shrimps, which Nature has
generally lodged in Holes along the banks of Rivers. A pleasant, temperate Sort
of Diet, commended for their Virtues in expelling Poison, and being Remedies
for the Strangury, and Antidotes to cure the Biting of Mad Dogs.

The Divine Prophet therefore often frequenting the Waters of the River Jordan,
wherein he used to wash his Converts and Disciples; these Men suppose, he took
Occasion to allay his Hunger with these little Shellfish, which he might
easily take in mighty Numbers from their watery Nests. And they endeavor to
strengthen this Opinion, by asserting, That the Food which the Waters afford
us, is much more Pure and Holy than what the Earth brings forth; in regard the
Earth lies under the Malediction of God, ever since Noah's Flood, whereas the
Waters never were Cursed. Hence, say they, it is very probable. That the
consecrated Hero, would not defile his Spotless Life with cursed Banquets from
the Earth, but rather chose to appease his Hunger with the harmless, blessed,
and wholesome Product of the Waters.

If thou will have my Opinion after all, I Am apt to think these (...) were
nothing else but the tender Tops of Plants, such as we call Asparagus, or
perhaps they were wild Apples of the Wood; and then we may suppose there is some
Mistake in the Greek Copy. (...) for (...). Or, it may be the Holy Prophet, in
the proper Season of the Year, did use to crop and eat the Ears of Barley, and
then the Word should be (...). For, what could be more sweet and pleasant to an
Abstemious Man, than to sustain his Life with fruits, Grain, Herbs, or Roots?
Nor did the Malediction reach the Vegetables, but only the Animal Generations,
from which a perfect Man abstains.

Certainly, those, who out of an Aversion for Purity, Prayer, and Fasting, turn
themselves from Humane Bodies to Swine; and from Religious Abstinence to
Salvage Gurmundizing on Flesh, seem to derive their Pedigree from a Race of
Devils: Especially such as after the manner of Spiders, gathering Poison from
the Flowers of Piety, Blaspheme this Sacred Virtue of Abstinence, and call it
by the Infamous Name of Superstition.

For, if the Veneration we pay to God consist in the Knowledge, Love and Fear
of his Divine Majesty, with Adoration and Praise of his Eternal Attributes; it
follows, That we ought to worship him with the most Fervent Application of our
Spirits. But this Religious Ardour cannot subsist in any Soul, whose Body is
not mortified; nor can the Body be mortified without Austerity, which always is
accompanied with Rigorous Fasting and Abstinence from Flesh. Wherefore if we
ascend to God, by the very same Degrees as we fall from him, it follows, That
Abstinence is the First Step to Immortality and Supreme Happiness.

I do not mean by Abstinence, that Natural Aversion which some Men have for
Flesh, who never durst to taste of any in their Lives, compelled to this by
some Occult Antipathy in their Stomachs. For such a Necessity cannot make a
Virtue, it being common to Men and Brutes; there being many Animals, who fast
from all Provender at certain Seasons of the Year, and others that taste not
some Kinds of Food, during their Lives. So there are some Men, to whom Wine,
Flesh, Cheese, Apples, Herbs and other Things, are an Abomination from their
Cradles. There have been others, who, by a Praeternatural Necessity, have lived
some Days, VVeeks, Months and Years without either Meat or Drink. So Plato
records, That Herus Pamphylius lay Ten whole Days among the Dead Carcases of
Soldiers slain in Battle; and, when he was taken up to be laid on the Funeral
Pile, they perceived him to be alive. Laertius tells us, That Pythagoras fasted
Forty Days and Forty Nights from Meat and Drink. From whom Apollonius Thyanaeus
learned the Art of keeping almost a perpetual Fast. And these Modern Times
afford us the Example of a Spaniard, whom they call Alcantaro, who every Moon
used to Fast for Seven or Eight Days together. So a famous German Maid was
diligently observed and watched, whilst she passed away full Seven Years Time
without Meat, Drink, Sleep or Excrements. France also boasts of another Virgin,
who fasted above Three Years together.

Such Abstinences as these, are not to be put to the Account of Virtue, in
regard they were not the Effects of Humane Choice, but the Decrees of Fate. So
would our Abstinence be depraved, if we should only practice it, as the old
Gentiles did, who forbore to kill or eat some certain Beasts, because they held
them consecrated to their Gods. As the Dog to Diana; the Tiger to Bacchus; the
Horse to Neptune; the Woolf to Mars; the Eagle to Jupiter; the Peacock to Juno;
the Swan to Apollo; the Dove to Venus; the Owl to Minerva. Nor need we abstain
on the Account of the Soul's Transmigration; for, so we ought to forbear the
Vegetable Products of the Earth, as well as Animals, since the Soul is
Indifferent to all Bodies, in its separate State.

But our Reason in this Point, ought to take its Rise from the Fundamental Law
of Nature, the Original Justice of the World, which teaches us, Not to do that
to another, which we would not have another do to us. Now, since it is evident,
That no Man would willingly become the Food of Beasts; therefore, by the same
Rule, he ought not to prey on them. Next to this Foundation of our Abstinence,
we ought to build our Aims at the Perfection of our Nature, which cannot be
acquired but by Degrees: We must endeavor to abate the Aliment of our
Concupiscences, by exhaling the superfluous and grosser Vapors of our Blood in
Sacred Fasts and Oraisons. Then we should refresh our fainting Bodies, with
Food affording little Nourishment and Pleasure. That so our vain Affections,
Appetites and Lusts, may gradually die: Whilst the pure Mind revives, and being
free from the gross Vapors arising from too much, and too fatning Meats and
Drinks, the Films which darkened her Sight, fall off; and she can better now
discern the Naked Forms of Things, by her own simple Intuition, than before she
could through all the borrowed Spectacles and other Optics of Book-Philosophy.
Also she will more easily raise her self to the Contemplation and Science of
Divine Eternal Things. He therefore that in Earnest will apply himself to the
Study of accomplished Sanctity, must first by Fasting exhaust the Marrow from
his Bones, the Fatness from his Flesh, the Wild and Rampant Spirits from his
Nerves, and then he must purge the Words and Actions of his Life from Vice.
When this is done, the Soul becoming a pure Tabula Rasa, is fit for the
Impressions of Celestial Virtue.

Those who labor under acute Diseases, run great Hazard of their Lives,
according to Hippocrates, unless their Diet be accommodated with proportionate
Regard to the Quality and Time of the Critical Fits or Paroxisms. But, those
who are entangl'd with Vice, do labor under far more dangerous Distempers,
than such as afflict the Body. Wherefore the Prophet, our Holy Lawgiver, like
a Wise Physician, appointed certain Seasons of the Year, for Sacred
Abstinences, Fastings, Pilgrimages, Vigils, and other Holy Exercises,
especially the Mighty Fast and Vigil of Ramezan, wherein, though it be not forbid
to eat of Flesh after the Stars appear at Night, yet none but loose and
indevout Believers, take that Liberty; whereas the better Sort content
themselves with an Ascetick Diet. The Hebrews fasted with Unleavened Bread, and
a little Salad; the Christians also taste no Flesh, on their prohibited Days:
And shall the Mussulmans be greater Libertines than these Infidels?

O Hebatolla! how radiant is the Luster of a Lamp, when shining through a
clean, and fine, defaecate Crystal? So does the Soul display the Rays of her
Immortal Virtue round about, when she inhabits in a well purified, chaste, and
almost pervious Body. Wherefore, it is absolutely necessary for him to
attenuate his Body with perpetual Temperance and Abstinence, who consecrates
himself to Virtue and Devotion. He will not be ensnared or caught by any Baits
of Luxury or Voluptuousness; not yet affrighted from his constant, sober Course
of Life, by any Pain, or thwarting Accident. No Frowns or Menaces shall divert
him from his Noble Purpose: But he will so nourish his Body all his Life, that
it shall never be Surfeited, or over-fill'd with Meats. And such is the Magic
of this Sacred Virtue, That it can never be hurt, much less subverted by all
the Machinations of Evil Demons; or the Malicious Attempts of Men. But it
proceeds from Strength to Strength, and fights the Combat valiantly, till
having overcome at last, it Triumphs for ever, and receives the Palm, the Crown
and Chaplet of Divine Reward in Paradise.

Holy President, pray that I may practice what I so admire, and not be
self-condemned for living contrary to my Knowledge. For God neither loves a
double Tongue or Heart, neither delights he in Feet or Hands that are swift and
nimble to do Mischief.

Paris, 13th. of the 4th. Moon, of the Year 1669.
LETTER VIII. To Hamet, Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire.
NOw the Christians are in a general Consternation for Candy: The Pope has sent
Letters to all the Princes that are in his Communion; inviting and pressing
them to succor that Distressed Island. Levies are making every where; and the
King of France, who seeks all Occasions of Glory, appears the most forward of
any to assist the Republic in this Fatal Juncture. The Duke of Beaufort, and
the Chevalier de Vendosm, are appointed to lead the Forces designed for that
Service. They are gone to Toulon, in Order to embarque. The Pope has sent the
Duke of Beaufort a Breve, declaring him General of the Troops Ecclesiastic
that are to serve in Candy; and for his greater Encouragement, he has sent him
the Pontifical Standard.

In the mean while, there is a Triple League concluded between the Emperor,
the King of Spain, the King of England, the King of Swedeland, and the States
of Holland.

There is great Joy in Portugal for the Birth of the Infanta, who is called
Elizabetha-Maria-Louisa, She was Born the 6th. of the 1st. Moon; and on the
18th. the Empress of Germany was also delivered of a Daughter. These Western
Queens are very pregnant. Not a Year passes without the Birth, or Baptism, of
some Royal Infant.

This is all the News at present; but to oblige thee I will say something of
Italy, which is esteemed the Garden of Europe. Nay, Constantine Paleologus,
Emperor of Greece, was wont to say, Unless I had been assured by very Learned
and Holy Men, that Paradise was seated in Asia, I should have sworn that Italy
had been the Place.

It is most certain Italy is a delectable Country, abounding in Riches and
Pleasures. The Eye is not satisfied with seeing the infinite Variety of
Beauties, which grace this happy Region. Such is the lovely Intermixture of
Hills and Valleys, Groves and Plains, Palaces and Gardens, that a Traveller is
ravished as he passes on the Road. But this is not all: She is as rich as fair.
No Country in the World can match Italy for the Plenty and Variety of excellent
Wines; only they are of no long Continuance. Above all the rest, Travelers
commend that Sort which they call Lachrymae Christi, or, the Tears of Christ,
for its delicious Taste. Which when a Dutchman once tasted, he burst forth
into this Exclamation; O Christ! why did thou not weep in my Country? At
Papia, there are a Kind of Aromatic Grapes, which leave a fragrant Odor in
the Mouth of him that eats them. It is recorded of a certain Roman Lord, That
when he was in Prison half dead with Melancholy, he drank a Glass or Two of
this generous Wine, which so revived his Spirits, that instead of Despairing,
as he was ready to do before, he wrote a Treatise entitled [de Consolatione.]

Besides, Italy abounds in Cattle, Sheep, Fowls, Mines, Rocks of Alabaster,
Marble, Porphyry, Coral, Ophits, Agats, Chalcedonies, Azures, and innumerable
other precious Stones. Hence it comes, that in this Country are seen the most
Glorious and Magnificent Temples of the World.

But, this so fair and wealthy a Spot of Ground is Inhabited by a very wicked
Sort of People. They are quite degenerated from the Virtues of their Ancestors.
They are a Base, Effeminate, Sly, Sodomitical Race of Men, Covetous,
Revengeful, and Inexorable. I have heard a Story of Two Italian Brothers that
were walking one Night in the Fields, it being a very serene Sky; when one of
them looking steadfastly on the Heavens, wished, he had as many Oxen as there
were Stars. The other wished, he had a Field as large as the Firmament. What
would you do with it? said the First. Let your Oxen graze there, replied he.
But, as they proceeded in this Kind of foolish, loose Discourse, they kindled
each others Anger; and at length, falling from. Words to Blows, killed one
another on the Spot. Behold, the Consequence of their Covetous Desires. They
are extremely addicted to Revenge, and are as dextrous at poisoning as the
Indian Princes. A certain French Author gives us a very Compendious Account of
the Benefits a Stranger gets by traveling into Italy, in these Words: We go
into Italy, says he, with Incredible Charges, only to purchase the mere Shadow
of Civility, and we bring back from thence the whole System of Vices. The
Milanese teach us how to Cheat. From the Venetians we learn Hypocrisy. Rome
transforms us into perfect Atheists and Libertines. Naples turns us to Satyrs.
Florence instructs us in the Artificial Methods of Poisoning. There is not one
City, which does not tincture us with some Specific Ill Qualities.

Sage Hamet, In all my Letters to thee, I studiously insert some Remarks on
these Western Nations, that so I may gratify thy Wishes. Pardon the want of
Order: For, I write Things as they present themselves to my Memory. Accept all
in good Part from Mahmut, who obeys thy Commands cheerfully, and honors thee
without Flattery.

Paris, 12th. of the 5th. Moon, of the Year 1669.
LETTER IX. To Hamet, Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire.
THou may Register in the Archives of the Sacred Empire; That Dom John of
Austria, is made perpetual Governor of the Low Countries, under the Spanish
King's Obedience. He is also Viceroy, and Vicar General of Arragon, Catalonia,
and Valenciae. But it is fit for thee to know also, That this is so far from
being esteemed by that Prince a Happiness, that he counts it his Greatest
Misfortune, in Regard it is no better than an Honorable and Irrevocable
Banishment from the Court of Spain; where his Royal Blood and Merits, are
out-master'd by the Genius of a certain Priest, whom they call Father Nitard.
This Man is very Ambitious, always aiming at High Matters; yet admired by no
body for his Learning, Beauty, or any other good Qualities. Only the Queen of
Spain, is pleased to make him her Favorite.

He could never buckle to the Humor of Dom John; and hence arose a secret Envy
between 'em; which afterward burst forth into open Animosities, Feuds and
Quarrels. So that at last, the Favorite got the Day, and Dom John was forced
to quit the Field.

It is impossible to trace the Sovereigns of the Earth in the Footsteps of
their Royal Conduct: Or else, one would of Course conclude, That though so great
a Prince as this, of the same Lineage as the Queen her self, should have easily
eclipsed the borrowed Luster of an Upstart Minion. But Monarchs have Specific
Reasons to themselves, which others cannot penetrate.

Perhaps this cunning Priest used a Trick like that of a Soldier in the Army of
Alexander the Great: Who being of an Ambitious Spirit, and coveting to make
some greater Figure than that of a Private Sentinel, considered Alexander's
Humor, and how to hit it. He knew, that his Heroic Master took Delight in any
Thing was bold and brave. But how to come into his Presence, he was Ignorant.
At length, he pitched upon this Method. One Day, as Alexander was debauching
with his beloved Parmenio, Haepheston, Lysimachus, and other Officers. This
Fellow (whose Name was Clytus) put himself into a Mimick Dress of War,
counterfeiting himself Mad, and dancing the Pyrrhick Measures, with his
brandished Sword, killed Five new-listed Soldiers lately come from Colchis. The
Guards soon siez'd upon him; and it being a Tragical Novelty, the News was
carried to the King; who caused the Fellow to be brought before him. And
examining him on the Point, Clytus answered, "Great King, those Five Men whom I
have killed, had conspired to take away thy Life this Day, being hired thereto
by the King of Colchis, and therefore sent into thy Army. Their Tent being next
to mine, I had an Accidental Opportunity last Night, of overhearing their
Discourse, when they were plotting together the Time, the Place, and Manner of
thy Death. I kept a Watch upon them, and observed their Motions from that
Moment. For, though I knew the Hour appointed by them for this Execrable
Regicide, yet I was sollicitous, lest some ill Fate should prompt the Ruffians
to antedate their own Resolves, and hasten a Murder, whose Delay might else
discover their Designs, or at least prevent 'em. Therefore I took this mad
Disguise, to execute the Soberest and most Important Purpose that ever I framed
in all my Days; which was at once to save the Life of the World's Conqueror,
and get my self Immortal Honor by the Happy Deed."

After profound Deliberation of the Drunken Cabinet-Council, Alexander approved
the Fact, and ordered Public Honors to be done to his Deliverer. According to
the Macedonian Custom, he vested him with Purple Robes, and gave him a Chain of
Gold, admitting him to the latter End of the Banquet, and afterward esteeming
him above his most Familiar Friends. Till such another Debauch as this, but
more Unfortunate to Clytus, at once deprived him of the King's Favor and his
own Life: So Inconstant is the State of Humane Greatness.

Sage Hamet, the Favor of Princes is like a Reed of Egypt, which either
transpierces him that leans upon it; or flinches from the Burden, and so gives
him a Fall, which most Times plunges him over Head and Ears, in the choking
Mire of Popular Hatred.

God grant thou may never be crushed to Death from Above, by the Weight of
the Sultan's Displeasure, or undermined from Beneath, and swallowed up in an
Earthquake raised by the Multitude.

Paris, 18th. of the 7th. Moon, of the Year 1669.
LETTER X. To Hebatolla Mir Argun, Supeior of the Convent of Derviches at Cogni
in Natolia.
Thou will not be displeased to hear of a Mighty King, that laying aside his
Diadem and Scepter, and abandoning the Height of Humane Glory, has consecrated
himself to a Private Religious Life, vowing Perpetual Poverty, Chastity, and
Obedience.

Yet this is true of John Casimir, late King of Poland, who from a Sovereign
Monarch is become an Humble Subject, and having forsaken the Pleasures and
Magnificences of his Royal Palace, voluntarily confines himself to the Narrow
Circumstances and Austerities of a Monastic Life.

He chose France for the Place of his Retreat from his own Kingdom; and the
Abbey of St. Germains near Paris, as his Sanctuary from all Worldly Affairs. He
was magnificently received and entertained in every City through which he
passed. And on the 4th. of the 11th. Moon, he made his first Entry into the
Mosque or Church of the Convent, where he made his Vows, in Quality of Abbot,
or Superior of that House: For which they solemnly sung their Te Deum, or a
Song of Praise to God. And the Court of France seems to be proud of the Honor
this Prince has done it, in retiring hither, and making it the Theater of such
Pious Resolves, the last Stage of his Pilgrimage on Earth, where he will bid
Adieu to the vain Pageantries of Honor, Wealth and Empire; and having shaken
off the Glittering Burden of a Crown, with all the other Clogs of elevated
Mortality, he will the easier climb to Paradise.

Abstracting from the Particular Superstitions of the Nazarenes, I cannot but
commend the Sage Undertaking of King Casimir; who, in this, seem to outgoe the
noisie ostentous Action of Adrian, one of the Roman Emperors: For he only once
celebrated in outward Pomp his own Funerals, by way of Type or Figure; making a
splendid Cavalcade, before which his Coffin was carried in a kind of
Mock-Triumph: As if after all his other Victories, at last he had lead Death
himself Captive: Whereas this hindered not, but that he returned again to the
Vanities which in this Public Emblem he seemed to despise; And from a
Dramatick Conqueror, he became a real Slave. His personated Mortification in
the Streets, ended in his ordinary Passions at Home. And he had a stronger
Inclination to the Bed of Voluptuousness at Night, than he seemed to have by
Day to his Grave.

But this Heroic King of the Poles, is really gone into his Sepulcher. (For no
better is a Monastery in my Opinion.) He has translated the Seat and Throne of
his Kingdom, to a Tomb; not for Three or Four Hours, to make a show, but there
really to lead a dying Life, or living Death; and reign in Funeral Majesty all
the Rest of his Days. For, to be thus Recluse from the World, is to be buried
alive.

O Venerable and Benign Dervich, pardon the Favorable Opinion I have of this
Christian Monarch. I do not patronize his Errors in applauding his Virtue.
Besides, it is the General Faith of Mussulmans, That, let a Man be a Christian,
a Jew, or Pagan, provided he lives up to the best Light he has, he shall be
saved. And the Holy Prophet himself gave us Encouragement to believe so.

Thou will at least conclude this King to be more Pious and worthy of Praise,
than one of his Predecessors, who usurped the Polish Crown. This was Vladislaus
V. who having entered into a solemn League with one of our Former Sultans,
living in his Time, and taken an Oath thereupon, giving also the Eucharist (or,
that which they esteem the Body of Christ) in Hostage; yet soon after broke the
Articles that he had Signed, Sealed, and Sworn to, and for the Performance of
which he had pawned his God.

This so provoked the Grand Signior, that he had recourse to his Arms for
Justice, and invaded Poland with a Mighty Force: To repel which, Vladislaus
also levied an Army, and met him in the Field. But, just as they were going to
give Battle, the Sultan took out of his Bosom, the pawned Eucharist, with the
Capitulations agreed upon, and sworn to between 'em. Then holding the Wafer in
One Hand, and the Articles in the Other, he cried out, in the Hearing of both
Armies; "O thou Crucified God of the Christians, behold thy Perfidious Adorers,
who have given thee to me as a Pledge of their Faith and Truth in what they
have sworn; yet in a most Impious Manner they have violated their Oath. If thou
art a God chastise them now by my means, for their Abominable Perjury, and
Profanation of thy Name." His Prayer was heard of Heaven: For the Victorious
Osmans gave a Total Overthrow to the Infidels; and that Blasphemous Prince was
himself killed in the Battle.

Whatever various Forms of Religion there be in the World; we know there is but
One True God, Creator of Heaven and Earth, Conservator and Governor of Men. He
connives at the Invincible Ignorances, Frailties and Infirmities of our Mortal
Race. He accepts the Good Works and Sincere Vows of Pagans, and the
Uncircumcised, as well as those of the True Believers, and Followers of the
Prophet. But he abhorrs and punishes all Injustice, Perjury, and Treason, both
in the One and the Other. For he has no Partial Regards for This Nation or
Person, more than for That. They are all equally the Works of his Hands; and
his Care is alike over them.

The Sun runs from the East to the West: In his daily Circuit he Illuminates
and Warms this Hemisphere; and by Night, our Antipodes enjoy his Favors, and
welcome Influence. At one Time of the Year he comforts the North, at another he
revives the South. There is no Part of the Globe, which in due Season does not
rejoice in his all-chearing Beams.

The Moon never slacks or deviates from her wonted Course; but from the Cresent
to the Wane, observes the Laws of him that made her. She is exact in timing the
Flux and Reflux of the Sea. And she guides the wandering Mariners by Night. The
Inhabitants of the Artick and Antartick Circles, wait for her Light, when the
Sun absents himself for Half the Year. As soon as they see the Chariot of Diana
appear on the Road of their Heaven, every Man claps his Hands for Joy. They
rouse from their Domestic Dullness and Melancholy; they come out of their Dens
and Caves. With Dances and Songs, they welcome the Approach of the Beautiful
Goddess; Knowing that She is but a Second Remove from the Eternal Light: The
Mirror of the Sun, in which that Glorious Planet may see his Face; in whose,
by Reflection, we see the Face of God.

So do the Stars keep on their various Traverses through the Heavens. Each
Constellation faithfully maintaining its Post; each Planet pursuing its Road.
Whilst all together, at so vast a Distance, appear a flying Camp, never
setting up their bright Pavilions but by Night, and in the Morning taking 'em
down again. This may be called the Army of Heaven, the Host of God, embattel'd
in the Firmament, to guard his Friends on Earth, and to chastise his Enemies.

To descend lower yet into our Sublunary Elements; we find the Rain, Hail,
Snow, Winds, Thunder, Lightning and other Meteors, are impartially scattered
up and down the Climates of the Earth; I do not mean by Chance, but by the
Universal Providence which governs all Things. As the Alcoran expresses it:
"'It Is he directs the Seminal and Prolifick Showers, to Barren and Desert
Places: Doubtless, this is a Sign of his Divine Unity."

In fine, all Provinces and Corners of the Earth bring forth their proper
Fruits in Season. And the Negro's of Africa, and America, though gross Idolaters,
and some of them worshipping Infernal Demons, yet enjoy God's Blessings; and
live as Plentifully, with as much Content and Joy, as we that Adore his Eternal
Unity.

Every Nation takes up their Religion on the Credit of their Priests; and so
long as they observe the Natural and Moral Law imprinted in their Hearts: The
Indulgent Judge and Father of Men, will dispense with those that Err, in
Obedience to the Positive Laws of their Nation: for Sedition is like Magic,
odious to God and Man, and equally liable to Universal Punishment.

Once more, O Pious Father of the Derviches, I beg of thee to pardon the
Freedom I take, in discoursing of Religious Matters in thy Presence, who art a
Light to the Blind, a Guide to those that Err; a Resolver of Doubts, an
Arbitrator of difficult Questions; The Only Oracle of thy Province.

I endeavor not to inform thee, but to dis-entangle my self from Error; and
testify, that though I Honor God and his Prophet; yet I think there is no need
of a Falsehood to defend the Truth.

Paris, 7th. of the 2d. Moon, of the Year, 1670.
LETTER XII. To Useph, Bassa.
DEath has of late Celebrated a Triple Triumph in the Court of France; having
lead away Captives to the Invisible World, The Cardinal Duke of Vendome, a
Duchess of the same Title, and Henrietta Maria, late Queen of Great Britain,
being the Relict of King Charles I. and Youngest Daughter to Henry IV. of
France.

Thou may also report to the Divan, that Casimir, late King of Poland, is
now at this Court; Having left Poland, as soon as he saw Prince Wiesnowiski
elected his Successor. The Dukes of Lorrain and Newburgh had severally laid
Claim to that Crown, and levied Armies apart, in order to make good their
Pretentions. But the Polanders, being aware of it, were resolved not to bring
themselves under the Jurisdiction of any Foreigner, so long as there was a
Prince of their own Nation capable of the Dignity, and one who being the Son of
King Casimir, seems to have the best Title to his Father's Throne, whose
Virtues he inherits.

Here is also arrived the Prince of Tuscany, who has traveled through all
Europe, and takes France, as the last Kingdom, in his Return Homewards:
Protesting, That he does this in good Manners, as preferring France to all the
Nations in Christendom. Indeed, he could do no less in Good Manners, than make
this Apology, which yet sounds very Flat toa Court so refined as this; which
might have expected his First Visit as a Token of his Regard; since, though in
Domestic Processions, Entries, and Cavalcades, those of highest Dignity take
the last Place; yet in Foreign Embassies, and Voyages, it is usual for Princes
to address to those first, for whom they have the Greatest Esteem.

The Politicians here keep very secret the News that comes from Candy, which
makes all Men conclude, it is none of the most Prosperous. It Is generally
reported for a Truth, That Admiral Beaufort is either Killed, or taken Prisoner
by the Ottomans; and that the French have lost near Two thousand Men in this
Undertaking.

I wonder why the Painters always describe Death in the Form of a Naked
Skeleton, a Starved System of dry Bones: whereas one would think, he ought to
be portrayed as a Monster, a Miracle of Fatness; since he is the greatest
Glutton in the World, hourly gurmundizing on all manner of Flesh, and is the
very Original, Universal Cannibal of Nature, who from the Beginning of the
World has feasted himself with Humane Bodies. But, perhaps, he has a bad
Digestion, and none of all his raw and bloody Diet, will afford Nutriment
enough to form so much as a poor Skin to cover his Nakedness. And, therefore
it is he is always drawn in this lean Figure.

Courteous Bassa, suffer me from this vain Jest, to fall into a serious
Reflection on our Mortality, and the frail Estate of Humane Race.

Man's but a fetid Vapor, first exhaled from the Earth, and afterward
advancing, is condensed into a Cloud, that so his Filthiness may be concealed
under the Covert of a Skin, there in Secret to engender a Thousand Meteors of
Fiery Passions, Lusts, Concupiscences, and Extravagant Thoughts. Which in time
burst forth, and trouble all the World: Yet end at last in empty Smoke, Rain,
Hail, or Wind, and are extinct almost as soon as they were formed.

The Elements of which we are compounded, may serve as Mirrours to represent
the constant Mutability of our Nature. So the devouring Fire, when all its Fuel
is spent, decays and dies. Earth, Air, and Water, all are subject to
Corruption, and from thence our Generation takes its Rise: likewise thither we
return again. This is the Eternal Circle of Natural Products. The Trees, the
Flowers, with all the Vegetable Race; the Birds, the Beasts, and Fishes, with
every Species of Animals, are so many Remembrancers of our Mortality. Which way
soever we turn our Eyes, they are presented with fresh Images of Humane
Weakness. And the very Breath, which does prolong our Life, helps equally to
shorten it, since every Respiration carries away some Portion of our Substance.
Our finer Particles gradually vanish into Smoke, and Air, whilst the more gross
Remainder scums off in noisome Excrements. And if there appear a Show of any
thing solid in us at our Death, it is soon reduced to Ashes, Dirt, or Worms. Our
Bodies, of which we make so great Account whilst living, are lost in the Abyss
of Universal Matter, soon after Death.

What were the greatest Prince the happier, though he possessed the whole
Circumference of this Globe? It Is but a Mighty Heap of Dirt, or Dung,
perpetually exhaling or crumbling away. It Is one of the Dishes which compose
the Banquet of All-devouring Time. And whilst the insulting Monarchs of the
Earth trample on it in Disdain, spreading their Armies far and wide, and
boasting that their Empires have no Bounds; each does but hasten to be shut up
himself within a little, obscure and putrid Hole, not much surpassing the
Limits of a Molehill.

Great Bassa, Let not the Honors and Dignities thou possessest, make thee
forget the Miseries to which thou art liable each Hour: But, remember thou art
a Man.

Paris, the 6th. of the 11th. Moon, of the Year 1669.
LETTER XIII. To the Kaimacham.
HEre is arrived a Muta-faraca, called Solomon Ismael, with Expresses from the
Grand Signior. 'Twas no small Refreshment to see his public Entry, which
appeared like a little Epitome of the Mussulman Grandeur and Magnificence. The
Young Rabble were as curious to be Spectators of this Eastern Cavalcade, as the
Romans were fond of beholding the Secular Plays, which were exhibited but once
in an Age. Nay, People of all Ranks, Ages, and Qualities, filled the Streets,
the Windows, and Battlements of their Houses: Some, because they never saw such
a fight before; others, despairing that they should live long enough to be
Witnesses of such another.

Yet with all their Curiosity, none but the Ministers of State are able to dive
into the least Secret of his Instructions. These willing communicate the Titles
which the Great Arbiter of the Earth, gives the French King. That so not only
his Subjects, but Neighboring Nations may conceive the profounder Veneration
for him, without penetrating the Measures he takes. This is an Artifice common
to all States, to turn the best Side outermost; only the Hollanders excepted,
who, in the Days of their Revolt from the King of Spain, could not so much as
put a good Face on a bad Matter: But were forced to expose their Poverty and
Nakedness, as well as suffer under it; addressing themselves to Elizabeth, then
Queen of England, in the Character of, The Poor Distressed States of Holland,
and so begging her Assistance.

However, Solomon has faithfully imparted to me his Affairs, as I have reason
to believe. He Is too well born, and bred, possesses more Reason and Wit, than
to amuse the Old Man in the Cassock, (so they call me here in the Streets, who
know me not by any other Character; so Private is Mahmut in Paris, at this
Hour, notwithstanding all his public Sufferings.)

I esteem Ismael as one fit to represent the Grand Signior's Person among
better People than Infidels: Yet, I tell thee, the French are the most refined
of all the Western Giafers.

Ismael understands the Force of the Civil Laws, which he learned from
Justinian's Code, and other Books: For he is perfect in Greek and Latin, and
has bestowed some Years in reading their Book, both Prints and Manuscripts.

He makes a very Personable Figure, being Tall, Full-body'd, Well-shap'd, and
not of an ugly Face; which is enough to be said of a Man, designed for
Business, and not only for Love. He Is never in danger of falling under Cato's
Censure, who seeing Two Ambassadors sent from Rome to a Foreign State, one of
which had his Head so little, that it could hardly be distinguished from that
of an Owl; and the other such a Cripple, that he could not walk without a
Cripple, that he could not walk without Stilts; cried out, Here Is an Embassy
which has neither Head nor Tail.

And then, our Muta-faraca is rich: He supports the Charges of his Commission,
with extraordinary Munificence. His House is already become the Sanctuary of
all the distressed Levantines, whether Greeks, Armenians, or Followers of the
Prophet: and he speaks French as readily as a Native. Yet he Dissembles his
Expertness in that Language, to keep up the State and Reservedness of the
Ottoman Empire, which disdains to condescend to any other Speech, than Turkish,
or Arabic. Besides, he has the Advantage, by thus artificially shutting his
Ears, that he can at one time both hear and be deaf; understand and be ignorant
of whatsoever is said by the Spies of the French King. And this is no small
Gift in a Man of his Character and Trust. For he had need of an Angel, or a
Devil at's Elbow, that thinks to overreach this Court.

Above all, I believe our Solomon will never be guilty of the Error committed
by the Ambassadors sent from Tenedos to one of the Roman Emperors. I Am sure he
is not yet. For, those Gentlemen had seen the Death of the Emperor's Son,
Eleven Moons, and Fourteen Days, as the Story says, before they knew 'twas
their Duty to make an Address of Condolence: Or, at least, before they called
it to mind; for, they were drowned in the Roman Luxury. So that, when they came
to perform that Devoir, the Emperor could not forbear to Scoff at them in these
Terms: I much lament, said he, the Fate of the Renowned Hector, your
Countryman, and Champion, whom Achilles the Grecian killed above a Thousand
Years ago.

I speak this in a particular Regard to Solyman's Deportment here. For, when he
first came to this Court, he found them all in Mourning for the Death of the
King's Aunt, the late Queen of England, and of other High Personages
(particularly those that were slain in the late Action at Candia) whereof I
have already given an Account to the Sublime Port, in another Letter. Without
Instructions he very demurely accosted the King, and told him, "There could be
no Dunalma in the Ottoman Empire, for the late Success at Candia, so long as
the French Court were Mourners."

This was a sensible Touch to those that understood it; and from that Moment
the Grandees and Ministers of State have made a Difference in their
Entertainment of this Ingenious Muta-faraca, and that which they used to give
to the Chiauses formerly sent from the Port.

I can assure thee, he is, at the same time, very Blunt, and very Elegant, in
his Discourse. There Is Fire in every word he utters, to warm and refresh, if
they take it at a due Distance; but, if they approach too near, he scorches
their Spirits, and puts them into a Choler, they dare not show. They consume
inwardly in their own Despite: yet cannot help themselves.

Doubtless, the King of France is the Greatest Monarch, the most Powerful and
Victorious Prince in Christendom, the only Invincible Emperor of the Western
Franks. Yet he veils to our Majestic Sovereign, Lord of the whole Earth. And
our Eunuch will not part with a Tittle of his Master's Honor, or give any
Advantage by an Easiness worthy of Blame, in a case that may be turned to a
Precedent. He is very happy in his Repartees, as thou will perceive by the
Answer he gave to a French Lord yesterday, when he asked him, Whether he
thought it not a Violation of the Civil Law, for Ambassadors to be Imprisoned,
as they often are at the Ottoman Port? No, (says Solomon) it is not, where the
Ambassador is guilty of Treason, or Crimen laesae Majestatis. But, if it were,
you French- men have the least Reason to accuse us of it, since we first
learned this Maxim from the Backside of your Salick Law, where it is Endors'd.
And then he produced Twenty several Instances of this Kind in the Court of
France.

In a word, Solomon has hitherto acquitted himself with Mavelous Success, in
every thing; though the French Grandees often set upon him to try what Metal he
is made of, having generally a mean Opinion of Mussulmans, because Learning is
so little countenanced among us.

I have no Matter of News to acquaint thee with, save that a violent Plague
broke forth not long ago at Soissons; and a terrible Earthquake in Sicily,
frighted the Inhabitants of Catanea, and the adjacent Towns, from their
Habitations; After one whole Village had been swallowed up.

Those who were curious to pry into the Cause of these particular Convulsions,
and that affrighting Overthrow, perceived, after diligent Search, that it
proceeded from a new Eruption, or Breach, in Mount Gibell, about Two Miles from
Catanea: Where the Horrid Chasm vomited forth Floods of Fire, with Flaming
Stones; which being carried violently through the Air, for the space of near a
League round about, at last fell down in Flaming Showers, or Cataracts,
producing sad, and Calamitous Effects in the Neighboring Country.

Serene Minister, it is evident that the Judgments of God are upon these
Infidels: Yet, they will not be converted from their Errors, and Vices. They
have felt the same Tempest of Fire which overwhelmed the Nine Cities of the
Lake Asphaltites. Yet, they remain Insensible and Obdurate. Surely, they will
be exterminated from the Earth.

Paris, 4th. of the 12th. Moon, of the Year 1669.
The End of the SECOND BOOK.
LETTERS Writ by A Spy at PARIS.
VOL. VII. BOOK III.
LETTER I. To Mehement, an Exiled Eunuch, at Alcaire in Egypt.
BE no longer Melancholy, my Friend, nor sink under the Burden of thy
Misfortunes. Give not thy Enemies an Occasion of double Triumph in that they
have driven thee from thy Self, as well as from the Grand Signior's Happy
Presence. Thou have Money and Jewels enough left to purchase thee a competent
Felicity any where. Or, at least, thou have Virtue, which renders every Place a
Paradise. Associate thy self with the other Exiles in that City, Victims to a
Royal Caprice; suffered with all their Immense Riches, to make a Pompous and
Magnificent Entry into that Metropolis of Egypt, but soon after stripped of all
their Wealth, and Sacrificed to the Court-Avarice. So were the Consecrated
Bulls of old, dressed up in stately Equipage, their Horns and Hoofs all gilded
over with Gold, adorned with Ribbands of costly Silks, their Bodies covered
over with Mantles of Broccade and Tissue, embroidered with Pearls and Precious
Stones, and trailing on the Pavements of Apollo's Temple: Whilst the Priests
stood ready at the Altar to dispatch whole Hecatombs of these gay Sacrifices.

Your Case is not so bad at Caire, in that your Lives are spared, and you at
Liberty to carve new Fortunes to your selves, where ever you please. You ought
to aid and counsel one another in your Misfortunes. It is a Comfort to the
Miserable, to have Companions in their sad Estate. Insinuate thy self into the
Bassa's Favor. He may do something to Alleviate thy Grief. He Will measure thy
Circumstances by his own; considering that he has but Three Years to enjoy his
present Wealth and Grandeur.

Go to the banished Mufti, if he be living at Caire; desire his Spiritual
Advice: Perhaps thou may receive in to the Bargain some Temporal Advantage
from it. He has a greater Influence on some of the Egyptian Beys, than the
Grand Signior has himself. You're all alike embarked in one Affliction, whose
Essence does consist in being degraded from your former Honors, (though in
different Degrees) and being separated from your Friends, that bask in the
immediate Luster of Imperial Dignity. It is your Business therefore now, to
find out some new Source of Happiness: to make New Friends, since you have lost
the Old; or, at least, to prop up one another by a mutual Friendship, not to be
Broke or Dissipated, but by a Destiny equal to the former. And then you have no
more to do, but prosecute your several Interests, and be resigned to Fate.

As for thee, I am particularly sollicitous; being engaged together from our
Youth, by a Reciprocal Participation of Good Offices, which was the Effect of a
deep rooted and strong Sympathy. The Agreeableness of Humor, united first our
Souls, and taught us the Mysterious Lessons of Platonic Love. We saw each
other, and were straight inspired with sacred Inclinations. My Eye no sooner
fixed on thine, but through that Perspective I could see the inward Virtue of
thy Soul, which immediately produced a Veneration in my Breast: And I soon
found our Hearts heat Time to one another. This generous Passion afterward
increased as we grew up; and what it lost of its First Violence, it gained by
acquiring a more lasting Strength, more durable Integrity and constant
Faithfulness. Our Joys and Griefs were still the same. No Prosperous or Adverse
Fortune could ever change our Minds, to warp us either to Flattery or Contempt:
But with an even Mind we still sustained the different Accidents of Humane
Life, and propp'd up one another with tight Affection; till 'twas the Will of
Fate to separate us, I being made a Slave in Sicily, whilst thou enjoy'dst the
Smiles and Favors of thy Infant-Fortune, which introduced thee first to the
Serail'. Afterward I gained my Freedom, and returned to the Imperial City, and
to the Palace of the Sultan. But was not suffered long to enjoy that Happiness,
being appointed for this hazardous Post in Paris.

I tell thee, Mehemet, I reckon my Case far worse than thine, in that I am
forced to take my constant Residence up among these Infidels. Could my
propitious Stars encourage me but with the smallest Hopes to change my present
Course of Life, I Would never repine at what is past, but please my self with
flattering Prospects of some future and unknown Felicity. But, to be
irrevocably chained down to the Oar, without a Glimpse of any Sign that I shall
ever be relieved, is worse than Death it self.

Whereas, on the other side, thou art disposed of in the happiest Region of the
Earth; Egypt, the Mother of Sciences, the Midwife of Celestial Secrets; the
Nurse of Sages, Saints, and Prophets; the Granary of the Mussulman Empire; and
the Refuge of Distressed Mortals. Oh! Mehemet, prize the vast Advantage thou
have of me, and others of thy Fellow-Slaves. Improve thy Privilege, and
Opportunity of ranging where thou list. Go, visit all the Antiquities of Egypt,
and trace her Borders to the West and South. If this will not divert thy
Melancholy, go farther yet, and search the mighty Cataracts of the Nile, which
deafen Mortals with their Fall. Go view the Mountains of the Moon in Aethiopia:
Or, see the Desolation of the Smoaky Vale, and of the Cities, whose Inhabitants
were in a Minute Metamorphos'd into Stones, as a Memorial of Eternal Vengeance
against crying Sins.

But, after all, my Mehemet, depart not from thy Reason, Loyalty and Faith. For
these are Armour-Proof against the Assaults of Chance and Destiny, of Men and
Devils, of Earth and Hell. And when thy Travels are finished here on Earth,
those Virtues will not fail to carry thee to Heaven.

Paris, 5th. of the 4th. Moon, of the Year 1670.
LETTER II. To the same.
I Cannot forbear giving thee the Trouble of another Letter by this Post; that
I may yet more encourage thee to a Virtuous Resignation to the Will of Fate,
which, thou know, is Inexorable.

There is an Eternal Law fixed in the Universe, which admits of no Repeal. No
Prayers, or Tears of Passionate Mortals; no Vows, Alms, Pilgrimages, or any
Supererrogating Works can move the Destinies. They Are more Inflexible than the
Judges of the old Athenian Areopagus. And the Unchangeable Edicts of the Median
Empire might sooner be reversed than the Decrees of Fate.

If thou could make Corban with a Hundred Thousand Sheep, and feed the Poor
of all the East, according to the Mussulman Practice; or Sacrifice as many
Bulls, after the Fashion of the Ancient Gentiles: could thou monopolize all
the Aromaticks of the Orient, to compound the most exalted Incense, and make a
Pyramid of Odoriferous Smoke ascend, high as the Shadow of the Earth at
Midnight, whereby the Heaven of Heavens should be all perfumed, and every
sleeping Deity should be awakened by the Fragrant Smell; could thou bribe
the Quires above, to tune the Spheres anew, and raise the sweetest Harmony,
that ever reached the Eternal Sense; yet all would not prevail, to alter the
Resolves of Heaven, or re-instate thee in thy former Honor. No! my Mehmet,
thou art lost for ever at the Serail': The Face of Things is changed, since
thou have been in Egypt. Thy Friends are all dispersed abroad in the World, or
Dead; which is but another kind of Separation. There are no Hopes now left
thee, of ever returning again to that Proud City, which inherits the Character
of Ancient Rome, The Lady of the Earth. I wish the Roman Luxury be not alike
entailed.

Rouse up, my Friend, and look not on thy State, through the deceitful Optics
of thy Passion; but let Reason light the Prospect. Thou were before a Slave;
now thou art free, and Master of thy Self. However, to rid thee of the very
Idea of phansy'd Misery, I counsel thee once again, to travel.

Go, make the speediest Retreat thou can, out of the Limits of the Ottoman
Empire, that thou may forget thy Cares and Fears. Take not thy Way by
Barbary, nor covet to see the Place where ancient Carthage was situated; be not
curious to enquire after Queen Dido, Aeneas, or Hannibal, or to hear some
Stories of the Famous Scipio. Nor would I counsel thee to pass the Kingdoms of
Morocco and Fez. For, though those Realms pay no Obedience to the Sultan: Yet,
they are his Allies; and that Reflection will always keep thee in Pain.
Besides, the sight of Mussulmans will terrify thy Mind and fill thee with a
Thousand Apprehensions.

Go rather the directest Way thou can, unto the Kingdoms of the Negro's or
Black People, inhabiting the Torrid Zone. But, take this Rule: Be sure to Coast
along the River Nile, as near as the Roads of Africa will permit: That so thou
may avoid the Horrible and Affrighting Deserts of Libya, Nubia, and Zanfar,
with other Inhospitable Mountainous Parts between the Tropic of Cancer and the
Equinox. For, thou will not find it very pleasant to encounter and converse
with none but Dragons, Basilisks, and other Monsters of those Regions. And yet,
for ought I know, it is better, than to fall into the Hands of Humane Salvages.

I know not how to give a General Character of the Southern Blacks; since every
Province varies in its particular Principles, Customs, Laws, and Institutions.
The Abyssines are Christians; so are the Inhabitants of Congo, Songo, Angola,
and other Countries bordering on the Upper Aethiopia. Those that dwell along
the Red Sea, are generally Mahometans. They discourse also of a very Populous
Country thereabouts, possessed by Jews alone. And there are Authors who assert
a Female Kingdom; a Nation of Amazons. It Is certain, on the Western Side
they are all Pagans.

It will be worth thy Labor, to observe the different Humors of these People,
and make Comparison between the Ancient and this Modern Gentilism; to abstract
their Morals from their Superstitions: And tell me then, whether they do not
better deserve the Title of True Believers, than we Mussulmans, since they act
according to their Faith, whereas we go by a quite contrary Method. They
believe no other Gods but their Domestic Priests, and these they never
willingly offend. Whereas, whilst we profess the Eternal Unity, we scruple not
to sin against Him every Hour. They Circumcise, Wash, Pray, Abstain from Meats,
give Alms as well as we. Their Justice is as strict, their Mercy soft as ours.
In fine, they are Men differing from us, only in Color, Education, and the
peculiar Maxims of their Country, which they rigorously observe, and hope for
Happiness thereby, as we do by Obeying the Law brought down from Heaven.

Mehement, Our Holy Prophet has said, "That whosoever lives innocently and does
Justice, whether he be a Christian, Jew, or Pagan, shall be saved as well as
his Disciples." Therefore in all thy Travels, despise not any Man for his
Religion, be it never so ridiculous in Appearance; provided he be Good and
Honest in his Conversation: Much less contemn those Africans for their Color;
since Black and White are all alike to him who first gave Man the Power to know
the Difference.

Mehemet, if thou acceptest my Advice, take also my Wishes for thy good Voyage
and Prosperity.

Paris, 5th. of the 4th. Moon, of the Year 1670.
LETTER III. To the Mufti, Venerable Patron of Learning and Knowledge.
FRom thy Clemency I will not fear a Charge of Negligence, in that I have
delayed to perform the Task thou enjoinedst me. Thou know my Circumstances,
and wilt consider, That though I have read Books, yet I have not a Library of my
own. It Is true, I often frequent those of this City, but my Seasons are
limited, either to those Hours when the Libraries are opened, or to those I can
spare from the Affairs of my Commission. I cannot serve the Grand Signior, and
follow my Studies both at once. Yet I have out-pass'd Frugality, and turned a
Niggard of my time, that I might obey the great Oracle of True Believers, and
promote a Work, for which I have so passionate a Regard.

The Enclosed Paper contains the Size of the Volume, which I conceive will be
most proper for so great a Work, with the Contrivance of the Pages, which I
have divided into Columns, that so the Years of the World, the Date of the
Olympiads, with other Remarkable Aera's, may be ranked in Order, each Parallel
with the rest, and all with the Matter treated of at such a Time.

This I have done in the enclosed Paper, not thinking it proper to interrupt
the Series of my Letter, with a blank Scheme, which is for the Use of the
Compilers; but to present thee with a transient View of the Four Monarchies,
which have made such a noise in the World; wherein thou need'st not fear the
Fatigue of a tedious continued History; for I design only to cull out such
Passages as are most Diverting, and worthy of Perusal.

To begin then with the Assyrian Monarchy, which was the First of the Four:
This Nation was, for a great while, contented with its own Bounds, without
seeking to encroach on the Territories of others. And Ninus was the First of
the Assyrian Kings, who enlarged his Dominions by Conquest. He subdued the
greatest part of Asia, and raised Assyria to the Title of an Empire.

After his Death, Semiramis his Wife, took upon her the Government,
counterfeiting the Person of Ninyas, his Son, who was as yet but a Child. She
wore the Habit of a Man, and being like her Son, passed for him, as the lawful
Successor, unsuspected. This Virago enlarged the Conquests of her Husband, and
spread her Empire from India to Aethiopia; and to lay the Foundation of an
immortal Fame, she built Babylon.

To her, succeeded Ninyas her Son, of whom nothing is Remarkable but his
Effeminacy. For neglecting the Affairs of War, he spent all his Time among his
Concubines. And the same Stain is fastened on his Successors, even to
Sardanapalus; in whose Death the Assyrian Monarchy suffered an Interruption,
being Cantoniz'd into Petty Royalties, by the Governors of Provinces. Among
whom, those who assumed the Crown of Babylon, were of most Note, in regard they
first recovered the broken Empire to its Old Grandeur and Unity.

By a Succession therefore of many Kings, in Reference to whose Actions History
is silent, the Monarchy descended to Merodach Baladan: In whose Days happened
that wonderful Retrogradation of the Sun, mentioned by Hebrew Writers and
others, which occasioned those Famous Controversies among the Philosophers, and
Astronomers of that Age, mentioned in the Persian Chronicles. For they
observing, that not only the Sun, but the whole Planetary System, and all the
Fixed Stars went back at the same Time, or at least seemed to do so, began to
revive that curious Question, about the Motion of the Earth, which the
Chaldaeans, and Gymnosophists of India had started before, when the Sun and
Moon stood still at the burning of Ida. And it was concluded by some of 'em,
That the Motion of the Earth being granted, its standing still, or going back
at these extraordinary Times, would solve all the Astronomical Appearances
better, and in a more Natural Way, than by supposing such a Prodigious Stop to
be put to the whole Celestial Frame at one time, or that the Everlasting
Spheres should be Rolled backwards at the other.

This Dispute was the Occasion of that famous Conflux of the Eastern Sages to
Babylon, mentioned in the Persian Poets, and Historians. For Baladan being very
Inquisitive after Knowledge, and particularly desirous to be informed in the
Grounds of this Preternatural Appearance, sent Messengers into India, Egypt,
Persia, and all Kingdoms, where Learning flourished; inviting the Astrologers,
Priests, Magicians, Prophets, and all that had the Character of Wisemen, to
come to his Court at Babylon, where they were magnificently entertained; and
when they had fully satisfied all the King's Demands, he sent them away laden
with Gifts and Presents, every Man to his own Country.

Arkianus succeeded Baladan in the Kingdom of Babylon, in whose time Ecbatane
was built. To him succeeded Belithus, Aphronadius, Rigibelus, Messissimerdacus;
after whom the Kingdom was again translated to the Assyrians, in the Reign of
Escharhaddon, in the 3323d. Year of the World, and the 24th. Olympiad. During
the Empire of this Escharhaddon the Assyrian Monarch, Chalcedon that lies over
against the Imperial City, was built by the Thracians, in the 25th. Olympiad,
and 3329th. Year of the World.

To Escharhaddon succeeded Saosduchinus, Chyladanus, Nabopolassar; in the Reign
of which last, Necho King of Egypt, attempted to cut a Canal from the Nile to
the Red Sea, wherein he employed an Hundred and Twenty Thousand Egyptians; but
discouraged by the slow Progress they made, and the vast Expenses he was at, he
gave it over.

This Nabopolassar, once more raised the Kingdom of Babylon to an Universal
Monarchy; for before his Time it had been for some Years in the Hands of the
Assyrians; but he subdued all Syria, Phoenicia, Judaea, and Egypt, and expelled
the Scythians out of Asia.

To him succeeded his Son Nebuchadnezzar, who dreamt of the Four Universal
Monarchies, that were to succeed one another. In his Reign was born the Grand
Cyrus, who raised the Persian Monarchy. Of him it is Recorded, That one Night
he dreamed, The Sun stood at his Feet, whom when Cyrus Thrice attempted to lay
hold on, the Sun as often disappeared: Which the Magi interpreted, as a sure
Sign that he should Reign Thirty Years, which came to pass accordingly.

During this Reign, there was a Notable Duel fought between Pittacus, one of
the Seven Wise Men of Greece, and Phrynon the most Renowned Combatant of those
Days; for he always won the Prize at the Olympic Games. He was General of the
Athenians; and being puffed up with his constant Successes, he defied any Man
to a single Combat. Pittacus the Sage, accepted the Challenge; and when they
were hotly engaged in the Field, he suddenly threw a silken Net over Phrynon's
Head, and having thus entangled him, thrust him through with his Lance.

This was that great Nebuchadnezzar, who having besieged and taken Jerusalem,
burnt it down to the Ground, razed the Walls, and carried away all the Jews
with their Riches into Captivity to Babylon.

Afterward having Conquered all the Neighboring Nations, he new built
Babylon, and enclosed it with Three Walls: He also built those Pendulous
Gardens, Renowned throughout the Earth; and made those Brazen Gates which were
reckoned among the Wonders of the World. But at length, being puffed up with
the Thought of his Magnificent Works, he was Metamorphos'd into a Satyr or
Sylvan, and dwelt Seven Years in the Deserts of Arabia, being a Companion of
the Brutes. My Countrymen show the Places of his wild Haunt, to this Day;
having received it by Tradition from their Fathers. They say also, that
Paremiel, the Angel of the Woods, when the Term of Seven Years was expired,
interceded with God for Nebuchadnezzar, who thereupon turned him into a Man
again, and restored him to his Empire. He dyed peaceably in the 3442d Year of
the World, and the 43d of his Reign.

To him succeeded Evil-Merodach, Neriglissor, Laborosoarchod, and Labynitus, in
whose Time there was War between the Babylonians and Persians; when Cyrus after
many Victorious Campaigns, at last laid Siege to Babylon, took the City, and
translated the Empire to the Persians; and having subdued all the West of Asia,
even to the Red Sea, he died at Seventy Years of Age; Commanding his Servants
not to Embalm his Body, nor use any costly Pomp at his Funeral, but burying him
decently like a Man, should cause this Epitaph to be writ on his Tomb: O
Mortals, I am Cyrus who laid the Foundation of the Persian Monarchy, and was
Emperor of all Asia: Therefore envy me not a Grave.

To him succeeded Cambyses his Eldest Son, who marching with his Army into
Egypt, and laying Siege to Pelusium, caused a great Number of Cows, Apes, Birds
and other Animals to be placed in the Front of his Army; knowing, that the
Egyptians worshipped such for Gods, and consequently would forbear to shoot
their Arrows that way: By which Stratagem he took the City, and afterward
Conquered all Egypt, carrying away many Thousands of the Egyptians, with
Foreigners residing there, into Captivity, among whom was Pythagoras the
Philosopher.

After this, Cambyses sent Spies under the Notion of Ambassadors to the King of
Aethiopia, with Rich Presents. But the King suspecting what was their Business,
took a Bow in his Hand and bent it, as though he would shoot; and giving it to
the Spies, he bid them carry it to their Master, and tell him, That when he and
his Persians had learned to bend Bows of that Strength, he might think of
invading Aethiopia, and not before, for that the Aethiopians were Giants in
Vigor. And when the Spies returned to Cambyses, there was no Man found among
his Soldiers which was able to bend that Bow. Yet he marched directly toward
Aethiopia with a Great Army; Part of which was overwhelmed in the Sands of the
Deserts, to the Number of Fifty Thousand, and the Rest being reduced, for Want
of Provisions, to a Necessity of eating one another, he returned in a great
Rage to Memphis, where he slew Apis the God of the Egyptians, and caused his
Priests to be Massacred. He also slew his own Brother, and killed his Wife
because she mourned for him. He shot Prexaspes through with an Arrow, and
commanded Twelve Persian Nobles to be buried Alive: He set Fire to the Temples,
blasphemed the Gods, and at last killed himself by an Accident with his own
Sword.

After his Death, the Magi Crowned one of their own Order, and set him on the
Throne of Persia, giving out that he was Smerdes the Younger Son of Cyrus, who
had been murdered by the Command of his Brother Cambyses. And it was easy to
carry on the Fraud, in regard the Persian Kings rarely suffer themselves to be
seen; which is a Custom, thou know, observed by all the Monarchs in the East.

One Ostan, a Persian Prince, first discovered the Cheat by Means of his
Daughter, a Concubine of the King's: For she, by his Instruction, found out,
that the King had no Ears: Which was a convincing Argument that he was one of
the Magi, whose Ears Cambyses had commanded to be cut off.

This Ostan drawing Six other Princes into a Conspiracy, they rushed into the
Palace, and killed all the Magi, and singl'd out of their own Number, one
Darius, the Son of Hystaspes, to succeed in the Throne. This was not done by
Election, but by Lot: For they agreed to meet all together, one Morning, before
the Palace Gates on Horseback; and that he whose Horse first Neigh'd, after the
Sun was up, should be King. This fell to Darius's Share, by the Stratagem of
his 'Squire, or Master of the Horse. Then the other Princes Crowned him, and
made him swear by the Sun and the Fire, that he would never put them to Death,
or deny them his Presence.

But Darius finding himself curbed by these Princes, was resolved to rid
himself of such dangerous Companions. Wherefore he caused a Stove to be built
on purpose for a Banqueting House, and so artificially contrived that the
Fireplace being under the Banquetting-Chamber, should in so many Hours burn
asunder the Pillars that supported the said Chamber, and cause the Floor to
fall down into the Fire. Then he invited these Princes to a Feast, which he
held in this Banqueting House, and was merry with them till the Signal was
given for him to depart: At which Time he left them in the midst of their
Mirth; and within a while after he was gone, the Floor of the Chamber fell
down, with all that were in it, into the Fire underneath, where the Princes
were soon consumed to Ashes.

After this, Darius managed all the Affairs of his Empire without Control. He
ruled over all the Provinces of Asia, from India to Aethiopia, containing above
a Hundred Kingdoms. He extended his Conquests to the Provinces of Greece; and
setting forth a prodigious Fleet, he sailed into the Mediterranean and
Archipelago: He conquered the Islands of the Aegean Sea, reduced Chalcedon, and
all the Cities along the Hellespont and Propontis, even Byzantium it self, the
present Seat of our August Emperors. At length, having Reigned prosperously
Thirty six Years, he died, and left Xerxes his Son to succeed him in the Throne.

Thou see, Great Guide of the Faithful, that I have not yet reached to the
End of the Persian Monarchy; whereas I thought to have comprehended all the
Four in one Letter: For I have only touched upon the most Remarkable Passages,
omitting the main Body of the History, which it would be too tedious for thee
to peruse.

If thou approvest what I have written, I will continue thus to abbreviate the
History of the Persian, Macedonian, and Roman 'Empires in other Letters: But if
thou think what I have already writ, to be a sufficient Model for the
Compilers of an Universal History, I submit to thy Oraculous Appointment.

In the mean time, I pray the King Eternal, who Establishes and Dissolves all
the Empires in the World, and has put into the Possession of the Grand Signior
those Ample Tracts of the Earth which formerly belonged to the Successive
Monarchies; to extend the Limits of the Mussulman Empire through the Five Zones.

Paris, the 17th. of the 6th. Moon, of the Year 1670.
LETTER IV. To Mirmadolin, Santone of the Vale of Sidon.
It Was a long time before I could find out the True Secret of Humane Happiness.
I have for many Years grop'd after it in the Dark; and when I thought I enjoyed
a Prospect of it, as clear as of Things we discern in the Light of a Midday
Sun; that Sun was little better than the Sol Mortuorum of the Ancient Romans,
whose Beams served only to give a faint Mock-Glimmering to the Ghosts that
wander on this side Charon's Ferry, and like an Ignis fatuus to mislead 'em up
and down in the dark Suburbs of Elyzium, the Fens and Marshes of the Stygian
Lake. So have I straggl'd, all my Life, through unknown Ways, seeking the Road
to Heaven, yet finding nothing but the Paradise of Fools.

Sometimes, I thought, by outward Works of Virtue, to purify my Self and gain
Perfection. I was punctual in observing every Precept of the Law; and performed
not a few Acts of Supererogation. Confiding too much in the Fidelity, and
inviolable Fastness of my Wings, the Force of my Religious Passions, first
formed by Nature, afterward improved by Pious Tutors; I strove to make Heroic
Flights, and soar above my Guide. But, alas! they were mere borrowed Feathers
which bore me up so long; dead Artificial Wings, cemented to my Soul only by
Education, Custom, and the Practice of my Fathers; a Composition of Spiritual
Wax, or Glue, which could not stand the Brunt of hot and fiery Trials, but soon
dissolved in my Unwarrantable, Bold Approaches to the Sun. So that, in fine, my
Wings dropped piecemeal off, and I Would the Fate of Icarus, to fall a Victim to my
own obstinate Zeal, and Rashness.

Surely our Souls are like the Augaean Stable, which no Humane Power, Art, or
Industry, can ever cleanse, did not the Messengers and Favorites of God, like
Hercules, teach us the Method of opening a Canal from Heaven, and letting in
the Torrent of the River of Purification from Paradise.

Our Vices, Hydra-like, still start Young Infant-Heads, as fast as we cut off
the Old. Whereas our Virtues are like the Venetian Treasure, which being once
showed to the Spanish Ambassador in many Coffers of Silver, Gold, and Jewels;
the Wise Castilian desiring to see the Bottoms of those Wealthy Chests turned
up; when it was done, made this Remark, Your Riches have no Roots, nor grow,
like those my Master does possess in the Indies. So are all the boasted
Excellencies acquired by Humane Discipline, more inanimate and dead than the
Artificial Productions of Minerals, Metals, and Stones. No traditional
Chemistry of Men, can ever revive a Soul, that is dead to God. Perhaps, some
Theological Paracelsus, Helmont, or Arabian Ifriqui, may, from the Ashes of an
Original Flower, raise the Fantastic Form of it again; I mean the Color and
Contexture of the Leaves: But none of them is able to bestow the Vital Sap, the
Seminal Juice, the Inward Virtue of the once prosperous and flourishing
Vegetable. No Mortal can repair what Adam once destroyed. That Protoplast has
ruined us All.

Well then! Must we despair of Remedy? Shall we decamp, and sneakingly retire
to Hell, because we cannot take Heaven by Storm, nor Undermine it; nor have
recourse to Stratagems; nor Bribe the Garrison; or make a Party amongst the
Celestial Burghers? No: Let Us rather lie entrenched within our Selves, till
Heaven shall voluntarily open its Gates, and Sally forth in Love, to invite and
lead us in.

Oh! Thrice-Happy Santone, thou have experienced what I say. My Resolution is
to follow thee, by suffering my self to be gradually abdicated from the World,
and from my own Will. Vouchsafe to instruct me in the Method, lest Self-Love
misguide me to my Ruin.

In the mean while, repose thou in the Bosom of God, which is the Bedchamber
of Holy Souls.

Paris, 1st. of the 8th. Moon, of the Year, 1670.
LETTER V. To the Selictar Aga, or Sword-bearerto the Sultan.
I Shall entertain thee now with a Medly of Relations, some containing News of
the freshest Date, others only informing thee of Things done many Moons ago,
yet pleasant enough in the Rehearsal. However, I beg of thee to accept this as
a Testimony of my Devoir and Regard; in that I have abundance of Letters to
write, many Friends to gratify, and cannot send the same Matter to All. I am
forced to parcel out my Intelligence, and suit every Letter to the Genius and
Station of him to whom I Address. Knowing therefore thy particular
Inclinations, I shall present thee with something very Agreeable.

No doubt but thou art acquainted with the Christians Carnaval, which is a Time
of public Joy, Licentiousness, and Sport. This Year the King and Queen of
France observed it with wonderful Magnificence.

Among their other Divertisements, they were presented with a Play, wherein Two
Rival Princes, by an Ingenious Emulation, strove to out-vy each other in
regaling a Princess, equally beloved by both. The Representation was very fair,
and full of Majesty. On the Right Hand of the Theater appeared Apollo in the
Air, returning to his Heaven, after he had chased and routed all the Cyclops,
with the Serpent Python. On the Left was seen the same God on the Top of
Parnassus, in the midst of the Nine Muses, scattering Flowers on the Arts and
Sciences which were at the Foot of the Mountain. Then a Veil being drawn
a-side, discovered a Sea, surprizingly natural and fine: In the midst of which,
the Gods of many famous Rivers appeared seated on Rocks, with Tritons, and
Cupids ranged on each side, upon the Backs of Dolphins. Then from above, amidst
the Clouds, King Aeolus appeared, laying his straight Commands upon the Winds,
that they immediately retire into their Caverns, excepting only Zephyr, who,
for his soft and gentle Breezes, was permitted to be present at this Feast.
After which, came Neptune riding in his Cockle-Chariot, drawn by Four
Sea-Horses, attended by a Train of Gods that dwell within the Deep.

Immediately the Scenes changed into a Champain, representing the Delicious
Fields of Tempe; where a most excellent and agreeable Comedy was acted, to the
Satisfaction of all the Court. I leave the Dances, Interludes, and other
Novelties to thy Imagination; assuring thee, that all was Astonishing and
Magnifick.

But not to entertain thee longer with these empty Trifles, I shall now
acquaint thee with something of Importance; which is a Peace concluded between
this King, and the State of Algiers. On the 2d. of the 3d. Moon, the Count de
Guiche brought the Articles of the Treaty to the King, from the Hands of the
Marquis de Martel, Lieutenant General of the French Fleet in the Mediterranean.

If thou would know [the Particulars of this Agreement, read the enclosed
Paper: As for Matter of Fact, all the French Slaves at Algiers, were
immediately released upon the Signing and Sealing] the Treaty, and delivered up
to the French Commander; with some French Vessels also which they had seized.
And so dishonorable are their Capitulations, That at the same Time they have
yielded up a Ship of theirs, which the French had taken from them, for ever
quitting all Claim to it.

In the Beginning of May, the King took his Journey to Flanders, to visit his
New Conquests there. This put his Enemies into a great Consternation, fearing
that he had some Design upon them. They began to be upon their Guard, and
prepare for a sudden Surprise. But the King perceiving their Alarm by his
Spies; sent them Assurance, on his Royal Word, That he would do them no
Violence at this Time.

However, he soon after sent the Marshall de Crequi into Lorrain, with a force
considerable enough to reduce that Prince to Reason, who had not kept his
Parole with him in several Instances. The Effect [of this Expedition, was the
Reducing Pont-a-Mousson, Espinal, Chaste, Longwy, and all the Principality of
Lorrain, to the French King's Obedience: So that the poor Duke is forced to
seek his Refuge in Foreign Courts.

Noble Aga, this Duke is not to be Pitied, being very Ungrateful, and a perfect
Madman. He owes his Liberty and Life to the King of France, yet could not
forbear Plotting against him. Now he is deservedly Chastis'd for his Folly. So
may all those suffer, who abuse their Benefactors. But, upon the Benign and
Good, may the Favors of Heaven rest till the Splitting of all Things.

Paris, 13th. of the 9th. Moon, of the Year, 1670.
LETTER VI. To Isouf, his Kinsman, a Merchant at Astracan.
I Received thy Letter, and perused it with much Complacency, finding thy
Sentiments very agreeable to Reason. Yet give me leave to warn thee of an
Excess which thou art running into. For I have had Experience of its ill
Consequence.

Thy Losses have made thee Melancholy, and the Fraudulent Dealing of thy
Correspondents, Factors, and supposed Friends, has taught thee to declaim
against Friendship, Men, and Business: And not only so, but it seems thou have
taken a Resolution to abandon all Worldly Affairs, Pleasures, and Engagements
whatsoever, and turn Faquir, Eremit, or Dervich at least: For, thou art
disgusted at Humane Society, and weary of all Things but Solitude.

I must confess, Isouf, these are very Generous Thoughts, and Pious Resolves.
But, they are not easily put in Practice. They are Undertakings, fit only for
perfect Saints, Men of unblemished Lives, and free from all Sorts of Vice;
Persons who have a Stock of Temperance, Chastity, Prudence, Justice, Fortitude,
Patience, Humility, and all the other Virtues, a Fund of Magnanimity, which can
never be exhausted by any Temptations, Difficulties, or Perils, that usually
assault and environ such as enter into so austere a Course of Life.

Will thou be able to endure the unrelenting, rigid Cold of Winter in the
Desert, where there are no Chimneys, Hearths, or Stoves, nor any other Method
of keeping Fire to warm thee by? Can thou sustain the raging Blasts of Boreas
at that Season, or the killing Tempests of North-Eastern Winds, which blow from
far, and fill the Air, the Earth, and Sea, with baneful Mists, Frosts, Ice,
Snow, Sleet, and other chilling Meteors, out of their Eternal Magazines, within
the Artick Circle, which Ovid calls the Frigid Zone?

There are many other Extremities to which a Man's exposed in such a Solitary
State. Nor will thou be less liable to Inconveniences and Hardships, if thou
should ramble as a Faquir, up and down the World. Much less could thou
endure the sad Restraints, and Mortifications of a Convent. Thou Would hardly
live out thy Novitiate with Patience. It goes against the Grain of Nature to
obey another's Will, in every trifling Matter that he commands. Thou must not
Eat or Drink, but thy Superior will set the Place, the Time, and Manner of thy
Diet; which will be irksome to thy Freeborn Soul. And then thou must forsake
thy Amorous Pleasures; for ever Forswearing also, the very Thoughts of Money,
or of being Rich. I tell thee, thou must resolve to become a Religious Drone,
fit for nothing but to mumble over thy Beads, or turn the Superstitious Round,
till thou art Giddy, or Dance an Hour together to the Music of a Thousand
Hue's and Hei's, hoarsly croak'd out in Frantic Tones, by thee, and all thy
Brethren Derviches, till ye are sick, and foam at Mouth: Then your Devotions
are thought Meritorious. Can thou digest these sacred Fooleries? Or grant
this to be a Rational Service of the Divinity, as some will plead; who say, We
ought to employ each Member, and all our Faculties, in Praising him that made
'em; yet can thou brook a Confinement all thy Days, to this Religious State?

I tell thee Isouf, I have been often tempted in this Manner, to forsake the
Sultan's Service, with all other Engagements of the World, and throw my self
into a Convent, or spend the Residue of my Days in some obscure and solitary
Corner of a Desert: Yet, I found at length, that this was nothing but Delusion,
and the subtle Sophistry of that Malicious Demon, who envies Man his
Happiness. It Is he that whispers Arguments of Discontent and Murmuring into our
Souls, watching his Opportunities when any Thing gives us exquisite Pain or
Grief, to drive us to Despair.

So have I sometimes labored under an Intolerable Anguish of Mind, besides the
fretting Maladies of Flesh, and Blood, with outward Crosses in my Fortune. Then
have I wished my self in some dark Cavern of the Earth, or on the solitary Top
of Teneriff, where I should converse with none but Spirits and Demons dwelling
above the Clouds. Or else I coveted the Melancholy Retirements of the Lybian
Desert, which affords no other Society than that of Lions, Tigers, Dragons, and
other Beasts of Prey.

When these Wishes have appeared too Extravagant and Wild, I then retrenched my
Thoughts, and pitched upon some other Manner of Life, equally promising
Comfort, yet less threatening and Dangerous. I gave my self up wholly to Prayer
and Fasting for a while, thinking to hold out thus for ever. So sensible a
Pleasure attends these Exercises, That at certain Moments a Man's all Rapture,
Ecstasy, and I know not what. He is apt to think himself in some New World. A
Sacred Pride invests his Soul. He seems all Majesty within; an inseparable
Companion of the Immortals, and the Darling Friend of God. Whereas all this
results but from the Ventilation of his Blood, by Vocal Oraisons; and is no
more than a mere Natural Operation, whereby his Lungs are artificially
breathed, and gently forced to Disembogue their overheated Airs, their thick
caliginous Vapors, which fill the Heart and all the rest of the Vitals with
Seeds of Melancholy, Fear, Suspicion, Grief, and other doleful Passions.

But, mark a Zealot, when his Prayers are over, his Fast is done, and all his
Fervent Pious Discipline is accomplished; how like a Hypocrite he looks and
acts: How formal is his Carriage, or at least, how vain and light? He either
heaves out fulsom Hypocondriack Sighs, with Supercilious Looks, and Chaps, set
like the Furrows of a sowrfac'd Hadgi; or else he is tickled into a loud
ungovernable Laughter, and all his Carriage is ridiculous and wanton. Either
his Hunger, Thirst, and Faintness, the usual Effect of such Excessive Devotion,
makes him Peevish, Choleric, and Unmortified; or else he is as Apish as a Cat.

Humane Nature cannot abide long in the same Humor, and those that seem to be
always Even Tempered People, like the Caspian Sea, without Ebb, or Flow, are
only Counterfeits, and Politicians. There is an Art to conceal ones Passions,
but there is none that can annihilate them. We change from one Affection,
Appetite, and Desire to another. Our Inclinations circulate with our Blood.
They are transformed each Minute, Hour, and Day; they vary like the Wind and
Weather. Therefore never think of taking an Eternal Pleasure, or Distaste, in
any Thing here Below. Prayer is good in its Turn, I mean, the Vocal
Aspirations. So are Fasting, Abstinence, and other Religious Severities. But if
all Men should be perpetually at these Exercises, God in a little Time, would
have but few Adorers on Earth. The Ground must be left Untilled; the Fields
would quickly bring forth Crops of Briars and Weeds, instead of Corn. The
Gardens then must turn to Wildernesses. There would be then no need of Millers,
Bakers, and the other Trades, whose Livelihood depends upon the Husbandman. And
so for want of proper Sustenance, Mankind must quickly perish.

I do not argue against those who seem to be Constellated to a Solitary Life;
or by some special Grace of God, are strengthened to endure the constant
Hardships of an Hermitage: Such as the Illustrious and Great Mohammed, of Mount
Vriel in Arabia, who is our Holy Prophet's Tenant and Successor, in the Cave of
Wonders. Such also is Ilch Rend Hu, the Celebrated Bramin of Cachemire in
India, who lives on the Top of an High Mountain, is a Hundred and Twenty Three
Years old, foretells Things to come, resolves all Doubts, gives Infallible
Counsel, heals diverse Diseases, works some Miracles; and in fine, says and does
all Things by a Spirit worthy of Admiration.

The Mountain whereon this Philosopher, or Prophet dwells, seems to be the
Landmark between Summer and Winter. For one side of it is always covered with
Snow, the other with Blossoms, Flowers, Herbage, and Fruits. This over-looking
a spacious Valley, which they call the Paradise of the East; That affording a
Prospect little more agreeable or fair, than what the Poets speak of the
Riphaean Hill.

Ilch Rend Hu, has his Habitation in a Cave or Grot, which passes through the
Rock, as Virgil's does near Naples in Italy, which thou have seen.

In this Mysterious Station, he appears like Aeolus, Lord of the Weather: For,
it is certain, he commands the Winds to blow or cease, at the least word, within
the Verge of his accustomed Walks. If any Person dare profane the Silence of
the Place, with Words, or other ruder Noise, they are immediately surpised
with dreadful Storms of Thunder, Lightning, Wind, and Rain; such as seen to
threaten the Dissolution of all Things: Which makes all Men in those Parts,
hold Ilch Rend Hu in great Veneration. He is the only Oracle of the Indies.
They resort to him from the Neighboring Provinces, and Kingdoms, in all their
Difficulties. The Grandees of Persia, Tibet, and Cathay, send to him Honorable
Presents, desiring his Counsel in Matters of Peace, and War. Nay they make
devout Pilgrimages to him from the Kingdoms of Tunquin, and China. He is the
Apollo of the East.

Isouf, it would be some Encouragement for Thee and Me, to embrace a Solitary
Life, if we might ever hope to attain such wonderful Perfections. But, as We
have hitherto lived in the World, and stained Our Selves with the Common Vices
of Mortals, We connot presume to merit these extraordinary Favors: Our Old
Habits are rooted in Us, and if We have Time and Strength to plant New ones in
their Stead, yet they will not grow up to Maturity, but with many Years: For,
believe Me, Cousin, no Body becomes a Devil, or a Saint all at once.

Paris, 6th. of the 11th. Moon, of the Year, 1670.
LETTER VII. To the Chiaux Basha.
IT appears, That the King of France's Fortune not only procures him constant
Victories and Triumphs in Europe, but such a Renown and Character in foreign
Countries, as stimulates the most Remote Princes, and Puissant Monarchs of the
Earth, to court his Alliance and Friendship.

Here is at this present, an Ambassador come from the Coasts of Guinea, in
Africa, being sent by the King of Arder, one of the Greatest Sovereigns in
those Parts, possessing an Absolute and Uncontrollable Authority over his
Subjects, as the Grand Signior does over the Faithful Osmans. But, we will not
compare the narrow Limits of his Dominion, with the vast and unbounded Extent
of the Mussulman Empire, the Inheritance of our Sublime Sultan, the Lord of the
Globe at large. Suffice it, that this Black Prince is a Wise Man, descended of
a Race of Sages; and, that Policy of State is as natural to him, as common
Craft or Cunning to the meanest of the Vulgar. He knows how to make War or
Peace abroad, and to keep his Subjects in Awe at Home.

Surely, there is a Force and Charm in the Derivative Blood of Heroic and Wise
Ancestors, which secretly inspires their Offspring with Maxims, and Principles,
agreeable to the Inclinations, Aims, and Purposes of the Family from whence
they descend. And where it is experienced otherwise, it may be supposed That
change of Climates, unhappy Marriages, or some overruling Misfortunes in the
World, have caused the Degeneracy. For so some Noble Vegetables of Asia, and
other Quarters of the Earth, lying near the Sun, will not prosper, if once
transplanted into the Cold and Barren Soils of Northern Europe. Thus Poverty,
Disgrace, and other abject Circumstances, chill the Greatest Spirits, and spoil
their Growth. Yet there is an Inborn Excellency in some Natures, which with
Evenness supports the Strokes of Fortune, and pushes through all Difficulties
to attain its End.

So this great African King, informing himself, not only by French Vessels
Trading in his Ports, but also by other Ships of Christendom, of the Grandeur
of the French King, his Wealth and Puissance by Sea and Land, with the vast
Interest and Traffic he has in both the Indies; thought it high time to seek
his Friendship, whose Enmity would, in all Probability, be very Fatal to him:
For he had heard of his Conquests far and wide. It Is no matter, whether by
Valor, or good Conduct, we make our Selves Happy. One is as laudable as the
other, in the unequal War we are engaged in, with Fate, Providence, and Chance;
with Angels, Men, and Devils; with Heaven, Earth, and Hell.

I speak this in reference to the Celebrated Prowess, Magnanimity, Riches, and
Strength of this Negro King; who need not yield to the King of Benin, his next
Neighbor, and the most Potent of all the South-Western Maritime Princes of
Africa, nor to any of his other Neighbors besides; yet could not think himself
safe, or be at rest, till he had sent this Embassy to the King of France,
offering his Lands, his Havens, his Seas, and whatsoever was within his
Jurisdiction, to this Great Monarch.

The Address which his Ambassador made to the French King, deserves Remark.
For, after the usual Obeysances at the Foot of the Throne, he went up Three
Steps, and then prostrating himself Three times on his Face and Belly; he
clapped his Hands in token of Reverence, and put his Fingers on his Eyes, to
show, that he was not able to behold the Luster of so much Majesty. This is the
French Interpretation of his Carriage: But I tell thee, 'twas rather designed
as a Precedent to the French Ambassadors, if any should be sent to Guinea,
where it is the Custom of the Country for all Foreign Ministers, to observe the
same Ceremonies to the King of Arder, and other Princes his Neighbors.

These Europeans, because they first found out the Art of Navigation; or at
least, first improved it to the Discovery of many Remote Countries, value
themselves too high; imagining, That all the Nations, formerly Unknown, are
Fools, and know not themselves, and their own Strength. They thought, 'twas
impossible to find in Africa or America, Empires, Kingdoms, and Commonwealths,
as strong and well Governed, as those in the Heritage of Japhet: But, it is a
damned Mistake. For, the most High is Impartial, in the Distribution of his
Gifts and Favors. Those despicable Blacks, whom all the Princes, and Nobles of
Europe and Asia, buy as Slaves, being born of the Vulgar, are, nevertheless,
come out of Regions, where Power, Riches, and Wisdom, are as much in their
Zenith, as in these Western Countries.

They are all Outwardly Flesh and Blood, as we are, notwithstanding the
Contrariety of our Colors. And as for their Souls, they are even just as
Capable of Knowledge and Ignorance, Reason and Folly, Vice and Virtue, Piety
and Profaneness, Superstition and Atheism, as we are, who pretend to be Lords of
the World, and all Things.

May Thou and I, practice Moderation, and not contemn any of Humane Race,
though they be the Caphars of Mosambique. But let us always remember the old
Turkish Proverb, That it is not good or safe, to point in Mockery behind the
Grand Signior's Back. Adieu.

Paris, 3d. of the 12th. Moon, of the Year 1670.
LETTER VIII. To Mohammed, the Illustrious Solitary of Mount Uriel, in Arabia.
THE Grand Root of the Common Injustice which Men are guilty of, in reference
to the Beasts, and of the Intemperance with which they corrupt themselves, I
perceive, is a false Principle which they have established, denying the
Capacity and Use of Reason to all Living Creatures but themselves.

This Error was first publicly maintained by the Peripateticks, Stoics, and
Epicureans; and afterward by Claudius of Naples, out of a particular Aversion
they had for the Doctrines of Pythagoras and Empedocles, Two famous Patrons of
Abstinence.

Heraclides Ponticus undertook to explain the Sentiments of the former Sects;
and Hermachus those of the Latter. But, both of them seem to confide more in
the little Tricks and Arts of Sophistry, than to use true Reason. For at the
first Essay of their Skill, they strive to cast a Mist in the Readers Eyes, by
dividing the Generations of Living Creatures, into such as are endu'd with the
Faculty of Reason, and such as want it. Whereas, thou know, it is an
indubitable Maxim in the Eastern Philosophy, That every Thing which partakes of
Sense, has also Reason. For, it is the Mind alone, which sees, hears, etc. the
Body of it self being deaf, blind, and void of all Sense. It is evident
therefore, that since the Beasts do see, hear, and perform all other Actions of
Sense, they have also what the Greeks call (...) or the Mind in them, which is
the very Seminary, or Native Seat of Reason.

It Is true, indeed, we cannot affirm, That they possess a Reason so perfect as
ours, since that Perfection is acquired by Discipline, which the Generality of
the Brutes want. They have no Colleges or Schools, where the Arts and Sciences
are professed, and taught by Rules. Nature is their only School-Mistress, and
they learn her Instructions with abundance of Promptness, and Sagacity. They
are educated in the open Elements, as in an Academy, or University founded by
the Creator of all Things; where every Thing they encounter, serves as a Book
to teach them all the Knowledge which is necessary to their Well-being on
Earth. And they need no more.

It Is manifest also, That some Species, and Individuals, are more capable of
Learning what is taught 'em, than others; even as we discern the same
Difference among the various Nations, Families, and Persons of Men. But we do
not use to say of Inanimate Things, That this piece of Wood is more apt to
Learn than another, as a Dog is more Tractable and Docile than a Hog: Nor of
Immovable Things, That this is slower than that: Nor of Things which want
Sense, That a Stone is duller of Apprehension than a piece of Iron. So could we
not properly affirm of Animals, That one is more Crafty and Sagacious than
another; more provident, chaste, temperate, cleanly, and the like Epithets; if
they were not by Nature, capable of Knowledge and Virtue. And yet we daily see
all this true, in comparing one Species of Living Creatures with another; nay,
and one Individual of the same Kind, with some of its Fellows.

When Antipater accused Asses, and Hogs of Nastiness, he did not consider how
accurately Nice and Curious the Lynxes and Cats are, which, with so much
Diligence and Care, hide their Excrements, that they can never be seen, or
smelt again. So the Swallows teach their Young to mute over the Brims of the
Nest. All which are Arguments of their Prudence and Discretion. Doubtless,
every Animal has its peculiar Gift, and Excellency. One is more quick-sighted
than another; This has better Ears than That; a Third surpasses in the goodness
of his Smell, or the swiftness of his Feet. Let not vain Man therefore Boast,
and Insult, as if he were the sole Engrosser of all Wisdom and Virtue; since
the Beasts of the Field, the Birds of the Air, the Fish of the Sea, with all
the Generations of Reptiles, Insects, and whatsoever is endu'd with Life and
Sense, possess their Shares as well as he.

It is manifest also, That there are various Principles of Folly, Injustice,
and all Manner of Ignorance, Error, and Vice, in Humane Nature, equal to what
we can possibly find in the rest of Animals, whom we so much despise. And it is
a Question, Whether even the very Seahorse, who murders his Father, and for
that Reason, was by the Ancient Egyptians, made the Hieroglyphick of Impiety;
may not justly exchange his Character with Some of Humane Race, who make their
Parents the continual Martyrs to their Ambition, Pride, Envy, Avarice, and
other Vices.

I would fain know, Whether any Man would not take it ill, to be told, he is
Blind and Deaf, because he cannot see and hear so quick as some of the Beasts?
Or, that he is a Cripple, because he cannot outrun a Heart? Certainly, a strong
Man deserves that Character, though he cannot pretend to match the Strength of a
Camel, or an Elephant. And shall we then say, That the Beasts have no Reason,
or Virtue, because they cannot discover those Qualities so Artificially as Men?

Besides, Do not all Privations suppose some Habits? And is not Madness a
Privation of the Habits of Reason and Prudence? If therefore Dogs, Bulls,
Foxes, and other Animals are known to be sometimes Mad, Shall we think it less
fit to say of them, That they are out of their Minds, or Wits, than to affirm
the same of Men? And if Compos, or, Non Compos Mentis are proper Expressions of
any Beast, when it is Sober, or Mad; Who, that is not deprived of Reason
himself, can deny, that they have the Possession of that Faculty by Nature, as
well as he?

As often as I trouble thee with Letters on this Subject, thou may conclude, I
am newly awakened to a Sense of my Error, in not Religiously observing the
Sacred Institution of Abstinence; which ought to be the Natural Consequence of
these Thoughts: For, in a word, if it be lawful to kill the Animals for the
sake of Food, I think we may as well turn Cannibals, and eat the Flesh of our
purchased Slaves, or of our Captive Enemies, over whom we have, by the Law of
Nations, an equal Right as to their Life and Death, as over our Beasts.

Abstemious Sage, I leave thee to the Divine Inspirations of the Genius, which
possesses that Holy Cave: I leave thee to the sacred Whispers of Winds from
Eden, and to the Sweets of an innocent Solitude, which admits no other Society
than that of Angels, or Beasts.

Paris, 26th. of the 2d. Moon, of the Year 1671.
LETTER IX. To Zeidi Alamanzi, a Merchant at Venice.
I Received thy Dispatch, which informs me, That thou art commanded to remove
from Venice, with all speed possible, and to visit Naples, Genoua, Rome, Padua,
Milan, Florence, with the other Chief Cities of Italy: In fine, that thou art
not to make a long Residence, or take up thy Abode any where; but after the
Manner of a Traveller, to be always in a moving Posture from Place to Place,
from one Province and Principality to another; that thou may take a just
Estimate of the Strength and Riches of each State, through which thou shall
pass: That thou may dive into their Counsels, observe their Motions, watch
their Designs, and transmit thy Remarks to the Ministers of the August Divan,
the Mysterious Cabinet of the Earth's Great Sovereign.

There may be less of Profit in such a Peregrination, for the Present, than in
thy constant Residence at Venice, where thou art established in a settled way
of Merchandice. But, thou will find abundance more Pleasure: And if thou
acquittest thy self Successfully, the Grand Signior will reward thy Merit.
Besides, thou may meet with a Thousand Opportunities of Traffic, even in
thy Travels. An Active and Diligent Spirit, cannot fail of Means to advance its
own Interest in any Part of the World; and thou do not want a Stock of Money
to support thy honest Undertakings.

Thou will meet with a New Sort of Italian, wherever thou shall set thy Foot:
That People being strangely mixed, and descending from several Nations. Every
City has a different Genius; which is so Remarkable and Conspicuous, that they
have all got peculiar Epithets: As, Rome the Holy, Naples the Gentile, Florence
the Fair, Bolonia the Fat, Milan the Large, Ferrara the Civil, Bergamo the
Subtle, Genoua the Proud, Padua the Strong, Siena the Studious, Mantua the
Glorious, Lucca the Industrious, Ravenna the Mild, Capua the Amorous, Vrbin the
Loyal, Verona the Worthy, Brescia the Fortified, Furli the Wanton, Rimini the
Good; and so of the Rest.

Beware of contracting Friendship with any Italian: And if thou do engage, be
cautions how thou give a just Offense. Thou can not be too tender in this
Point: For, as the Italians are very Constant where they have once pitched
their Affection, so they are Inexorable in their Revenge, where they apprehend
their Love abused; and they are the most Jealous People in the World. If thou
have made Two false Steps, never seek to repair thy Fault by After-Submissions,
but Fly; for thou have wounded his Soul, and he will never Pardon thee, or let
thee live to be Guilty of another Affront. They have a Common Maxim in this
Case, 'He that Wrongs me Twice, it is his Fault; but if I let him Injure me the
Third Time, the Blame's my own.'

The wisest Course is to be Civil and Modestly reserved; not to be too frank
and open in Discourse, or loose in Carriage. For this lays a Man naked, and
exposes him to the Contempt and Censure of such as are more composed and
recollected: And this is the peculiar Character of the Italians, 'That they
think more than they speak, and are many times disgusted at the Person on whom
they Smile.'

When thou art on the Roads in Apulia and Campania, when thou beholdest the
Beauties of that Luxuriant Soil, and thy Smell is ravished with the Fragrant
Odors of the Hedges, and adjoining Groves; think on Elyzium, Paradise, or
whatsoever Place Nature has made Delightful; and say, It must be in this
Country, or in some Region very like it.

As thou sojournest at Naples, remember with what Pleasure Virgil passed away
his Time there. 'Twas in that happy Air, that Horace penned his Admirable
Poems. There Livy wrote the Roman History, and Seneca his Morals. From thence
we have the Works of Statius, Claudian, Laurentius Valla, and many other
Learned Writers.

Forget not, when thou art at Genoua, the former Glory of that Commonwealth;
how once she did possess Sardinia, Cyprus, Lesbos, Chios, and did extend her
Conquests to Pera, near Constantinople: How she entered the Black Sea, planted a
Colony of Genouese at Caffa, and stretched her Dominion to the River Tanais.

Thou will find Matter of Contemplation in Pisa, Milan, Padua, and all the
Cities of Italy. But when thou art at Rome, 'twould be a kind of Sacrilege not
to cast back thy Eyes, and view her Ancient Glory, when she was the Mistress of
the World: When she had Three Millions of Men within her Walls, and a Hundred
and fifty Millions of Gold in Yearly Revenue: When she kept in Constant Pay, at
Home and Abroad, Six hundred, Five and forty thousand Men. Her Foreign
Conquests may be numbered by her Domestic Triumphs; which from Romulus, her
Founder, to Augustus Caesar, were no less than Three hundred. Julius Caesar
augmented the Public Treasury, with Forty Millions of Gold. In the Reign of
Aurelianus this City was Fifty Miles in Compass, and the Number of her
Inhabitants, increased to Four Millions: And they were prodigiously enriched
with the Spoils of their Enemies. Seneca when he died, left Seven Millions, and
Five hundred thousand Crowns behind him. Claudius Isidorus, though much exhausted
by the Civil Wars, yet left Four thousand One hundred and seventeen Slaves,
Three thousand and sixty Yoke of Oxen; and of other Cattle, Two hundred and
fifty seven thousand. There were commonly kept in Rome, Five hundred
Gladiators, a Thousand Bears, and a Hundred Lions. There were always Five
hundred Men employed in looking after the Aqueducts, and Bathes of Rome.

When Cyneas, the Ambassador of Pyrrhus had viewed the City round, and was
asked what he thought of Rome; He answered, I think all Rome is but One Temple;
(for there were above Four hundred in the City) Her Senate is an Assembly of
Kings; She is the Beauty of the whole Earth: The Flower of Mankind dwell within
her Walls.

Zeidi, this was the State, this the Grandeur and Magnificence of Pagan Rome.
But since the Incursions of the Goths and Vandals, the Lombards, Huns, and
other Barbarous Nations of the North, Rome's Glory is Eclipsed, her Honor laid
in the Dust. Whereas before, she lifted up her stately Crest on Seven High
Hills, now she is fain to stoop, being humbly seated in the Plain of Campus
Martius, being not by a Fifth Part so large as formerly, nor yet so populous.

All over Italy thou wilt meet with Relics of the Ancient Roman Majesty and
Greatness. And in some Places, thou may encounter Persons of great
Extraction, but very Poor, who may not unfitly be called the Ruins of Ancient
Nobility: Such as the Marquisses of Ceva, the Earls of Piacenza, and the
Knights of Bologna, who are become the Proverb of Illustrious Poverty. Such
also are the Counts of Lusigniani, Three of whom were once seen upon a
Fig Tree, eating the Figs to keep 'em from Starving. And many Italian Lords get
their Livelyhoods by selling of Ptisans, Limonades, Essences, Powders, and
other Refreshments, to the Gentry. Yet they are Proud, and when any one
Addresses to them he must entitle them, Most Excellent, Most Illustrious, or
else they will Frown and be Affronted.

Zeidi, If ever it be thy Fortune to be made a Lord, I pray Heaven give thee an
Estate answerable to the Title: For a Lord without Riches, is like a Soldier
without Arms, very Ridiculous.

Paris, the 15th. of the 4th. Moon, of the Year 1671.
LETTER X. To Dgnet Oglou.
THis Day, something has happened to me very Prodigious, and I know not what to
make of it. About the Hour of Quindinamasi, I was suddenly taken with strange
Fits of Vomiting: My Stomach was in a Prodigal, or rather a Philosophical
Humor; resolving to cast off all Superfluities, and only retain what was
necessary to its Ease and VVelfare in this Life. I labored under a Thousand
Horrid Agonies, which made me fear, that either an Imposthume was the Cause of
such violent Convulsions; or at least, that they would end in opening the
inward Sluices of my Blood, by too much forcing of the Pectoral Veins.

Whilst I were busied thus with sad Presages of a sudden Death, (for I dread
to be so unawares thrust out o'th World) I longed and passionately languish'd
for an Arabian Orange.

It happened at the same Time, my Mother Oucoumiche, Daria and Eliachim the
Jew, were with me in my Chamber, and had been there an Hour. They all stood at
the VVindow to see a Procession that was going by. But when they heard the
straining Noise I made, immediately they ran to my Bedside, as Human Nature,
Curiosity, or Passion, uses to prompt in such like Cases.

With a faint broken Voice I told 'em what I wished for Eliachim forthwith
gives Order to his Boy that waited in an Antichamber, to run with speed, and
buy the best Arabian Oranges he could find.

The arch Young Lad was gone full Thirteen Minutes by my Watch, and then
returned with Half a Dozen Oranges of Spain, (for he could get no other.) But
Heaven, as I have Reason to think, supplied his Negligence, and unsuccessful
Mercating. For long before he came with that sour crabbed Fruit, Daria spied
an Orange of Arabia on the Table.

No body knew from whence it came, or what kind Hand had laid it there. They
were all equal Witnesses, That there was no such Thing upon the Table, when
they came to the Bedside, nor a considerable Time afterward: And when it was
suggested, that some one of the Company had privately conveyed it thither,
whilst the rest were looking another way; Eliachim with solemn Vows and
Imprecations cleared himself; so did Daria, and my Mother. As for my self, they
all were sensible it was impossible for me to do it, as I lay in my Bed. A
General Astonishment possessed us all; and the Women would needs have it to be
a Miracle, whilst I greedily eat the Delicious Fruit, not troubling my Thoughts
with making endless Scrutinies, or so much as caring which way it came there,
so long as I had the Enjoyment of it.

Yet I ceased to be thus Indifferent, when I perceived my Malady on a sudden
removed by eating of this wondrous Orange. And whereas I had lain for Six whole
Days and Nights in a continual faint and languishing Condition, not able to get
down a Morsel of Bread, now my Spirits grew brisk and fresh; I seemed like one
transformed, or in another World. My Stomach revived, my almost dissipated
Vigor rallied, and I rose cheerfully to eat a hearty Supper. These Things, I
must confess, put me, as well as the rest of the Company, upon thinking.

I tell thee, upon the strictest Examination possible, I am very well
satisfied, that there could be no Design, or Trick in the Case: For if there
were, no body would be guilty of so many repeated horrid Perjuries in denying
it: But every one rather would have been forward to own themselves the
Instruments of thus happily and unexpectedly rescuing a poor sick Man, from the
very Jaws of Death: For I was just then ready to expire.

Whether there be Magic in the strength of a Man's Fancy at such Times; and
that through the Intense Agitation of his exalted Spirits, he moves the Soul of
the Universe by Sympathy to exert some of its hidden and uncommon Faculties,
and gratify his necessary Desires: Or whether there be an Order of Officious
Beings Invisible about us, who have the Charge of Mortals committed to them,
and are bound by the Laws of their concealed Kingdom, to assist us in
Extremities, even to the Height of a seeming Miracle, where it cannot be done
without, I know not. But it is certain, any observing Man may take notice of
some extraordinary Passages in the Course of his Life, of which he can give no
Rational Account, but must be forced to put 'em on the Score of Praeternatural
Causes. Such is our Ignorance of the Secret Operations of Nature.

All the Company were ready to list me among the Prophets; or in the Catalogue
of Saints, for this stupendous Occurrence. But I had other Thoughts of my Self:
For comparing this with some former Occurrences of my Life, I presently
concluded, 'twas the Forerunner of some grand, but short Affliction: And so I
told them All.

I believe, my Dgnet, that God will hedge me in with diverse Kinds of Adverse
Circumstances: He Will rush upon me on a sudden, like a Troop of Tartar Horse,
who swiftly spread themselves all round the affrighted Country, and take
Possession of the Roads and Passes. They hunt the Conscious Infidels from Dens
and Caves, and other lurking Places in the Woods and Mountains. None can escape
their Chastisement and Revenge: So my presaging Soul foretells some sad
surprising Inrodes from the Omnipotent.

That which I have to do in this Case, is to make speedy Expiations for my past
Security and Presumption, to repair the ruined Fastnesses of Virtue, and build
new Ones where they are wanting; to keep strong Guards; and lastly, to retire
my self into a most profound Humility, and Compliance with the Will of God;
which is the strongest Fortress, in time of a Divine Invasion.

Paris, 23d. of the 6th. Moon, of the Year 1671.
LETTER XI. To Sephat Abercromil, Vanni Effendi, Preacher to the Sultan.
THE Character and Fame of thy Exemplary Life, and profound Doctrine, though
studiously concealed and suppressed by thy self, have yet made a forcible
Eruption, and filled the Mussulman Kingdoms with the fragrant Odor of thy
Incomparable Piety, and Virtue. Even these Remote and Infidel Regions of the
West, are edified by thy sacred Rules and Institutions of a Spiritual Life. The
Nazarene Priests and Doctors, begin to harbor Emulations of thy Sanctity,
since they have seen no fairer Draught of true Acceptable Religion, than what
the Chaplains to the French Ambassadors at the Port, have copied from thy
Principles, and recommended to their Friends among the Clergy of France.
Insomuch as Francis Malevella, a Blind Ecclesiastic, but an Argus in the
Sciences, has publicly espoused thy Theorems and Practices; having in Print,
now lately, undertaken the Patronage of a Contemplative Life, so much insisted
on by thee; to which the College of Sorbonne have also given their Approbation.

That Excellent Man, though he has lost the Use of his Corporeal Eyes, yet has a
Soul transformed all over into Light, by which he clearly can survey the vast
Mysterious Horizon of the Invisible World, and penetrate the most recluse and
hidden Secrets of Eternity. The Age is ravished with the Book he published: He
has Ten thousand Proselytes among the Roman Priests and Derviches. None but the
Jesuits and Dominicans oppose him.

The former of these Orders is grown odious throughout Christendom, for the
Impious Doctrines they maintain, and the Enormous Crimes they have committed
being notorious Boutefeu's, Traitors, Hypocrites, and Secret Libertines. Their
Colleges are esteemed the Shops and Forges of Sedition, Faction Public
Animosities, Broils, and Wars, with all the Mischief that is done in Europe.
The Latter are not loved in France, because they are generally chosen Officers
of the Inquisition: Which inhumane Judicature, was first projected by St.
Dominick, their Founder, in order to exterminate the Moors from Spain. There is
a Natural and Irreconcilable Antipathy between the French and Spaniards. They
mutually abhor each others Customs, Laws, and Humors: But, above all, the
French can never be reconciled to that Infernal Court, which tyrannizes over
the Souls of Men, and punishes them for Thoughts. It is an equal Crime to
speak, or to be silent; to pray, or not; to go to Church, or stay at Home,
provided you are Rich. It Is Wealth the Inquisitors aim at, not the pretended
Safety and Deliverance of the Church from Enemies and Rebels.

Therefore the Dominicans and Jesuits being looked upon as Favorers and
Patrons of the Inquisition, and for that Reason hated by the French; in vain
they argued against Malevella's New reformed Model of Interior Religion, which
is but a Translation of the Original Dogmata, laid down by thee. Thy refined
Sentiments are Prolifick, as the Solar Beams, which by Ineffable Increases,
propagate themselves without diminishing the Illustrious Fountain. Each bright
and fertile Atom, by a miraculous Emanation, begets another; they multiply by
an Admirable Progressive Issue and Expansion from every Point of the Refulgent
Center, till every splendid Particle becomes a Ray of equal Length, and all
together produce an entire Orb of Light. Thus thy serene Idea's of Religion,
dilate themselves through this dark Side of the World, as fast as they
illuminate the Moselman Hemisphere. The Honester Sort of Western Franks, are
already, by a Demi-Metamorphosis, grown half Mahometans, capitulating with
their Pre-possessions, Prejudices, and the Force of Education, for the rest.

They go to Church, but not to babble over a Thousand vain Tautologies, which
are taught 'em by their Priests, and to ensure their Memory, are printed in
their Pocket-Manuals, or Books of Prayer: Nor do they number a long Series of
the same repeated Oraisons on Beads, or use any other Exterior Form of blind
and lame Devotion: But with inward Recollection, Silence, Purity, and fervent
Application of the Spirit, they address themselves to God; or rather by a
certain gradual Passiveness, Oblivion of Outward Things, and dying to
themselves, they prepare and fit their Souls for the Divine Approaches: Thus
having barricado'd up their Senses, and made Retrenchments round the Center of
the Mind, to secure it from the last Invasion, and Assault of Mundane Objects;
thither they retire, desiring Death, rather than to take Quarter by a faint
Cowardice, or timorous Apostasy, and surrender to the World.

These People undergo at certain Times, strange Drynesses, Desertions, and
Sterilities of Spirit, which are the Torments that compose the most severe and
painful Martyrdoms. A common Death, or any violent Dissolution of the Body, is
but the Recreation, Sport, or Play of Nature, when compared with these
Tremendous, Tragical and Dark Annihilations of the Soul. A Man at such a
Season, seems to be reduced to an Eternal Catastrophe. His Spirit descends, and
is engulph'd in the Abyss of Hell; or Hell comes up to him, and yawning with
its horrid Dragons-Jaws, Murders the Soul with Baneful and Infernal Breath. Yet
this they find to be the only near directest Way to Heaven. This is the
Mystic Fence, the Ditch, Bastion, and Counterscarp of Paradise. He that would
scale the VValls, or enter by the Gates of Eden, must first pass through these
terrible Outworks. This is the straight and narrow Bridge, over which each
Soul must pass that would attain Immortal Life. Moses, Jesus, Mahomet, and all
the Messengers of God, have pointed at this, as the only Way to our supreme
Felicity. Neither was it unknown to the Ancient Poets and Philosophers, among
the Gentiles. Orpheus, and Hesiod, recommended it in their Mysterious Verse.
Empedocles, Theophrastus, Plato, Plotinus, Porphyry, Jamblichus, with many
others, improved the Sacred Revelation, adding new Lights unto the Blessed
Discovery: And if we take the History in a right Sense, unless I am deceived,
Socrates died a Martyr to this Important Truth. Many of the Learned Hebrew
Rabbi's, have asserted it. The Persian and Arabian Doctors, before and since
the Holy Flight, have been its Advocates: And let not Envy refuse to give some
of the Christian Priests their due Acknowledgment, who preached this Doctrine
in the Primitive Assemblies, taught it in the Public Schools, and ensur'd it
to Posterity in Learned Manuscripts. Such were Origin, and Ammonius, Clemens of
Alexandria, Simplicius, Chrysostom, Tertullian Augustine; and in more modern
Times, Thomas of Aquin, Marsilius Ficinus, Bonadventure, with many others: And
it is esteemed the Height of Indian Religion to this Day; the Bramins delivering
it as an Hereditary Article of Faith, and Point of Practice, from Immemorable
Ages. Since therefore all Religions in the World agree in this, notwithstanding
their other Ceremonial and Speculative Differences; Doubtless it is the Voice
and Will of God, not the Contrivance or Innovation of Man.

Reverend Effendi, It is a common Proverb among the Christians, That
wheresoever God has a Temple, the Devil has a Chapel. That cunning Spirit,
like a Serpent, winds himself into outward Forms and Ceremonies of Devotion.
But he that builds a Mosque in the Center of his Soul, may bid Defiance to
Tagot: For that is the Throne of God, near which the Demon cannot approach.

May thou and I, live always Skreen'd behind our Selves; for in that Dark
Recess from Visible Things, the Eternal loves to manifest his otherwise
Invisible Light. Adieu.

Paris, the 17th. of the 6th. Moon, of the Year 1670.
LETTER XII. To Cara Hali, Physician to the Grand Signior.
AFter all my Scepticisms, I at this Hour believe, there is Something of us
remains Immortal, and Incorruptible, when our grosser Bodies are dissolved.
Call it what you will, an Astral Body, a Ghost, a Spirit, or any Thing else,
I Am sensible some Part of us will never die. What signifies the vain Dispute of
Words, the dark Resolves of Plato's Cave? Let it be Substance or Accident,
Matter or Form, or a Result of all; There Is still a certain Portion of our
Nature, against which the Stroke of Death, and of Ten Hundred Thousand Deaths,
can never prevail. We may be changed indeed, and masquerade it up and down,
perhaps, through Infinite Worlds, in so many different Disguises: But we can
never be annihilated, or made Nothing. We cannot be excluded from the Eternal
List of Atoms. The Loss or Absence of the least Particle from the Universe,
would either cause the Loudest never-ending Thunders and Lightnings, or an
Everlasting Silence, Sullenness and Darkness. This mighty Aggregate, and
Stupendous Heap of Beings, would fall to Ruin, if there were the least Vacuum,
or the smallest Mite missing. Steal but the most Indivisible Atom from the
rest, and down comes all the Fabric: For one supports another by an
Inseparable Adhesion, Reciprocal Congruity, and Mathematical Fitness. They are
so cunningly hitch'd and knit together, so closely fastened and indented each
with other, by the Original Art, or Chance which formed the World, that all the
Motions of this Grand Machine would at an instant stop, in such a Case; as does
a Watch, when the least Tooth is missing from any one of the contiguous Wheels.
Every Thing in Nature, is full and pregnant. Neither can there be any other
Emptiness, save what we think we see in Bottles, or other Hollow Vessels; which
when they are void of Water, Wine, or other Liquors, it is but to be crammed
brim-full of Air, which Element insinuates and crowds it self into each
Diminutive Crany, Chink, and Pore of grosser Substances: So if the Airy Atoms
have any Hollownesses in 'em, the smallest Vacancy possible is still supplied
with its full Measure of the purer Ether, and that again, with some Matter
more refined, if any such there be, or else it drinks full Draughts of
Immaterial Essences: and by such a Sub-ordinate Gradation, Humane Souls, though
in themselves, perhaps, pure Incorporeal Spirits, are yet fastened and cemented
to our Bodies. Thus is one Being successively, and Eternally, either a Syringe,
or a Sponge to another. The Elements inebriate one another by Turns; an
Universal Epicurism and Drunkenness Reigns.

So the Hot Stomach of the Earth, parched with Inward Mineral Fires, greedily
guzzles down the very salt unpalatable Lees of the Sea, rather than be adry:
With a Thousand Thousand gaping Throats, it gulps the Beverage which Neptune's
Deep and Mighty Cellar runs withal. It pants, and sucks eternally, the thick
ropy Settlements of the Ocean's Bottom. These are distilled again in hidden
Limbecks, Cylinders, and other Chemical Vessels below, that so the gaping
Channels on the Superficies, may be constantly supplied, with more refined
Liquor, through the Springs and Fountains: And yet the Globe not having
quenched its Thirst with this perpetual Draught, continually sups up the Rain,
a Liquor more sublime and pure than all the rest. But this is only on certain
Holy Days of Fate, when the Celestial Powers, the Planets, Stars, and
Constellations, order a Dunalma for the Vegetable Race Below, to refresh the
Herbs, the Corn, and Trees, with Banquets from the Clouds. Then the Big-belly'd
Tuns above are rolled out of their hidden Storehouses, and broached; the
Conduits of the Upper Region spout and run with plentiful Showers and Cataracts
of Nature's Seminal Juice, the Radical Allchearing Nectar of Heaven. The greedy
Soil imbibes the sacred strong Cascade; each joyful Turf is frolicksome, and
swallows down large Bumpers of the Elemosynary Wine. Whilst the least dry and
crumbling Lump of the late fainting Glebe, has Drops and Supernaculum's enough
to revel on; till party-colored Iris, the Major-Domo in these Yearly
Festivals, perceiving the tender Seeds and Roots are well nigh fuddl'd with
what at Second Hand they have exhausted from the over-laden Ground, makes her
Appearance in the Clouds, inviting all the Guests to a splendid Collation of
warm Beams and Rays, with which the Sun is minded to regale them.

A grateful, soft and cheerful Noise was heard throughout the Room before. The
Earth and Air were in a merry Humor. Well pleased with the Debauch, they would
have sat till Morning at it, being loath to leave their Liquor behind 'em, or
change it for dry Meat. But at the sight of Iris, every one changed
Countenance; an universal Murmur ran throughout the Hall; they were sorry thus
to be balked in the midst of all their Mirth. Till courtly Zephyrs come with
their soft Compliments, and tell 'em, It is necessary for their Ease and
Health: Then are the Tuns, and Bottles removed, with all the drunken Tackle.
The Table soon is spread, and covered with a Rich Course of glittering
Chargers, sent from Phoebus.

That Sponging Planet only lives by Bantering and Wheedles. The Illustrious
Figure he makes in the World, is always borrowed. He never wore a Fashionable
Dress in's Life, but what he took up by Tally from the First Source of Lights:
For which he is bound to pay so vast an Interest, that he would necessarily
become a Bankrupt, did he not repair his broken Fortune, by playing Tricks upon
the Earth. Thus whilst he mocks this Sublunary World, with his pretended
Treats, he makes it pay for all, with costly Exhalations. He plunders the
Elements, picks the Pockets of the Earth, and robs the Treasuries of the Sea:
Nor can he forbear filching something from the Air; and when he has stolen
enough, he slinks away in the Dark, and flies to the other side of the Globe;
there to commence New Shams and Cheats upon the Antipodes. And all the while,
the Stars are full as bad as he: For like a Brave Highway-man, that Luminary
frequents the Public Road of Heaven by Day; he robs in open sight of all the
World, and leaves a generous Viaticum, wherever he borrows any Thing. But the
Stars, those little Bullies of the Sky, are perfect Night-Pads, Shop-lifts, and
Sharpers; they skulk about in the Dark, through all the private Alleys of the
Firmament, and commit a Thousand Murders, Rapes, and other Violences. Some of
their Aspects are as venomous as the Fatal Eyes of Basilisks; they carry diverse
Kinds of Mortal Poisons in their Looks, which they disperse at Random in this
lower World. They strew the Earth with Hemlocks, Aconites, and other baneful
Weeds. They also scatter up and down, the more contagious Seeds of Envy,
Avarice, and a Thousand black Infernal Vices, which take Root in Humane Souls,
at our Nativities; and growing up with us, in time bring forth the fatal Fruits
of Death. The ugly Race of Dragons, Serpents, Crocodiles, and all the Reptile
Generations, with every Thing that is Hideous, Cruel, and Destructive on the
Globe, derive their Natures, Qualities, Forms, and Dispositions from some
Malignant Stars or Constellations, if Astrologers say true. So do the Scaly
Monsters of the Vast Abyss; and every Bird of Horrible Figure flying in the
Air. They Are all the Brood, the Emissaries, Spies, and Agents of the Powers
Above, sent down on Thievish Errands, to prey on other Animals, more innocent
than themselves.

There is an Eternal Chase in Nature, whilst every thing is either on the Hunt
or Flight. Thus Heaven purloins from Earth, and that from Heaven again. When we
are first conceived, our wandering Souls are caught, as in a well-baited Trap.
And when we dye, it is but the Soul's Escape from One Snare to be soon trapann'd
into Another. Perhaps a Humane Body may be our Prison again, or we may be
attracted by some more agreeable Embryo. This Magnetic Star may draw us up to
Heaven, or the wide Jaws of all-devouring Orcus, may swallow us down into the
Hungry Paunch of Hell; which God avert.

Learned Hali, let not thou and I, be too sollicitous about these Things: For
all our Timorous Forecasts are in vain. But, considering the secret Magnetisms
dispersed throughout the Universe, and that every Thing attracts its Like, let
us take care to qualify our selves with Celestial Habits and Dispositions; and
then we cannot fail of being drawn up to Paradise.

Paris, 2d. of the 9th. Moon, of the Year 1671.
LETTER XIII. To the Mufti.
IN Obedience to thy Commands, I shall now proceed in relating the most
Memorable Transactions of Former Ages, during the Four Great Monarchies,
observing thy Instructions not to be prolix, or overcurious in tracing down
the particular Successions of Kings and Princes; but rather to relate the
Actions of Famous Men, the Wise Sayings of the Ancients, with such other
Remarks, as may be at once Delightful and Instructive.

'Twill be no Breach of this Rule, to begin where I left off in my Former
Letter, with the Death of Darius, and Succession of Xerxes his Younger Son,
there being something of Nicety in the Plea between him and his Elder Brother
Artabazanes for the Crown: For this laid Claim to it on the Account of his
Primogeniture: But in regard he was born before Darius was made King, the
Succession was determined in favor of Xerxes, who had a Double Advantage, in
being begot by a Crowned King, and born of Atosh, the Daughter of Cyrus, who
first Established this Monarchy.

As soon as Xerxes was settled in the Throne, he lead an Army into Egypt, and
suppressed the Insurrections in that Country. Then he fitted out a Fleet of
4200 Ships, on Board of which were above Five hundred thousand Men. He had a
Land Army also, consisting of Two Millions, and Five hundred thousand Soldiers
of several Nations. With this vast Multitude he marched against the Graecians;
and to facilitate the Voyage of his Fleet, he caused one Part of his Army to
dig a Passage through Mount Athos, whereby the Sea was let in, and the Ships
might sail Two a-brest; whilst another Part of the Soldiers, were employed in
building a Bridge of Boats over the Hellespont. No sooner was this done, but
there arose a vehement Tempest; which so discomposed those Narrow Seas, that
between the Winds and Waves, the Boats which made this Bridge, were all
dispersed, broken, and cast away.

This so incensed Xerxes, that he commanded the Sea to be scourged with Whips,
and a Chain to be thrown into it, as a Mark of its future Subjection. He also
Beheaded those who built the Bridge, and caused others to make a new One.

Here one of Xerxes's Eunuchs, and a Particular Favorite of the King, sent for
a Grecian of the Isle of Chios, who had formerly deprived him of the Evidences
of his Virility. And the Old Man coming with his Sons to wait on this great
Courtier, the Eunuch caused him first to Castrate his own Sons, and afterward
forced them to do the same by their Father, in revenge of his own Loss, and
Disgrace.

From hence Xerxes marching with his Army by the Place where once stood the
Famous Town of Troy, went in Pilgrimage to the Tomb of King Priamus, where he
sacrificed Ten Hecatombs of Oxen, to the Ghosts of the Ancient Heroes, and to
the Divinity of the River Scamander, which his Soldiers drank dry, and yet half
of them had not quenched their Thirst.

After this, he came to the Hellespont, where taking a Survey of all his Land
and Sea-Forces, which covered the Hellespont, and all the Neighboring Shores;
and Contemplating the Shortness of Man's Life, and that of so Innumerable a
Multitude, not one should be alive at an Hundred Years End, he Wept bitterly.

Then having sacrificed to the Sun, for the good Success of his Expedition, he
caused all his Army to pass over the Hellespont by his Bridge of Boats; after
which they drank their Way through another River, which had not Water enough to
satisfy half his Men and Cattle: For his Army increased all the Way, by the
Accession of Soldiers out of every Nation through which he passed. Yet
Leonidas, King of Sparta, with a small Body of 4000 Lacedaemonians, gave Battle
to the whole Army of Xerxes. And in a Sea Fight at Salamis, the Persians lost
500 Ships, with a considerable Part of their Army; which, with other Disasters
of Sickness, Famine, etc. so terrified this Great Monarch, that he posted back
again, as fast as he could, by the Way of the Hellespont, which he crossed in a
poor Fisher-Boat all alone, leaving Mardonius to pursue the Wars in Greece. But
an ill Fate attended their Arms; for at Platea, the Graecians set upon them
under Pausanias their General, and routed the whole Army, Killing above Two
hundred thousand of them upon the Spot, and Burning their Camp, and Navy.

Xerxes hearing these ill Tidings, fled toward his own Country, and by the Way
set Fire to the Temples of the Gods at Babylon, and other Parts of Asia,
sparing none but that Magnificent Fane at Ephesus, which was Renowned
throughout the whole World.

About this Time dyed Pagapates, the faithful Eunuch of Darius, who had passed
Seven whole Years Mourning at the Tomb of his Master.

I must not omit the Treachery of Pausanias, the Lacedaemonian General, who
held a Private Correspondence with Xerxes. And having been Twice accused of
Treason, and as often acquitted, was the Third time discovered by a Boy whom he
kept as his Minion; and, by the Sentence of the Ephori, was starved to Death.

Thou have forbidden me to augment the Bulk of these Historical Letters, with
Glosses, or Remarks of my own, or else it were a proper Occasion to put thy
Holiness in Mind, how great a Value ought to be set on a Faithful Man, and let
Nature it self plead my Excuse for entrenching on thy Orders; whilst I
vindicate my self from the Calumnies of the Envious, and beg of thee to rest
assured, That no Man on Earth can be truer to his Trust, than the Arabian Slave
Mahmut.

But to return to Xerxes, He was Unfaithfully dealt with by the Captain of his
Guard; who, by the Assistance of Spamitres the King's Chamberlain, and Seven
other Conspirators, killed him in his Bed with his Eldest Son Darius, and
crowned Artaxerxes in his stead.

To him fled Themistocles the Athenian, who was suspected a Partner in the
Treason of Pausanias. The King received him into his Favor, and made him
Governor of a Province, adding the Gift of Five Great Cities, to furnish him
with Money for the Expenses of his Table and Wardrobe. And this the King did,
not as a Reward or Encouragement of Treason, (from which he knew Themistocles
was free, being falsely accused by the Athenians) but he heaped those Honors on
him, as a Debt to the Merits of that once Illustrious Enemy, now become a
Friend, and seeking shelter in the Persian Kingdom, from the Barbarous
Ingratitude of his own Countrymen; who, for all his Eminent Services to
Greece, could think of no better Acknowledgement, than to put to death as a
Traitor, the Bravest and Wisest Captain of that Age.

Not long after this, the Persians lost 200 Ships in a Sea Fight with the
Graecians, and were routed at Land by a Stratagem of Cimon, the Grecian
General, who, after the Naval Victory, put his Men aboard the Persian Vessels
which he had taken, and apparelling them in the Garments of the Persian
Captives, landed them near the Enemies Camp in Pamphylia; who taking them for
Friends, suffered them to enter their Trenches without Jealousy, and so were
all slaughtered, except a few who escaped by the swiftness of their Horses.

About that Time, Pericles was made Prince of Athens, of whom I made mention in
my former Letters. And Themistocles being made General of the Persian Army, and
sent against the Graecians; rather than fight against his Country, or betray
the Cause of his New Master, became a Voluntary Victim to his own Integrity and
Honor: For, sacrificing a Bull in his March, he drank off a Bowl of the Blood,
and fell down Dead at the Foot of the Altar.

The next War the Persians were engaged in, was with Egypt; where, in a Battle
near Memphis, they lost a Hundred thousand Men. But sending fresh Recruits,
they dried up the River Nile, where the Athenian Fleet, Confederate with the
Egyptians, lay at Anchor. Which so amazed the Egyptians, that they made their
Peace with them: And the Athenians set their own Ships on Fire, in Number 200,
and returned Home with Disgrace, when they had been Six Years in Egypt. After
this, a Peace was concluded between the Persians and those of Greece. And in
the First Year of the 84th. Olympiad, which soon followed, there was an
Universal Peace throughout the World, which continued till the First Year of
the 87th. Olympiad, at what time began the Peloponnesian War.

In the 4th. Year of the 88th. Olympiad, Artaxerxes dyed, and his Son Xerxes
was Invested with the Crown. But at a Years End, being overcome with Wine, and
falling asleep in a Place where no Guard was kept, his Brother Secundianus,
with the Help of an Eunuch, murdered him, and took the Government on himself.
He also, was soon after dispatched by his Brother Darius.

I overrun whole Olympiads, without mentioning any Thing, save the
Transactions which made most Noise in those Times. But I am unwilling to slip
the Reign of any King, though I speak but Two Words of it, that so thou may
have a perfect Idea of their Succession.

During the whole Series of Darius's Reign, History mentions nothing
Remarkable, but is taken up in relating the little Quarrels, and
Reconciliations of several Provinces in Greece, some Private Treaties between
the Persian Governors of Lesser Asia and those of Peloponnesus, and the
Overtures of Peace between the Lacedaemonians and Persians, the End of the
Peloponnesian War, with such other Passages, as would be too tedious for a
Letter.

I will only rehearse a Memorable Saying of Darius, on his Deathbed, to his
Eldest Son Artaxerxes, who was to succeed him in the Throne. The Prince being
assured by the Royal Physicians, That his Father's End drew near, thus
addressed Darius: "My Father, since it is the Will of the Gods to take you from
Earth into their own Blessed Society, and that you have been pleased, with the
Consent of the Nobles, to declare me your Successor in the Kingdom; tell me, I
beseech you, by what Methods of Policy you have Governed this Empire these
Nineteen Years, that so I may follow your Example." 'To whom the King Replied;
"My Son, be assured, That if my Reign has been blessed with greater Success and
Peace than those of my Predecessors, it is because in all Things I have Honored
the Immortal Gods, and done Justice to every Man."

As soon as Artaxerxes was possessed of the Crown, he sent for his Brother
Cyrus; and put him in Manacles of Gold, with Design to make him privately away;
but at the Intercession of his Mother, he released him again, and restored him
to his Government of Lydia.

About this time, Plato the Philosopher being very Young, gave an early
Specimen of a ripe Wit, in Comforting Antimachus the Poet, who lost the Garland
in a Contest with Niceratus, at the Lysandrian Feast. For when he beheld the
Poet extremely vexed at the Ignorance and Partiality of Lysander, who knew not
how to distinguish between his lofty Measures, and the flat Rhimes of his
Antagonist, Plato bid him be of good Courage: For, said he, his Ignorance no
more diminishes thy Knowledge, than a Blind Man's mistaking thee for another,
would deprive thee of thy Sight.

When Cyrus was returned to his Government, he plotted to depose his Brother:
And to win Lysander to his Party, he presented him with a Ship built all of
Gold and Ivory. Alcibiades, the Famous Athenian Captain perceiving this,
designed to give Artaxerxes notice of his Brother's Treason; but by the Way he
was murdered himself by some Soldiers hired for that Purpose by Lysander, who
yet durst not set upon him in the Daytime, when he was armed in his own
Defense, but in the Night set his House on Fire; and as he was escaping through
the Flames and Smoke, they lying in Ambush, shot him dead with Arrows.

However, Artaxerxes quickly became sensible of his Brothers Designs; and
raising an Army of Nine hundred thousand Men, gave him Battle not far from
Babylon. In the Fight he was wounded by Cyrus; but after a hot Dispute, Cyrus
was killed, and Artaxerxes got the Victory.

Parisatis, the Mother of Cyrus, to revenge the Death of her Son, caused those
that wounded him, to be killed with lingering Torment: And inviting Queen
Statyra, the Wife of Artaxerxes, to a Feast, she divided the Bird Rhindaces
asunder with a Knife poisoned on one side, and gave the Envenomed Part to
Statyra, eating the other her self. Upon which, the Queen died in horrible
Anguish and Torture.

The famous Deeds of many Heroes, are also Recorded, during the Reign of this
Artaxerxes; as of Agesilaus, King of the Spartans; Iphicrates, Pharnabazus,
Tissaphenes, and Tizibazus, Persians; with Conon the Athenian. But fearing to
entrench on thy Patience, I content my self with only mentioning their Names,
and so finish my Letter with the Conclusion of Artaxerxes his Life, who died of
Grief for the Death of his Son Arsames, whom Ochus his Brother had caused to be
Murdered out of Envy and Jealousy, because his Father doted on him.

If I have not answered thy Expectation in this Letter, blame not me, but the
Historians, from whom I have collected these Passages, or accuse the Men of
that Age, that they did not perform Greater Actions However, in the next thou
shall hear of the Birth and Life of a Great Prophet, even Alexander, the
Conqueror of all Asia. In the mean time, I plunge my Self in the Idea's of the
Dust thou treadest on, and shrinking into an Abstract of Humility, I bid thee
Adieu.

Paris, 2d. of the 9th. Moon, of the Year 1671.
The End of the THIRD BOOK.
LETTERS Writ by A Spy at PARIS.
VOL. VII. BOOK IV.
LETTER I. To Pesteli Hali, his Brother, Master of the Customs, and
Superintendant of the Arsenal at Constantinople.
I Know not well, whether it is my Part to be sorry or glad, when I hear thy
Son is Wild and Prodigal: That he is Amorous, and very much addicted to Frolic
with Women, Wine, and Music; That he frequents the Bathes and Play Houses, on
purpose to make some Interest for his Love, that he may sometimes get a sight
of Beautiful Ladies, and have the Pleasure of being admitted into their
Company; That he haunts the Society of Foreign Merchants, the Houses of
Christian Ambassadors, and insinuates himself into the Acquaintance and
Familiarity of all Travelers, who make any Figure in the Imperial City.

I protest, it seems difficult in my Opinion, to determine whether thou thy
self have Reason to be grieved at all this, or not rather to rejoice, as at a
Presage of his future good Fortune; since it is a manifest Argument of the
Greatness of his Soul: And, let that alone to work out its own Way to
Happiness. Never check a Generous Spirit: For such are full of the Divinity.
They are the Eagles, the Lions, the Kings and Princes of the Earth. Their Veins
flow with Sacred Blood; their Nerves strut with the Milk of Paradise. A
Thousand Excellencies possess their Hearts, and Ten Thousand Perfections take
Root in their Brains. Whatever of Precious is scattered up and down in the
Elements, meets in their Accomplished Nature, as in an Epitome, or rich
Compendium of the Brightest Essences; an Extract of all that is Valuable, Good,
and Lovely in the Universe.

Be not discouraged to see thy Son Amorous of Women. It Is a Sign of a good
Nature; and he is looked upon as a Monster, or degenerate Person, who feels no
Warmths or Passions for that lovely Sex. Women are sent into the World on
purpose to blow up those gentle Flames within our Breasts, which sublimate our
grosser Mold, and make us more refined. Love is a sacred Frenzy of the Soul,
a Divine Madness, elevating a Man up to the Pitch of a Santone, and rendering
him the Care of the Benigner Demons. He is every where safe; having the Favor
of Gods and Men, as the Roman Poet expresses it: Quisquis Amore tenetur, eat
tutusque sacerque.
And had it not been for thy own Experience of this Noble Passion, thou had
not had a Son to complain of.

Perhaps it makes him expensive and costly in his manner of living. He would,
no doubt, appear Gay and Polite in the Eyes of his Mistresses: He would be
Generous and Magnificent in his Entertainments; Liberal to his Friends and
Acquaintance; Charitable to all Persons in Distress. And can thou really
blame him for putting in Practice so many Amiable Virtues? Is not this better
than to see him of a sneaking, sordid Temper, addicted to Avarice, and other
Ignoble Vices? Remember thy own Genius, when thou were Young; what a passionate
Delight thou took'st in Traveling? Yet, this could not be maintained without
great Charges. Consider therefore, that it is thy own Blood, running in the
Veins of thy Son, which prompts him to a Noble Way of living. And do not thou
imitate those Fathers, who by their Severity, teach their Children to
degenerate, instead of making them better, or more reformed. They frighten them
from the Paths of innate Virtue, for the Lucre of their Gold, and take
Abundance of Pains to instruct them in the Methods of Covetousness; as if that
alone were the Zenith of Wisdom and Virtue, whereas it is in Truth, the very
Sink and Seminary of all Vice.

I will relate to thee a Story which I have heard in Paris, which has something
in it very Singular and Remarkable, concerning the Affection and Care of a
Father toward his Extravagant and Prodigal Son. This old Gentleman had a fair
Seat about ten Leagues from this City, which had belonged to his Family for the
space of Five Hundred Years. His Yearly Revenue was very considerable; and
having only one Son, he gave him the Liberty of managing Half his Estate, when
he came to the Age of One and Twenty Years.

This young Spark being of a High Spirit, was so far from harboring any
Thoughts of Frugality, that he could hardly brook the Necessity of living
within the Compass of his Allowance. He addicted himself to Gaming, Drinking,
and other lewd Courses, which in a short Time consumed his Means, and reduced
him to great Streights.

About the same Time his Father dyed, and left him the Remainder of his Estate,
giving him all the Instructions that are usual in such Cases; and among the
Rest of his Sage Counsels, he charged him, If it should be his Misfortune to
become a Bankrupt again, so as to be forced to sell his Estate, that he would
at least not part with that House which had been so long in the Possession of
their Family: Especially he conjured him to reserve one particular Chamber for
himself as long as he lived, which was the same where he then lay a-dying. For
this, said he, will be a Sanctuary for you, when you have no other Place of
Refuge in the World.

After the Old Man's Decease, his Son fell to his former Course of Life; and,
to make short of it, in a few Years spent all his Patrimony; even that very
House it self, which he was forced to sell at last for an under-price, to
supply his present Necessities. However, he obeyed his Father's last
Injunction; and in the Sale of the House, made Articles for the perpetual Claim
and Use of that Chamber to himself.

It was not long before he had consumed the Money which he received for the
House: So that now his last Support was gone. He tried to borrow some of his
Friends and Acquaintance: And in Charity they supplied him at first with small
Sums: But when he often pressed them, they grew weary of him, and denied to
part with any more.

The disconsolate Gentleman, overwhelmed with Grief and Melancholy, returns to
his Chamber, hoping to find some Ease in that private Recess; where he might at
least have the Privilege of venting his Sorrow in Sighs and Tears.

He passed away some time in this dejected Condition, when at length he cast
his Eyes on an old Trunk which stood in a corner of the Chamber, and which he
had scarce ever regarded before. An odd Curiosity prompted him to rise and look
into this Trunk, perhaps not so much in Hopes of finding any Relief there, as
to divert himself and pass away the tedious Minutes. And yet it is Natural for
People in great Calamities and Misfortunes, to flatter themselves with the
Imagination of unexpected Reliefs, and to catch at every the least Glimpse or
Shadow, that seems to presage any Good. Be it how it will, he fell to rifling
the Trunk, but found nothing, save a Parcel of Old Rags and Papers, with other
Remnants and Fragments of Silk, Linen, and Velvet, the Relics and Spoils of
his Father's Wardrobe. This was no Booty for him: However, he ceased not his
Scrutiny, till he had quite emptied the Trunk. When to his no small
Astonishment he found these Words on the Bottom: Ah Prodigal! have thou spent
All, and sold thy House? Now go and hang thy self. There is a Rope ready
provided for thee in the Beam of the Chamber.

The Young Gentleman looking up to the Cieling, and seeing a Halter hang there,
being fastened to an Iron Ring, was struck with such a Damp, that concluding it
was the Will of Fate, that he should fulfill the Words he found on the Bottom
of the Trunk; he immediately took a Chair, or Stool, and placing it just under
the Rope, got up and raised himself upon it, that so he might the better reach
the designed Instrument of his Death.

He stood not long musing: For Life appeared now Insupportable to him.
Wherefore putting the Halter about his Neck, in the Height of Despair, he
kicked the Stool away. When behold, instead of hanging there, he fell to the
Ground, the weighty Swing of his Body having pulled out a Piece of square
Timber from the Beam, being that Part to which the Ring was fastened.
Immediately he was like to be overwhelmed, and buried alive in a great Heap of
Gold, which came showring down upon him out of the Hollow Place, which his
Father had contrived on Purpose in the Beam, to put this Kind Sarcasm on his
Son, now sufficiently mortified by so many Sorrows.

In a word, this made so deep an Impression on him, that he grew reformed,
buying all his Estate back again with Part of the Money; and employing the Rest
in Merchandising, grew to be a Richer Man than his Father, or any of his
Progenitors.

Dear Pesteli, thy Son is Generous and Witty: It is thy Part to reclaim him by
Methods agreeable to his Nature. For Ruggedness and Austerity, will make him
but the worse.

Paris, 5th. of the 11th. Moon, of the Year, 1671.
LETTER II. To Codorafrad Cheick, a Man of the Law.
HEre has happened an Accident of late, which testifies the Zeal of the French
for their Religion, as well as it discovers the Rash and Unwarrantable Fury of
a Bigoted Desperado. This Person was one of that Sect they call Huguenots, of
whom there are great Multitudes in France; and they are Diametrically Opposite
to those of the Roman Faith in their Principles, and the Manner of Worshipping
God; yet are tolerated by the State, to prevent the Inconveniences of a Civil
War, and the Effusion of Humane Blood. The King choosing rather by Clemency to
win them to his Party, than by a severe Execution of the Laws in Force against
them, to compel their Consciences in Matters relating to God.

Yet many Men are of Opinion, That this Royal Condescension will not have its
desired Effect, upon a Stubborn and Ungrateful sort of People; who instead of
being obliged to Fidelity and Obedience by such Indulgent Favors, are apt to
interpret them as Arguments of the King's Impotence and Disability to punish
those that resist his Authority, and to harden themselves the more in their
Factious Insolence: As it will appear by what I am going to relate of a certain
Religious Furioso, a Huguenot by Profession. This Fellow coming one Day into
the Great Temple in Paris, which they call Nostre Dame, makes up directly
toward the Priest who was celebrating the Mass; and waiting a convenient Season
to execute his Purpose, just as the Priest was elevating that which they esteem
the Sacramental Body of Jesus, the Messiah, above his Head, according to
Custom, that it might be Adored by all the Congregation; this Ruffian steps to
him, and striking the Wafer out of his Hand, trampled it under Foot, and then
assassinated the Priest with his Dagger.

The whole Assembly were astonished at such an unexampl'd Attempt. They stood
still like Statues for a while, and suffered the Villain to pass through the
Throng, till he came to the very Gate of the Temple: When beginning to rouse
out of their Stupefaction, some run after him, and so he was siez'd, and
carried before the next Cadi, or Judge of Criminal Causes, who condemned him to
have his Right Hand first cut off before the Gate of the same Temple, where he
had been guilty of this Assassine and Profanation, and his Body presently
afterward to be burnt alive. Which was accordingly executed.

But not thinking this a sufficient Expiation of the Dishonor done to God, the
Archbishop of Paris commanded Public Prayers to be made which they call the
Oraisons of Forty Hours. He appointed also a Solemn Procession of all the
Clergy to the Temple of Nostre Dame, to cleanse it from the Defilement (which,
according to their Belief) it had contracted by this Impious Action. The
Sovereign Companies of the City likewise, attended these Ceremonies in their
Robes of Honor, to testify their Devotion.

Thou will not conclude me an Infidel, or say that I undertake the Patronage of
the Roman Religion, if I condemn this Fellow as a Martyr to his own Presumption
and Arrogance. The Romans and Huguenots are all alike to me, so long as they
are equally Enenemies to the Messenger of God. But it is not decent or wise,
neither Good Manners nor Policy to affront the Established Religion of the
Country where a Man lives. 'Twas sufficient that this Ruffian, and all his
Brethren, had the Liberty of serving God after their own Way. It was an
unpardonable Immorality to disturb the lawful Priests of the Nation, especially
in so barbarous a Manner, in the very Height of their Mysteries, the midst of
their Daily Sacrifice at the Altar of their God; where they profess to immolate
after a transcendant Manner, no less than the Body and Blood of the Messiah,

Doubtless, all Nations are Zealous for their Religion, and we Mussulmans
should not scruple to put to Death a Headstrong Giafer, who would presume but
to pollute our Sacred Mosques by his Uncircumcised Presence; much less should
we spare him, if he attempted to offer any Violence to a True Believer, as he
was Adoring the Eternal Unity, after the way observed by our Fathers, and
commanded by the Prophet. And though these Nazarenes are Worshippers of Images
and Pictures; though they Adore that, which to all outward Appearance is but a
Piece of Bread; yet the Precept of Moses ought to be regarded, which says, Ye
shall not Blaspheme the Gods of the Nations whither ye go to dwell.

Venerable Successor of Moses and the Prophets, vouchsafe to pray for Mahmut,
that whilst he dwells among these Infidels, he may neither make Shipwreck of
his Faith, by embracing their Vanities, nor yet forfeit his Discretion by any
Rude, Unseemly, or Violent Carriage against them.

Paris, 23d. of the 12th. Moon, of the Year 1671.
LETTER III. To Dgnet Oglou.
THere are a sort of Men among the Nazarene Ecclesiastics, whom they call
Casuists. These are profoundly Versed in the Learning of the Schools, which (if
thou remembrest) Honest Father Antonio, the Old Sicilian Priest, our Friend,
used to term The Science of Husks. A dry, chaffy Sort of Knowledge, consisting
only of empty, vapid Notions, windy Idea's, Distinctions made in Sand, which
may be effaced, altered, or formed at Pleasure. The very Contemplation of these
Metaphysical Trifles, is enough to put one in a Fever; so subtle is the Poison
they contain: a spiritual Venom, which darts like Lightning through ones
Thoughts, and soon ferments the Soul, boiling our Reason up, to Scum and Froth
it self away in Divine Jargon, and Religious Nonsense.

These Men will spilt a Hair in Divinity, to make a Scruple, or to disannull
it. They raise a Dust in the Eyes of those that give Heed to them, and play
fast and loose with Humane Reason, as it serves a Turn. They Will make a Hog of a
Cushion, and turn an Elephant into a Coffee-Dish, with their enchanting
Haecceities, Identities, Quatenus's, and the Rest of their Learned Legerdemain,
the perfect Hocus-Pocus of the Sorbonne, by which they juggle Men out of their
Senses, and frame Chimaera's far more Monstrous than those in the Fictions of
Ovid, or the more Early and Mysterious Poems of Musaeus, Orpheus, and Hesiod.
They teach Men to stumble at a Feather in the way of a Religious Life, yet not
to boggle at a Millstone or a Mountain, where Interest calls for Resolution and
Speed. They start more Difficulties than themselves can answer in the Cases of
the Poor: But where Plenty of Gold appears, every Thing is made easy and
plain. Mere Higglers in Religion; Quacks and Empiricks in Matters of
Conscience; murdering a Thousand Distempered Souls, for one they Cure:
Pretending to be Guides to Paradise, they lead Men through uncouth Paths, and
intricate windings, till they are lost in Labyrinths of Error, bordering on the
Confines of Hell. And then they leave 'em to themselves; where, if they make
One false Step, they go out of their Bounds, trespass on the Devil's Frontiers,
and so are either in Danger of a Precipice, or at least of being taken
Captives, by the out-lying Scouts of the Infernal Kingdom, from whom it is
difficult to escape.

There were such as these also among the Jews and Gentiles of Old, and so there
are at this Day, in all Religions, Men who are severe in Punctilio's, and
neglect the more Important Precepts of the Law. Nor can the Mussulmans
themselves be free from this Embarassment of the Faith and Truth brought down
from Heaven.

If thou observest the grave and supercilious Looks of our Imaum's, Mollah's,
Cadi's, etc. Thou Wilt take 'em for the Justest Men, the Holiest Saints on Earth.
Mark but their Discourse, it is an Abridgement of the Alcoran. They Are seen each
Morning at the First Hour of Public Prayer, walking before the Mosques, or
sitting in the Royal Coemeteries, under some Melancholy Cypress, reading the
Book of Assonah, or some other Spiritual Treatise. With Eyes cast up to Heaven,
or humbly fixed upon the Ground, and Minick Postures of their Hands, they act
Devotion to the Life: Yet, in their Hearts, perhaps, are studying how to
Circumvent their Neighbor.

Go to these Persons for Instruction in any doubtful Case: They Will hamper thee
with far-fetched Terms and crabbed Problems: With formal Aspects, and tedious
Circumlocutions, stroaking their Beards, and sighing from Deceitful Breasts,
they will Industriously amuse thy Soul with Dark Aenigma's, and trapan thy Sense
in Snares of Insignificant and Untelligible Words; striving to make thee
believe, they are the Pick-Locks of the Eternal Cabinet, if not the
Privy-Counsellors of Heaven: Whereas, the way of Piety is plain, and
circumscribed with certain noted Boundaries. It Is hard indeed for a bewildered
Traveller, to find the Narrow Gate and First Avenue of this Sacred Path,
amongst so many Gorgeous, Glittering Portals, ever standing open, and inviting
Men into the spacious Fields of Vice. But when he has once entered the obscurer
Pass, he has nothing else to do, but go directly on, without turning to the
Right Hand or the Left; only regarding the fixed Landmarks of Eternal Truth,
invariable Reason, and sound Morality. To speak plainly, A Man's Duty is
comprehended in a few easy Rules: And he that goes to render 'em difficult, by
knotty, thorny Glosses, throws Stumbling Blocks before the Feet of True
Believers, and interrupts their Pilgrimage to Heaven.

My Friend, if any Pious Scruples trouble thee or me, let us henceforth be our
own Casuists; and not by blind implicit Faith, enslave our Souls to Men
perhaps more Ignorant than our Selves. The Law is plain and positive, in
necessary Matters. What need we seek to entangle our Selves with more?

If we perform our Oraisons at the appointed Hours, What matter is it whether
we observe the Six Traditionary Postures, or no? We that are Illuminated, I
only speak of such. As for the Phlegmatic, Dull Multitude, it is fit they
should be curbed with Discipline, and made to observe the nice Punctilio's of
Obedience. What signifies the old Versatile Turn of the Head, from one side to
the other, as if we thought to catch the Prophet peeping over our Shoulders?
Or, Where Is the Sense of the profounder Mystery, of poring on our Fingers with
extended Palms, as if we were at School, and learning our Alphabet; or imitated
the clownish Rusticks of Armenia, who as they work in the Fields and Vineyards,
will make a Dyal of their Hand, a Gnomon of a Straw, and lose an Hour in
steadfast gazing on their dirty Fists, to know what Time of Day it is? Then the
Mysterious Resting of our Hands upon our Knees, with other Formal Ceremonies;
What are they all, but an External Discipline, confirmed by Ancient Custom,
and observed for Order's Sake? This need not trouble thee or me, when ever we
have Occasion to retrench such Indifferent Niceties.

Nay, to go farther; if we should neglect the stated Periods of Solemn
Adoration, compelled thereto by Sickness, Traveling, or any other Necessity;
Be not disconsolate, as if thou had been guilty of a Mortal Sin. Some
supererogating Work of Charity, will cancel Ten such Faults as that: Or at
least, thou may look boldly in the Face of God, when at another Season, on
thy Knees, thou make ample Compensation; Or by sacred Abstinence and Fasting,
dispersest all the Mists and Clouds of Guilt, that sat so heavy on thy Soul.
The Times are all alike to him who is Eternal. There Is no Distinction of Day or
Night, with that Immortal Essence, who made the Sun and Stars, and is himself
the unchangeable Source of Light.

So, if we should address our Selves to Heaven, without the usual Forms of
Prayer, or any words at all; we have no Reason to be sad, as if our Oraisons
were Ineffectual and Unheard. In the Eternal High Recess, our silent Vows and
softest VVhispers of the Soul, Echo as loud as the most bold and noisy Clamor
of the Tongue. There is a Rank of Spirits among the Rest Above, on purpose made
to waft the Secret Thoughts of Mortal Men to Heaven. We cannot fail of Audience
there, when ever we send the least Ejaculation up, with firm Credentials, from
the Heart.

In a word, believe my Dgnet, That the Supremely Intelligent and Wise, chiefly
regards the Intention and Fervor of our Minds, the Habitual Bent of our Souls,
with the Innocent and Pious Actions of our Lives. He is not to be moved (unless
to Indignation) by the vain Tautologies of our Verbal Oraisons, the nauseating
Crambe of devoutest Words, common to Hypocrites and Persons of Sincerity, to
the most Incorrigible Sinners, and the Greatest Saints. The humble Silence of a
Heart resigned to Destiny, is a Pacifick Sacrifice, attoning for the greatest
Sins, attracting choicest Favors, Smiles and Benedictions from the Eternal.
This is the Discipline of Sacred Love; the Rule of perfect Life, the Secret
Chart of the Elect, whereby they steer their Course to Paradise.

Which of the Prophets was a formal Beadsman, to number out his Oraisons at
Finger's End, and offer up to God a short and vain Retail of Words, in
Recompense of Infinite Bounties Past, and in Hopes of more to Come?

When Mahomet was pursued by cruel Infidels, and forced to make the
Wilderness his Sanctuary, and hide himself within the Hollow of an Aged Oak,
He did not seek to amuse the Eternal with studied Forms of Speech and Humane
Eloquence, or tire the Immortal Ears with a Religious long Harangue; as if he
thought to ensnare the General Mercy of the Holy One, in Trains of Artificial
and Elaborate Language, or catch his more particular Indulgence, in a Trap of
Subtle Rhetoric. The harmless Saint, with Heart and Face, composed with
Selfdenying Thoughts and Looks, stood like a Statue in the Blessed Asylum:
Whilst gentle Rivolets of Compassionate Tears trill'd down his Cheeks, His
Soul was pierced with Sacred Pity to his Enemies. He sighed, and wished, in
short, whatever Blameless Piety could suggest for him and them. Angels
immediately carried the Prophetic Vows to Heaven. His silent passionate Prayer
was heard. The Cruel Persecutors, blinded with Impious Fury, rushed into the
Desert; they sp^ad themselves abroad and rode at large: One Traitor spurred his
Horse through thickest VVebs of low entangl'd Thorns and Underwoods, greedy of
the Royal and Majestic Prey; whilst others took the open Paths, hoping to
overtake the Prophet on the Flight. They seemed to swim or fly, rather than
ride, such was the Swiftness of their Course. Fierce was the Cry, re-eccho'd
from the Hollows of the Rocks, and Valleys, [Mecca, for the Head of Mahomet.]
Some stumbled at the out-creeping Roots of Trees, and broke a Leg or Arm, by a
Precipitate Fall from off their Beasts; whilst others had their Eyes struck
Blind by Interfering Twigs. One had his Turbant rudely brushed off, and Scalp
severely shaved, by broken Stumps of Boughs, and Rows of Knotty Branches,
placed and bent down by Fate, on Purpose to revenge the Apostle's Cause on such
a Miscreant as this. Another could not curb his Horse from jumping down into a
deep blind Quarrey, dugg in the midst of the VVood, where the proud Heretic
dashed his Skull and Brains upon the Marble Pavement at the Bottom. So Sensible
and Vindictive are Inanimate Creatures, when a Good Man, a Saint, a Friend of
God is wronged. The very Stocks and Stones, and all the Elements are touched
with Sacred Sympathies at such a Time. The Frame of Nature feels strange tender
Passions, Fits, and Qualms of Amorous Regard: And God himself, if I may so
express my self, is rowz'd as from a Trance, and snatching up the Weapons of
his Power and Wrath, runs like a Champion to defend the Cause of injured
Innocence.

But, I forget that I am writing a Letter, and therefore ought to be Brief.
Besides, what I have said, is sufficient to convince thee, That I have an Idea
of Religion, far different from that which the Casuists, whether Mussulmans or
Christians, would Imprint in Men's Minds.

If thou can not think as I do, I condemn thee not. Use thy Native Freedom;
but remember, That though Men's Reasons and Opinions vary as do their Faces; yet
Truth is Homogeneous, Uniform, and ever of the same Complexion, in all Ages and
Nations.

Paris, the 1st. of the 2d. Moon, of the Year 1672.
LETTER IV. To the Kaimacham.
THE King of France has lately made a League with the King of England.
VVhereupon the People, by way of Proverb, say, That Mars and Jupiter are now in
Conjunction: Reflecting thereby on the different Tempers of these Two Princes.
The One, Debonaire and Jovial, Excessively addicted to Women and Wine, yet
not forgetting or declining Martial Affairs, when his Honor or Interest
invites him to take up Arms: The Other seeming wholly taken up with the
Thoughts of Conquest, and enlarging his Dominions; yet sparing some Time for
the Enjoyment of Himself, and Prosecution of his Amors.

However, both of them now have proclaimed Open War against the Hollanders, by
Sea and Land. The King of Sweden, who was before an Allie of the Dutch, has of
late declared himself a Neuter. And the Bishop of Munster, who is one of the
Electors of the German Empire, is engaged in the French Interest.

Thus are some of the Princes and States in Europe divided already; and God
knows how far the Breach may extend in Time.

It Is not altogether unworthy of Remark, what different Factions there were of
Late amongst the Hollanders themselves, though a Republic pretending to greater
and faster Union of Interests, than what can be found in any Monarchy. Yet this
Commonwealth was rent into Three several Parties: Whereof One was headed by
the Prince of Orange; the Other by John De-Wit; and the Third was composed of
the Commons, without any Chief of Note.

I will (...) trouble thee with a Character of the Prince of Orange. He is
already known by Fame at the Sublime Port. As to John De-Wit, I can give no
other Account at present; but that he was a Person whom Fortune had raised to
such an Eminence in the Commonwealth, as made him the Prince of Orange's Rival,
and Competitor for the Supremacy. Therefore he sought to exclude him from all
Employments and Offices of Trust, that he might establish himself in his Place.

The Third Party, whom we may call Republicans, were of Opinion, That it was
not for the Honor of the Commonwealth to acknowledge any Head; judging that
the Establishment or Exclusion, the Rise or Fall of the Prince or De Wit, ought
to be a Thing Indifferent to the States. In regard the Commonwealth appeared in
their sight sufficiently to flourish, under the Protection of her own Arms and
Riches, without having any Need of either the Prince of Orange's Assistance, or
De Wit's.

However, notwithstanding these Animosities of the Hollanders among themselves;
as soon as they found themselves engaged in a War with Two such Potent
Monarchs, They all Unanimously chose the Prince of Orange, as General of their
Army; Remembering the Famous Actions of his Fathers, the Princes of the House of
Nassaw; by whose Valor and Conduct, they had gained and conserved their
Liberties. On the other side, De Wit having rendered himself Odious to the
Vulgar, was by them torn in pieces: Such a Destiny often happening to those who
aspire to raise themselves by Unlawful Methods, and who are Ambitious to be the
Ringleaders of a Faction.

The French call the Prince of Orange, a General without an Army; In Regard,
the Hollanders being as yet only upon the Defensive, and their Towns wanting
strong Garrisons; their Soldiers are all disposed of this Way, so that there is
little or no Appearance of a Field-Army.

This is Certain, the King of France is the most Gallant Prince in Europe. he
passes from Divertisements to the Toils of War; and from the Champaign returns
to his Pleasures again. Thus, it is difficult to distinguish between his Labors
and Recreations; his Pleasures and his Business. They seem to be near of Kin,
that he takes equal Pleasure in both

'Twas but a little before the first Appearances of this War, That he and his
Queen were revelling in the Gardens of Chantilly, where a Royal Entertainment
was prepared for them by Night. The Court attended them thither; and there the
Roman Luxury was seen in Royal Miniature. As soon as the Gates were opened,
there appeared an Artificial Day; so light was the Place made with Flambeau's
and Lamps: Which being well placed among the Trees, with other refined
Illuminations, adorned with Chaplets of Flowers, which presented the Eye with a
pleasing Medly of Colors, interspersed with Oranges, Citrons, and other
agreeable Fruits, transported the Company with exquisite Delight. All together
pretty well resembl'd a Forest in a Chamber: For the Walls not being far from
the Place where the King sat, were hung with Arras, with a Multitude of Lights
burning near the Hangings: And there was a Spring of Water in the Middle of the
Garden, raising it self after a wonderful Manner into the Form of a High
Pyramid; and falling again into Three Basins of Marble successively from one to
the other, made a pleasant Spectacle to the Courtiers.

Then a most Magnificent Collation was served up with Vocal and Instrumental
Music, so soft and fine, with a sudden Dew cooling the Air, which had a Smell
like Sweet-Bryars, as rendered the Place a perfect Paradise. After which
followed the King's Supper, far surpassing the other Banquet in all Manner of
Delicacy and Politeness, as well as the stupendous Abundance of Dishes. When
Supper was ended, they were entertained with a Show of something Admirable and
New in Fireworks. But, though it be so to them, I will not trouble thee with a
Description of it, since thou have seen far Finer and more Costly at
Constantinople, or wherever the Great Sultan kept his Residence at the Time
of a Dunalma.

After this, the King went to see the New Fortifications of Dunkirk, which he
had ordered not long before. And in a little time, followed this Declaration of
War against Holland.

So things go in a Circle; from War to Peace; from Peace to War again. However,
thou will the better know by what I have said, how to comport thy self, in Case
of any Difference between the English, French, and Hollanders at the Sublime
Port. God inspire thee with Climacterical Wisdom, to adjust all Difficulties in
their Stated Periods.

Paris, 26th. of the 3d. Moon, of the Year 1672.
LETTER V. To Cara Hali, Physician to the Grand Signior.
THou have born with a Thousand Impertinencies in my Letters; and I know not,
whether what I Am now going to write, will deserve a better Character. However,
I feel a Spirit within me, checking my Stupid Mind, in that I was not before
sensible of my Error, but must make so late a Recantation. It is impossible for
me to reflect on the vain and trifling Subjects I have all along entertained
thee with, and not to blush at so grand an Oversight; Since I then seemed not
so much as to regard thy Knowledge and Practice in Medicines, which has exalted
thee to the Honor of being placed in the Front of those who take Care of the
Grand Signior's Health. Much less did I present thee with Matters suitable to
thy more Interior Knowledge, and that hidden Wisdom, which deservedly ranks
thee among the most Perfect and Accomplished Mortals.

In Ancient Times, Theology and Physic were counted Sciences of such a near
Relation and mutual Dependence, that one could not subsist without the other.
By Physic they meant the General Science of Nature, otherwise termed Magic:
Which comprehended under it the Knowledge of the Heavens, the Elements, and
every Being within their vast Circumference; The Motions of Sun, Moon, and
Stars, their various Aspects, Influences, and Dominions in this Lower World;
The Nature of the Winds and Meteors, with their Effects; The Virtues of all
Plants, and Living Creatures; as also of Insensible Things, the Metals,
Minerals, and other Substances found both on the Surface of the Earth, within
its Concave, and in the Sea.

Such as these of Old, were Apollonius Tyanaeus, with the Magi of Persia and
Chaldaea. Such was Hierarchas among the Brachmans; Tespion the Gymnosophist;
Budda the Babylonian; Numa Pompilius at Rome; Zamolxides of Thrace; Abbaris the
Hypberborean; Hermes Trismegistus of Egypt; Zoroaster the Son of Oromases, King
of Bactria; Evantes, an Arabian King; Zacharias a Babylonian; Joseph a Hebrew:
With many others of different Nations; as, Zenotenus, Kirannides, Almadal,
Thetel, Alchind, Abel, Ptolomy, Geber, Zahel, Nazabarub, Tebiti Aerith,
Solomon, Astrophon, Hipparchus, Alomeon, etc. And of later Date, Albertus,
Surnamed the Great, Arnoldus de Villa Nova, Cardan, Raymund Lullius: With a
few more, not worth the Naming.

These contemplated the Secret Force and Virtue of Celestial and Sublunary
Things; the hidden Sympathy between them, and the Mysterious Powers of Nature.
Then having by a curious and painful Scrutiny traced out the true Genealogies
of Things; cast their Nativities; and discovered all their Kindred, Allies,
Friends and Enemies; knew by applying in due Seasons, Actives to proper
Passives, how to produce Effects appearing stupendous Prodigies to the Vulgar,
and no less than Miracles: Whereas, all this is but a pure Result of Nature,
helped by Humane Art. So Watches, Dyals, Clocks, and Mirrours, appeared at
first to the Ignorant World, the Effects of Magic: Especially the Simple
Natives of America, showed little more Wit than Apes or Cats, which look
behind the Glass, to find the Active Figure of themselves, that they saw in it.

And now I Am got amongst those poor Barbarians, I cannot forget a Passage of a
Peruvian Slave, who being sent by his Spanish Master with a Basket of choice
Fruit and a Letter to his Friend; The silly Ignoramus being faint, by Reason of
the excessive Heat; his Journey being also tedious, from the Town of Lima to a
Village near the Mountains of Potosi, eat up the Fruit by the way, to allay his
Hungry Thirst. However, not having so good a Stomach to the Letter, he
delivered it safe to the Person to whom it was addressed; never once dreaming,
that an Insensible Piece of Paper could tell Tales. But, that discovering his
Crime when he came home, his Master ordered him the Bastinado, to make him
sensible of it. Then he was sent again on the same Errand, with Oranges and a
Letter; and meeting with the same Temptation, he knew not what to do. At last,
he hid the Letter under a Heap of Sand; wisely concluding, That if it saw him
not, it could never betray his Fact. However, to secure it from all Means of
peeping, he spread his Mantle over the Place, and then fell roundly to his
Banquet; thinking he should now have no Accuser. In fine, he eat up all the
Oranges, and was worse banged for his Pains than the time before.

Generous Hali, thou see I Am fallen into the same Error for which I made
Apology at the Beginning of this Letter: But, thou can easily forgive such
Crimes as these. Suffer me only to relapse thus far, That I may mention the
Mathematical Magicians; such as Archytas, who made a Wooden Pigeon to fly; and
Albert the Great, who taught a Brazen Head to speak: not forgetting him unknown
by Name, who gave to the Statues of Mercury, Voluble Tongues, and Elegant
Language; by whose Mechanic Art, a Brazen Serpent learnt to hiss; and Birds of
the same Metal, with other Helps, outvy'd the Nightingales and Thrushes in
their Melody.

I will not omit the Execrable Practices of Necromancers, or such as Invocate
the Dead, and with nefandous Ceremonies, Rites and Sacrifice, call to their Aid
Infernal Spirits; bind them in Crystals, or some other Vehicle; and then Adore
them, as the Ancient Romans did their Lares and Penates. These are their
Oracles which they consult in all Emergencies; and by their Help, work Wonders
in the World, foretell Things Future, and reveal the most remote and hidden
Secrets, whether Past or Present. Nor is this a Fable or an Old Wives Tale;
for, unless the experienced Nations of the Earth had found some real Evils,
from Wizards, Magicians and Witches; they would not have made so severe Laws
against them, as to aim at their Extermination from the Earth.

Neither need we admire; that Women are as much addicted to these cursed
Vanities as Men; since they are naturally more inquisitive into Secrets, and
less cautious of being imposed upon: They Are prone to Superstition; and, from
their Infancy, bred up to observe their Dreams, their Moles, and other Marks
upon their Bodies. They covet all the Depth of Palmestry and Physiognomy;
besides a thousand other little Follies.

If they meet a Man in the street at first going out, they are encouraged, and
take it for a Sign of their good Fortune: but, if one of their own Sex
encounters them; they curse the undesigning Female, and return home again. They
observe Fatal Days, and Nights, and certain Critical Hours, wherein they try
Experiments to know their Future Husbands. They brew Enchanting Philters for
their Lovers, and Intoxicate them with Liquors, wherein young Human Cupids have
been boiled, with Herbs as powerful to effect their Wish, as those that Circe
or Medea knew. In short, there is no Species of Sortilegy, or Divination, which
vain young Maidens are not practiced in. Which is a fair Disposition, or
Introduction, to the Blackest kind of Magic.

But blessed are they, O Pious and most learned Hali, who being profoundly
skilled, and daily conversant in the Science of Nature, have never yet tainted
themselves by any unlawful Commerce with Spirits Unclean, Infernal, and
Enemies to God. They are Divine Magicians, having Celestial Characters, the
Hidden Name of God imprinted on their Souls; whereby they are able to attract
the Angels, and make the Highest Spirits obey them.

Hali, God grant that thou may be one of this Venerable and Happy Number.
Farewell.

Paris, the 5th. of the 4th. Moon, of the Year 1672.
LETTER VI. To Orchan Cabet, Student of the Sciences, and Pensioner to the
Grand Signior.
IT has been a long time since the Christians have openly published Libels
against our Holy Lawgiver, and the Book which he received from the Hands of
Gabriel, one of the Chief Princes of Heaven: They affirm for an undoubted
Truth, That Mahomet himself composed that Volume of Light, by the Help of
Nestorius a Christian Monk, and Abdalla a Jew: And that it is but an Artificial
Medley, a Hotch-potch, or Gallimaufry of Pagan, Jewish and Christian
Principles; cunningly suited and blended together, in order to gain Proselytes
of all Religions.

I protest by the Veneration I owe to the Eternal God of Heaven, That I really
believe the Alcoran to be of Divine Original. Such is the inimitable Elegance
of the Style, the Brightness and Force of its Reasons and Arguments the
wonderful and charming Contexture of Things Historical, Moral and Divine; That
all the Writings in the World beside, seem to me flat and insipid, compared
with this Sacred and Stupendous Pandect of Wisdom. Yet, I must confess, I know
not how to answer the Accusation of the Nazarenes, because I have never read
any Mussulman Treatise, that undertook to refute these Calumnies: Which makes
me apt to think, there is none such extant. For, I have made diligent Enquiry,
discoursed with several Learned Doctors of our Law; but can gain no
Satisfaction in that Point.

Perhaps, our Fathers in former Ages, were ignorant how the Messenger of God
had been traduced by the Christians: or if they knew it, yet they disdained to
answer such Malicious Lies. And as for these Modern Times, the Zeal of Religion
is grown too Cold among the True Believers. Every one is carried away with
Self-Love, whilst no Man will be at the Pains to defend the Truth, or manifest
the Errors of our Enemies. Besides, it is now impossible to disprove what they
say concerning Nestorius and Abdalla; unless we could produce Authors of
unquestionable Authority, who lived in Mahomet's Time, and so could give a more
exact Account of his Life, than those that came after them.

However, if we consult common Reason, we shall find it very improbable, That
Three Men of such Contrary Principles, as a Jew, a Christian and a Pagan,
should all voluntarily agree and jump in one Design of brewing their several
Religions together, and drawing such an Extract from them as could suit with
neither of their Parties singly, and was like to have all of them together for
its Enemies and Persecutors: There was no Ground for them to expect the
Conversion of any Jews, so long as the Alcoran asserts Jesus the Son of Mary to
be the True Messiah, the Word and Breath of God, Worker of Miracles, Healer of
Diseases, Preacher of Heavenly Doctrine; and Examplary Pattern of a perfect
Life; denying that he was Crucified, but affirming that he Ascended into
Paradise. Whereas the Jews call him an Execrable Impostor, Magician, Seducer of
the Nations; and finally, by way of extreme Derision, they term him the Man
that was hanged on a Tree.

Neither was the Alcoran like to find any better Entertainment among the
Christians, for this last Reason; In that it denies the Crucifixion of the
Messiah, which is the Basis whereon all the Superstructure of their Religion is
built; it is the Angular Stone of Christianity. Besides, they could never be
reconciled to Polygamy, Circumcision, abolishing of Images and Pictures, nor to
a great many other Things which the Mussulman Law enjoins. Especially, they
could never brook the Denial of the Trinity.

And for the same Reason, this supposed patched Form of Religion would have
been as little welcome to the Gentiles, in that it took from them the Multitude
of their Gods, and asserted the Unity of the Divine Essence. So that all
Circumstances being weighed, it appears that the Alcoran, since it has had such
Success in the World, could not be forged by those Three, nor composed by any
Humane Pen; but is of Divine Original. Besides, had there been such a
Triumvirate known in the Case, the Coraei's of Mecca, and other Mortal Enemies
of Mahomet and his Doctrine, would not have spared to upbraid him with it: And
if they were not known to the Arabians who were conversant with him, how come
the Christians to be informed of this private Cabal, who were altogether
Strangers to Mahomet at that Time?

Consider well these Things, and thou will have no Reason to give Credit to the
Calumnies and lying Aspersions cast on the Apostle of God, by Unbelievers; but
being more and more confirmed in the Undefiled Faith, wilt glorify God, who
has guided thee into the Right Way, and not into the Way of Infidels, and of
those with whom he is displeased.

Orchan, as thou art endu'd with great Learning, I counsel thee to employ it in
defending the Cause of the Prophet, who could neither Write nor Read.

Paris, 15th. of the 6th. Moon, of the Year 1672.
LETTER VII. To Hamet, Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire.
HEre has been hot Work this Summer in the West. The King of France has made
such swift and large Conquests on the Hollanders, that they have hardly had
Time to consider their Losses, and the Number of their Towns fallen into their
Enemies Hands.

It always falls out so, when this Monarch. goes in Person to the Campaign as
he did this Year. In a very little Time he took Burich, Orsoy, Rimberg, Vezel,
Rees, Emmerick, and many other Places. Yet this Success was allayed with the
Death of the Duke of Longueville, who fell a Victim, either to his Dullness or
Temerity, in not hearing or not receiving the Cries of the Enemy, who demanded
Quarter as the French were passing the Rhine. He was shot with a Musket-Bullet:
and the Duke of Enguien, his Cousin, verry narrowly escaped; for they were both
jointly engaged in the same Action.

The Death of this Prince is much lamented, not only by those of his Family,
but by the whole Court and City, as being the Flower of his Time; having
signalized his Valor at the Siege of Candie, the Conquest of the
Franche-Compte, and other Warlike Expeditions. And they discourse, as if he had
been designed to stand Candidate for the Polish Crown.

I am the more particular in this Relation, because the Enterprise of the
French King in passing the Rhine, is looked upon as one of the most hardy and
bold, that ever was taken in Hand. In all the Histories of these Parts, there
is not one Example of so surprising an Expedition. And the Success answered
their Expectations: For the Hollanders were extremely daunted and disheartened
by the News of these Exploits. In a little Time Arnheim and Nimeghen, were
reduced to the King's Obedience; with the Fort of Skin, and Towns of D'Oesburg,
Bomel, Zutphen; Deventer, the Metropolis of a Province; with Weifet, Tongres,
Maseick, Dortemein, Elbourgh, Woerden, Arnham, another Capital City, with many
more Places, too tedious to be rehearsed.

In a Word, such are his Expeditions, Marches, his Sage Counsels, his
Never-failing Success, That the People think it no Flattery to call him a
Second Alexander the Great, Timurleng, Scanderbeg, Scipio, Hannibal, and all
the Great Heroic Names in the World.

To speak the Truth, the Kings of France have all along made an Illustrious
Figure in the World. And their Famous Exploits in War, with their Heroic
Actions in Time of Peace, afford sufficient Matter for the highest Panegyricks,
without an occasion of Hyperbole's. Which made one of the Roman Mufti's, in a
Letter to the King of France, thus express himself: "By how much the Royal
Dignity transcends the State of other Men, so far is the Monarchy of France
exalted above all the Kingdoms in the World." Pope Urban IV. said, That the
King of France was as the Morning Star in the Firmament of Princes; brighter
than all other Kings, a perfect God on Earth. It Is asserted by another Author,
That by the King of France's Shadow, the whole World is ruled. And such was
the Esteem which Pope Clement had for this Monarchy, that he granted a Hundred
Days Indulgence to every one that prayed for the King of France; to which Pope
Innocent IV. added Ten Days more.

It Is a Maxim in the Salick Law, That the King of France never dies. But this
indeed is altogether as True in Spain, Great Britain, and other Hereditary
Kingdoms, till the Succession fails. For then it degenerates to an Elective
Monarchy, or otherwise into Aristocracy; or last of all into Democracy, or a
Republic.

But France is yet free from these painted Forms of Slavery. Her Kings are
Masculine and Vigorous; her Queens Chaste and Fruitful. There never wants an
Heir apparent to the Crown. And this secures the Nation from a Thousand
Calamities, which atten Elective Monarchies, and more Popular Forms of
Government.

What Injustices, Cruelties, Massacres, and all manner of Public Grievances
were complained of in Rome, after Claudius Caesar had bought the Empire of his
Soldiers? What Bickerings between the Senate, the People, and the Armies?
Each Party would have an Emperor of their own choosing, one Province was Emulous
of another: So that sometimes there have been Twenty or Thirty Emperors
together, all claiming the Sovereignty. And when there were but Two, such was
the Obstinate and Strong Dispute between them, That they have been forced to
share the Empire equally, as the only Means to prevent its utter Dissolution,
Hence sprung the First Institution of Colleagues in the Empire. And this was
the Root of those Factions and Divisions, which increasing and growing up with
Time, branched forth into smaller Schisms; till at length, by the Ambition of
some, the Misfortune or Carelessness of others, or at least their want of Power
and Courage; that Mighty Empire was Cantoniz'd, rent in Pieces, and dwindl'd
into that narrow Dominion which it now possesses under the Tutelage of the
House of Austria. And there appear no hopes of its ever being restored again to
its pristine Grandeur, unless the Bourbons, with their growing Fortune, shall
Crown the Eagle with a Chaplet of Flower-de-Lys's, and change the Seat of the
Western Monarchy, from Improsperous Vienna, to All-conquering Paris.

In a Word, Henry IV. began the Design; Lewis XIII. carried it on; and this
present King has so far improved it, by his Matchless Fortune and Courage, that
in all Probability, this or the next Age will see it brought to Perfection.

Accomplished Minister, I bow my self with Abundance of Interior Veneration, to
the Dust of thy Feet: I affectionately kiss the Border of thy Robe, and bid
thee a devout Adieu.

Paris, 14th. of the 8th, Moon, of the Year 1672.
LETTER VIII. To William Vospel, a Recluse of Austria.
THy Letters make me very restless and inquisitive; They awaken New Doubts and
Scruples in my Breast, instead of removing or satisfying the Old Ones. Fresh
Queries start in my Mind; and the more thou labourest to fasten me in thy
narrow Superstition, and bigoted Zeal for the Infallibility of the Pope and
the Roman Church, the looser I grow. My Soul is like a Wild Colt of the
Wilderness, that tosses up his Head, snuffs the Air in Indignation, and
scorning the Bridle of Servitude, neighs for Joy at his Native Liberty,
scampering at large through the solitary Waste; nor can he be wheedl'd by
Humane Craft, to lose his beloved Freedom, or change it for a Tame Captivity.

I have revolved in my Mind the Ages that are Past, and the Years of
Untraceable Origin. I have examined the Times and Seasons of the World,
recorded in History; from Adam to Moses, from Moses to Jesus, and from Jesus to
these present Days wherein we live. After all, I find that the Memoirs of
Former Transactions are covered with great Darkness; yet there are not wanting
some Glimmerings of Light, to direct a diligent Mind, an Impartial Lover of
Truth.

Jesus the Son of Mary, was of the Stock of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. He was
educated in the Law of Moses, which he observed in all Things to a Tittle: And
in his Life time he said, Think not that I come to destroy the Law, but to
perfect it. His Apostles observed the same Rule, and in all Things were strict
Observers of the Stated Precepts. So were the Primitive Christians, even to the
keeping of the Jewish Sabbath; besides the First Day of the Week, appointed for
the Public Celebration of their own Mysteries. They abstained from Blood, and
from Things strangled, and from all Unclean Meats, and such as were Sacrificed
to Idols. They had no Images or Pictures in their Churches, Chapels, or
Oratories. In fine, they observed all the Necessary Purifications, and Adored
One God with Unity of Heart, a Lively Faith, and Good Works. Whereas thou
see, the present Roman Church follows quite contrary Maxims. They give the
Lie to our Lord's own Declaration; and positively say, That he came on purpose
to Abolish the Law, and introduce an Universal Liberty; That we may now as
freely banquet on the Blood of slain Beasts, as on the Milk of the Living; and
Eat of Swines Flesh, and other Abominable Food, with as little Detriment to our
Souls, as on the Flesh of Lambs, or other clean Creatures allowed by the Law of
God.

How can this hang together, or be credited by any Rational Man? It Is no wonder
there are so many Libertines and Atheists in the World, when they find
Christianity to be a mere Heap of palpable Contradictions.

To this thou will answer, according to the common Rule of Divines, That during
the Primitive Times, the Apostles and all other Christians observed the Law of
Moses, for fear of giving Scandal to the Jews, of whom great Numbers were
converted to the Christian Faith, when they saw that the Followers of Jesus did
not deviate from the Institutions of the Seniors, the Statutes of the House of
Jacob: But that afterward, when the Gospel was preached far and wide on the
Face of the Earth, and that many of the Gentile Nations were brought over to
the Church; it was no longer necessary, for the sake of so Contemptible a
People as the Jews, to scandalize all the Rest of the World, and impose on them
a Yoke which they were not accustomed to bear, and which would tempt them to
shake off Christianity it self, rather than submit to so Intolerable a Burden:
Therefore the Church, to facilitate as much as in her lay, the Conversion of
the Roman Empire, which then extended it self over the Greatest Part of the
Earth; accommodated her Injunctions, Precepts, Manners, and Ceremonies of
Religion, to the present Humor and Mode of those Times. And whereas the
Gentiles eat of all Meats Indifferently; so they were taught, that this was
agreeable to the Will of our Lord Jesus, who came to rescue Men from the
Slavery and Bondage of Mosaic Superstitions.

By the very same Rule, they introduced the Use of Images and Pictures in their
Churches: And the Vestments of the Priests, the Ornaments of the Altar, the
Tapers, Lamps, Incense, Flower-Pots, and other Religious Gayeties; were
fashioned according to the Patterns they received from the Priests of Jupiter,
Apollo, Venus, Diana, and the rest of the Heathen Deities. Hence the Festivals
of the Gods and Goddesses, were turned to Holydays of Saints; and Temples
before consecrated to the Sun, Moon and Stars, were afresh Dedicated to the
Apostles and Martyrs. Thus the very Pantheon it self in Rome, or Temple of All
the Gods, in Process of Time, by an Ecclesiastic Dexterity, was Converted to
the Church of All Saints. In a word, Christianity in all Things seemed no other
than Gentilism in Disguise. And it must be thought a Pious Fraud, thus to
wheedle so many Millions of Sinners into the Bosom of the Church, whether they
would or no.

Oh! Father William, do thou not blush at these Trivial Excuses, for the
manifest Violation of the Laws of God? Can Man be wiser than the Omnipotent? Or
will he presume to correct the Ways of Him that is Perfect in Knowledge? Is the
True Religion to be propagated by imitating the Idolatrous Rites of Infidels?
Or by prostituting the Sacred Injunctions of Heaven, to the Caprices of Humane
Policy? Did ever any wise Lawgiver condescend to alter and new-model his Laws,
to humor a peevish captious Subject? Would he add or diminish any Thing for
the Sake of gaining a Faction or Party? And can we think, that God ever
designed, or can be pleased to have his Divine Laws garbl'd and mixed with
profane Indulgences, Dispensations and Amendments of Mortals? As if he had been
Ignorant what he did, when he divulged his Statutes, and wanted the Counsel of
his Creatures to help him out at a dead Lift.

Was that Tenderness to be only showed to the Jews for a Time? And were they
for ever afterward to be scandalized? In vain does the Church daily pray for
the Conversion of that People, whilst by her Doctrines and daily Practices, she
hardens them more in their Infidelity. The Ethiopian Church is a standing
Witness against her to this Day, where the Christians from all Antiquity, even
from the Times of the Apostles, have kept that Part of the Law of Moses, which
relates to Cleanness and Uncleanness, and prescribes the Choice we are to make
of Meats allowed to be Eaten, forbidding those that are Execrable, and an
Abomination. Hence it is, that there are more Jews Converted to the Christian
Belief in that Country, than in any other Part of the World beside.

It was, in my Opinion, to begin at the wrong End, thus to neglect the
Salvation of the Jews, our Elder Brethren, from whom we received the Oracles of
God, and run to proselyte the Gentiles by such preposterous Methods, as
rendered us in a manner as much Their Converts, as them Ours: since we shuffl'd
our Religions together at Random, and made a Lottery of Divine and Humane
Institutions; exchanging one Species of Superstition and Idolatry for another;
bartering Jupiter for Peter; and Mars for Paul; Venus and her Cupid, for the
Virgin Mary, and her Child Jesus: A God for an Apostle; and a Demy-God for a
Martyr: Whilst the Law it self, which is the Foundation and Main Prop of True
Religion, lies neglected and trampled under Foot.

The Christians of the East, seem more Excusable than we: For, though they are
not so punctual in observing all the Niceties of Cleanness and Uncleanness,
Meats and Drinks, etc. as those of Ethiopia: yet they will not taste of Blood,
or any Thing Strangled. And their Ecclesiastics abstain from all Manner of
Flesh, during the whole Course of their Lives. They observe also many
Purifications, and wholesome Rules of Life. Whereas we of the Latin Church,
wallow in all Manner of Filthiness like Swine, and bless our selves, as if we
were the Only True Catholics, the Elect of God, in the High Road to Heaven. I
am at a Loss, what to think of these Things. Neither ca I ever hope to see the
Jews converted, till these Offenses are removed.

There is a Rumor spread up and down, of the Wandering Jew. I suppose thou have
heard of such a Man. He is now at Astracan, and Preaches every where that there
will be a Reformation of Christianity, after the Year 1700. That the Jews shall
be Converted, and all this to be performed by the Admiral Gifts of an English
Man, who shall restore Truth to its Primitive Luster and Integrity. They say,
He will cause the Images and Pictures to be utterly destroyed, and the Law of
Moses to be kept, so far as relates to Cleanness and Uncleanness, etc. That in
his Days, the Temple of Solomon, shall be rebuilt, and the World shall put on a
new Face.

Father William, I would not have thee despise these Things, since they have
been long foretold by Joachim the Abbot, by St. Methodius, by Nostredamus the
French Prophet, and by many other Eminent Persons, whose Writings are extant,
and many of their Predictions are already come to pass. The Roman Church
manifestly stands in Need of a Reformation: And since the Governors of it
cannot be prevailed on to set their Hands to so Pious a Work, we know not but
God may effect it by the means of a Stranger, some Obscure Person at present,
but whose Light may shine hereafter through all Generations.

Father William, thou will pardon the Liberty I take in discoursing about these
Things, and remember, that it is a Work of Charity to bear with the
Impertinencies of others. However, I thank God I Am out of the Purlieu of the
Spanish Inquisition.

Paris, 1st. of the 10th. Moon, of the Year, 1672.
LETTER IX. To Codarafrad Cheik, a Man of the Law.
I Have a Kinsman by Blood, residing at Astracan, in the Parts of Moscovy. His
Name is Isouf, a Man of an ardent Spirit, and active Wit; a great Traveller,
and one who makes good that Character by the solid Remarks he has made on the
most Important Things in his Way through Asia, Africa, and Europe. For he is
not in the Number of those who come home from Foreign Countries, only laden
with Vanities and Trifles.

From him I receive frequent Dispatches, since his being settled at Astracan, in
Quality of a Merchant; where he improves his Estate to great Advantage, enjoys
the Innocent Pleasures of Human Life, without suffering himself to be tainted
with the Vices which are unprofitable, troublesome, and bring Scandal to a
Man's Reputation. For some Vices, thou know, pass into the Predicament of
Virtues, when Interest or Necessity give an Indulgence.

There is a mutual Intercourse between my Cousin and me: And among other
Letters which he sends me, I received one lately; wherein he informs me, that
he whom they call the Wandering Jew, of whom I made mention formerly in one of
my Dispatches to the Sublime Port, is now at Astracan; That he preaches openly
in the Markets, and at the Bourse or Exchange; not refusing private
Conversation with any that desire it.

There is a great Conflux of People from all Nations, and of all Religions to
that City. He carries himself with an equal Indifference to every various Sect,
and they all seem mightily taken with his Doctrines. The Chief Thing he aims at
in all his Discourses, is, That there will ever long be an Universal Change of
Religion over all the Earth; and that every Nation on the Globe shall worship
One God, obey the Law of Jesus the Son of Mary, and embrace One Faith. When he
insists on this, he seems to be void of all Doubts and Hesitations; speaks
Magisterially, like a Prophet, who has received a sure and certain Revelation
of the Thing he foretells. But when any Dispute with him, not in a Spirit of
Captiousness, but to sift the Truth; he freely condescends to answer all their
Objections with solid Reasons, and to convince them by their own Principles,
that it must be so.

He says, That about the Year 1700 of the Christians Hegira, the Invincible
Osmans shall break down the Fences of Europe, and shall overflow all
Christendom like a mighty Torrent, that has over-top'd its Banks. In those Days
there shall be great Desolation in Hungary, Poland, Germany, France, and other
Regions of the West. Only Denmark, Sweden, Muscovy, and other Countries of the
North shall remain untouched. But above all other Nations, he says, Italy will
be made a perfect Wilderness, her Cities laid in Ashes, her Immense Wealth
plundered and carried away by the greedy Tartars, Arabians and Turks; who will
spare neither Age nor Sex, putting all to the Sword, especially the
Ecclesiastics, none of which shall escape the Public Vengeance, save Three
Cardinals, sincere and Holy Persons, who shall fly into England for Sanctuary
by the way of the Sea.

That Island, he says, shall become the Refuge of all such who can escape the
Calamities involving the adjacent Countries. Thither they shall flock with
their Wives and Children and all their Wealth, when they shall hear of the
approaching Terrors; the present Devastation of Italy, and the Universal
Conquests of the Osmans. The King of the Country shall receive those distressed
Fugitives with open Arms, and shall assign them certain Portions of Land, where
they may build Houses and Habitations for themselves and their Families; there
being Abundance of waste Ground in that Island, which they may manure and
improve to their Own and the Public Advantage.

After this, says he, shall arise a certain Man in England from his Obscure
Center; a Person filled with all Manner of Divine Knowledge and Wisdom, endu'd
with the Spirit of Prophecy, of a Graceful Aspect, and Elegant Speech, of a
Composed Gravity, and Calm Address, a Man Mild, Innocent, Temperate, Chaste and
Merciful above the Rest of Humane Race. People shall let their Eyes fall on the
Ground, when they meet him in the Streets, even before they know what he is;
overcome by the Luster of Modesty, Grace and Virtue which shines in his
Countenance. A Person highly beloved of God and Man.

This Man shall meet the Three Fugitive Cardinals in an Hour of Destiny. Then
that which lay long smothering, shall suddenly burst forth into a Flame. The
Light of God shall be diffused through his Soul; his Heart shall be like a
Lamp, and his Tongue shall utter mavelous Things. When he opens his Mouth in
divulging the Mysteries of God, his Words shall be like the Sparks of an
Eternal Fire, kindling Flames of Love in the Breasts of the Hearers. The
Cardinals shall rise from their Places and run to embrace him. A Council of the
Chief Bishops and Priests of the Land shall be assembled by the King's Order,
where the Three Cardinals also shall be present; and after mature Deliberation,
with Unanimous Consent, they shall call for the Holy Oil of Consecration, and
shall anoint him: They shall proclaim him the Great Father, and Patriarch of
the Faithful; The Directer of such as would go to Paradise.

He shall show them a new Pattern of the Law of Jesus the Son of Mary; or
rather the Old and True One, freed from the Corruptions and Errors which have
been superinduced for many Ages. Their Hearts shall yield as to an Oracle, and
the King of the Country shall approve of their Council. So shall all those of
the Noble and the Vulgar, whose good Fate is written in their Foreheads. As for
the Rest, they shall remain in their Incredulity.

This Holy Person shall reform the Errors of all the Christian Churches,
utterly abolish the Use of Images and Pictures, convince the Jews of their
Infidelity, and chase away the Darkness of Superstition from Earth. He shall
argue with Reasons so forcible and cogent, so clear and demonstrative, that
none but the wilfully obstinate, ^ll resist the Truth which he divulges, or
oppose his Authentic Missions. Thousands shall be converted by the Dint of his
Word, and Ten Thousands by his Exemplary Life. For he shall go up and down
preaching and doing Good Works throughout Great Britain, till the Number of his
Proselytes is complete. Then he shall send Apostles and Messengers into
Swedeland, Denmark, Moscovy, and other Parts of Europe, who shall likewise
convert an Innumerable Multitude to his Law. Foreign Princes shall send their
Ambassadors to the King of Great Britain and to him; for he shall be at the
King's Right Hand. They shall enter into Leagues and Covenants, and all the
Christian Princes shall be at Unity. Mighty Armies shall be raised in the
North, who shall come down and give new Courage to the oppressed Nazarenes of
the West. They shall all take up Arms, and chase the Osmans back again to their
own Country, recovering the Wealth which they had taken from them.

After this, by an Universal Agreement of the Christians, this Holy Person
shall be proclaimed the Great Pastor of the Church. a prodigious Army shall be
gathered together out of all the Christian Nations, to conduct him to the Holy
Land, and to crown him in Jerusalem. They shall vanquish and exterminate the
Osmans out of Palaestine and all the adjacent Regions. Then shall Jerusalem be
rebuilt Gloriously, and the Temple of Solomon with Saphires and Emeraulds.
That City shall be the Seat of the Christian Mufti's, this New Patriarch, and
his Successors, to the Day of Doom. Then shall the Eyes of the Jews be opened:
They shall acknowledge Jesus the Son of Mary to be the True Messiah, whom they
have so frequently Cursed. In a word, he says, Both Jews and Gentiles, People
of all Nations, shall resort to Jerusalem, or send thither their Gifts and
Presents. It shall become the Mistress of the whole Earth.

Sage Cheik; This is the Substance of what my Cousin Isouf acquaints me with
concerning the Wandering Jew, and his New Doctrines. The Censure of which I
leave to thee, who have a discerning Spirit, and art able to distinguish Truth
from an Imposture. God only knows what is hid in the Womb of Futurity. Every
Age is pregnant and brings forth strange Events. Yet when it is over, all sounds
like a Dream. The World it self is no better; and I that write this, am but
methinks the Shadow of a Vision or Trance. I hardly know whether I Am asleep or
awake whilst my Pen seems to move. Therefore, it being very late, I lay it
aside, and bid thee adieu: Praying that thou and I may have the Happiness, even
in this Life, to taste the Sweet Slumbers of Paradise.

Paris, 7th. of the 12th. Moon, of the Year 1672.
LETTER XIII. To Hamet, Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire.
I Think all the sensible World are inquisitive into the Life of Cardinal
Richlieu. He was the Pole Star of Statesmen, whilst living; and now he is dead,
his Memoirs and Maxims serve as a Chart and Compass, by which the Politicians
steer their Course, to avoid the Rocks and Shelves which threaten a Kingdom, or
Commonwealth, both in the Tempests of War, and the Serene Calms of Peace.

Thou have formerly received some Remarks from me on the Life of this Great
Minister: Yet I am not surpised at the Contents of thy last Dispatch, which
require a farther Account of him. No body can know too much of a Man who was
the Miracle of his Time; and not only startled the wisest of his
Contemporaries, by his Prodigious Actions; but has puzzled all that survive
him, to trace his Footsteps.

Undoubtedly, France owes to his Conduct, all her present Grandeur, with the
Hopes she has of increasing it. To him she is indebted for her Conquests in
Flanders, Sicily, Catalonia, Piedmont, and the German Frontiers. 'Twas He first
taught Her the complete Way to Humble Her Insolent Neighbors, and to suppress
her Rebellious Domestics. He much abated the troublesome Weight of a Crown,
and made it sit Lighter on the Head of Lewis XIII. Whilst Cardinal Mazarini,
his Successor in the Prime Ministry, acting by the same Principles, rendered it
as soft and easy to the present King, as the Grand Signior's Turbant. In a
Word, through the Efficacy of Richlieu's Politics, Lewis XIV. is become the
most Absolute Monarch in Christendom. For he either undermines, or over-reaches
his Enemies, by specious Treaties of Peace, where he is sure to have the better
on it; or he runs them down with the Force of War. To conclude, he has a long
Head, and a longer Sword, which all will confess that have to do with him. And
this is the pure Result of Richlieu's Memoirs.

Yet after all, that Minister had his blind side too, as well as other Mortals.
Public Virtues, and Private Vices; State-Perfections, and Personal Frailties.
He served his Master, with a Zeal and Fidelity, with a Wisdom and Courage,
difficult to be matched; but he served himself after the Common Manner of Men.
He indulged his Favorite Passions, which were Love, Jealousy, and Revenge.

There is a Letter of mine Registered in the Archives of the Sacred Port;
wherein I mentioned a Particular Amor of this Great Prelate. Besides that, he
had several Intrigues with the Duchess of Elbeuf, the Countess of Soissons,
and other Ladies of Prime Quality. Nay, there are not wanting such as
confidently report, That he had Two Children by one of his own Nieces. And
Verses were spread about on that Subject.

As he cherished this soft Inclination to Women, so he was naturally Jealous of
all Rivals, whether of his Love or Interest. He would never suffer any Man to
live, whom he once suspected to be in a Capacity, and to make the smallest
Advances to thwart his Designs.

For this Reason, he gave the most Considerable Military Offices, both by Sea
and Land, to Ecclesiastics who depended on him: Which occasioned a certain
Waggish Poet, to pass this Jest on the Public Administration: Un Archeveque
est Admiral,
Un Gros Eveque est Corporal,
Un Prelat President aux Frontieres,
Un Autre a des Troops guerrieres,
Un Capuchin pense au Combat,
Un Cardinal a des Soldat,
Un autre est Generalissime;
France je croy qu' icy bas,
Ton Eglise si Magnanime,
Milite and ne triomphe pas.
Reflecting hereby, on the Archbishop of Bourdeaux, the Bishop of Chartres, the
Bishop of Nantes, the Bishop of Mande, Father Joseph, a Friar, Cardinal de
Valette, and Cardinal Richlieu; these being the Chief Commanders of the Land
and Sea Forces.

It will make thee smile, perhaps, to read an Epitaph that was made on that
Father Joseph abovenamed; who being esteemed a very Infamous Man, and lying
interred in the same Tomb with another Friar named Father Angel, provoked some
Satirical Wit, to put this Sarcasm on him: Passant, nest ce pas chose etrange,
De voir un Diable aupres d'un Ange?


I believe Father Joseph was the worse beloved for being Cardinal Richlieu's
Confessor. It was observed that he dyed suddenly, without Confessing himself,
which occasioned another Epitaph to be made on him: Sous ce Tombeau git un bon
Pere,
Qui eut tant de Discretion,
Que pour e'tre bon Secretaire,
Il mourut sans Confession.


Every body suspected the Cardinal had a Hand in his precipitate Death, to
prevent his telling of Tales: For he knew all his Secrets: And the Cardinal was
known to be with him when he dyed. It was during the Siege of Brisac, a City on
the Rhine, which was then upon the Point of surrendering to the French: And the
News coming to the Cardinal, just as Father Joseph was in his last Agonies, he
came to his Bedside, and laying his Mouth close to the poor Friar's Ear, cried
out as loud as he could, Courage, Courage, mon Pere, Nous avous pris Brisac. A
strange Cordial for a dying Man, and some body made these Verses on it: Ite
Cucullati, vobis si Purpura ridet,
Fungitur Inferni Munere Pontificis.


There is another Instance of the Cardinal^s Revengefull Temper and his
Cruelty. One Day the Duke of Orleans, who hated him mortally, went to his
Palace, under Pretense of giving him a Visit, but really with a Design to Stab
him. However, as soon as he came into the Cardinal's Presence, his Nose fell a
Bleeding. Which appearing to him as an Ominous Presage of what he was going
about, he was struck with some Remorse; and frankly confessing his Design to
the Cardinal, begged his Pardon. That cunning Minister dissembled his
Resentments, knowing the Duke was not a Man of Resolution enough to undertake
so bold an Action, unless he had been extremely animated by some body near him;
he presently reflected on Monsieur Puylaurent, the Duke's Chief Favorite.
Immediately he decreed his Ruin; and to effect it with more Ease, he pretended
an extraordinary Friendship to him, offering him one of his Nieces in Marriage.
Monsieur Puylaurent who suspected not the Train which was laid for him,
embraced the Proposal with much Joy, as hoping thereby to raise and establish
his Fortune under the Protection of his Potent Uncle. In fine, he married the
Cardinal's Niece, but lived not to enjoy her; for on the very Nuptial Day, the
Cardinal caused him to be arrested and sent Prisoner to the Bastile; where he
was poisoned by a Friar, in a Glass of Wine. As soon as he had swallowed the
Fatal Potion, the Friar told him, It was necessary for him to confess his Sins
that very Moment, in regard he had but a few Minutes to live. Monsieur
Puylaurent threw the Glass at the Friar's Head, giving him Two or Three
swinging Curses, and then fell on his Knees, to Confession; which being
performed, he expired.

Sometimes the Cardinal was very singular and Ingenious in the Execution of his
Revenge, as if he endeavored to persuade the World, That he fulfilled the Law
of the Talio, which requires an Eye for an Eye, and punishes by an exact Kind
of Proportion. As it happened in the Case of the Dukes of Guize, Montmorency,
and Monsieur de Bassompierre. These were the Heads of a Faction which
diametrically opposed the Cardinal and his Party. He was the Grand Eyesore,
the Chief Obstacle of their Designed Prevalence at the Court. Wherefore if they
could but once remove him out of the Way, they thought themselves sure of the
King's Ear in all Things. To effect this, they consulted together, how to
dispose of him. The Duke of Guize was of Opinion, he should not be killed, in
regard he was a Prince of the Holy Church, but that he should be sent to Rome,
there to attend the proper Affairs of his Ecclesiastic Function, among the
Rest of his purpl'd Brethren. The Duke of Montmorency was clearly for taking
off his Head. But Monsieur de Bassompierre was against both these Methods: For,
said he, if he be sent to Rome, he will be always plotting of Mischief against
us. And it would be an Eternal Blemish to France, if the Purple of the Holy
Church should be stained with Blood. Let us send him close Prisoner to the
Bastile, where he may spend the Remainder of his Days in writing Learned Books.

The Cardinal who had his Agents busy about in all Parts, soon was informed of
this Consult: and he retaliated every Man's Sentence upon its own Author. For
he banished the Duke of Guize, confining him to Rome. He beheaded the Duke of
Montmorency; and imprisoned Monsieur de Bassompierre in the Bastile, where he
lay till the Cardinal's Death.

I could insert a great many more Remarks concerning Cardinal Richlieu. But I
am afraid of offending by Tediousness. If thou command me, another Letter
shall present thee with more Varieties.

In the mean Time with humblest Obeisance and Respect I desist, and take my
Conge, wishing thee a long Life on Earth, full of Honor; and a Fame without
Blemish when thou art translated to Heaven.

Paris, 15th. of the 1st. Moon, of the Year 1673.
LETTER XIV. To Musu Abu'l Yahyan, Professor of Philosophy at Fez.
THou have laid a Grand Obligation on me by thy last Dispatch, whose Learned
Contents have opened my Eyes; or rather drawn back the Veil which covered the
Interious of Africa, from the View of Strangers. Now I stand as it were on the
Top of a high Mountain, from whence I take a clear Prospect of those fair
Regions, Inhabited by Blacks. I survey the Paradises of the Torrid Zone, a most
fertile and populous Climate; though blind Antiquity could not discern a Blade of
Grass growing there, nor any of Humane Race fetching their Breath.

My Mind revels in perfect Voluptuousness, and all the Faculties of my Soul
banquet on the Contemplation of that most Delectable Precinct of the World. Oh
Africa! Thou may be called the Bazar or Market, where Nature exhibits all
her choicest Wonders. Thy Mountains are Higher than the Clouds; their Tops are
Inaccessible. They approach the Borders of Paradise. On them fall the Rivers of
Eden in mighty Cataracts. The Noise of the Precipitate Waters is heard afar
off, like the Sound of Remote Thunders. It deafens the Ears, and astonishes the
Minds of Mortals. The Ambitious undergrowing Rocks, are proud of the Glorious
Cascade; and envy those that shoot up above 'em which receive the Sacred Flood
at the First Hand, from the very Wings of Gabriel.

Happy are the Valleys which lie beneath, and are Yearly impregnated by the
Heavenly Deluge. The grateful Fields and Plains in humble Acknowledgment, make
their Returns of Corn and Fruits in due Season. The Marshes of Egypt, are as
the Gardens of Asia; the Banks of the Nile, as the Fenced Seminaries of
Babylon, fragrant and abounding in all Sorts of Vegetable Delicacies.

My Heart is ravished with the Speculation of these Things I am full as the
Moon, and cannot utter my Sentiments in Order. Visions of Aethiopia, Marocco,
Fez, and the Land of Archers invade my Eyes. I behold the Beautiful Provinces
of the South in a Trance: I stand gazing in Ecstasy on the shady Groves of
Benin and Arder, the Haunts of lovely Demons, the Genij of the Upper Element;
who daily descend to those Refreshing Solitudes, and converse with their
Younger Brethren, Incarnare Mortal Demons, the Sons of Men.

I consider with Admiration the Monsters of Africa, the Creatures of the Sun
and Slime. With Contemplative Horror, I draw near the Dens of Dragons; the
Purlieu of Crocodiles, and other Amphibious Animals, which lurk among the Reeds
of Nile and Niger, to trapan with feigned Cries the Unwary Traveller.

In fine, I am moved with superlative Devotion and Joy, when I peruse thy
accurate Description of the Principal Mosch at Fez. Methinks I see the
Stupendous Fabric making its lofty Advances toward Heaven. My Eyes revere the
Holy and Magnifick Structure, on the outside adorned with stately Towers and
Minarets, and covering Fifteen Hundred Paces in its Circuit. But when my
Fancy enters in by any of the One and Thirty Gates by Night, I Am dazzled with
the Insupportable Splendour of so many Thousand Lamps, as burn within that most
Illustrious Temple. I admire with proportionate Veneration, the Character thou
give of all the other Magnificences in that Ancient and Noble City; with
whatsoever else thou say of the whole Kingdom, and the Adjacent Regions.

In Answer to thy Request, I will in another Letter send thee a short
Pourtraicture and History of Constantinople; but now I am interrupted by
Company. Besides, my Letter would be too long.

I beseech thee to cherish that Friendship which thou have hitherto showed me;
and let me have the Honor of thy frequent Conversation by Letters. For though I
live in a Populons City, yet my Life seems like that of an Owl or a Pelican of
the Desert, extreme Solitary and Dejected.

Paris, 19th. of the 3d. Moon, of the Year, 1673.
LETTER XV. To the same.
SUch is the Zeal I have to demonstrate how highly I value thy Friendship, that
I would not suffer this Post to escape without gratifying thy Expectations. I
just now dismissed my Company, and having Time enough, will entertain thee with
an Abstract of what I know to be most Remarkable in the State of
Constantinople, both at present and in Ancient Times.

In the first Place, it will be convenient for thee to know, That this City was
formerly called Byzantium, from one Byzas, Admiral of the Spartan Fleet, under
Pausanias the King of Sparta, who laid the First Foundations of it. The Story
is this:

In Old Time the Graecians having a Mind to build a New City in some Part of
Thrace, and being at Odds about the Choice of a Spot of Ground suitable to so
Great and Important an Undertaking, they at last agreed to consult the Oracle
of Apollo. They did so, and were answered, That they should lay the Foundations
of the City, right over against the Blind Men: For so the Inhabitants of
Chalcedon were called, because when they were upon the same Design of founding
a New City, they could not discern between the Fertility of the Soil on what
side the Propontis, where Constantinople now stands; and the Barrenness and
Desert State of the Ground where they built, on the other side.

Pansanias therefore busying his Mind about these Things, and pitching right
upon the Sense of the Oracle, caused the Foundations of the City to be laid
exactly over against Chalcedon: And when it was finished it was called
Byzantium, as I have said, from Byzas who had the Oversight of the Work.

It retain's this Name many Years and Ages, flourishing in a high Degree among
the other Cities of Greece and Thrace, being esteemed the Gate of Europe and
Asia, by which the Mutual Commerce of both those Quarters of the Earth was
interchangeably held up.

But after the Days of the Messiah, there arose an Emperor of Rome, whose Name
was Constantine. This Prince, as it is Recorded in Roman Histories, saw a Vision
in the Air when he was at the Head of his Army marching against Licinius, and
preparing to give Battle. He and all his Soldiers beheld the Figure of a Cross,
with these Words plainly engraven in the Firmament: In hoc Signo vinces.
Constantine took this for a Good Omen, and caused a Standard of Silver to be
made exactly after the same Form: To which he appointed Eifty Standard-Bearers,
to carry it by Turns, and to guard it: For it was exceeding Rich, being
embossed all over with Rubies, Diamonds, Pearls, and other precious Jewels of
the Orient. He built a Pavilion also for the Glorious Idol; and being
instructed in the Christian Law by Eusebius Pamphilus, and other Learned
Mollah's, he was at last Baptized by Silvester the Pope.

This Great Monarch, as the Story goes, being very Pious, and having conceived
a profound Veneration for Pope Silvester, left him the Dominion of Rome, and a
great Part of Italy, whilst he removed the Imperial Court to the East, and took
up his Residence at Byzantium, which he augmented with Innumerable stately
Edifices; striving, if possible, to equal it with the Majesty and Grandeur of
Rome. He collected whatsoever was Precious and Beautiful in all the East, to
adorn the City withal: Witness the Palaces of Superb Architecture the Admirable
Height and Form of Diverse Obelisks and Pillars, all made of Marble, Porphyry,
or Jasper. Not to insist on the Prodigious Strength and Firmness of the Walls,
the Costly Aqueducts, with other Serviceable Things. At last, that he might
consecrate himself to Immortal Renown, he called this City by his own Name,
Constantinople, or, the City of Constantine: By which Name it is known even to
this Day. It was also called New Rome, after it once became the Seat of the
Christian Emperors: In whose Possession it remained, till it was taken by
Mahomet II. Invincible Emperor of the Ottomans, in the Year 1453. according to
the Epoch of the Nazarenes; on the Third Day of the Week which they call
Pentecoste.

It had been a Grand Neglect and Oversight in any Prince so Potent and Politic
as Mahomet was, to suffer such an Opportunity to escape as Fortune offered him,
of taking the most Opulent and Glorious City in the World: For there was an
Irreconcilable Schism broke forth between the Churches of the East and West.
There were Two or Three Popes at the same time, quarrelling in Rome for the
Supremacy; there was a War of Fifty Years standing between the French and the
English, which unhinged all the Courts in Europe. The Christians had long
before, by dear-bought Experience (the Loss of many Hundred Thousand Men and
Infinite Sums of Money, consumed in those vain and rash Expeditions, which they
Sanctified with the specious Title of the Holy War;) found, that it was not
easy to wrest one Town of Strength out of the Hands of the Tenacious
Mussulmans; much less to defend it long, or save their most important Cities
from the Fury of a Turkish Reprizal. They were sick and surfeited with the
Visionary Stuff of Peter the Hermit; and all Illuminato's like him, grew out of
Fashion. Every Prince and State in Western Christendom, began to mind their own
Interest. No more Enthusiastic Tales of that Kind would go down: The Great
Ones had opened their Eyes.

Besides, he that was then Emperor of Greece, Constantinus Paleologus, was
looked upon by the Christians, as a Tyrant, the Offspring of Tyrants, and
Usurper. The Graecians still retained the Black Memoirs of those horrid and
nefandous Tragedies, acted by Michael Andronicus, John, and Manuel, the
Pedecessors and Ancestors of this Constantine. And they had such a particular
Aversion for his Government, that though there were Infinite-Treasures of Gold
and Silver in the Hands of the Rich Citizens of Constantinople, when that City
was besieged by Mahomet II. yet no Man would part with the least Sum of Money,
to support the Public Cause: But chose rather in a Kind of revengeful and
desperate Sullenness, to fall into the Hands of the Victorious Osmans, than to
afford their Hated Sovereign any Relief.

Thus fell that Queen of Cities, the Glory of all the East, under the Power of
our Puissant Emperors, in whose Possession it remains to this Day; and may it
so remain, till the Moon shall be in her last Wane, and the Sun cease to shine
on the World.

In the mean Time, I will entertain thee en Passant, as the French call it,
with a short View of the Chief Magnificences in Constantinople.

That which first draws the Admiration of Travelers, is the Glorious Structure
of Sancta Sophia, a Temple consecrated to the Eternal WISDOM, by which the
Worlds were made: Built by the Emperor Justinian with inimitable Magnificence;
though afterward Spoiled and Plundered of its chiefest Ornaments, by the greedy
Soldiers of Mahomet II. whom I have so often mentioned; and Six Parts of it
entirely subverted by succeeding Emperors.

Pity it was, if furious and ill-grounded Superstition was the Cause of such
deplorable Ruins. What can be said of those who demolished the Sub-Fana of the
Third Temple, celebrated in the Universal History of the World? That of Diana
at Ephesus, it is true, was the Pattern; yet 'twas not much beyond it.
Schelomo's boasted Fane at Jerusalem, without Iron Pins or Nails, or other
Work of the Hammer, excelled but a little in the Artifice and Symmetry.
Indeed, the Luster of Sion's. Mosch, was more Radiant and Glorious in
Workmanship of Gold, the VValls and Floor being over-laid with that Metal, and
the Roof on the outside was, as it were, studded with Spikes of Beaten Gold so
thick, that there was not Room for a Bird to perch between them. And this was
done to prevent the Profanation of the Temple by their muting on it.

When the Sun shone in his full strength, the covering of the Temple thus
adorned, looked like a Firmament glittering with Innumerable Stars.

But to return to the Mosch of Sancta Sophia, let us consider it in its
Primitive State, and we shall find some Excellent Curiosities. Among the Rest,
there was a Candlestick or Sconce of Beaten Gold, so admirably contrived, That
it spontaneously fed the Bowls of Seven Branches with a constant Stream of Oil,
which by equal Measures flowed into them, from the Hollow of the Shaft. So that
if the Flame but of one single One, had wanted Aliment, all the Rest must have
been extinguished at the same Time.

The VValls of this Glorious Mosch, within and without, present the Eye with
nothing but White Marble, Porphyry; and other Precious Stones. The Roof is of
a Prodigious Height, covered with Lead without, but proudly Ostentous of its
inward Cieling, which is divided into Vaults and Arches richly adorned with
Golden Fret-work; and supported by Pillars of Cyprian Jasper, purest White
Marble, and Porphyry. There is a Marble Stone in the Mosch, had in great
Reverence by the True Faithful, because the Tradition goes, That on it Mary,
the Mother of Jesus, washed the Infant-Prophet's Linen.

There are also under the Mosch, Innumerable Vaules or Oratories, full of
Altars and Sepulchers: But there is no Access to them, in Regard the Doors are
walled up.

In a Place not far from these, you find Ten huge Vessels full of Oil, reserved
there ever-since the Days of Constantine the Great, yet remains Uncorrupted,
being of Color White like Milk. It is an Inexpiable Crime for any, but the
Grand Signior's Physicians or Surgeons, to use or touch it. And they compound
certain Medicaments with it, for the Service of him and his Serail.

Now I remember what I have read in a very Authentic Historian, concerning an
Oil made by certain Holy Persons who only had the Secret of it. As the Story
goes, it was Extracted from the Leaves and Chips of VVood which are found
floating in the Rivers that descend out of Paradise. This Oil they compounded
with other Ingredients, and performed Cures therewith, which were esteemed
Miraculous. It was sent from one Prince to another, as a Sacred and Invaluable
Treasure. Till at last it came into the Hands of the Eastern Patriarchs, who
presided over the Christians of the Greek, Armenian, and Egyptian Churches:
Who pretend to the only true Mystery and Power of making it at this very Day.
And that though the Ancient Popes of Rome, were formerly presented with a Yearly
Portion of it so long as they remained in Communion with the Patriarchs of the
East; yet after Victor once had made the Fatal Schism, which never could be
healed since, the Holy Favor was denied to his Successors: Who instead of the
Original Genuine Oil, were forced to counterfeit it, using a Spurious Unguent,
to preserve the Authority of their Religious Sacraments. And hence, they say,
it comes to pass, that few or none are ever healed by the Extreme Unction of
the Latin Church.

God knows, whether this be Truth or no. But I am apt to think, That the Ten
Jarrs of Oil beforementioned which lie under the Mosch of Aja-Sophian, are
Relics of the Ancient Patriarchs of Constantinople; who had the Secret of
compounding the Mysterious Extract.

From the Place where these Vessels are kept, you descend into the Dormitories
of Royal Ottoman Carcasses, the Sons of our Renowned Emperors. From thence you
pass into Two Caverns; One leading directly to the Seraglio, the Other
extending it self under the Buildings of the City, by a vast long Tract of
Ground. I know no Use there is at present of the Former Cave: but the Latter
serves for a VVork-Room, to certain poor Silk-Spinsters.

This Letter would be too tedious, if I should describe all the other Moschs,
and Buildings of Note in Constantinople. Wherefore not to tire thee, I will
reserve what remains to be said of that Glorious City, for other Dispatches.

In the mean Time, with an Affectionate Conge of my Soul I bid thee Adieu:
Praying God to let thee crop the choicest Flowers of Humane Happiness.

Paris, 14th. of the 5th. Moon, of the Year 1673.
LETTER XVI. To Hamet, Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire.
NOw I will perform the Promise I made thee long ago; which was, to present
thee with an Idea of the different Strength and Policies of these Nazarene
Kingdoms and States: Wherein, I will begin with Germany, which is, as it were,
the last Retrenchment of the Declining Roman Empire.

The Annals affirm, That in the Reign of Charles V. when the Mussulmans Invaded
Austria with Innumerable Forces, that Emperor opposed them with an Army of
90000 Foot, and 30000 Horse. Maximilian II. went beyond him, and raised 100000
Foot, and 35000 Horse. Neither was Corn dear in so vast an Army. It is certain,
That the German Emperor can, upon Occasion, send into the Field 200000 expert
Soldiers. It is moreover observed, That from the Year 1560 of the Christians
Hegira, even to these present Times, there has been no War between France,
Spain, and the Netherlands, wherein many Thousands of Germans have not served.

Their best Infantry is gathered out of Bavaria, Austria, and Westphalia. And
their choicest Cavalry come out of Brunswick, Juliers, and Frankendal. Both
Foot and Horse fight better and more successfully in an Open Plain or Field,
than in Narrow, Covert Places, such as Lanes and Woods etc. For they are not
good at taking Advantages of Ground, or at politic Skirmishes, and cunning
Ambuscades. They have not Patience to lie long waiting the Enemies Motions,
neither care they to divide their Main Body into Fragments or Detachments; but
they love to wedge themselves altogether in Form of a Triangle, and so march
with grave and slow Pace, that so they may break through the Enemies, and
confound their Order, which they esteem a certain Step to Victory. They fight
better also under a Foreign Commander, than a General of their own Nation. They
cannot endure the Hardships and Afflictions of a long Siege; but when once they
begin to smart for want of Provisions, they soon Capitulate and Surrender.
Neither have they more Patience in a Camp to bear the Injuries of Weather: But
they make have to set upon the Enemy, and decide the Quarrel in a pitched
Combat: Wherein if their First Onset fail, they seem like Men Stupify'd,
Astonished, or in a Trance, not knowing whether they had best to renew the
Assault, or to fly: And, if they oncefly, there is no rallying them again. Yet
these Armies are not raised without a vast Expense, nor maintained without a
greater, being cumber'd with a Train of Women, Children, and Servants; who
consume the Provisions of the Soldiers, so that many Times they starve for want
of common Ammunition-Bread.

Their Horses may be called rather strong than sprightly, and bold; being, for
the most Part, taken from the Plough, or other Rural Drudgeries. In a word,
they are like their Riders, Phlegmatic and Dull; having this also peculiar in
their Constitution, that at the sight of Blood, they shrink, and are ready to
faint: Whereas, the Spanish Horse gather fresh Courage from this Spectacle.

The Germans also have considerable Forces by Sea; but they seldom make Use of
them, unless it be against the Danes and Suedes. Besides all this, their
Auxiliary Armies are not to be forgot, which they receive from the Italian
Princes; from the Dukes of Savoy and Lorrain; and sometimes from the Trusty
Suisses.

But there are Two Things chiefly wanting in this Empire, amidst all its
Numerous Forces: One is, Unity and Concord among the Subjects; Another is, a
fixed Resolution and Readiness to enterprise any Thing of Moment. Their Hans
Towns are always Jealous of the Neighboring Princes. And these again give 'em
Occasion to suspect their Power, and hate their Interest, which they so often
employ against them, by encroaching on their Privileges. Then the Catholics,
and Protestants are always quarelling: And one Sect of Protestants, perpetually
Persecuting another. Hence it falls out, That the Princes go so unwillingly and
rarely to the Diets: And when they come there, they spin out so much Time in
adjusting their private Pretensions, Claims, and Privileges; in performing of
State-Ceremonies; and in deliberating concerning the Public Good, whilst every
one contradicts his Neighbor, and labors with all his Might to establish his
own Opinion, and get it passed into a Decree, by the Sanction of the Diet; that
before they come to any Resolves, an Expeditious and Potent Enemy might rush
into the Heart of the Country, and even take all these Northern Blockheads
Prisoners.

The German Empire is Elective; and the Power of choosing Caesar, is in the
Hands of Seven Princes. These are First, the Archbishop of Mentz, Grand
Chancellor of the Empire; in whose Custody are the Archives and Decrees of the
German Diets. The Second is, the Archbishop of Triers or Treves, Great
Chancellor of the Empire for France. The Third is, the Archbishop of Colen,
Great Chancellor of the Empire for Italy. The Fourth is, the King of Bohemia,
Cup Bearer to the Emperor. The Fifth is, the Count Palatine of the Rhine,
Master of the Imperial Palace. The Sixth is, the Duke of Saxony, Marshal or
Sword Bearer to the Emperor. The Seventh and last is, the Marquis of
Brandenburgh, Great Chamberlain or Treasurer of the Empire.

There are reckoned 25 Politic Princes, or Dukes in the Empire, 6 Marquisses,
5 Landtgraves, 9 Archbishops, and Bishops 47. Abbots who enjoy the Title and
Dignity of Princes 12. Abbots of a lower Degree 52. With Innumerable Others too
tedious to be named. They reckon also 82 Counts of Principal Note, besides many
of a Meaner Figure. They number 49 Barons and Free Lords, 90 Hans-Towns, and 10
Circles of the Empire.

In the German Diets, this Order is observed: When the Emperor is placed in
the Throne, the Archbishop of Triers takes his Place just over against him: He
of Mentz sits next to the Emperor on his Right Hand; the Second Place belongs
to the King of Bohemia; and the Third to the Count Palatine of the Rhine. On
the Emperor's Left Hand, the Archbishop of Colen takes the First Place; the
Duke of Saxony the next; and the Marquis of Brandenburgh the Third.

The Hans-Towns, which acknowledge no other Lord but the Emperor, are grovern'd
by their own Municipal Laws and Privileges. In some of them, the Common People
bear Rule; in others, a Mixture of the Commons and Nobles, and many of them
wholly obey the Nobility.

No Man salutes by the Title of Emperor, him whom the Princes have Elected to
that Dignity, till he be crowned by the Pope or Mufti of Rome. They call him
Caesar, or King of the Romans, or King of Germany; but not Emperor, till the
Coronation is finished. Nor does the Emperor, even after he is Crowned and
Established in the Throne, exercise an Absolute Power in all things; Affairs of
Importance being generally referred to the Public Diets or Divans of the
Empire: Where the Electoral Princes deliberate all Things, on whom the very
Power of the Emperor himself depends.

These Diets are very confused and tedious, in Regard the Princes seldom appear
there in their own Persons; but send their Ambassadors and Deputies, who yet
have not full Power to conclude any Thing without Particular Orders from their
Respective Masters. So that a Prodigious deal of Time is taken up in sending
Couriers to inform the Princes of all emergent Counsels and Transactions, and
in waiting for their Express Instructions, and Answers again.

In a word, considering the Diversity of Interests carried on by the Electoral
Princes, their Mutual Feuds and Dissentions, Domestic Animosities, and Foreign
Engagements, both on Religious and Politic Accounts; it is a Miracle that this
tottering Empire stands so long, and does not fall to Ruin: Especially being
environed and almost continually assaulted by Three Potent Enemies, the King of
Sweden, the King of France, and our Invincible Monarch. Not to mention the
frequent Incursions of the Moscovites and Tartars; the Revolts of the
Hungarians, Transilvanians, Bosnians, Croats, and other Nations which are
counted Members of the German Empire. But he abounds in Men and Money, with all
other Necessaries to support his Wars: There not being a more Rich and Populous
Region on Earth than Germany.

Sage Hamet, when the determined Period is come, God will abase the Pride of
these Infidels by the Hands of the True Believers: The Riches of the West shall
become the Spoil of Eastern Hero's; and the Posterity of Shem shall take Root
in the Cities of Japhet.

May thou live till that Time, to tri^ph in the Glory of the House of
Ismael, when they shall be exalted more than in the Ages that are past.

Paris, 9th. of the 7th. Moon, of the Year 1673.
LETTER XVII. To Cara Hali, Physician to the Grand Signior.
THy Memory is like the Smell of Incense; refreshing as Wine of Tenedos in a
Goblet of pure Gold. When my Heart is almost dead with Melancholy; when I can
find no Pleasure in Company abroad, and the very Elements of which I am made,
frown upon me; when the Time of Night forces me to come home Sighing as to a
Prison, and the Hangings of my Bedchamber look dull and seem to be painted
with horrid Tragedies: In a word, when every Thing in Nature appears in an
angry threatening Fit, then I think of thee, my Friend, and that Thought
relieves me. Thy beloved Idea is a perfect Talisman, working Wonders in my
Soul. It Charms or Countercharms, as my Occasions do require. No Fears, or
Griefs, or other Melancholy Passions dare abide its Energy: As soon as it
appears, each baneful Thought is gone; the Troops of sad Chimaerae's vanish
like the Morning Mists before the Sun Thou art as a strong Tower or Fortress,
where I can take Sanctuary from my Enemies: An Impregnable Citadel seated on
the Top of a high Rock: From whence I can look down with Scorn on my
Persecutors beneath; possessing my self in perfect Security.

I dare not so much as vent my Thoughts to another, though a Mussulman, for fear
of some untoward Consequence: So Industrious is the Malice of most Men; so
vigilant and studious for an Opportunity of doing Mischief. And as for these
Infidels, my Conversation is, for the most part, Histrionick. I am constrained
to act to the Life, a very Zealous Christian and a Catholic: When, God knows,
my Heart keeps not time with my Exterior Actions and Words. Not but that there
are Scepticks among the Christians, as well as among the True-Belivers: But
they are generally very private and reserved: For open Blasphemy, or what is
reputed so here, is certainly punished with Death.

I sometimes meet with Ingenious and Candid Souls, with whom I can discourse
freely, and like a Man that doubts of many Things, which others currantly
believe. Yet we dare not trust each other too far, nor the very Air into which
our Words vanish, after it has helped to form 'em; lest some sly envious Demon
should catch the transient sound, and reverberate the yet articulated Body of
Particles which made it, into some Inquisitive Ear, to ruin us. For there are
certain busy Gossiping Eccho's, scattered up and down the Elements, which are
always listening to the Words of Mortals: And if the spightful Elves can but
take Hold of any Syllable, to do a Man an Injury, they are big till they have
vented it. Yet they make no Show nor Noise, but whisper out their Tales in
Secret; sometimes in Dead of Night, when Men are fast asleep; at other times
when they are deeply musing on the hidden Things of Nature. For, it is only to
the Wise, the Sage, the Noble, and the Great, that they reveal these Passages,
beeause it is such alone have Ears to hear Them. They haunt the Bed-Chambers of
Kings and Princes, to tell 'em News in Dreams. They are the swiftest Couriers
in the World: For they have VVings, and fly from Court to Court, and from one
Climate to another in a Moments time. They Are always buzzing in the Ears of
Statesmen and great Politicians, to whom they show the Dark Intrigues of
Foreign and Domestic Enemies. Thus are Conspiracies and Plots of Rebels often
discovered, though managed never so secretly. They visit, now and then, the
Closets of Philosophers, and such as love the Sciences. Men of abstracted
Souls; whose Thoughts are volatile and pure, their Phancies lively and vegete.
To these they unfold the covert Mysteries of Nature, and show 'em Things to
come. They frame the Idea's of remote unknown Events, which they imprint upon
the Ductile Minds of Prophets and Holy Men; Inspiring them with strange and
unaccountable Presages of what shall shortly happen to themselves or others,
whether it be Good or Evil. For these Busybodies are the Daughters of the
World's great Soul; and they inherit an Universal Sense and Feeling of
whatsoever happens in the Elements. It Is true, some Knowledge they acquire by
Study and Observation, even as we Mortals do; but at a far swifter Rate. Their
Airy Bodies do not so oppress their Intellectual Faculties, as our gross Hulks
of Flesh do ours. We Are forced to Dig and Plough, to Sow and Harrow for small
Returns of Science. Our Soil is barren, it must be manured and cultivated with
Art and Cost, before it yields a tolerable Harvest of what deserves the Name of
Solid Knowledge. But these defecate Tenants of the Air, have no more to do, but
to be merely passive, and they straight learn every Thing: For the Eternal
Sapience wanders through the Universe, to seek out such as will or can imbibe
her free Impressions. She voluntarily slides into receptive Souls, and fills
them with her Rays. Thus the Sublimer Genij of the Air, bask in an open Orb of
Intellectual Light, because they are embodied in the most refined and purest
Matter: Whereas we Mortals, must be thankful for her Illuminations by Retail.
She only shines on us through Chinks and Cranies of our Dungeon Flesh: And yet
but seldom so in direct Beams. Few Men can boast that Privilege. The greatest
Part walk only in the Uncertain Twilight of Opinion; or at best in the faint
languid Glimmerings of Humane Reason, which like the Moon, conveys the Original
Light of Science to us by Reflection, and at second Hand. We Are fain to learn
from Books, from Conversation, and Experience.

Courteous Hali, thou will pardon the Confusedness and want of Order in this
Letter, when thou shall consider the Force of Melancholy which first prompted
me to write it. For, being very sad, and overcast with Clouds of dark and
gloomy Thoughts, which different Passions caused to justle one against another
in my troubled Mind; I knew not how to escape the Tempest better than by
writing to thee, my Learned Friend, though only to express my Circumstances. For
when I began, I knew not what to say; but 'twas an Ease to write at random, any
Thing to breath my Heart, and ventilate my Spleen. But the Specific Remedy of
my Grief consisted in addressing to thee, my Dear Physician, whose very
Remembrance is a Catholicon, proof against all my Maladies.

Adieu, thou Aesculapius of the Ottomans, and live for ever.

Paris, 15th. of the 8th. Moon, of the Year 1673.
LETTER XVIII. To Musu Abul Yahyan, Professor of Philosophy at Fez.
THou shall see, That I am a Man of my Word, and will keep my Promise: For
this Dispatch contains a farther Description of Constantinople, which I engaged
to present thee with in my last.

This Famous City is Sixteen Miles in Circuit, and contains Nine Hundred
Thousand Inhabitants. It Is divided into Three Parts, by the Intercourse of
certain Arms of the Sea; and almost forms the Figure of a Triangle. The VValls
are of an Incredible Height, and encompass Seven Hills within their Extent. One
is near the Grand Signior's Serail: Another is in the Opposite Corner of the
City, which leads to Adrianople. Between Two others, there lies a Plain, which
is called the Great Valley. In this is to be seen an Aqueduct of Admirable
Contrivance and Structure, the Work of Constantine the Great, who by his
conveyed Water to the City from Seven Miles distance. Solomon II. augmented
it, by opening a Current of Waters Two Miles beyond the Source of
Constantinople, which run through Seven Hundred and Forty Pipes into the City;
besides those which serve the Mosques, the Bathes, and Houses of Purification.

At the Extremity of the Town is seen the Antique Building of a Fortress, which
is called, the Castle of the Seven Towers; a Work of Inimitable Architecture.
There is a Garrison in it of Two Hundred and Fifty Soldiers, not one of which
dares to set his Foot out of the Castle Gates without the Leave of the Vizir
Azem, unless it be on Two certain Days in the Year; That is, the First of
Beiram and Ramezan.

In this Place formerly the Ottoman Emperors used to lay their Treasures of
Gold and Silver; their Arms and Ammunition, their Books, and whatsoever they
esteemed Precious. But Amurat the Son of Selymus II. translated all these
Things into the Serail'; where they have been kept ever since: And this Castle
is turned into a Prison for Kings and Princes taken Captives by the True
Faithful; as also for Rebellious Bassa's, and other Persons of Quality. Here
Coresqui, Vayvod of Moldavia, was shut up in the Year 1617. of the Christians
Era. And in the Year 1622. of the same Date, the Rebellious Janissaries
Imprisoned their Sovereign Lord, Sultan Osman, whom afterward they strangled
in the same Place.

There are above Two Thousand Mosques, Oratories, and Sepulchers within the
VValls of Constantinople. I have already described that of Aia-Sophian, in my
last. It remains now, that I speak of Four others, built by some of our former
Emperors. The First and Chiefest, was built by Sultan Mahomet II. to express
his Gratitude to God for the Taking of Constantinople. It is a Magnificent
Structure, raised according to the Pattern of Sancta Sophia. He caused a
Hundred stately Chambers to be built round about it, both for the Service of
the Imaum's and Mollah's who belong to the Mosch; and for the Entertainment of
Strangers, let them be of what Nation or Religion soever. He raised also Fifty
other Chambers without these; for the Use of the Poor: And endowed the Mosque
with Sixty Thousand Ducats of Yearly Revenue.

The Second Mosque was built by Bajazet II. the Son of this Mahomet. The Third
was built by Selymus I. The Fourth by Solomon the Magnificent. The Three last
of these Princes lie buried, each in his own Mosch, under Monuments of a Superb
Figure: Innumerable Lamps burning over them and round about them, night and
day, whilst certain. Mollah's pray by Turns, without ceasing, for the Health of
the Departed Royal Souls.

But the last of these Moschs which was built, as I have said, by Sultan
Solomon; far exceeds all the Rest, and comes not short of Sancta Sophia, in the
Richness of Marble, Porphyry, and other excellent Materials.

The Greeks have Forty Churches and Chapels in Constantinople, where they
perform the Nazarene Worship. The Armenians have Four. Those of the Latin
Communion have but One, with a College annexed to it for a certain Number of
Jesuits. This is seated in Pera, which is a kind of Suburb to Constantinople.

The Jews have great Liberty in the Imperial City. Their Habitations are
Contiguous, taking up Nine Principal Streets, and they have Eight and Thirty
Synagogues.

The Walls of the City remain very entire, and are double toward the Land.
There are Nineteen Gates in them; One of which is called the Holy Gate, in
Respect of a vast Multitude of Christian Saints who lie buried in a Chapel hard
by it. It was through this Gate, that Mahomet II. made his Triumphant Entry
into Constantinople, on Purpose, as it were, to profane the reputed Sanctity
of the Place, and insult over their False Gods; whilst he came to establish the
Law and Worship of the Only True God; Creator of Heaven and Earth.

There are Abundance of Antique Monuments in the City, as Pyramids and Obelisks
of Admirable Figure and Contrivance. In one Place, there are Three Serpents of
Marble, stretching themselves to the Height of Two Men, and mutually twisting
about each other. The Report goes, That these were erected by a Magician, at a
Time when the Citizens were much infested with Living Serpents, and that by
this Enchantment they were freed.

One of these has a Wound in the Neck, which was given it by Mahomet II. when
he rode into the Vanquished City. For, he beholding the Horrid Idol, and
guessing right, that it was the Work of some Magician, was moved with Holy Zeal
and Indignation. Wherefore, couching his Spear, and giving Spurs to his Horse,
he ran full Tilt against it, and wounded one of the Serpents in the Neck, which
is seen to this Day.

In the same Pavement there stands a very Elegant Column of Rustic
Workmanship, as they call it: The Marbles of which it consists, being fastened
together without the Intervention of Mortar, Bitumen, or any other Cement. It
has within a winding Staircase, by which one may go up to the Top.

In this Place, which is called the Hippodrome, the Ottoman Grandees exercise
themselves on Horseback, and sometimes the Grand Signior himself: Especially on
great Festivals.

Round about it, there are above Two Thousand little Shops of Tailors or
Botchers, for the Use of those who would have their Garments mended, scowr'd
and polished at a small Price. And yet out of this so contemptible a Trade, the
Grand Signior receives a Yearly Custom of Eleven Thousand Zequins. By this thou
may take an Estimate of his other Revenues, which flow into his Coffers from
all Parts of so vast an Empire.

There are above Forty Thousand Warehouses and Shops of Merchants, Brokers,
Pedlars, Hucksters, and such like Callings: Each Trade having their proper
Bazar, or Market, according to the Quality of the Goods they sell. But there is
one more Eminent than all the rest, which is called Baystan; where be
Goldsmiths, Jewellers, and such as deal in any Manner of fine and costly
Things. This Place is environed with very strong Walls, Six Foot Thick, and is
shut up every Night by Four double Gates, and at other Times, as Occasion
requires: So that it looks like a Little well-fortified Town.

In this wealthy Market, there is a Gallery or Piazza neatly arched and
supported by Twenty Four Pillars. Under this, there are Abundance of little
Shops, Six Foot long, and Four in Breadth. Here all those precious Commodities
are exposed to Sale on Tables or Counters, and with their Luster dazzle the Eyes
of such as pass by.

Thou may also conjecture at the vast Gains of these Merchants, by the Rates
which they pay to the Grand Signior, only for their License to sell in this
Place. I have known one Man, that was my particular Acquaintance, give Yearly
Two Thousand Franks for this Liberty; and he told me, That no Man could enjoy
the Freedom of the Place under that Price, unless he had great Favor shown
him, which is very rare; and even then it would not be much abated.

As one passes from this Market one way, there arises a stately Column of
Porphyry, begirt in many Places with Iron Hoops: And little distant you see
another more Lofty than this: It is called the Historical Column, being
engraven all over with the Figures of Men. In this also, there is a Staircase
to the Top, but much broken, and in Danger of falling, if it were not
strengthened and held together with vast Hoops of Iron.

The next thing worthy to be seen, is the Old Palace of Constantine the Great:
Worthy I say to be seen, only for its Antiquity; for it is no very Elegant
Building; yet it has this Commendation, That it stands in the purest and most
wholesome Air of the whole City.

There is another Market also walled in, besides that of the Goldsmiths, etc.
Which has a Piazza supported by Sixteen Pillars. In this are sold all manner of
Silks. And a little way off from this, is the Bazar, where they sell Slaves. So
great are the Gains of this Traffic, that those who use it, pay to the Grand
Signior, by way of Custom, the Yearly Sum of Sixteen Thousand Zequins.

The Vintners, Victuallers, and Sutlers, who sell Wine to the Christians and
Jews, and privately to the Mussulmans, pay Yearly Fifty Eight Thousand, Seven
Hundred and Eighty Eight Zequins. The very Fishermen of Constantinople who
live along the Strand, pay the Yearly Sum of Twenty Nine Thousand Three Hundred
Ninety Four Zequins. The Corn-Market, where all Sorts of Grain, Pulse, Meal and
Flower are sold, pays Yearly into the Treasury 14 Purses of Money, each Purse
being worth a Thousand Six Hundred, Thirty and Three Zequins. The Egyptian
Merchants, who bring their Goods from Alcaire to sell them at Constantinople,
pay 24 Purses. The Fraught of all Foreign Merchant Ships, makes up 180 Purses
of Gold. I have mentioned the Value of each Purse before. The Great Shambles
without the City, pays 32 Purses. There serve in this Place 200 Butchers; over
whom there is a Prefect or Master, without whose Consent no Man can kill any
Beast, unless it be in the Case of Corban. Nay, so great is the Authority of
this Prefect, that the Jews themselves are forced to ask his Leave to kill
their Beasts after their own-Fashion. The Reason why the Shambles is without
the City is for Purity's Sake, lest the City be polluted with Blood.

It is Impossible to cast up the Prodigious Revenue which arises to the Grand
Signior from the Sale of Hungarian Sheep and Oxen in the 10th. and 11th. Moons.
But thou may comprehend that it is very Great, when sometimes in one Days
time there are sold 25000 Oxen, and 40000 Sheep.

Neither is it more easy to reckon up his Incomes from the Sale of Houses,
Skiffs, Galleys, Saicks, and bigger Vessels. Besides, it would be too tedious
for one Letter. What shall I say of the Tribute which the Jews and Christians
pay, amounting Yearly to a Prodigious Sum of Money? Time, Paper, Ink, and Human
Patience it self would fail, in rehearsing so many Particularities.

But thou may frame a Regular Judgment of the Immense Riches which the Grand
Signior is possessed of; when thou shall know, that there is a Mint in the
Imperial City where Four Hundred Men perpetually labor in coining new Money,
having a President or Overseer who supervises the Work, who must be a Grecian,
by a special Privilege granted to that Nation by our Munificent Emperors;
because the Mines of Silver and Gold, are within the Limits of the Grecian
Empire. So that none but Greeks are admitted to assist at this curious Artifice.

The President is obliged every New Moon to send into the Serail Ten Thousand
Zequins of Gold, and Twenty Thousand in Silver. For such is the Pleasure of the
Great Sultan, that the Royal Palace should always abound with fair New Money.

Sage Musu, assure thy self, that Constantinople is the Grand Treasury,
Exchequer, or Banque of the whole Earth: Where all the Riches of the East,
West, North and South, and of the Seven Climates, are refunded and laid up as
in their proper Center. But I have more to say in another Letter concerning
this Glorious City. Only Time just now gave me a Prick with the end of his
Scyth, to put me in Mind of an Urgent Affair not to be neglected this moment.
Wherefore in have Adieu.

Paris, 21st. of the 8th. Moon, of the Year, 1673.
THE END.
BOOKS lately Printed for Hen. Rhodes, in Fleet Street.
1. MOnasticon Anglicanum; or, The History of the Ancient Abbeys, and other
Monasteries, Hospitals, Cathedral and Collegiate Churches, in England and
Wales. With diverse French, Irish, and Scotch Monasteries formerly relating to
England. Collected, and Published in Latin, by Sir William Dugdale, Knt. late
Garter King of Arms. In Three Volumes. And now Epitomized in English, Page by
Page. With Sculptures of the several Religious Habits. In Folio, Price 10 s. 2.
The History of Father La Chaise, Jesuit, and Confessor to Lewis XIV. the
Present King of France: Discovering the Secret Intriegues by him carried on, as
well in the Court of England, as in all the Courts of Europe, to advance the
Great Designs of the King his Master; with Letters that passed betwixt the
Duchess of Portsmouth, Father La Chaise, and the French King. Made English
from the French Original. In 12 s. Price 2 s. 6 d. 3. An Antidote against a
Careless Indifferency in Matters of Religion. Being a Treatise in Opposition to
those that believe, That all Religions are Indifferent, and that it Imports not
what Men Profess. Done out of French. With an Introduction, by Anthony Horneck,
D.D. Chaplain in Ordinary to Their Majesty's. 4. The Present Court of Spain;
or, The Modern Gallentry of the Spanish Nobility unfolded. In several
Histories: And Seventy five Letters from the Enamored Teresa, to her Beloved
the Marquis of Mansera. By the Ingenious Lady -- Author of the Memoirs and
Travels into Spain. Done into English by J. P. In 12 s. Price 2 s. 6 d. 5. The
Triumph Royal: Containing a short Account of the most Remarkable Battles,
Sieges, Sea Fights, Treaties, and Famous Archievements of the Princes of the
House of Nassau, etc. Described in the Triumphal Arches, Pyramids, Pictures,
Inscriptions at the Hague, in Honor of King William III. of England, etc.
Curiously engraven in 62 Figures in Copper Plates, with their Histories. In 8
vo. 6. Voyages and Travels over Europe: Containing all that is most Curious in
that Part of the World. Done out of French. In Two Parts. In 12 s.
All Printed for Hen. Rhodes, at the Star, the corner of Bride-lane, in
Fleet Street.

FINIS.

