THE CHURCH of ENGLAND, AND THE Continuation of the Ceremonies THEREOF,
Vindicated from the Calumnies of several late PAMPHLETS; More particularly that
Entitled, The Vanity, Mischief, and Danger of continuing Ceremonies in the
Worship of God. Subscribed,

By P. M. a Minister of the Church of England.

To which are added Some farther Considerations of a Reunion of the Dissenters
with the Church of England: Wherein, the true Causes of the Schism, its
Continuance, and the means to put an end to it, etc. are proposed.

(...). D. Paul. 1 Cor. 14.40.

(...). Conc. Nicaen. 1. Can. 6.

(...). S. Ignat. Epist. ad Antioch.

(...). Id. ad Philadelph.

London, Printed for S. Cook, and are to be Sold by the Booksellers of London,
1680.

To the READER.
AMongst those many Factious and Schismatical Pamphlets, which in these
licentious times have passed the Press, I chose, after a considerable time's
neglect, at vacant hours, to bestow some considerations on our Author's;
because subscribed (as is pretended) by a Minister of the Church of England;
thinking thereby, both to have had an opportunity of vindicating some innocent
Ceremony, against his ignorant or malicious Misrepresentation of it; and that
the appearing in our Holy Mother the Church of England's quarrel, when beset
with Domestic, as well as Foreign Enemies, forsaken by many of her formerly
pretended Friends, and risen up against by her undutiful and unnatural Sons,
(howsoever weakly her Cause should be managed) would yet be an argument of my
sincere and constant duty and affection. The Title of his Pamphlet is harsh,
bitter, and malicious, and intimates its Author to be either some ill designing
Schismatic, or blind Zealot bigoted to opposition, and actuated as a Tool by
a more intriguing Head; however it might well be expected, that such a bold
Front should be followed with great attempts to demonstrate what that so
largely intimates, viz. That vain, mischievous, and dangerous Ceremonies are
continued, prescribed, and used, in the Divine Worship of the Church of
England. But upon a perusal, his Pamphlet appeared to be a malicious and
railing Invective, an heap of undecent, passionate, and virulent expressions, a
fardle of spightful suggestions, founded upon false and precarious Principles:
He has taken leave with a supercilious pride to censure, and Pythagorically,
to condemn (and that in unbecoming terms) all our Ceremonies, without ever
telling us, either what he means by them, and in which acceptance of that
equivocal Word he desires to be understood, or proving all or any of them to be
unlawful or undecent. And tho he has no where asserted; yet he has every
where presupposed, that nothing may be lawfully used in the Worship of God, or
imposed on the Clergy or Congregation, by Ecclesiastical Canons and
Constitutions, as matter of decency and order; which is not positively and
expressly commanded in the Text of the Scriptures; which Position is altogether
unsound and precarious, and sufficiently (without other arguments) overthrown
by that one Maxim, That which is not prohibited, is conceived to be allowed.

I always both liked and loved the Constitution of our English Monarchy, as
being such a middle betwixt a Despotick and Titular Government, as seems to
have laid the most probable and stable Foundations, of a mutual and lasting
happiness of both Prince and People: It gives to the King a Prerogative and
Supremacy, large enough to make him the Father of his Country; and to the
Subject more liberties, privileges, and security than any other Monarchy, much
more inferior Government, (known to me,) always enough, and (unless more loyal)
in many instances too much; and therefore I have, with not a little admiration,
and regret often beheld some in the highest Station, whose Interest, as well as
Duty, it has been to support it, connive at encourage, nay concur with its
Enemies, in the pulling of it down: And others (who live more happily and
securely under it, than they can under any Aristocracy, much more Democracy)
imagining that they make not figure great enough in the Government of this
Monarchy, conspire the translation of it, into a Commonwealth, hoping to be
more conspicuous, when set at an higher Post as the reward of their intrigues
and merits.

And I think the Church of England as already by Law Established, to be the
best constituted of any now Visible; the like excellent moderation between two
extremes may be observed in her Public Worship, avoiding the multitude of
needless Observancies and Ceremonies used in the Church of Rome, inclining to
Superstition; and the rustical undecencies and clownish disorders, introduced
by some pretended Reformers, tending no less to confusions and profaneness. And
tho I will not assert that our present Liturgy cannot admit of a greater
accuracy in some Collects and Offices; yet I believe it to be now the most
perfect extant, that there is nothing in it, but what any Man how pious and
conscientious soever, if humble, peaceable, and duly informed, without scruple,
may comply with and join in; and that the making any considerable alterations
in it, would lay a new Stumblingblock before the Papists; and make them more
averse from coming over to our Church, and scandalize many of our own
Communion, by our levity, needless, and frequent changing, and modelling even
our Religious Worship and Divine Offices, to the humor of designing Persons
and a State-Cabal; and that all the alterations that may or can be made in it,
and our Constitutions both, will never answer their purpose, viz. effect a
Comprehension and Reunion of the Dissenters, with our Church, for they as long
as any thing remains, will never want a pretense for their Separation.

And to an unconcerned Spectator, it cannot but appear strange and
unaccomptable to see some Persons of the highest Orders and Degrees in the
Church, so zealous and impatient to make such alterations in its Liturgy,
Customs, and Legal Establishments, as must in all reason precipitate the
subversion of it, and to sacrifice its Honor, Rites, and Constitutions to the
Pride of a few designing Persons (so divided among themselves, that they could
never agree in any thing, but in a joint enmity and opposition to the
Government of the Church and State,) who herein aim not so much at an Union of
themselves with us, as at the destruction of our Ancient Hierarchy, to make way
to establish their novel Discipline; this experience might have taught us: But
if the Persons concerned, will not be cautioned neither by the avowed
Principles of their Adversaries, nor by their Practices, especially for this
last half Century; it will be easy (without the trouble of erecting a Scheme)
to predict, that when the Supreme Order of our Churchmen, shall be acknowledged
useless by a public concession of an equality of degrees, and an identity of
that Order, with the hitherto (and that truly) supposed inferior; then their
Superiorities, Privileges, and Revenues, will in a very little time expose
them, so prevalent a temptation to the Pride, Ambition, Envy, and Avarice of
their pretendedly conscientious, but really designing, etc. Enemies, that the
tottering Monarchy (tho never so desirous, because obliged in interest, etc.)
will not be able to rescue them from becoming their Prey.

What I have said by way of consideration or answer to any particular
expression of our Author's Pamphlet, or of the whole in general, or of himself;
you are allowed to judge of, as after an impartial reading of it, you shall
find cause; If you shall imagine that any Passages I have used concerning
Dissenters are too harsh; my Apology is that all I have said concerning them,
is reconcilable with that charitable opinion I have always had, viz. that many
of them are good Men, who yet are too credulous, and with a Faith too
implicit, follow their designing Teachers, not knowing the danger of their
living in Schism; That my accidental circumstances have occasioned me to know
that sort of People very well, and that I have taken great care not to do them
any wrong by a Mis-representation; but on the contrary, in this imperfect
Pourtraicture, have been cautious, and out of pure kindness have very sparingly
used such proper colors as I knew would make the draught to the life, for fear
of making it too ruthful a Spectacle.

CONSIDERATIONS ON THE PUBLISHER's PREFACE TO THE READER.
WHETHER our Author's pretended Friend the Publisher, has not by an imitation
of his own prevarication, instead of a real commendation, mocked him with an
Irony, when he called him a Man of Excellent Principles and Healing Temper, let
the Learned judge. The tripartite reflection he makes upon the Clergy of the
Lower House of Convocation as being Men of hot Thoughts, crude Judgments, and
four Humors; they may either take quietly amongst themselves, if true, or if
otherwise answer as they please, being of age to speak for themselves; I should
have passed it by, had he not made another more general, worse designed, and a
more malicious one, wherein he attributes the not proceedings of the said
House, and their not consenting to the pulling in pieces our Liturgy, Articles,
Canons, Act of Uniformity, etc. to the peevishness, ignorance, and
dissaffectedness of some of the Clergy to the present Government, and all this
(such is the Modesty and Conscience of the Man,) without any reason or proof,
but ushered in with a foolish and unmannerly Confidence, I doubt not. This
Epistoler having a large Talent in Railing, is not only very free in the
exercise of it, but is so rude and uncivil as to impose the Belief of his
Calumnies, upon his Readers, and cause them to read the following Pamphlet,
with as much prejudice against the Clergy, as it is written with malice against
our Ceremonies and Church Constitutions. He would no less falsely than
malicioufly represent all those who are well satisfied with the Church, to be
dissatisfied with the Government. Though how it can be inferred, that those
Clergy men that sincerely declared their Assent and Consent to the Book of
Common Prayer, etc. and are not willing that they should be abolished either in
the whole or in part, are therefore disaffected to the Present Government, it
is not very easy to apprehend. How absurd is it to suppose every body, who
approves of the Church's Doctrine and Discipline, to be disaffected to the
Civil Government, when the King has declared his approbation of them, and
promised to protect the Church as now by Law Established, and the Queen joins
with him in his Communion with it? Must they not therefore, according to our
Publisher, be disaffected to their own Government? However, (though I believe
this Publisher was not aware of it,) that supposition (if true) would cast a
vile reflection, on the late Revolution, as being really in lieu of (what was
pretended) the Preservation of that Government in the State, which was
agreeable to the Doctrines and Discipline of the Church; the Introduction of
another so opposite thereunto, that he who adheres to his former Faith and
Church Service, must be therefore supposed to be disaffected to it. And that
all the Clergy and all others, who in pursuance of our Statutes have sworn
never to endeavor any alteration in the Government of Church or State, must be
supposed to be either perjured or disaffected to the Government. The greatest
part of the Clergy, or rather all the Beneficed Clergy in the Kingdom, (some
few particular Persons only being excepted,) The Divines and others in the two
Universities, the Members of the House of Commons in the Late Convention and
Present Parliament, and almost all others thereunto obliged, have given
sufficient evidence of their affection to the Present Government, by their
taking the Oaths; and yet it is rationally supposed that by far the greater
part of all these, as also of the Nobility and other Gentry in the Kingdom, (by
reason of the present satisfaction of their Judgments, their former
Obligations, the apprehensions of the many and great damages and
inconveniences, which naturally follow all frequent changes in Religious
matters, and which accidentally would follow these, and many other weighty
Considerations) are against such alterations in the Church Service and
Government as by Law established. But some Men are too malicious and designing
to be long quiet, civil, or satisfied with any Persons, or things, or in any
circumstances. It has been the usual practice and policy of Fanatic,
Schismatical, and Seditious Spirits; appearing under the Vizor of Purity and
Zeal, to asperse and calumniate all Sober, Sincere, Honest, and Loyal Persons
(the only preservers of our Monarchies and Church's Peace) who would not concur
with all the extravagant humors, and sudden motions of the Mobile, when
actuated by the Jesuits, Enthusiasts, or intriguing Commonwealths Men, in
order to disgrace them, and advance themselves, in the esteem of the Vulgar:
Thus in the Reigns of King Charles I. and II. to effect their designs, they
imposed on them the Names of the Popish Party, Cavaliers, Malignants,
Pensioners, Court-Faction, etc. And now those of Popishly-affected, disaffected
to the Present Government, Well-wishers to King James, (in the more civil, and
in the more factious and supposed odious terms) Jacobites. And this
Machiavellian Principle of calumniating is so well learned and practiced by our
Dissenters; that neither herein, nor in equivocations, pretenses of Conscience,
Hypocrisy, Oppositions to Monarchy, breeding of mischiefs, disturbances and
divisions in Church and State, shall the Jesuits need to be ashamed of the
proficiency of their Scholars. And this (as many other evil Artifices)
recommends either the inclinations and ingenuity of the Learners, or its
easiness in being learned; for not only the Author himself of this thundering
zealous Pamphlet, but even the Broker of it this small Publisher, and
confederate retailer, has arrived at that perfection in it, that I am content
to own my self little able or willing, either to contend with him for the
superiority herein, or to retaliate.

CONSIDERATIONS On a Late PAMPHLET; ENTITLED, The Vanity, Mischief, and Danger
of continuing Ceremonies in the Worship of God.
Humbly proposed to the Present Convocation, etc.
THat, An Englishman never knows when he is well, is a Proverb which we use at
home, and wherewith we are reproached abroad; and that too justly to be denied
applicable, both to single Persons, and conjunct Societies, the tendency of
Affairs in this Nation, since the Year 1640. beyond all possibility of
contradiction does evince.

The Subjects of this Kingdom, through the Grants of former Kings, and by
virtue of the good Laws by them enacted and made, were better secured in their
Rights, Properties, and Persons, than any other Nation of the Universe: Nor
were they less happy as Christians, living in the bosom of a Church, whose
Faith was Catholic, Government Apostolical; whose Public Liturgy,
Constitutions, and Canons, in perfection excelled those of any of the Reformed,
or any other then Visible Church; whose Clergy were esteemed the wonder of the
World. Hence the envy of the Roman, and the admiration of the Reformed
Churches: Such was then the condition of the English Church, and State; that it
was hard to imagine, what could be thought wanting to complete their happiness;
unless, perhaps you will say, their being sensible of it. But not knowing when
they were well, they (by God's just permission) actuated by the Romish
Emissaries, who took advantage of the ambition and covetous Inclinations of
some, and of the discontented and restless Spirits of others, involved the
Nation in a most odious and unnatural Rebellion; the Violences, Cruelties, and
Murders which accompanied; and the Oppressions, Usurpations, Tyrannies,
Plunderings, and Miseries which followed it, are too many to be numbered, too
woeful to be rehearsed; and such as any Man in his right Wits, would for ever be
cautioned by, to avoid as the worst of evils, any actions, means, or methods,
whereby the like may again be brought upon us: And yet as if Men were led by
destiny, or guided by those ludicrous Spirits, (which our Author supposes) play
little tricks in disturbed houses; and others (learned in those matters) think,
set Men together by the ears, as they do Cocks and Dogs for their own
diversion; they seem industriously to lay the Foundations of future troubles,
to return to 1640. and to be willing to react the same Tragedy, and that before
the Epilogue is ended, and the Actors all gone off the Stage. Hither tend most
of our new Scriblers and their Pamphlets; some devesting the King of all
Inherent Sovereign Authority, Supremacy, and Prerogative, etc. Others
representing our Monarchs of the last Race, as the most Monstrous and Wicked
Villains that ever lived, and under the pretense of Secrets, relating things
not only incredible in themselves, but if supposed, yet impossible to be known
to any but Pimps, and Persons (if any such there be) of a more odious
Character; thereby endeavoring to possess the People with an ill opinion of
the Persons of Kings, in order to prepare them, for the dissolution of the
Monarchy: Essays tending to the same purpose, have been also made against the
Church; designing Men having unjustly slandered her Divines, as inclined to
Popery, and popishly affected; till in King James's time to their no less glory
than hazard, they appeared the greatest, if not the only Champions in the Cause
of our Religion and the Laws; and thereby made all future calumnies of that
sort, appear too unjust and malicious to be used. How is it to be wished that
our Enemies malice could have had an end? But alas! though they thus were
forced to change the Object, yet they have retained the Vice: Nothing will
please them, they will never be quiet; now our Rites and Ceremonies must be
illegitimated, our Liturgy circumcised, our Subscriptions, Constitutions, and
Canons all abolished, to gratify those, who if all these things were done,
would be as little satisfied as now they are. Our Author, their Adversary,
betrays too much Passion, before the things themselves and their consequences
are well considered, he is all upon the fret, and out of all patience to be
pulling down, the whole Ancient and therefore venerable, the well compact, and
firm Fabric of the Church of England; which having been of full proof against
all the assaults of our Foreign Roman Foes, must now be undermined by her
domestic Enemies, and what is yet more intolerable, her own pretended Friends
by an easy surrender of her outworks, make her main strength less tenable, and
precipitate her ruin.

Our Author, like a Man full of design, or big with some conceit of his own, or
News heard from others, breaks out, and with abundance of concern and passion,
thus vents himself. It is the wonder and grief of all good English Protestants,
Pag^ (...)
that such an unaccountable frenzy should possess and hurry some hot Clergy
Men amongst us, with a blind zeal against the good proposals of Peace, prepared
by the Kings Commissioners in the Jerusalem Chamber. If by all good English
Protestants, he means the Men of the Church of England as by Law Established;
to whom that Name (borrowed from the Lutherans, who at Spire, in the Year 1529.
protested against the Corruptions and Usurpations of the Church of Rome, whose
Communion they then forsook;) more properly than to any other People in England
belongs; both because they are an Established and Visible Church, and because
all Sectaries whatsoever among us, hold more in common with the Papists than
they do; then his assertion is too general to be true: Many and perhaps the
most and wisest, admire what an unaccountable frenzy should hurry some hot
Churchmen amongst us, with a blind Zeal against that Pious, Good, and above
all extant the most Perfect Liturgy; to which and all things therein contained
and prescribed, they have all once at the least declared (as they then
pretended) their unfeigned assent and consent, or against that Government in
Church, which as far as we can understand by the Scriptures, was Instituted by
our Savior; which the Ancients assure us was propagated together with the
Christian Faith, by the Apostles and their Successors; and which the continual
Succession of the Catholic Church of Christ, for now more than 1600 Years has
delivered to us; and those wholesome Constitutions, which the Wisdom and
Experience of the Learned and Grave Fathers of our own Church, (relation being
had to those of elder times also) have produced; and the Civil Laws of the Land
confirmed unto us.

As for His Majesty's design in giving a Commission, to some of our Reverend
Fathers and Divines to prepare things for Peace; and calling of a Convocation,
etc. Who ever blamed it? though as to the Method, it must be supposed, that the
unseasonable precipitancy and preposterous Zeal of some in the Late House of
Commons, to gratify their dissenting Friends by an Act of Toleration, has
prevented even those few good Fruits, which they who are acquainted with that
sort of People expected from it; but of this afterward. I shall here only add,
that this would be too great a change, (if due regard be had to those, who are
very well satisfied, that all things should continue as they are;) to be
huddled up in have by a few Persons; the Affair is weighty enough to consult
both the Universities, and all the Clergy in England, which may easily be done
in the space of one Year at their several Visitations. Late experience may
convince us, how inconvenient it is to impose the Sentiments of some few
Persons in particular things, to be generally approved of, consented to, and
joined in, by the whole National Church.

Let all our Reverend, Pious, Pa^ (...)
and Learned Churchmen weigh well the manifold considerations that oblige
them, by all means to endeavor, that the (...) the advancement of the
Protestant Interest at home and abroad: For so his Argument, if it be one,
should run; Otherwise we must suppose K. William, came not to preserve the
Government of Church and State, our Laws, and Religion; but to alter both, and
to make new Laws, and Establish another Religion; and our parting with them
now, will show, that either he never came to preserve them, or that we give him
little thanks for so doing. For suppose a Gentleman's House on Fire, and his
Friend coming to his assistance, should make it his chief care, to save a
Cabinet wherein he knew his Gold, Jewels, and chief Writings concerning his
Estate were kept, and should with the utmost difficulty and danger effect it;
and the Gentleman who owned it, should when brought to him, take it, and cast
it into the Thames; would not his Friend think himself ungratefully rewarded
for his service, and his care, pains, and hazard ill bestowed in the
Preservation of that, which when in danger, the Owner pretended to value above
all things, ^bid.
but when preserved, threw away? Let it not give offense, if I say, that we
shall be ungrateful toward Dissenters. It seems our Author, had run about half
a Page in full cariere before he could stop, but now remembering himself to have
been guilty of an expression improper, unwarrantable, and offensive, in joining
the Dissenters with Christ our Sovereign; ^bid.
he strives to justify or excuse it, saying, They were steady for the
Preservation of the Church of England in the day of our distress, against the
taking away of the Test and Penal Laws, by which they had smarted so much. This
expression almost makes me doubt whether I have not hitherto mistaken the
design of his Pamphlet, in judging it to be intended for an Harangue made in
favor of the Dissenters, against that Church which he pretends to be engaged
in; for it is so far from truth, in a literal sense, that I know not how to
understand it, but as an Ironical upbraiding them with, and exposing them for
their carriage in those days. However, if the filling the Gazettes for so many
Months with Addresses, and in them the giving thanks for Liberty of Conscience
granted by a dispensing Power, designed in favor of the Papists; and their
weakening of the Church of England, by their running back again into
Conventicles upon that account; if their promising in some Addresses,
implicitly, to choose such Representatives as should comply with his Majesty's
desire, in others explicitly, to choose such as should take off the Penal Laws
and Test, then they were so; ^bid.
if not, then the contrary. He adds, There were more of our own Communion, than
of theirs, that revolted from us and turned against the Laws. This account
differs from mine, therefore I will not allow it, but demand a Poll, and will
not believe him, nor be determined without it and a Scrutiny upon it. ^bid.
And now they have an Indulgence by Law, they are contented with the liberty of
serving God according to their Conscience, and trouble not the Government with
Petitions for more. I am afraid that is too good News to be true, for by all
that I have read of them in History, Chronology, etc. by their Intriguing for
the Election of Members, as formerly in all other, so now in this Parliament;
and by all that I could see, hear, or observe, to this day, induced thereunto.
I do not believe they are, or in this World, ever will be quiet: if our Author
believed they were contented, why did he trouble himself? they need not his
impertinent Advocacy, nor will thank him for it. Does he think to draw them out
of their Conventicles (where they are now by this Act of Indulgence lodged, as
safe as a Thief in a Mill) to dance after his Pipe? So that he might easily
have apprehended that this attempt for them (if he had no design of his own, to
serve in it) whether it took effect or not, must needs be made in vain. The
meetings of Dissenters are as legal as ours. I^^^
As to the Laws of the Land, which I doubt not are here referred to; The
Lawyers say, Conventicles are against the Common Law, and I suppose they are at
least reductively and analogically contrary to Magna Charta. I am sure they are
contrary to many Statutes, the Rubricks confirmed by diverse others, and the
Ecclesiastical Laws and Canons confirmed by Royal Authority; and consequently
according to the whole body of our Laws, are illegal; and therefore I do not
believe, that one Statute of disputable Authority which only conditionally
suspends the execution of some Penal Statutes yet unrepeal'd, can make their
Meetings as legal as ours. He adds, Ib^^
None are by the Law of God or Man obliged to hold Communion with as upon the
present terms. As for the Law of God, I refer the Author, and all his
dissenting Clients to those places of holy Scripture where Unity, Love, Peace,
Order, Decency, Unanimity, Brotherly-kindness, Charity, Uniformity, Humility,
Gentleness, Mildness, Obedience, etc. are commanded, and where Pride, Malice,
Envy, Hatred, Carnality, Self-conceit, Turbulency, Contention, Disorder,
Disobedience, Atheism, Apostasy, Heresy, Schism, Separation, Divisions,
Scandals, Offenses, etc. are forbidden. All these, the Laws of the Land, both
Civil and Ecclesiastical, and I might add the Law of Nature; and (if they
availed any thing) the Laws of Reason, Justice, and Charity oblige all persons
(Foreiners not naturalized only excepted) to hold Communion with us upon the
present terms, as long as we remain a true Christian, visible, and National
Church, and nothing which is imposed upon all persons communicating with us, is
demonstrated to be directly sinful. Ib^^
And God may charge upon them [viz. those who are for our Church, its
continuing as it now is, and as his present Majesty has often promised, and
once sworn to keep and maintain it, as many have sworn never to endeavor any
alteration in the Government of it, and as our Author himself has subscribed,
and declared his assent and consent to her Liturgies, Articles, etc.] all the
blood that has been shed from the foundation of the World, from the blood of
Abel unto the blood of those glorious Champions for our Religion and Laws,
Essex, Russel, Sydney, Cornish, etc. A strange piece of Theology, fathering
that upon the just and merciful God, which a Magistrate, or Judge of but common
honesty would not have said of himself, were it but for shame. I challenge the
Author whoever he is, to give any tolerable sense of that Expression, at the
peril of his Reputation. In the mean time, I shall pass them over, adding only
in the behalf of the Religion, Laws, and justice of the Nation; That the Earl
of Essex's death is to be lamented, but to be made no other use of, till it be
better known, how it was compassed; if he died by his own hand, we ought not to
judge him, but leave him to stand or fall to his own Master: if by the hands of
others, Why do not they who long since pretended the Murder was detected,
bring the Murderers to Justice? hanging is too good for them. And of the Lord
Russel, Mr. Sidney, Alderman Cornish, etc. I am not willing to say much,
perhaps they had hard measure, and suffered summum jus; but the title of
Glorious Champions for our Religion and Laws, I cannot allow them; for I think
they neither designed, nor used the proper, or lawful means or Methods to be
so. It cannot properly be said of any Man, who after a legal Trial, is
condemned by a Court of Justice legally authorized to take cognizance of the
Crime whereof he is accused; that he was murdered: no, though he was
maliciously sworn against, and not guilty of the Crime for which he suffered,
for then the fault is in the Evidence, and not in the Court. Some Credit
certainly is to be given to the justice of any Nation as such, much more, of a
Nation where Christianity is professed, and every Man concerned in it upon his
Oath. When the Papists accuse this Nation of persecution for Religion, and
Sanguinary Laws, and boast of their Martyrs (as they call them) and say they
died for the Catholic Faith and a good Conscience; We produce their Trials,
our Records, and Chronicles to prove that those very Jesuits and Seminary
Priests of which they speak, were attainted of High Treason, or Felony, and
executed for the same, and expect belief.

2. (...) ^.4.
It is a vain thing to attempt the continuance of Ceremonies. Wise Men when
they are earnest in the prosecution of any Affair, aim at some end that may
recompense their diligence. The Men of the Church of England desire to be wise
unto Sobriety, to be taught by the observation of elder times, and their own
Reason. They know that since Men living here have Bodies as well as Souls, some
external Rites, Habits and Gestures must be used in the public Worship of God;
that such due regard being had to their lawfulness in themselves, their
expediency in respect of Communion with the Catholic Church, scandal of any
particular Church concerned, and the edification of our own Church; (...)
are determinable by the Civil and Ecclesiastical Authority of this Kingdom.
That the said Authority having interposed accordingly and prescribed these now
in use, as few, ancient, (...)
inoffensive, tending most to Uniformity, Decency, and Devotion, and
consequently best answering all the forementioned purposes, and established
them by as good Laws as any are made in the Kingdom; they are not yet convinced
by any solid Reasons hitherto appearing, much less by the virulent Railing,
rather than Arguments of this Author (who has demonstrated nothing so much as
his prepossession and prejudice, his unruly Passion, and the large liberty he
takes in abusing every body but his Clients, the Dissenters,) that any change
or alteration is necessary to be made in the present Service of our Church.
They are already well aware, that Innovations usually let in more and greater
inconveniences than they remove: That proud, peevish, and ungovernable Spirits
will object against every thing, and be satisfied with nothing; and that the
designs, interests, and ambition of some; the prejudice of education, weakness
of judgment, and perverseness of temper of others; would make even a total
abolition of Ceremonies, as ineffectual for the producing of a reunion of the
Dissenters to the Church, as the attempts of others for the continuance of
them. As for the endeavors for a comprehension, and the objections against it,
which our Author mentions; it seems, by the event, that either the
comprehension was judged not feasible, or the objections of force enough to
stop the endeavors after it. And certainly, the best way we have or can have,
to preserve the Members of our Church from turning Papists; now the doors of
liberty are set open to all Religions, and Men may choose which they please, is
to let them see, that we have some regular constancy in our Worship and
Devotion as well as the Papists; for otherwise our giddiness and frequent
changes in Religious Worship, will confirm them in their belief, that the being
of an Infallible Judge is necessary; since they may observe, that we who
reformed under pretense of a greater purity, having forsaken that Principle of
Unity, can never be long at any certainty. That the Doctrine, Worship, and
Constitutions of our Church, which our Martyrs maintained with the loss of
their Lives in Q. Mary's Reign, and we thought to be lately in so great danger,
were not so adhered to, out of vainglory, or love of opposition; but out of a
well grounded choice, proceeding from a conviction of Judgment and Testimony of
Conscience; and therefore we can as little be flattered out of them now, as we
could be frightened out of them then: I might add, that the strength of that
objection, being founded in the Laws and Rules of Justice, Sincerity, Charity,
and of not giving offense, and laying a Stumbling Block before any of our
Communion or theirs, will never cease, at least as long as any Papists remain
in this, or rather in the three Kingdoms; neither will the appearance of Popery
in its proper Colors take off the obligation; but bind us not to retaliate
injuries, and to be careful that while we condemn them, we do not run into the
same or greater enormities. I am afraid, that our carriage of late Years, will
be no great inducement to them to come over to our Communion, or otherwise, to
have any very good opinion of us, or our Principles, if they should judge of
them by our Practices. That passage which our Author quotes out of a Sermon,
(...)
in these words, God be thanked for it, that there is an end put to all
Persecution in matters of Conscience; that the first and chief Right of humane
nature, (...)
of following the dictates of Conscience in the Service of God is secured to
all Men amongst us, etc. Wherein is included this Affirmative, it is the first
and chief Right of Humane Nature, to follow the dictates of Conscience in the
Service of God; to the truth of which I cannot, no not upon so great Authority
give my Assent; for if Humane Nature has such a Right, God who is the Author
of Humane Nature must be the giver of it; but that he never gave any such Right
to Mankind, appears from Exodus 20.4, 5, 6. -- Because, God who is the Author of
the Law of Nature, is none of those short-sighted Legislators which make a
latter Law contrary to the former; and the Moral Law has always been expounded
as explanatory, but never as contradictory to the Law of Nature; neither will
it help, to say, that tho God might contradict the Law of Nature, yet man
cannot, for both the Law in Deuteronomy. 13.6, etc. -- and the approved practice of
Hezekiah in 2 Kings, 18.4, etc. -- quite overthrow that pretense; nor will it
avail to say, that Idols are not Gods; for besides that the Heathen did not
Worship the Idol as the God it self, but some, as the Representation or Visible
Resemblance, and others, as the Body or Vehicle of the God which they supposed
to be present therein; there is the same reason for the Dictates of Conscience
to be free in the one Case, as in the other; and the whole Worship must be
supposed agreeable to the Dictates of their Consciences, since no other reason
can be assigned for the Institution of it.

2. If this were true then, Hezekiah and Josiah, for what they did, 2 Kings,
18.4. and 23.4, etc. to 17. were most wicked Persecutors, and unjust Invaders
of that first and chief Right, and yet they are both highly commended for what
they did herein, Chapter 18.3, etc. 23. v. 24, 25. 3. It would from hence follow,
that if any Men from Turkey, the East or West Indies, should come hither, and
follow their Mohammedan, Pagan, or Diabolical Worship; or if this new
Indulgence, (as the late Rebellion) should cause a Resurrection of the
Adamites, and they should go naked through the Streets to their Conventicle,
(which is as justifiable as their being naked at it,) they must not be hindered
by the Magistrate, for fear of Invading that first and chief Right of Humane
Nature, of following the Dictates of Conscience, in the Service of God. Lastly,
the Dictates of Conscience are by no Divines affirmed to be the Rule of it: And
if they are the first and chief Right of Humane Nature in the Service of God; I
see no reason why they should not be so, as much or rather much more in all
other actions of the life; and then the Jews in killing the Apostles, John
16.2. and St. Paul in Persecuting the Christians, Acts 9.1. etc. ought not to
be hindered; Or the Anabaptists in Germany, the Presbyterians in Scotland, the
Dragoons in France; all pretending Conscience for their several Barbarities to
be interrupted; and every thing must be allowed, for which the Dictates of
Conscience may be pretended, for fear of abridging this first and chief Right
of Humane Nature.

The Act of Indulgence sets all Men at liberty, and it comes not long after a
very fierce Persecution: Our Author by virtue of an Act of Indulgence, which
sets all Men at liberty, makes an unhandsome reflection upon K. Charles II. in
his Grave, and his two Houses of Parliament, in calling the Late, Legal,
Moderate Prosecution of the Dissenters (unto which their Caballing, Intriguing,
and Plotting, provoked the Government) a fierce, a very fierce Persecution. Not
to mention that the Presbyterians were the first among the Reformed, who taught
and practiced Persecution; or the carriage of that people where ever they have
gotten the Secular Power of their party, or the concurrence of it, and
particularly here in England betwixt the Years 1640, and 1660. It is to be
considered, that during the pretended Persecution no Man was under any legal
pressure for holding any Opinion, or performing any religious exercise in his
own Family, but only for his external action not necessary to Religion, and his
public frequenting of and joining in such Assemblies,, as experience had
taught to have been dangerous to the Government, and therefore prohibited under
a pecuniary penalty; and farther, that this prosecution was founded upon a Law
invented, and consented unto by the People's Representatives, in whose Persons
the whole Commons of the Kingdom are virtually, interpretatively, and
determinatively comprehended: So that by consequence, if it was a Persecution,
the people persecuted themselves; or at least the Representatives, the persons
represented; which is not to be supposed they would do, under that Notion.
Therefore in common Reason and Charity it must be supposed, That the
Parliament, the grand Council of the Nation advised and consented to that, (as
to all other Laws) for the public good and safety, a moderate Coercion of such
illegal Assemblies, and a wholesome Statute to prevent a factious and dangerous
Schism, and establish an Uniformity in divine Worship; though time and
experience have proved it, as ineffectual, as the abolishing of Liturgies,
Ceremonies, Church-Orders, and Constitutions, etc. (were any so senseless as to
try the experiment, would now be) to reduce them to Unity, Order, Peace, or
Reason.

We can impose these things upon none but the Ministers and their Clerks. Page
(...)
Then all others being unconcerned may be satisfied: And if nothing be imposed
on them, What is it they complain of, or would be eased from? Why does our
Author rage, rave, and be in such a mighty heat in the behalf of Dissenters,
for the pulling down such Ceremonies as are imposed on none but the Minister
and Clerk? cannot he let the Minister and his Parish-Clerk keep their
Ceremonies if they please, as well as let him have a May Pole, who has a mind
to one? Ib^^
As knowledge increases, Zeal for Ceremonies will grow more and more
ridiculous. That is a great mistake. Had it been for his purpose, he might more
truly have said, As Knowledge increases, opposition to Ceremonies will vanish.
For Scrupulosity (the parent of Opposition (if conscientious) is the Child of
Ignorance. It is generally believed, that there is no Rite, Ceremony, or Custom
enjoined, and practiced in the Church of England, but the same is fully and
sufficiently explained, maintained, defended and vindicated by the Learned Mr.
Hooker, Dr. Falkener, Dr. Comber, etc. to the satisfaction of all free,
indifferent, and competent Judges, whether Natives or Foreiners. And as far as
I could ever observe the more knowing, discreet, and pious Men are, so much the
more conformable to the established Church: and accordingly it is in every
Man's observation, that the more learned and judicious Men of all persuasions,
Opinions and Sects, are the most moderate; and the vulgar and unthinking Herd,
the most violent and furious: hence the Epithete of blind Zeal. And that to be
doubtful, timorous, and scrupulous in things indifferent, of small moment, and
not essential to Religion, are symptoms of little knowledge, weak judgment, and
an erroneous Conscience, appears sufficiently from the Apostles Discourse in
the 14, and 15. Chapters of his Epistle to the Romans.

As to our Authors new Project, of the Parliaments making a Law; that the
Members of both Houses shall choose Men to sit in Convocation, etc. The
possibility of it (if the King should be so ill advised, as to give consent to
it) I shall not much dispute, remembering that a Parliament in King Henry the
Eighth's Reign (surnamed the Almighty-Parliament) and some since have de facto
done such strange things in annulling, transferring Titles, Rights, Claims,
Possessions and Inheritances, etc. without regard to Superior Laws, as argue
Infallibility and Arbitrary Power, except in the Persons of Popes and Kings, to
be neither absurd nor disallowable. I shall only take leave to say, that the
Clergy are as competent Judges of the Parliament Men, as the Knights and
Burgesses of the Convocation-men; that whatever alterations they may make de
facto in our Liturgy or Ceremonies without the Clergy, yet it is absolutely
impossible to make an Union without them. I need not add, that such alterations
would be a taking away that Liberty of Conscience from the established Church,
which is given to all Dissenters; for it is to be supposed that our
Parliament Men (if not infallible) are yet wiser than at the suggestion of this
Furioso to attempt the removing the ancient Landmarks, and constitutions of the
Nations Government, such violent Convulsions of the Monarchy must needs both
presage and produce a dissolution of it.

All the Art and Power in the World cannot make trifles in the Worship of God
seem matters of importance to them that relish heavenly things. (...) 6.
The conformable Clergy and Laity of the Church of England, knowing many things
to be lawful and innocent, and judged by our Superiors to tend to Order,
Decency, and Devotion, use them as such; and cannot so properly be said to make
them seem matters of importance, as they who pretend Conscience for
disobedience in the use of things (no where prohibited and therefore
indifferent) and disturb all peace and Unity in the Church to introduce their
own confusions and divisions. (...) 7.
What Trumpery are Habits, various Gestures and Postures to a Man that is
swallowed up in the contemplation of the infinite Majesty of the Glorious God?
This Man is too wise, as being wise above what is written. A modest and
well-bred Man would never have used such rude and vilifying terms of such
things as the Almighty God was once pleased to appoint and command in his own
Worship. If any say those sacerdotal Habiliments and Levitical Impositions are
not obligatory to us Christians; I say, no more are the Judicial Laws given by
Moses; and yet if any Man shall therefore say, they are unjust, absurd, foolish
or ridiculous, I think God the Supreme Legislator is reflected on, and
concerned in his Honor; and the person so saying must be supposed immoral
bold, and profane. If our Author should be censured by this Paragraph, he
would be thought not only a Phanatique, but an Enthusiast. Would this
contemplative Politico have the Priest officiating lose his Body as well as his
Mind and Wits? for otherwise he must of necessity use such Trumpery as Habits,
Gestures, and Postures, and if they in use are lawful (as our Author saying
nothing to the contrary, must in all reason be supposed to allow) why not those
as well as others, especially since they are few, Grave, Decent, Ancient,
Naturalized, and by Law established. Innovations are always hurtful, and
sometimes dangerous; always tend toward, and sometimes precipitate dissolution.

3. It is unreasonable to continue Ceremonies. Ibid.
After all the Wisdom and Power of Imposers can do, the judgments of Men will
differ. And I can say with equal truth and reason: After all that Abolishers
can do, Page (...)
the judgments of Men will differ. He proceeds, It is as possible to make their
Hair all of one color, their Bodies of the same proportion, their Faces all
alike, as their Judgments to be the same in Rites and Ceremonies. To which I
may add, or in any thing else: Must nothing therefore be continued? If every
thing must be abolished concerning which Men have different Opinions, not only
Rites and Ceremonies, but our Creeds and Sacraments; nay our Houses, and our
Bibles (which gave occasion to great diversities of Opinions and some Heresies)
must be abolished and burnt: not only University Habits, Notes of Degrees, and
Church Vestments; but all manner of Clothes, must be left off; and if our
Author's inference were pursued home, it would abolish his own dear Corpse. As
for that Rule, Ibid.
Nothing but what is necessary should be imposed as terms of Communion; to
understand it aright, we must first enumerate those things which are enjoined
the Members of the Church of England: and they are, That they should duly
frequent their Parish Church, be present at and join in the Public Prayers and
Offices of the Church, with reverence and attention hear the Church Homilies or
other Sermons read, or preached, and receive the Holy Communion at the least
thrice in a Year. That they should bring their Children to the Font, to be
baptized, to the Church, to be Catechized, and to the Bishop, to be Confirmed.
I know nothing else required of any person as necessary to their holding
Lay-communion with it: and these I think to be both few, and such as are
generally necessary to Salvation. What is meant by Imposition of things as
Terms of Communion, when spoken (if properly it may be so) of persons here born
and bred, is not so easily understood. It is true the Church assumes, as her
part, a maternal care to instruct and educate her Children, in her Bosom;
Whereas that Expression, Imposition of things as Terms of Communion, seems to
relate properly either to Foreiners or Converts, presupposing them Professors
of some other Religion, and She treating with them, and offering them
conditions of admittance to her Communion, and this if such Foreiners are
already received into the Catholic Church by Baptism, with us, is done by
virtue of the Communion of Saints, upon their freely uniting themselves with
the Congregation of that Parish where they inhabit, joying therewith in its
Public Worship, and other Churches Offices, and, if duly qualified, their
participating of the Sacraments: But if a person yet unbaptized and
consequently no Christian, being made a Convert, desires to to be received into
the Communion of this Church; it is requisite that he make profession of the
Christian Faith contained in the Apostles Creed, desire and receive Baptism.
What else can be understood by Imposing Terms of Communion? The Prescriptions,
Rules and Constitutions of the Church of England are all directed to those
already in her Communion, and suppose all Persons born in this Kingdom to be by
Baptism made so. But, if by it, is meant, that nothing may be prescribed in a
Church to be observed by the Members of it, which is not necessary to
Salvation, I cannot believe it to be, in that sense, true, for some things may
be not only lawfully, but also laudably used and established in a constituted
Church, which are not absolutely necessary to Salvation. A Man who is dumb, and
deaf, or a Natural, who cannot be instructed, being born of Believing Parents
and baptized, may be saved, and he who being many Years sick cannot go to
Church; and yet it is lawful to appoint public Prayers, Catechizing, and
Preaching. A Man born in the Country of a Mohammedan or Pagan Prince, of
Christian Parents, may want both the preaching of the Word, and administration
of the Sacraments, and yet be instructed sufficiently to his Salvation: and we
here not only may, but also must use them. God himself required other and more
perfect Service in the Land of Canaan, than he accepted in the Wilderness. And
accordingly the Christian Church has practiced otherwise in times and places
of Danger and Persecution, than of Peace and Security.

Those famous Men of our Reformation, mentioned in Page 8. being perhaps
prepossessed with a good opinion of what they had been used to in their
Pilgrimage, or exasperated against Popery, that being the cause of it, by
Persecution, or perhaps being too far transported by a well-meaning Zeal, might
approve of the abolishing of innocent and decent Vestments, whilst other good
Men might think there was too much abolished before, since the abolishing of
any lawful Thing or Custom, might by giving offense to the Papists, as being
the effect of Passion and a perverse Humor, and not of conviction of Judgment,
be an obstacle to the Reformation. Every good Man's opinion and judgment
cannot, nor is fit to be made the Standard of a National Reformation: and
therefore herein certainly the wise Queen was directed by Providence, or at the
least more in the right than those good Men; for the preserving and continuing
the use of them, was far more agreeable to that excellent temper and
moderation, which that great Man, Iren. page 121, etc.
the then Dr. Stillingfleet so justly commended (and all good and wise Men do
the same) both in our English Liturgy and the French Prayers: and indeed it
behoved them to act like the Reformers of the Old Church, and not the Founders
of a New, and what was corrupt only needed Reformation, and not what was pure.
It may be observed, that those excellent Bishops judged the use of those
Vestments a thing in it self indifferent, and so complied with the continuance
and injunction of them, and if all others had imitated their Piety, Peace and
Prudence, this unhappy strife about them, had never been.

The Apostles did not at all favor the imposing humor. Page 9.
The Holy Ghost and the Apostles were only for requiring necessary things, Acts
15, 28. Here our Author catches at the word Necessary without any regard to the
sense wherein it is used; The next Verse enumerates those necessary things,
That ye abstain from meats offered to Idols, and from blood, and from things
strangled, and from fornication; Where of these four things necessary, three of
them are so only in respect of the Jews, which they were obliged not to offend
(as being a probable course to hinder their conversion) but rather to abstain
from the lawful use of indifferent things: Romans 14.14.
for that the first of them is lawful, appears from 1 Cor. 8. and that the two
next are ( Moses's Ceremonial Law being understood as a temporary positive Law
obligatory only to the Jewish Nation, and that only till our Savior's
Crucifixion) is evident by common Reason and Custom. I might observe for my
purpose against our Author, That the same Holy Ghost who enjoined the Gentile
Converts to forbear the use of some iudifferent things, for fear of giving
offense to Jews (yet zealous for the Law of Moses) amongst which they conversed
(being always consonant to himself,) by this Text, commands us to continue the
use of other indifferent things, lest we should scandalize the Papists, not
only in these three Kingdoms, but in all the Western Churches, by a wilful,
perverse, and unnecessary secession and departure from them, in the use or
disuse of lawful and indifferent Things, Customs, and Ceremonies; for where
there is the same Reason, there is the same Law. So that this inconsiderate
Author could scarcely have cited a Text more fatal to his Cause. This
precedent, the Apostle's practice, 1 Cor. 9.19, etc. and the Scripture Canon, 1
Cor. 14.40. had they been duly imitated, observed and obeyed, the greatest part
of the Schisms and Divisions which have unhappily rent and distracted the
Christian Church, had either been prevented, or soon reunited.

4. The manifold mischiefs of these Impositions: Page 1^
No Man can show any good they have done, etc. I know no other Impositions upon
our Congregations, but those I have already mentioned; and let our Author tell
us either which of them is unnecessary and hurtful, and he would have
abolished, or what else he means by Impositions, that so we may know whether
they are so mischievous as he talks of. The good they were designed to do, was
to testify our reverence to Antiquity, and our holding Communion with the
Catholic Church of Christ, to justify our Reformation, and prevent giving any
scandal to the Papists, and to cause all things in our own Church to be done
decently and in order: of which if they have fallen short, we may thank some
Men, who have been turbulent and unquiet, proud, peevish, and schismatical, and
troubled with the humor and spirit of contradiction. What follows in our Author
assigned as the mischief of Impositions, is neither true, nor of Date ancient
enough to be so, nor is an Argument fit for a Divine to use in Church Matters;
but seems to be the passionate resentment of some covetous ambitious Person,
lately candidate for some Civil or Military Employment, and discontented for
the missing of it: the venting the spleen of some well-willed to the Good Old
Cause; or the shallow and mistaken observation of some small pretender to
Politics, who usually prognosticates the Prosperity or Fate of the Kingdom,
according to the measures of the Elevation or Depression of his own Sect, tho
the most factious and seditions in it, and of Principles the most destructive
to its Government. As for that which is cited out of a great Man in our Church,
Ibid. Or. Stilingfleet. ^ren. Pref. 9.
in these words, Without all controversy the main Inlet of all the
distractions, confusions, and divisions in the Christian World, has been by
adding other Conditions of Church Communion than Christ has made. When that
Learned Man shall be at leisure to reconcile these words with his own in the
two following Pages of the same Preface; and 122, etc. of his following Book,
and shall be farther pleased to tell us which are the conditions of
Church Communion that Christ has made; it will be easy to determine, whether
the adding other has been the main Inlet of all the distractions, confusions,
and divisions in the Christian World: but nothing can be inferred from such
general expressions. -- The mischiefs I am speaking of are innumerable, some of
them are reduceable to these six Heads: 1. Mischiefs to the Church. 2. To the
State. 3. To Souls. 4. To Piety. 5. Mischiefs in promoting a mighty increase of
Profaneness, and all kind of wickedness. 6. Hindering a world of good.

1. Page 11.
Mischiefs to the Church. Zeal for Men's devices begets in people a strange
Levity of Mind, makes them such triflers in Religion, that they disregard the
great Interests of God, and his Church in the World. They are not sensible of
the desolations of Gods Churches in France, Orange, Piedmont, the Palatinate,
Ireland, etc. It might be answer enough for me to say, that all this is nothing
to the purpose, both because the Persecutions and Massacres in these several
places were not made upon the account of external Ceremonies, but partly upon a
secular account, and partly upon a religious, where then Communion and
Doctrines of the Church, and not Ceremonies were controverted: and because the
Church of England does not impose Ceremonies, or Men's devices upon any under
penalty of Persecution. But I add, that these instances disprove what they are
brought to confirm; for the desolations of God's Churches in France, Piedmont,
etc. are so far from proving that Zeal for men's devices begets in people a
strange Levity of mind, and makes them such triflers in Religion, etc. That
they evince nothing, or else the quite contrary; that such as raise
Persecutions upon the account of Religion, are not Men of light Minds or
Triflers in it, or disregard the Interests of God and his Church; though
perhaps they prosecute them the wrong way, and by undue Mothods; for it is
evident they (if without sinister design) pursue what they think to be God's
and his Church's Interest, more than their own. The Kings of Spain weakened
their Kingdoms, and exhausted their Treasures by Banishing the Moors, and
erecting the Inquisition; and the French King cannot be supposed to gain by the
Flight of his Subjects, their ceasing to trade, and withdrawing their effects;
neither was it trifling they fled from. Do you Sir, who in the behalf of the
Dissenters (clamorous enough without assistance) with open jaws set up the Cry
of Persecution here in England, and call the French King, the Duke of Savoy,
their Armies, Officers, and Dragoons; Triflers?

What the Church of England-men (which this Pamphleteer abusively calls Zealots
for these things,) did in reference to a Popish Successor, was agreeable to
their Principles, both of Loyalty and Honesty. They remembered, that tho to do
evil that good may ensue, be a Doctrine received in the Church of Rome; yet it
is not so in the Church of England. They well knew, that an Act for Exclusion
(notwithstanding any Infallibility or Omnipotency a Parliament can pretend to,)
would be still in it self unjust, as contrary to the Laws of God and nature,
and to the Rules of Equity, and common Reason; void in it self, as being
contrary to the Fundamental Laws of the Land, and the very Constitutions of the
Monarchy; and mischievous in its Events, as that which would most certainly
have involved these three Kingdoms in a most Bloody Civil War, and perhaps have
brought an Invasion from abroad, in upon us to boot. But behold the tender
Conscience of our Dissenters, they cry out of Persecution, upon the Levying a
small pecuniary mulct (for the frequenting an unnecessary and seditious
Conventicle,) in pursuance of diverse Laws made by their own Representatives;
but would exclude an Hereditary Prince from his undoubted Right and
Inheritance, (by a Law they were no ways authorized to make,) and involve three
Nations at the least in a Bloody War, and all the miseries attending it, that
so they might again swallow up the Crown Lands to maintain the Grandeur of
their Hogan-Mogan-Ships, in a new Commonwealth; and all this under pretense of
the Preservation of the Laws, Liberties, and the Protestant Religion; the name
of which it is probable will grow as odious to after Ages, as that of Popery is
to us, by reason of such, who shroud all their ill designs and crimes under
that usurped, affected, and abused Notion.

The Scripture is our only guide of Unity: (...)
Uniformity is deformity and confusion, when Men appoint other terms of
Ministerial Service, and Church Communion, than are prescribed in Gods Word. If
the Scripture is the only guide of Unity, let our Author tell me, why his
Clients the Presbyterians, Independents, Quakers, etc. are not guided into
Unity by it, since they all have it, and pretend to follow it, and yet are far
enough from Unity? The Scripture it is true, prescribes and commands Unity, but
never actually effected it, without the interposition of Ecclesiastical
Authority, as in the Primitive Church, Ecclesiastical and Civil, as in the
Reformation of our Church; or Civil, as in Spain, by the Inquisition, in France
by Edicts, etc. That Uniformity is or can be deformity and confusion, I shall
think to be a contradiction, till our Author shows how it can be reconciled.
Those terms of Communion, which he intimates to be prescribed in Gods Word, he
would do well to show us, or tell us where we may find them, if he can. They
would do more, if clearly discovered and demonstrated, toward the Union of our
differences, than a Thousand such railing Pamphlets, and the Intrigues and
Politic Desings, contrived by Malcontents, and as hotly pursued by such
Tools as he, for the involving us into the same miseries that followed upon the
last Rebellion.

2. (...) 3.
Mischiefs to the State; Zeal for Ceremonies begets in Men a contempt of
Public Rights and Boundaries. This is a very strange discovery which our
Author has made, but it is so incredible, that he could not in reason have
supposed, that we should take it merely upon his Word: Therefore, he would have
done well to have informed us farther, how a Zeal for Ceremonies begets a
contempt of Public Rights, whether by an Univocal or Equivocal Generation. If
any Man should argue thus, This Man is zealous for Ceremonies, therefore he
contemns Public Rights and Boundaries; would not all Men wonder at the
Inference? The Consequence will better follow on the contrary side thus; This
Man disturbs the Peace and Order of the Church, and makes no conscience of
breaking the Ecclesiastical Laws and Constitutions; and therefore it is
probable that out of the same Principle of disobedience and humor of
opposition, he will contemn Public Rights and Boundaries, and all obligations
of the Conscience to obedience, set by the Civil Law also. But our Author
proceeds, When they dote so much upon vanities in Worship, as to inslave their
Consciences, and to despise their Christian liberty, it is no wonder if they
sell at any rate their own and others Civil Rights and Privileges. Surely this
is spoken of the Inhabitants of the Moon; or some Utopian Countries, for most
Men here have as little Zeal, and as much contempt, or at least neglect of the
daily Service of the Church, as our Author supposes them to have of the Public
Rights and Boundaries. To join in the Public Worship of the Established Church
(though it be supposed there are Ceremonies, and (what he has no less
maliciously than falsely insinuated) vanities) in it; would not be to despise
our Christian liberty, but to make use of it; Whereas he who scruples it,
either is weak and thinks he has no liberty in that case, or which is worse,
is sullen and will not use it. But suppose Men despise their Christian Liberty,
(though I understand not how the Members of the Church of England can be said
to do so,) will they sell therefore their Civil Rights and Privileges at any
Rate? I wonder our Author is not ashamed of such gross non sequitur's. As for
any indirect means, which may be supposed to have been used in Juries,
Elections, Corporations, etc. I think the Dissenters, both in modesty and
justice ought to have held their tongues, as having by far exceeded the
Conformists; for as far as I could ever see, hear, read, observe or learn, they
were much more diligent and industrious, used more indirect courses, and
underwent greater fatigues to uphold and carry on a Faction against the
Government and Laws; than these (some whereof being not so designing, they
usually drew over to their Party) were, either to maintain the Right, or
countermine their attempts.

The best course which can be taken to recover God's blessing, the Church's
Union, and the Kingdom's Peace, Riches, Wealth, Strength, and Reputation; is
not the Parliaments (or rather some few turbulent Spirits) struggling (as our
Author says) with the Prince; nor the maintaining an unquiet and never to be
satisfied Faction to confront the Government, or extort Privileges or Liberties
from the King, by the diminution of his Prerogative; the glorying in the
Doctrine of Resistance, under the pretense of Preservation of the Protestant
Religion, and the Laws; or the encouraging of Dissenters to make the Schism
greater; for these do but make one Party jealous of another, and neglect the
Public Good to oppose each other; but a true practical Piety toward God; a
Loyalty and quiet Subjection to the Prince, and a permission of him to manage
his own Province; a Charity and mutual Love and Unity, without interessing our
selves in, much less hating and separating from, one another, for our
respective private Opinions; and an industrious following every one his own
lawful Vocation and Employment.

3. Mischief to Souls. Page 1^
For trifles there has been exercised a mad Tyranny over Men's faculties. This
is that which cannot be made good, for all Men have and (since the times of
Popery) every Man had liberty by the Laws of England, to be of any Judgment or
Opinion he should think most probable, and freedom for his faculties and the
exercise of them, (where they could claim any right to do so) in their own
Houses and Families, nor if a Friend, Stranger, Traveller, or a Neighbor or two
happened to be present, was there any danger or penalty thereby incurred. But
that every Man under pretense of Conscience, should therefore have liberty for
all his outward actions, and be allowed for his own private advantage to make
public Harangues, to disturb the Peace, and seduce his Neighbors by the
propagation of a Schism dangerous to both Church and State; is that which does
not follow, even the Dissenters themselves, when they had power in their Hands
being Judges; as appears, by their carriage to the Clergy of the Church of
England, in the late times. That a pretense of Conscience, where nothing
evidently sinful in it self is positively enjoined, will not justify a Man in
Schism, or exempt him from Penal Laws, as having a Right by the Law of Nature,
to be tolerated therein, I shall imagine my self to have proved, till I see
farther.

The little things imposed are a means of depriving the Church of the Service
of many useful Ministers that are apt to teach, (...) 16.
and would be glad to give the Bread of Life to those Souls, that are by the
Drones left in the broad way to destruction. The Church of England wants not
Ministers, that are apt to teach; but in some places Persons that will be
taught, and in others maintenance for the Teachers. No place where there is a
competent visible subsistence needs to want a Preacher: Our Universities can
supply another Kigndom. In the mean time this needs none of their assistance,
if the Usurping Ministers and Encroaching Pastors, would return the straying
Sheep home to their own rightful Pastors, and proper Folds, whence designedly
they have drawn them for their own advantage; they would thereby do better
Service to God, his Church, the Kingdom, their own, and the seduced and deluded
Men's Souls, than possibly they can any other way. If any are Drones, let them
be amended or removed, they may well be spared; Ibid.
Christ commands his Ministers to Preach, and qualifies them for that Service:
Christ commands none to Preach, but those which he calls by his Church; and he
who intrudes into the Sacred Office without an Ordinary Mission; unless he
demonstrates by Miracles an extraordinary one, can show no tolerable reason why
he should not be esteemed and used, as either an Euthusiast or Impostor;
neither can any qualifications though exceeding those of other Men (which yet
never have been found in them) be reasonably laid in the balance with the
Peace, Order, and Unity of the Church, and the Love and Charity of the
Neighborhood.

Our Author says, in Page 17th. The Ruin of Souls, may be for want of the
Labors of those able Ministers whom we exclude for toys. I know none are
excluded, but such who exclude themselves, and the more shame for them if they
will be so humoursome and pettish, as to shut out themselves; because they
cannot in every thing have their Wills; and the more trivial the things
objected are, the more evident it is that somewhat else besides, and more than
Conscience (which is pretended) is the true cause of their Non Conformity. But
yet I can see no such great danger of the ruin of Souls (more than now there
is,) if they were as silent, as they are clamorous; Salvation in another sense,
than that in which it is usually taken being the common end of at least a great
part of that noise and disturbance, which is made by that Party; and I heartily
wish, that their Hearers laying aside that blind zeal, outside Piety, and
unreasonable opposition to the Government, both of Church and State, in which
they please themselves, and whereby they are distinguished from other Men; they
would by the regular Piety, Loyalty, Peace, Humility, Obedience, and Charity of
their Lives, convince the World of the excellency and sincerity of their
Teachers, (...). 18.


4. Mischiefs to Piety. The most Learned Divines, and the Wisest Statesmen in
the World, are but bunglers when they take upon them to add unto Gods Worship,
what he has not appointed. If our Author either could or would tell us, what
Worship God has particularly appointed, it were easy to determine what has
been added thereunto; in the mean time it may be sufficient to deny the charge,
and let him prove it if he can. Mankind has for many Ages been possessed and
tormented with a furious spirit, the Devil of Imposition, it will never be well
till this Spirit is cast out. If he had with a little alteration said thus;
This Church has for this last Age been tormented with a furious Spirit, the
Devil of Opposition, etc. It had been far more truly and properly spoken, both
because the Spirit of the Opposers has been far more furious, than that of the
Imposers; and also because Opposition is more properly than Imposition,
attributed to the Devil; who, the Apostle tells us, works in the Children of
disobedience. (...)
Piety may now as well live and flourish without our Ceremonies, as it did
mount without them above Idolatry, and conquered the World. If our Author
means, that there are more Ceremonies now imposed in the Church of England,
than were in use in the Christian Churches, in the time of Constantine the
Great (by whose Profession of Christianity and kindness to the Christians, it
signally conquered and abolished Pagan Idolatry out of the Empire,) he is very
much mistaken; let him if he please compare them at his own leisure, and he
will find it so.

Ceremonies in Worship corrupt Peoples minds with vanity, make them light and
trifling in the weighty concerns of God and their Souls. God Almighty has
plainly enough determined the contrary, by his Institution of so many, in his
own Public Worship. I have already said, that there are no Ceremonies enjoined
to be observed by the Congregation, in the Public Worship of God, in the
Church of England; unless he will call kneeling and standing, (which are only
gestures of the Body) so; but if he will, yet it cannot be said of them, that
they corrupt People's minds with vanity, and make them light and trifling in
the weighty concerns of their Souls. Such decent postures have by the common
Sentiments of the Christians in all Ages, been observed not only as conducing
to Order and Uniformity; but also as tending to promote zeal and devotion, and
are certianly in themselves as decent, as having the Head uncovered; which the
Apostle so largely insists on, in 1 Cor. 11. Nor can our Author show the least
shadow of reason, why those Ancient and Catholic Gestures should corrupt
People's minds with vanity, or make them light and trifling in the weighty
concerns of God and their Souls; or on the other Side, why the uncouth Gestures
of leaning upon a Seat, lolling upon their Elbows, or sitting upon their Br --
s should increase Devotion; or not rather corrupt Peoples minds with an
undecent slothfulness, and an unchristian clownishness in the presence of God,
and his Holy Angels, unmeet for the place and employment. Many think they have
done much if they have exactly conformed to Rites and Ceremonies. No Man in the
Communion of the Church of England can reasonably think so, both because there
are no Rites and Ceremonies prescribed to be observed by the Congregation; and
because those very few retained in all our Church-Offices jointly taken, are
declared to have no intrinsic Holiness, but to be in themselves things
indifferent, and no otherwise enjoined: But it is in every Man's observation,
that a great part of the Fanatic fury (by themselves mistaken for a Godly
Zeal) is spent in loud, boistrous, and malicious invectives, against innocent
Habits, Gestures, and the Observation of Anniversaries, etc. as if their malice
and ill words were (what they will not allow the Papists good works to be,
viz.) meritorious; nay farther (that which the Holy Sisters esteem more
precious) much of the Pulpit sweat is wasted in impertinent railings, (by way
of useful digressions, when arrived at an end of sense and reason,) against
Episcopacy, the supposed Superstitions and Ceremonies of the Church of England,
and the wickedness, and profaneness of all other Men, but their own sweet
selves: Hence their pride and affectation, prejudice and malice, their
censoriousness and moroseness of humor, their fourness and bitterness of
Spirit, etc. All the rest of this Paragraph seems more applicable to the Church
of Rome, which is overgrown with Ceremonies, and Representations of Spiritual
Mysteries, by sensible Objects, than to the Church of England, in whose Public
Worship and Administration of the Sacraments, a Man cannot speak of Sacraments
in the Plural Number. Piety has been scorned, vilified, and persecuted under
the notion of Puritanism. If the Name of Puritans was assumed by themselves, as
pretending (like their Predecessors the Pharisees and Novatian Heretics) to be
more Pure and Holy than others, there is no reason they should be dissatisfied
with the use of it by others: Yet that Piety has been scorned, etc. perhaps
will not be so easily proved, as said; for real Piety, Honesty, Justice, and
Charity have the inward and tacit approbation of all Men, and the outward
applause of all; except only some few ill bred, envious, and designing Persons,
who yet can neither condemn nor scorn it: But the affectation of a canting
dialect, a superstitious placing of Religion in the use of indifferent things,
and an outside and formal preciseness, and an abundance of Zeal, in and about
trifles, used by many; when (like the Painted Sepulchers of the Pharisees) they
are full of secret corruptions, the discovery of their seeming Sanctity, to be
the most odious wickedness under the Vizor of Hypocrisy, exposes them to the
scorn and contempt of the World; like him who pretended he could not endure to
have a Bishop's hand laid on his Head by way of Ordination, but (besides his
other crimes) could embrue his Hands in an Archbishops Blood by a revengful
Murder; or him, who under pretense of Conscience, was a Schismatic, from that
Church to which the use of Ceremonies could not be objected, and an active
Rebel against his Sovereign; and yet lived in Fornications and Adulteries, and
was guilty of Incests and Bestialities: not that all called Puritans and
Schismatics, have been guilty of such gross sins, but that when such Men's
seeming Religious Zeal, and the concealment under it has been discovered, and
that though outwardly they strain at Gnats, yet secretly can swallow Camels;
then not true Piety, but the Hypocritical pretender to it, is scorned and
vilify'd.

The next Paragraph of our Author's own endicting (being the first in page
20th) is an extravagant furious accusation of, I know not whom, upon I know not
what account; if his passion be over, and he be yet come to himself, and left
Master of any modesty or reason, let him look it over, I know not what to say
to such scurrilous railing and lying.

The Removal of Ceremonies will take away the Vizor, with which Formalists, Page
(...)
Hypocrites, Wicked and Profane Men do cover themselves. Suppose kneeling at
Prayers, and standing up at the Creed and Gospel, to be Ceremonies; they are
the only Ceremonies enjoined the Congregation, in the ordinary Public Worship
prescribed in the Church of England; Will the removal of them take away the
Vizor, with which Formalists, Hypocrites, Wicked and Profane Men cover
themselves? Wicked and Profane Men as the words themselves imply, are
barefaced Sinners, and wear no Vizor; and as for Formality and Hypocrisy,
they were never (since the Ancient Pharisees) used by any more than by our
Modern Sectarists; nor ever so much in esteem and fashion, as since the number
of those, who under that disguise, decry Ceremonies, made them bold and
confident: Had kneeling at Prayers, and standing at the Creed and Gospel been
such an excellent Vizor, it would not be prudence in us to abolish them,
especially, for nothing; for many of the Dissenters, who need a Vizor as well
as others, would either use them in their Conventicles, or come over to us
themselves, merely for the benefit of them; but suppose (what it is almost
ridiculous to suppose, viz.) that our Author had herein spoken Truth and
Reason; yet the removal of Ceremonies would effect little as to that: for we
find that the Dissenters, who seldom kneel at Prayers, or use the Creed, and
have no Gospel, have yet under the Vizor of purity, preciseness, and tenderness
of Conscience, done abundantly beyond all that ever Ceremonies can or could
pretend to; neither need we to strip our Church Offices of these, and run from
the little remainders of decency, remaining in use in our Churches, into
downright rusticity, and more than Corinthian rudeness in our Public Worship,
in hopes that then, Drunkards, (...)
Swearers, Whoremongers, and such like will be known to be what they are, a
mere Herd of Brutes. It would be a foolish and too costly an experiment, and an
extravagant instance of our levity and indiscretion; but no discovery unless of
that which every body knows already; or if any Man wants farther satisfaction
herein, let him repair to our Author, who can tell him such wonderful things
concerning Rites, Ceremonies, etc. as all the World never dreamed on before,
nor any Man of but ordinary Sense and Judgment will believe now.

5. Mischiefs in promoting a mighty increase of profaneness and all kind of
wickedness. Pag^ (...)
--

1. Profaneness in the outrageous contempt of holy things. The tautologies,
impertinencies, improper inferences, and untrue assertions of our Author's
Pamphlet, are too many to be considered or remarked; but a Man must either have
a conceit of himself like to that of his own Infallibility, or else he must
presume wonderfully upon the simplicity, dullness, and ignorance of his Readers;
before he comes to put such down right contradictions upon them: Him who all
this while he has bitterly inveighed against as a Bigot and Zealot, he now
makes a profane and outrageous contemner of holy Things; whereas Zeal (when
taken in ill part for Superstition) and profaneness are, and always were
esteemed the two contrary extremes and vices on either side Religion. There is
scarce any thing in Religion, that has escaped the scorn and reproach of blind
Zealots; The Ordinance of Preaching, the Lords Day, the Scripture, our Holy
Religion, and Jesus Christ himself; all have been struck at. To scorn and
reproach, Preaching, Scripture, the Lord's Day, etc. has been always hitherto
looked upon as a Sign of a Profane, and not of a Zealous Person, and this
Author has shown us no reason to change our Sentiments; but suppose his words
to be true, hence we may observe, 1st. That a Schism caused by a difference in
belief (though erroneous) can never be reunited by the abolition of Ceremonies,
for the cause remaining, the effect would continue, 2ly. That the apprehensions
of Men being so various, and their judgments so discrepant, a comprehension
without a compliance in things indifferent, and a forbearance with Men in their
particular Opinions can never be effected; but these being once supposed, it
may follow as things now are. 3ly. That there are diverse others as extravagant
Zealots as our Author, whose Notions are altogether impracticable who increase
the Schism, and widen the Separations in the Church; under pretense of making
propositions for a comprehension, and should not be regarded till they learn
more discretion and moderation, than at once to ask the abolishing of all
Ceremonies, the exercise of jurisdiction, (...)
and power of Orders, and the pulling down the whole Constitutions of our
Church.

The Ordinance of Preaching. (...) 21.
The constant, serious, diligent performing of this, would spread knowledge
amongst the People to the prejudice of humane impositions in Divine Worship:
They would see what light things they are in the Service of God. (...) 43.
The Constitutions of the Church of England, are so far from discouraging or
obstructing constant, serious, diligent Preaching (as our Author would
insinuate) that on the contrary she requires and enjoins it, (so that in that
sense even the Ordinance of Preaching may properly be called an Humane
Imposition;) neither do we of her Communion, if Passionate, Malicious,
Schismatical, Sinister-designing Railing go not (as often it has) under that
notion, fear any prejudice thereby ensuing, to any Impositions in use in our
Divine Worship. We wish all Men in our Communion, and in theirs too; were more
knowing, pious, discreet, honest, and conscientious than all the Preaching of
Dissenters, and our Author, with all others of his Opinion, is ever like to
make them. We would be glad all Men did see what light things all our
Impositions and Ceremonies, both, are in the Service of God; hoping then they
would be better satisfied both of the lawfulness and decency of them, and if
their prejudices and interests (which with ignorance are the great causes of
our Schisms and Separations) should not hinder, would approve of them and
conform to the use of them, for their lightness adds to their weight and value,
and their easiness and fewness to their Commendation; for those Impositions and
Ceremonies which were otherwise allowable (as were the Jewish) when their numbe
(like theirs) makes them weighty, Matt. (...)
become a burden too heavy to be born. As for Preaching, it must be confessed
to be far less necessary now, (at least in a converted Nation) than when the
World was Pagan. And whereas the Papists have resolved all public religious
Duties into Prayers, and the Dissenters have run into the other extreme, and
placed them in long Preachments: the Church of England, has herein, as in most
other things, retained the golden Mean, and uses both, and tho frequency is
more necessary to the former, yet the latter is not to be neglected; but when
it excludes Catechizing, the change is made for the worse: and indeed were that
most useful way of instruction of both the young and ignorant, much used in the
Primitive Church, and prescribed by our own, revived, thoroughly performed, and
duly frequented; Can. (...) 61.
as it would be far more difficult to the Teacher, so it would be far more
beneficial to the People, than Preaching.

The Lords Day has met with many and great Enemies among the Ritualists. Page
(...)
I know of no Men in the Church of England that are Enemies to the Lord's Day,
and if any such there are, they never learned it from their Mother. It
suffices to my purpose that nothing is constituted or used in our Church to
hinder or discountenance the most pious and religious observation of it, but so
far on the contrary, that our public Worship is appointed to be every where
observed on it: Neither am I (or any other in her Communion, I suppose) against
the most strict and Christian observation of the whole day, which is
reconcilable to the necessities and infirmities of this life, provided always,
that it be not accounted, nor used as a Jewish Sabbath) nor observed by way of
obedience to the fourth Commandment of the Decalogue.

The Scripture has its share of contempt from Ceremonialists; Page (...)
of the truth hereof, the Impositions of Rome are a full proof. What are the
Impositions of the Church of Rome to us? Who is bound to justify all things in
use in that Church? Let our Author if he be at leisure, and so please, try his
hand with them, and see what Defense they will make. As to us, either let Men
write to the purpose, or not trouble themselves, abuse the ignorant, and harden
the prejudiced; or tell us particularly which are those Impositions which are
Terms of Communion, and which are Scriptural and unscriptural, or otherwise he
and such like who make precarious suppositions, and from thence deduce
Inferences as much inconsequent, must expect to hear that their pretended
preciseness is childish; and the wresting alleged places of Scripture, from
their genuine senses, to their own purposes, is no other than impertinency;
which is no reflection on the sacred Scripture; but on those superstitious and
scrupulous Persons, who desiring to seem more holy than others, raise doubts
under pretenses of Conscience; and to appear more wise and understanding in the
Scriptures (as if they could see those things there which no Man could ever do
before) quote them, tho improper to prove what they design.

2. (...) 4.
Mischiefs in promoting an increase of all kind of wickedness. What our Author
says upon this Head, is of a piece with the rest of his Pamphlet, magisterial
assertions without Proof or Reason, precarious suppositions, and idle beggings
of the Question, intermixed with scurrilous reflections, is stuffed with bitter
Railings; (...)
These are part of his words: The most immoral Men if they did pretend zeal for
Ceremonies, and were furious against Dissenters, did pass for good Christians,
and true Sons of the Church. I might as well, viz. with no less truth and
reason, say, that amongst the Dissenters, The most immoral Men if they did
pretend zeal against Ceremonies, and were furious against Conformists, did pass
for good Christians, in their own phrase, true Professors and the seriously
Godly, and in the Dialect arrived here the last year sound Protestants; and
with at least equal pretense subjoin his words, (...).
This false measure has hardened abundance in their evil ways, mightily
cherished and increased Vice in the Land. If he is not satisfied with this way
of answering; let him alter his way of writing, when he can make good his words
I shall easily do mine. He adds, Conformity to Ceremonies has been a Cloak
that has covered the most filthy Abominations. Had this been true, Dissenters
would never have been so numerous. The changing one word, putting Opposition
for Conformity, and reading it thus, Opposition to Ceremonies has been a Cloak
that has covered the most filthy Abominations, will make the Sentence much
truer, and this Assertion of mine needs no other proof than the allowance of
what he insinuates plainly enough in these words, A Ceremonial War has been
once fatal to Clergy men: (...) 7. (...) etc. (...) 2
to be true. They assure us, That the Rebellion against King Charles the First,
was raised to oppose Ceremonies, and elsewhere to the same purpose, the words
are plain and admit of no other interpretation; I therefore challenge him to
give the like instance or proof of Conformity to Ceremonies being a Cloak to
cover the most filthy Abominations, (...)
which if he does, he shall carry his Cause.

6. Hindering a world of Good. It cannot be proved that Ceremonies in Worship
ever did any good. (...) 25.
We in the Church of England (as I have said) have no Ceremonies in use, or
enjoined in our public Worship, unless kneeling at Prayers, and standing at
the Creed and Gospel, he called Ceremonies; and if they be, they may do so much
good, as to testify our inward humility, and devotion, in the one, our
resolution to stand by, maintain, and defend the other; and our Communion with
the Primitive, and diverse Modern Christian Churches, in both: and this, if Men
were not contentious, though short, might be a satisfactory account of two
ancient and Catholic, and even in themselves decent Postures. What good more
would our Author have of them? They hinder Reformation, Love, and Communion of
Churches.

1. They hinder Reformation. In the Reformation of the Church of England from
the Novelties and corruptions in Doctrines and Practices tending to Idolatry,
Superstition, and Schism from the Primitive and Catholic Church of Christ,
great care was taken to prevent the Papists still continuing in the Communion
of the Church of Rome, from accusing us of injustice and perverseness in
abolishing any thing which was innocent and decent in it self, made venerable
by Antiquity, and Catholic by the use of the Universal Church, or merely
because they used it: which prudent and Christian moderation, as it was
designed to justify our Reformation from the imputation of Schism or
unnecessary separation, and prevent the giving a scandal to them, or throwing a
stumbling block before them, which might hinder their coming over to our
Communion: So it was attended with so good success, that it became more
generally and universally received through this Kingdom, than in those places
where it was brought in by force, and accompanied with Tumults and Rebellions,
as in Scotland, Switzerland, the Low Countries, etc. Insomuch that had not that
politic King of Spain, Philip II. prevailed with the Pope by his Bull to
prohibit the Roman Catholics here in Queen Elizabeth's time, to frequent our
Churches; it is with great probability conjectured that her happy Reign would
so far have out lived Popery, as that it would no more have been openly
professed in this Kingdom. And agreeably hereunto, I remember a Clergyman of
my Acquaintance who lived some years in Ireland, affirmed in my hearing, that
if Kneeling at the Sacrament, the use of Godfathers, and the Sign of the Cross
at Baptism were abolished in Ireland; it would breed such a prejudice in the
Irish, a People very tenacious of their first Principles, against the
Protestant Religion, that they would very hardly be brought over to it, and
that one of the greatest prejudices they labor under in that Church, upon that
account, is the abolishing of Confession to the Priest, and of Public and
Catholic Church fasts. However what our Author adds, viz. Ibi^.
The Quarrels occasioned by them hinder the Progress of the Reformed Religion;
must be granted, if it be understood, that the many Divisions and variety of
Sects amongst us; is an Objection the Papists make against the translation of
the Bible into the vulgar Tongue, and their pretense for their not coming over
into that Church which is already so full of subdivisions, caused as they think
by the forsaking of the visible Head of the Church here on Earth, under whose
conduct they therefore continue, as the only means to preserve Unity, and avoid
confusion. But this must not be charged upon the Church, whose Moderation is
designed as a preservative of Union, but on those perverse and humoursom
Persons whom nothing will satisfy: there is nothing in use in our Church, but
he who condemns it, must condemn with it the Catholic Church of Christ; and he
who dare do that, is a man no ways fit to be gratified by the condescension of
a Nation, and the alteration of the most perfect Liturgy and the best
Ecclesiastical Constitutions, that any visible Church now known to us, enjoys.
Pag^ (...)
-- All wise and good Men amongst the Clergy and People desire the taking away
the Instruments of our Confusions. The execution of this would extend farther
than our Author intends it, or for fear of his own Copyhold would assent to:
Many Pharisaical Zealots by an opposite Superstition (in whose number I place
him) injuriously accuse our innocent Ceremonies, as the instruments of our
confusions, when indeed they are not (as we shall shortly consider) but Men,
which if they should be taken away or brought within the compass of the
Apostle's wish, (...) 5.12.
the Conventicle-doors would be shut up, and our Author himself dismissed.

Ceremonies have been Cloaks of Impiety and Maliciousness: ^^id.
if these are continued it will be exceeding difficult to purge out Vice, which
will shelter it self under them. This Expression (like the greatest part of his
Pamphlet) has an abundance of prejudice and malice; but no truth or show of
Reason; for how is it possible, that Ceremonies should be the Cloak of Impiety,
whenas if the Ceremonies be supposed to be numerous, vain, or not agreeable to
the simplicity and spiritual sincerity of the Christian Religion (for then only
they become noxious) they indeed become the parents of Superstition; but can
never as such be the Cloaks of Impiety, because it is the opposite extreme. Why
may not that Man who kneels at his Prayers, and stands at the repetition of the
Creeds, and Gospels, as easily have his Vice purged out, as he who sits at his
Prayers, and frequents a schismatical Meeting where they use no Creeds, nor
Gospels? Or what strange Vice is it which can shelter it self more about a Man
kneeling or standing in our Church, than about one who sits in a Conventicle?
These are such gross, absurd, malicious, and false insinuations, and assertions
of our Author's, that I wonder, he is not ashamed to propose them to a
Convocation, or even to undervalue himself by writing them, or can in
Conscience thus abuse the credulous Vulgar, whose unaccountable prejudices are,
by such Artifices very easily improved into Malice and Schism. Debauchery came
in with Ceremonies, (...) 28.
we shall be happy if they fall together. To make this good (if we pass by the
British Churches) our Author must grant that Debauchery came into England with
Augustine, commonly called St. Augustine, sent hither by Gregory the Great
Bishop of Rome in the seventh Century; for he brought more Ceremonies in with
Christianity, (...) Test^^y to (...) Truth ^^esus ^^st, and ^^ur ^^mn ^^gue,
than are now in use in our Church: but this I suppose he never thought of.
However that Debauchery has no dependence on Ceremonies, appears even from
hence; that in the late times of Rebellion, wherein the Government both of
Church and State being dissolved, and there was no King, every one did that
which was right in his own Eyes, all sorts of Vice, Wickedness, and Debauchery
grew up to that strength and vigor that they have never since been rooted out
of this Kingdom; and though now we should part with all our Ceremonies, which
we would very gladly do upon condition we could banish all Debaucheries with
them; yet there are no hopes to effect it, as long as Schisms are no Crimes,
and the pretended Puritans are indulged in the sins of the godly, and that God
sees no sin in his Elect, etc. is allowed for Orthodox Divinity.

2. They hinder love among the People, and between the People, and their
Ministers.

1. Love amongst the People is mightily hindered by the divisions and
animosities caused by human Impositions. That human Impositions are the causes
of our Divisions and Animosities, is presupposed by our Author, since he
asserts it without proof; but this is but begging of the Question, we must not
grant him that as a Postulatum, I leave what I design to say on the true causes
of the Schism till the last. In the mean time, that love amongst the People is
hindered by our Divisions and Animosities is too apparent to be denied; tho that
ought in truth and justice to be charged upon the Dissenters, as the evil
effects of their unnecessary and wilful separation; for Ours being supposed
(which they also grant) a true Christian Church, their Schism becomes
unnecessary, and therefore sinful, and these Animosities are the fruits of that
Schism, and the pride of their Spirits, heightened by their Teacher's
industrious railings against our Church, and her Constitutions, thereby to gain
Proselytes to themselves, and retain them to their own advantage -- Soon after
the Restoration, the Enemies of Piety, and Virtue, resolved to continue the
division between the two most potent Interests of the Protestants in England;
to further this a Sham-plot was cast upon the Presbyterians in several
Counties; this was so improved in Parliament that Penal Laws were easily
obtained to inslave and destroy the Dissenters. By the Enemies of Piety and
Virtue (whosoever our Author means) if we will reconcile it to Truth, can be
understood none but the Dissenters; because it lay only in their power either
to renew and continue a Division, which they did; or to reunite themselves with
the Church of England, as they ought to have done, and so to have prevented the
Evils which it has since produced. It is no wonder our Author takes such
Liberty to make undecent (if true) reflections upon some single Persons; when
he ventures to cast such a severe tho oblique one, upon the whole Parliament,
as to insinuate them all to be imposed upon by a Sham-plot; yet I would gladly
know how he came by such skill in discerning of Spirits, as to discover that to
be a Sham-plot, which was cast upon the Presbyterians, when the Parliament so
far believed it, as to make Penal Laws (a good sign they were in earnest) upon
that occasion. Some think the best evidence we have for the Popish Plot, is the
credit given to it by Parliament; now suppose a Papist of equal credit with our
Author, should say the Popish Plot was a Sham-plot (for it is as easily said)
would he or others therefore believe him, or not rather think he casts an
unhandsom reflection on that Venerable and Sage Assembly? Our Author reflects
undecently upon King Charles the Second, because upon the account of his
Subjects he made War upon the Protestant States of Holland: he might have
remembered that that was no more than the long Presbyterian Parliament had done
in the times of the late Rebellion, and that the attempt, to take their Smyrna
Fleet was no more robbing than that, to take the Spanish Plate-fleet, and far
more justifiable than the designed surprise of Hispaniola. How little the
Protestant States of Holland care for the Protestant Religion, or for the Crown
of England (tho their best and truest Friend in Queen Elizabeth's time) their
carriage toward her Successors at several times since, at Amboyna, Moscovia,
Siam, the Island of Fornosa, Bantam, etc. are sufficient evidences, and show us
what we may expect from them, whenever we have no other security than the
Protestant Religion; he that is not satisfied herewith, let him try them
farther. Ictus piscator sapit.

2. (...)
They hinder love between Ministers, and the People. Ceremonies, or the use of
them cannot hinder love between Ministers and People: but when certain Men
calling themselves Ministers of the Gospel (tho their Mission be at best
precarious, and they both teach and practice things contrary to it) who by
false criminations and injurious Railings, founded in ignorance, and carried on
with design, possess blind Zealots with a false opinion of their being
Antichristian, and inflame fierce and turbulent Spirits, with their
exclamations against them, as Popish; are suffered at their pleasure to
sacrifice to their own Nets: they may by such Artifices hinder love between
Teachers and their People; yet all this Outcry against Ceremonies is used for a
pretense to promote Interests; if no Ceremonies were used, and consequently
this pretense were wanting, they would soon find others, as we may see in
Scotland, where there are none enjoined. We live in a knowing Age, People see
the vanity of those things on which some among us place all their Zeal. He must
certainly be both an ignorant Fellow, and conscious of it, who is afraid of his
Hearers's becoming too knowing for him; It is a great part of a Teacher's
business to instruct them, and the greater fruits he can reap of his own
labors, or their industry, or both, the better: I heartily wish all the Men in
England were much more knowing, judicious, and wise than they are; and that
amongst other Reasons for this also, that so they might see the vanity of
placing and spending all their Zeal, in their opposition to such innocent and
indifferent things, as Vestments which they never wear, and Gestures which they
seldom use: for the Dissenters violent opposition and separation (supposing it
conscientious and not pretended) upon the account of Gestures, Habits, and
those three innocent, ancient, and Catholic Ceremonies retained in our Church,
but not imposed upon the Laity, are as great and cogent Arguments of their
ignorance and superstition; as the Papist's gentle embracing and receiving such
a multitude (many whereof are Novel, and some unjustifiable) upon the Authority
of their Church: only here is the difference made by an advantage on their
side; they do it out of a principle of Peace, Unity, Submission and Obedience,
which is the Parent of Virtue; but these act out of a proud, schismatical,
contentious, and disobedient Disposition, which is the mother of Vice. They
value us only for Piety, Sobriety, and Diligence; I wish they would value the
learned Men of our Church for their Piety, Sobriety, and Diligence, which if
they would, those qualifications being very reconcilable with all, and more
Ceremonies than are used in our Church: such Persons using them should more
rationally beget a good opinion of the Ceremonies; than the Ceremonies in
themselves innocent, an ill opinion of them, that use them.

3. They hinder the Communion of Churches. Page (...)
We have stood at so great a distance from other Reformed Churches. If there be
too great a distance between us and other Reformed Churches, the fault is not
therefore on our side, but on their's, who made a farther Secession and
Separation from the Catholic Church of Christ, than was either necessary or
lawful; and cannot be excused any better than by the iniquity of the times,
Apol. (...) Confe^ ^^ne, and (...) Exan^^ Cens. (...)
and the necessity of their Affairs and Circumstances, which diverse of the
Reformers in other Countries have both acknowledged and lamented: It has been
the concern of some, that wanting the concurrence of Authority, they could not
bring their Reformation to the same perfection, as ours; and indeed the
greatest defects of ours must be imputed to the want of Authority, and the
licentiousness and refractoriness of the People. In the mean time, I know none
of the Reformed Churches (except perhaps the Lutherans upon the account of
their retaining Images, and holding Consubstantiation) would, or do, refuse
Communion with us; but if any do, it is more their fault, than ours; It is far
more fit and reasonable that they should by endeavoring to arrive at greater
Perfection, make their advances toward us, who retain the Primitive and
Catholic Government; than that we receding from it, should decline to their
popular and imperfect Model, whose Antiquity is only sufficient to make it the
parent of Confusion and subdivisions; and has in its effects and consequences
been more fatal to Europe, than the Spanish Inquisition. See H^^^ry of (...)
Presb^^
Our Author's politic contrivance which follows in his Pamphlet; when Men are,
or will be all of one mind (which the abolishing all the Church Customs and
Ceremonies he can name or think on, will never make them) may take place; but
in the mean time is as much impracticable as an Union of Diffenters amongst
themselves.

Our Author seeming to be out of breath, and to have lost himself, in a tedious
railing Ramble, pretends to turn from the warm Men (forgetting himself to be of
the number) has changed his Object, but not his Subject; so that in the
following Harangue directed to the Pious and learned Pastors of the Church; I
need not here as new observe the virulency, malice, and bitter and calumnious
railing at it; for the whole contexture of his Pamphlet is in such language as
sufficiently argues him a very unfit Man to be a Moderator, much less a Peace
maker. As to the Prophetic part both of it and the Pamphlet; As I think he
has given no great indications of his being endued with the spirit of
Prophecy; So I, who make no pretensions that way, shall not (though perhaps I
might with a greater probability) contradict him, but rather wish that he and
many others (whose ambition it has been to be thought wiser than more modest
Men) had been more sparing both in the interpretations of Prophecies in such a
manner, and in uttering their own Imaginations and Whimsies in such terms, as
have encouraged some unjudicious and credulous Persons (by the like phanciful
application of the fulfilling of them to themselves) to attempt strange things
to the disturbance of our Church's, and the Kingdoms Peace; the Emotions of the
Anabaptists in Germany long since, and the Fifth-Monarchy-men in England in the
time of King Charles the Second, are such evident instances hereof, that I need
name no more. I could be heartily glad that that expression of his to them.
(...). 31.
It depends much on your pious Counsels to calm the storms that rage in some
Men's minds, to heal our breaches, etc. were true, tho for a far better, more
generous and Christian end, than that which he adds, To make us a terror to
our Enemies: and wish that our Author to prove it, would give us an instance of
the Efficacy of their pious Counsels by the future calmness of the storm that
so lately rages in his own Mind, and in his Disciples.

5. (...). 35.
The danger that threatens us in the continuance of Ceremonies in the Worship
of God -- We are threatened with a double danger, present, and future.

1. Our present danger: this may be set forth in three Particulars.

1. The continuance of these things, will bring upon us the contempt and hatred
of the People.

It was well enough (because plainly and honestly) confessed, and the motive
allowed sufficient for the writing of a Play, which the Comedian acknowledges
in his Prologue, Poeta, cum primum animum ad scribendum appulit,
Id sibi negoti credidit solum dari.
Populo ut placerent, quas fecisset fabulas.
But it ill becomes a Divine, to plead for any alterations in the worship of
God by arguments drawn from worldly Interests and Advantages, even the favor
of a Prince, much less of a Populace, one single Reason deduced from the Peace
and Union of the Church; were it to be this way attained (as it never will,
after the greatest condescensions, alterations, and abolitions our Author, or a
more furious Phanatick, if any such there be, can propose) in the balances of
the Sanctuary (which only are to be used by the Church) would infinitely
outweigh all such considerations. And I may add, that the continuance of these
things is so far from the bringing upon us the hatred and contempt of the
People; that on the contrary the abolishing of them would most certainly, and
upon far juster grounds, do it, as being Persons of levity and inconstancy in
our religious Worship, and making it truckle to our worldly Interests and
designs; men, that have not hitherto been in earnest with God, or the World,
who prostitute their Consciences to the pleasure of others, and are contented
for advancement to make themselves ridiculous, by giving the Lie to all their
public Professions, Declarations, Subscriptions, Defenses, Vindications, and
use of our Church-Customs and Constitutions. The Dissenters doubt of the
lawfulness of our terms of Communion, and therefore cannot yield to us; (...)
but we may with ease and innocence condescend to them, in quitting Impositions
not appointed by God. What our Author means by terms of Communion, and
Impositions not appointed by God, who can tell, he having no where told us? but
while he intimates the former to be unlawful, and the latter to be so
innocently, easily, and advantageously parted with, he does but beg the
Question: If it were enough to say, the Dissenters doubt of the lawfulness of
our Church, Customs, and Constitutions, and therefore cannot yield to us; by
equal reason, it may be sufficient to return; we doubt of the lawfulness of
parting with them, and therefore cannot yield to them. However when our Author
and his Clients the Dissenters shall show unto us, what and which are by us
made terms of Communion, and are unlawful, as also, which are the Impositions
that are, and are not appointed by God; and when he and they are come to an
agreement amongst themselves, and give us security to be all concluded by it;
then I dare engage the Church of England will join with them, and do what they
would have done; in the mean time, it is not rational to talk of an Union,
since no Man knows what will please them.

The Bishop of Salisbury's Exhortation is very good, but I think it should more
properly have been directed to the Dissenters, for it is in their Power only to
heal the wounds, and close the Schisms they have (to say no worse)
unnecessarily made, by their own voluntary separation from us; but in ours it
is not, tho we should give away our Ceremonies, our Liturgy, our Churches, our
Consciences, and our Lives.

Our Brethren have according to the Act of Indulgence subscribed our Doctrine,
(...)
and are thereby incorporated into the Church of England. Except I see the
Subscriptions of our Author's Brethren, or at the least receive it from far
better Testimony than his Pamphlet; I shall not believe, that they have
subscribed the Thirty Nine Articles of the Church of England, for I never
remember such an instance of their Obedience to Authority, and it is difficult
to leave an old ill custom; but if it be true, then they have thereby approved
of our Ordinations, Creeds, and consequentially of our Ceremonies also; yet are
they not thereby incorporated into the Church of England, for incorporation
into a Church does not depend upon believing (or testifying that belief by
subscription) of some few Principles in Religion (which perhaps may so be
elected and composed that Papists, Lutherans, Calvinists, Arminians,
Independents, etc. (which hold not mutual communion amongst themselves) may
subscribe them;) but in being baptized in it, as to Infants, and in living in
actual Communion in the Word, Sacraments, Prayers, and other Public Offices
with it, as to the adult and faithful: Suppose they did all subscribe the whole
39 Articles, and agree with us in the substantials of our Religion, 1 (...). 3,
(...)
(which are only worth contending for) is it not a plain Argument of their
pride, carnality, and disobedience, that they will make a Schism and separate
from our Communion upon the account of order and decency, and the use of such
things as they themselves cannot say are unlawful? Who and what Party used to
obstruct Affairs in Parliament, he needs no Information, who can remember the
Reign of King Charles II. But to charge some Clergymen, and Priest ridden
Gentlemen, with the obstructing the Affairs of Parliament, hindering the Relief
of Derry, etc. can be looked upon nothing less than a malicious slander, till
he names the Men, and proves the thing, if he can do either, or both of them,
let him, he is welcome; he will do good service, he needs not fear, the Law is
on his Side; Criminals ought to be brought to Justice, and he may expect a
Reward; however he has malice enough toward Clergymen, and (perhaps for
their sakes to) the Priest ridden Gentlemen, to discover them if he knew them;
and therefore unless he does so, what he says, ought in all reason to be
esteemed as a notorious Calumny and Libel, and our Author to be dealt with
accordingly. Who brought Ireland and Scotland into their late, and present
condition is very well known. (...) 6.
All the pious, sober, and moderate Clergymen are for a Union. I believe they
are so, but all the Question is, how we shall attain it; an abundance of Men
have undertaken to dictate to the Convocation; many whereof have (like the
Cobbler in the Proverb, who went beyond his Last, judged of things beyond the
Verge of their knowledge, and prescribed Methods both unreasonable and
impracticable; Our Author cannot be thought to have contributed to the cure,
but must be accounted amongst those unskilful Operators, who instead of
lessening and removing, have only increased our Maladies, and made them more
incurable; for in lieu of Wine and Oil, he has brought Gall and Vinegar to
pour into the Churches Wounds. The account he gives of the rest of the Clergy,
is such as can be called no less than an heap of malicious false suggestions,
and slanderous, railing accusations, and deserves and admits of no particular
answer; If I should say of his magnified Clients, the Dissenting Teachers, some
are whimsical Enthusiasts, and not worthy our regard; some are ignorant Dunces
and incompetent Judges; some are Proud and Hypocritical Pharisees, and separate
as their Predecessors amongst the Jews to be thought more holy than others;
that their Glory and Triumph consists in leading filly Women captive; that
instead of the Solid and Practical Doctrins taught in the Church of England,
they entertain their seduced and beguiled Disciples, with useless, canting, and
unintelligible Phrases; that their separation from our Communion, was not so
much out of Conscience, as out of Pride, Peevishness, and Love of opposition to
their Superiors in Church and State; that they study more to avoid the scandal
than the vice, and differ from the most profane, but as he who wears a Vizor
from him who goes barefaced, that they all drive on a Carnal and Worldly
Interest, and do but maintain a Faction, to be maintained by it: I should do
violence to my inclinations and intentions, and write with almost as little
civility and show of good breeding; but with far more truth and modesty than he
has done, concerning the Clergy of the Established Church.

Our Author for fear his successive cajoling and railing, should not prevail
with the Church of England, to part with those ancient Rites, and laudable
Customs, wherein she holds Communion with the Primitive and Catholic Churches;
whereby she justifies her separation from the Roman, and performs the solemn
Worship of God, with decency and uniformity in her own Public Assemblies;
which her Pious and Prudent Reformers and Fathers recommending unto Authority,
are secured unto us by Laws, and Constitutions; and he in contempt calls
Ceremonies; proceeds now at length to threatenings, to frighten her Members into
a compliance; and to this purpose he tells our Clergymen, that in the next
Rebellion, the People, viz. the Dissenters will be severely revenged on them,
Page (...)
make sure work with them, (I suppose he means, by cutting their Throats, for
that is as secure a way as any I know) and totally extirpate them: Whether our
Author speaks these things experimentally, from what some suffered in the late
Rebellion, or prophetically by virtue of his talent that way, let the learned
judge; however we may see what manner of Spirit, he and his Clients are of, and
how fit he is to be a Peacemaker, and what manner of stuff he has proposed to
the Convocation; he might well have called his Pamphlet, the second part of the
Healing Attempt. As for those dreadful Comminations, who can deny their being
probable? What passed between the Years 1635. and 1660. is sufficient to teach
us that the usage of Presbyterians, and Papists, to those in their Power, is
much alike, and that when they shall have the same or the like opportunities,
an indissolvible House of Commons to protect them, and the Rabble to fight for
them, and their Brethren of Scotland to assist them; they may expect the same
or a worse Persecution; for what fair Quarter can they look for, when Kings are
beheaded, etc. But in the mean time, what would he have them to do, to pull
down their Churches themselves, for fear the Dissenters should do it? This is,
but for a Man to hang himself for fear of dying. In the next National Deluge of
Rebellion and Bloodshed, which our Author Prophesies to be at hand, and our
Friends the Dissenters (true Lovers of Peace, desirers of Union, and upholders
of Monarchy) in pursuance of their Solemn League and Covenant, and for the
establishment of their Godly Discipline) shall bring upon us, and therein
overwhelm our Church and State, they do not expect to escape, nor are covetous
to survive them, and yet at present, are not willing either to be the Authors
of, or to anticipate their own misery.

2. Our danger of losing all our lately recovered Rights, (...)
if by our Divisions we should again let in the Common Enemy. That our Church's
parting with all her Liturgy, Rites, Ceremonies, and what else our Author has
confidence enough to ask, would not reunite the Dissenters to the Established
Church; I shall elsewhere endeavor to make apparent. I shall therefore here
only observe, that in this time of danger, all the Dissenters, even the most
Potent Interests, as well as the lesser Sects, would do well and wisely (since
better Motives will not prevail with them,) to reunite themselves with the
Church of England; but to exhort the Church of England to go over to any of
them, is not so proper or decent. The Agreement of the Church of England, with
Scripture, and the Primitive and Catholic Church, both in Doctrine and
Government; the moderation of her Reformation; Her Apologies, Defenses, and
Vindications of her self and practices, from the Calumnies of the Church of
Rome and Separatists; her Orthodoxness of Principles, Regularity of
Constitutions and Legal Establishments; to which I might add the Personal
obligations a great part of the Nation is under not to endeavor any
alterations in the Government of either Church or State, as by Law established;
all prohibit it, and make it unequal and unreasonable. And farther, that if the
Church of England will not, for these and other reasons, part with any Rite,
Ceremony, laudable Custom or Constitutions; till the Dissenters shall prove
them unlawful, or show her better motives so to do; yet there is therefore
nothing the more danger of losing all our lately recovered Rights, by letting
in again the Common Enemy; unless we suppose, the always peevish Fanatics,
should now take the Pet, because they are not humored in every thing, and all
turn Papists, and going over into Ireland, should (doing in earnest, what they
in jest promised him,) stand by King James with their Lives and Fortunes. As to
our Author's long excursion, on the cruelties of the Papists; it cannot be
denied, even by him who would Advocate their Cause, that they have used wrong,
unchristian, and cruel Methods, to preserve the Unity of their Church: of
which, I hope, they are now ashamed, God forbid! that the like should ever be
used again, or the same repeated. Neither is it any more than truth, that the
Calvinists though they want their Opinion of merit to actuate them; and that of
the Damnation of all but those of their own Church to excuse them; have yet so
well improved the rest of their Principles, and prosecuted them under a
pretense of duty, and the Obligations of Public Conjurations, with as great an
industry, as if they rivaled them, and scorned to come short of their Example.
Popery, under the Vizor of Zeal for the Extirpation of Heresy, was the first
Enemy the Reformed Church of England had to encounter, and attempted to
strangle it in it is Infancy, but being overcome by the sincere practice of her
Primitive Doctrine of Passive Obedience and Non-Resistance, it vanished, and
left it in the possession of a most Glorious Victory, which it enjoyed for a
while; but alas, our seemingly vanquished Adversary, by an equivocal
Generation, unfortunately became the Parent of a less affrightning, but far
more fatal Enemy, Fanaticism; not so professedly opposite to the Doctrine, but
in the event more destructive to the Polity, Peace, Order, Decency, Unity, and
Uniformity of our Church; these two, have both by open and secret Attempts,
successively made against her, exercised our Churches Patience, and persecuted
her upon contrary accounts; one because she will not, and the other, because
she will use, (as is pretended) a Ceremonious Worship. O happy! though
unfortunate Church of England, which for the best of Choices, the Golden Mean
of safety and moderation, art thus persecuted on the Right Hand, and on the
Left, by both the opposite Parties, who (like Herod and Pontius Pilate in their
enmity to thy Lord) agree in nothing but their continued Hostilities against
thee. I shall not recount the pretenses made, the means used by either of them
for their so doing, nor the event probably following; but only note that Popery
seeming to have made, or at least designed the last assault, Fanaticism may
rationally be expected to make the next. And that it may prove as much
destructive, as it is a foolish and unprofitable policy, to run so far from the
advances of one Enemy, that we never stop till we are within the quarters of
another. Our Author might have remembered, that Men of other Religions besides
Popery, can enter into Plots and Conspiracies, strike at the Foundations of
Government, Resist, Depose, Assassinate, and Murder Kings; absolve Subjects
from their Allegiance, and dispense with the most horrid Wickednesses; and
consequently are as little to be trusted.

3. Our danger in respect of God's Judgments, which we may bring upon our
Heads. Though Popery should never be able to lift up its Head again in this
Land; yet if we continue in the same course that provoked God to cast us into
the late confusions, he can find other Plagues to inflict upon us. I shall
readily enough believe that Popery (which seems to be withdrawn from us for a
while,) is not that great Enemy this Church and State have now to conflict
with; and also, that if the Men of this Nation will yet continue in their Sins
and Follies, which provoke Almighty God to wrath, and subject us to his
Punishments; he can find other Plagues of the contrary extreme, no less fatal,
to inflict upon us: I wish we do not prevent his Judgments, by finding out
Plagues to afflict our selves, and so become our own Executioners, and Martyrs
to our own lusts, which God in anger and judgment suffers us to enjoy.

Are not Gods People now in Spiritual Captivity, when they must not enjoy his
Ordinances with us, but upon terms they cannot conform to, and he never
appointed. Our Author in his Fanatic Cant, calls the Dissenters Gods People;
which must be understood, either exclusively or eminently; but they have no
title to that Appellation in either sense: But how is this reconcilable with
what he has told us before? The Meetings of Dissenters are as Legal as ours;
and afterward, the Act of Indulgence sets all Men at liberty. What then needs
this whining and impertinent complaint of spiritual Captivity, in times of too
great liberty? As for the Ordinances, who ever hindered their enjoyment of them?
but they voluntarily refused to communicate with us, made a perverse Schism,
and then complain of it, and now they have what they wished for, are no more
satisfied than they were before; are so unjust, now when they have leave to use
their own novel inventions, and homely postures; that they will not let us
quietly enjoy our Ancient, Catholic, Decent, and Legal Customs; and so
unreasonable, that they will needs have us (merely to humor them,) recede from
our own approved and regular Constitutions; and join in their Confusions, and
use their Customs, though they are such as we cannot conform to, and God never
appointed. If People did look before them, and consider the Providence of God,
and tendency of things, they would be more indifferent toward indifferent
things. Gods Providence is beyond our comprehension, and his Precepts, and not
that, should be the Rule of our Lives: What our Author means by Peoples looking
before them, or the tendency of things, I know not; but think if Men would look
behind them to the practice of the Primitive and Catholic Church, for 1500
Years, and not condemn all the Generations of God's Children; certainly they
would not separate from a Church, which both in Doctrine and Discipline is so
agreeable to the Primitive, that they thereby do consequentially grant, that
there never was a Christian Church Visible in the World; with which (had they
lived contemporary) they would have held Communion; or would look before them,
and consider whither these unreasonable and unnecessary Schisms tend, and the
lamentable mischiefs that will in time befall this unhappy Church and State, as
the effects and fruits thereof; if they had either conscience or prudence, they
would cease making such violent and humoursom opposition against the
Established Order, consult their own and the Churches Peace, and be more wise
and indifferent toward indifferent things. As for Mr. Charnock's abusing of
the Devil, (...).
in calling him Fool, etc. (he being otherwise represented to us in Scripture)
perhaps it may be the result of his false Principles; however, I shall not much
concern my self since it is impertinent to my purpose, and I am no ways obliged
to vindicate his reputation.

2. (...)
Our future danger from the continuance of Ceremonies, and that in respect of
the account we must give to our Judge. Our Author, it seems, would have the
World believe, that we have many, or at least some, very dangerous Ceremonies
in the Church of England; whereas (except kneeling and standing are such;) as I
have already observed, and his tautologies have often forced me to repeat)
there are no Ceremonies enjoined, to be observed by the Congregation, in our
Public Worship; and all the Ceremonies the Clergy are appointed by our Church
to use in all her Public Offices jointly taken (if Ceremonies are taken in
that sense, in which they include not Baptism and the Holy Communion) exceed
not three, and those three are so inoffensive in themselves, and innocent in
their signification, that none of the Dissenters could ever yet prove them
unlawful, and our Author (who has shown malice enough by his railing) thought
fit to pass over that Topic in silence; retained, for so good ends and
purposes; and tend so much and evidently to Devotion, Decency, Order, and
Uniformity; the Piety and Wisdom of our Reformers, in reserving them and only
them out of such a Multitude, deserve not only to be commended, but admired;
neither is it to be supposed, that those Holy Men, most of which, either dyed
or suffered Banishment in the Cause, would clog and burden that Doctrine and
Reformation, with evil or unprofitable Ceremonies, which they were forced to
espouse, with the utmost peril of their Lives and Fortunes.

How will you at that day lift up your Faces before your Master and your Judge,
when he shall demand of you, what is become of those his Lambs, (...)
which you drove into the Wilderness by needless Impositions? Instead of other
answer to this Question, I shall ask another, How will you, (O ye dissenting
and seducing Teachers,) at that day lift up your Faces, before your Master and
your Judge; when he shall demand of you, what is become of those his Lambs,
which you have enticed and enveigled away from their own proper Pastors and
Folds into the Wilderness, by your needless oppositions to things lawful and
indifferent, by your perverse separation from a decent Established Order, and
by your scandalous Schism from my true Church, and making mischievous divisions
in it; Rom^ 17, ^^
upon the specious pretense of Conscience, when the true inward Motives were
pride, sensuality, and interest; and the effects have been prejudices,
censures, malice, railings, seditions, rebellions, etc?

To conclude, notwithstanding all those dreadful denunciations of vengeance,
that our Author uses to affright our Clergy, or the Members of our Church; I
doubt not, but that it will be far more tolerable, both for our Reformers, who
continued our present Rites and Ceremonies, and the Clergy who since did, and
yet do use them, in the Day of Judgment, than for those, who out of Pride and
Interest, oppose them upon their account, make an unnecessary Separation from
the Church, or (like our Author) seditiously and schismatically libel the
Government and Church, to increase the Enemies, and endanger the Peace of both.

Some Considerations on the Author.
1. HAD not our Author by an ambiguous (if not fictious) Subscription obtruded
himself upon the World for a Clergyman of the Church of England, I should, as
well as others, for ever, (as I did a long time,) have let his Pamphlet lie
neglected upon the Booksellers Shop windows, as being (what the Title Page
shows it) a fardle of malice and railing, prejudice and passion (for such
usually are the Pamphlets of our Adversaries) and therefore fitter to be
answered by silence and contempt than any other way. If we take liberty to wave
the Subscription (and judge of the Author by his work,) he seems to be really
(though disguised) a Jesuit, or at least a Regular of some other Order in the
Romish Church, Commissioned as an Emissary, and sent hither to disturb our
Peace; and this we may the more readily believe, if we remember, That the
Church of Rome esteeming the Church of England, (because so like the Primitive,
both in Doctrine and Discipline, and the only Church able to convince her of
her corruptions and novelties) her greatest and most invincible Enemy; which
since her Champions could neither by their Pens confute, (...)
nor by their Swords destroy; they made it their business to weaken by
divisions, pursuant to which proposed Method, long since in the beginning of
Queen Elizabeth's Reign, they set patterns to the Dissenters to make long
extemporary Prayers, to decry set Forms, rail against our Liturgy, Ceremonies,
the pretended corruptions of our Church, and Popery it self, for which good
service one Faithful Common, (...).
in particular, was rewarded by the then Pope with 2000 Ducats: On the same
errand were many other Jesuits sent over into these Kingdoms, in the Reign of
King Charles I. which how well they succeeded, is but too well known: And our
Author following the same labor, it is but rational to suppose him set on work
by the same Master, carrying on the same design, and expecting the same issue,
and hoping for the same or the like reward.

2. Or since the Pamphlet contains weak or rather no Arguments, but instead
thereof strong calumnies, its Style is Fanatick-cant, intermixed with downright
scurrilous railing, and is with no less impertinence than conceited confidence,
proposed to the Convocation; we may suppose our Author to be some small
retailer of the Geneva-Discipline and Government; who having read a Systeme or
two, where that Model is laid down as Orthodox Divinity, is therewith so
captivated and possessed with it, that all others must be censured, condemned,
and abolished to make room for it; and being fully persuaded of the truth of
those notions, he judges every thing lawful or unlawful, as it suits or
disagrees with them; neither will the subscription though in unusual terms, By
P. M. a Minister of the Church of England; make it much less probable, for
Presbyterians, besides an envy to the Episcopal Order (because it is superior
to their own) and Antimonarchical Principles, may have learned of their elder
Brethren, the Jesuits, the useful art of Equivocation, by virtue whereof our
Author, if he believes his own words, in page 36. Our Brethren [meaning the
Dissenting holders forth] have according to the Act of Indulgence subscribed
our Doctrine, and thereby are incorporated into the Church of England; perhaps
may think it in some sense, to be reconcilable to truth; and to this
conjecture, the use of that affected word Minister (which as in use formerly in
the Jewish Synagogue, (...) 20.
signified, him who kept the Book and prompted the Reader, according to its
derivation, a Servant, and in the Christian Church, a Deacon, or Alms Keeper,)
adds a great probability.

3. But if our Author be really, such as he designs to be thought (a Clergyman
in the Church of England) though a Minister or Deacon in the lowest Station; he
has degenerated yet lower, and become guilty of the greatest prevarications
his small abilities made him capable of; It is true, his Pamphlet being stuffed
with false Principles, railing Invectives, and scurrilous Reflections; and
wanting proper Motives to persuade, or solid Arguments to convince, can be
supposed to operate, only upon Persons of a deluded fancy, prepossessed
intellect, and infirm judgment; and if he designed it for such (as it is
probable he did) it may not altogether, in respect of them, be without some
though evil effects: However, by the writing of it in such a manner, he has
given very great occasion to others to think, either that he, for filthy lucres
sake, conformed to the Church Constitutions as by Law Established, not
following what proved most excellent to his judgment, but what was most
grateful to his desires, because most agreeable to his Interests and
Circumstances; and that he declared his Assent and Consent outwardly, to what
he did not inwardly approve of, and that with such a reluctance against the
Sentiments of his mind, as could not be durable; and therefore they have now
made a violent eruption, to the contradiction of his actions, and the discovery
of his Hypocrisy; or that if being indifferent, he did not disallow of what he
did, that now when he thought some alterations would be made in our Liturgy,
Canons, etc. with the same indifferency, in things of Conscience and Zeal for
Interest, he strove to be one of the first to condemn what before he swore,
subscribed, or declared his Assent and Consent unto, and frequently used;
undecently and (as I hope) vainly thinking, that being esteemed a Borderer upon
Fanaticism, (though by such an odious contradiction of himself) he should
therefore be thought the better qualified for and nearer to preferment, as if
Hypocrisy, Levity, or Prevarications were the most eminent endowments, and
such as would most effectually recommend him thereunto. Our Church in her being
persecuted, both on the one hand by Popish Heretics, and on the other by
Fanatic Schismatics, has often been said to be like to her Lord, in that he
was Crucified between two Thieves; and now our Author (if his Subscription be
really true) has made Her resemble Him in another of his Sufferings, viz. in
being betrayed by a pretended Disciple; and that (as it is thought, and to be
feared) in hopes of what his Predecessor more expressly covenanted for viz. a
Money-reward.

Lastly, upon the same supposition, he has given the World a notorious
instance, how necessary it is to continue the Impositions, Constitutions,
Subscriptions, etc. enjoined by our Church, which he so much, and so leudly
declaims against; for if neither the ingenuity of his Education, the Dictates
of his Conscience, the Precepts of Holy Scripture, the Canons and Constitutions
of the Church; nor his own Oaths, Subscriptions, Declarations, and daily
Practice could govern his prejudice, malice, or sinister designs; how imprudent
would it be, either to remove those fences, or lessen that security, or cancel
those obligations, which the Piety and Prudence of our Superiors have placed
for the preservation of our Church; and so by a contemptible prostitution of
them, to the crafty pretensions of our insincere Adversaries, expose our selves
to no purpose, but that of an insolent ridicule, from the pride of a designing
Enemy?

Our Author whosoever he is (especially if what the Subscription to the
Pamphlet, intimates for his base and malicious prevarications) has evidently
incurred the Excommunication, ipso facto decreed in Canon 6. the Prosecution of
him by virtue of which, and the judicial inflicting of that or some other
Ecclesiastical censure, in salutem animae and morum correctionem is a thing by
the Constitutions of our Church committed to his Ordinary, to whose care and
discretion I recommend him.

Some farther Considerations, of a Reunion of Dissenters, with the Church of
England.
1st. IT is to be considered, that the Dissenters could not without both a
tacit reprehension of themselves, and a supposition of our being very good
natured, and easy to be imposed upon, have desired from the Church of England,
so much as a Toleration of their Public Profession; because the giving of it,
is contrary to both their own judgment and practice. Mr. Calvin, the Author of
the Presbyterians, from whom they derive both name and thing (as also his
Successor Theod. Beza) taught and practiced the Pe^secutions of others,
differing from them in matters of Religion, (as the Papists do) under the
notion of Heretics: Of the same Opinion, generally are all that Sect, as
appears, not only by the Writings of those two already named, but by those of
the Divines of Bearne, Tigure, Schaffhuse, Basil, etc. by the Decree of the
Synod of Dort against the Remonstrants; and their Brethren here in England
wrote against a Toleration of any differing from themselves, from Sion College
to the Assembly at Westminster An. 1645. And for matter of practice, the
burning of Servetus, and their other transactions of Affairs at Geneva; the
long actual Persecution of the Remonstrants by the Contra-Remonstrants in
Holland; And the Carriage of that Party here, when they had usurped Power, in
the Year 1642, etc. was such toward the Clergy and others of the Church of
England, as would in all Justice, Reason, and Conscience stop their Mouths
from all complaints against her for ever, at least till the Burden laid on
them by Law, becomes heavier than what they imposed on her by Illegal Force; to
omit the unjustice, violence, robberies, barbarities, tumults and
insurrections, done, committed, and raised in Scotland, under pretense of
Religion, are sufficient Evidences. That their Younger Brethren the
Independents are of the same Principle their attempts here; (...)
their Persecution of the Quakers, their making it penal for any Man to abstain
from his work, or to observe the Christians grand Festival called
Christmas Day, and their other Laws relating to Religion, etc. in New England,
are Testimonies too convincing to leave a place for doubting. The Anabaptists
by their Extravagancies, committed under pretense of Conscience and Religion,
have discredited themselves in Germany, etc. And might no doubt if numerous
enough be dangerous elsewhere; The Fifth-Monarchy-Men, though but an handful,
showed in this City what we might have expected from them, had their number
enabled them to prosecute their designs. The Quakers are yet in their Minority,
both as to Age and Number, how they will behave themselves if they live to
attain both, or whether they will then continue in their seeming innocence, is
not yet known: Hereby it appears, I hope sufficiently that the Dissenters in
general, are against a Toleration of other Religions, and therefore can have no
Plea for it, founded in Conscience, Right, or Debt: Yet so far is the
disposition of the Church of England from any Persecution of the Dissenters
(though justifiable both by their own Principles and Practices, and the equal
Rule of retaliation) for Religion (as our scurrilous and malicious Author
insinuates falsely, and brings a railing accusation against her) that she has
at least concurred to the granting of them a Parliamentary Indulgence; neither
did her kindness end there, but she entertained thoughts of making farther
attempts to reunite them to her Communion, till their own carriage and ill
returns, made her pursue those Methods more coldly, which by the outward
Symptoms appear already to be without any hopes, of the designed success.
Therefore, Pa^ (...)
as to the many Dissenters living in the confines of our Church, the bringing
them back to her Communion; and thereby the Restoration of a mutual
tranquillity, peace, and charity among all her Members, and the recalling of
that Christian Love, which seems now to have forsaken us (as well as the rest
of Europe) would be the greatest and most valuable blessing both to our Church
and State, can be attained on this side Heaven; and he does not deserve to be
reckoned in the number of good Christians, who would not part with all his
temporal enjoyments, or even his Life it self (were it at his own disposal) to
purchase it; God forbid! that any Clergymen of the Church of England, should
hold any Rites or Ceremonies, (the two Sacraments (often so called) only
excepted) Church-Constitutions, Canons, Customs, Benefices; or Preferments
whatsoever so dear unto them; but that they would most gladly Sacrifice any or
all of them, to the Peace and Unity of the Church, were it thereby attainable;
this Peace and Union, are that which every one wishes and desires, though few
find solid ground whereon to fix their hopes, while we mistake the means and
methods to obtain them. The Dissenters (being unwilling to own the real Motives
of their Separation from our Church) have for a pretense, cavell'd and excepted
against some few Passages in our Liturgy, some of our legal Constitutions and
Establishments, our Subscriptions, Ceremonies, Church Customs, etc. Wherefore
several have thought that the alteration and removal of them, would effect a
Reunion; but that this is, at the best, but a great mistake; I shall think my
self to have sufficiently proved, when I have produced such Reasons, as shall
be effectual for the proving the following Position, viz. Any alterations (how
many or great soever) that can be made in our present Liturgy; the utter
abolishing all the Ceremonies prescribed or used in our Public Worship, and
any alteration^ that can be made in our Book of Constitutions and Canons, or
all these together, should they be accomplished, would never heal the Schisms
that are amongst us, and re^unite the Dissenters to the Church of England. For,

1. If the Liturgy, Ceremonies, and Constitutions in use in the Church of
England, were the causes of these Schisms and Separations; then where these are
not in use there would be no Schisms; but we see the contrary: In the United
Provinces, what a great and formal Schism did the Calvinists make upon the
account of Five disputable Articles, neither way accounted Heresy, and what a
severe Persecution did they raise against the Remonstrants (which they could
neither confute nor convince of error,) because they would not say as they
would have them. In Scotland, the Church there by Law Established in the Reign
of King Charles II. used no Liturgy, no Cross after Baptism, nor any other
Ceremony that ever I could learn; and yet the Dissenters there behaved
themselves far worse to the Conformists; than ever the Jews did to the
Samaritans; nay so barbarously as undeniably to evince, that the true
Presbyterian Spirit is no less full of rancour, malice, spleen, hatred, and
(when let loose from fear of Laws) of Robberies, Persecution, and Bloodshed,
than the Papal.

If any fay this is nothing to us, the English Presbyterians are not like the
Scotch, I answer, God forbid they should; but yet that any alterations in our
Liturgy, etc. Abolishing of all our Ceremonies, etc. would never make an Union
in our Church, is apparent from hence, that some few Years after 1640. (and
thence till 1661.) When the Supreme Authority lodged (as was pretended) in the
House of Commons, with the assistance of the Rabble, had disowned the King's
Authority in Church and State, and thrown all our Laws thereunto relating out
of doors, and our Liturgy, Rites, Ceremonies, Church-customs, Constitutions and
Canons, were all abolished and discharged, (so that if the cause of the
Con-conformity, Schism, and Separation lay in any or all of them, it must
necessarily have been removed.) The Dissenters were so far from an Union among
themselves, (...) ^ by, ^ Mr. (...).
that on the contrary they subdivided themselves into many minute Sects and
Opinions, and gave birth or revival to about forty more than our Church was
formerly troubled with, some whereof neither Amsterdam nor the World it self
had ever seen before. And this is so convincing an Argument being taught us by
experience; (the School Mistress of Fools,) that I need add no more for the
proof of my Assertion, but I subjoin, ex abundanti.

If our Liturgy should be altered, our Ceremonies abolished, and our
Constitutions and Canons till they became insignificant, so that one or two of
the gravest, wisest and most moderate of the Dissenting Preachers for the love
of Peace and Union, having Episcopal Ordination should come over to our Church,
and conform unto it, yet the main Body of the Presbyterians who being
unacquainted with Antiquity, have credulously embraced the opinion of Lay
Elders, believe the Ordination of Presbyters by Presbyters to be valid, and are
too wise in their own Eyes to be informed: The Independents who before
separated from the Presbyterians, and were numerous and powerful enough in Anno
1647. to supplant and displace them: The Anabaptists and Quakers, whose opinion
of Liberty of Prophesying makes them incapable of being united in Church
Polity. And all the other subdivisions and lesser Sects and Relics of Schisms,
having the same Reasons, must be supposed to continue in the same Separation as
formerly, and consequently by these means would never be reunited to our
Communion and Church.

Some of their Teachers would be conscious to themselves of their own
Ignorance, and that their whining Tones, useful impletives of Hums, Huh's,
spittings, Coughings, etc. Canting Phrases, affected, and unintelligible
expressions, so melting and ravishing to the Apron-proselytes, would not meet
with that applause and Admiration in a more judicious Auditory, and a
Congregation used to the more pertinent, solid and rational Discourses made by
the learned Clergy in the Conformable Churches; and therefore will think it
prudence, rather to stay where they imagine themselves highly in esteem, than
to go where their defects will render them only tolerable. Others, since our
Church is abundantly supplied with learned and deserving Divines, which will
and may with good reason expect the best Benefices, and their qualifications
being none of the greatest, they (consulting their own interest) perhaps will
judge the Men's present gratuities, together with their Wives superadded and
secret kindnesses, more eligible than the probability of being provided, after
a considerable long expectation, with a small One; Others (as if the
pertinacious continuance in a perverse and mischievous Schism, was as
commendable as the bearing testimony to the good fundamental truths of the
Gospel, or a constancy to the profession of Christianity, in times of danger
and persecution) will take pride to appear, in the Eyes of their small
Disciples, as Men of resolution and courage, who resisted the Temptation, and
stood firm to their Principles, and so by a dexterous manage of all the
Revolutions, and putting suitable colors and pretenses upon their Actions in
all circumstances (like him who sails with all Winds) make the perseverance in,
as well as the entrance into, a criminal Separation, seem a Virtue, and both
tend to the enhaunsement of their Reputation; and think it no small acquisition
and degree of Happiness, to be great and high in the esteem, and to receive the
gifts and kindnesses, the Applauses and Caresses of the holy Sisters.

II. The Schisms and Separations made by the Dissenters from the Church of
England, did arise from other occasions and Causes than the Church's retaining
some few Ceremonies, using the present Liturgy, and enjoining of the prescribed
Subscriptions, and therefore will not upon, or by the abolishing of the first,
and the making any how great soever alterations, in the other two, be again
closed and reunited.

1st. When some of our first Dissenters went beyond the Seas, to avoid the
Persecutions here, and lived in Geneva, Frankfurt, Strasburgh, Arn heim, etc.
They returned with a pertinacious adhering to, and an unsatiable desire to
introduce the Ceremonies, Discipline, and Customs which they had seen in their
Travels, in opposition to what as good and wise Men as themselves, had agreed
on, and Authority established here at home, which cannot so reasonably be
thought to proceed from the dictates of Conscience, or the discretive judgment,
as a partial affection to what they had seen abroad, and a peevish humor too
much mixed with Pride, as if they thought themselves undervalued, if any others
Instructions, Judgment, or Advice should be preferred before what they had
there learned and brought over, as the price of their banishment: which is just
like that foppish Humor our Gentlemen used to send their Sons to fetch out of
France, who going over before they had learned any thing at home, at their
return Ape the Frenchmen in all their Fashions, be they never so ridiculous,
and think it strange that every body else does not admire those Vanities which
cost them so dear, and are all that they have to show for their Father's Money,
and their own time, and travel; and upon which they do not a little value
themselves. And hither, and to the Jesuit's industry and labors in sowing
Tares amongst our Corn; and not to any convictions of Evidence, or
conscientious adhesion to the Truth (as some are willing to pretend) for then
Others here of at least as much Piety, Learning, Judgment, and Conscience; and
of far more unprepossess'd, unprejudiced, and unbiased understandings than
themselves, would have had the same apprehensions and Notion of the same
things;) must we refer the first beginnings of our unhappy Schisms and
Divisions.

2. In the Year 1662. How happy an opportunity was there put into Men's hands,
to have reunited the Schisms, then in being, to the Church, and so both piously
and prudently, at once to have put an end to their miseries and confusions both
in Church and State, and have buried the both in one Grave? The King graciously
gave a Commission for a review of the Common Prayer, and tho nothing could be
proved unlawful in it, as then it was; yet the Commissioners for the
Conformable Church, consented to correct, amend, and add many things to make it
more perfect, if it were possible without exceptions: but alas! How do Men
obstruct and lessen their own Happiness? The Presbyterians and Independents
(the two most numerous Parties amongst the Dissenters) did so idolize their
mistaken Reputation, that they chose to sacrifice the Peace and Unity of the
Church to it, and so for fear of lessening it, would not submit to Episcopal
Ordination, (Tho (except some few of them) what Ordination they had was
Uncanonical, irregular, illegal, schismatical, and if not altogether invalid,
yet very doubtful and preca^ious; the Church of God having for fifteen hundred
Years never used nor allowed of the like) nor would they renounce the Scotch
Covenant, tho a foreign Oath and unlawful in it self, and unlawfully imposed
and taken, and therefore the Obligation of it void; to qualify themselves to
hold Benefices, and so were displaced by the Law of the Land, and tho some
therefore censure them; yet their greatest Crime, was not that they did not
conform, but that they actually revived the Schism, which might have been so
opportunely, either totally extinguished, or at least diminished into a very
inconsiderable one; had they lived peaceably, conformed as far as they could,
gone to Church, and exhorted others to do the like, forborne Holding-forth, and
keeping Conventicles, and schismatically Ordaining of others; to perpetuate
that Separation, which they have these twenty eight years now almost,
maintained to mantain themselves: for doing which, since all pretenders to an
Obligation in Conscience to Preach, by virtue of a Divine inward Call, without
any lawful and allowed Ordination thereunto, a settled place to exercise their
Function in, and a Charge regularly committed to them (unless they are able to
demonstrate and confirm that pretended supernatural Call by Miracles,) must be
concluded, to be either Enthusiasts or Impostors: they can never be excused.

3. Difference in Opinion. And this being (as usually it is) accompanied with
Pride, Self-conceit, a malignant Temper, a fiery blind Zeal, a strife who shall
be Greatest, and endeavors to make a Schism, and maintain it to serve an
Interest; gave occasion to many of the ancient Heretics (diverse of whose
Errors were in themselves consistent with Communion) to separate from the
Catholics. Thus, to omit the rest, the old Puritans the Novatians and the
Meletians made a needless Schism (but very mischievous to the Church. And since
small dissentions began about indifferent things, through the Pride of some,
Covetousness and Ambition of others, they have been agitated and increased into
greater and unhappy Schisms, too many to be named. Tho the Clergy of the Church
of England, do mutually allow to one another their several interpretations of
the sense, in which our Savior is said, in the Creed, to have descended into
Hell, as being none of them contrary to the analogy of sound Faith; and do
permit to each other, their enjoyment of their different Notion of
Predestination, and the Tenants depending on it, as being all reconcilable to
the Latitude of the Articles subscribed; Yet the Calvinists (being usually of a
fierce Temper, four Humor, and made by Pride impatient of contradiction) on
the account of the latter, in Holland, severely persecuted the Remonstrants:
Upon as small a discrepancy did the Independents separate from the
Presbyterians here in England; and diverse other Sects less numerous from them
both. And if all other pretenses, for the continuance of a Schism were removed,
perhaps this founded in the difference of Opinion, would be made a new one by
our Dissenters, for many of them reproach (as they imagine) some eminent
Divines of the Church of England, by imposing on them the name of Arminians.
Their Doctrines of Solifidianism, Imputative Righteousness, the Instruments of
Justification, etc. though founded in mistakes and wrong acceptations of words)
were by many of them imbibed and received with that confidence and assurance,
that they had not patience to hear them explained, much less doubted of; and if
there were no Schisms occasioned by them, in those times of their Reformation
(for it would puzzle even a good Ramist, to Analyze the several subdivided
Sects and their Opinions, which that great confusion produced,) Yet how they
aspersed, reviled, and persecuted one another upon that account, is well known;
if not Mr. B. can inform any Man who desires it, more fully.

4. Not only difference of Opinion in matters of Religion, but also in the
Civil Government is sufficient to make a separation and division in the Church,
especially if any Authority in Ecclesiastical Affairs be assigned to the
supreme Magistrate; for that neither the Papists nor Presbyterians will allow
him: It has been often observed, that Rebellion in the State, is usually
attended with a Schism in the Church. Jeroboam of old introduced Idolatry, to
continue his Revolt, lest Union in one Religion and Communion in one Church
should restore Loyalty in the Kingdom. The Feuds betwixt particular Families,
arising from the ambitious Emulation of the Prince's favor; The Faction
between the Covenanters, and the Anti-Covenanters in Scotland; The Attempts of
the Anabaptists in Germany, and the Fifth Monarchy-men here in England;) to
omit the most famous Faction between the Guelphes and Gibellines (both Parties
of the same Religion,) and other ancient and foreign Instances;) I shall give
you one Example sufficient alone to prove my Assertion. The Mountain
Conventiclers in Scotland, who having under pretense of Conscience, separated
themselves from the established Episcopal Church, and also subdivided
themselves from the Presbyterian Dissenters, followed select Teachers of their
own, which being prosecuted according to the Laws of that Country, King Charles
the Merciful indulged some of them, and licensed them to Preach, which when he
had done, and they accepted; they who before could by no Authority, Laws and
Penalties be restrained from flocking to them in multitudes, quite deserted
them and refused to hear them Preach Such was their pretense of Conscience, but
indeed Zeal for the Covenant, aversion to the King's Monarchical Authority and
Supremacy, etc. So that if there were not one Rite, Ceremony, Vestment,
Gesture, etc. (if it were possible) retained or used in our Church, nor even
the Liturgy it self, nor any Constitutions and Canons in force; Yet the Old
Kirk and Commonwealth Principles beginning to be revived again, and the
Question being not (as some short-sighted Clergymen imagine) about Rites,
Ceremonies, Liturgy, Vestments, Constitutions, and such like small and
inconsiderable things) but whether a King or Commonwealth; if a King, from
whence shall his Power be derived; how limited, etc? There needs no more than
that Opinion of the King's Supremacy, and that Adherence and Loyalty to
Monarchy, which the Church of England was formerly renowned for, to cause the
Dissenters all which are against the King's Supremacy, and many of them Men of
Commonwealth Principles (whose Fingers itch after the Crown and
Church-Revenues) to separate, and continue their Schism from the Church, the
Quarrel being really and truly more Political than Religious, and of this the
War against, and Execution of King Charles the First, the Fanatick-Plot against
the Life of King Charles the Second (which perhaps they will say was the Action
of but some few particular Persons) and the Carriage, Conversation, Writings
and Actings of the N. Cs. in general in those times, ever since, especially
this and the last year, the transactions lately in Scotland and their
precipitate abolishing of the King's Supremacy there, are sufficient evidences
to any Man who is in his right Senses.

5. Different persuasions concerning Ecclesiastical Discipline: See^ (...)
En^^^^ No^^^ for^^^ und^^^ K. C^ etc.
The Advocate of the Non-conformists, (as a reason of their Recusancy,) objects
against Lay-Civilian's decreeing Persons to be excommunicated, which he calls
the exercising the Power of the Keys; (though this objection is absurdly urged
by any Man, who asserts the Presbyterian Model by Lay-governing Elders,) but
the removal of this, would do little to their satisfaction. Neither would what
the Author of the Healing Attempt, proposes, viz. In (...)
A condescending to settle the Power of Orders and Jurisdiction on Presbyters
as well as Bishops, according to the Learned Archbishop Usher 's Model, etc.
satisfy them, so long as there remain any Persons in our Church, superior to
them in degree, the Power of Ordination, and the exercise of Jurisdiction; for
that is not only inconsistent with their affected Parity, but irreconcilable
with that Vice gerency, which they pretend (as well as the Pope) to derive
from, and hold under Christ, as the Supreme Head of the Church: Thus the Author
of the Survey of Discipline, (tells them, (page 440, 441.) See, (...)
Do^^ame'^^ fence^ the S^^^ etc. (...) 6. p. (...)
They had said) that your Discipline is the Kingdom of Christ, wherein your
Presbyters hold, as it were Christ's Scepter; -- That the Question between the
Bishops and You, is about no less matter than this, whether Jesus Christ shall
be King or no, etc. Or more truly and plainly, whether they shall be his
Viceroys, and as Popes over several Parishes, Lord it over their Flocks. As
for Lay-Chancellors, tho it is some deviation from the Primitive Times, when
Bishops with the assistance of their Colleges of Presbyters managed all
Affairs; yet the Christian Magistrate afterward committing many Causes to
Episcopal Audience; Silvanus the Famous Bishop of Troas, delegated them with
approbation, Soc. (...) cap. (...)
to the hearing of Laymen: However, I believe all the Clergy and Laymen
living in the Communion of the Church of England, would be glad the Reverend
Fathers of it, by a personal execution of the Episcopal Office (with their
Cathedral College) in all cases of Conscience, Heresy, Schism, Crime, and
Scandal, for their own sakes, (if not for their Church's) would remove that
Objection. As for the Learned Archbishop Usher's Model, every body knows it was
not his judgment, but invented as an expedient to prevent things from coming to
the utmost extremities, that it does not settle any Power of Orders (as is
insinuated) upon Presbyters, or of Jurisdiction, but what they have already and
may exercise, as to the substance of it, by virtue of their Order, our Rubricks
confirmed by Statute, and our Canon; besides, that Model excludes the lately
invented Lay Elders, and is as little reconcilable to the Congregational way
(into which most of our Modern Presbyterians seeing themselves supplanted by
the Independents, have degenerated) as the Episcopacy by Law Established; and
therefore would be little satisfactory to the Dissenters, or available to the
effecting a reunion: I might add, that their insisting only upon Power of
Orders and Jurisdiction (the two chief Prerogatives, and distinguishing
Characters of Bishops, no otherways necessary to the discharge of the
Ministerial Function in a Parochial Congregation, than as by our Church
prescribed, and by our Laws allowed and commanded,) is an evidence, that it is
not conscience which troubles them, but the old contention which shall be
greatest; that their desire of the multiplication of Bishops, (or rather the
Consecration of Chorepiscopi,) to the number of the quondam Rural Deans, must
be supposed to proceed from hopes of their advancement, at least to some of
those many small Sees, or from some worse design: As for the words of the
Disciplinarian, we may see by them, how far the Presbyterian Principles when
asserted in their proper Latitude, will extend, and that the Prosecution of
them would abolish not only Canonical Ordination, that Spiritual and Paternal
Oversight of both Pastors and Flock, which would tend to the Peace, Unity, and
Good of the whole, but also the Episcopal Order it self; which immediately
succeeded to the Administration of the Apostles, and has continued in the
Government of the Primitive and Universal Church of Christ in all Ages, from
their Deaths till the last Century. As it would be a very bold attempt to
presume to abolish, remove, or weaken the Primitive and Catholic Government of
the Church by Episcopacy, which was evidently (at least) Jure Apostolico
Established in the first Ages of it; to introduce the novel humane invention of
Presbytery; So it would not be a little imprudent and unsafe in regard of State
Government, since it would undermine the Monarchy by the very same means and
methods as Popery, viz. by depriving the King of his Supremacy in all Causes,
and over all Persons, by elevating the Presbytery above him, by exalting every
little Mas John to be a Popeling, and investing him with the same absolute
Authority in his Parish, as the Pope of Rome challenges over the World, by an
exemption of the Presbyterian Teachers from the Civil Jurisdiction, making
their assembling of Synods to depend upon their own and not the Prince's
pleasure, and by the Preaching their Doctrins of the lawfulness, and their
obligations to propagate and defend their Religion, and Kirk-Government by
Arms; will certainly by a gradual diminution of the King's Prerogative and
Authority, lessen his Power to that degree, that whenever they please to
exert their democratical Principles, and animate the Populace (easily
influenced (under pretense of Conscience) with the hopes of plunder) into such
an Insurrection as may reduce this Kingdom (if not the three,) to the same or a
worse condition than they were in, in 1641. etc. And thereby the Government of
both Church and State be swallowed up in Anarchy and Confusion; out of which
(if they become not a prey to some Puissant Foreign Enemy,) the vast expenses
of Blood and Treasure the Nation will be put to, the many divisions and
separate interests will be in it, the contentions of the Schismatics which
shall be uppermost, etc. will hinder a re-establishment of Monarchy, or a
settlement of any form of Government more perfect than that (which is most
agreeable to the Presbyterian and Independent Discipline,) of a Democracy,
which amongst so fickle and unconstant People must needs be short-lived, and
during its continuance, by reason of its own proper inconveniences and
inherent defects, is but a degree above confusion.

III. The Schism which the Dissenters have made from the Church of England
(whatsoever may be pretended) was not really made upon the account of any thing
contained in our Liturgy, any Ceremonies in use in our Public Worship, or any
subscriptions enjoined by our Laws as in themselves contrary to their Judgments
in case of Conscience; as appears, because

1st. None of the Dissenters have hitherto, with any cogent Arguments, proved
any of them unlawful, and therefore can have no reasonable cause or lawful
Warrant to either make or continue a Schism; if it be said, They doubt of the
lawfulness of some of them: I answer, That is not enough to excuse the Schism,
which unless it be to avoid the doing of that which is evidently sinful, is
always unlawful and criminal. The Obligations to Order, Peace, Unity, Charity,
and Communion with the Church of Christ, to obedience to our Ecclesiastical
Superiors, their Constitutions and Canons, and to our Civil Governors, and
their legal establishments, in indifferent things, and the circumstantials of
Religion, are derived from Divine Authority, of an Eternal Nature, and so far
binding as not to admit of a Relaxation, unless plain and notorious sin be
positively commanded; for otherwise to separate, would be both to omit a
certain duty, for fear of being guilty of a possible mistake, and to commit an
evident and aggravated sin, of many pernicious consequences, to avoid the
transgression of a single Precept, either not existent, or at least not
evident: Doubts under pretense of Conscience, are usually made to shroud a
perverse disobedient humor, or some sinister design, not willing to appear
above-board: Thus a Man being called to give an evidence, which he knows will
endanger his Friends Interest, Liberty, or Life; not willing either to damnifie
him, or perjure himself, as a mean expedient to prevent both; he pretends that
he did not hear the words, or that he does not remember them; So here the
Dissenter not being able to prove any thing contained in our Liturgy, or the
innocent and decent gestures of standing and kneeling observed in the use of it
(for nothing else is enjoined the Congregation in our Public Worship)
unlawful, nor willing to own the true causes of his Schism, pretends he doubts;
but the unhappiness of it is, that in the former case, the answer does not
avoid the perjury, nor in the latter, the doubts take away the Hypocrisy and
guilt of Schism, and are no more than mere evasions; for there is nothing but
has or may be doubted, or at least be pretended so to be, and if every such
pretense should be allowed, nothing can be commanded, nor no order, decency, or
uniformity observed.

2. The greatest part by far of the Dissenters are such as never examined, or
seriously considered our Liturgy, Articles, Rites, Ceremonies, Constitutions,
or Customs, or any other of their Teachers pretenses for their separation; a
considerable number of them are such as never saw nor heard them, and are not
qualified either to read or understand them; and scarce any of them can say, in
their own defense, that they have sought any satisfaction at home, by reading
impartially such Treatises, as the Divines of our Church have written to
explain, defend, and vindicate them, or abroad from the several Pastors, under
whose care and charge Providence and the Laws of the Land have placed them; and
which they might and ought (if any doubts and scruples had arose in their
minds,) to have had recourse to and consulted. And indeed the frequenters of
Consenticles consisting of Petty-coat Proselytes; the vulgar sort of Men who
are illiterate, ignorant, and unstable, and some few Men of better quality that
sometimes grace those Meetings with a fair outside, and the attendance of a
Coach and Lacquey, whose infirmities and defects made it necessary or
convenient for them to give up themselves, fortunes, and Religions to the
conduct and choice of their Wives; for all such Persons, it is more fit and
necessary to be well instructed in the Church Catechism, by their own proper
Pastors; than to take upon them to judge of, or determine controversies in
Religion, of which they are no more qualified to be Judges, than blind Men of
colors; So that being no competent Judges of such matters, they can have no
right to plead that the conviction of their judgments, that such and such
things in our Church are unlawful, is the cause of their separation; because it
presupposes them to have judged and determined in a case, in which no Wise Man,
much less any Church or Synod, ever allowed them to have any right so to do.
But the truth is, some suck in Fanaticism with their Mothers Milk, are
initiated with the Principles of it in their Infancy, continue under the
prejudices of that education, and inherit their Parents Schism, and have no
more reason for it, than the ignorant Papists, Jews, and Mahometans have for
their Religions: Some are Dissenters upon Worldly accounts, and for temporal
advantages, as the promotion and increase of Trade, gaining of Custom, advance
of Fortune, conveniences of Marriage, pleasing of Relations, friendship of
Favorites, etc. Others are Persons of a fickle and unstable temper, affect
novelties, and as if the Religion of our Parents Age, and our Infancy, as well
as their Houses, and our last Years Clothes, were out of fashion, and
unsuitable for us; think to recommend their judgments to the World by their
singularity and new Choice, and allege the Apostles Precept of proving all
things, for their justification. Others being Persons of strong passions, but
weak judgments, are of a ductile temper, and wrought upon by the whining tone,
affected cant, fustian Language, stuff and unintelligible Phrases of their
Holders forth; not discerning that all these are, but the designed artifices,
and cunning craft, whereby they lie in wait to deceive, sacrifice to their own
nets, and enhaunse their Glory by leading silly Women Captive. Others well
inclined (without any persuasion of the unlawfulness of any thing in our
Church's Doctrine, Discipline, or Constitutions, or so much as doubting of it,)
hearing these Venders of the Geneva. Discipline, make such large boasts of more
than ordinary purity of Worship, strictness of Discipline, and holiness of
life, as if they were entailed upon that Sect; (since so Pharisaical a
confidence without something to support it, would be monstrous and absurd,) are
apt to think, that some parts of them are true, and not aware that all this is
done to draw the more Customers together, and get the better Market for their
spiritual Wares; blindly give up themselves, by a Faith more implicit and
inexcusable than that in the Romish Church, to be taught and guided by them.
Thus ordinary People being Men of great inadvertency and small judgment, become
their cheap and easy prey, and as for the richer sort (whose Wealth may be
useful to the supporting of the cause) they usually imitate the Method of the
first deceiver, and so make their Addresses, that the Men are made Disciples by
the mediation and assistance of their Wives. I might add hereunto the evil arts
those designing Persons use to decry others, to recommend themselves, such are
their traducing both Persons and Things, the envious detractions and calumnies,
the unjust aspersions and slanders, which they used to insinuate and spread
abroad amongst their hearers, with a purpose to put them out of conceit with,
and make them disaffected to the Government, of both Church and State in
general, and the Persons of our Governors and Clergy in particular; hence arose
that malice, censoriousness, want of Christian Charity and bitterness of
Spirit, which they are leavened withal more than, and above other Men; this
makes them turbulent and unquiet, disobedient to the Government, (and like S.
J. struggling with it,) contriving, caballing, and plotting against it, factious
in the State, Schismatical in the Church, proud and peevish in their
dispositions; morose, unsociable, and unneighbourly to all but themselves, and
banishes that Christian Charity and Brotherly Kindness, which would qualify
them more for a reunion with our Church, and conduce more to it, than our
abolishing all our Rites, Ceremonies, Church constitutions and Customs can or
ever will do, for it is not any evil in them or any of them, but the evil
designs of Men that caused these unchristian breaches and divisions.

3. If the Dissenters had really made their Schism upon the account of
Conscience, the same Principles of Conscience would have influenced their other
actions as well as it; and they would certainly have behaved themselves very
differently from what they have done, and have carried themselves humbly,
modestly, quietly, and obediently to the Monarchy as God's Ordinance; as the
Primitive Christians did, to even the Heathen Emperors, Pro-consuls, and
Governors: But alas! we find them of a quite contrary temper, (to omit what
Men of the same Principles have done in Germany, France, Bohemia, Holland,
Switzerland, Geneva, etc.) The Murmurings, Tumults, Covenanting Conspiracy,
Insurrection, and open Rebellion of the Scots against King Charles I. and their
Invasion of England, being promoted both by the Instruments of Cardinal
Richelieu (who aimed at furthering the French Kings designs against the
Hugonots, and Flanders, by diverting King Charles's Forces and Attempts
designed against France;) and by the Missionary Jesuits (who to ruin the
Church of England) exclaimed against the King and his Government, the
Archbishop and evil Counselors, Arbitrary Power and Popery, etc. blew the
coals, fomented differences, pretended grievances, aggravated miscarriages,
exasperated Parties both here and there, and excited the Fanatic Party here to
encourage their Brethren in Scotland, first by secret, and then open assurances
of their assistance, to invade this Kingdom; cannot be imputed to the
obligations of their Consciences, unless the Cardinal and Jesuits are allowed
the Guides and Directors of them. The two several open Rebellions raised in
Scotland against King Charles II. the Fanatic Plot against his Life here; the
continued carriage of the Dissenters in general, and of the Presbyterian Party
tin particular since his Restoration; their malicious and bitter Speeches
against him and his Government, in ordinary conversation and discourses, the
slanderous Libels, railing Pamphlets written and dispersed by them; their
intriguing, caballing, and plotting, their pragmatical and indirect interposing
in all Public Elections, Places, and Offices; their perverse oppositions of
the Civil Magistrate's Authority, and exclaiming against his Government; their
industrious spreading of false and malicious reports, to undermine it by
possessing others with prejudice against it; are all sufficient, nay,
undeniable evidences, that their actions are not directed to the preservation
of a pure and undefiled Conscience (as is pretended) for that is void of
offense toward God and Man) but to the increasing and upholding a Faction in
the State to confront the Government. I might add hereunto the practice of our
Dissenting Brethren in New England, in their combinations, conspiracies
against, and oppositions to their Governors and the Royal Authority, their
Penal Laws made against those of the Communion of the Church of England, their
Sanguinary ones against the Quakers, etc. their Persecutions of the former, and
Executions of the latter, and their injurious and unchristian dealings with all
Men, not of their new Church fellowship; are such plain instances, that their
Principles and Practices are such, as for which no Conscience or Conviction of
judgment, can with any show of reason be pretended, or with any appearance of
discretion be allowed.

4. To allege the Immorality of the Dissenters Lives in general, as an
Argument that their Schism was not caused by the conviction of their
Consciences, since he who lives in the wilful Commission of any one known sin,
has forfeited his right to the Plea of Conscience in any other case; though a
probable Inference, yet I am sensible, would be to insist upon an harsh and
unpleasing Topic to others, as well as my self; having therefore in the last
Paragraph intimated it, in relation to their carriage to their Governors in
Church and State; Here, in Scotland, and New England, from the beginning of the
Rebellion against King Charles I. and often since; observing only here, that
the Scripture, Histories, Reason, and Experience have taught us sufficiently,
that no actions can be more immoral than the conspiring, beginning, and
carrying on of Oppositions, Insurrections, and Rebellions, and those things
which precede, accompany, and follow them; which when made under pretense of
Religion are thereby yet aggravated by the dishonor done to the Profession of
it, the scandal given to others, and the addition of their own Hypocrisy; I
shall pursue it no farther, but only give you a Character, which one who knew
them very well by his own woeful experience, has left us, gathered by his
personal observation, and confirmed with a solemn Protestation; It is that of
King James I. to his Son Prince Charles. Take heed therefore! (My Son) of such
Puritanes very Pests in the Church and Commonwealth, whom no deserts can
oblige, neither Oaths or Promises bind, breathing nothing but sedition and
calumnies, aspiring without measure, railing without reason, and making their
own imaginations (without any warrant of the word) the square of their
Conscience: I protest before the great God, and since I am here as upon my
Testament, it is no place for me to lie in, that ye shall never find with any
High-land or Border-Thieves, greater ingratitude, and more lies and vile
perjuries, than with these Fanatic Spirits, etc. Basil. Dor. l. 2. p. 160.
This is a Testimony too great to be disputed, much more to be denied, it
commands belief, and needs no confirmation, and is large and wants no addition.

Lastly, This Schism, (themselves being judges,) is unnecessary; for upon
supposition, that either the Presbyterian or Independent, in the difference
betwixt the Church of England and them, is in the right (tho the Institution of
our Savior, the Writings and Practices of the Apostles, the Universal
Government of the whole Catholic Church being against them both, it is
scarcely to be supposed) yet since neither of them can deny a true Christian
Church, wherein are all things necessary to Salvation, to have subsisted under
the Episcopal Government; unless he will assert, that there never was such a
true Christian Church in the World, till Mr. John Calvin erected one at Geneva
Anno Dom. 1541. which I think, neither of them will affirm; what can be
imagined should hinder, but that they may both live in Communion with the
Church of England, which they cannot deny to be such an one? It is evident
enough by the Writings of the Presbyterians, Printed between the Years 1640.
and 1660. (part of which time the Government was in their own or a Friends
hand,) that they insisted upon this as a sufficient argument against the
Independents Separation, That they allowed their Churches to be true Christian
Churches; and therefore, they condemned them and all others separating from
them, as guilty of Schism, and declared against a Toleration of them, as
appearas by their Covenant, Letter to the Assembly, Testimony to the Truth of
Jesus Christ, and others too many to be named; So that it is evident that they
themselves (since they cannot deny our Churches to be true Christian Churches)
are now such Persons, as when they had power in their hands, they judged to be
inexcusable, and not to be tolerated in their Schism, because unnecessary, and
therefore unlawful, being made from that, which the Separatists themselves
confess to be a true Christian Church; and consequently that their then
judgment condemns their present practice. This might be a sufficient argument
for us (if we had no other) to conclude, that the prepossessions and
prejudices, education, custom, relation, interest, temporal advantage, fear of
being accounted fickle, unstable, etc. if conforming; and not any conviction of
Judgment, obligation of Conscience, sense of Duty impartially considered, or
objection against our Liturgy, Rites, or Ceremonies rightly understood and
duly pondered; are the true (though concealed) causes of their renewing and
continuing this (which when time was (at least by parity of reason) they
themselves judged) unnecessary and unlawful Schism. Whether it be no reflection
on these pretended Teachers, to act so contrary to their own Principles and
former practices, let their Consciences and the World judge: In what guilt they
involve themselves and their deluded Proselytes, for their own temporal gain,
interest, reputation, and advantage; deserves their most serious Examination.
In the mean time, to all those who desire to hold the unity of the spirit in
the bond of Peace, it must needs be a very sad spectacle, to see prejudiced,
ignorant, unstable, and inadvertent Men, not considering the relation they
stand in to their own proper Pastors, the hazards they run of their own Souls,
by the guilt of Schism they incur, and the scandal they lay before others; nor
the invalid Ordination of these new intruding Teachers, (...) 10.1.
their want of Mission, or their designing Schism; nor the Obligations of their
own Consciences to promote, and preserve the Peace, Order, Unity, and Communion
of the Church, or the many and great mischiefs attending an unnecessary, and
therefore a criminal separation; should contemn those spiritual advantages of
Church Ordinances celebrated in the most Decent, Pious, and Apostolic manner,
and needlessly make a childish and perverse Schism, from the most Orthodox, and
best constituted Church now Visible to the World. And though the Dissenters in
general, thought it advantageous to their cause to pretend objections against
the Liturgy, Rites, Ceremonies, and Constitutions of the Church of England, as
being founded in Conscience, and the most plausible, because the Obligations of
it depend upon the WIll of God the Supreme Lawgiver, and the insincerity of
the pretense not easily demonstrable: Yet since, according to their own
Principles sufficiently known, such a Schism as theirs, (from our Church,) now
is, is sinful; and a Toleration not to be allowed; it must rationally be
imputed to other Motives and Inducements; for had they been Men of a modest
temper, peaceable disposition, pious and regular lives; they would have been
very careful not to have given offense, they would have submitted themselves to
every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake: They would never have separated
upon the account of kneeling at Prayers, and standing up, at the repetition of
the Creed and Gospel; (and yet these are all that are enjoined the Congregation
in our daily and weekly Public Worship;) or of any indifferent Rite or
Ceremony retained in our Church for the sake of Order, Decency, Unity,
Communion with the Primitive and Catholic Church, and avoiding of scandal; or
of any other Rite, Ceremony, Vestment, Gesture, or Custom whatsoever, not
evidently sinful in it self, and so rigorously enjoined them, that they must
necessarily either make that particular Rite, Ceremony, Vestment, Gesture, or
Custom their own by an actual participation in it and approbation of it, or be
excluded from Communion. This last being the only case in which it can be
lawful to separate from a national established Church, had it been observed all
our Dissenters, Quakers, and other Enthusiasts only excepted) notwithstanding
any different Opinions about smaller matters, would have continued in the
Communion of our Church; as we may observe the several Factions, Parties, and
orders in the Church of Rome (though disagreeing sufficiently amongst
themselves in many things) yet make no Separation from it. By what has been
said, I suppose it evident, that this unhappy Schism was not caused by our use
of the present Liturgy, any Rites, Ceremonies, and Constitutions of our Church;
and consequently that any alteration of them whatsoever, or even a total
abolition of them would never put an end to it; neither is there any other way
to do it but one, and that is by the alteration of Persons and not of things;
if the Dissenting Teachers, for the Love of Souls, and the Restoration of Peace
to this miserably divided Church, would be persuaded (though but for a while)
to act counter to their seeming (rather than real) worldly Interests, and
exercise self-denial, to unsay what they have unjustly (to serve Sinister
Interests) said in imputing any thing of Popery or Superstition to any Ceremony
or Custom in our Church, teach their Disciples and prevail with them
effectually, to lay aside all that prepossession, prejudice, pride,
self-conceit, malice, superstition, erroneous Opinions, love of opposition,
untractableness, and censoriousness, which they have all this while
industriously and designedly instilled into them, and leavened them with; and
to put on that humble, innocent, modest, and docible temper, which our Savior
speaks of in Children, and recommends to us in imitation of them in the Gospel;
guide them to their own proper Folds, whence they have injuriously for their
Fleece sake, and other their own ends seduced them; and then either qualify
themselves to become their lawful Pastors, or by their good Instructions and
Examples learn them (as in duty bounden) to be content to be taught by them
that are; it may be done, our Liturgy, Rites, etc. remaining entire, but
without such a conscientious concurrence, assistance, and compliance; though
all of them should be altered as much as can be proposed, or (what is really
designed by some) abolished, it will never be attained. And though the
Dissenting Teachers to silence their own and satisfy their Disciples
Consciences, when accusing them as guilty of Schism, cast the blame on the
Church of Englands Liturgy and Constitutions as the cause of it, and it is
probable, that had they seen no preparation of attempts to remove those
objections, nor nothing proposed to the Convocation in order thereunto, they
would have continued to insist upon them with loud and repeated exclamations;
yet by their since present silence in that point, by their inveighing against
Episcopacy and other Laudable Church-Rites and Customs, approved by all the
Reformed Churches in their late Pamphlets, and by their repetitions of their
Usurped Schismatical and Invalid Ordinations in so plentiful a manner, in the
interim; it appears plainly, that (notwithstanding their complaints) they are
really unwilling (for fear of being put to the trouble of inventing new ones,
and so by the shifting of the Scenes too often, the juggle should be in danger
of being discovered) that their old pretended grievances should be removed, and
that they never did sincerely intend to put an end to the Schism; and hence it
is, that as I am credibly informed several of their Teachers have entered into
new Combinations and Conspiracies, never to reunite themselves with the Church
of England, notwithstanding any endeavors or alterations, any omissions or
condescensions, that should be made or granted to that purpose in their favor,
and to the same end (if the Bodies of their Pamphlets correspond to their
Titles) several of them have lately written.

So that upon the whole matter, he that shall consider the Original growth and
propagation of the Schism, will easily perceive that as hitherto some other
Motives more than those of their Consciences, and our Ceremonies caused the
Dissenters to begin, continue, and increase it; so now notwithstanding they
continue to pretend the same objections, their design is not seriously to put
an end to it, and strengthen the Church by a Reunion of themselves with it,
but to gain an opportunity of vain glorying and insulting over her,
interpreting all alterations (though granted but as Free, Benign, and Paternal
Condescensions) as demonstrations and concessions, that the Established Church
has been all this while in the wrong, and they themselves in the right) to
expose, contemn, and deride their Folly, Levity, and Cowardice in deserving
their own Principles, and to undermine and reduce the Church to that weak and
languishing condition, in which it cannot long be preserved from utter ruin,
by taking away her Foundations, Constitutions, and Establishments, which have
till now supported Her as Impregnable against both the Papists and Themselves;
and thereby in time be able once more to grasp the Revenues of both Crown and
Mitre, and (if their Potent Rivals the Independents interpose not too early and
powerfully) having destroyed both the Civil and Ecclesiastical Government) to
make themselves Peers in Church and State: Quod tamen absit.

FINIS.

