A TREATISE OF THE HOLY TRINUNITY. In Two Parts.

THE FIRST, Asserting the Deity of Jesus Christ and the Holy Spirit, in the
Unity of Essence with God the Father.

THE SECOND, In Defense of the former, contains Answers to the chiefest
Objections made against this Doctrine.

By Isaac Marlow.

John 1.1, 2, 3. In the Beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and
the Word was God: The same was in the Beginning with God: All things were made
by him; and without him was not any thing made, that was made. LONDON, Printed
for the Author, and are to be sold by Richard Baldwin in the Old Bailey, 1690.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader,
HAving met with some opposition to the Doctrine of the Holy Trinunity, it
occasioned my more than ordinary Meditations on this Subject, wherein I
received great satisfaction of Mind. And notwithstanding the Socinians have
taken great pains to find out Arguments to support their Error, yet I found
they had no Foundation in the Holy Scriptures: And nothing is more the Duty of
every Christian than to inform himself of the Truth as it is in Jesus, both in
the Doctrinal and Practical Parts of the Christian Faith: And tho the Knowledge
of every sacred Truth is worth the treasuring up in our Hearts, yet there are
some more than others conducing to the Glory of God, and the mutual Fellowship
of Christians.

Among which the blessed Doctrine of the Holy Trin-unity is the chiefest: for
to deny the Deity of Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost, is a great deprivation
not only of the Glory of these two Divine Subsistencies, but also of the
Father: For he that honors not the Son, honors not the Father, Joh. 5.23.
And unless we see the Divine Rays of the Son, we cannot see the Father, chap.
14.9. And if we have not the same Light, we cannot walk in the same Fellowship:
for what Communion has Light with Darkness, 1 John 1.7. 2 Cor. 6.14. Moreover,
seeing that the Fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom: and [the Knowledge
of the Holy is Understanding,] Prove. 9.10. and that the Welfare of our Souls
depends on our knowledge of God, and true Faith in him, as he is revealed to us
in the Holy Scriptures to be our Savior, it is highly necessary, and the duty
of every Christian to have a true distinct Knowledge of God, subsisting in the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. For as neither an implicit Faith can secure us
from being turned aside by every wind of Doctrine, and cunning Craftiness of
them that lie in wait to deceive: so unless we have true Notions of the Holy
Trinity, we cannot worship God aright.

To the end therefore that those who have not a good understanding of this
Doctrine, may be enlightened, and more established therein, and may have
somewhat to answer, and stop the mouths of Gainsayers; and that others may be
convinced of their Error, and confirmed in the Truth, I have presented this
small Treatise to public view.

And tho I am sensible of my own Weakness, and Incapacity to manage this
Inconceivable Mystery, so as to suit and correspond with the Grandeur and
Perfection of it; yet there is such Evidence and clear Demonstration given from
the Word of Truth, of the Deity of our Blessed Lord and the Holy Spirit, as
might easily gain it credence in the Minds of those that do oppose it, if their
Imbecility were not such as to limit the mysterious and transcendent manner of
God's Being to their finite Reason; and make the Scriptures subservient to it:
And therefore to those it is my humble Request:

1. That with a studious and intentive Spirit they will peruse this little
Treatise.

2. That no former Prepossessions may hinder their full adherence to what has
Divine Authority stamped upon it, and then I doubt not of some good Effects of
my Labor. For this Fundamental Truth has so firm a Foundation in the Holy
Scriptures, as will stand the shock of all the Socinian Arguments: And tho I
have not here undertaken to answer the multitude of them, or of their
Objections made against this Doctrine, or any particular Author on this
Subject; yet I have taken hold, as I conceive, of the chiefest Pillars on which
their Fabric depends; and those being taken away, their whole Building will
fall. Which that it wholly may, and that every Christian may be established in
the Truth of God, Is the Prayer of him, who desires to be a true Worshipper of
the Trinune God, and is a Well-wisher to all Men.

The CONTENTS.
Chap. I. THE Case is briefly stated. Page 1. Chap. II. Shows that there is
but one God, the Creator of all things. Page 6. Chap. III. Asserteth a
Plurality of Divine Subsistences. Page 8. Chap. IV. Proves the Deity of our
Lord Jesus Christ. 1. By his Names. Page 11. 2. That God in the Old Testament
in diverse Places, is Christ in the New. Page 13. 3. By seven particular Texts
of Scriptures. Page 16. 4. That Christ preexisted his Incarnation in his Divine
Nature. Page 26. And is no Angel incarnate, Page 30. but is eternal. Page 32.
5. By his Works. Page 35.6. By Divine Worship given to him. Page 38. Chap. V.
Proves the Deity of the Holy Ghost. 1. That he is a Divine Person. Page 43. 2.
His Deity is asserted from several Scriptures. Page 45. 3. By his Works. Page
48. 4. By Divine Worship. Page 52. Chap. VI. Proves the Unity of the Holy
Trinity. Page 54. Chap. VII. Contains some Explications of the Holy
Trinuility. 1. Of the essential Being of God. Page 64. 2. Of a Divine Person.
Page 64. 3. Of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. Page 65, 66. 4. Of the
Unity of the Holy Trinity. Page 66. 5. Of the Distinctions between the Divine
Nature and the Persons, and some Shadows by way of Comparison. Page 67. 6. Of
the Union of Christ's two Natures. Page 74.
PART II.
Chap. I. Answers Objections against the Scriptural Proofs of Christ's Deity.
Page 76. Chap. II. Answers to Objections drawn from several Texts of Scripture.
Page 123. Chap. III. Answers to several Arguments against the Deity of Christ.
Page 128. Chap. IV. Answers to several Objections against the Scriptures that
prove the Deity of the Holy Ghost. Page 132. Chap. V. Answers to some
Objections drawn from diverse Scriptures to disprove the Deity of the Holy
Spirit. Page 157. Chap. VI. Answers to some Scriptures from whence our
Adversaries assert that the Father only is the true God. With a general Answer
and Conclusion. Page 169.
A TREATISE OF THE Holy Trinunity. In Two Parts.
PART I.
CHAP. I.
In which after a short Introduction, the Case is briefly stated.

GOD who at sundry Times, and in diverse Manners, spoke in Times past unto the
Fathers by the Prophets; has in these last Days spoken unto us by his Son: Who
first in his own Person declared the Father's Will, and then by his Holy
Apostles, through the Spirit, more fully opened the Mysteries (that had been
hid from Ages and Generations) unto his Saints, and left them upon Sacred
Record for future Ages. By which means we come to the knowledge not only of the
Grace, Office and Operations of the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, but of the
great Mystery of these Three, for ever blessed, holy, and divine Persons,
subsisting in the Unity of the Godhead from all Eternity. But no sooner did the
Glory of the Holy Trinity begin to shine in the Ministration of the Gospel of
Jesus Christ: But Satan the Prince of Darkness (lest Men should embrace the
Truth, and so his Kingdom should fall) did what he could to hinder the Progress
of the Gospel in its primitive Purity, and in Enmity to the weal of Mankind,
suggested many pernicious Errors into their Minds, as we may find in the
Writings of the Apostles of our Blessed Lord, which I forbear here to mention.

And throughout every successive Age he has not wanted some Instruments, to
disturb the Peace of the Church with false and erroneous Doctrines, thereby to
weaken the true Interest of Jesus Christ, as well as to ruin the Souls of Men.

And among others that have been broached in the World, this is one, viz. That
the Son of God, and the Holy Spirit, are not one infinite and eternal God,
Coessential with the Father, but are so much inferior in Nature to him, as to
be but Creatures only.

But to speak more particularly, Some affirm that Jesus Christ is only humane,
or nothing but Man: And though the Racovian Catechism, does acknowledge he is
more than a mere Man; yet they do not allow Christ to have a divine Nature, as
we may see in Page 27, 28. of that Catechism: Where by way of Question, they
say, Is the Lord Jesus then a mere Man? The Answer is, by no means; For he was
conceived of the Holy Spirit, and born of the Virgin Mary; and therefore is,
from his very Conception and Birth, the Son of God, as we read Luke 1.30. and
the Answer is closed with these Words, That the Lord Jesus ought by no means to
be reputed a mere Man.

Yet the next Question being put, Has he not also a Divine Nature? The Answer
is, At no Hand; for that is repugnant not only to sound Reason, but also to the
Holy Scriptures.

Now if they will not allow Jesus Christ to have a Divine Nature, and yet do
say he is more than a mere Man; what can he then be? unless we suppose either
(as Biddle says Article 6. of his Confession of Faith) that the Holy Spirit is
an Angel, and so by Conception he may be said to participate of their Nature;
or else that His visible and external Exercise of the Power of God, is his
Divine Nature. From the first Socinus (whom Biddle reproves for it) and
Crellius do dissent, for they deny the Spirit to be a Person, but the Power and
Efficacy of God the Father.

So that according to their opinion Christ cannot be of the Nature of Angels by
conception. Nay, Biddle himself, though he asserts the Holy Ghost to be an
Angel, and Christ to be conceived by him, yet he says that Christ has no
other than a humane Nature. Article the 3d.

Secondly, If his external and visible Exercise of the Divine Power of God, be
the external and visible Exercise of his own Nature; it is what we are pleading
for, and if this were but granted, the main Controversy would quickly cease,
for the Power of God as it is in God, is his Nature: so it must be in Christ.

But it is hard to conclude from what these Men do say, what Christ and the Holy
Spirit are; for some are for having Christ nothing but Humane: and others, that
He is more than a Man, viz. the Son of God by Conception, and yet that he is
not God by Nature: So likewise Biddle is for having the Holy Ghost to be an
Angel; others say, That he is the Power and Efficacy of God the Father: And
what they will hammer forth at last, or where they will settle, who can tell?
However, in this they all agree, That neither the Son nor the Holy Ghost, are
God by Nature, or have the supreme Divine Nature of God for their own Nature:
And therefore, forasmuch as there has been great endeavors used to suppress
the Doctrine of the Holy Trinunity; and to raze out, or so besmear the written
Word of God, that we should not discern the Beauty and Excellency of the Nature
of Christ, and the Holy Spirit; I shall endeavor to demonstrate the Truth of
their Deity; and in order thereunto,

First, I shall note, that on all Hands it is agreed among Christians, that the
Scriptures do distinguish and make a difference between the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Ghost; and that there is but one that is personally called the
Father, and but one other Chief and only Son of that Father, and also a third
distinguished from both, and called the Holy Ghost, besides which there is not
another that is so called, as may be collected from the following Scriptures,
Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6. 1 John 4.9. chap. 5.7. 2 Pet. 1.16, 17. John 6.27. chapter 14.26.

CHAP. II.
Wherein is proved that there is but One God, the Creator and Former of all
Things.

TO show this, I shall only give a bare Citation of several Texts of Scripture,
and not take up our time, in that which is so generally believed by all Persons.

Deuteronomy. 6.4. Hear O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord. 1 Samuel 2.2. There is
none Holy as the Lord, for there is none besides thee, etc. Isa. 46.9. Remember
the former Things of old, for I am God, and there is none else; I am God, and
there is none like me. 1 Cor. 4.6. There is none other God but One: but to us
there is but one God the Father, of whom are all things. 1 Timothy 2.5. For there
is but one God, etc. Jam. 2.19. Thou believe there is but one God, thou do
well. Nehem. 9.6. Thou, even thou, art Lord alone; Thou have made Heaven, the
Heaven of Heavens with all their Hosts, the Earth and all Things that are
therein, the Sea and all that is therein, and thou preservest them all, and the
Host of Heaven worshippeth thee. Psalm. 86.9, 10. All Nations whom thou have
made, shall come and worship before thee, O Lord, and shall glorify thy Name:
For thou art great, and do wondrous Things, thou art God alone. Isa. 44.6.
Thus says the Lord, the King of Israel, and his Redeemer the Lord of Hosts, I
am the first, and I am the last, and besides me there is no God. Ver. 24. I am
the Lord that makes all Things. Isa. 45.18. For thus says the Lord, that
created the Heavens, God himself that formed the Earth and made it: He has
established it, He created it not in vain, He formed it to be inhabited, I am
the Lord, and there is none else. There are many other Scriptures of like
import, but these are plain and sufficient Testimonies to prove that there is
but one God the Creator and Former of all Things.

CHAP. III.
Shows that there is a Plurality of Divine Subsistences.

FIrst, from Genesis 1.1. In the Beginning God created the Heaven and the Earth.
The word in the Hebrew is [Elohim] Gods, or Almighties, in the Plural Number: I
find an Exposition of this Text by Mr. William Streat, which because it gives
much Light, I shall present the Reader with the material part of it.

The Author reads [(...)] the Almighties, and in Page 2. In Mr. William
Streat's Book called, The dividing of the Hoof. Page 1.
speaking of the opposition of Elohim, Almighties, which is a Noun Plural to
the word Bara, he created, says thus; God's Phrase, in a Dialect of his own,
transcending all humane Arts, purposely to amaze them in the Mystery of the
Trinity, is one Thing.

Man's ordinary means of discovering earthly Things by Grammatical Rules in
humane Learning, is another.

This Hebraism is not used by Moses (the Almighties Secretary) Penman of sacred
Truth, joining a Verb Singular to a Noun Plural, for Contradiction, but for
Interpretation. Therefore the word Bara [he created] is most fittingly and
significantly joined to a Noun Plural, Elohim, Almighties; because titling
himself in a Plural Number, he might give us to understand a Plurality of
Persons, which are the three Persons in the Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost; who wrought together in the Work of Creation. And the Author further
adds ( Page 3.) that the Holy Trinity is here to be understood; and that
because the word God is not to be found in the Singular Number El, nor in the
Dual as Elohaim, but in the Plural Elohim, as comprehending the three Persons
in the Deity. But some may say that the word Elohim, proves rather three Gods,
than three Divine Persons in one Godhead. But note, that this is corrected by
the Verb Singular, which betokens the Three to be One in Essence. And surely
there is something in this Hebraism, because it answers so well to that which
follows, ver. 26. And God said, Let Us make Man in Our Image, after Our
Likeness, etc: Mark the words [Us] and [Our] signify more than One Person: And
though some may object that the Angels are here to be understood; yet this
cannot be, for the Works of Creation were never attributed to any Creatures.
And as there are other Texts, Genesis 20.13. and chapter 35.7. Josh. 24.19. 2 Samuel
7.23. see the Dutch-Annotations, in which the Hebrew word ( Elohim) Almighties
is found in the Plural Number, as likewise the word [Makers] Job 35.10. Eccles.
12.1. So also in our English Translation, there is a Concurrence in several
other places of Scripture, with this of Genesis 1.26. as in chapter 11.7. where the
Lord said, Go to, let us go down, and there confound their Language. And Isa.
6.8. The Lord said, Whom shall I send, and who will go for us? etc. Which
places denote a Plurality of Persons in the Godhead.

CHAP. IV.
Asserteth the Deity of our Lord Jesus Christ by his Names.

THAT the Father is God, is universally owned by all Christians. And therefore,

Having made some little Preparation, I now come to prove the Deity of the Son
of God. That our Lord Jesus Christ is not only Humane; but that he is also of
the very same Spiritual Essence, Nature and Substance of God the Father. And,

First, I shall take notice of those Names or Appellations, which are given to
our Lord Jesus Christ in the Holy Scriptures; for he is frequently called by
those Names which are properly applicable to none but God; As, Mighty God, Isa.
9.6, 7. applied to Christ, Luke 1.31, 32, 33. Most Mighty, Psalm. 45.1 to 8.
applied to Christ, Heb. 1.8. Almighty, Rev. 1.8. with ver. 17, 18. Jehovah,
Jer. 23.5, 6. These are proper Names of God, and are applied to Jesus Christ,
who is often called God in the Holy Scriptures, as John 20.28. My Lord, and my
God: and Heb. 1.8. But unto the Son he says, Thy Throne, O God, is for ever
and ever. Romans 9.5. Whose are the Fathers, and of whom, as concerning the
Flesh, Christ came; who is over all, God blessed for ever. Amen. And though
others may be called Gods, Yet unto us there is but one God, 1 Cor. 8.6. And
what ever some may think (that would turn the current of Scripture another way)
yet I cannot conceive that Jesus Christ should be so frequently called, by the
highest Appellations God has, in a relative Sense only, and not as proper
Names belonging to him, as a Person subsisting in the same Nature; nor do I
believe that his Name Immanuel, which is, God with us, Matthew. 1.23. was given
to him but as a suitable and descriptive Name, of both his Natures, as real God
in our Nature; He took Flesh upon him, Heb. 2.16. and Phil. 2.6, 7. He thought
it not robbery to be equal with God: But made himself of no Reputation, and
took upon him the form of a Servant, etc. Here are the two Natures of Christ
asserted, his Divine Nature, which only can be equal with God, and his Humane,
both which do appropriate his Name Immanuel to him: and if his Names are proper
to the Nature of God, we must then either admit of Jesus Christ to be of the
same Nature, or deny his Names to be proper to him.

Secondly; I shall prove the Deity of the Son of God, by three particular
Scriptures, that relate to God in the Old Testament, and which are applied to
Jesus Christ in the New: whereby it may appear, that (respecting his Divine
Nature) he is one and the same with God.

First Scripture is Zech. 14.3. Then shall the Lord go forth, and fight against
those Nations, as when he fought in the day of Battle. Ver. 4. And his Feet
shall stand in that day upon the Mount of Olives, which is before Jerusalem on
the East, etc. Ver. 5. And the Lord my God shall come, and all the Saints with
thee. This Text, for its natural Affinity with the rest of the Chapter, cannot
be allegorized without gross Absurdity; but must be taken in a literal Sense,
of the coming of Christ with all his Saints. And it well agrees with what the
Angel told the Disciples, saying, that this same Jesus which is taken up from
you into Heaven, shall so come in like manner as you have seen him go into
Heaven. Then returned they to Jerusalem from the Mount called Olivet. This
shows that Christ ascended into Heaven from the Mount of Olives, and that
thither he shall descend again; and so it agrees with the Prophet. And as to
the coming of the Saints, with the Lord, or Jehovah God, this also is applied
to Jesus Christ. 1 Thessalonians. 4.14. For if we believe that Jesus died, and rose
again: even so them also which sleep in Jesus, shall God bring with him. chap.
3.13. At the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all his Saints. So that he
who is by the Prophet Zechariah called the Lord God, is by the Apostles called
Jesus Christ.

Second Scripture is Zech. 12.10. And I will pour upon the House of David, and
upon the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Spirit of Grace and of Supplication, and
they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him,
etc.

First, The Holy Ghost speaks of Christ in different Persons, viz. [Me] and
[Him] to betoken his different Natures of God and Man, who being both, may be
differently spoken of as a Person relating to either Nature.

Secondly, This is confirmed by John, Rev. 1.7. in apylying the same to Christ
only. And our Lord himself speaks of this great Mourning; When they shall see
the sign of the Son of Man in Heaven, coming with Power and great Glory. Mat.
24.30. So then (as it is apparent that the Prophet Zechariah's Jehovah, or
Lord, in ver. 1. which stretches forth the Heavens, and lays the Foundation
of the Earth, and forms the Spirit of Man within him, is that [Me] whom they
have pierced, and Him they shall look upon and mourn for, viz. Jesus Christ in
the New Testament.) we must either admit Christ to be of the Divine Essence, or
else confound the two Testaments.

Third Scripture is Isa. 8.13. Sanctify the Lord of Hosts himself, and let him
be your Fear, and let him be your Dread. Ver. 14. And He shall be for a
Sanctuary; but for a Stone of Stumbling, and for a Rock of Offense to both the
Houses of Israel, for a Gin, and for a Snare to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem.

This Text is applied to Jesus Christ in 1 Pet. 2.6. Wherefore also it is
contained in the Scriptures, Behold, I lay in Sion a chief Cornerstone, elect,
precious; and he that believes on him shall not be confounded. And this Corner
Stone, which is Jesus Christ, as the preceding Verses show, is a Stone of
Stumbling, and a Rock of Offense, etc. ver. 8. So that comparing these two
Scriptures together, they demonstrate Jesus Christ the Metaphorical Stone of
Stumbling, and Rock of Offense, in the New Testament, to be the Lord of Hosts
[Himself] in the Old, viz. Jehovah, for so is the Word Lord in the Hebrew, in
all the aforesaid places in the Old Testament; which is an Essential Name of
God, Whose Name alone is Jehovah, Psalm. 83.18. And therefore the Son of God is
Co-essential with the Father.

Thirdly, I shall prove the Deity of our Lord Jesus Christ by seven particular
Scriptures.

First is, Rev. 22.6. And the Lord God of the Holy Prophets, sent his Angel to
show unto his Servants the things which must shortly be done. Ver. 16. I Jesus
have sent mine Angel, to testify unto you these things in the Churches. With
Chap. 1.1. The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him, to show
unto his Servants things which must shortly come to pass; and he sent and
signified it by his Angel unto his Servant John. God, viz. the Father, Rev.
chap. 4. and chap. 1.5, 6, 7. with chap. 3.21. gave the Revelation to Jesus
Christ; and its said, He, not the Father, sent his Angel, to signify it unto
his Servant John; and this Jesus Christ is the Lord God of the Holy Prophets.
And therefore he is the true Supreme God by Nature.

The Second Scripture is Acts 20.28. Take heed therefore unto your selves, to
feed the Church of God, which he has purchased with his own Blood. 1st. The
Blood that purchased or redeemed us, is the precious Blood of Jesus Christ, 1
Pet. 1.18, 19. 2dly. If Jesus Christ were but a Man, tho only made of a Woman,
yet being the Seed, the Offspring of the Flesh of David, Acts 2.30. Rev.
22.16. the Person of a Man, his Blood would be the own proper Blood of that
Person; and so it could not have such a special Relation unto God: but as he
was no Person, but by the assumption of the Divine Nature; so his Blood has a
special Relation (tho not natural) unto that Nature as it is part of Christ's
Person, and without which he did not exist. Now this Blood, which is the Blood
of Christ, being the own Blood of God, shows the assumption of Humanity by his
own Nature; and the like may be said of the Life which God laid down for us, 1
John 3.16.

Third Scripture is Phil. 2.5, 6, 7, 8. Let this Mind be in you, which was also
in Christ Jesus: who being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be
equal with God: But made himself of no Reputation, and took upon him the form
of a Servant, and was made in the likeness of Men. And being found in fashion
as a Man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto Death, even the Death of
the Cross.

First; In this Scripture Christ is said to be in the form of God, which is not
only as Man by Creation, who bears something of his Image in the natural
Qualities of the Soul, but in equality with God; so that in Nature he is not
inferior to him, and therefore he can be no Creature: For there is no Creature
that has its being from God, can be equal to God.

Secondly; the Divine Nature of Jesus Christ must be understood by his being in
the Form of God: because he did preexist his Incarnation in that Form: his
Condescension of mind, and his Power in that form, to take the form of a
Servant, went before his actual Condescension in taking our Nature. Let this
Mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus. Who being in the form of God --
made Himself of no Reputation. Which must be understood of our Lord Jesus
Christ's subsisting in his Divine Nature before his Incarnation, in the form of
God, and equal to Him.

4th Scripture, is John 5.26. For as the Father has Life in Himself, so has
he given to the Son to have Life in Himself.

First, For the Son to have Life in Himself, is not to receive it from an
higher Nature, for then he would have it in another, as Fellow Creature with
us, whose Nature and Personality have their Life and Being in God: But to have
Life in Himself, is to have it in his own Nature, which cannot be if he were
only Humane. Acts 17.28.

Secondly, For the Son to have Life in Himself, given or communicated to Him by
the Father, denotes the great Mystery of his eternal Generation in the Divine
Nature; for else the manner of Speech would be absurd, and contradictory in it
self; for if it were given Him as a Creature, he could not have it in Himself,
and if he have it in Himself, though it be given of the Father, he cannot be a
Creature; for that Nature which has Life in it self, must needs be the Nature
of God, and this is the Nature of the Son.

Fifthly; John 10.30. I and my Father are One. This Text cannot simply be
understood, as if Christ and the Father were One only, even as we are one in
Them: for Christ, speaking of his Sheep in the 27, 28, and 29, Verses, says, My
Father which gave them me is greater than all, and none is able to pluck them
out of my Father's Hand. Here Christ asserteth the greatness of his Father's
Power, that he was greater than All, but yet says, I and my Father are One; as
if Christ should say, As my Father is greater than all, So also I am greater
than all; and his being One in Power, shows him to be One in Nature with him.
And thus the Jews understood our Lord, when they took up Stones to stone him,
ver. 31. that he being a Man, made himself God, v. 34, 35, 36. But Christ
reproves their rashness in charging him with Blasphemy, looking on it as great
Indignity, not to allow him any Supremacy above others they called Gods; in
that they said of him, whom the Father had sanctified, -- Thou blasphemest,
because he said, I am the Son of God. I question not but 'the Jews would have
born it well enough, though he should have assumed the Name of God, so it were
in the Sense of their Law, like other Men, ver. 34, 35. or of a Son of God, as
they themselves being Children of Abraham, claimed God to be their Father: But
their great quarrel with Christ was, that he so affirmed Himself to be the Son
of God, as one and the same with the Father, equal to him in Power; and
therefore he is of the same Nature.

Sixth Scripture is 1 John 5.20. And we know that the Son of God is come, and
has given us an Understanding, that we may know him that is True: And we are
in him that is True, even in his Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God, and
eternal Life.

What can be more plain to prove that the Son of God is the true God, than to
have it so asserted of him? and can he be the true God, and not so by Nature,
the very God, and but a Creature? If so, we must then acknowledge two Gods, the
One the true God the Creator, the other the true God a Creature, which is
repugnant to the Scripture: for there is none other God but One; for though
there be that are called Gods, whether in Heaven or in Earth (as there be Gods
many, and Lords many) But to us there is but one God, as before was showed, 1
Cor. 8.4, 5, 6. And Gal. 4.8. there is an Exclusion of all from Divine Worship
that are not God by Nature; and therefore if our Lord Jesus Christ be the true
God, he must then be of the One true Natural Godhead.

Seventh Scripture is Coloss. 2.9. For in him dwells all the fullness of the
Godhead Bodily.

First; To imagine from this, or any other Scripture, that the Humane Nature of
Christ comprehends the Deity, is to conceive in our Minds, that of God which is
inconsistent with his Immensity and Infinity of Nature. Or,

Secondly, To say that the three Divine Persons in the Godhead, do personally
and equally after the same manner tabernacle in the Humane Nature of Christ,
makes it common to all the three Subsistencies; so that the Father and the Holy
Spirit, as well as the Son, would be incarnate: But this is contrary to the
written Word of God, which declares to us, the Son of God who is the brightness
of his Glory, and the express Image of his Person, that laid the Foundation of
the Earth, etc. That He it is that took Flesh upon him. Heb. 1.1, 2, 3, 8, 10.
and chapter 2.14, 16. And all that Christ did by way of Atonement for us, and
Reconciliation of God to us, is ascribed to him as the Person of the Son of God
only, and not as the Father, or the Holy Ghost, though in the Unity of Nature
they cannot be excluded. But,

Thirdly, If we are neither to understand this Scripture, as if the Godhead
were comprehended in Christ's humane Nature; nor that the three Divine Persons
were equally incarnate, what then can be further proposed as the meaning of it?
But that the Person of the Son, or the Divine Nature of Christ subsisting in
the one whole Nature of God, has all the fullness of that Nature dwelling in
him, for there is no Division of the whole Nature of God, with all its
Essential Properties and Perfections from the Divine Persons: for then neither
the Nature nor the Persons could be Infinite or Immensurable, but limited and
subscribed; and therefore there is a necessity that every Divine Person should
have the whole Divine Nature with all the Essential Attributes and Perfections
of it, whether it be Omnipotency, Omnipresency, Omnisciency, Immensity,
Eternity, Goodness, etc. the fullness of all is in every Divine Person: they
differ not in Nature, but in personal Properties: as the Father is not begotten
like the Son, neither did the Son beget like the Father, nor also did either of
them proceed like the Holy Spirit; and so also in Office they differ the one
from the other; but in Nature they are the same, and have all the same
Essential Properties and Perfections, as was said before.

So then all the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily or substantially in the
Person of the Son, that is, he has the whole Spiritual Substance or Essence of
the Divine Nature, and by his hypostatical Union with the Humane Nature, the
fullness of the Godhead may be said also to dwell Bodily in the Humane Nature of
Christ. So then, if all the Attributes and Perfections of the Nature of God in
their fullness dwell in our Lord Jesus Christ, it is a sufficient and undeniable
Evidence of his Deity.

But some may say that the Godhead dwells in Christ, after the same manner it
dwells in us.

Answer. Tho it is said, that we are the Temple of the Living God, and of the
Holy Ghost that dwells in us, and that Jesus Christ is also in us, 1 Cor.
6.19. 2 Cor. 6.16. Joh. 17.23. Romans 8.9, 10. Yet what is this to that Fullness
which dwells in him? We indeed have Communion with the Father and the Son,
through the Spirit, and are made partakers of the Divine Nature, Ephesians. 2.22. 2
Pet. 1.4. but not after the same manner as Christ is: For the Holy Spirit has
his Union with us, by way of Fellowship with our Spirits, and unites himself in
Communion with us. Phil. 2.1. 2 Cor. 13.14. 1 Cor. 2.12. 1 John 2.20. whereby
we are guided by the teachings of him into all Truth, Joh. 16.13. Gal. 5.18.
But we have not our existence in the Spirit, as the Human Nature of Christ in
the Divine Person of the Son; for we are distinct human Persons before, and
after we are regenerated. But Christ did not exist but by Conception in the
Divine Nature, in which he had his Being, and thereby a relation, by virtue of
the Hypostatical Union of the Son of God with his Human Nature, to all the
Attributes and Perfections of the Divine Nature. And tho it is said, that God
the Father, and Christ, and the Holy Spirit dwells in us; yet I cannot find
it was ever said, that the fullness of the Godhead, or of the Nature of God,
dwells in us: So that this Objection is of no force, to overthrow the
sufficiency of this Scripture to prove the Deity of Jesus Christ.

Fourthly; the Deity of our Lord Jesus Christ, is proved by his Eternity; and
as a Preparative hereunto, I shall first show that he preexisted his
Incarnation.

And, First, from Heb. 2.16. For verily he took not on him the Nature of
Angels; but he took on him the Seed of Abraham. In the Margent of some of our
English Bibles, it is read, He takes not hold of Angels, but of the Seed of
Abraham takes he hold.

First; This could not respect the Spiritual Seed of Abraham, for they were not
such when he first took hold of them.

Secondly; Nor is this taking hold to be understood only of the Posterity of
Abraham, or literal People of the Jews; because this is but a light thing to
the Salvation of the Gentiles, Isa. 49.6. And besides, it is put in opposition
to the nature of Angels, to that of ours; and therefore his taking hold, or
taking on him the Seed of Abraham, is a taking his Flesh upon him, ver. 14.
Forasmuch then as the Children are partakers of Flesh and Blood, he also
himself likewise took part of the same. So that this Text of Scripture has a
special relation to his Incarnation; and in that he took on him the Seed or
Flesh of Abraham, it shows that he not only came forth of his Loins, but that
he did preexist the taking hold of that Seed; for he that takes hold of a
thing must needs preexist that act of taking hold.

The Second Scripture to prove the preexistency of Jesus Christ to his
Incarnation, is Dan. 9.17. Now therefore, O our God, hear the Prayer of thy
Servant, and cause thy Face to shine upon thy Sanctuary that is desolate, for
the Lord's sake.

As we cannot reasonably imagine that this Lord should be any other than
David's Lord, Psalm. 45.11. with Matthew. 22.42, 43, 44. viz. the Son of God: So
also there is as little ground to believe, that the Prophet should implore the
favor of God, for the sake of one not in being: Because it would have been
more proper for him to have prayed to God for the sake of his own gracious
Promise of Mercy, than for his sake, who was fore-appointed of God to make an
Atonement for our Sins, if he were not then existing in his Divine Nature. For
as there could be no Promise on Christ's part, to undertake and perform the
work of Atonement for us, whereby to engage the Father to show us Mercy; so
neither could God be engaged for the sake of one that was not then in being, to
do or promise the performance of any Mercy. And therefore I humbly conceive,
that from the Prophet's Prayer to God for the Lord's sake, we may conclude that
the Son of God (for whose sake alone our Sins are forgiven) did then exist.

Third Scripture is, Phil. 2.6, 7. Who being in the form of God, thought it not
robbery to be equal with God: But made himself of no Reputation, and took upon
him the form of a Servant, and was made in the likeness of Men. These Words do
show, that Jesus Christ was not made of no reputation by another, but that he
made himself so. Whence note, he did preexist his Disreputation, and that in
the form of God, and equal to him: For if he was not (before he took the form
of a Servant) in greater Dignity, how then could he make himself of no
Reputation? So that it is evident our Lord Jesus Christ did preexist his
Incarnation.

Fourth Scripture is John 1.30. where the Evangelist says, This is he of whom
I said, After me comes a Man which is preferred before me, for he was before
me. As John was conceived at least six Months before Christ; so also he began
his Ministry before him: for Christ was Baptized by him, and he did not preach
the Gospel, till after John was put in Prison, Luke 1.35, 36. Mark 19.14. Mat.
4.12, 18. And therefore seeing that John was before Christ, both in his
Conception, and Ministry, wherein then was Christ before him but in his Divine
Nature?

But if it should be said, that Christ was before John in the Purpose and
Decrees of God? It may be answered; That the Purposes and Decrees of God are as
eternal as God Himself: and to admit of any real or absolute Precedence of any
thing in God, is repugnant to his infinite, eternal, and immutable Perfection
and makes Him subject to Accidents. So that it is undeniable our Lord Jesus
Christ did preexist his Incarnation. But not in the Nature of Angels.

First, For though the Nature of Angels is more excellent than Man's, yet
neither for their excellency of Nature, nor any work it is capable of, could
the proper Works, Attributes and Perfections of God be ascribed to it: for no
Creature can be equal to the Creator, or have equal Attributes and Perfections
to him: and therefore whatsoever is or may be applied to Christ, from the Word
of God that is proper to the Holy Deity, could not be applied to him, if his
Nature were not better and more excellent than the Angels.

Secondly; The Apostle Paul in the first and second Chapters to the Hebrews,
largely discourses this Matter, and sufficiently proves that Christ is no
Angel. First, from chap. 1.4. Being made so much better than the Angels, as he
has by Inheritance obtained a more excellent Name than they. This Text does
not import, that only Christ's Name, obtained by the Inheritance of his Kingly
or Priestly Office, is more excellent than the Angels, but also that his Nature
is different from theirs: for the Apostle speaks not of Christ and the Angels,
in such words or form of Speech, as might any ways intimate both Him and Them
to be of the same Nature: as if he should say, that Christ had obtained a more
excellent Name than the rest of the Angels had; but so as to demonstrate that
Christ is no Angel: for his Speech is comprehensive of all the Angels, of their
whole Nature; and excludes the Son of God from their Number. And this the
Apostle insists farther upon, in the 5th and 13th Verses of this Chapter: For
after he had told us what the Son of God is, viz. That he is the brightness of
his Father's Glory, and the express Image of his Person, ver. 3. and that he is
made better than the Angels, ver. 4. he moreover says, For unto which of the
Angels said he at any time, Thou art my Son, this Day have I begotten Thee? And
again, To which of the Angels said he at any time, Sit on my Right Hand until I
make thine Enemies thy Footstool? No, it was to no Angel, but to the Son; who
for his excellent Nature, above that of the Angels, is called God, ver. 8.

Secondly; From chap. 2.16. For verily he took not on Him the Nature of Angels,
but He took on Him the Seed of Abraham. This is meant of his Incarnation, as
the 14th Verse (which relates to this) more fully shows; and then if His
assuming our Nature, is put in opposition to his taking on Him the Nature of
Angels, it is a clear Demonstration, that he preexisted his Incarnation, in
some other Nature than either of these. And to imagine that the Holy Apostle,
who wrote by the Holy Ghost, should affirm, that the Son of God did not assume
the Nature of Angels, if he had before existed in it, would be an Imputation of
Absurdity to him, yea to the Holy Ghost, which is Blasphemy. From all which it
is apparent, that Christ did not preexist his Incarnation in the Nature of
Angels, but, as it must follow, in the Divine Nature of God.

Secondly; I come to prove the Deity of the Son of God by his Eternity.

First Scripture is, John 1.1. In the Beginning was the Word. First, this Text
is not to be understood of the preaching of the Gospel by Jesus Christ, or John
the Baptist, for this was not a Mystery fit to be set as a frontice-piece to
John's Book, nor is there any such Intimation in the Words; and therefore it
preceded that beginning. Secondly; He speaks of that Beginning in which all
Things were created, ver. 3. which shows that he did not only precede the
preaching of the Gospel, but the beginning of the Creation, and therefore he
was from all Eternity.

Second Scripture is, Isa. 9.6. Unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is
given, and his Name shall be called -- Everlasting Father, or Father of
Eternity, as is confessed by our Adversaries: See Biddle's Confess. Article 3.
If we read ver. 7. and compare it with Luke 1.31, 32, 33. we may see, that
this Text is applied to our Lord Jesus Christ; and if he be the Author of
Eternity, he must Himself be Eternal.

Third Scripture is, Col. 1.17. And he is before all things. And so as that (in
ver. 16.) All things were created by Him in Heaven and Earth, visible and
invisible; which could not be said of Christ, unless he were the Eternal God,
existing from all Eternity.

Fourth Scripture is, Rev. 1.17, 18. Fear not, I am the first and the last; I
am He that lives, and was dead, and behold I am alive for evermore.

This Scripture cannot be applied unto any other but Jesus Christ, who was
dead, and is alive again; for though it was the Angel that spoke, yet it was as
representing the Person of Jesus Christ; and therefore whatsoever he says in
his own Person, must be applied to him; and this is manifested in ver. 8. I am
Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the Ending, says the Lord, which is, and
which was, and which is to come, the Almighty. And in chapter 2.8. where the Angel
speaks the same words, but not in the same Person he did before, saying, And
unto the Angel of the Church in Smyrna, write, These Things says the First and
the Last, which was dead, and is alive again. Yea and in all the Epistles to
the Seven Churches of Asia, he does not only dictate them as from another; but
also, the same Description that John gives of the Angel, the Angel applies to
the Son of God, chapter 2.18. So that these Words, I am the First and the Last, do
relate unto Jesus Christ: and as nothing can be first or preexist the Creation,
but the Divine Nature; So our Lord Jesus Christ, as being the first, must
preexist all things in the Nature of God.

Fifth Scripture to prove the Eternity of the Son of God is, John 17.5. And
now, O Father, glorify Thou me with thy own Self, with the Glory which I had
with Thee before the World was. If the Son were in Glory with the Father,
before the World was, he was then existing before Time, and therefore from all
Eternity, Coessential with the Father.

Fifthly; The Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ is proved by his Works.

First, from John 2.19, 21. Destroy this Temple, and in three days I will raise
it up -- But he spoke of the Temple of his Body.

We read of many mighty Works that were wrought by the Holy Apostles, but not
in their own Names, or by their own Power: says Peter, Acts 3.12. Why look you
so earnestly on us, as though by our own Power or Holiness, we had made this
Man to walk? And Moses, for saying, Must we fetch Water out of this Rock? was
shut out of the Land of Canaan, Number. 20.12, 19. For though God had given such
power to Men; yet he expected the Glory should be given to him alone, as the
Apostles did to Jesus Christ, ver. 16. And surely if our Lord Jesus had not
been God equal with the Father in Nature, he had offended in assuming that
Power to Himself, which is to be ascribed to none but God; Who is said to have
raised him the third Day, Acts 10.40. So that the same Power which is ascribed
to God, the same does our Lord Jesus assume unto himself, and this demonstrates
him to be of the same Nature.

Second Scripture is, John 1.3. All things were made by Him; and without Him
was not any thing made, that was made. And therefore the Word, or Son of God,
ver. 14, 18. is the Eternal God and Creator of all Things.

Third Scripture is, Col. 1.16, 17. For by Him were all things created that are
in Heaven, and that are in Earth, visible and invisible, whether they be
Thrones or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers; all things were created by
Him, and for Him: And he is before all things, and by Him all things consist.
It is not, neither could it be said, that all things were renewed by the Son of
God; for the good Angels had no need of it; and the Devils were not, neither
were Men, save only a select Number in part, but not wholly renewed; for this
cannot be until our Bodies are raised up from the Grave, and reunited unto our
Souls. Nay, the whole Creation was never yet renewed, but is groaning under the
bondage of Corruption, and waiting to be delivered into the glorious Liberty of
the Sons of God, Romans 8.19, etc. And therefore this Scripture as it must of
necessity be taken in its literal Sense, so fully asserts the eternal Power and
Godhead of our Lord Jesus Christ, that I know not how its Authority can be
evaded: for if all things were created and are upheld by him, and that because
(as the Apostle gives the reason) that he was before all things; then he must
be the eternal God, Co-creator with the Father.

Fourth Scripture is, Heb. 1.10. And thou, Lord, in the Beginning have laid the
Foundation of the Earth, and the Heavens were the Works of thy Hands: The word
[And] connexes this Verse with the preceding Words, and makes it relate to ver.
8. as if we should read it thus, But unto the Son he says, Thy Throne, O God,
is for ever and ever. And (to the Son he says) thou, Lord, in the beginning
have laid the Foundation of the Earth, etc. And therefore he cannot be a
Creature, but the Creator of all things.

Sixthly, The Deity of Jesus Christ is proved by that Divine Worship and
Adoration given to him. None but God is to be worshipped with Divine Worship;
But the Son of God is to be worshipped with Divine Worship; therefore he is God.

First, to prove the Major in Matthew. 4.10. It is written, Thou shall worship
the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. And Rev. 19.10. chapter 20.8. In
both which places, when John fell down to worship the Holy Angel, he was
forbidden, saying, See thou do it not; for I am thy Fellow Servants: worship
God. And Gal. 4.8. Howbeit then when ye knew not God, ye did Service unto them
which by nature are no Gods. And Isa. 42.8. I am the Lord, that is my Name; and
my Glory will I not give to another, etc. And chap. 48.11. For my own sake,
even for my own sake will I do it, for how should my Name be polluted? and I
will not give my Glory unto another.

Now from these Scriptures, there is an Exclusion from Divine Worship of all
that are not God by nature; and none is to be glorified, or worshipped with the
same Glory or Worship which belongs to God, but Himself only.

Secondly, to prove the Minor; That the Son of God is to be worshipped with
Divine Worship, Matthew. 14.33. Then they that were in the Ship, came and
worshipped him, saying, Of a truth thou art the Son of God. So in chapter 2.11. The
wise Men worshipped him: In chap. 8.2. The Leper worshipped him: And in chapter
28.17. The Disciples worshipped him: and in many other places he was
worshipped, and he never forbad any. And therefore we have good reason to
believe that it was due unto him as God: For when Cornelius fell down to
worship Peter, he took him up and said, Stand up, I my self also am a Man. And
so also in Rev. 19.10. and chapter 20.8. when John fell down to worship the Holy
Angel, he was forbidden saying, See thou do it not; for I am thy
Fellow Servants, and of thy Brethren: worship God. So likewise if Christ had not
been God by nature, he would not have suffered his Disciples and others to have
worshipped him, without rebuke for it. But to proceed.

There are other Scriptures of greater force, to prove that the Son of God is
to be worshipped with Divine Worship; as Heb. 1.6. And again, when he brings
the first-begotten into the World, he says, And let all the Angels of God
worship him. And Rev. 5.8, 9. The four Beasts, (or rather four living
Creatures,) and four and twenty Elders, fell down before the Lamb ( viz.
Christ, John 1.29.) having every one of them Harps and golden Vials full of
Odours, which are the Prayers of Saints. And they sang a new Song, saying, Thou
art worthy to take the Book, and to open the Seals thereof: For thou wast
slain, and have redeemed us to God by thy Blood, etc. Ver. 13. And every
Creature which is in Heaven, and on the Earth, and under the Earth, and such as
are in the Sea, and all that are in them heard I saying, Blessing and Honor,
and Glory and Power, be unto him that sits upon the Throne, and unto the
Lamb for ever and ever. Ver. 14. And the four Beasts (or living Creatures)
said, Amen, even so, Amen. Chapter 7.9. After this I beheld, and lo, a great number
which no Man could number of all Nations, and Kindreds, and People, and
Tongues, stood before the Throne, and before the Lamb, and cried with a loud
Voice, saying, Salvation to our God which sits upon the Throne, and unto the
Lamb. So that our Lord Jesus Christ is counted worthy of the same Divine
Worship by all Creatures in Heaven and Earth, as God the Father, and has the
same Power as well as Honor and Glory ascribed to him.

Thus I have proved both the Major and the Minor; viz. that none but God is to
be worshipped with Divine Worship.

That the Son of God is to be worshipped with Divine Worship, and the
Conclusion follows, therefore he is God.

To what I have said, by way of positive proof, touching the Deity of Christ, I
shall not further add, for there has been given plentiful and sufficient
Evidences from the Word of God, that our Lord Jesus Christ has undeniable marks
of the Divine Nature upon him; so that his Deity cannot be denied without
subverting the Holy Scripture, which gives him the same Names, proves his
Eternity, renders the same Worship, attributes the same Works, and asserts him
the same as God the Father. And if we cannot know him as God by these Marks, by
what can we know him then? And if these be insufficient, how shall we know God
the Father? For if the chiefest Marks of the Divine Nature that are found on
our Lord Jesus Christ, be no proof of his existing in the same Nature; we may
then question the Deity of God the Father, who is only known and distinguished
from all Creatures by these and the like Attributes given to him, and
Descriptions of him. So that I see no way to escape the powerful convincing
Testimonies of this Truth, if there be but a searching after it, unless we deny
the Authority of the Holy Scriptures.

CHAP. V.
Wherein is proved the Deity of the Holy Ghost.

AS the Scriptures have given a clear Testimony to the Deity of our Lord Jesus
Christ; so also they will afford us sufficient Evidence of the Deity of the
Holy Spirit, which I intend to demonstrate in this Chapter. And,

First, I shall prove that the Holy Spirit is a Divine Person, and not a
Quality in God.

First, Our Lord Jesus Christ speaks of the Holy Ghost as a Person, John 14.16,
17. And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that
he may abide with you for ever: Even the Spirit of Truth, whom the World cannot
receive, because it sees him not, neither knows him: But ye know him, for he
dwells with you, and shall be in you. Chap. 16.8. And when he is come, he
will reprove the World of Sin. Ver. 13. Howbeit when he the Spirit of Truth is
come, he will guide you into all Truth: for he shall not speak of himself, but
whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak: and he will show you things to
come. In these Scriptures the words [ He, Him, and Himself] are used to the
Holy Spirit, and these all do note him to be a Person, and not a Quality.

Secondly, He is called the Comforter, John 16.7. which is a personal Name.

Thirdly, He is put in the same rank with other Divine Persons, as a Person,
Matthew. 28.19. Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost. 1 John. 5.7. For there are Three that bear Record in Heaven,
The Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost; and these three are one. Now from
these Texts of Scripture, I shall make these three Observations.

First, That we may as well say, that the Father, and the Son are Qualities, as
the Holy Spirit. And,

Secondly, The baptizing in the Name of the Spirit, denotes him to be a Person,
as well as the Name of the Father and the Son, by their Names are so denoted.

Thirdly, He cannot be a Quality; for if the Word and the Holy Ghost be
Qualities, and the Father only a Person; or else the Father and Word Persons,
and only the Holy Ghost a Quality, yet the three can neither be one Person, nor
one Quality.

Fourthly, The Holy Ghost is a Person, and is so far from being a Quality in
God, that he has in himself the Quality of Knowing and Understanding: 1 Cor.
2.11. Even so the things of God knows no Man, but the Spirit of God; and also
of willing, John 16.7, 8. 1 Cor. 12.11. But all these works that one and the
self-same Spirit, dividing to every Man severally as he will. And therefore the
Holy Spirit having personal Qualities, is denoted to be a Person; and there is
not the least reason to believe but that the Holy Ghost is a Person, who is so
generally treated of as a Person.

Secondly, The Holy Spirit is God from the Testimony of four several Scriptures.

First, is Matthew. 28.19. Go ye therefore, and teach all Nations, baptizing them
in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. If the Holy
Ghost were not God, why should we be baptized into his Name, and ascribe unto
him a share in the Work of Man's Salvation? But that as the Father was pleased
to elect and ordain the Son to lay our Iniquities upon him, and accept us in
him; and as the Son was willing (as it were) to disrobe himself of the Glory he
had before the World was, to bear the Wrath of God, that was due to us for our
Sins, that we might be delivered from it; and to reconcile him to us by the
precious Blood of his Cross: So the Holy Spirit changes our Hearts, and
reconciles them to God, by infusing into us a new Nature with Holy Dispositions
and Power against Sin, which the good Angels could never do: for though they
have great Power to communicate to our Spirits, and influence our Souls with
good things; yet the evil Angels having the same Power of Nature, and being
first in Possession, may keep our Souls in Bondage, till one that is stronger,
casts them out, Luke 11.22. 1 John 4.4. And therefore the Holy Spirit, having
so great a hand in this glorious Work, may rightly receive a share with other
Divine Persons of our Acknowledgment of it, which demonstrates that the Holy
Ghost is God; for otherwise we should ascribe that Work unto the Creature which
is above the Power of its Nature, and is only possible for God himself.

Second Scripture is 1 Cor. 3.16. Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God,
and that the Spirit of God dwells in you? To have the Spirit of God dwelling
in us, is to have our Bodies the Temple of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6.19. And the
Temple of the Holy Ghost is the same as the Temple of God; and to say that the
Temple of God is the Temple of a Creature, or to give it the Name of a
Creature, is a Dishonor to it, as not sanctified unto God: And therefore the
same Spirit or Holy Ghost that dwells in us, is God that dwells in us.

Third Scripture is 1 John 5.7. For there are three that bear Record in Heaven,
the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one. This
Scripture is so clear an Evidence for the Truth I am pleading for, that there
have been some who would blot it out, denying its Authority to be equal with
other Scriptures, which I shall answer unto in its proper place.

But whereas it is said, [and these three are one] it must be understood that
they are one in Essence; for in ver. 8. where the Essences differ, the manner
of speaking also differs, [as agree in one] viz. in Testimony; but in the Text
it is [are one] viz. in Essence, as the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost,
are not only one in Agreement of their Testimony, as the Blood, the Water, and
the Spirit are, but are one in Essence. And this Distinction was made in the
two Verses, that we might not miss of the Truth of God in them.

Fourth Scripture is, 2 Cor. 3.17. Now the Lord is that Spirit: and where the
Spirit of the Lord is, there is Liberty. Ver. 18. We are changed into the same
Image from Glory to Glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord, or (as it is in
the Margent) Of the Lord the Spirit. Now if the Holy Spirit were not of the
same Divine Essence, it could not be said, the Lord is that Spirit.

Thirdly; I shall show that the Holy Spirit is God by the Works of Creation
that are ascribed to him.

1st. Job 33.4. The Spirit of God has made me, and the Breath of the Almighty
has given me Life.

2dly. Job 26.13. By his Spirit he has garnished the Heavens, his Hand has
formed the crooked Serpent.

3dly. Psalm 104.30. Thou sendest forth thy Spirit, they are Created, etc.

4thly. Genesis 1.1. And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the Waters. The
Spirit did co-create with other Divine Persons, or Subsistences in the Deity:
And therefore it is said, That in the beginning Gods (or the Almighties)
created the Heavens and the Earth: Which Words, being inclusive of more than
one Person, and the Spirit of God being said to move upon the Face of the
Waters; I think we may safely say, that the Holy Spirit did co-work with other
Divine Persons in the work of Creation, and was one of those Persons of whom
it is said, Let us make Man in our Image, after our Likeness, etc. So that from
these Scriptures it is clear, that the Holy Spirit did create, and therefore we
cannot deny his Deity.

Fourthly; The Deity of the Holy Spirit is demonstrated by what is ascribed to
him in the Conception of our Lord Jesus, and by the Works that he accomplished,
through the Power received from him.

First, Jesus Christ was conceived by the Holy Ghost. Luke 1.34. Then said Mary
unto the Angel, How shall this be, seeing I know not a Man? Verse. 35. And the
Angel answered, and said unto her, The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the
Power of the Highest shall over-shadow thee: Therefore also that Holy Thing
which shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God. And Matthew. 1.18.
Mary was found with Child of the Holy Ghost.

From both these Scriptures it appears that our Lord Jesus was conceived by the
Holy Ghost, the Power of the Highest, which is God. Not that any should imagine
from hence, that every particular attribute in God are so many Persons in the
Godhead, but essential Properties of the One most high God, and, as such,
cannot be separated from him: And therefore to ascribe the Conception of Christ
to the immediate Power of God, is to attribute it unto God, for all his
Attributes are so many descriptive Appellations of him. And therefore seeing
that the Power of the Highest is the Highest himself, and that the Holy Ghost
is this Power which came upon Mary, and overshadowed her, then the Holy Ghost
must be God. And he cannot be otherwise understood: for no created Spirit could
produce a Child in the Womb of the Virgin Mary.

Secondly, It appears that the Holy Ghost is God, by the Works that our Lord
Jesus accomplished by him.

First, He was anointed with the Holy Ghost to preach the Gospel, Luke 4.18.
The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach the
Gospel to the poor, etc. -- With the Oil of Gladness above his Fellows -- for
God gives not the Spirit by measure unto him, Heb. 1.9. John 3.34.

Secondly; Jesus Christ cast out Devils by the Spirit of God, Mat. 12.28. But
if I cast (...) Devils by the Spirit of God, then the Kingdom of God is come
unto you.

Thirdly; Our Lord Jesus offered up himself unto God through the Spirit. Heb.
9.14. How much more shall the Blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit
offered himself without spot to God, purge your Consciences from dead Works to
serve the living God.

Now if our Lord Jesus Christ have the same Nature in the Unity of Essence with
God the Father, why should he then attribute that Power, by which he cast out
Devils, and performed his Ministerial Office in preaching the Gospel, and
offering himself a Sacrifice to God for us, unto the Spirit, if he were but a
Creature? For thus to exalt the Creature, would much eclipse his own Power and
Glorious Deity. And therefore I cannot think, that all those glorious Things
should be attributed to the Holy Spirit, unless he were a Divine Person
subsisting in the Nature of God.

And forasmuch as God has said, that He will not give his Glory to another,
there cannot be any Color of reason to deny the Deity of the Holy Ghost,
unless we deny the Deity of Jesus Christ. And seeing that his Deity is so
plainly proved, that none can deny it, if they open their Eyes to the Light of
the Holy Scriptures; and that the Deity of the Holy Ghost does so naturally
flow from it, that none can reject the one without the other; there is ground
from hence, as well as from the preceding Evidence of the Holy Spirit's Deity,
to believe that he is a Divine Person in the same Nature and Essence, together
equal with God the Father, and the Son.

Fifthly; The Deity of the Holy Ghost is proved by the Divine Worship that is
given to him.

As the Scriptures do demonstrate the Holy Spirit to be a Divine Person
subsisting in the Nature of God; so to worship God adequately aright, we must
include the Holy Spirit: for whether we worship God indefinitely, yet as the
one Nature and Spiritual Substance of God, is the Nature and Substance of each
Person, we therein do worship each Person; or whether we worship a Person by
peculiar Attributions, proper to that Person; yet as the one Nature and
Substance of the Deity, is the Nature and Substance of that Person, we therein
do worship the Deity: So that we can neither exclude any one Person in the
worshipping of the Deity, or the Deity in the worshipping of any one Divine
Person, if we know what we worship. John 4.22. chapter 8.19. chapter 14.7, 8, 9. But,

1st. To prove that the Holy Ghost is to be worshipped with Divine Worship, I
shall cite Matthew. 28.19. Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost. What is our being Baptized in the Name of the Holy
Ghost, but our Acknowledgment of our Faith in him, and our yielding of due
Obedience and Worship to him, as well as to the Father and the Son?

2dly. The Holy Ghost is worshipped with Divine Worship. Isa. 6.1, 2, 3, 8, 9,
10. compared with Acts 28.25, 26, 27. The Prophet saw the Lord sitting upon his
Throne, high and lifted up, and his Train filled the Temple. Ver. 2. About it
stood the Seraphims. Ver. 3. And one cried unto another, and said, Holy, Holy,
Holy is the Lord of Hosts, the whole Earth is full of his Glory. And the Lord
bad the Prophet, ver. 9. Go and tell this People, Hear ye indeed, but
understand not; and see ye indeed, but perceive not. Now the same Lord that
spoke to the Prophet, and was worshipped by the Seraphims, is said to be the
Holy Ghost in Acts 28. and from thence it appears, that the Holy Ghost is to be
worshipped with Divine Worship, and therefore he is God.

CHAP. VI.
Wherein is proved the Unity of the Holy Trinity.

FOrasmuch as it is manifestly declared in the Holy Scriptures of Truth, that
there is but one God, and that the Father is God, the Son is God, and the Holy
Ghost is God, it must then consequently follow, that these three are but one
God.

And first, this is farther showed, and declared to us by our being Baptized in
the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Matthew. 28.19.
for as these three are ranked together as Divine Persons, so there is no reason
to think that they should differ in their Nature, seeing we ascribe the great
work of Salvation to all of them: And surely if Christ and the Holy Spirit were
instrumental in our Salvation, only as Creatures under God the Father, they
would not be ranked together with him as the efficient Cause: For the Holy
Angels, though they are all Ministering Spirits sent forth to minister for them,
who shall be Heirs of Salvation; yet are we not required in any
Church-Ordinance to acknowledge their Service in honor to them, Heb. 1.14. 1
Cor. 11.10. For though we are exhorted to such a Holy Behavior, as that we
might not prevent, or disturb them in their Ministerial Work and Office, yet
the Glory of all is to be given to God alone, viz. to Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost: and the reason to me is plain, because the Angels are of a lower Nature;
otherwise it were not irrational to believe, that if the Angels were equal in
Nature to Christ and the Holy Spirit, though lower in Office, they should have
a share proportionable in the Attributions of Protection and Salvation.
Besides, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit are ranked together, because
these three only are Omniscient and Omnipresent: Do not I fill Heaven and
Earth, says the Lord? not only the Father, but also the Son and the Holy
Spirit. For they created all things, as has been showed, and therefore they
know all things. He that teaches Man Knowledge, shall not he know? And, whither
shall I go from thy Spirit, etc. Or, whither shall I flee from thy Presence,
etc. And Christ says, Where two or three are gathered together in my Name,
there am I in the midst of them; And, Lo, I am with you always, even unto the
end of the World. Jer. 23.24. Matthew. 18.20. chap. 28.20. Psalm 139.7 to 14.
Psalm 94.10, 11. If any say, that Christ means only, that his Doctrine shall
continue among the Faithful that congregate in his Name; or, as Ephesians. 3.17. To
dwell in our Hearts by Faith, viz. in his Doctrine. It is answered, That not
simply his Doctrine as it is mixed with Faith, in its abstract from inward
feeling, is here to be understood; but some other presence of Christ with his
People; for he says, John 14.23. If a Man love me, he will keep my Words, and
my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with
him. Where note, that to such as have already received his Word by Faith in the
love of it, and keep it, he has promised a further Presence: And what can it
be, but the inward sensation or feeling of his Love? as sometimes we have, Rom
5.1 to 6. tho at other times we have not, Job 13.15. chapter 23.8 to 11. But they
may further say, If this be the Presence of Christ you speak of, it is not his
personal Presence, but by the Spirit, which is called the Spirit of Faith, that
sheddeth the Love of God abroad in our Hearts. To this I reply, True, it is not
the personal Presence of Christ, either as God-Man, or of the Divine Person of
the Son, but as in and through the Spirit; which will prove what is denied by
them, viz. That the Holy Spirit is God, yea, and the Son also. For the Office
of the Spirit is universal to all Saints, throughout the World, at the same
instant time, which is beyond the power of any finite Creature; indeed Satan
deceives the World, but not by an infinite Presence, at the same time in every
place, but by a finite personal going to and fro, and walking up and down in
it, seeking whom he may devour, being assisted by his evil Angels, Job 1.7. 1
Pet. 5.8. And as the Holy Spirit by his Office must be Omnipresent; So also the
Son as well as the Father is Omnipresent, in and through the Spirit with the
Saints in all places, and in and with all Persons, Places and Things
whatsoever; though not by the same Ministrations or Operations, yet at the same
instant Season: and as the Father is Omnipresent in and through the Spirit, so
I see not the least reason why we should deny it to the Son; but understand his
Presence in the same sense, seeing both are present in the Unity of the same
Spirit. For, know ye not that ye are the Temple of God, and that the Spirit of
God dwells in you? As God has said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them:
And he that is joined to the Lord, is one Spirit with the Father, and the Son,
for the Holy Ghost is called, The Spirit of our Father -- that speaks in us,
and the Spirit of the Son, sent forth into our Hearts, crying, Abba, Father:
And the Spirit which is upon Christ shall not depart out of his Mouth, nor out
of the Mouth of his Seed -- nor of his Seed's Seed, from henceforth, and for
ever: and if any Man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, and by
our Communion with the Holy Ghost, we have Fellowship with the Father, and his
Son Jesus Christ, and are one in them, and they will come and make their abode
with us, through that one Spirit, whereby we are joined unto the Lord. 1 Cor.
3.16. 2 Cor. 6.16. 1 Cor. 6.17. Mark 13.11. Matthew. 10.20. Gal. 4.6. Isa. 59.21.
2 Cor. 13.14. 1 John 1.3. John 17.21. chap. 14.23. And it is comfortable for us
to believe, that greater is he that is in us, than he that is in the World, 1
John 4.4. Otherwise what may the Soul say when he is in trouble: Surely, I
fear, that notwithstanding the fullness of the precious Promises, and the great
Engagements of Christ to me, that Christ and the Holy Spirit are far from me,
and are busied with other Saints, and know not my Distress; and therefore I may
perish before they come to help me. But blessed be God, that has laid help
upon one that is Mighty, Psalm. 89.19. who is able to save to the uttermost all
that come unto God by him, Heb. 7.15. that knows all our open and secret
Wants, Rev. 2.23. and makes Intercession for us: And as for the Holy Spirit,
our Bodies are the Temple of the Holy Ghost that dwells in us, that abides
with us for ever; though his Operations may sometimes cease, when he is grieved
by us; 1 Cor. 6.19. John 14.16. So that the Holy Ghost is not as one that
comes but now and then to visit our Souls, but he makes his constant abode in
us, and so is always ready to mortify and sanctify our vile Natures, and make
them meet to have Fellowship with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, 1
Jo. 1.3. And this is a Christian's Mercy, that as none is able to pluck him out
of Christ's Hands, so the greatest Corruptions are not able to withstand the
powerful Sanctifyings of the Holy Spirit. Satan may withstand an Holy Angel of
God; for his Fall does not deprive him of the natural Power of an Angel: but
yet he cannot withstand Christ nor the Holy Spirit, because of the Potency of
their Nature, John 10.28, and 30. Romans 8.13. 2 Cor. 10.4 to 7. Dan. 10.13. Jude
9. and we may say in this case, as John did concerning the sealed Book, Rev. 5.
That none in Heaven nor on Earth, nor under the Earth, was found worthy besides
the Son and the Holy Spirit, to redeem and sanctify the fallen Sons of Adam:
The Angels could not do it, for they are beholden to Christ for their standing,
1 Timothy 5.26. But blessed be God our Savior, for in him shall all the Seed of
Israel be justified, and shall glory, Tit. 2.10. Isa. 45.25. To whom be Glory
and Praise now and for evermore, Amen.

So then if we ascribe and acknowledge the Work of Man's Salvation to the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Ghost, which are ranked together, as the efficient Cause,
and therefore receive the Glory of it: and seeing both the Father and the Son
dwells in us, in and through the Holy Spirit, whose Office in his Omnipresence
bespeaks his unlimited and infinite Nature; I cannot conceive but that the
great Unity of these three Subsistencies should be in Essence.

Secondly; The Unity of the Holy Trinity is manifest from Isa. 6.23. where the
Seraphims cried one unto another and said, Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lord of
Hosts; agreeable to Rev. 4.8. Now here are three Holies, viz. Holy Father, Holy
Son, and Holy Ghost: and though I do not lay the stress of the proof on the
bare repetition of the word Holy; yet doubtless it echoes to the Truth that is
couched in this Chapter, and which I hope to demonstrate by the help of other
places referring to it. And in order thereunto I shall note who the Prophet saw
upon his Throne, high and lifted up, whose Train filled the Temple: And this
was Jehovah (an incommunicable Name of God, Psalm. 83.19.) the Lord of Hosts,
who fills the whole Earth with his Glory, but this was not only the Father,
but also the Son and the Holy Ghost.

1st, That it was the Father, needs no proof, because it is not denied, but
confessed by our Adversaries in opposition to the other two Divine Persons.

2dly, That this Vision is applied to the Son, we have the Words of the Apostle
for it, John 12.41. who speaking of Christ from verse 37 to 40. and citing the
Prophet Isaiah's Message, when he saw this Vision, says, These things said
Isaias, when he saw his Glory, and spoke of him, viz. of Christ, whom John was
speaking of.

3dly, This Scripture is also applied to the Holy Ghost in Acts 28.25, 26. as
has been said already, and will be defended in its proper place. So that if we
will credit the Holy Apostles, who were doubtiess the best Expounders and
Appliers of dark Prophecies; and have unfolded the Mystery of the Holy Trinity
which lay hid in the Words, Holy, Holy, Holy, and couched in the Plurality of
Persons, hinted to us in these Words, Who shall go for us? ver. 8. Then surely
we must acknowledge that seeing the Prophets Jehovah, and the Apostles Son and
Holy Spirit, are one and the same; that these two are Divine Subsistencies as
well as the Father, subsisting in the supreme Nature of God.

Thirdly, If we couple together John 10.30. and 2 Cor. 3.17. I and my Father
are one. -- The Lord is that Spirit; we may see that the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Spirit, are but one God.

Fourthly, John gives so clear a Testimony to the Unity of the Holy Trinity,
that I know not how it can be denied, 1 John 5.7. For there are three that bear
Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are
one in Essence, as was showed before.

CHAP. VII.
Contains some Explications of the Holy Trinunity.

FIrst, Of the essential Being of God.

God is one single, infinite, eternal, immense, perfect, spiritual Being, no
Compound, for Compounds must be either finite or infinite; not of Finites, for
Finites are imperfect, temporal and mensurable, and so cannot make one infinite
perfect Being; not of Infinites, for more than one infinite Being cannot
subsist, for one infinite Immensity cannot admit of another infinite Immensity,
nor is infinite Perfection exclusive, but comprehensive of all Perfection.

Hence it is that we must not imagine God to have any shape, because an
Infinite Being cannot be any ways limited or subscribed. Deuteronomy. 4.12, 15. John
4.24. Deuteronomy. 33.27. Psalm. 147.5. Psalm. 90.2.

Secondly, Of a Divine Person.

Mr. Chynel in his Divine Trinunity, Page 96. describes a Divine Person. A
Divine Person is a spiritual and infinite Subsistent, related indeed to these
other uncreated Persons, which subsist in the same Divine Nature with it, but
distinguished from those co-essential Persons, by its peculiar manner of
Subsistence, Order of subsisting, singular Relation and incommunicable Property.

Thirdly, Of the Divine Person of the Father.

The Divine Person of the Father is unbegotten, and subsists of himself in the
Divine Essence, and has the Divine Nature of none.

Fourthly, Of the Divine Person of the Son.

The Divine Person of the Son is naturally and necessarily begotten of the
Father, by eternal Generation, for he is Eternal, as has been showed, and is
of the Father, John 5.26. by eternal Generation, and he subsists in the
unbegotten Nature of God; for the Father did not beget the Divine Nature of the
Son, but the Son is begotten in the Divine Nature.

Fifthly, Of the Divine Person of the Spirit.

The Divine Person of the Spirit has his Subsistence, naturally and
necessarily both from the Father and the Son, by eternal Spiration or
Emanation, Job 33.4. and therefore the Holy Ghost is called the Spirit of
Christ, who breathed on his Disciples, and bid them receive the Holy Ghost, to
show that the Spirit was breathed forth by him as well as from the Father, John
20.22. John 15.26. 1 Pet. 1.11. 2 Pet. 1.21. not from the Father alone, or the
Son alone, for then he might be said to be the Son of the Father, or of the
Son, but by the Father and the Son, and not being separated or divided from
either, he subsists in the same Nature, and is co-essential with them both.

Sixthly, Of the Unity of the Holy Trinity.

The Divine Nature is common to all three Subsistencies, and the whole Divine
Nature is the Substance of every Person which distinctly subsists in it; and
all its essential Properties pertain unto each of them, and the Divine Nature,
because it is infinite in Perfection, it contains all relative as well as
absolute Perfections.

Seventhly, Of the Distinction between the Divine Nature and the Persons.

I shall cite Mr. Chynel in his Divine Trinunity; Page 105, etc.

First, The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, do all three really, positively,
truly, subsist in the Divine Essence; and yet these three Subsistencies, and
the Divine Essence, do not make four, no nor two things really distinct; even
as Entity, Truth, Goodness, and Unity, do not make four things really distinct,
as you heard but now, but are one real thing, and no more.

Secondly, Ens is not compounded of Entity, and its three Affections; nor is
God compounded of the Godhead, and three Subsistencies; nor is any one Person
compounded of the Divine Nature and Subsistence.

Thirdly, As Truth is not Goodness, nor Goodness Truth, nor either of them
Unity, and yet all three are Entity: So the Father is not the Son, nor is the
Son the Father, nor is either of them the Holy Ghost, and yet all three are
God; for they are all three but one God, subsisting with all absolute and
relative Perfection, as has been showed.

Fourthly, Every one of the three Affections of Ens, does connote Entity: every
one of the three Subsistencies does connote the Godhead, the Divine Nature, as
has been proved at large.

Fifthly, Not any one of the three Affections of Ens, does, nor do all three
together, superadd a new Entity; not any one of the three Subsistencies does,
nor do all three together superadd a new Deity, a new Divine Nature, or
Godhead: for Ens is one; Ens est trinum, non triplex, trinum and unum, Ens
trin-unum, Deus est trinus, non triplex, trinus and unus, Deus trinunus; this
instance does in some Measure resemble the Mystery of the Trinunity.

Sixthly, No Affection of Ens can be really separated from Ens, nor can one of
the Divine Persons be separated from the Divine Nature, or the Divine Nature
from any one of the Divine Persons, or any one of the Persons from either of
the other two.

Seventhly, All the Affections of Ens are distinguished, but none divided: all
the three Subsistencies are distinguished, but they cannot be divided.

Eighthly, Truth and Goodness, which are two of the Affections of Ens, are
distinguished by their peculiar and several Relations; Truth has Relation to
the Understanding, and Goodness to the Will: The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost
are known to be distinguished by their several and peculiar Relations; and if
it be not unreasonable to say, that there is in Entity three Affections, and
two Relations in Ente simplissimo, without any Composition in, or
Multiplication of the Entity, why should it seem unreasonable, or at least why
should it seem incredible, that there are three Subsistencies, and several
Relations in the Godhead without any Composition in, or Multiplication of the
Godhead?

Ninthly, One Affection, nay all the Affections in abstracto, do but
inadequately represent Ens, unless you take notice of the Entity it self, as
well as the three Affections. One single Subsistence, nay all three
Subsistencies in abstracto, do but inadequately represent God, unless you take
notice of the Godhead in which they subsist; and therefore this precisive
Abstraction of the Subsistencies from the Divine Nature, is but an inadequate
Conceit of God, as has been demonstrated above in this very Chapter; for we
must not dream of a Trinity of Modes, but assert and believe the glorious and
co-essential Trinity. The Father is truly God, that God who is the only true
God; but the Father alone does not adequately represent God to us, as he is
described in the Holy Scriptures.

It is true that the Divine Essence is by the Subsistence of the Father,
adequately the Father; but as God is represented by that Divine Subsistence
only, he is not Deus Trinunus, he is not the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; The
Father alone, is not all these three Witnesses who are one God. And therefore
the acute Socinians, with their precise Abstractions, do but suggest an
inadequate Conceit of God: That only true God, whom we worship, does not
subsist only in the Person of the Father. We worship God, subsisting with all
absolute and relative Perfection in Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; for these
three are that one God, who is the only true God blessed for ever. This is the
adequate Representation of God in the Scriptures of Truth. And we are resolved
to regulate all our Metaphysical Notions by the Holy Scriptures, that we may
make the highest of Sciences to acknowledge the Supremacy of that Divine Science
which is no where to be learnt but in the Word of God; for the purest Reason
must be elevated by the Word and Spirit of God, for the discovery of this
Mystery.

Tenthly; These Affections of Ens represent the manner of that Being, which Ens
has as it is transcendently considered; and the three Divine Subsistencies do
represent that manner of Being, which God has as he is most transcendently
considered, namely as subsisting, after the most glorious Manner, with all
absolute and relative Perfection.

It is the manner of a transcendent Entity to be one, and true, and good, and
it is the manner of God's Being, to be one God in three Subsistencies; these
three are one single God, there is no Composition, or Multiplication
imaginable, in this single and infinite Being.

When I read this Similitude, and conceived the Light it gave into this
Mystery, I thought it worth my time to convey it unto others out of this
learned Author; and I doubt not, but (if well considered) these rare
Distinctions of the Divine Nature, and the Persons, will be profitable. For as
the Author says, When Divine Revelation has gone before, and we have built
upon that as the Groundwork and Foundation, by a serious Faith, these
Metaphysical Notions may be subservient helps in a subordinate way. And if
there might be so great Simplicity or Singleness in a created and finite
Entity, notwithstanding there are three Affections, and two Relations which do
affect that Entity; it seems to me somewhat easy to believe that there are
three Subsistencies in one infinite Godhead, without any Composition in, or
Multiplication of the single Godhead.

Estwick in his Confutation of Biddle's Confession of Faith, Page 17. does give
(among other Resemblances of the Deity) an instance of the Soul and its
Faculties, saying, If they are (as Scotus and his Followers, Zanchius and
Scaliger, and others do maintain) one thing, for then there is not a real
Composition betwixt the Soul and the Faculties of it.

Memory in the Soul is the beginning of the Knowledge begotten in it, and so it
represents the Father. By Intelligence is represented the Son, because he is as
Knowledge begotten of his Father. By Memory, and the Will, is represented the
Holy Ghost. (This is some oversight in the Author, or Error in the Printer:
for it should be thus,) Of Memory and Intelligence proceeds the Will, which
represents the Holy Spirit, (and so it agrees with what follows;) because he is
alone produced of the Father and the Son; these are distinct, yet one in
Essence. August. lib. 15. de Trinitate, cap. 20. Radu. page 2. Controv. 13.
Art. 2. This Comparison (says he) I confess is too short, for neither are the
Faculties of the Soul Persons, nor does there appear in them such a strange and
wonderful manner of Production, as in the glorious Persons of the Blessed
Trinity: This does our Faith with Admiration apprehend, which our Knowledge
cannot attain unto.

To conclude (says he) the Premises show that this great Mystery is not
against Reason, though it be above Reason, etc.

Eighthly; Of the Union of the Nature of God, and of Man, in one Person.

Of this I shall cite Estwick in his Confutation of Biddle's Confession of
Faith, page 115. Suppose an Apple Tree grow up, into which the Branch of
another Tree is ingrafted, which makes not the Tree to be of a compound or
middle Nature, but causing the Branch, which being set into the Ground, might
have proved an entire Tree of it self, to pertain to the Unity of the Tree into
which it is implanted, and yet retains its own Nature, and bears its own Fruit;
and as you may truly say, this Harvy-Tree is a Pippin-Tree, and this
Pippin-Tree is a Harvy-Tree; and consequently this Harvy-Tree bears Pippins,
and this Pippin-Tree brings forth Harvies. So may we say of the Person of
Christ, consisting of the Natures of God and Man: The Son of God, who was a
complete and perfect Person, has added to it the humane Nature in the Unity of
the same Person; as the Divine Nature of our Savior, notwithstanding the
Personal Union, is not capable of any humane Imperfections, no more is the
humane Nature (in that respect a finite Creature) capable of any Divine and
infinite Perfection; the weakness and infirmity of Man was not swallowed up in
the Majesty of God, nor was God's Majesty in the least diminished really by the
Assumption of Man. The Union of the Word, in regard of the Persons subsistence,
graciously bestowed on the humane Nature, is not finite, nor the humane Nature
infinite: and as the forenamed Tree is but one, and yet has two different
Natures in it, and bears two kinds of Fruits; so the Holy Son of God is but
one Person, and yet has two different Natures, and by them performs the
distinct Operations pertaining to either of them.

PART. II.
Wherein the Proof of the Holy Trinunity, in the former part of this Treatise,
is defended against the chiefest Objections and Arguments of the Adversaries.

THERE are many Objections made, and of diverse kinds, against this Doctrine;
some against its Scriptural Proofs; and others inferred from diverse Texts of
Scripture, besides those which are offered against it as inconsistent to
Reason. To which I shall make replies in order.

CHAP. I.
In which I shall answer those Objections I find against the Scriptural Proofs
of the Deity of Jesus Christ.

FIRST Objection unto Gen 1.26. and to other Places also, which are cited to
prove a Plurality of Divine Persons in the Godhead: We might by the same kind
of arguing conclude, that because Christ in Mark 4.30. says, Whereunto shall
we liken the Kingdom of God? or with what comparison shall we compare it? and
John 3.11. Verily, verily, I say unto thee, We speak that we do know, and
testify that we have seen, and ye receive not our Witness: Therefore there are
several Persons in Christ. And also in Paul, 2 Cor. 10.1, 2. The utmost that
can be concluded from this passage in Genesis, is, That there was some other
Person with God whom he employed in the Creation, which Person had been before
mentioned by Moses, Ver. 2. with Psalm. 104.30. Job 26.13. chapter 33.4. These
Scriptures do plainly intimate, that the Spirit was but the Instrument of God
in creating Things, it was he only ( which he says is an Angel:) For had the
Son of God, Christ Jesus, been also employed in creating of Adam, would he not
have been likewise mentioned in the History of the Creation?

Answer. First, It does not from hence follow, that because Christ and Paul
speak of themselves, and others with them in the plural Number, that there is
the same Reason to conclude, that there are several Persons in Christ, and in
Paul, as there is for a Plurality of Persons in the Godhead; for those Texts do
only show a Plurality of Persons, not in Christ nor in Paul, but of
Personalities abstracted from their Nature: for no created Persons as such, do
subsist in their common Nature. Christ was a humane Substance abstracted from
the humane Nature, in Conjunction with the Divine Person of the Son, and so he
became the one Person of Christ, and might speak of himself and others, as
Equals of the Humane Nature, not taking notice of the different Subsistence of
their Nature.

Secondly, This does not oppose a Plurality of Divine Persons in the Deity, but
rather confirm it, for it being confessed that Genesis 1.26, etc. does signify a
Plurality of Persons, it must also be of Equals of the same Nature.

Thirdly, The Omission of the second Person (the Son of God) by Name, is no
Exclusion of him from cooperating with the Father and the Holy Spirit in the
Creation of the Word; because Omission is not always an Exclusion: if it were,
then God the Father would be excluded, when only Christ or the Holy Spirit is
mentioned, as Job. 33.4. and Colos. 1.16. and in the Text, where the Father is
as well omitted by Name as the Son; and the Holy Spirit is only named, because
he is the great Agent which proceeds from the Father and the Son, in whom
they work; so that when it is said, In the beginning God (a common Name to all
three Subsistencies) or Almighties (which includes all three Persons) created,
we must not limit it only to the Father, Son, or Spirit, but understand it of
all three Subsistencies. And in ver. 2. where the Person of the Spirit is
mentioned, we must include the other two Divine Subsistencies, working in and
by him. So that notwithstanding these Exceptions against those Scriptures that
are brought to prove a Plurality of Divine Persons in the Deity, yet they abide
as sufficient Testimonies thereof. And as for his asserting the Holy Spirit to
be an Angel, we have but his Word for it, which needs no farther Answer.

Second Objection. The Appellations of Christ are no Proof of his Deity,
because other Persons and Things have the same Names ascribed to them.

1st. Persons; Exodus 4.16. chap. 7.1. Jer. 33.16.

2dly. Things; Genesis 22.14. Exodus 17.15. Judge. 6.24. Ezekiel. 48.35.

Answer. First to Exodus 7.1. with chap. 4.16. we say, That there is not the
same Reason to prove the Deity of Moses, as there is of Christ, from those
peculiar and incommunicable Names of God that are given to him. 1st. Because
that Moses is not absolutely called by this Name, as Christ is in some of the
aforesaid Places, and in Isa. 8.13. Zech. 12.1, 10. chap. 14.3, 4. but it is
only said to him, I have made thee a God to Pharaoh, that is, Moses was
inspired with Wisdom, and received Commission from God, to do Wonders in the
Sight of Pharaoh and all his People, in his stead: The Lord not working so
immediately from himself, as he did by the Hand of Moses; like as Moses was
instead of God to Aaron his Brother, to put Words into his Mouth, chap. 4.15,
16. which place does much open and confirm this Exposition.

2dly. To Jer. 33.16. And this is the Name wherewith she shall be called, The
Lord our Righteousness. Mr. Estwick in his Answer to Biddle's Catechism, page
422. gives us this account of the Words: The word Name is not in the Original;
and to hint this to the Reader, it is printed in lesser Letters than the rest,
which is the sacred Text; nor is there any Pronoun in the Hebrew which
signifies [she]; nor is there any Necessity to read the word in the passive
Signification, to translate it thus, She shall be called; but in the Holy
Tongue it is word for word, as Arius Montanus does turn it; And he that shall
call her, is the Lord our Righteousness: And then the Name is given to Christ;
And this is confirmed by the Dutch Translation, after the same sense. And it is
most likely to be the true Interpretation of it; for as the aforesaid Author
says, who can say of the Church, She is the Lord our Righteousness?

3dly. To Genesis 22.14. And Abraham called the Name of that Place Jehovah jireh:
that is, the Lord will see or provide: This place was called so in respect to
God (who had there provided a Ram for a Burnt-offering instead of Isaac) as a
Memorial of what he had done there.

4thly. To Exodus 17.15. And Moses built an Altar, and called the Name of it
Jehova-Nissi, that is, the Lord my Banner; which was in remembrance of God's
appearing for his People against the Amalekites.

5thly. To Judge. 6.24. Then Gideon built an Altar there unto the Lord, and
called it Jehovah-Shalom: The Lord send Peace as a Token of the Promise of
Peace, which God had made in ver. 23.

6thly. To Ezck. 48.35. And the Name of the City from that Day shall be, The
Lord is there: Which Scripture, as well as those foregoing, relates to the
Presence and Appearance of God in some extraordinary manner in those places;
and therefore as the Name Jehovah has no proper Relation to them, so it
hinders not the Proof of Christ's Deity, by those several incommunicable Names
of God, that are positively given to him as proper Names.

Objection. To those Scriptures that are brought to prove the Deity of the Son
of God, being such as relate to God in the Old Testament, and are applied to
Jesus Christ in the New.

What things are spoken of God under the Law, may for another reason be spoken
of Christ under the Gospel, namely for the great and intimate Conjunction
between God and Christ, in respect of Dominion, Power and Office, that Christ
has obtained by the Donation of God. Now if the Scriptures deliver the very
same things of Moses, Exodus 32.7. Acts 7.35. and of others that are elsewhere
written of God himself, when as neither Moses nor those others had so great
Conjunction with God, as intervened between him and Christ, much more
deservedly may those things which are primarily spoken of God, be accommodated
to Christ, by reason of that most singular and strict Conjunction that is
between them.

Answ. First, It Is true, that that which is primarily spoken of God, to have
brought up Israel out of Egypt, or to be their Deliverer, is also spoken of
Moses, and of the Angel, Acts 7.35. the same did God send to be a Ruler and a
Deliverer by the Hands of the Angel which appeared to him in the Bush. Yet how
remote this is to the case in hand, let the Reader judge; for Moses we see
plainly by the Text, is put as the third cause of Israel's Deliverance out of
Egypt, as only an Instrument in the Hand of God through the Ministry of the
Angel. And this agrees with the Old Testament, Exodus 33.1, 2. And the Lord said
unto Moses, Depart and go up hence, thou and the People that thou have brought
up out of the Land of Egypt -- And I will send an Angel before thee. And Psalm.
77.20. Thou leddest thy People like a Flock by the Hand of Moses and Aaron. But
the Case is far different with respect to the Son of God; for, as in the Old
Testament it is absolutely spoken of God, so in the New it is positively
applied to Jesus Christ, without such Restrictions as it is to Moses, etc. And
though Christ has Pre-eminence of Dominion and Power, etc. above others, by
Donation; yet respecting only the Gist of God to him, there is no reason that
those things that are absolutely spoken of God in the Old Testament should be
so positively spoken of Christ in the New, unless Regard were had to his Divine
Essence.

Secondly, Forasmuch as those things that are primarily spoken of God in the
Old Testament, are referred to Christ in the New, as the proper Subject to whom
they belong; it is a plain Demonstration of Christ's Divine Essence; for
otherwise they could not be equally applied to each of them.

Thirdly, If Christ's Supremacy in Dominion and Power were only by Gift of
Deputation from God, he should not bear the supreme Glory equal with him: for
as it cannot consist with common Right, so God will not part with his own Glory
to invest a Creature with it equally with himself, Isa. 42.8. This may suffice
here in Answer to those Objections, as to the Dominion and Power of Christ,
received by Donation from the Father. I shall speak more distinctly to it
elsewhere.

Objection. To Acts 20.28. -- To feed the Church of God, which he has
purchased with his own Blood. The Blood which is called [the own Blood of God]
is in such a way of speaking, and for such a Cause, as the Prophet says, that
he which touches the People of God, touches the Apple of God's Eye; and it is
so called for the exceeding great Conjunction that is between them, and as he
is the Lamb of God.

Answer. I cannot perceive wherefore either of these Scriptures that are
brought as Examples, should be an Impediment to the Text, that it should not be
understood of the Union of both Natures in the Person of Christ, seeing there
is not the word [Own] conjoined with them, which intimates the special Affinity
and Relation of the Blood of Christ unto God; but that the Blood of Christ is
called [the own Blood of God,] for the exceeding great Conjunction that is
between them, not as the Adversaries mean, as I suppose, of the official Power
and Dignity of Christ in subordination unto God, but as the Assumption of the
humane Nature by the Divine Person of the Son did relate that Nature to the
Divine Nature of God.

Objection. To Phil. 2.6. Who being in the form of God, thought it not Robbery
to be equal with God: but made himself of no Reputation, and took upon him the
form of a Servant, and was made in the Likeness of Men. This Equality of Christ
with God, is to be extended no further than as he was in the form of God. But
the form of a Thing (as appears by the common Acceptance of the Word, and by
that following Clause, He took upon him the form of a Servant; and also from
these words, Mark 16.12. After that he appeared in another form unto two of
them) is something visibly and outwardly apparent, such as is neither the
Essence nor Power of any Thing, but only the Exercise and Demonstration of
Power: In the Exercise thereof and Demonstration of Divine Power, whereby he
did Miracles, was Christ in the form of God, and equal to God; And when it is
said, But emptied himself, (or, as our English Translation has it, made
himself of no Reputation;) this implies that if Christ had not emptied himself
of that Divine Form, he had thought it a Prey to be equal with God: Which
cannot without the Implication of a Contradiction, or what is worse, of
Blaspemy, be affirmed of God. But Christ had thought it Robbery, or a prey to
have been equal with God, in doing Miracles, if he had not laid aside the
Exercise and Demonstration of Divine Power, and fallen into the Hands of his
Adversaries, as a weak and vulgar Man: For unless he had done so, he had
disobeyed the Commandment of God, and consequently thought his Divine Form to
be a Prey, not a Gift of God, and that it was to be kept on for his own Glory,
and not put off for the Glory of God.

Answer. First, It Is true, that this Equality of Christ with God is to be
extended no further than as he was in the form of God, but yet I do not hold
with these Men: That his being in the form of God, is only the visible, outward
and apparent Exercise and Demonstration of Divine Power, and not the Divine
Essence or Power it self; for the common Acceptance of the word [Form] cannot
be limited to denote only the Exercise and Demonstration of Power without the
Essence, as they would have it; or only an artisicial Figure, Draught or Shadow
of any thing whereby its Likeness is represented, but also the Likeness of one
Person or thing to another of the same Nature, which may have the like natural
Power and Properties in its own Essence; as Adam, who begat a Son in his own
Likeness, after his Image, Genesis 5.3. And, as Christ is said to be in the Form
of a Servant, which was not only in outward Appearance, but in Nature and
Substance, having the same natural Properties. So that if the word [Form,
Likeness, or Image] (which are equivalent in their Significations) are used to
express the Likeness of Essence of one created Person or Nature, to the Essence
of another created Person; why may it not signify the Likeness of uncreated
Persons in their essential Being and Power? For though the one is a Personal
Likeness in their personal abstracted Being, or only natural, and the other is
different to it, in that it is not in personal Properties (because the Divine
Persons are not alike in Properties) but essential, as subsisting in the Unity
of the same Essence; yet this hinders not the word [Form] of its proper
Signification, when it is used to either of them; because it is extensive to
represent any manner of Likeness whatsoever: And therefore as visible outward
and apparent things have such forms; so the Subsistence of any one Divine
Person in the Godhead can only be likened to another subsisting in the same
Nature.

Secondly, To Mark 16.12. Where Christ is said to appear in another Form. I
reply, That it shows the Power of the Divine Nature, in representing Christ in
another Form than what he was in before; but there is no reason wherefore this
outward form should limit the Form of Christ in the other Text, to be only
outward and visible, seeing the Word is common to signify any Form, and that
the two Texts have no Relation to each other.

Thirdly, We cannot conclude from those Words, He made himself of no
Reputation, That if Christ had not emptied himself of that Divine Form, he had
thought it Robbery or a Prey to be equal with God; because the Apostle neither
in this, nor in any other place of Scripture, assigns it as the Reason: And
therefore, seeing their Exposition of these Words has no other Foundation than
what is imaginary in their own Conceit, we are not obliged to hearken to it.

Fourthly, Christ's emptying himself of that Divine Form, or making himself of
no Reputation, was not his laying aside of the Exercise and Demonstration of
Divine Power, which he had by Donation as Man: 1st, Because, as Man, Christ was
not in the Exercise of it, when first he made himself of no Reputation; but was
afterward invested with it, when he took upon him his ministerial Office, and
therefore could not lay aside the Demonstration of the Divine Power, before he
was in the Exercise of it. 2dly, Nor can it be meant of his Sufferings as a
vulgar Man, because his making himself of no Reputation in assuming our Nature,
and taking on him the Form of a Servant, preceded his Sufferings. 3dly, Nor did
he properly empty himself of the Divine Nature, as God, or as the Son of God,
the second Person in the Trinity; for this could not be without his
Annihilation: And therefore we must inquire after some other sense that may
better suit with this and other Scriptures.

1. In this sense the Son of God may be said to empty himself, or make himself
of no Reputation: to wit, in derogating from his own Glory, by his wonderful
and inexpressible Condescension, in stooping so low to save Man, as to take our
Nature into such an extraordinary Relation and Conjunction with himself, and
that in the former Habit of a Servant. This was that which made Christ pray
unto the Father, saying, Glorify thou me with thine own self, with the Glory
which I had with thee before the World was. It was so beneath the infinite and
glorious God, to take our Nature into Community with his Nature, that his very
Assumpsion of it was, as it were, a debasing of his Divine Nature.

2. Christ may be said to make himself of no Reputation, or to empty himself in
respect to that Manifestation which he made of himself to the Sons of Men by
his Works. The Son of God did not appear to us in the essential Glory of his
Divine Nature; for so he dwells in the Light which no Man can approach unto,
whom no Man has seen, nor can see, but in the Vail of Flesh, through which he
was emptied to our Appearance from those Divine Rays, that would have dazzled
the Sons of Men, and have made them afraid to look upon him, lest they should
be consumed; Exodus 20.19. 1 Timothy 6.16.

But yet there is something further objected against this Text of Scripture,
ver. 6. He thought it not Robbery to be equal with God. That which is equal,
has always a different Essence from that which it is equal unto, otherwise the
same thing would be equal unto it self: Equals are Relatives, and consequently
Opposites; If therefore Christ be equal to God, in respect of Essence and
essential Properties, the Essence of Christ must of necessity be different from
the Essence of God; wherefore they must either hold two Divine independent
Essences, or two most high Gods, or that Christ is not the most high God.

Answer. First, If it is meant, that Equals have always a different Essence,
respecting their Singularity or Personality, as being abstracted from their
common Nature: This I do readily grant of created personal Beings: because such
Singularities or Personalities cannot exist, but by Abstraction from their
common Nature, and so must have different, singular and personal Essences, the
one to the other, and (as Relates of the same Nature) are Equals. But what is
this to the Deity of the Son of God? must we limit Divine Persons in the
uncreated Nature, and confine them to the Parallel of created Beings? Surely
the Scriptures teach us otherwise, that the Divine Persons are not abstracted
from the Divine Nature, but are coessential, yet differing in personal
Properties. Christ is equal to God, ( viz. the Father) not respecting the same
personal Properties, as to beget, etc. But essentially considered, as
subsisting in the Unity of the same Nature, and having all the essential
Properties of that Nature coequal with him. And thus there is neither two
Divine independent Essences, nor most high Gods, but one only, subsisting in
three Divine Persons, each of which subsisting in the Divine Nature, and
mutually in one another, is the most high God.

Objection. To 1 John 5.20. And we know that the Son of God is come, and has
given us an Understanding, that we may know him that is true; and we are in him
that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ: this is the true God, and eternal
Life. These Words [This is the true God] cannot be referred unto Christ, not as
if he were not [true God] but because he is not [the true God] that is here
spoken of, as the Article added in the Greek does intimate. Neither does it any
whit advantage the Adversaries Cause, who will have these Words, [This is the
true God] referred unto Christ, that was mentioned immediately before. For
Relatives are not always referred to the Antecedent immediately going before,
but oftentimes to that which is chiefly spoken of; as appears from these
places, Acts 7.18, 19. chap. 10.6. 2 John 6.7. Many Deceivers are entered into
the World, who confess not that Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh. This is a
Deceiver, and an Antichrist. Wherefore the meaning of those words is thus:
This, whereof I have last spoken, is the true God, (namely he that for (or
[sent] it being, as I suppose the Printers Mistake) his Son Jesus Christ) and
it is also eternal Life, (namely to know Thee, the true God, and to be in him
by his Son Jesus Christ) with this accords, John 7.3.

Answer. First, As to the Article in the Greek, it no ways hinders our Sense,
or Exposition of the Words, but is rather a strengthening of it; for is it not
more emphatical to say? This is [the] true God, than to leave out the Article,
and read it, This is true God, and Eternal Life.

2. Those Words, This is the true God, are not to be referred unto Christ,
because Relatives always are not referred to the Antecedent immediately going
before, as Acts 10.6. chap. 7.18, 19. 2 John 7.

To this I answer, 1st, That these words 2 John 7. This is a Deceiver, and an
Antichrist, are no Relative either to Christ, or to the many Deceivers entered
into the World, but as they are connexed to the description of the many
Deceivers, and of the Antichrist. 2dly. To those two Texts Acts 7.18, 19. chap.
10.6. It is one thing to say, that such a one, that knew not such a Person, did
such a thing, and that lodges with such a Man, shall tell thee what thou
ought to do, which points at the Person, and is a Description of him, and
therefore refers the Relative higher than the immediate Antecedent; and
another thing to divide and refer the Relative, This is the true God, from the
immediate Antecedent, Jesus Christ. 1. Because the matter of the verse plainly
relates to the Son of God. 2dly. The Relative, This is the true God, must of
necessity be referred to Jesus Christ, because it is strongly fixed to the
immediate Antecedent Jesus Christ, by the Words [Him] that is true, [Him] that
we are in, as if it were said, The Son of God, this Him that is true, this Him
that we are in, (viz. Jesus Christ) is the true God, and Eternal Life. So that
notwithstanding their Opposition to the Evidence of this Scripture, it is not
weakened, but still remains a firm proof of the true Godhead of Jesus Christ.

Objection to Coloss. 2.9. For in him dwells all the Fullness of the Godhead
bodily. This word Godhead may denote the Divine Will, Ephesians. 3.19. and forasmuch
as the Apostle does oppose that Speech, not to Persons, but to Philosophy and
legal Ceremonies, it is evident, it is meant of the Doctrine of Christ, not of
his Person. But should we take the words as they sound, yet could not such a
divine Nature, as the Adversaries have imagined, be thence collected. For it is
true and manifest that the fullness of the Deity or Godhead does now dwell in
Christ even bodily, in that his very Body is altogether Divine, as being made
both of Divine and Spiritual Matter, namely that of the Heavens, see 1 Cor.
15.45, 47, 48. and being endowed with divine Life and divine Splendour, and
divine Strength.

Answer. First the words [Godhead bodily] cannot be limited, as only denoting
the Divine Will of God; because the Signification of the Word, will not allow
of it. Godhead is the Nature of God, which is not only his Will, but his Power,
Immensity, yea, all his essential Properties and Perfections.

Secondly; Nor can we confine this Text to the parallel of Ephesians. 3.19. And to
know the Love of Christ which passes Knowledge, that ye might be filled with
all the fullness of God, viz. of his Love in all its parts; because there wants
the words [Godhead bodily] to be filled with all the fullness of the Godhead
bodily, is to have all the fullness of the Nature and Perfection of God dwelling
really, perfectly and solidly in him, or the whole Spiritual Substance of God.

Thirdly; It is apparently clear, that the Person of Christ, and not his
Doctrine, must be understood to have all the fullness of the Godhead dwelling in
him: For it is said, Coloss. 2.8. Beware lest any Man spoil you through
Philosophy and vain Deceit, after the Traditions of Men, after the Rudiments of
the World, and not after Christ: For in him (viz. in Christ) dwells all the
fullness of the Godhead (or Nature of God) bodily. They say indeed that by Him
is meant the Doctrine, and not the Person of Christ, and that by Godhead is
meant his Divine Will, and so that the fullness of his Divine Will, ( viz. the
revealed Will of God, otherwise it is incommunicable to the humane Nature)
dwells in the Doctrine of Christ. But certain and plain it is that by Him,
which betokens a Person, must be understood the Person it relates to, viz.
Christ; and the revealed Will of God is the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, which
(their meaning is) must dwell in the Doctrine of Christ: but how absurd and
foolish this is, let the Reader judge.

Fourthly; Those words are not simply opposed to Philosophy, but with some
respect to the Persons in whom it dwelt, that we should beware lest any Man
spoil us through Philosophy and Vain Deceit -- and not after Christ, (viz. his
Doctrine in opposition to their Doctrine, and his Person in opposition to their
Persons, and his Fountain, ( viz. the fullness of the Godhead) in opposition to
their Fountain, viz. the Traditions of Men) and the Rudiments of the World: So
that these words, In him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily, must
of necessity be understood of the fullness of the Divine Nature of God in the
Person of Jesus Christ through the Union of both his Natures.

Fifthly; For them to say that this fullness of Godhead in Jesus Christ, is not
of that supreme Divine Nature of God, as we are treating of, but of an
inferior Divine Nature, flows only from the Notions of their own Brains: for
there is no such thing in 1 Cor. 15. nor in any other part of the Holy
Scripture: for though Christ as Man, and others by way of Gift, have had
something of Divine Power and Splendour invested in them; yet this is not
properly another different Godhead, but a Demonstration of the same Supreme
Deity, through their Official Ministration; and in all those 3 Scriptures, Acts
17.29. Romans 1.20. and Coloss. 2.9. wherein Godhead is mentioned, it must of
necessity be understood of the Supreme and Eternal Godhead only. So that I see
not the least reason why the corrupt Notions of our Adversaries should weaken
our Faith in this Doctrine, which is so clearly asserted, in this as well as in
many other Scriptures.

Objection to John 1.1, 2, 3, 10. In the Beginning was the Word. Nothing is
here concerning Christ's being from Eternity, since mention is here made of the
beginning, whereas a Beginning is opposite to Eternity.

Answ. 1. If Christ were in the beginning of the Creation, and so as that all
Things were made by him, ver. 3. then he did preexist the Creation, and it is
not said he began to be in, or with the Beginning, but then he was, which
denotes his being before the Beginning, and nothing could preexist the
beginning of the Creation, but God alone.

Secondly; They say, that the word [ Beginning] is every where in the Scripture
referred to the subject Matter, which is here the Gospel which John undertook
to describe, as will appear if you compare this of John with Mark 1.1. Luke
1.2. chap. 3.23. where, according to the Greek, it ought to be rendered thus,
And Jesus was about thirty years of Age, when he began, etc.

Answer. First, Mark, in chap. 1.1. declares unto us, what he knew only from
the beginning of the preaching of the Gospel. 1st. Hinting to that of John's
Ministration, and then immediately comes to Christ, ver. 9.

Second, Luke's beginning is said in ver. 3. to be from the very first, and he
begins higher than Mark did, and gives us an account of the Conception and
Birth of John, and then of Christ, and after these, that at Christ's Baptism,
he began to be about thirty years of Age, or (as they will have the Greek) that
he was thirty years of Age when he began, viz. to preach the Gospel, for so it
must be understood; so that (as they say) Beginning is to be referred to the
subject Matter treated of: And therefore [ Beginning] in John 1.1. must not be
limited to either of these, but referred to its own proper subject Matter, as
the others were to theirs. Now that this subject Matter, to which it must be
referred, is not the Gospel (as they affirm) does appear, because he is
speaking of the Creation of the World by the Word, which is confessed by them
to be Jesus Christ. But here (as they think) they have a Salvo; for though all
Things are said to be made by him in the Beginning, (yet they say it is not
simply and absolutely All, but all Things belonging to the Gospel, like that in
2 Cor. 5.17. All Things are become new.) And that the next words, Without Him
was not any Thing made that was made, must be understood, that all Things were
not [ done] by him, for so the Greek will bear it, as they say: for though they
acknowledge, they were begun by him, yet they were not brought to an issue by
himself, but by his Apostles in his Name, and by his Authority, and so not done
without Him. And they further object, that it is not said that the World was
created, but made by him; not that he made it, but it was made by him, as the
second Cause, and that the word [ World] does not only denote the Heaven and
Earth; but besides other Significations, designeth either Mankind, as the
present place shows, or the World to come, as appears by Heb. 1.6. which
they draw from chap. 2.5. and by chap. 10.5. which also they affirm to be
spoken, not of this World, but of that which is to come, since it is said in
chap. 8.4. For if he were on Earth, he would not so much as be a Priest. From
all which they give us the sense of the words two ways. First, That Mankind was
reformed, and as it were made again by Christ, because he brought Life and
Immortality to Men who were lost, and subject to Eternal Death. 2 d. The latter
Sense is, That the World to come which we expect by Christ, is by him made as
to us, as the same is said to become in respect of us, although it be already
present to Christ and the Angels.

To these I shall give particular Answers.

First; All things that were made by Christ, cannot be here understood, of the
all things of the Gospel, but of the Creation of the World. And this I shall
endeavor to demonstrate, by showing the great difference between the Text of
John, and that of Paul to the Corinthians, and how little relation they have to
each other.

In 2 Cor. 5.17. Therefore if any Man be in Christ, he is a new Creature: Old
things are past away; behold, all things are become new. The Words all things
become new, must of necessity imply a Renovation; for tho the Graces of the
Spirit are created in us, yet the Man is not created, but renewed, and restored
by them.

So that in the same Sense that the Man is a new Creature, all things may be
said to become, new; and this agrees with other Scriptures, as in Ephesians. 2.8,
9, 10. That which is said to be by [Creation] in Christ Jesus, is in Titus 3.5.
by the [Renewings] of the Holy Ghost, but in John 1.3. it is said that all
Things were made by him: which is not only a different mode of Speech to that
of Paul, but does imply a different thing; for, as I have showed, the words of
Paul import a Restoration or Renovation of the Creature, as they also do
affirm, but this of John has peculiar relation to the Creation of the World.

1st. Because the words, All Things are made by him, are plain and positive,
and therefore it is dangerous and presumptuous to restrain their Sense to other
Scriptures, whose subject Matter is foreign to it, and to impose such an
uncouth Sense, which cannot naturally be drawn from it, and which is incoherent
with other Scriptures, that mutually concur with its plain and proper Sense, as
Coloss. 1.16. to which place I may say something hereafter.

2dly. Those words, All Things were made by him, is meant of the Creation, and
not of the Gospel, appears from ver. 10, 11. He was in the World, and the World
was made by him, and the World knew him not. He came unto his own, and his own
received him not, etc. Now to assert, as they do, That these words, The World
was made by him, must be understood of Mankind that was reformed by Jesus
Christ, is a squeezing forth such a Sense, as they cannot possibly bear, and it
is unusual and improper in such a form of Words to express the Reformation of
Mankind; and I do not know of any such absolute Text that asserts the new
Creation, or Gospel-Renovation, but that there is some adjunct to explain it
from the Creation of the World, as to be created in Christ Jesus; to become
new, or the new Man which is created, and the like: and therefore such as force
the Text, contrary to the genuine sense of it, to comply with a
Gospel-Reformation, do greatly subvert the Word of God; nor is there any
Agreement in those words to such an Exposition: for the World was so far from
being reformed by Christ, that it knew him not, and his own received him not,
viz. his own Nation was not reformed by him.

3dly. I shall make some reply to their latter Sense of those words, ver. 10.
The World was made by him, which say they, is, That the World to come, which we
expect by Christ, is by him made as to us; that is (if I mistake them not) it
is made by a partial Reformation; which if they would but speak out, is not
made, but only making. And they say further, that this World to come, is
already present to Christ and the Angels, that is (as I imagine to be their
meaning) it is fully come to them, by their pre-knowledg and assurance of it,
having laid its Foundation. What else they should intend by these and the like
words, does not at present occur to mind: But this is presumptuously asserted
by them; for there is no mention made of the World to come, neither is there
any thing in the Text that relates to it; neither is there any reason wherefore
they should go about to prove, that because there is mention made of a World to
come, in Heb. 2.5. therefore this in John 1.10. is of the World to come also.
Nor do I yet perceive why Heb. 1.6. chap. 10.5. and 8.4. should be understood
of the World to come, or what ground they have to impose from thence, their
Sense on John 1.10. For though the Apostle speaks of something which relates to
the World to come in Heb. 1. yet he does not begin with it until ver. 8. and
therefore as the matter in ver. 6. plainly shows, the World there, is not the
World to come, but the present World: But if it were, yet John 1.10. must not
be confined to this or any other Text any further than the concurrence of the
Texts and Contexts, and the Signification of their words will bear. But now let
us take notice how little difference the Socinians here make, between the time
past, and the time to come. The World that was (with them) was the World to
come; that was made, was yet to make. What a monstrous way they have of
expounding the Holy Scriptures! by all things, say they, is only meant
Gospel-things were made by Christ, the rest were made by his Apostles, and that
not in the beginning, as the Text asserts, but after even their own prefixed
beginning. But if this may pass for truth, at this rate it is not to be found in
the Holy Scriptures. But these Exceptions are groundless, and so are of no
effect, to weaken the proof of the Deity of Jesus Christ from this Scripture.

Objection to Isa. 9.6. Where Christ is called, The everlasting Father, or,
Fa-Father of Eternity, as it is admitted by the Adversaries, who nevertheless
say, it quite subverteth the Common Doctrine, by confounding the first and
second Persons of the Trinity. He is the Everlasting Father, both because he is
the Author of eternal Life to them that obey him, and lives for ever to
shelter, and protect, and cherish Christians who are elsewhere called his Seed,
see Isa. 5.3, 10.

Answer. First, The words in the Hebrew, (...) the Father of Eternity, do not
so much subvert the Common Doctrine of the Trinity, or confound the Persons, to
understand them of the Divine Nature of our Lord Jesus Christ, than of him as
only humane: For though Christ is said to be the Author of eternal Salvation,
Heb. 5.9. Yet it cannot be as Man only, either in the Ministration of it, or
being the prime Author. For there being a Ministration of Salvation under the
Old Testament, Christ as Man could not be the prime Author of it; but God, who
elected and foreordained Christ, and us in him, unto Salvation before the
Foundation of the World, Isa. 42.1. Ephesians. 1.4. 1 Pet. 1.20.

So then as Christ did not then exist in his humane Nature, as Man he could not
be the prime Author, or Administrator of eternal Salvation: And when he was
come, considered as Man, he could only bear a greater Testimony of the purpose
and Good Will of God toward us, than any of the Prophets did before him. But
to acknowledge the Son of God to be of the same Divine Nature co-essential with
the Father, makes the name Father of Eternity, to have relation to him not
personally, but as he is essentially God; and his being called by it, is an
evident Demonstration of his Unity of Essence co-eternally with the Father,
wherein only he can be the Author of eternal Salvation to us his Spiritual Seed.

Objection to John 17.5. And now, O Father glorify thou me with thy own self,
with the Glory which I had with thee before the World was. Christ does beg this
Glory of the Father which shows, that neither he was formerly in actual
Possession thereof; for then he would have been in possession of it still; nor
had a Divine Nature, for that would have supplied him with such Glory as he
wanted: wherefore the Sense is, that Christ beseeches the Father to grant unto
him that Glory which he had with him in his Decree before the World was; As we
are said to be saved according to the Grace which was given us in Christ Jesus
before the World began.

Answer, First. The better to clear this Text from these Objections, I shall
expound it. 1st. If it should be understood, that these words denote a
Deprivation of Glory, yet it must not be absolutely considered; for the Divine
Nature of Christ, ever was, is, and shall be in it self, infinitely Glorious
without the least Diminution, Alteration or Change. But we are to take it with
respect to the great Humility and Condescension of his infinite glorious
Nature, in uniting himself with our Nature. It is said, Phil. 2.6, 7, 8. Who
being in the Form of God, thought it not Robbery to be equal with God, but made
himself of no Reputation: -- He humbled himself, and became obedient unto
Death. The Divine Nature of Christ consented to the exposing of his humane
Nature, that was in so great a Conjunction with it, to Sufferings as an
ordinary Man. And if God is said to humble himself to behold the things that
are in Heaven, and in the Earth, Psalm. 113.5, 6. Then surely this must be a far
greater piece of Condescension, for the Son of God to disrobe himself as it
were of that Power and Majesty which he had with the Father, in subjecting his
humane Nature to suffer the Revilings and Scourgings of wicked Men, and to be
put to Death by them. Now if the Text must be understood of a Deprivation of
Christ's former Glory: then the meaning of Christ's Prayer is, that as his
Condescension in taking our Nature, had been an Eclipse of his Divine Glory,
Power and Greatness, in laying it aside, as it were to suffer in his humane
Nature for our sakes, that now the Father would so translate his humane Nature
from that mean Estate and Condition, to one more glorious, that might better
suit with his infinite Perfection, and correspond with it. But,

Secondly; This Text most properly (as it seems to me) ought to be understood
not of a Deprivation of Glory of the Divine Nature, but only of the Exaltation
of the humane Nature of Christ; as if Christ should have said, And now, O
Father, glorify thou me in my humane Nature; or glorify my humane Nature, in
taking of it into that Glory which my Divine Nature had with thee before the
World was.

This I humbly conceive is meant by the words of our blessed Lord; but take it
in either sense, it agrees with the Deity of Jesus Christ.

Secondly; I come more particularly to answer the said Objections.

1st, Though (as it is objected) it may be concluded from the Words, that
because Christ begs this Glory of the Father, therefore he had it not in actual
Possession before. Yet this is only respecting his humane Nature, which opposes
not the Truth of his Deity; for though he was not yet supplied by it, or
glorified, John 7.39. Yet he then had the Divine Nature, and was in Union with
it.

2dly; For any to say, that that Glory which Christ had before the World was,
is only meant of God's Decree, is an imposing on the Text that which it cannot
bear, for it does not run parallel with 2 Timothy 1.9. because it is one thing to
say, that we are saved and called according to his own Purpose and Grace, which
was given us in Christ before the World began; and another thing to have Glory
before the World began: the one plainly shows that we were not actually called
nor saved before the World was, but were then in the purpose of God only; and
the other is positively spoken of the Glory that Christ had in actual
Possession, as the sense of the words import. And I hope these are sufficient
Answers to clear the Text of these Objections.

Objection to Coloss. 1.16. For by him were all things created that are in
Heaven, and that are in Earth, visible and invisible, whether they be Thrones,
or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers, all things were created by him and
for him.

First, They say, that this Scripture speaks of Christ as a second or middle
cause, that God created all things by Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 3.9.

Answer. First, I do acknowledge that Jesus Christ is two ways to be considered.

1st, Essentially, as he is God, and so all things are of him and from him, and
created by him, indifferently with other Divine Persons.

2dly, Personally, as he is the second Person in the Godhead, and so is he also
in the Works of Creation; for all things are of the Father by the Son, through
the Spirit, 1 Cor. 8.6. John 1.3. Genesis 1.2. Psalm. 104.30. Ephesians. 2.18. For as the
Father is of himself a Divine Subsistent, so he works from himself; and as
the Son is of the Father, so he works from the Father; and as the Holy Spirit
is of the Father and the Son, so he works from them both, yet neither of them
exist or work before each other in time, but do naturally and necessarily work
together: for when we say the Son is the second Person in the Deity, we grant
the Father to be the first, (neither in time nor Excellency of Nature, to the
other Divine Persons) but in respect to Pre-eminence, according to his peculiar
manner of Subsistence and incommunicable Property. So also the Divine Persons
have their Order, or Pre-eminence of working according to their Order or
Pre-eminence of Subsistence and incommunicable Property in the Divine Essence.

Secondly; They say that all things in the Heavens, and on the Earth, are not
used for all things simply, and absolutely, appears, because the Apostle
says, By him God has reconciled all things in Heaven and on Earth; and also
in the words themselves, it is not said the Heavens and the Earth were created
by Christ, but all things that are in the Heavens and on the Earth. And the Sum
of what they understand by the Text, is, that after God had raised Christ from
the dead, and had given Glory to him: all the things both in the Heavens and on
the Earth were by him reformed and reduced to another State and Condition, in
that he became the head of Angels and Men, who before acknowledged God only for
their Lord.

Secondly, To this I answer.

1st, That if we can reconcile the word [Create] in ver. 16. so as that
naturally its Signification does import but one and the same thing with the
word [Reconcile] in ver. 20. then indeed there is some reason to acquiesce with
them in their sense: But as the words have different Significations, so they
signify to us different things.

2dly, Though reconciling all things to God by Jesus Christ, whether in Heaven
or in Earth, must be understood in a limited sense; yet there is not the same,
nor so good reason, for all things that were created by Jesus Christ to be so
considered: For those all things that were reconciled, were all things that
were reconcilable by the Blood of the Cross, whether in Heaven or in Earth,
and not all things absolutely in Heaven and in Earth; for the evil Angels are
not reconcilable: but in ver. 16. the case is much different, and is to be
understood simply and absolutely, that by Jesus Christ all things were created:
for the words are positive, By him were all things created that are in Heaven,
and that are in Earth; and because we should not misapprehend the Apostle's
meaning, he explains himself more fully to us, that they were all things both
visible and invisible, whether they be Thrones, or Dominions, or
Principalities, or Powers: And surely this cannot be meant of a Reformation or
Renovation of all things in Heaven and Earth, because the good Angels never
wanted such Reformation; neither were all Thrones, or Dominions, or
Principalities, or Powers, either of evil Angels, that are invisible, or of
wicked Men on Earth, then renewed, or so reduced by Reformation, as that Christ
became their Head, and was so acknowledged by them: For though Christ became
the Head of his own Church, yet the World did not know him in such a manner as
to own him for their Sovereign Lord, and to yield true and sincere Obedience to
his Laws, for under the Conduct of Satan, the Dragon Heathen Empire made head
against Christ, and all that professed his Holy Name. And tho something may be
said, that in the Reign of Constantine the Great there was a mighty Reformation
made in the Empire of the World, yet this cannot answer the Import of the
words, For by him were all things [already created] they were not to make in
future times, but they were already done before. So that I see not the least
grounds wherefore they should impose such an unnatural sense upon the words,
but that they must of necessity be understood of the Creation of all things in
Heaven and Earth by Jesus Christ. And though they make this Exception, that it
is not said the Heavens and the Earth were created by him, but only the things
contained in them; yet this omission cannot be an Exclusion of them, nor hinder
what is asserted in the Text, but that it remains a sufficient proof of the
Deity of Jesus Christ.

Objection to Heb. 1.10. This Author (to the Hebrews) does not refer the
Creation of Heaven and Earth unto Christ, but only the abolishing of them.

Answer. First, I do affirm that the Creation of Heaven and Earth, must of
necessity be applied to Jesus Christ; because the word [and] in the beginning
of the Verse is a conjunctive word, that joins this Verse to the Words going
before, which relate to the Son of God, so that as in ver. 8. we read, But unto
the Son he says, Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever; So also by virtue of
the Conjunction with ver. 10. it is proper to understand the Text, as if the
Apostle should instead of the word [and] have said, But unto the Son he said,
Thou, Lord, in the Beginning have laid the Foundation of the Earth, etc. And
this Conjunction is put for the same purpose; for in Psalm. 102.25. from whence
this Text is taken, there is none of it.

Secondly; There can be no reason assigned, wherefore the abolishing of the
Heavens should only be referred to Christ, when it is not by virtue of a
Conjunction immediately annexed, but of one annexed to the Creation of them
which does preceed, and therefore that of the Creation is primarily to be
referred to the Son of God.

Objection to those Scriptures wherein the Deity of Christ is proved from that
Divine Worship and Adoration which is given to him. Forasmuch as all the places
that testify concerning Christ's divine Honor, do also testify that this
Divine Honor was given to him at a certain Time, and for a certain Cause; it
is plain, that the Divine Nature of Christ cannot thence be collected. And
whereas it is said, Isa. 42.8. I will not give my Glory to another, it is
meant, as is presently added, nor my Praise to graven Images, God speaks of
them who have no Communion with him, and to whom, if any Glory and Honor be
ascribed, it redounded not to him. But he says not, that he will not
communicate his Glory with such a one as Christ, which is dependent of him, and
subordinate to him, for by this means no Diminution of his Glory is made, since
the whole is referred to him.

Answer, First; Though some places that testify concerning Christ's Honor, do
also testify that this Honor was given to him as at the time of his
Exaltation; and because he had a Name given him above every name, Phil. 2.9,
10. Yet the Divine Nature of Christ may be collected from his Divine Honor and
Worship given to him. For the time and cause of the Exaltation, and Honor of
Christ's humane Nature by Donation, does not hinder the truth of his Divine
Essence, from the Divine Honor ascribed to him; because such Honor and
Worship is not, nor cannot be simply conferred on Christ as Man, but by virtue
of his Divine Person: and this appears from what is already proved, that God
only is to be worshipped with Divine Worship, even Him only who is God by
Nature.

Secondly, To Isa. 42.8. they say, That God's not giving his Gloty to another,
is an exclusion of Graven Images, but they will not allow it as a total
Exclusion of all others.

Answer. It Is true that Graven Images are excluded, and so also are all others
whatsoever that are created Beings; for the words themselves import, that
besides Graven Images, he will not give his Glory to another, viz. Nature nor
Person: So that even the Son himself, if he had not an uncreated Existence,
subsisting in the Nature of God, he would be excluded from Divine Glory, and
therefore the Divine Glory ascribed to him, proves him to be a Divine Person.

As to the rest of those Scriptures that I have cited, to prove the Deity of
Jesus Christ, by the Divine Honor and Adoration given to him, I have not met
with any that have assailed them, and therefore I hope that no material
Objection can be made against them.

CHAP. II.
Wherein is answered some Objections that are inferred by our Adversaries, from
diverse Texts of Scripture against the Deity of Jesus Christ.

OBjection from Mark 13.32. But of that Day and that Hour knows no Man, no
not the Angels which are in Heaven, neither the Son, but the Father. From this
Scripture some do conclude, that Christ is not God, because he knew not all
things.

Answer. The Humanity of Christ might not know all things, until they were
revealed by his Divine Person, as it did not know of that Day nor Hour; for the
Divine Person had not yet revealed it; and though the Humanity of Christ, which
is not the Divine Person of the Son, but is only a part of Christ's Person, is
here called the Son; yet this impedes not the Text of this Exposition, for the
Humanity of Christ is sometimes put for his Divine Nature, John 13.13.

Objection from Acts 2.36. Therefore let all the House of Israel know
assuredly, that God has made that same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, both
Lord and Christ. From whence is formed this Syllogism.

He that was made Lord by another; he, if he be a God, was also made a God by
another.

But Jesus, of whom it is certain that he is a God, was made Lord by God.

Therefore he was also made a God by him.

Answer. This Syllogism may be confessed, as it is reconcilable to the Human
Nature of Christ: for as he was Man, he had a Name given him above every Name,
and a Lordship or Kingdom, and Authority to execute Judgment, and was called
Lord, Phil. 2.8, 9. Isa. 53.12. Joh. 17.27, 29. And so also as he did
officially minister the Power of God, and was one to whom the Word of the Lord
came, he may be called God, Joh. 10.35, 36. Heb. 1.1. and in this Sense he may
be said to be made a God by the Father: but as this is not the proper or
supreme Godhead and Lordship of Christ, because it is not natural nor
essential, so does it not oppose his natural, essential, and supreme Godhead,
and Lordship, as he was God from all Eternity.

Objection from Colossians 1.15. where Christ is said to be the Firstborn of
every Creature. The Firstborn must always be contained in the number of them,
of whom, except the Parents, it is said to be the Firstborn; and consequently
Christ must be comprehended in the Number of Creatures, whose Firstborn he is
said to be.

Answer. Christ's being the Firstborn of every Creature, neither includes him
to be only a Fellow Creature with others, or excludes him from the Deity.

First; Because Christ cannot properly be said to be the Firstborn of every
Creature, by Creation; for then it could not be said, That All things were made
by him, and without him was not any thing made that was made, unless a Creature
could preexist its own Creation, and give it self a Being. John 1.3.

Secondly; Christ's being called the Firstborn of every Creature, cannot be
understood of the natural Birth of some kind of Creatures; not of Man, for
there was none created before Adam, and Eve was the Mother of all Mankind, and
Cain was her firstborn, not Christ; neither could he be the firstborn of
Angels, for they do not propagate their kind, Mark 12.25. 1 Cor. 15.15.

Thirdly; Christ cannot be the firstborn of every Creature in time, preceding
all others in the new Creation by Regeneration, unless he had existed in his
humane Nature, before the Patriarchs and Prophets of old, and all the holy Men
from the Foundation of the World.

But having spoken in the Negative, I shall now endeavor to demonstrate how
Christ may be called the firstborn of every Creature.

1st. Christ may be said to be the firstborn of every Creature from the Dead,
in like manner as he is called the first begotten of the Dead, and became the
first Fruits of them that sleep, 1 Cor. 15.20. Rev. 1.5.

2dly. Christ may also be called the firstborn of every Creature, as
preexisting every Creature in his Divine Nature; like as the same Apostle
expounds it in the following words, ver. 16, 17. For by him were all things
created, -- and he is before all things, and by him all things consist. As if
he should say, the very reason wherefore I call him the firstborn of every
Creature, is (not because of Creation or natural Birth, or spiritual by
Regeneration) but because he was before all things in respect of time, and
Creator of them. So that it is clearly manifest there is no ground from this
Text for any to believe that our Lord Jesus Christ is either excluded from the
true Godhead, or included as a mere Creature amongst others, by his being
called the firstborn of every Creature.

Objection from Rev. 3.14. where Christ is called the beginning of the Creation.

Answer. This must not be understood as if Jesus Christ were the first of God's
Creatures, but that he was the first that gave being or beginning to the
Creatures: Rev. 22.13. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the
first and the last. Beginning here is the first by whom all things had their
beginning, and not the first of Creatures that had its beginning.

CHAP. III.
Contains Answers to diverse of the Socinian Arguments against the Deity of
Jesus Christ.

OBjection. If the Divine Nature of Christ were God, one with the Father and
the Spirit; then the Father and the Spirit would be incarnate.

Answer. The Union of the Divine Persons being in Nature and Essence, and not
in Person, or personal Properties; one Person in the same Nature, may be said
more properly to be incarnate than another.

Objection. If Christ have two Natures, then not only that Person that did
before exist is the Son of God, but the holy Issue of the Virgin also, so that
that opinion would make two Sons of God, and consequently two Persons in one
Christ.

Answer. Although the Divine Nature of Christ which preexisted his Incarnation,
be the Son of God; yet the Issue of the Virgin coming out of the Loins of
David, and receiving its matter from Man, cannot be naturally the Son of God,
but the Son of Man: so that as Christ with respect to his Divine Nature, is the
natural Son of God; so likewise though he was not generated after the common
way of Mankind, yet being deduced out of the same matter, so far he is
naturally the Son of Man. But from hence I see no reason to conclude that there
are two Sons of God, or that Christ is two Persons: for though the matter of
Christ's Humanity would have made a distinct Person, if it had been generated
after the common way; yet it was never so, because it never had its Being but
in Union with the Divine Nature, when the Person of the Son was united to it,
and so together became the second Adam, who was made a quickening Spirit in the
one Person of Christ, 1 Cor. 15.45. So that the Humanity of Christ was but a
part of his Person, and no distinct Person of it self; for Christ took on him
the form of a Servant only, and not the Person, Phil. 2.7. The Scriptures
declare no such thing as two Persons, but that he took our Nature, which became
a Person in the Divine Subsistence of the Son: so that the Person of Christ was
not a Compound of two distinct Persons together, but the one Person of the
eternal Son of God, as it were clothed with Humanity; for the whole Person of
Christ, ( viz. the Word and Flesh) is represented to us, as but one only
begotten Son of God, John 1.14, 18.

Objection. Had Christ had a Divine Nature in being the eternal Son of God, he
needed not the Assistance of the Holy Spirit, to furnish him with a humane
Nature from a Virgin, being himself able to produce it of her, unless you will
say that his own Divine Nature was in the mean while idle.

Answer. Estwick on Biddle in page 208, 209. answers this Objection: he says,
The Holy Ghost had no Efficiency or Casualty in the Incarnation of our blessed
Savior, which was not common to the Trinity; for as Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost are inseparable; touching the Divine Essence and Power of working, so
likewise are they inseparable in their Operations.

It Is a common Comparison to illustrate this Truth: Three Virgins do jointly
make up a Garment for one of them only to wear: so all the three Persons as one
Cause, did produce the humane Nature; yet was it taken only into the Person of
the Son of God. Christ became Man, not in regard of the Divine Nature simply,
which is common to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, but as it subsists in the Son
of God: It Is true, if we respect the The word Original must here be understood
according to the Author's sense of the personal Pre-eminence of the Father,
according to his personal Subsistence in the Divine Nature, and not in respect
to Original of time.
Original of working, there is a difference, the Father as he is of himself,
and from no other; so does he work from himself, not from the Son; and the Son
as he is from the Father, so does he also work from the Father: but because
there is no Distinction of the Persons, in regard of the formal essential
Principle of working, it follows, there is no Distinction or Separation of the
Divine Persons in the work it self. It was therefore both an absurd and
blasphemous Inference, and that as you say, from our Principle, either that it
was needless for the Holy Ghost to frame the Body of our Lord, or else that the
Divine Nature of the Son of God was idle. Will you grant then (which by this
your Reason must needs follow) because Christ was conceived by the Holy Ghost,
therefore God the Father was idle, and not the prime Worker of this mavelous
Conception.

What is here cited out of this learned Man, sufficiently shows the Weakness of
this Objection against the Deity of Jesus Christ.

CHAP. IV.
Wherein is answered some Objections against the Scriptures that prove the
Deity of the Holy Ghost.

OBjection to Matthew. 28.19. Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. It cannot be rightly inferred, that because the
Holy Spirit is here ranked with the Father and the Son, therefore he is equal
to them; by this account when the Apostle 1 Timothy 5.21. says, I charge thee
(Gr. I obtest) before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect Angels, that
thou observe these things without Prejudice, doing nothing by Partiality;
joining the elect Angels with the Father and the Son: this would imply that the
elect Angels are equal with the Father and the Son.

Answer. There is not the same reason to imply from this of Timothy, that the
elect Angels are equal to the Father and the Son, as there is for the Holy
Spirit's Equality with them, from Matthew. 28. For if we rightly consider these
two Scriptures, we may easily see that they are not Parallels; but that the
Holy Spirit, and the elect Angels, are joined together with the Father and the
Son, upon far different accounts; the one are ranked together, not as Equals
with the Father and the Son, but because they are ministering Spirits that have
their Eyes on the Church of God, and behold the Order and Discipline of it,
whose Work and Office is to attend upon it, and be familiar about it, 1 Cor.
11.10. Psalm. 34.7. Insomuch that we ought to be very careful of speaking or
doing any unseemly thing that might hinder the Ministration of those blessed
and Holy Spirits. Now for this cause Paul exhorts Timothy to observe those
things, as in the Presence of God, and of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Holy
Angels; and therefore they are ranked together, and not as Equals in Nature and
Divine Worship; for they refuse to assume that Glory which is peculiarly proper
to God alone, Rev. 22. So that this Text relates to the Inspection of Angels,
into the Obedience of the Saints, in the way of which Protection is ministered
to them by the Angels, who are said to encamp round about those that fear the
Lord, Psalm. 34.7. Or else the Apostle shows, by ranking these three together,
that the Angels are Witnesses to this Charge, though in all things else they
cannot be, unless they could search the Heart, and try the Reins. And why may
not the Apostle take them in as Witnesses, as Moses did, who called Heaven and
Earth, viz. God, Angels, and Men, joining them as Witnesses against Israel,
that he had set before them Life and Death? etc. Deuteronomy. 30.19. But the Holy
Spirit, Matthew. 28. is not ranked together with the Father and the Son, only as
a ministering Spirit, or as one that bears Witness together with them in any
matter, but to be equally honored with them both: for in this Ordinance of
Baptism, wherein we worship God, in acknowledging what he has done for us in
order to Salvation, we are commanded to ascribe it to the Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit. And there is reason for it: For though the Father had accepted the
Merits of his Son, on conditions of true Faith and Repentance; yet if the Holy
Spirit had not undertaken to work these Conditions in us, we had been lost; so
that we are obliged, both from the Work it self, and the Command of God, to
attribute the same Honor to the one as to the other: and herein chiefly lies
the Difference of this Text from that of Timothy, because this commands Divine
Worship to be given to the Holy Ghost, together with the Father and the Son,
which declares his Divine Nature.

Objection to Isa. 6.9, 10. compared with Acts 28.25, 26, 27. To these two
Scriptures I have met with Biddle's Objections, stated and answered ready to my
Hand by Mr. Estwick in his Confutation of Biddle's Confession of Faith, Page
307. whose Words I shall prefer rather than my own.

Biddle; In the one place the Lord said, in the other the Holy Ghost; therefore
the Adversaries do conclude, the Holy Spirit is the Lord. This arguing is very
frivolous: for at this rate I may conclude that Moses is the Lord; compare
Exodus 32.11. Israelites are called God's People, ver. 7. God calls them the
People of Moses: and Isa. 65.1. I am found of them that sought me not, Romans
10.20. Isaiah is more bold, and says, I was found of them that asked not after
me; therefore Isaiah is the Lord. God is said by his Power to save us, 2 Timothy
1.8, 9. Paul attributes the same to himself, 1 Cor. 9.22. and to Timothy, 1 Timothy 4.16. therefore Paul, yea Timothy, is God. If the Adversaries say these
things are otherwise ascribed unto the Lord, than to the Men aforesaid: I
answer, it is more than the Texts themselves hold forth, which neither express
nor intimate any such thing. If they say, that if not in these, yet other
Texts, and the Nature of the thing it self does sufficiently teach it: I reply,
that I can make the same Answer, touching the Lord and his Holy Spirit; but it
is well that there is such an Intimation in the Texts themselves; for in the
one the Lord spoke to Isaiah in a Vision; in the other, That the Holy Ghost
spoke them by Isaiah to the Fathers. These two are different, since Isaiah only
heard these Words in the Vision; for had the Fathers been there, why should God
bid Isaiah go, and tell them to the People; Paul ascribes these Words to the
Holy Ghost, to intimate only, that whatsoever was spoken in the Scripture, was
recorded by the Inspiration of the Holy Spirit, and so spoken by him.

Answer. Your Elusions to avoid the strength of the Argument are vain, and your
Examples taken out of the Scriptures, are fallacia parium, are unlike to this
in hand. Sometimes an Instrument speaks in the Name of the great God that sent
him. This is your Evasion, therefore it must be so taken; Isa. 6. compared with
Acts 28. this is a plain Fallacy. Exodus 32. Moses calls the Israelites God's
People in Covenant with him; and God calls them the People of Moses, being
under the Curse of the Law, by reason of their Idolatry; and because he was
God's Instrument to bring them out of Egypt, and to conduct them in the
Wilderness; it is apparent to every one, and the Text holds it forth, that they
were otherwise God's People, and otherwise the People of Moses, he being a
finite, distinct and separate Substance from the Lord God Almighty. We grant,
that because these are different, therefore it would be absurd to infer, that
Moses is the Lord: where is the Holy Ghost called God's Servant, or God's
Instrument?

The second place, Isa. 65. 1. with Romans 10.20. in the one place it is said, I
am found of those that sought me not; so says God, in another place, Isaiah
says the same Words; therefore Isaiah is the Lord. It is clear, the Lord by
Isaiah foretold the Conversion of the Gentiles, and that he by his Grace moved
them to seek him, before they looked for Salvation by Christ. St. Paul relating
the same Text, shows that Isaiah freely spoke of the calling of the Gentiles.
Who is so blind, as not to see clearly, that Isaiah used those Words, as God's
Messenger in the Name of the Lord? and what is more usual with the Prophets
than to use such Words, to gain due respect to their Words? Thus says the
Lord. This Example then is not parallel to that under Debate; it is not
agreeable to the Scripture Language for the Holy Ghost to speak in the Name of
the Lord.

The third, touching God's saving, and Paul's saving, is as unfit, and as far
from the Mark, as the former; for evident it is, that Paul himself could not
plant, except God gave the Blessing, and he always ascribes Salvation to God,
as the principal cause thereof, and confesses that he is but God's Instrument,
by whose Ministry he saved much People. A Creature cannot be properly called
God, nor does any other Scripture, or the nature of the thing it self teach any
such thing; nor does the New Testament, unless by quoting Texts out of the old;
Shadows being gone, use such. Expressions, lest we should conceive Gods
subordinate to the High God: This you grant, but you add withal, That you can
make the same answer, touching the Lord and the Holy Ghost. You have the Face
not to blush at strange Answers: What is it that you cannot write? But if you
should be peremptory in such an Answer, you cannot make it good. What Line in
God's Words, yea, what probability can you produce for this Parallel. It is
great Reason that if a Man will forsake the Common Road, that he should give a
good account of his going into By-Ways, not trodden by Passengers many hundred
years together: It is well, that by your own Confession, the other
alledged-Scriptures, do clearly distinguish betwixt the principal Cause and
Instrument; and it will be requisite, if you look to be credited, that you
demonstrate by the Circumstances of the Text, Isa. 6. or by some other
convincing Proof, that the Holy Spirit is a created Angel; and that he is in a
proper Notion God's Ambassador, and his Instrument to inspire the Holy
Prophets, to discharge their Embassy, which is a Task, I know, impossible to be
performed by you.

There is (say you) an intimation in the Texts themselves; for Isaiah only
heard the words in a Vision, and was to tell them to the People not present
with him: But Paul ascribes them to the Holy Ghost, because whatsoever was
spoken in the Scriptures, is recorded by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, and
so spoken by him. This is then his meaning: These Words were from the Lord as
first delivered by him to Isaiah; and from the Holy Ghost, as they were penned
in the Scripture. This is a senseless and groundless Figment, as though the Holy
Ghost spoke not as well to Isaiah, in that Vision to deliver his Message to the
People, as to inspire him to write infallibly what he had heard in that Divine
Vision. Is there any intimation of difference in these to be distinguished
Actions? and as tho the Lord himself did not both? The Current of the Scripture
is to this purpose, without a shadow of Contradiction. Take that one place, 2
Pet. 1.20, 21. No Prophecy of Scripture is of any private Interpretation.
Prophets prophesied not to their Auditors their own Sense, but God's Mind: For
Prophecy came not at any time by the Will of Man: but holy Men of God spoke as
they were moved by the Holy Ghost. So that they were acted by the Spirit, not
only in writing, but in speaking; yea, those Prophets which were not God's
Penmen, as Elias and Elisha, yet were inspired by the Holy Ghost: Such vain
Fancies as yours are, Mr. Biddle, can please none but vain and unsettled Heads.

To this I add, that the Lord's speaking to Isaiah in the Vision chap. 6. and
the Holy Ghost speaking by him to the Fathers, Acts 28. cannot be understood,
that at two different times the Lord and the Holy Ghost speak to the Prophet.
1. Because the Holy Ghost did not only inspire the Prophet afterward to record
in writing his Message to the Fathers, but by Word sent the Prophet, saying, Go
unto this People, and say, etc. So that the Prophet was to say to the Fathers,
what the Holy Ghost had said by word to him in the Vision. 2dly. Because John
tells us, Joh. 12.41. that Isaiah said these things when he saw his Glory, and
spoke of him; whereby it is manifest, that the Prophet spoke these things unto
the Fathers from the Mouth of the Lord, and the Holy Ghost in the Vision. And
forasmuch as the Apostle tells us, that it was the Holy Ghost which spoke in
that Vision, it shows, that he is the same Lord and Jehovah that the Seraphims
worshipped.

Objection to 1 Cor. 3.16. Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God, and that
the Spirit of God dwells in you? It is objected by some from this place, that
the Holy Spirit is God, in that our Body is said to be his Temple. I answer,
That it would follow, could it be proved, that our Body is so the Temple of the
Holy Spirit, as to be his by the highest Interest, and primarily dedicated to
his Honor -- they are his by Inhabitation. The Spirit is disposed of, and
given by God to us, and consequently he is ours by Interest, not we his: And
accordingly the Apostle concludes from thence, that we ought with our Body to
glorify not the Spirit, but God, who is openly distinguished from the Spirit,
and declared to be the Proprietor of our Body.

Answer. First, They say indeed that our Body is not the Temple of the Holy
Ghost by Interest, but they cannot prove it, for our being his by Inhabitation,
excludes not our being his by Interest, any more than God's dwelling in the
Temple which Solomon built, did exclude his highest Interest to it, and its
chief Dedication to his Glory; but our being his first by Interest, makes us
his by Inhabitation.

Secondly; Though the Holy Spirit be given of God, and so by donation becomes
ours; yet neither does this exclude us from being his by the highest Right; for
the Holy Spirit's being sent, and given to us, shows his Office and not his
Essence, of which I shall speak hereafter: and if his being sent does not
disprove his Divine Essence, it cannot disprove us from being his by the
highest Right, which is in effect the same.

Thirdly; Nor does it thence follow, that because the Apostle says, we must
glorify God in our Body, that therefore he (not the Spirit) is the Proprietor
of our Bodies. For if the Holy Ghost had a lesser Right to our Body, as a
Creature only helping with us to worship God, our Body could not be properly
said to be his Temple; for no Temple bears the Name of the Worshippers (which
then with us the Spirit would be) but of him that dwells therein, and is
worshipped: and therefore seeing that our Body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost,
and it consequently follows, that he is to be glorified therein, it then agrees
with the Apostle's words, Glorify God in your Body. And to say that the Holy
Ghost inhabits the Temple of God, 1 Cor. 2.16. and receives the same Worship,
either defiles, and dishonours his Temple, and gives his Glory to another, or
acknowledges the Holy Spirit to be God: And therefore as we must not presume
to think that the Holy Apostle should so dishonor the Temple of God, and
pollute his Holy Name, as to ascribe the name of a Creature to it; So we may
conclude, that our Body which is the Temple of God (as appears in 1 Cor. 3.16.)
would not be asserted to be the Temple of the Holy Ghost, unless by his highest
Interest as he is God. And though our Adversaries would have the words [Glorify
God in your Body] to enforce the Sense of the Text, in favor of their opinion;
yet they have a far different Signification, than to bring in God as Proprietor
of our Body, in opposition to the Holy Ghost's highest Interest to us: For the
Apostle does not intend by these words either to exclude the Holy Spirit from
the highest Interest to our Bodies, or to intimate to us, that God and the Holy
Ghost are two different Essences, but he rather designs, by the word God
indefinitely spoken (instead of the Holy Spirit before mentioned) to include
also the Father and the Son; that not only the Holy Ghost, but all three Divine
Persons should be glorified in our Body, and in our Spirit, which are God's.
Now let us sum up the whole, and see what our Adversaries gain by these
Objections. First, I have showed that our being his by Inhabitation, excludes
not our being his by Interest. Nor, Secondly, does the Donation of the Holy
Ghost, or his being sent, exclude our being his by the highest Right. Nor yet,
Thirdly, do these words Glorify God in your Body, destroy the primacy of the
Holy Spirit, to our Bodies: And if neither of these disprove that our Body is
the Temple of the Holy Ghost by the highest Right, and as primarily dedicated
to his Glory; then nothing yet they have said, can disprove his Deity from this
Scripture: for, as it is confessed, that to prove the one is to prove the
other; so not to disprove the one, is not to disprove the other.

Objection to 2 Cor. 3.17. Now the Lord is that Spirit: and where the Spirit of
the Lord is, there is Liberty. By [that Spirit] is not here meant the third
Person in the Holy Trinity; but the Expression implies the same Spirit that
was before in the 6th Verse, opposed to the Letter, and consequently the
Mystery or hidden Sense of the Law, denoted by the Letter; for thus the word
Spirit is to be taken, Romans 2.29. Circumcision is that of the Heart, in the
Spirit, and not in the Letter. And Romans 7.6. But now we are delivered from the
Law, that being dead wherein we were held; that we should serve in newness of
Spirit, and not in the oldness of the Letter. And Rev. 11.8. where Jerusalem is
mystically and spiritually called Sodom and Egypt. Wherefore the Sense of the
Words of Paul is this, namely, That the Lord Christ is the Mystery, Life, Scope
and Kernel of the Law; as being both foretold therein, and prefigured by the
Ceremonies thereof.

Answer, First; As they say Spirit is not put for his Person, in ver. 6, 8. but
for his Effects and Operations, or Gospel-Ministration; however it cannot from
thence follow, that Spirit in ver. 3, 17, 18. is put only for his Effects, and
not his Person.

1st. Because the Effects of the Spirit, ( viz. his Writing, and
Gospel-Liberty) is joined together with the Spirit; and therefore the Spirit
here is not put for his Effects, but for Himself; and so it is in ver. 18.
where it is said, We are changed into the same Image, from glory to glory, even
as by the Spirit of the Lord. [Margent, Of the Lord the Spirit.] Here also the
effect of the Spirit, to wit, our change into the same Image of Christ's Glory,
being joined together with the Spirit (there is a necessity that by Spirit must
be meant his Person, and not Effect.) And this is noted to us by the
Translators of our Bible, in writing [Spirit] with a great Letter, when for his
Person, and with a little Letter, when the Spirit is put for his Effects, which
may be seen in this Chapter, where thrice ver. 3, 17, 18. the Person of the
Spirit is understood, and thrice his Effects, ver. 6, 8.

2dly. That the Lord Christ, is the Mystery, Life, Scope, and Kernel of the
Law, as being both foretold therein, and prefigured by the Ceremonies thereof,
may be granted to them, but not that this is properly intended by those Words,
[ The Lord is that Spirit] as pointing thereby only to his Effects in ver. 6,
8. 1st, Because we may better refer those Words to that Spirit, which is put
for his Person in ver. 3. which, as it there appears, is the efficient cause of
the Epistle of Christ written both in the Hearts of the Apostles, and of the
Church of Corinth, ver. 2, 3. So that [ that Spirit] is there first put for his
Person, and the efficient cause of the Effects, for which it is put in ver. 6,
8. and afterward in ver. 17, 18. being joined with his effects, and thereby
differenced as the efficient cause and Person of the Spirit, is said to be the
Lord, or, as it is expressed, the Lord is that Spirit: and therefore if they will
have these words [that Spirit] ver. 17. to point at Spirit before mentioned in
the Chapter, it must then be referred to Verse 3d, Person to Person, and not
Person to effect. 2dly, Nothing is more plain than that Spirit in ver. 17. must
be taken for his Person, because his Effects are so strongly joined to him,
viz. Liberty, which the Gospel it self, ( viz. the Letter of it) does not give,
but by the Power and Efficacy of the Holy Spirit. So that it is clear from the
Text, that by these words, [the Lord is that Spirit] must be understood the
Person of the Spirit in the Unity of Essence with the second Person, the Son of
God. 3dly, In Verse 18. We are said with open face to behold as in a Glass, (
viz. of the Gospel) the Glory of the Lord, by whom we are changed into the same
Image from Glory to Glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord, [or the Lord the
Spirit.] Which whither it be meant of our being more and more renewed in the
Spirits of our Minds in this World, or, as I rather take it, from the Glory of
the Lord, which we behold in the Glass of the Gospel, to our eternal Glory; yet
it is by the Lord the Spirit, the efficient Cause of this change, and therefore
it is not the Effect, or Grace of the Spirit only, but his Person.

4ly. The Dutch Translators read ver. 17. The Lord is [the Spirit] and not
[that Spirit] and so it does not point to Spirit before-named, but is to be
understood as the Words lie in themselves; and thus it cuts off the Relation,
and is not governed by what is meant by Spirit going before. So that I see no
reason wherefore these Objections should weaken the Proof of the Deity of the
Holy Spirit from this Scripture.

Objection to 1 John 5.7. For there are three that bear Record in Heaven, the
Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one. The Sum of what
is objected against this Scripture, being laid down, and learnedly as well as
largely confuted by Mr. Francis Chinell in his Book of the Divine Trinunity, I
shall make a Recital of his Words so far as it is needful to our purpose, from
page 251, to Page 256. It is objected by some, that the words, These three are
one, 1 John 5.7. are not to be found in some ancient Copies, and therefore it
will not be safe to build a Point of such Weight and Consequence upon such a
weak Foundation.

Answer. It is true that these Words are not to be Si Syrum ceterosque
sequimur, vel hiatus admittitur, vel (...) quae imprimis elegans turbatur. Mihi
qui talem primo usurparunt in sacris licentiam (...) videntur. Heinsius, in
locum.
found in the Syriac Edition, but they who speak most modestly, do acknowledge
that the Syriac Edition is not authentic. Learned Heinsius is much offended
with that Edition, as appears by his Annotations upon 1 John 5.7. And if we
consult the Scriptures, and compare this Text with the following Verses, and
with some other places of Scripture, which are more plain, and then add the
Testimony and Interpretations of the ancient and reverend Doctors of the
Church, concerning the Words in question; we shall beable to pass a right
Judgment upon the point in hand.

First, The Equality of the number of Witnesses, suits very right, three
Witnesses on Earth, and three in Heaven.

Secondly, The opposition between the Quality of the Witnesses on Earth, and
Witnesses in Heaven; and yet their sweet Harmony and Agreement in one
Testimony; all six bear Witness to one and the same Truth.

Thirdly, The Diversity of the very Nature of those three who bear Witness on
Earth, and the Unity of their Divine Nature, who bear Witness in Heaven, is
very considerable, and it is excellently expressed in the Variation of the
Phrase; These three are one, ver. 7. and these three agree in one; namely, in
one Testimony, ver. 8. Though their Nature be different, yet their Testimony is
the same. But it is objected, that the Complutensian Bible says of the
Heavenly Witnesses, that these three agree in one, ver. 7. I humbly offer this
Satisfaction to pious and learned Men; That we have good reason to believe,
that there is an imprudent Addition in the Complutensian Bible, rather than an
Omission of so many ancient and approved Bibles; and therefore it is fit that
that Addition should be expunged out of that one Copy, by the concurrent
Testimony of so many Copies. Moreover, it is clear by the joint Testimony of
other Copies, that the words (...) are omitted in ver. 7. and the words (...),
belong to ver. 8. and therefore there is an inexcusable Omission, and an
imprudent Transposition in that corrupt Merces satis fallaces vendit officina
Chr. Plantini Antverpiae in editione 1584. excusa and cum Bib. Ar. Mont.
Vulgat. Joh. 8.17, 18.
Edition.

But then it is further objected, that these Words, These three are one, are
wanting in some other Greek Copies. For Answer I proceed in my Observations.

Fourthly, If we look upon the Scripture-Account in other places, we shall find
it exactly agreeable to the Account in this place, 1 John 5.7.

In John 8. our Savior pleads that two Witnesses in Law were sufficient for
the Proof of any Point, John 8.17. and in ver. 10. says he, I am one, and my
Father that sent me is another; they are two Witnesses, and yet but one God, I
and my Father are one, John 10.30. One in Power, and therefore one in Nature:
He speaks not of the Spirit, because Christ was not yet glorified; nor was the
Spirit yet manifested by that eminent and glorious Mission and Effusion, which
was to follow after the Ascension of our blessed Lord. But he did foretell that
the third Witness was to be sent from the Father by the Son, John 15.26. But
when the Comforter is come whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the
Spirits of Truth, which proceeds from the Father, He shall testify of me. I
might add to these Testimonies all other places of Scripture, wherein all the
three Witnesses are named together, and then produce all the places which have
been formerly cited in this Book, to prove the coessential Trinunity of those
Heavenly Witnesses.

Fifthly, The Copulative [and] in the beginning of the verse, 1 John 5.8. does
very fitly connect the whole seventh Verse with the eight, as they are printed
in our ordinary Translation.

Sixthly, Hierom does assure us that the Words in question were expunged by the
Arians, because the few Words do hold forth an undeniable Proof of the Divine
and Coessential Trinunity of those Heavenly Witnesses. And diverse other learned
and judicious Men conceive that these Words were blotted out in the time of
Constantius and Valens the Emperors, who were sworn Enemies of the blessed
Trinity, and professed Patrons of Arianism.

Seventhly, The Heretics did blot out those Words, Vide Ambros. lib. 3. de
spiritu sancto. cap. 11. jurati veritatis hosts lucem banc non tulerunt
ideoque eraserunt. Vide Heinsium in 1 Job. 5.7.
John 4.24. God is a Spirit, as Ambrose assures us; and therefore this Practice
of repugning such Words in the Scripture as did refute their Errors, was too
common amongst the Heretics of old, as we might prove by Witnesses enough, if
that were our Business.

Eighthly, These Words, 1 John 5.7. are to be found in Copies of great
Antiquity and best Credit.

Athanas. Tom. 1. Page 91, 92, 93.
Ninthly, This Text is cited by the ancient Fathers, by Athanasius in his
Dispute with Arius at the Council of Nice, and Arius never denied it for to be
Scripture, which certainly he would have done, if there had been any doubt made
of it in the primitive times. It is cited by Cyprian in his Book de Vnitate
Ecclesiae. Paxillus in his Book de Monomachia, proves by an Induction of the
learned Doctors of the Church, both before and since Athanasius, that the
Doctrine of the coessential Trinunity of these Heavenly Witnesses, was
generally received by all that were esteemed orthodox and pious in the Church
of Christ. Calovius also in his Fides patrum ante Concilium Nicenum, gives in a
Catalogue for the Satisfaction of all that desire Resolution in this weighty
point. [See Mr. Estwick of the Godhead of the Holy Ghost. Dr. Alting his
Vindication of this Text in his Confutation of the Racovian Catechism.]

CHAP. V.
Wherein are answered some Objections inferred by our Adversaries from diverse
Texts of Scripture, to disprove the Deity of the Holy Ghost.

OBjection from Matthew. 11.27. All things are delivered unto me of my Father,
and no Man knows the Son but the Father; neither knows any Man the Father
save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him. How could this be
true, were the Holy Spirit a Divine Person distinct from the Father and the
Son, and in all things equal unto both? for some other besides the Father would
have known the Son, and some other besides the Son would have known the Father,
namely the Holy Spirit.

Answer. First, We must not understand this Text in the strictest sense, as if
Christ the Son of God was not known at that time by any besides the Father.

1. He was known as Man, John 7.27. We know this Man whence he is.

2. He was known as the Son of God, John 1.41, 49. Said Andrew to Simon Peter,
We have found the Messiah. -- Nathaniel answered and said unto him, Rabbi, Thou
art the Son of God, thou art the King of Israel. His Disciples believed on him,
chap. 2.11. and others, chap. 4.53.

Secondly, Neither is this Scripture to be considered, as though Christ's
Disciples and others then had not some Knowledge of God the Father; for in John
6.44, 45. it is said, No Man can come to me, except the Father draw him. --
Every Man therefore that has heard, and has learned of the Father, comes
unto me. So that no Man could come to Christ without some Knowledge and
Teachings of God the Father.

Thirdly, It then follows that if this Text is not to be understood totally to
exclude all Men from some Knowledge of the Father and the Son, until afterward
they should be revealed; then it intends only to exclude them from some special
and peculiar Knowledge which they have, and in reference to their revealing of
each other.

The Father knows the Son, and the Son the Father, in a different manner from
all Creatures, in that they know each other perfectly of their own
Self-Knowledg: Yet the Words of Christ are not to be taken simply of that
peculiar Knowledge, but with reference to the Revelation which the Father makes
of the Son, and Christ of the Father, as appears in ver. 25. where Christ
says, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have hid
these things from the Wise and Prudent, and have revealed them unto Babes. And
now it follows that Christ tells us, No Man knows the Son [but] the Father;
neither knows any Man the Father [save] the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son
will reveal him: As if he had said, No Man knows the Son, so as to reveal him
savingly [but] the Father, neither does any Man (after the same manner) know
the Father [save] the Son only. And this suits with the following Invitation
for burdened Souls to come to Christ, as to one that can reveal and open the
Father's Heart, wherein they may (through him) have rest for their weary Souls.
ver. 28, etc. chap. 1.18. chapter 6.41.

Fourthly; Having opened the Text, and showed that it must not be positively
understood, I shall now answer directly to what is objected concerning the Holy
Spirit. And,

First, I shall note, that if Men who are named, (and only intended) are but in
part excluded, then the Holy Ghost, who is not named (neither intended) cannot
from these words be excluded from the knowledge of the Father and the Son.

Secondly, We must not conceive that the Holy Spirit is excluded from the
Fellowship of this Knowledge which the Father and the Son have of each other,
because he is not mentioned; for the Ministration of the Spirit was not yet
come. I said before that here we are not to understand Knowledge simply, but
with reference to Revelation; and this was now ministered by the Father and the
Son more secretly through the Spirit, but apparently (to assure his Disciples,
and convince the Sons of Men that Jesus was the Christ the Son of God, that was
sent forth from the Bosom of the Father, to declare his Will) by such sensible,
visible and external Testimonies, as would leave all Men without excuse: The
Father bearing witness to the Son, twice by a Voice from Heaven, and the Son by
the mighty Works he wrought in the Father's Name, bore witness of him, and gave
undeniable proof of his special Mission from God, and that he was the Messiah
that was to come. John 1.18. chap. 5.17, 36, 43. chap. 14.10. 2 Pet. 1.17, 18.
Matthew. 3.17. And this was the very reason that so little mention was made of
the Holy Ghost, the Mystery of God being left more fully to be opened and
revealed after Christ's Ascension, by that Divine Person, whose proper Work it
was to confirm the Testimony of the Father and the Son, that went before. So
that the Holy Ghost was not omitted by Christ, because he was not in the Unity
of that Knowledge; but because the time for the great work of his ministerial
Revelation was not yet come. So that no Foundation can be laid on this
Scripture in opposition to the Deity of the Holy Ghost.

Objection from 1 Cor. 2.12. Now we have received not the Spirit of the World,
but the Spirit which is of God. The Spirit which is of God is God's Effect, and
depends upon him, and so is inferior to him.

Answer. 1 Cor. 2.10, 11, 12. But God has revealed them to us by his Spirit --
For what Man knows the things of a Man save the Spirit of a Man which is in
him? Even so the things of God knows no Man, but the Spirit of God. Now we
have received the Spirit which is of God, that we might know the things that
are freely given to us of God.

First, The Apostle uses this Comparison not to demonstrate the Being of God,
but to show that we cannot know the things of God till the Spirit of God
reveals them to us.

Secondly, They cannot from thence conclude that the Spirit of God is God's
Effect, and so is inferior to him, any more than that the Spirit of Man is
also the Effect of Man, and so inferior to Man: But if they will run the
Comparison to demonstrate the Being of God, we must then conclude, that as the
Spirit or Soul of Man (being the most excellent part of his Nature) is
essential to his Being; so by this Rule is the Spirit of God also, which proves
his Deity.

Objection from John 1.32. And John bare Record, saying, I saw the Spirit
descending from Heaven like a Dove, and it abode upon him. The Spirit is not
God, because he changed place, and descended in a bodily Shape.

Answer. First, This Descension of the Holy Ghost disproveth not his Deity,
because the like has been said of God, in Genesis 11.5. And the Lord came down to
see the City and the Tower. And in Genesis 18.21. I will go down now, and see
whether they have done altogether according to the cry of it. And the Lord
descended on Mount Sinai, Exodus 34.5.

Secondly, Although the most High God has no shape, yet he appeared to Abraham
in the Shape of a Man, representing his Assumption of that Nature, Genesis 18.2,
22. chap. 19.1. and therefore this Objection against the Deity of the Holy
Ghost is of no weight; and not only from the aforesaid Example, but also
because we find, that when the Holy Ghost fell on the Disciples, that there
were cloven Tongues, which was an outward and visible sign of the Gifts and
Operation of the Holy Spirit, and did neither betoken his corporal Substance,
nor was a description of his Shape. In like manner the Holy Spirit's descending
in the bodily shape of a Dove, did neither betoken his corporal Substance nor
change of place; but like Noah's Dove, Peace and Glad-tidings toward Men. For
Peter in his first Epistle, chap. 3.20, 21. makes the Waters of Noah a Type of
Gospel-Baptism; and then, as after Noah's Ark did rest upon dry Ground, a Dove
was the minister of glad-tidings to him and all his House: so God was pleased
in answer to that Type (and as was fittest to represent the Innocence of
Christ) after his Baptism and Salvation from the Water, to send the Holy Ghost
to him in the same shape: and afterward to his Disciples, to minister such
divine Power and Comfort as might strengthen, comfort, and encourage them to
that work which God had appointed for them: so that there is not the least
reason from this Scripture to deny the Deity of the Holy Spirit.

Objection from John 16.13. Howbeit, when He the Spirit of Truth is come, he
will guide you into all Truth: for he shall not speak of himself; but
whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak, and he will show you things to
come. Ver. 14. He shall glorify me, for he shall receive of mine, and shall
show it unto you. Ver. 15. All things that the Father has, are mine:
therefore, said I, that he shall take of mine, and shall show it unto you. The
Holy Spirit is here said not to speak of himself, but what he hears, which
shows that he receives those things by Commission from another, and
therefore he is not God, for God cannot be said to receive any thing from
another which he had not before.

Answer, First, The Holy Spirit must be two ways considered.

1. Essentially, as he is essentially God.

2. Personally, as he is a Divine Person in the Godhead.

First, As he is essentially God, he can neither receive Commission, or be
under the direction of any other of what he should either do or speak.

2dly. As he is a Divine Person or Subsistent in the Godhead, and proceeds
from the Father and the Son, and has his peculiar Office, he may be said to
receive, to speak, and be sent by Commission from another; he may be inferior
in Office (though not in Nature) to the other Divine Persons. And hence it is,
that some times the Holy Ghost is said to be sent in another's Name, and given
to us, John 14.26. and at other times it is spoken, as of his Power in himself
to work according to his Will, John 16.7, 8. 1 Cor. 12.11. Now each of these
are proper to the Holy Ghost, viz. to be given, sent, to receive, and speak
from another, or to have Power in himself to work as he will. The first they
respect his Office, according to his Personal Subsistence by procession from
the Father and the Son, (and not that he had not the Knowledge of those things
before;) and the other takes in the Divine Essence too.

Secondly, It may be further said, That the Disciples of our Lord, had much
darkness on them, and were ignorant of many things contained in the Holy
Scriptures, till Christ did enlighten their Understandings; and therefore they
might not have fully understood, and digested this sacred Truth; for we read of
some which said, We have not so much as heard whether there be any Holy Ghost,
Luke 24.45. Acts 1.6. Acts. 19.2. This being premised, our Lord Jesus might
speak this to assure them of the Holy Ghost's infallible Conduct into all
Truth, not only because he is the Spirit of Truth himself, which cannot err;
but also because he should not speak only as a single voluntary Act of his own,
but with the mutual concurrence of the Father and the Son: So that whatsoever
he should hear actually interceded for by Christ, and assented to by God the
Father, which should be needful for us to know, that the Holy Spirit should
show unto us. So that this Scripture wherein the Holy Ghost is said not to
speak of himself, but what he hears, etc. has a peculiar relation unto his
Ministerial Office, which cannot be repugnant to his Divine Nature; for one
Person may be inferior to another in Office, and yet of the same Nature, as
has been said.

Objection from Rev. 1.1, 13. chapter 2.7. where it appears that the Spirit which
the seven Churches of Asia, were required to hearken unto, was none other but
the Angel that was sent to John, and did personate Jesus Christ; and therefore
the Holy Spirit cannot be God equal with the Father.

Answer. The Angel that personated Jesus Christ, the same bid the Apostle John
to write to the seven Churches of Asia: But in all the Epistles, he did not
speak to him in his own Name or first Person, nor dictate the Epistles as from
himself, but from the Person of Jesus Christ, saying unto John, Write these
things, says he, ( viz. the Son of God) -- the First and the Last, which was
Dead and is Alive, etc. So that when the Angel in the conclusive part of the
Epistles says to John, He that has an Ear, let him hear what the [Spirit]
says to the Churches; he speaks not of, and from himself, but of Jesus Christ
who is that Spirit whom they are bid to hear. And this agrees with 2 Cor. 3.17.
The Lord is that Spirit; and is farther confirmed and laid as a
Foundation-Truth, in the Beginning of this Vision, viz. that what the Angel
said must be referred to the Almighty Lord, ver. 8. I am Alpha and Omega, the
Beginning and the Ending, says the Lord, which is, and which was, and which is
to come, the Almighty. And therefore this Scripture is so far from proving this
erroneous opinion, touching the Holy Spirit, that it confirms his Deity; for if
Jesus Christ be of the Divine Essence, and the Holy Spirit is said to speak or
say when Christ says, then it is evident that Christ and the Spirit are
Coessential.

CHAP. VI.
Wherein are answered three Texts of Scripture, from which our Adversaries
urge, that the Father only is God, in opposition to the Doctrine of the Holy
Trinunity.

OBjection from 1 Cor. 8.6. But to us there is but one God the Father, of whom
are all things, and we in him: and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all
things, and we by him. Say they, It could no way come to pass that Paul being
about to explain who that one God is, should mention the Father only, omitting
the other Persons, if that one God were not the Father only, but also the Son
and Holy Spirit, since those two Persons, besides the Father, were as necessary
to declare who that one God is, as the Father himself.

Answer. It might come to pass, that Paul should call God Father, omitting the
Names of the other Divine Persons, and yet not exclude them from the Unity of
the Godhead.

First; He might call God Father, not simply respecting the Person of the
Father, but indefinitely as he is Creator, viz. Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, in
opposition to false Gods, ver. 5, 6. For though there be that are called Gods,
whether in Heaven or in Earth (as there be Gods many, and Lords many:) But to
us there is but one God the Father, of whom are all things -- which is
agreeable to Mal. 2.10. Have we not all one Father? Has not one God created us?

Secondly; It does not from hence follow, that because the Son and the Holy
Spirit are here omitted, and the Father only is called that one God; that
therefore the Father only is God: because that such omission, is no denial nor
exclusion. For the Father being in the Unity of Essence with the other Divine
Persons, must not be simply considered, when he is called by those Names, as
are common to all three Sublistencies and the Deity, neither must the Son nor
the Holy Spirit, unless the matter treated of confine us to the Person, which
in the Text is reconcilable to the Divine Essence; for all things are of God
indefinitely, Father, Son and Holy Ghost: and therefore the Father may be
called that one God essentially, comprehending the other Divine Persons.

Thirdly; There is some reason that may be given, wherefore the Father is,
called God, and the Son and Holy Spirit are sometimes omitted, and left to be
included in that common Name, and that is because of the preeminence that the
Father has among the Divine Persons: For though in excellency of Nature, the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are neither of them above each other, nor any one
of these blessed Persons before the other in Time, yet the Father has a
preeminence of Order and Subsistence according to his manner of self-subsisting
in the Divine Essence. For the Father is named first, and then the Son and the
Holy Spirit, 1 John 5.7. Mat. 28.10. and that because the Father is of none,
the Son is of the Father, and the Holy Ghost is of them both. And from hence it
is, that we worship the Father by the Son, and through the Spirit, Romans 1.8.
Ephesians. 2.18, 21. Phil. 3.3. So then it is proper enough to call the Father that [
one God] (essentially considered, as he is in the Unity of Essence with the
other Divine Persons) forasmuch as he has this preeminence of Order and
Subsistence, and that the other two divine Subsistences are of and in the
Father.

Secondly, they say, That if Christ and the Holy Spirit were God, it were as
necessary to name these two Persons as the Father, to declare who that one God
is.

To this I answer, That if these Words One God the Father, are personally to be
considered of the Father, yet there was no necessity to mention the Son and the
Holy Ghost: For I hinted before, that when the Father is called that One God,
the Son and the Holy Spirit must be included in that common Name, as being of
and in the Father, who is essentially so called. Now the Apostle having told us
who that one God is, by naming that Person, which most properly and
significantly includes the rest, it is sufficient, seeing that his design was
more to tell us in opposition to those many false Gods, That to us there is but
one God, than to give a large Description of him. So then let the words One God
the Father, be taken in either sense as Creator, and so common to all three
Subsistencies, in the Unity of the Godhead, or personally of the Father; yet
they do neither exclude Jesus Christ, nor the Holy Spirit from the Godhead.

Thirdly, some do further add, that Christ is manifestly distinguished from
that one God, and so is demonstrated not to be that one God.

Answer. It was necessary that Christ should be distinguished from that one God
the Father, by those Words, One Lord Jesus Christ, to betoken his Lordship by
Donation, as he is Man or Mediator, because it is different to his supreme and
essential Lordship; and therefore it requires a different Name to express it
by: But yet this does not exclude him from the Unity of Essence with the
Father: But, as in ver. 5. it is said, There were many Gods, and many Lords
inferior to those Gods; So this is to show, in opposition to them, that there
is but one God to us Christians, and but one Lord and Mediator, viz. Jesus
Christ, that considered as Man was exalted to that Dignity, and appointed by
God to be our Lord.

Objection from Ephesians. 4.6. One God and Father of all, who is above all; lest we
should understand the Trinity by the Name of that God who is called one; two
Persons of the Trinity were already mentioned, and distinguished from that one
God.

Answer. There cannot more be proved from this Scripture, than what is granted,
to wit, that the Father has some Pre-eminence (though not in Nature nor Time)
to the Son and Holy Spirit.

First, In that he has his Subsistence, neither by being generated, nor by
Procession, but is of himself a Divine Subsistent in the Divine Nature.

Secondly, The Father may be said to be above all, and have the Pre-eminence
with respect to the Work and Office of the other Divine Persons, in bringing of
us to God the Father, as the ultimate Object of our Faith and Worship, but yet
not so as to exclude the Son and Holy Spirit: For though we through the help of
the Holy Spirit and Intercession of Christ, come to the Father who is above all
their ministerial Offices, and through them in us all, viz. the Saints; yet the
Father, Son, and Spirit, either or all of them, essentially considered, may
have equally the same Worship and Adoration given to them, but respecting the
different Share, Work and Office, belonging to our Salvation, proper to each
Divine Person, we ought in Divine Worship to make different Attributions
accordingly thereunto.

Thirdly, The Apostle's Design was not to make a full Description of God unto
us, but to show the calling of the Church, that it was but one body in the
Unity of one Spirit, in one Hope and Faith, in one Lord, unto one God and
Father, who is above all the ministerial Offices of Christ and the Holy Spirit,
who work from him, and through them he is in us all. And therefore it was
needful to use those different Titles, otherwise the Union of the Church in one
Spirit, with one Lord the Mediator, and head in our Nature, and Order of Faith
and Worship, could not so distinctly be understood.

Objection from John 17.3. And this is Life eternal, that they might know thee
the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. Since Christ so
described the Father, as to call him the [ only] true God, it is understood
that only the Father of Christ is the most high God; to exclude them from the
true Godhead, who were then falsely esteemed and worshipped for Gods: and not
only them, but all others also besides the Father, from the most high Godhead;
for the word [ only] excludes all others from the Communion of the Predicate,
viz. the [ true God] besides him, viz. the Father, to whom it is applied, and
consequently Christ and the Holy Spirit: For if the Gods of the Heathen are by
those words of Christ understood to be excluded from the true Godhead, because
it is apparent, that they are different from the Father; then it is necessary
that all who are apparently different from the Father of Jesus Christ, should
be excluded from that true Godhead; for otherwise the Argument which should
from these Words be drawn to exclude the Idols of the Heathen from the true
Godhead, would be invalid.

Answer. 1st. Christ so describes the Father, as the only true God, to exclude
them from the true Godhead, who are falsely so esteemed and worshipped for Gods,
and that are not God by Nature: But it is not to be understood as if the Person
of the Father only were the true God; for though they say that the Adjective [
only] as often as it is implied to exclude other Subjects from the Communion of
the Predicate, belongs to the Subject, not the Predicate, yet this must be only
granted where the Subject is not in the Unity of the same Essence with other
Subjects, but here it is; and therefore the word [ only] belongs to the
Predicate, not the Subject. Now then the Question will be, whether the word [
only] is here so used as to exclude others that are in the Unity of Essence
with the Subject, from the Predicate or not. If it had been said, that the
Father only is the true God, it had excluded all others from the Unity of
Essence with him, and consequently Christ and the Holy Spirit. But the words
are, That they might know thee, the only true God; and thus the word [ only]
does not exclude such from the Communion of the Predicate, viz. the true God,
that are in the Community of the Subject, viz. the Father, as Christ and the
Holy Spirit are, but those only that are out of Community with him. So that
they must first prove, that the Son and the Holy Spirit are not in the Unity of
Essence, coessential with the Father, before this Argument can be of use to
them.

2dly. I shall note wherefore Christ did assert his Father's Deity more than
his own, and that was to inform us what was Life eternal. For as the Knowledge
of the Father as true God, yea, as the only true God, is essential to
Salvation: so also is the Knowledge of the Son of God, as Mediator in both
Natures: for to know and believe in the Son, as the only true God only, will
not save us; but we must know him also as he is in our Nature, in which he
purchased eternal Life, Romans 3.25. 1 John 4.3. John 6.53.

Now seeing that it was necessary to assert the Father to be the only true God,
and to mention the Son, that we should know him as Mediator in both Natures, as
his Name Jesus Christ suits unto, why then should any imagine that this Text of
Scripture opposes the Deity of Jesus Christ?

To what is before objected concerning the Holy Spirit, I shall add what
another of our Adversaries says on this Text, viz. That our Savior Christ
setting down those Persons, in the Knowledge of whom eternal Life consists,
makes no mention of the Holy Spirit; whereas if he were God, the Knowledge of
him would be as necessary for the Attainment of eternal Life, as that of the
Father.

To this I answer.

First, That here to omit the mentioning of the Holy Spirit, does not deny the
Knowledge of him as God to be essential to Salvation.

For, as was said, to know Jesus Christ in both Natures, is essential to
Salvation: for we find that eternal Lise is entailed on the Son of God, John
3.18. viz. his Person in our Nature, and not in his human Nature alone, (for
that is but an Appendent to his Person) and then the Holy Ghost being only
omitted by Name, he must be included in the Knowledge of the Father and the Son,
as being the Spirit of the Father and the Son, and personally proceeding from
them both, and subsisting coessentially in them: And therefore when the Father
and the Son are mentioned, the Holy Spirit must be included.

Secondly, All saving Knowledge or Revelation of God, depends upon God himself,
who only can so reveal himself unto his Creatures, Matthew. 11.25, 27. I thank
thee, O* Father, because thou have hid these things from the Wise and Prudent,
and have revealed them unto Babes. -- No Man knows the Son but the Father,
neither knows any Man the Father save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son
will reveal him. And John 16.15. All things that the Father has are mine,
therefore said I, He (viz. the Spirit) shall take of mine, and shall show it
unto you. And 1 Cor. 2.10, 11. But God has revealed them to us by his Spirit.
-- For what Man knows the things of a Man, save the Spirit of Man which is in
him, even so the things of God knows no Man, but the Spirit of God. From
which Scriptures we find that the Revelation of the Knowledge of God is
appropriated to the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, and that none [ but]
the Father [ save] the Son, and [ but] the Holy Spirit can savingly reveal God,
or each other personally and essentially unto us. And as we cannot exclude our
Knowledge of the Father, and the Son from the Revelation of the Spirit, though
it is appropriated to the Father and the Son by those words [ but the Father]
and [ save the Son] nor exclude our Knowledge of the Spirit from his self
Revelation to us, seeing all Revelation is by the Spirit; then surely there is
no reason to exclude our Knowledge of the Holy Spirit, as essential to
Salvation, and consequently his Deity, though he is not named with the Father
and the Son. Besides, if this should be allowed to disprove the Deity of the
Holy Spirit, by the same Rule the Deity of the Father would be disproved, when
eternal Life is appropriated to the Knowledge of the Son only, which is more the
current of the New Testament, 1 John 5.11, 12, 20. John 3.36. And therefore as
all saving-Revelation both of the Father and the Son. is by the Holy Spirit,
who proceeds from them, and is coessential with them both, and as we cannot
be ignorant of him who is so necessarily included in our Knowledge of the other
two Divine Persons; so it was not so necessary that he should be named as it
was for the Father and the Son, secing he is included with them, as the
Revealer of them both, John 16.15. 1 Cor. 2.10, 11, etc. So that from John
17.3. there is no reason to exclude either Jesus Christ or the Holy Spirit from
the Unity of the Supreme Godhead.

There are other Objections urged against this Doctrine, by our Adversaries,
which may seem to be very plausible to those that have not weighed them in the
Balance of the Sanctuary. Say they, how can three be one, and one be three?
This is so absurd and contrary to their Reason, as if one should say, that
three Men are one Man, and one Man is three: And how can the Son be begotten of
the Father, and the Holy Spirit proceed from both, and yet both of them
co-essential, and coeternal with the Father.

To these and diverse others of the like nature, I shall give a general Answer.
May we not say, that these Men do savor of a Nicodemus Spirit; and therefore
the Words of Christ to him may be alluded to them, John 3.9, 10. Nicodemus
said, how can these things be? Jesus answered, If I have told you Earthly
things, and ye believe not, how shall ye believe if I tell you of Heavenly
things? For those would far more have exceeded his carnal Reason. And if we
know not what is the way of the Spirit, nor how the Bones do grow in the Womb
of her that is with Child, even so we know not the Works of God, who makes
all, Eccles. 11.5. and if our Faith be limited to carnal Reason, we cannot
believe the Resurrection of the Body; and if the Works of God are too high for
us, and his Ways are past finding out, Romans 11.33. how much more impossible is
it for finite Creatures to conceive the perfect manner of Existence, and
mysterious Subsistence of an infinite Being. We cannot by searching find out
God, nor the Almighty unto Perfection, Job 11.7. God has been graciously
pleased to make known himself unto us in such a manner as that we may rightly
worship him, and as is sufficient for our Support and Comfort in all our
Afflictions here below, and perseverance to Salvation: And there we must rest;
for as for those secret things which belong to God, we are not capable to
comprehend them, Deuteronomy. 29.29. And therefore we do embrace this mysterious
Doctrine, because it is revealed to us in the written Word of God: But they
reject it as inconsistent with natural Reason, foreing the Scriptures to comply
with that, whereby they make it the Rule of Faith rather than to admit of that
as a Mystery which God has declared to be a Mystery, 1 Timothy 3.1, 6. -- Col.
2.2.

Moreover, we cannot conceive, that it could consist with the faithful
discharge of that great Trust which God had committed to his own Son, and
Christ to his Holy Apostles: If while they were asserting so many things, that
might give us to understand the supreme Deity of the Son and Holy Spirit, that
they did not intend nor believe the same themselves; nor can it be imagined,
that if they had taught the contrary Doctrine to the Deity of Christ and the
Holy Spirit, that they should deliver it in such words, as that the Common use
and sense of them should oppose and destroy their true meaning intended by
those Words.

But to conclude my Discourse on this Subject, four Things are necessary to be
considered in order to a right Judgment in this point of Doctrine.

First, Consider how firm a Foundation this Doctrine has in the Holy
Scriptures, what Number of sacred Texts there are, that plainly assert the
Deity of Jesus Christ and the Holy Spirit.

2dly. Consider what monsterous work the Socinians make, to escape the force of
those clear Scripture-Testimonies, that assert the Deity of Christ and the Holy
Spirit; how absurd they are in their Expositions, and the violence they use to
defend their Heresy, by wresting, denying and abusing the Holy Scriptures, may
easily be perceived; and what pains they take to squeez out of some few Texts,
that which is not contained in them, and is repugnant to the current of sacred
Scripture.

3dly. Consider how fairly those very Scriptures on which they build, are
reconciled to this Doctrine of the Holy Trinunity, and how our Expositions of
them are coherent with it, and in themselves, as is apparently manifest from
what has been said in answer to them. So that their Doctrine is inconsistent
with the Infallibility of the Word of God: for while they are not able to
reconcile so great numbers of sacred Texts (that assert the Deity of Christ and
the Holy Ghost) to their Opinion, they render it exceeding ambiguous, and full
of Discords. And therefore there is a necessity that we acknowledge the Holy
Trinunity, otherwise in effect we reject the Scriptures, as insufficient to
guide us into Truth and Righteousness; and therefore seeing the Authority, and
the sweet Harmony of the Holy Scriptures depends on the truth of this Doctrine,
and that the contrary Opinion destroys both, and leaves us destitute of a Rule
of Faith and Obedience, it is the indispensible Duty of every Christian, to
discard so great an Error, and to believe that there are three Divine
Subsistencies in the Deity, and that these three, the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Spirit, are but one God. To whom be Glory and Praise, now and for
evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

