THE Sixth Volume OF LETTERS Writ by a Turkish Spy, Who lived Five and Forty
Years, Undiscovered, at PARIS: Giving an Impartial Account to the Divan at
Constantinople, of the most Remarkable Transactions of Europe; And discovering
several Intrigues and Secrets of the Christian Courts (especially of that of
France) continued from the Year 1659, to the Year 1682.

Written Originally in Arabic, Translated into Italian, and from thence into
English, by the Translator of the First Volume.

LONDON, Printed by J. R. for I. Hindmarsh and R. Sare, at the Golden Ball in
Cornhil, and at Gray's Inn Gate in Holborn, 1694.

Mahmut the Turkish Spy Aetatis suoe 72.


TO THE READER.
AS superfluous as Prefaces seem, yet there is one thing which makes it in a
manner necessary to prefix a few Lines to this Volume, in regard there is an
Occasion given by the Objections some Gentlemen have been lately pleased to
make against the Style of the English Translation. These Persons having by a
very costly Inquisitiveness, found and procured the Italian Copy of these
Letters, and compared them with the English, pick many Faults in the latter,
which they would fain improve to the lessening the Reputation of the Turkish
Spy, or at least to the heightening their own Characters as Wits and Critics,
Masters of Languages, and the Grand Patentees of Humane Sense.

In the First Place they say, the Italian Translation keeps close to the
Original Arabic; whereas the English abounds too much with Anglicisms, which
are not sufficient to express the Author's Primitive Sense.

How Impossible a Thing it is, to please all People in Undertakings of this
Nature! Formerly they were offended that so many Turkish and Arabic Words were
left untranslated* And that being answered in the Preface to the Fourth Volume,
they have now formed New Arguments out of that very Answer, to assault us on
the contrary Side, and tax us with being too Vernacular. It Is true, the Letters
they have sent to the Bookseller on this Account, are not subscribed at Length.
Yet by Accident, one of the Gentlemen's Handwriting is known. And though we
acknowledge him to be an Ingenious Person, and a Man of Learning; yet I believe
he would be unwilling his Letter should here be exposed in Print (or the
Original showed to some that know him, and perhaps may claim an Equal Rank
among the Critics.)

But to come to the purpose; I have often heard Translations blamed for keeping
too close to the Original Phrase, but never any before this, for a Negligence
that is absolutely necessary to retain the Sense of a Foreign Author. All the
World knows, there is a vast Distance between Arabic and the Languages of
Europe; and if the Italian Translator was more exact in forming his Words up to
a near Imitation of the Eastern Proprieties of Speech, no doubt but Impartial
Men will rather Censure it as a Fault, than cry it up for an Excellency; since
nothing sounds well in any Language which is not delivered in the Natural
Idiom. Every thing ought to be writ in as Familiar a Style as we Discourse;
especially Letters, which are but a Proxy-Method of Conversing at a Distance.
And he that Translates out of one Language into another, ought to aim Chiefly
at this, That he be sure to retain the Original Sense, and render it smooth and
easy to the Reader. The Flowers of Arabia and Italy, when once Transplanted to
our barren English Soil, lose their Virtue and Beauty, till they are
Naturalized: What then must we expect from their Weeds? Doubtless, there are
some Peculiarities in all Languages; and to Translate Verbatim from so Remote a
Tongue, would sound as harsh as French does in an Englishman's Mouth, when he
pronounces it as it is writ.

What I have more to say is, that as this Volume contains a History of things
transacted within the Memory of most Men now living; so the Two succeeding
Tomes fall down lower and nearer to the present Times: Giving an Account of
Events whereof many have been Eyewitnesses, and wherein not a few have had a
Personal Share either by Way of Action or Suffering, Profit or Damage; which
must needs afford Delight to thinking Men, since there is nothing more
Agreeable to Mortals than to reflect on the former Passages of their Lives
according to that of the Poet: Haec olim meminisse juvabit.


Besides, for the farther Encouragement of the Candid Reader, he may assure
himself, that toward the Conclusion of the Last Volume, he will meet with
several Secrets between the French and Turkish Courts, which will discover the
true Source of the Present War between the Emperor of Germany and the Grand
Signior; and give a Glimps of the Private Machinations and Springs which have
put all Europe into the Hurly burly it is now in.

I have but this more to say, That we hope to be more Speedy in publishing the
Remainder of these Letters, than we have hitherto been in the Former Volumes.
Reader, Adieu.

A TABLE OF THE LETTERS and Matters contained in this Volume.
VOL. I.
BOOK I.
LETTER I. MAhmut the Arabian at Paris, to Dgnet Oglou his Friend at
Constantinople. page 1 He relates the Errors he committed in Point of Address
and Carriage, when he first came to Paris.

II. To the Reis Effendi, or Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire. 9 Of a
Fellow that dogged him up and down the Streets of Paris; and his Apprehensions
thereupon.

III. To Abdel Melec Muli Omar, President of the College of Sciences at Fez. 14
He complains of his frequent Sadness on the Account of his Employment.

IV. To the Kaimacham. 18 Of the Quakers in Holland, England, Germany, and
other Parts of Europe.

V. To the Same. 23 Of the Peace concluded between France and Spain. Of the
Match between the King of France and the Spanish Infanta. Of the Duke of
Lorrain's Release, and the Prince of Conde's Restoration.

VI. To Hamet, Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottomam Empire. 26 He
congratulates his Accession to that Dignity. Of the Death of the King of
Sweden, and the Duke of Orleans.

VII. To Dgnet Oglou. 32 He discourses against the little Superstitions of the
Mahometans. Of Moses and the Jews in Egypt.

VIII. To the Kaimacham. 40 Of the Prince of Conde's Reception and
Entertainment at the French Court. Some Passages of his Life.

X. To the Same. 43 Of King Charles II. his Restoration to the Crown.

X. To Mehemet, an Exiled Eunuch, at Caire in Egypt. 47 He breaks forth into
melancholy Excursions.

XI. To Hamet, Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire. 51 He
relates some Passages of Henry IV's Life.

XII. To Mustapha, Berber Aga. 55 Of the Extraordinary Magnificence at the New
married King and Queen's Entry into Paris.

XIII. To Dgnet Oglou. 58 Of an Earthquake at Paris.

XIV. To Hamet, Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire. 61
Observations on the Reign of Lewis XIII.

XV. To Mahummed, in the Desert. 67 Of the Earthquake at Paris, and other Parts
of France.


BOOK II.
LETTER I. TO the Venerable Mufti. 71 Of Cardinal Mazarini's Death. Some
Remarks on his Life.

II. To the Vizir Azem at the Port 75 Farther Remarks on Cardinal Mazarini.

III. To Pesteli Hali, his Brother, Master of the Customs at Constantinople. 77
Of his Cousin Isouf's Residence at Astracan. A Character of the Moscovites.

IV. To Orchan Cabet, Student in the Sciences, and Pensioner to the Sultan. 80
He congratulates his Conversion to the Mohammedan Faith.

V. To the Mufti. 83 Of the King of France's Power to cure the King's Evil.

VI. To Mirmadolin, Santone of the Vale of Sidon. 86 He applauds the happy Life
of a Santone.

VII. To Dgnet Oglou. 90 Of Painters. A Story of Martin Heemskirk. Another of
Giotto.

VIII. To Lubano Abufai Saad, an Egyptian Knight. 97 Of the Dauphin's Birth.

IX. To Cara Hali, Physician to the Grand Signior. 101 Of Hardiness,
Indifference, and Resignation.

X. To the Same. 106 Of Plays, and an odd Accident that happened at one, in the
Presence of the King and the whole Court,

XI. To Dgnet Oglou. 113 He compains of the Slanders cast on him by some at the
Seraglio.

XII. To Abrahim Eli Zeid, Hadgi, Preacher to the Seraglio. 116 Of the Wicked
Lives of Priests and Monks.

XIII. To the Chiaus Bassa. 152 Of the French Kings Conduct and Government.

XIV. To the Same. 130 More on the same Subject. Of an extraordinary
Tournament, or Carousal, at the French Court.

XV. To Zeidi Alamanzi, a Merchant at Venice. 135 He applauds his Sincerity in
embracing the Mussulman Faith.

XVI. To the Kaimacham. 141 Of the Attempts made on the Lives of the Duke and
Duchess of Crequi.

XVII. To Mohammed, the Illustrious Eremit of Mount Vriel in Arabia. 144 Of the
Contradictions and Uncertainty of Ancient Records, etc.

XVIII. To Hasnadar-Bassi, Chief Treasurer to his Highness. 148 Of the Birth
and Death of Madam of France. Of the Peace concluded betneen France and Spain.
He reflects on the English, for delivering up Dunkirk to the French. Of the
Marriage between the King of England and the Infanta of Portugal.

XIX. To the Kaimacham. 152 He relates a strange Passage that happened to him
in Visiting a Calabrian Traveller, professing Astrology and Physic.

XX. To the Captain Bassa. 157 Of a Wonderful Man taken up on the Coasts of
North-Holland.

XXI. To Nathan Ben Saddi, a Jew at Vienna. 161 He endeavors to convince him,
that Ismael was Heir of the Promises made to Abraham, as being the Firstborn
Son. With some Recriminations on the Race of Isaac.

XXII. To the Same. 166 He discourses concerning the Origin of Nobility and
Grandeur among Men.

XXIII. To Codarafrad Cheik, a Man of the Law. 173 Of a Man that was executed
at Paris, for asserting, That he was the Son of God.


BOOK III.
LETTER I. TO Solomon, his Cousin, at Chalcedon. 177 He applauds his Removing
from Place to Place; and advises him to travel farther in the World; or at
least to visit his Cousin Isouf at Astracan.

II. To Pesteli Hali, his Brother, Master of the Customs at Constantinople. 181
Of the Wars and Revolution in Indostan; with some Remarks on the different
Policy of Eastern Nations.

III. To Vseph Bassa. 186 Of the Conversion of the Duke of Meckleburg to the
Roman Faith. Of the Magnificent Entry the Suis-Embassadors made into Paris.

IV. To Hamet, Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottom^n Empire. 188 Of
the King of France's Amors. A pleasant Story of his Confessor.

V. To Pesteli Hali, his Brother, Master of the Grand Signior's Customs at
Constantinople. 191 Of Mahmut's Inclinations to travel; his particular Fancy
for Indostan: With a Description of the Pleasures he should take in passing
thither.

VI. To Hamet, Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire. 200 Of
the Death of the Duchess of Savoy, and Carolus Josephus, Brother to the German
Emperor. A General Character of Germany, France, Spain, England, Holland and
other Parts of Europe.

VII. To Kerker Hassan, Bassa. 206 He acquaints him, how he had been
Assassinated one Night in the Streets, as he was returning to his Lodgings. Of
his Removal thereupon to another Part of the City.

VIII. To Nathan Ben Saddi, a Jew at Vienna. 213 He informs him of the same
Accident, referring him for farther Instructions to Eliachim, who would be
shortly at Vienna.

IX. To Zeidi Alamanzi, a Merchant at Venice. 216 He forbids him to send any
Letters to Paris, till he has received Fresh Orders from the Port.

X. To Murat, Bassa. He complains for want of timely Intelligence from the
Ministers of the Port. Of the Victories and Successes of the Ottomans in
Hungary. Of Count Strozzi's Arrival at Paris in Quality of Ambassador from the
Emperor.

XI. To Isouf, his Kinsman, a Merchant at Astracan 223 A Character of Spain.

XII. To Afis Bassa. 225 Of the General Consternation in Europe, upon the News
of the Grand Signior's Advances into Hungary. Of Cardinal Chisi's Arrival at
Paris in Quality of Legate de Latere from the Pope.

XIII. To Hamet, Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire. 228
He gives him a Character of Spain, different from that he sent his Cousin Isouf.

XIV. To Musu Ab'l Yahyan, Professor of Philosophy at Fez. 233 He discourses of
the various Languages of Europe. A Story of a German Ambassador at the French
Court.

XV. To Osman Adrooneth, Astrologer to the Sultan at Adrianople. 238 Of a Comet
appearing in the Firmament. From whence he takes Occasion to discourse about
the Nature of Comets.

XVI. To Hamet, Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire. 241 He
informs him of the Peace made between the Pope and the King of France, after
the Affronts put upon the French Ambassador at Rome. Of the French King's
Design on Africa.

XVII. To Abdel Melec, Muli Omar, President of the College of Sciences at Fez.
He complains that True Science is not to be found, unless among the Bramins of
India.

XVIII. To Mirmadolin Santone of the Vale of Sidon. 250 He asserts, That Men
are Partakers of the Divine Nature. A Digression concerning the Ancient
Religion of the Gentiles.

XIX. To the Same. 253 A Skeptical Discourse, after the manner of an Epicurean
Philosopher.

XX. To Isouf, his Cousin, a Merchant at Astracan. 256 Mahmut complains of his
Uneasiness in Paris, and expresses his Emulation of the Arabs and Tartars.

XXI. To Hamet, Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire. 260
Remarks on the Marshall de Turenne; with a Character of that Prince.

XXII. To Orchan Cabet, Student of the Sciences, and Pensioner to the Grand
Signior. 265. Of a Paper of Verses, which the King of France found one morning
on his Table. Of Anne Marie de Skurman the learned Maid of Saxony.

XXIII. To the Captain Bassa. 268. Of a Notable Victory obtained by the
English, under the Command of the Duke of York, in a Sea Fight with the Dutch.
Of the King of France's Design to Unite both Seas, by Cutting a Canal through
Part of his Kingdom.


BOOK IV.
LETTER I. TO Achmet Beig. 273 Of the Death of Philip the IV. King of Spain;
and the Duke of Vendosme.

II. To William Vospel, a Recluse of Austria. 278 Mahmut endeavors to reclaim
him from Bigottry.

III. To Nathan Ben Saddi, a Jew at Vienna. 284 He reflects on the Misna and
Talmud of the Jews: rehearsing briefly several ridiculous Stories out of the
Latter. Of a Sort of Jews in North-Asia, different from the Rest of that
Lineage, in their Language, Laws, and Religion.

IV. To the Same. 289 He gives him a more particular Account of these Jews,
their Customs, and Manner of Life.

V. To Mohammed, Hadgi, Dervich, Eremite of Mount Vriel in Arabia the Happy.
295 He tells him he is in doubt of his Future State: However, asserts, That
it is good to meditate on the last Things.

VI. To the Kaimacham. 300 Of Mirammud, the Son of the Xairiph of Salle's being
taken Prisoner by the French. His Character and Entertainment at the Court.

VII. To Hamel Muladdin, Xairiph, of Salle. 302 He acquaints him with the same
thing, and advises him to send speedy Ambassadors to the Court of France, in
Order to his Son's Redemption.

VIII. To Pesteli Hali, his Brother, Master of the Customs at Constantinople.
305 He informs him of the Treachery of Solomon his Cousin, in employing some
Armenian Merchants at Paris, to pry into Mahmut's Secrets.

IX. To Dgnet Oglou. 308 More on the same Subject.

X. To Hamet, Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire. 313 Of
the Plague at London, and in other Parts of England. Of the Death of the
Queen Mother of France, and of the Prince of Conti.

XI. To Nathan Ben Saddi, a Jew at Vienna. 317 He reproaches him with Bigottry,
in believing Sabbati Sevi, the pretended Messiah of Smyrna, etc. to be the True
Redeemer of Israel. A short history of Sabbati Sevi's Life.

XII. To the Kaimacham. 323 An Account of the Jew's Extravagances on the
appearing of Sabbati Sevi, as their Messiah. Strange Reports of the Ten Tribes
that were carried away captive by Salmanassar King of Assyria.

XIII. To Murat, Bassa. 327 Of a War between the French and the English. Of a
Marriage between the Emperor of Germany and the Infanta of Spain.

XIV. To Pesteli Hali, his Brother, Master of the Customs, and Superintendent
of the Arsenal at Constantinople. 331 He congratulates his New Advance; relates
the Blowing up of Rezan a City in Russia, and Descants on the Day of Doom.

XV. To Vseph, Bassa, 337 Of the Continuance of the Plague in England. Of the
Fire at London.

XVI. To Cara Hali, Physician to the Grand Signior. 341 He complains that our
Knowledge of a future State is very uncertain.

XVII. To Kerker Hassan Bassa. 347 He rejoices to hear, that he is to be
removed from Paris to a Country Life, somewhere in Asia.

XVIII. To Isouf, his Kinsman, a Merchant at Astracan. 354 He gives him a
Character of his Cousin Solomon, and bids him beware of him if he should come
to Astracan


LETTERS Writ by A Spy at PARIS.
VOL. VI. BOOK I.
LETTER I. Mahmut the Arabian at Paris, to Dgnet Oglou, his Friend at
Constantinople.
IT makes me smile sometimes, when I reflect how often I was put to it for an
Address suitable to the Manners of the Nazarenes, and the particular Mode of
Paris, when I first arrived at this City: For, thou know, we had other
Employments, than to learn Fashions and Conge's at Palermo. The Mind of a Slave
is dejected under the Circumstances of his Captivity; so that he has not
Leisure to regard any Thing, but how to accomplish his daily Task, and to
please his Patron. All his Study and Care is bent upon this, and there is no
Room left for Generous Thoughts; Neither has he Means or Courage to venture on
Projects, or improve the Present Occurrences in Order to his Future Happiness:
Nay, he hardly dares think of ever being Happy again. This was my Case, and I
believe 'twas not much better with thee.

Yet, notwithstanding all the Rigorous Usage I had, the Bastinado's, Kicks,
Bruises, Cuts and Wounds, I received from the Hands of that Barbarous Giafer,
my Master, which made me sometimes Incapable of doing him any Service by Day,
or of taking any Rest my self by Night, I was resolved to find some spare Time
for Books. I rose Early, and went Late to Sleep; neglecting no Moment, wherein
I could apply my self to Study. The Acquaintance I had with that Sicilian
Carpenter, our Friend, was of Singular Advantage to me in this Kind: For, thou
may remember, he was well stocked with many Ancient and Learned Treatises.
He furnished me with Plutarch, Polybius, Strabo, Pliny, and other Histories.
All which, and many more, I devoured with Greediness; for I had a strong
Appetite to Knowledge. And after my Redemption, I passed away some Time in the
Academies, where I learned the Knotty Tricks of Logic, how to split Moods and
Figures, and chain one Impertinent Syllogism to the Tail of another to
Eternity. I also ran through a Course of Philosophy and other Sciences. Neither
was I altogether Ignorant of Men: For the Reading of Histories, fits a Man the
better to make Practical Experiments in the Affairs of the World. To which
also, Philosophy is not a little helpful, in directing our Observations on the
various Tempers of People, Men's Personal Dispositions and Singularities, with
the Humors and Customs Peculiar to this or that Nation. For these things
depend many Times on the Difference of the Climate, the Nature of the Soil, the
Qualities of the Air, and the Manner of their Diet.

But neither History, Logic or Philosophy, were able to efface the Impressions
of my Early Years, or unteach me the Manners in which I had been Educated from
my Infancy. I brought Arabia and Constantinople along with me even to Paris.
And because I had not been used to dissemble the Profession and Carriage of a
Mussulman, during my Thraldom in Sicily; I was at a Loss in my Deportment, when
I came First hither.

How often have I been like to discover my self by Pronouncing the Sacred
Bismillah, either when I sat down to Eat, or put a Glass of Water to my Lips;
or, when I begun any other Action of Importance? So likewise in uttering the
Handillah, after a Repast, or when any Thing happened which prompted me to
praise Ged.

When I met any of my Acquaintance in the Streets, I was apt to forget that I
had a Hat on. And instead of putting off that, according to the Fashion of the
Franks, I laid my Hand on my Breast, and sometimes bowed so low, that my Hat
fell off from my Head, before I was sensible of my Error.

If I had Occasion to address my self to a Person of Quality, I was ready to
take up the Bottom of his Cloak, Gown or Robe, and to Kiss it in Token of
Reverence, as the Custom is in the East, when we salute the Grandees. Nay,
sometimes I could not forbear falling on my Knee, or prostrate on the Ground
before Cardinal Richlieu, and those of his High Dignity. All which,
nevertheless, passed only for Clownishness, and want of Courtly Education,
which teaches the Nice Punctilio's of Address. They took me for a Kind of
Moldavian Rustic, without any farther Jealousy. Or perhaps, they smiled at all
this, as some Singular Caprice or Humor, like that of the Philosopher
Pasicles, who coming to salute a Great Captain, and the Ceremony of those Times
requiring him to touch the Captain's Knee, he laid his Hand on his Genitals. At
which the Captain being affronted, and thrusting his Hand away with Scornful
Words; What! says the Philosopher, does not that Part belong to you, as well as
your Knees? It often diverts my Melancholy, to consider how many Errors of this
Kind I have committed, not through Ignorance, or any Cynical Humor, but only
in pure Oversight, and Forgetfulness.

It was a long Time ere I could frame my Fingers to handle a Knife and Fork at
Meals, as is the Universal Custom in these Western Parts; Whereas thou know,
we make use of no other Instruments in Eating, but our Fingers and Teeth.
Whence it was, that I could not sometimes forbear thrusting my Hand into a
whole Dish of Meat; which is counted a great Indecency in France. And after I
was reconciled to those Nicer Instruments of Voluptuousness, so as to Carve my
Meat a la Mode; yet when once I had it on my own Plate, I laid aside those
Tools as Useless, and tore it asunder with my Fingers and Teeth, feeding a la
Turcesque, as the French call it; that is, like a Mussulman.

Nevertheless, no Body suspected me; but all these Miscarriages passed for
Moldavian Barbarisms, the salvage Customs of that my supposed Country. I tell
thee, that though the Manner of Eating among the French, seem to have something
more of Neatness and Delicacy in it; yet it appears full of Softness and
Luxury, and I cannot in Reason prefer it to the more Natural and Simple Method
of Diet, used in the East. Neither would the Franks themselves condemn us for
Salvages in this Point, as they commonly do, did they but consider, that this
Negligence very well becomes Men of the Sword; and that in their Campagnes,
their own Generals are ambitious to appear Careless in every Thing relating to
their Body.

Doubtless, the Ancient Romans, who brought the Greatest Part of the World
under their Power, shunned all Finenesses in Diet and Apparel, till such Time
as their Manners were debauched, and their Empire in its Decline. Our Annals
record, That when Sultan Selim lay down with his Army before a certain Place,
and the Governor of the Town sent Commissioners to treat with him about a
Surrender; they found him at Dinner, which consisted only of Two or Three
Onions, a little Salt and Bread.

Histories also relate of the Faithful Omar, Successor of the Prophet, That
when he was with his Army not far from Jerusalem, the Nazarene Prince who
governed that City, sent a Spy into the Host of the Mussulmans, to observe
their Discipline, and bring him a Lively Character of their General. The Spy
went according to his Master's Order. And having tarried some Time in the
Arabian Camp, returned again, and thus spoke to the Governor.

"It will be Needless to recount every Thing I observed among these Soldiers;
since by what I shall say of their Leader, thou may comprehend the Manners
of them all: For they obey him, and follow his Example in every Thing, with
Exquisite Silence and Modesty. I saw Omar their Prince, at the Head of his
Army, fitting on a Camel, his Face Tawny and Scorched by the Sun, in a Vest of
Persian Cotton, girded about with a Belt of Leather, at which hung a Cymetar
and Dagger, with a Knapsack tied behind him like the Meanest Soldier. I saw
him take out from thence hard Crusts of Bread, shaking off the Husks of Millet
which stuck to them; and saying, In the Name of God, he Eat heartily of the
same. Then he drank Water out of a Leathern Bottle hanging by his Side; And
when he had done, he said, Praise be to God. All his Army made their Repast at
the same Time, and in the same Manner with Admirable Temperance, and such an
Order and Modesty, as I never saw before, neither can I express."

When the Prince heard this, he stood still a Considerable Time, musing as one
Astonished. Then turning to the Seniors and Chief of the People who were
present, he said, "It is Necessary that we surrender our City to these People;
for they have the Smiles of Heaven. Their Prophet and their Law, oblige 'em to
Temperance, Frugality, Obedience and a Modest Deportment. These Virtues are
certain Steps to Victory and Empire. Besides, I have received a Tradition from
my Ancestors, That a People shall come out of Arabia, with a New Law and
Religion, which shall abolish all that went before it. They shall subdue
Palestine and Egypt, and shall found like the Humming of Bees. Their Empire
shall extend from East to West, and to the Extremities of the Earth. This is
what I have learned from my Forefathers, and which I believe is now coming to
pass. Therefore it will be in vain to resist these Men; for they are Invincible
by a Decree from Above."

Those that were about him, did not approve the Counsel of this Wise Nazarene.
However, he sent to Omar, and obtained Favor for himself and his Family.

Thou will say, I Am got wide of the Mark of my First Discourse, which related
to my self, and not to any of the Primitive Cailiphs: But it is impossible to
restrain our Thoughts from roving. Some say, they hang together like the Links
of a Chain; and that one Idea being fastened to another in our Memory, we
muster them in Rank and File, according to their proper Order, when we think,
or make Reflections. God knows how it is. This I Am sure of, That when I write to
my Friends, I study not to make an Elaborate Speech on it, as if I were penning
an Oration; but pursuing my First Intention at Random, I run on, letting one
Thought and Word beget another.

But I was telling thee how great a Bunglet I was at first in all the
Ceremonies and Manners of the Franks, which differ from those of the East. I
was as much to seek in my Address, as an Ass would be to play on a Lute,
according to the Roman Proverb: Yet Time and Practice rendered all these Things
Familiar and Easy. Now, methinks, I Am a thorow-pac'd Nazarene as to my
Exterior. I go to the Court, and the Temples with as much seeming Formality as
the Christians whilst, God knows, my Heart is somewhere else. All my Actions
are out of their Natural Bias, so long as I am Absent from the Society of True
Believers.

In a word, I Am forced to imitate the Fox, which Creature, when it is environed
with Huntsmen and Dogs, counterfeits a Barking like the Latter, and so passes
undiscovered for one of their Company.

Paris, 3d. of the 9th. Moon, of the Year 1659.
LETTER II. To the Reis Effendi, or Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire.
I Am at this Time possessed with more Apprehensions and Jealousies, than an
Old Infidel Usurer. My Lodging affects me with greater Melancholy, than would a
Prison. And my Uneasiness is the same when I go out of Doors. Every Body that
meets me, looks either as my Accuser or my Judge: And some appear as terrible
as Executioners. By Day, my Imagination torments me like a Fury; and by Night,
I am affrighted with Melancholy Visions. I dream of nothing but Racks, Wheels,
Saws, Gibbets, and such like Instruments of Humane Cruelty. Or that I am in
some dark Dungeon, condemned to more Unsufferable Tortures, by Order of the
State; with Cardinal Mazarini, sitting by me like a Spanish Inquisitor, and in
the most Tyrannical Manner, threatening me with Pains, to which the Damned
themselves are wholly Strangers, if I will not confess what I am, and reveal
the Secrets with which I am entrusted.

The Occasion of these Terrors which harass me Night and Day, is this: I have
for Four or Five Days together, found my self dogged up and down Paris, by a
Man whose Face I never saw before in my Life. Let me go where I will, he is
always at some Distance from me. If I stand still, so does he: Or if I turn
back, he is quickly at my Heels. I have endeavored by all the Prudent Methods I
could take to drop him in the Crowd of People, or in the Churches: But all in
vain; for still I encounter with the same Face. He pursues me like my Shadow.
Neither Coach nor Boat, Land or Water, House or Alley, can rescue me from the
Fellow's Eyes, who is more quick-sighted than Argus, and nimbler than Mercury.
He is very Cunning also in this Business, and as dexterous as a Jugler,
conveying himself when he pleases out of my Sight; yet presently after, he is in
View again. And if I chance to lose him in the Dark, I am sure to find him not
far from my Lodging next Morning.

This is it which gives me so much Disturbance, and pierces me with a Thousand
Anxieties, For I know not what to conjecture of this Fellow's Design. Sometimes
I think he is employed by Cardinal Mazarini to watch my Motions, observe what
Houses and Company I frequent, and trace me in all my Appointments. And I am
the more confirmed in this Suspicion, when I reflect on my Former Imprisonment
in this City, and the Occasion of it. Besides, when I went Yesterday to see
Eliachim the Jew, this Spark followed me near to the Door: And though I tarried
there Two full Hours, yet when I came out, I had not walked a Hundred Paces,
before I saw him again, footing it after me in a Careless manner, with his Arms
folded, and his Eyes fixed on the Ground, as if he knew Nothing of the Matter.
These are convincing Circumstances, that he is set at Work by the Cardinal, or
some Body else, to discover my Business.

But when on the other Side, I consider, that if the Cardinal suspected me, he
might go a nearer Way to work, and seize me in my Chamber, where my Letters
would betray me; this Thought vanishes, and I am at a Loss what to think.

Then comes into my Mind the Encounter I had once with my Sicilian Master, who
strove to set the Rabble upon me in the Streets of Paris, but my better Stars
delivered me out of his and their Hands, whilst, for ought I know, he drew upon
himself the Mischief he designed for me. However, when I reflect on that
Passage, I am apt to think he may be now in Paris, and having by some Accident
seen me go in or out at my Lodging, contrives how to revenge himself on me, and
uses this Fellow's Assistance in compassing his Ends. Perhaps, think I, he will
cause me to be stabbed or pistoll'd at some convenient Season; Or, he will find
out some other Way, less noisy and more malicious to dispatch me. It may be he
seeks to entrap me, and render me Obnoxious to the State. I have a thousand
Imaginations about it, and know not what to conclude. I value not my self, nor
am I careful to prolong a Miserable Life for my own Sake. All that I can hope
to enjoy in this World, would come far short of tempting me to skreen my self
from the Stroke of Death, by any Action Unworthy of a Philosopher, and a Man.
But the Duty and Affection I owe to the Grand Signior's Service makes me
willing to live, till I have acquitted my self of my Province with perfect
Success, that so I may return to Constantinople with Honor. And then I care
not how soon I post to that Unknown World, where all the Generations of Mortals
take up their Eternal Rest: For in this there is Nothing but Labor and Grief.

In the mean Time, I know not what Conduct to use in this Emergency; Whether
I Would best to speak to this Fellow, or dissemble my Suspicion; Whether it will be
safe to trust this Event to the General Providence, or to sacrifice him that
gives me so much Disquiet, and so secure my Peace. I could easily have him
dispatched without any farther Noise. But then my Conscience would trouble me
with after-Claps, lest I should have Murdered a Man without Reason, which is
expressly forbid by the Alcoran. Besides, I should always stand in Fear of some
Discovery, I protest, I am at a Loss for want of Ample Instructions in such
Cases as these. And I am weary of mentioning what I have so often intimated
already to the Ministers of the Port, without any Direct Answer. However, I
will do what my Reason suggests, and leave the Event to Destiny.

Happy Minister, the Affairs of this World are full of dark Windings and
Meanders; and we have all need of a Guide or a Clew to conduct us through 'em.
May that Omnipresent assist us, whenever we are caught in a Knot, or lost in a
Labyrinth of Difficulties.

Paris, 3d. of the 9th. Moon, of the Year 1659.
LETTER III. To Abdel Melec Muli Omar, President of the College of Sciences at
Fez.
THY Venerable Dispatch I received with Kisses, and a Transport of Joy. I
Thrice touched my Eyelids with the Paper of High Esteem, and as often I laid it
to my Breast. I broke up the Seals with Modesty and Reverence, and my Greedy
Eyes devoured the Lines of Profound Wisdom; the Sentences and Aphorisms worthy
to be written in Letters of Gold. Then 'twas I blessed the Hour of my Nativity,
and the more Happy Moment wherein I First had the Honor of thy Familiarity and
Friendship: O thou Sincere and Eximious Patron of such as love the Sciences!
Renowned for thy Learning and Probity of Manners! Prince of the Alfaqui's and
Doctors! Crown of the Sage Assembly of Philosophers! Oracle of the Age!

Glory be to God, who has neither Beginning nor End; Who alone possesses the
Infinite Expanse and Life Eternal; Who is Adored by the Inhabitants of Heaven,
of Earth and of Hell. Benedictions on Michael, Gabriel, Israphiel, Ithuriel,
Jeremiel, Hasmariel, and on all the Happy Ministers of his Divine Majesty; as
also on the Angel of Death. Peace to the True Believers on Earth, and Salvation
to the Devils and Damned, after they have accomplished their Penance in Hell,
and the Term of Wrath shall be Expired.

An Universal Charity dilates my Heart; I embrace with Love all the Creatures
of God. This is owing to the Seasonable Arrival of thy Letter: For at the
Moment when that came, I was plunged in so deep a Melancholy, that I could
hardly afford a Kind Thought for any Thing on Earth, and I perfectly hated my
self. I have these Fits of Sadness often, it being an Effect of my Constitution.

At those Seasons Life appears an Insupportable Burden, and all the Bustle and
Noise of Mortals a Vain Fatigue. My Senses, which at other Times administer
Delight and Pleasure, are now the Instruments of Anguish and Pain. Every Thing
I see and hear, disgusts me. I abhor my Necessary Food. Neither can the
Sweetest Odors, or softest Strains of Music bring me into a better Temper;
Till Sleep Eclipses the Light of my busy Imagination, and puts out every
glaring Thought. Then my Soul takes her Repose: And stealing from my Body,
enters into the Shady Vale of Visions, and sports with Innocent Idea's. Thus
having diverted my self with jumbling Monstrous Essences together, and hurling
one Chimaera at another, I return again to my Body, and Sighing awake, grieved
that I could not longer stay in that Mock-World, where I could have wished my
Residence for Ever, rather than in this, which gives me so much Real Pain. Thus
is my Anguish renewed with the Morning. Light is more Irksom to me than
Darkness, and the Day which brings Joy to other Mortals is more terrible to me
than Night, and the Shadow of Death.

I complain to the Elements, but they will not hear or regard me. All Nature
seems to laugh at my Affliction, and the Beasts of the Field triumph over me.
As for Men, here are none but Infidels, my professed Enemies to whom I can vent
my Sorrows: And I Am ashamed to make a Woman my Confessor, though 'twere my own
Mother, who lives in Paris, and daily sees me.

If in this dolorous Condition I prepare my self with the accustomed
Purifications of the Law, and address to the Omnipotent, I know not where to
find him: His Essence is Unsearchable, and flies from Human Thought. I call him
aloud by his Ninety Nine Adorable Names, but receive no Answer. I repeat his
Incomprehensible Attributes, but all to no Purpose. In a Word, I say and do all
that the Law enjoins, the Prophet counsels, Holy Persons recommend, or my own
Reason suggests, as proper Means to obtain the Favor of Heaven, and a Redress
of my Calamity: But find no Comfort. And, for ought I know, that Spaniard might
as soon be heard, who being ignorant what Form of Prayer to use, rehearsed the
Four and Twenty Letters of the Alphabet, desiring God to form such Words out of
'em, as best expressed the Petitioner's Necessities.

I tell thee, Illustrious Prelate, after I Am tired with Vocal Devotions, I have
Recourse to Contemplation. I examine my Past Life, and find that I my self am
the Source of my own Melancholy, in not strictly obeying the Law of the
Prophet, the Precepts of the Seniors, and the Dictates of my Conscience: And
all this, for the Sake of Loyalty to the Grand Signior, and in Confidence of
the Mufti's Dispensation. Now I ask of thee, Whether it be Lawful to commit a
Thousand Vices, that I may only acquit my self fairly in One Virtue? Or, to
think, that in such Cases, the Mufti has Power to disannul the Express,
Positive Injunctions of our Holy Lawgiver? Is the Empire of the Faithful to be
served by the Infidelity and Profaneness of Mussulmans? Or the Truth to be
supported by Lies and Perjuries?

I tremble to think what a Confusion I shall be in, when the Prophet shall
reproach me, That I have preferred the Favor of Men, to the Smiles of Heaven.
I know not what to do. Oh, that I were in the Parching Deserts of Libya, or any
the most Unfrequented Solitude of Egypt! A Companion of Dragons, and other
Horrid Monsters of Africa! rather than in this Station, which renders my Life a
Hell upon Earth, and torments me with Half the Disquiets of the Damned.

But if this appears too Extravagant and Desperate a Thought, let me at least
wish my self at Fez, the meanest of thy Slaves, or of the Incomparable Musu
Abul Yahyan, of whom thy last Letter gave so high a Character. I have addressed
a Dispatch to him, hoping for the Honor of his Friendship and Correspondence.

Let not the Liberty I Have taken to tell thee of my Sadness, discourage thee
from writing: But rest assured, that whenever thou shall vouchsafe me a Letter,
though I were in the Agonies of Death, 'twould call me back again.

Paris, 25th. of the 9th. Moon, of the Year 1659.
LETTER IV. To the Kaimacham.
THese Nazarenes are very Fertile in New Religions. Europe is a Wilderness
overrun with Monstrous Sects and Heresies. Every Age produces fresh Pretenders
to Prophecy and Divine Revelation. Error is Prolifick and multiplies
Infinitely, whilst Truth remains the same for Ever, and is comprehended in a
few Rules.

Of late Years there are a Sort of People sprung up in England, Holland,
Germany, and other Parts of the North, boasting of a New Commission given them
from Heaven, to Preach the Everlasting Truth, reform the Errors and Vices of
Mankind, and lead People the only Infallible Way to Happiness. Their Address is
Plain and Simple, Bold and Uniform, using no other Ceremonies or Compliments in
their Discourse or Carriage to Persons of the Greatest Quality, than to the
Vulgar, and those of the most Inferior Rank.

They style themselves, The True Seed, the Offspring of Jacob, Jews of the
Promise, Israelites without Fraud, with such like vain Titles; but by others
they are generally called Quakers.

They say the Ringleader of this People, professes himself to be the Messiah,
being in all Parts of his Body and Features of his Face like Jesus the Son of
Mary: Or at least it is observed, That he exactly resembles that Pourtraiture of
him which Publius Lentulus sent to the Senate of Rome out of Judaea, when he
was Governor of that Province. Hence his Followers scruple not to call him
Jesus, The Beauty of Ten Thousand, The Only begotten Son of God, The Prophet
who is to Seal up all Things, the Prince of Peace, King of Israel, Judge,
Consolation and Hope of the World.

When he travels, his Disciples attend him bare-headed (which, thou know, is
a Token of Reverence among the Franks) yet they never uncover to any other
Mortal. He rides on Horseback, whilst they walk on Foot before, behind, and on
each Side of him, spreading their Garments in the Way through which he passes.
The Hoofs of his Beast tread only on Silks, or other Costly Stuffs. And as they
enter any Town or City, they Chaunt aloud his Praises, proclaming him the Son
of David, and Heir of the Divine Promises.

All his Followers pretend to be Prophets, boasting of strange Illuminations
and Raptures, foretelling Things to come, and reproaching the Vices of
Governors and the Greatest Princes, with a Boldness which has but few
Precedents. In a word, they every where preach, That God is laying the
Foundation of a New Monarchy, which shall destroy all the Rest in the World,
and shall never have an End it self.

This gives a Jealousy to the States where they live, and therefore they are
persecuted in all Places. Yet they appear very constant in their Sufferings,
and tenacious of the Doctrines they preach.

They seem, in my Opinion, to resemble one of our Mussulman Sects, who assert,
That Jesus the Son of Mary shall return again upon Earth: That he shall Marry
and beget Children, be Anointed King of the Nations who believe in One God, and
in this Glorious State shall reign Forty Years. After which he shall subdue
Antichrist, and then shall follow the Dissolution of all Things. Yet the
Orthodox Believers reject this Tenet as Fabulous. Neither is there any
Countenance given to it in that Versicle of the Alcoran, where it is said, Thou
Mahomet shall see thy Lord return in the Clouds: Since that only intimates the
Glorious Descent which Moses, Jesus and Mahomet shall make from Paradise, with
Enoch, Elias, and the One Hundred Twenty Four Thousand Prophets, to assemble
the Elect at the Day of Judgment.

If thou would have my Opinion of these New Religionists in Europe, and
their Leader; I take him to be an Impostor, and his Followers to be either
Fools or Madmen. Even just such another Crew, as those who followed
Moseileima, in the Days of our Holy Lawgiver. This was an Arabian Impostor,
who pretended to set up for a Prophet, and attempted to compose a Book like the
Alcoran. But he was Infatuated with a Vain Arrogance, and there was no Truth or
Elegance in his Writings, no Justice on his Side, nor Understanding in him or
his Party. To be short, both he and they were all cut to pieces in the Vale of
Akreb, by the Troops of Abu-Bacrossadic, the First Cailiph.

As to these Modern Seducers, they are not Men of Arms, but a Herd of Silly,
Insignificant People, aiming rather to heap up Riches in Obscurity, than to
acquire a Fame by any Heroic Undertaking. They are Generally Merchants or
Mechanics, and are observed to be very Punctual in their Dealings, Men of few
Words in a Bargain, Modest and Composed in their Deportment, Temperate in their
Lives, and using great Frugality in all things. In a word, They are singularly
Industrious, sparing no Labor or Pains to increase their Wealth; and so Subtle
and Inventive, that they would if possible, extract Gold out of Ashes. I know
none that excel them in their Characters, but the Jews and the Banians. ^he
Former being the Craftiest of all Men, and the Latter so superlatively Cunning,
that they will overreach the Devil.

But these are no Signs of a Pure Religion; For that only prescribes the
Methods of withdrawing and separating the Soul from the Contagion of Earthly
Things, and of uniting it to the Deity, which is its Sourse.

Illustrious Kaimacham, I bid thee Adieu, praying that thou and I may at last
meet in that Center of all Things, after our Various Epicycles and Excursions
in this Lower World.

Paris, 15th. of the 11th. Moon, of the Year 1659.
LETTER V. To the Same.
I Sent a Dispatch some Moons past to the Cadilesquer of Romeli, Guardian of
the Imperial Canons, Interpreter of the Laws of Equity; wherein I informed him
of the Advances that were made in order to a Peace between France and Spain.
Now I can assure thee, that Peace is concluded, and the Articles Signed on both
Sides by the Two Plenipotentiaries.

I need not repeat what I particularly related to that Grandee. My Letters are
all published in the Divan, and Registered. Yet it will not be unwelcome
perhaps to thee, to hear with what Niceness of Punctilio, these Infidel
Ministers met to accomplish an Affair, whereon depends the Interest and Honor
of their Respective Masters, the Happiness of the Two Kingdoms, and the General
Bias of all the West.

There is a little Island formed by the River Bidassoa, called the Isle of
Pheasants, through the Middle of which, a Line is drawn which exactly separates
the Territories of both Monarchs. This Place was agreed on for the Interview of
the Two Ministers. Each had his Bridge to enter the Island in that Part which
belonged to his Master. And over the Line of Separation was erected a large
Divan or Council-Room, to be entered only by Two Private Doors, one out of
Cardinal Mazarini's Lodgings, raised on the French Side of the Council-Room,
the other out of Don Louis D' Aro's Apartment, built on the Spanish Side.

Each of these Ministers was accompanied by several Princes, and Grandees of
the Court, and above Sixty other Persons of Quality, with a Guard of Four
Hundred Horse and Foot, to secure their Bridges, and the Place of Conference.
In a word, Things were managed with so much Moderation and good Success, that
the Marshall de Gramont was sent Ambassador Extraordinary into Spain, and
received at that Court with Infinite Civilities and Honor.

The Subject of his Negotiation, was to treat of a Match between the King his
Master, and the Infanta of Spain. His Conduct and Address were such, as soon
procured the Catholic King's Consent: And from that Time the Marshal
approached the Infanta with more than ordinary Submissions, esteeming her now
as the Queen of France. Soon after this, the Nuptial Contract, and the Peace
was mutually Signed, to the Immense Joy of the Subjects of both Sides, who were
very glad to exchange the Toils and Calamities of War, for the Sweets and
Profit of Peace.

It will be needless to insert here all the Articles on which they agreed. Two
will be worth the Knowledge of the Supreme Divan. And those are, the Release of
Charles Duke of Lorrain, on the Spanish King's Side; And on the Part of the
King of France, the Restoration of the Prince of Conde to the Free Possession
and Enjoyment of all his Estates, Honors, Dignities and Privileges, as the
First Prince of the Royal Blood, with the Government of the Provinces of
Bourgoigne and Bresse.

A little before these Articles were Signed, the Young Prince of Spain died
suddenly, not having seen Twelve Moons. I mentioned the Birth of this Royal
Infant in one of my Letters, and the Extraordinary Solemnities that were made
thereupon by the King of Spain, and his Ambassadors at Foreign Courts. These
Infidels appear in all things too passicnately affected with the Glories of our
Mortal State, which at the Height are but Transient Shadows, or something less
Considerable.

I Am amazed at the bold Rebellion of the Bassa of Aleppo, and that he should
endeavor to cheat the Empire with so stale an Imposture, as a Sham-Son of
Amurat. Yet it seems he made a Considerable Progress under this Pretense. Some
were glad of Novelty, others were frightened out of their Allegiance: Whilst
only a few served his Interest in pure Discontent and Hopes to amend their
Fortune. The Country People are generally oppressed by their Governors, and
'is no Wonder if they take up Arms for one that promises to deliver 'em from
their Calamities. This is the Usual Pretext of all Innovations in the State.
The Soldiers also are defrauded of their due Pay; and then they are ready to
Fight under the next General that brings most Money with him. Neither are there
wanting Malcontents among the Grandees at such Times, to foment and abett an
Insurrection.

All these Events proceed from the Ill Conduct of the Supreme Ministers, who
alone are Responsible for the Miscarriages of the State.

Illustrious Kaimacham, the Frame of the Ottoman Government is out of Order; I
wish Fate does not pull it in Pieces, as a Necessary Step to its Amendment.
Adieu

Paris, 2d. of the last Moon, of the Year 1659.
LETTER VI. To Hamet Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire.
I Wish thee all Imaginable Joy of thy New Dignity; yet question, whether thou
or thy Predecessor be the Happier Man. It Is a vast Honor indeed, and attended
with Immense Profit, to serve in this Station the most High, most Potent and
most Invincible Monarch on Earth. But at the same Time, there is Infinite Toil
and Fatigue in it, with Abundance of Perils. From all which the Fortunate Muzlu
is now delivered, and they are become thy Portion.

As for him, I cannot but esteem him Happy, in that he has got Permission to
retire to his Country-Seat, out of the Crowd and Noise of the City, and from
the Stifling Businesses of State, which choke the more Innocent and Natural
Delights of the Soul. Now he is fully restored to the Elements, and to himself;
whereas before, the perpetual Hurry of the Court, made him in Part a Stranger
to Both: For there a Man insensibly loses Acquaintance with his own most
Intimate Affections: His Spirit is alienated amidst the Multiplicity of his
Concerns; it is stretched on the Rack of Ten Thousand Cares and Inquietudes;
it is divided, shattered and rent in Pieces.

Besides, were he as free from these distracting Thoughts as a Santone; yet the
very Necessity of living always in a City, was enough to render him Miserable.
For I esteem such a Confinement, no better than a Prison at Large; and not far
from being buried Alive.

It Is true, Constantinople has the Advantage of all the Cities in the World,
for the Delightfulness of its Situation; the Houses being so pleasantly
intermixed with fair Gardens, and the Streets refreshed with cool Breezes from
the Sea. It looks at a Distance like a Town in a Wood; or one may term it, a
Forest composed of Minarets and Cypresses. The Terrasses afford agreeable
Prospects of the Neighboring Fields and Mountains: And it is pleasant to stand
on the Waterside, and view the Innumerable Variety of Boats and Vessels
Sailing from one Port to another, with all the other Divertisements on the Sea,
and the Beautiful Mixture of Palaces and Groves, Chioscs and Gardens,
Seraglio's and Villages which grace the Opposite Shore. O Queen of Cities,
Mistress of Kingdoms, Glory of Nations, Commandress and Sanctuary of the Whole
Earth! Thrice Happy should I count my self, if I might have the Favor to
reside within thy Venerable Walls, and exchange the polluted Society of
Infidels, for that of True Believers.

How often do I languish to see the Glittering Crescents, the Triumphant
Ensigns of the Ottomans, on the Tops of the Minarets in the Imperial City? How
often do I wish my self prostrate on the Carpets of the Sacred Mosques, in the
devout Assemblies of the Faithful, Adoring the Eternal in Perfection of
Sanctity? Whereas, now I Am forced to go into the Temples of Idolaters, to kneel
and bow down before Stocks and Statues, to join seemingly with Unbelievers, and
pray to that which has no Life, nor Sense, nor Power,

How do I envy the Blessed State of the meanest Artizan in Constantinople, who
daily feeds on the wholesome Pillaw of the East, and drinks the delectable
Sherbets, or Waters tinctured with the Rich Fruits of Greece? Whereas, I am
compelled to eat Meats forbidden by our Holy Prophet, and to render my Soul
Execrable by an Impure and Profane Diet, or I must Starve. For, these
Vncircumcis'd are more Abominable than Ravens and Vultures, to whom the most
filthy Carrion is a Dainty. And to cloak their Uncleanness they corrupt their
own Gospel, and forge a Toleration from the Messiah himself. As if that Holy
Prophet, who in every the least Tittle obeyed the Law of Moses, and set himself
as an Example for his Followers to imitate, could be guilty of Contradicting
those Divine Precepts, and running Counter to his own Practice, in recommending
Uncleanness and Libertinism. No: the Admirable Son of Mary, was the most
Temperate and Abstemious Man in the World, and both in his Words and Actions
preached up those Virtues to others; having often expressly declared to his
Disciples, That he came not to abolish the Law, but to refine and perfect it.

He was Circumcised on the Eighth Day after his Nativity, according to the
Injuntion of Moses, and the constant Practice of the Sons of Israel. In a Word,
through the whole Course of his Life, he never deviated from the Traditions of
his Fathers, the Seniors of the House of Jacob.

It Is true, he frequently argued against the many Trivial Superstitions of the
Pharisees, who evacuated the more Essential Points of the Law, by superinducing
a Number of Insignificant Ceremonies: But he never opened his Mouth against any
Positive Precept; such as were those which limited the Choice they were to make
of Meats, distinguishing the Impure from the Clean. Yet, the Christians delude
themselves with a False Belief, that he gave 'em a Dispensation to eat any
Thing without Caution or Reserve.

Hence it is, that they defile themselves with Swines-Flesh and Creeping
Things, and Blood is in all their Dishes. They scruple not to eat of that which
died of it self, and banquet as freely with what was knocked down or strangled,
as we would do with the Flesh of a Beast that was killed in Pronouncing the
Name of God. The Shambles here afford no other Provision but such as this; and
he that will not Eat that which is an Abomination to a Mussulman, must be
contented with Herbs. This I reckon as one of the Greatest of my Misfortunes,
and it makes me burn with Desire to return to Constantinople.

Yet, after all, I should think my self far more Happy, if I might have the
Liberty to spend the Rest of my Days in my Native Country: So great an Admirer
I am of a Rural Life, and Solitude. And it is for this Reason, I count thy
Predecessor a Happy Man, in having the Privilege of a sweet Retirement; where
he may take Breath from the vain Importunity and Bustle of Mortals.

In the mean Time, there is a Species of Felicity in thy Employment: And thou
can not be called Miserable, so long as thou acquittest thy self fairly, and
enjoyest the Favor of thy Sovereign.

I perceive by thy Letter, that thou art curious to know the Characters of
Foreign States, with the various Interests of Nazarene Princes; The Intrigues
of these Western Courts; their Overtures of Peace and War; And the different
Laws, Maxims and Customs by which the People are Governed. Thy Conversation
with Ambassadors at the Port, will furnish thee with Abundance of Useful
Remarks in this Kind: But, since thou requirest me to send my Observations, I
will hereafter obey thy Commands in Successive Letters. For, this is too large
a Theme for one Dispatch.

At present, thou may receive and Register for true News, That the Peace
between France and Spain has been Signed by both Kings, and Solemnly published
throughout their Territories, with Inexpressible Joy and Magnificence. It is
certain also, that the King of Sueden is dead, and the Duke of Orleance, Uncle
to the French King: Which has in some measure qualified the Mirth of the French
on this Occasion. Assuredly, Human Affairs are Equally checkered with Good and
Evil. Bliss comes not to us in Pure Unmixed Streams. Death keeps an even Pace,
and knocks as boldly at the Gates of Kings, as at the Cottages of the Meanest
Slaves.

It is the Part of a Wise Man to be always resigned to Heaven, and prepared for
the worst Events: As for the Best, they never come amiss.

Paris, 17th. of the 3d. Moon, of the Year 1660.
LETTER VII. To Dgnet Oglou.
SHall I converse with thee, as Horace used to do with his Friends over a Glass
of Generous Wine? Let us lay aside Masks for a while, and discourse with open
Souls. I believe thou have as equal a Veneration for our Holy Prophet, as I;
and have been Educated in all the Tendernesses of Piety, the Niceties of Divine
Love, as our Mollahs are pleased to call it. We have been both of us Careful to
rise before the Sun, and say our Oraisons every Morning in a Demy-Trance, that
is, Half a-sleep, and Half a-wake. This, no doubt, is a necessary Point of
Piety. And we have been no less sollicitous in observing the other Four Hours
of Prayer. Either of us would have counted it an Irreligious Negligence, if we
had seen a Piece of Paper on the Ground, and had not stooped to take it up,
with Reverence wiping off the Dirt, and kissing the Tabula Rasa, on which Men
use to write the Name of God. As if 'twere not an Equal Argument of Respect, to
secure from Profanation, Sticks, Stones, Rags, or any Thing whereon 'twere
possible to Engrave or Print the All-Mysterious Characters; Nay, or the very
Sands themselves, which, as some say, were the First Books on Earth. However,
if they were not the First, we are sure that in very Early Ages, Men used to
stamp their Memoirs, or draw them out in perceptible Figures on the Surface of
the Earth: Witness the Old Ship-wreck'd Philosopher, who being cast ashore in
an Unknown Land, soon traced out the Manners of the People, by certain
Mathematical Impressions which he found in the Sands: For, he concluded these
to be the very Footsteps of Humanity and Virtue. But, to return to the
Business of Religion: We have been Obedient to the Instructions of our Fathers
and Tutors; Zealous in observing every Punctilio of Traditional Piety. We have
Fasted, Prayed, Washed, and given Alms, at the Appointed Seasons, and in the
Manner prescribed by the Law. All these, I own, are Commendable Exercises. But,
methinks, they are not the Solid and Substantial Parts of True Religion. I hate
Hypocrisy, and the devout Wantonness of those who think to mock God with
Ceremonies and Empty Forms. It were much better to mix with the Idolatrous
Rites of Bacchus (if they deserve that Epithet) and rant in Honor of Eternal
Wine, talk Reputed Blasphemy, and reform the Model of the Universe; I say, I Would
choose to do all this, and more, rather than cheat my self with Empty Hopes of
gaining Paradise, for acting to the Life, the Shams of Pious Mimickry.

I would not have thee think, that what I have now said, proceeds from any
Contempt of the Eternal Majesty.

By those fair Heavens above, and all the Immortal Spangles of the Sky, I
swear, there is not a Faculty in Mahmut's Soul, which is not filled with
Gratitude and Veneration, which does not burn with Flames of Sacred Love to the
Adorable Fountain of All Things. In a word, I only strive to rescue my Friend
from the Attempts of Pious Frauds, the Religous Burlesques of our Mollah's and
Mufti's.

Believe, my Dear Dgnet, That there is a God, a First Cause, a Just Judge
presiding over the World: Believe also his Prophet, the Holy, the Beloved,
Mahomet, the Minion, as I may say, of the Omnipotent. But, have some Faoth also
for the Rest of his Messengers and Favorites. Let not Hali be thought of,
without some Inward Flurry's of Devotition. He was a Mussulman, and the Fourth
Cailiph, though his Followers be damned Heretics in our Divinity. Had Right
taken Place, perhaps he had been the First of the Vicars, but his Cause was
superseded by his Absence. Let him, and that, rest till the Final Inquisition:
And acknowledge, that I have said too little for a Schiai, and not too much for
a Sunni.

I know no Reason also, why we should not reverence the Memories of Mercury,
Orpheus, Cadmus, Melissus, Faunus, and the Rest of the Ancient Sages and
Lawgivers, who Instructed the Nations of the Earth in the Mysteries of
Religion, taught them to Adore One Supreme God, to believe the Immortality of
the Soul, and to practice Good Works.

What, though the Ceremonies of their Worship were different from ours, and
perhaps polluted with an Unjustifiable Adoration of Images? What though their
Altars reek'd with the Blood of slain Beasts, and sometimes smoked even with
Humane Sacrifices? These Barbarous Rites were not Instituted by the First
Oracles of Religion, Illuminated Souls, Nuncio's from God to this Lower World:
But, they were afterward super-induc'd through the Corruption of Times, the
Avarice of Priests, and the Superstition of the People. And for ought we know,
our own Historians have not been Impartial in relating the Truth.

There is an Innate Envy between People of different Families and Nations. Both
We and our Fathers that descend from Abraham by Ismael, and the Jews who are
his Posterity by Isaac, have been too favorable to the Offspring of that
Beloved of God. We generally entertain and cherish a Specific Pride on the
Score of our Illustrious Pedigree: Especially the Jews, who will not allow any
People on Earth to be their Equals, either in Point of Antiquity, the Nobility
of their Race, or the Innumerable Multitude of their Brethren. Whereas they
consider not, that they are dispersed up and down over the whole Earth, like
Sheep without a Shepherd, not permitted to possess a Cubit of Land which they
can call their own: Contemned, hated, and made a Proverbial Scoff among all
Nations: Infamous Vagabonds, Usurers, Slaves, and Pimps to other Men's
Pleasures: Men of no Fame or Character: Finally, in their present
Circumstances, the most Spurious and Ignoble of all the Sons of Adam, except
the Kafars of Ethiopia, who feed on the Guts and Dung of Beasts.

It Is true indeed, their Ancestors made a Considerable Figure in the World in
the Days of Solomon and other Victorious Kings, during their Possession of
Palestine. And yet in those very Times, they were often humbled and led away
into Captivity, by the more Fortunate Kings of Babylon, Persia, and Assyria,
and afterward subdued by the Grecians; till at last they were totally Ruined,
their Cities laid Waste, their Temple burnt to Ashes, and their Country quite
dispeopled by the Romans.

If we ascend yet higher to their Celebrated Migration out of Egypt, of which
their own Historians make such a Noise, and tell so many Fabulous Wonders. We
shall find a very Mean and Contemptible Character given of 'em by Egyptian
Writers, and those of other Nations, Men of as great Authority, as Josephus, or
any other Jewish Historian. Manethos a Priest of Egypt, calls 'em a Crew of
Leprous and Nasty People, and says, they were expelled the Country by Amenophis
then Reigning, and driven into Syria; their Captain being Moses, an Egyptian
Priest. A like Relation we have from Chaeremon, an Author of good Credit among
the Greeks, who tells us, That in the Reign of Amenophis, Two Hundred and Fifty
Thousand Lepers were forcibly banished out of Egypt, under the Conduct or
Tisithen and Peteseth (i. e.) Moses and Aaron. And though other Writers differ in
the Name of the King then Reigning in Egypt, yet all agree in asserting the
Israelites to be a Nasty Sort of People, overrun with Scabs and Infectious
Boils, and that they were esteemed the Scum and Filth of the Nation. Tacitus, a
Roman Writer, of Unquestionable Authority; adds, That Moses, one of the Exiled
Lepers, being a Man of Wit and Reputation among them, when he saw the Grief and
Confusion of his Brethren, bid them be of good Cheer, and neither trust the
Gods or Men of Egypt, but only confide in him, and obey his Counsel: For that
he was sent from Heaven to be their Conductor out of this Calamity, and to
Protect them from all their Enemies. Upon which the People not knowing what
Course to take, surrendered themselves wholly to his Disposal, from which Time
he became their Captain and Lawgiver, leading them through the Deserts of
Arabia, where they committed great Rapine and Spoil, putting Man, Woman and
Child to the Sword, burning their Cities, and laying all Things desolate. Dear
Dgnet, What could be said worse of a Company of Robbers and Banditi?

Moses is gone to Paradise, and when I mention his Name, it is with a profound
Reverence; for, he was the Greatest of the Ancient Prophets. Yet give me Leave
to have some Regard for my own Reason. He was but a Mortal as well as I; and
without doubt, was not exempt from Humane Frailties. He had the Advantage to be
Educated in the College of the Royal Priests at Memphis, which none of his
Nation could boast of besides himself. Suffer me to tell thee my Thoughts
frankly, and without Disguise. Magic and Astrology were the only Sciences then
in Vogue: And he being perfectly versed in all the Mysteries and Secrets of
Egyptian Wisdom, 'twas no hard Task for him to possess the Rude and Ignorant
Sont of Jacob, with a profound Attach and Veneration for his Person: And in
that distressed Condition, to mold their flexible Spirits to what Discipline he
pleased.

Suspect me not for an Infidel or an Atheist, because I discourse with this
Freedom. I have heard some of our Mollahs, say a great deal more in their
Private Conversation. And it is a superstitious Timerousness, not to be bold in
the Exercise of our Reason, which taught even the Prophet Moses himself, the
Methods of Conquest, and getting a Fame which should know no End.

I am not Ambitious, nor would I tempt thee to aspire at an undue Grandeur: But
let us not be less than our selves, that is, Men, There is no reason we should
be imposed upon by Fabulous Reports of Interress'd and Designing Writers: Or
that we should give Faith to every Credulous Fool, Doubtless, there were many
Nations established on Earth before the Israelites; and Great Prophets, who
were not of the Lineage of Abrahim. The Date of the Olympiads is much more
certain to a Day, nay, to an Hour, than the Hejira of the Israelites: since the
Former is Demonstrated by the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, interwoven by the
Gentile Historians, in the Body of their History; whereas the Latter is
defective in this Material Point, and is exposed to a Thousand Disputes among
Writers.

My Friend, let not thou and I trouble our selves with Needless Controversies,
or be Zealous for Things of no Moment; but Adoring One God, and believing what
is Rational, we may possess our Souls in Tranquillity and Peace.

Paris, 11th. of the 5th. Moon, of the Year 1660.
LETTER VIII. To the Kaimacham.
AT length, after a long Alienation, the Prince of Conde is restored to the
King's Favor: For which, he is obliged to the King of Spain. I have already
intimated in one of my Letters, That this was agreed on in the Treaty of Peace
between these Two Crowns, as an Article Equivalent to that of the Duke of
Lorrain's Release, solicited by the King of France. Now it is put in Execution,
and the Rebel Prince is received with Abundance of Caresses, by the King,
Queen Mother, Cardinal Mazarini, and the whole Court.

He is counted the Valiantest Man of this Age; and was so pronounced long ago
by the Marshall Turenne, who is a Soldier of no mean Character, both for his
Judgment and Courage. He was once extremely beloved by all the French. But his
Wildness and Inconstancy, with the Destructive Effects of the Civil Wars which
he raised, changed their Affections for a while into Indifference, Coldness,
and Ill Will. But now all is well again.

He and his Brother the Prince of Conti, seldom agreed, being often the Heads
of Contrary Parties, during the Minority of this King. And the Younger being
crump-Shoulder'd, Conde used to be a little Sarcastick upon him, threatening to
shave his uncourtly Back into the Fashion with his Sword.

It is certain, the Prince of Conde was very wild and profuse when Young, but
now he begins to take soberer Measures. During his Father's Life, he was called
the Duke of Enguien. And to reflect on the Parsimony of the Old Prince, he used
to take several Handfuls of Gold with one Hand, and fill a Purse, saying, This
is my Father's Practice. Then he would turn the Purse up-side down with the other
Hand, and scattering the Gold among his Favorites, would add, This is my
Humor.

Once as he was passing on Foot through a Town in France, under his Father's
Government; the Chief Magistrate of the Place, who was an Old Man, met him and
begun to make an Oration with the best Rhetoric he could. But the Prince being
in a Frolicksom Humor, took Advantage of a very low Conge the Old Gentleman
made him, and leaped over his Head, and stood still behind him. The Magistrate
not taking any Notice of this wild Prank, turned very gravely about, and
addressed himself with a new Obeisance, but not so low as the Former. However,
the Nimble Prince caught him upon the Half-Bent, and setting his Hands on the
Old Monsieur's Shoulders, whipped over again the second Time; Which quite spoiled
his intended Speech, to the great Diversion of all the Spectators.

In his Youth he was much addicted to Women, and took a peculiar Delight in
debauching Nuns: Which occasioned the Queen Mother to reflect on him something
Satyrically once, when he informed her that the Suisse Soldiers were guilty of
great Disorders, some of them getting into the Nunneries, and violating the
Chastity of those Consecrated Females. For the Queen replied, If you had told
me they broke into the Wine-Cellars, I would believe you; for the Suisses are
all known Drunkards. But as for Amors with Nuns, none is so likely to make 'em
as the Duke of Enguien.

However, all that I have said, hinders not but that he is now a Prudent Man, a
good General, and Fortunate in recovering his Sovereign's Favor.

In a Word, this Court is so overjoyed at the Marriage of their King with the
Infanta of Spain, that they have no Room left for peevish Resentments. All
Crimes are forgiven. And the Devil himself would be welcome at the Wedding,
provided he would be debonair, and good Company.

The Nuptials are only Celebrated by Proxy as yet. But here are vast
Preparations making for the completing the Ceremony.

What the Issue of this Marriage and Peace will be, it is not easy to divine:
But I doubt, the Christians are hatching Evil against the Ottoman Port, in
Regard all the Princes in Europe, are coming to an Agreement.

Illustrious Kaimacham, Let not this Intimation pass away as a Dream. For I
tell thee again, these Infidels are plotting of Mischief.

Paris, 1st. of the 7th. Moon, of the Year 1660.
LETTER IX. To the same.
I Believe thou will now receive from me the earliest News of a Mighty Change,
a Surprising Revolution in the English Government. Know then, that he whom I
have so often mentioned under the Title of King of the Scots in my Former
Letters, the Eldest Son and Rightful Heir of the British Kingdoms' Charles II.
is restored to the Throne of his Father's, without Violence or Bloodshed, by
the Unanimous Consent, and Earnest Desire of his Subjects.

This Young Prince has been an Exile for Twelve Years in Foreign Courts, and
has heard of as many several Alterations in the State of his Dominions, during
his Absence; every Change producing a New Form of Government. The Rebels had
run over all Aristotle's Politics, and the Various Models of Plato and other
Philosophers, who treated of Commonwealths, to find out such Patterns as best
suited with the Necessities and Genius of that Nation. There is not a Species
of Aristocracy, Democracy and Oligarchy, which they did not put in Practice to
support the Frame of that Government, whose Basis they had removed; for it was
founded on a Monarchy of a long and Hereditary Descent. And therefore all their
most Artificial Contrivances were Ineffectual, and they might as well have
endeavored to make Buttresses for a Castle in the Air. In a Word, the English
found themselves so disjointed and weakened by Civil Wars, Taxes, and the other
Usual Effects of Usurpation and Tyranny, that they had no other Way left to
save their Nation from utter Ruin, but by bringing their Lawful King back
again, who is the Angular Stone whereon all their Welfare and Interest is built.

There is one Thing Remarkable in this Turn of English Affairs, That their
Sovereign landed and made his Triumphant Entry into that Island, on the
Anniversary Day of his Birth. Which puts me in Mind of what is Generally
discoursed here at Paris; That on the Day of his Nativity, there was seen a
Bright Star in the Heavens, when the Sun was just above the Meridian. From
hence the Astrologers of those Times predicted great Things concerning him. And
those of the Present Age, who have seen his Fortunate Return to his Kingdoms,
presage yet greater Events to come.

God only knows what Embryo's are in the Womb of Futurity; and we Mussulmans
have no Reason to rejoice at the Grandeur of any of these Infidel Princes. Yet
such a Sign as that of a Star appearing at Noonday, just over the Place where
a Mighty Queen was in Labor with a Prince, has Something in it Extraordinary,
and full of Promising Circumstances. It was an Appearance of this Nature which
rendered the Birth of the Messiah so Illustrious, though otherwise obscure
enough; when the Eastern Magi, directed by such a Star, came and found Mary the
Mother of Jesus in a Stable, and the Infant-Prophet lying in a Manger, instead
of a Cradle. So we are told, That Eclipses of the Sun portend the Misfortune or
Death of Great Personages; and that all other Prodigies, whether in Heaven or
Earth, have their proper Signification.

But whether these Observations be true or no, it is certain this late banished
Prince, is returned with Abundance of Splendour and Advantage to his Native
Royal Possessions. And I thought it would be a Grand Neglect in me, to let one
Post-Day pass, before I gave thee an Account of a Revolution so astonishing to
all Europe, and which is like to give a New Turn to the Affairs of most
Christian Princes and States,

Besides, I know there is an Ambassador from England, residing at the August
Port; which determines the Quarrels of all the Nations on Earth. There are also
Abundance of English Merchants in the Imperial City. They may have Feuds among
one another. The Interest of some of them is joined with that of the English
Rebels; others are for their King. Therefore knowing of his Restoration, thou will be better able to adjust all Matters of this Nature, according to Reason,
Equity, and the Honor of the Majestic Port. For this King makes already a
greater Figure than any of his Progenitors, and therefore his Friendship is not
to be contemned.

The Care of these Things rests on thee, who art the Vicars Vicar of the
Vicegerent of God.

Paris, 3d. of the 7th. Moon, of the Year 1660.
LETTER X. To Mehemet, an Exiled Eunuch, at Caire in Egypt.
OH that I were in one of the Pyramids near the City where thou residest, shut
up in Tremendous Darkness, in the most Obscure and Horrible Vault of the Royal
Pile! That I might converse with the Ghosts of Egyptian Kings, hugg Demons in
my Arms, and run the Gerit with Hobgoblins and all the Spirits of the Night
round the Tomb of Cheops, or up and down the dismal Galleries, or in the Nest
of Bats, Screech-Owls, Harpies, and the rest of the Winged Monsters, the
Excrementitious Spawn of Humane Souls, or at least the Superfetation of pickled
Carcasses, reposited there for Eternal Mummies, some of them before Noah's
Flood, and the Rest after, if the Story be true. God knows whether it be or no:
That Is Nothing to me: But I have a strong Inclination to try what I can find in
those Antique Monuments, after all the Search of so many Travelers. I have a
Specific Sort of Melancholy upon me, which cannot be vented any other Way,
than by keeping Company with the Dead, or having Ten Hundred Thousand ugly
rampant Spirits dancing their Infernal Measures about me, and grinning like
Babboons of Hell. Oh, God! How 'twould set me a Laughing? An Entertainment of
this Nature would ease my Spleen, and restore me to a Good Humor.

Are there no Beings extant, but those which are every Day exposed to our
Senses? Or, is Nature Poorer than the Imagination of a Mortal, which can form
the Idea's of an Infinity of Creatures that he never saw? I am cloyed with the
Crambe of Objects and Joys which these Narrow Elements afford, and therefore
would fain grope out some New and Untried World, to find Refreshment in.

But oh, my Mehemet, when I look toward the Heavens, and behold the Moon and
Stars; when my Eye is lost in the Boundless Firmament, and my Soul can find no
Limits to the Universe; then I sink into my self, full of Humility and
Confusion, because I have injuriously reproached the Omnipotent, and cast
Obloquies on his Works. For all Things appear admirably Beautiful and Perfect,
and the least Atome is large enough to afford Apartments for a Thousand Souls.
Every Thing in Nature is pregnant and full of pleasing Wonders: Yet I cannot be
free from these Hypochondriack Fits at certain Seasons. I am sometimes the
saddest and most Melancholy Man in the World. I take all things by the wrong
Handle, look on them through false Optics, and yet persuade my self I am in
the Right, and see them in their true Complexion. Such is the Fatal Sophistry
of this black and sullen Passion: It takes away the Gust and Relish of the
sweetest Enjoyments. And if the Contagion could possibly find Admittance among
the Blessed Above; surely 'twould renber their Paradise a Hell, and would
afford some Ground for the Fiction of the Ancient Poets, who brought up the Use
of Nepenthe among the Gods, to appease their Choler, and put 'em in a good
Humor.

I know not what that Drink was: But I tell thee, my Nepenthe is a Glass of
good Languedoc Wine, which is as Rich, and far more Delicious than the Wines of
Tenedos and Mitylene. I once could boast of another Method to subdue my
Melancholy, by giving Battle to my Thoughts in open Field; but now I am fain to
have Recourse to Stratagems and Ambuscades, trepanning the ugly, hideous
Monsters out of their strong Retrenchments and Fastnesses in the Spleen, by
Generous Frolicks with Wine, Women and Music. I bury all Care in profound
Sleep, the Effect of brisk and free Drinking. And then I awake as merry as a
Lark; as young as if I Would been in Medea's Cauldron.

What signifies it to pretend Sanctity in our Words and Exterior Carriage,
whilst at the same Time we are ready to burst with Malice, Pride, Ambition,
Avarice, and a Thousand more Vices? Whereas Wine seasonably drank, cures all
these Distempers of the Soul, makes a Miser Liberal, a Cruel Man Tender, a
Spightful Fellow Kind, melts Stiff and Haughty Spirits into a Wonderful
Softness and Complaisance. In fine, it makes a Lamb of a Lion, and changes a
Vultur to a Dove, purifying and transforming Souls into a Temper wholly Divine.

Why then should we be tied to Laws of Morality, never practiced by those who
made them? All the Philosophers were boon Companions, and our Holy Prophet
himself privately drank the Juice of the Grape. Our Emperors and Grandees do
the same. The only Reason why they forbid it to their Subjects, is, lest they
should grow too Wise, and strive to shake off the Yoke: For Wine elevates the
Spirits, emboldens the Heart, and transforms a Slave to a Lord in his own
Conceit. For want of this Liquor, all Nations where the Vine grows not, have
found out one Beverage or another, as efficacious to relieve Melancholy, and
drive away Sorrow from the Heart. The Chinese make Wine of Rice. In my Country
they have another Intoxicating Drink, compounded with certain Roots. The same
is used in some Parts of Persia. In these Western Provinces, they brew diverse
Sorts of Strong Liquors of Wheat, Barley, Honey, Molossa's and other
Ingredients. And they make Wine of Apples, Pears, Cherries, Currants, and most
Fruits that grow. I tell thee, my Friend, there is no living, unless we
sometimes give Nature a New Ferment to rouse her from her Lees.

Yet let us practice a due Mediocrity, remembering that God gave us these Things
for our Health and Refreshment, and not for our Bane. In a Word, Mehemet, let
us be Merry and Wise.

Paris, 26th. of the 8th. Moon, of the Year 1660.
LETTER XI. To Hamet, Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire.
I Have taken some Pains; turned over a great many Memoirs of Old Courtiers,
and conversed with not a few now living, who can remember the Days of Henry IV.
that so I may comply with thy order, and oblige thee with some Remarks on the
Life of that Prince, who though he had but a little Body, yet like another
Alexander, had so vast a Soul, and performed such illustrious Actions, as
deservedly fastened on him the Title of Great, and made him be esteemed the
Arbiter of all Europe.

It is observed of him, that he was always Unfortunate in his Wives; yet they
relate a pretty Passage of his First Wife, Margaret of Valois, which seems to
contradict that Remark.

He was then a Protestant, and only King of Navarre, when the Famous Massacre
of Paris was committed, with Design to Murder him among the Rest of his
Religion. But being aware of this, when he heard the Assassins making toward
his Chamber, where he sat with the Queen, he hid himself under her Garments as
she sat in a Chair. The Villains rushing in, asked for the King. She with a
great Assurance of Spirit, told 'em, He went out from her in a Passion. They
seeming satisfied, went away without doing any farther Hurt. Which occasioned a
Common Jest, That Queen Margaret 's Smock, saved King Henry 's Life.

This Woman was called the Minerva and Venus of France, on the Score of her
Learning and Amors, never denying any Thing to her Lovers, and being seldom
without Men of Science in her Company. In a Word, King Henry looked on himself
as a Noted Cuckold, and so gave her a Bill of Divorce. Her own Mother Katharine
de Medicis, was called the Fourth Fury of Hell.

It is Recorded of this Lady, that she practiced much with Wizards and
Magicians, who in an Enchanted Glass, showed her who should Reign in France for
the Time to come. First appeared this Henry IV. then Lewis XIII. next Lewis
XIV. and after him a Pack of Jesuits, who should abolish the Monarchy, and
govern the Nation themselves. This Glass is to be seen in the King's Palace to
this Day.

As for Henry IV's Second Wife, it is said he never enjoyed a Peaceable Hour
with her, but when she was asleep. They often fought together, and she spared
not sometimes to Beat and Scratch him even in his Bed, so that he has been
forced to quit the Field, and take Sanctuary in another Chamber. This Prince
was taxed with Ingratitude toward his most Faithful Servants, and want of
Liberality to all. It was a Common Saying of his Predecessor Henry III. That he
shared his Kingdom with his Loyal Servants and Friends. But Henry IV. loved not
to part with any Thing which he could handsomely keep.

Yet he was very obliging to his Mistresses, and his Passion for them carried
him into many Irregularities. He was so deeply enamored of one, that to enjoy
her he signed a Promise of Marriage to her with his own Blood; which, one of
his Favorites seeing, tore the Paper in Pieces. The King being incensed at
that, swore by the Belly of St. Gris, an ordinary Oath with him, that this
Person was mad. Yes, replied he, but I wish I were the only Madman in the
Kingdom. Thereby reflecting on the King's Extravagancy. Another Time he gave
Fifty Thousand Crowns, for one Night's Enjoyment of a Lady.

I have many Years ago spoke of the Death of this Prince, in my Letters to the
Ministers of the Port. Now I will acquaint thee with one Circumstance, to which
I was then a Stranger.

It happened, that the Viceroy of Navarre, was walking with several Nobles in
the Meadows of Bearn, a Town under his Jurisdiction, washed by the River Pau.
When on a sudden all the Cows, (of which there was a great Number in those
Fields) ran violently into the River, and were there drowned. The Viceroy
being astonished at this, as at a Prodigy, writ down the Day and Hour when it
happened, which proved exactly the very same Time to a Minute, when Henry IV.
was stabbed in his Coach by Ravaillac; as the Viceroy was soon certify'd by
Dispatches which he received from the Court, containing Intelligence of that
Tragedy.

All this may be pure Chance, for ought I know, but there are Abundance of
Symptoms of something else. As for Man, he is wholly a Stranger to himself, and
the Secret Operations of his own Soul are hid from him. How then can he know
the Natures of other Things, or be familiarly acquainted with the Occult
Dispositions of Beasts? The least Worm or Insect, baffles our severest
Scrutiny, and we are lost in the Speculation of their Embryo's. The most Silent
and Inanimate Beings, proclaim aloud the Folly of our boasted Science: Every
Atom in Nature, ridicules our best Philosophy. Who then will pretend to
unriddle the more Uncommon Mysteries of Providence, or trace the Footsteps of
Eternal Destiny? Historians speak variously of this Parricide. Some say, the
Villain was approved of at the Court of Rome, and that he was there ranked in
the Number of Martyrs. It Is certain, he under went as horrible a Death, as the
Wit of Man could invent, to punish his matchless Treason. And it seems, the
Judges that examined him, were either afraid, or ashamed to divulge what they
heard from his Mouth: Obliging themselves by an Oath to Eternal Secrecy.
Ravaillac himself owned, that he had Twice before attempted to kill the King,
but was thrust back by one of his Nobles, who suspected some ill Designs in his
Looks.

Sage Hamet, may God preserve our Glorious Sultan from the Rage of Mutineers,
from a Jewish Physician, and from the Common Disasters of Humane Life. And the
Care of his Attendants will prevent the sudden Strokes of a desperate Assassin.

Paris, 26th. of the 8th. Moon, of the Year 1660.
LETTER XII. To Mustapha, Berber Aga.
THis City is now as full of Noise and Lights, as some Cities of Asia are at an
Eclipse of the Moon, or as Constantinople is during the Fast of Ramezan. It Is
near Midnight, and yet here is such a Medley of Noises compounded of the loud
Acclamations of Mortals, the Ringing of Bells, Beat of Drums, Sound of
Trumpets, and other Musical Instruments, whith the Thunder of Sky-Rockets,
Guns, and other Fireworks, that a Body would think ones self in a Battle or a
Siege.

The Occasion of all this, is the public Entry of the New-Married King and
Queen, it being the First Time they have seen Paris since the Nuptials. Neither
my Tongue or Pen are able to express to the Life, the Inimitable Pomp and
Magnificence that have appeared to Day in the Royal Train, and in the
Preparations which the City made to receive them. The Luster of Silver, Gold
and Precious Stones, dazzled ones Eyes from all Parts; and I could have wished
for a Mussulman Army, to have been at the Plunder of such Immense Riches. Yet
there were Forty Thousand of the Citizens, and King's Guards in Arms, to
augment the Glory of the Day.

The Monarch with his Royal Spouse, appeared seated on a Majestic Throne, all
glittering with Gold and Diamonds. It was raised on High, and there were
several Steps or Degrees to ascend up to it. On these were placed the Princes
of the Blood, the Dukes and Peers of the Realm, with other Grandees and Nobles,
as also Princesses, Dutchesses and Ladies of the First Quality.

'Twas at the Foot of this Throne, there were made Innumerable Speeches, and
Congratulatory Addresses by the Priests and Monks of all Orders, by the
Students in the Academy, and by the several Companies of Tradesmen. But, that
which was most surprising, a certain strange Maid uttered several Orations in
Latin, Greek, French and Spanish, wherein she magnified the King's Heroic
Undertakings, his wonderful Successes, great Wisdom and Courage, with other
Virtues, which she made the Subject of her Panegyric. She also no less
extolled the Queen's Matchless Beauty, the Greatness of her Birth, the Royal
Endowments of her Mind; And concluded with restecting on the Joy of all Europe,
for this Illustrious Match, and Alliance of Two the most Potent Crowns in
Christendom.

She delivered herself with such an Incomparable Grace and Modesty, as drew the
Eyes and Ears of all that were present. And it is said, the King was extremly
pleased with her; much more the Queen, who had never before encountered so
Learned a Female.

The French Ladies have for many Years applied themselves to the Study of
Languages and Philosophy. But it is not so in Spain, where the Men are too
Rigorous to the Fair to allow 'em that Liberty. They are as morose to Women, as
the Moors, from whom a great Part of that Nation are said to descend. Every
Country in Europe, has suffered mighty Changes, by the Incursions nd Conquests
of the Moors, Goths, Huns and Vandals. So that it is difficult to trace the
Original of any People in such a Hotch-Potch of Foreign Blood. Neither have
they any Care of their Genealogies, as we Arabians have in the East.

Illustrious Aga, though it signifies Nothing to spring of a Noble Stock, unless
we inherit the Virtues of our Ancestors, as well as their Splendid Titles and
Estates: Yet it is both profitable and pleasant to have by us a Register of our
Families, that reading their Characters and Heroic Actions, we may imitate
their Examples, and add to the Glory of the Tribe from which we descend.

Paris, 26th. of the 8th. Moon, of the Year 1660.
LETTER XIII. To Dgnet Oglou.
I Know not whether I shall finish the Letter I begin; or, if I do, whether it
will be above Ground, or in the Bowels of the Earth. However, I cannot forbear
writing to thee, my Dear Friend, though both the Paper and I, with the House
wherein I lodge, and all this Beautiful City, may, for ought I know, be
transported to another Region before Morning. Nay, it is possible this very Hour
may People Elyzium with a New Colony from France, and Paris may descend with
all her Magnificent Palaces to the Shades below, changing the Banks of the
River Seyne, for those of Acheron or Styx, and the Refreshing Airs of
Champagne, for the Choking Sulphurs of Hell. In a Word, we have felt the
Menaces of a Terrible Earthquake this Evening, but as yet have suffered no
Damage.

When I lived in Asia, an Earthquake was almost as Common as the Yearly
Revolutions of Summer and Winter: And we took as little Notice of it, as we did
of Lightning, Hail or Rain. Besides, one Mussulman encouraged another, and the
General Faith of True Believers confirmed us all, That we ought to be resigned
to God, and to the Appointments of Eternal Destiny, whether it were for
Pleasure or Pain, Good or Evil, Life or Death. But now I have been so long
disused to these Convulsions of the Globe, (for I have not felt one above these
Two and Twenty Years) and am also separated from the Society of the Faithful;
that I am become like the rest of the World, and even like these Infidels,
Timorous, astonished, void of Reason, and of little or no Faith.

My Mind at first, staggered as much as my Body, when I was walking cross my
Chamber, and felt the Floor rock under me, with that Singular Kind of Motion,
which no Humane Art or Force can imitate. I soon concluded 'twas an Earthquake,
but knew not how to bear that Thought with Indifference. Death is familiar to
me in any other Figure, but that of being so surprizingly buried alive. It
appeared horrible to sink on a sudden into an Unknown Grave, I knew not
whither: Perhaps I might fall into some Dark Lake of Water; or it may be, I
might be drenched in a River of Fire, or be dashed on a Rock: For, who can tell
the Disposition of the Caverns below, or what Sort of Apartments he shall find
under the Surface of the Earth? We walk on the Battlements of a Mavelous
Structure, a Globe full of Tremendous Secrets. And whether Nature or Destiny,
Providence or Chance, occasion the Ruptures that we find are made in diverse
Parts of the Earth, it matters not much, so long as we are in Danger of
tumbling in. Such a terrible Fall, would put the best Philosopher in the World
out of Humor, and Spoil all his Reasoning. I Am sure, 'twould vex me thus in a
Trice to be plundered of my Thoughts. Which makes me either wonder at the
Vanity of Empedocles, if he threw himself into the flaming Chasm of Mount
Aetna, only for the Sake of being esteemed a God, (as the common Report is);
or, gives me Reason to conclude, he had some other End in his Venturous Leap:
Since it is not probable, that empty Fame could be esteemed by that Great Sage,
as his Final Happiness. A much easier way had Aristotle, who, disgusted at his
Ignorance of the Flux and Reflux of the Sea, threw himself in, to put an End to
his Disquisitions, if the Story be true. But, I can hardly believe the
Stagyrite was such a Fool. I guess of other Men, according to the Experience I
have of my self. I am as little sollicitous about Death as any Man; yet I
should be unwilling to hurl my self out of the World headlong, without a Firm
or a Tefta, I love New Experiments, but am not very fond of such as take from
us irrecoverably the means of trying any more.

We had News here of an Earthquake which has overthrown Part of the Pyrenaean
Mountains, some Days before this happened at Paris; but few regarded it.
Calamities at a Distance frighten Nobody. Yet, those which we feel, put us all
in Tears. For my Part, it has this Effect on me, that I am improved in my
Carelessness, and become fearful of Nothing. And, I think, there is Reason on
my Side, since all my Care, Apprehension and Forecast, can never defend me from
the Underminings of the Omnipotent.

Paris, 15th. of the 11th. Moon, of the Year 1660.
LETTER XIV. To Hamet Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire.
LET not the Distance of Time between my Letters, prompt thee to conclude, I
forget my Duty; or that I am careless to oblige so Illustrious a Friend. I have
many Obligations to discharge; and therefore endeavor to husband my Hours to
the best Advantage, and so to divide my Dispatches, That the Grand Signior may
be served, the Divan informed of all Material Emergencies, and the Expectations
of each Minister gratified.

As to the Reign of Lewis XIII. It was shared successively between the Marshal
D' Ancre, the Duke of Luines, and Cardinal Richlieu, The First was the
Queen-Mother's Favorite; the Second was the King's; As for the Third, he was
absolute Master both of King, Queen and Kingdom.

During the King's Minority indeed, Queen Mary de Medicis, the Relict of Henry
IV. took the Regency into her own Hands, and managed Things in an Arbitrary
Manner. But the Princes of the Blood, with other Grandees, not able to brook
the Government of a Woman, conspired against her. Among these were the Prince
of Conde, Father to the present Prince, and the Duke of Bovillon. The Former
was a Bold Man, and durst do any Thing that was Brave: The Latter was a Cunning
Statesman.

They Caball'd not so privately, but the Queen Mother was acquainted with their
Meetings, and the Duke of Bovillon was the First who knew his Party was
betrayed. This Intelligence was brought him from assured Hands, whilst he was
sitting with the Prince of Conde, and other Nobles at the Place of their
Private Rendezvous. Whereupon, he acquainted them with it, exhorting all to
abscond immediately, lest they should be seized on the Spot. But they
retorting, That the Queen would not venture on an Action of such dubious
Consequence; He started up and took his Leave of 'em, with these Words: "My
Lords, you may follow your own Counsel. I Will immediately to Horse, and escape
to Sedan, in my Stockings: Where, if they make me wear out a Pair, as an Exile;
by Heavens, I Will make them wear a Thousand Pair of Boots."

His Words came to pass, and the Effect was a diminutive Civil War; when the
Queen was forced to raise an Army, to reduce this Prince to Obedience, the Rest
of his Party being Imprisoned, as soon as she heard of his Flight.

Whilst these Disturbances lasted, the Moors were expelled out of Spain, to the
Number of Six Hundred Thousand. Part of those who lived toward the Maritime
Coasts, went by Sea into Africa. The Rest, whose Residence was farther within
Land, sought a Passage over the Pyrenaean Mountains, and so through the
Southern Provinces of France; offering a Ducat a Head to the Viceroy of
Navarre, for their safe Conduct. He, out of Curiosity coming to see these
Travelers, and beholding 'em ragged and almost naked, with Visages like
Ghosts; took Pity on them, and gave 'em Liberty of Passage gratis: Saying, "God
forbid I should extort so much Money from these miserable Wretches, who are
abandoned to the wide World."

But, it seems, his Commpassion was needless. For these Mussulmans were too
cunning for him, having their Squalid, torn Garments, quilted all over with
Gold and Precious Stones. Which occasioned all People to ridicule the
Viceroy's Easiness, and to call him the Friend the Gibeonites.

I should appear too Partial in reflecting Satyrically on this Prince, whose
Generosity deserves Praise: Yet I cannot but smile at the Craft of the Moors,
whereby they not only escaped paying the accustomed Tribute of Passengers, but
also blinded these Infidels, and took from 'em the Suspicion of greater Riches;
which if they had once known, perhaps not a Moor should have carried a Piece of
Money along with him into Africa.

This Passage seemed worthy of thy Knowledge, since it in Part resembles the
Famous Departure of the Israelites out of Egypt, though it comes short of the
Robbery and Plunder which they committed on the Inhabitants, the Day before
they began their Journey. However, this Story may afford thee some
Divertisement.

As to the Marshal D' Ancre, the Queen's Favorite; in his Life and Death, he
was compared to Sejanus, being qualified with the like Virtues and Vices, and
having much the same Fortune; his Body after having been dragged about the
Streets by the Rabble, was at last torn in Pieces.

If thou would know, how the Duke of Luines obtained the King's Favor, it
was by Ingratitude. For, when he and his Brother were first brought to Court,
they were both so poor, that they had but one Cloak between 'em; and for that
Reason could not go abroad together. Yet being recommended to the King by a
certain Nobleman for excellent Falkners, they were received into Favor. But
they abused the Kindness of their Patron; and insinuating malicious Things into
the King's Ear, against the Nobleman and his Family, caused him to be banished
from the Court. After which they managed all Things.

Then succeeded Cardinal Richlieu in the Chief Ministry; of whom I have said a
great Deal in my Former Letters to the Grandees of the Port, and thou will find
them in the Register. I will now add, what I never mentioned before; That he
was very Ambitious to be thought a good Judge of Verse. He gave to one Poet, for
a Witty Conceit on his Coat of Arms, Two Thousand Sequins, though 'twas but a
Verse of Seven Words. Another he promoted to an Ecclesiastic Dignity, worth a
Thousand a Year, for comparing him to the Primum Mobile. But he caused a Third
to be kicked out of Doors, for his Obstinacy in denying to alter a Word of his
Poem, which the Cardinal disliked.

This Minister was very Revengeful, and amongst other Effects of his Temper,
none was more taken Notice of, or reflected on, than the Death of Monsieur de
Thou, whom the Cardinal cut off for no other Reason, but because his Father in
a General History which he wrote, had represented one of Richlieu's Ancestors,
under a very Ignominious and Abominable Figure. That Historian was the Renowned
Thuanus, of whom, I suppose, thou have heard.

As to King Lewis XIII. himself, he was esteemed a great Dissembler; accustomed
to caress those with more than ordinary Endearments, whom he designed suddenly
to ruin: Whence it grew to a Proverb in his Time at the French Court, when
they saw any Nobleman smiled on, to say, His Business is done. It cannot be
denied that this Prince had a Great Spirit, and some Wisdom; yet he was
observed to take Delight in many petty Actions unbecoming Royal Majesty. He
would spend much of his Time in Painting, and send for the most Famous Masters
in that Art, to view his Works. An equal Inclination he showed to Music. And
sometimes he was ambitious to be thought a good Cook. Once he made a Great
Pasty with his own Hands, filling it with Venison only fit for the Mouths of
Infidels, viz. The Flesh of Dogs, Wolves and Foxes, with other Abominable
Animals, of which it is not lawful for a True Believer to taste. This he caused
to be served up to Table at a Feast which he made to some of his Courtiers, who
to Honor the King's Handywork, eat greedily of the Horrid Dish, and highly
praised his Skill; whilst he diverted himself with laughing at them. He had
many other such Freaks as these, which rendered him Contemptible and Ridiculous
to the Grandees of his Kingdom. In a Word, he was more reverenced Abroad, than
at Home. And this was owing to the Conduct of Cardinal Richlieu; who was justly
esteemed the very Genius of France.

Illustrious Minister, all that I have said of this Monarch, speaks him but a
Man: And no body is Wise at all Times. But the Follies of Princes are more
Conspicuous, than those of meaner Persons.

Paris, 5th. of the 12th. Moon, of the Year 1660.
LETTER XV. To Mahummed in the Desert.
MAY the Angel of Peace pitch his Pavilion at the Entrance of that Blessed Cave
where thou residest. May thy Soul feel Calm and Undisturbed Joys, and for ever
repose in Divine Tranquillity; Whilst the Rest of the World are molested with
Perpetual Cares and Fears, Broils and Enmities, Passions within, and Furies
without: In a word, whilst they are always in Danger of one another, of
themselves, and of the Elements which compound their Nature.

O Man highly beloved of God, Favorite of the Angels, Care of Heaven, and the
singular Darling of Providence. The Palm of an Almighty Hand is extended under
thee when thou sit down or walk, always ready to snatch thee up from the
Calamities which threaten this Lower World, and lift thee to Paradise, where
the Assembly of the Just wait for thy Presence.

There has been an Earthquake lately in these Parts, which has put all France
into a great Consternation, astonished every Body, and increased the
Thoughtfulness of the Wise. The First Effects of it were felt by the
Inhabitants of the Pyrenees, which are certain Mountains dividing France and
Spain. There it did great Mischief, overwhelming some Medicinal Baths, many
Houses, and destroying Hundreds of People. Only one Mosque or Church, which
sunk into the Caverns below, was thrown up again, and stands very Firm, but in
another Place. This is looked upon as a great Miracle, especially by the
French, who, for ought I know, may censure Partially, favoring their own
Interest; in regard this Church has been disputed between them and the
Spaniards, each Nation claiming Right to it, as standing before exactly on the
Frontier Line. But now their Quarrel is uncontestably decided; For it is removed
by this Convulsion of the Globe, near half a League from its Former Situation,
which is so far within the acknowledged Limits of France. This the French
Priests magnify, as an apparent Proof of the Justice of their Pretensions, and
the People seem very willing to believe it.

As for me, I have another Opinion of Earthquakes, and am persuded, that they
are as Natural as the Winds, which no Man knows how to draw into any Party or
Faction, unless we believe the Stories of the Lapland Witches. I am persuaded,
that this Globe is much more Ancient than the Generality of Mankind imagine it
to be: That it has undergone various Changes by the Predominance of Fire and
Water: And that it is now hastening toward another Revolution. I believe the
Central Fire has eaten its Way almost to the Surface, and kindled all the Mines
of Sulphur, and other Inflammable Matter, which it meets with in its Circular
Ascent. These corroding and daily consuming their own Vaults, approaching also
sometimes too near the vast Receptacles of Subterranean Waters which lie nearer
the Surface, over-heat those Lakes; which being thus rarefied into Vapors, and
pent up in the Hollow of the Globe, strive to break forth with Immense
Violence, which causes that Heaving and Rocking of the Superficies, that so
terrifies Mortals. But then the Cause is very deep and far from us. For where
the Surface is shallow, in such Passions of the Globe, the Earth commonly
breaks and tumbles in, with whatsoever is upon it. Nay, whole Cities sometimes
have been thus swallowed up. And the Danger is easily fore-known by a short
Snatching and Trepidation of the Ground, Houses, Trees, Men and every Thing
within its Reach; for then the Convulsion is Generally Fatal. But where the
Motion is Heavy, Grave and Regular, it is a Sign that both the Source and the
Danger of it are far off. And this is so much the more Evident, by how much
farther the Earthquake is felt above Ground. For the nearer any such Passion
happens to the Center, it must be granted, that its Force is extended the wider
on the Circumference. This depends on a Mathematical Demonstration, and there
needs no more be said to thee who art Consummate in the Sciences.

What I esteem a due Reflection on this is, That though there be no Peril in
these Remote Earthquakes, yet we know not how soon they will come nearer to us,
neither can we be assured, where or when they will happen, or how far they will
reach. It follows therefore by a Natural Consequence, That since these Things
are Unavoidable, and all the Wit of Man cannot invent a Means to escape sinking
into the Bowels of the Earth where it breaks in; we ought to be careless and
Indifferent what Death we die, and only be solicitous to live like Men, that
is, according to Reason. For whether our Souls survive or no, 'twill be
comfortable to expire in Peace, and full of our own Innocence.

Paris, 5th. of the 12th. Moon, of the Year 1660,
The End of the First Book.
LETTERS Writ by A Spy at PARIS.
VOL. VI. BOOK II.
LETTER II. To the Venerable Mufti.
HERE is now like to be a great Change at this Court. Cardinal Mazarini is
dead. He died at the Castle of the Wood of Vinciennes, on the 9th. of this
Moon, having been sick a long Time. There happened a great Fire at the Louvre
(so they call the King's Palace in this City) about Five Weeks ago, which
obliged the Cardinal, who log'd there at that Time, to remove to his own House.
From whence, for the Sake of Air, he was advised by his Physicians to go to the
aforesaid Castle. But all in vain: For Death, which finds Access into the
strongest Fortresses, pursued him thither, and led him in Triumph to the Region
of Silence and Forgetfulness, who had made so great a Noise and Bustle in this
our World.

It is reported, that a certain Astrologer foretold him, he should die in this
Moon. But the Cardinal gave no Credit to him: Though one would think he had some
Reason to believe him in this, for the Sake of a Former Prediction of his,
concerning the Duke of Beaufort. I have mentioned this Prince, and the Enmity
that was between Mazarini and him, which occasioned the Duke's Imprisonment in
the Castle of the Wood of Vinciennes. During his Restraint, the forementioned
Astrologer gave it out in Paris, That the Duke should escape out of Prison
precisely on such a Day. The Cardinal being informed of this, waited till the
Day came, designing to punish the Astrologer as a Cheat, or at least to expose
him for an Ignorant Person. To which End he sent for him, and upbraiding him
with Presumption and Folly, in that the Day was now come, and yet the Duke of
Beaufort was still a Prisoner, without any Hopes, or scarce a Possibility of
escaping, ordered him to be sent to the Bastile. But the Astrologer addressing
himself with much Submission and Earnestness, spoke to this Effect: May it
please your Eminence only to respite my Sentence till to Morrow, and then hang
me if you do not find that I have spoke Truth. The Day which I foretold, is
come indeed, but it is not past. A Courtier will soon convince you, that I have
not studied this Science in vain.

The Cardinal moved with these Words, only confined the Astrologer in a Chamber
of his own Palace. And the next Day he received an Express, which gave him an
Account of the Duke's Escape, and the Manner of it, viz. That on the Day
before, he had let himself down by a Ladder of Ropes into the Castle-Ditch, and
was no more to be seen or heard of. Thus the Astrologer escaped the Cardinal's
Revenge, and got much Fame at the Court, which was increased by the Cardinal's
Death, falling out exactly according to his Prediction.

This Minister was a very subtle Man; and Cardinal Richlieu used to say of him,
That if he were minded to put a Trick on the Devil, he would only set Mazarini
to Work. Therefore he made him his Confident, instructed him in all the Secrets
of the French Court, the Art of Government, and on his Deathbed recommended
him to the King, as the fittest Man to succeed him in the Management of the
Public. He was after the Death of Lewis XIII. at first opposed by several
Grandees; but the Queen's Authority, and that of the Prince of Conde supported
him: Whence arose a Common Proverb in those Days, The Queen permits All, the
Cardinal Commands All, and the Prince puts All in Execution: For this last had
then the Office of General.

This Minister was not esteemed so Covetous as his Predecessor, yet he heaped
up Vast Treasures; Part of which he bestowed in Magnificent Buildings and
Furniture, the Rest he sent into Italy to his Father; who astonished at the
Prodigious Quantities of Gold he received, used to say, Sure it rains Money in
France. However, he made himself Odious to the Subjects of this Nation by his
Continual Oppressions; and they are glad he is gone.

It Is a Byword at Rome, when any Pope dies, to say, Now the Dog is dead, all
his Malice is buried with him. But I doubt, it will not prove true in the Court
of France at this Juncture. For the King will either find a Minister Equal in
Subtlety to the Deceased Cardinal, who shall supply his Place; or he will take
the Administration of Affairs into his own Hands. Be it which Way it will, we
are like to see the same Maxims pursued, so long as Cardinal Richlieu's Memoirs
are in Being, who first taught this Crown to understand its own Strength.

Paris, 14th. of the 3d. Moon, of the Year 1661.
LETTER II. To the Vizir Azem at the Port.
I Have sent a Dispatch to the Mufti acquainting him with the Death of the
Cardinal Mazarini, First Minister of State, and the Greatest Favorite that
ever lived. Now I will inform thee of some Passages, which I omitted in my
Letter to that Venerable Prelate. It is Necessary for me thus to distribute my
Intelligence, with a due respect to the different Quality of my Superiors.

Thou, I suppose, wilt require some Account of his Disposition and Morals, with
such a Character as may render this Great Genius familiar to thy Knowledge.

He seemed to place his chief Happiness in aggrandizing his Master whom he
served with a Zeal so pure and disinteress'd; a Loyalty so Incorruptible, and
by such regular Methods of Prudence and Policy; as if in his Days, nothing were
to be counted Virtue or Vice, but what either favored or opposed the King of
France's Interest. He was of a Happy Constitution for a Courtier, being by
Nature Debonair, Complaisant, Affable, and of a Sweet Deportment. Yet
Experience and Art, taught him to improve these Advantages, to the Height of
Dissimulation. You should see Courtesy and extraordinary Goodness flowing into
every Feature of his Face; You should hear Words breathing from his Mouth, like
the soft Benedictions of an Angel: Yet at the same Time, his Heart gave the Lie
to Both. He meant nothing less, than that a Man should find him as good as his
Word. He was ever ready to promise any Thing that was demanded of him: But in
Performance, slow and full of Excuses. Frugal of his Prince's Money, and
Liberal of his own. Magnificent in his Buildings, and the Furniture belonging
to them: Aiming in all Things to exceed other Men, his Equals; and in some, to
surpass even Mighty Princes, his Superiors. In a Word, he was accomplished
with all Qualifications requisite in a Fortunate Courtier, and a good Statesman.

Yet after all, this Sublime Genius yielded to Death: But not like Common
Mortals. He died altogether like himself, without so much as changing that
settled Gravity, and Serene Air of his Face, as had been Remarkable during his
Life. He made the King Heir of his Estate, and bequeathed abundance of Legacies.

To say all in Brief: If he was Great in his Life, he was much more so in his
Death; mingling his last Breath with the Sighs and Tears of the King, who
lamented his Departure with the Mourning of a Son for a Father.

Paris, 26th. of the 3d. Moon, of the Year 1661.
LETTER III. To Pesteli Hali, his Brother, Master of the Customs at
Constantinople.
YEsterday a Dispatch came to my Hand from a very Remote Part of the Earth Our
Cousin Isouf sent it from Astracan, a Famous City for Traffic, formerly
belonging to the Crim Tartars, but now in the Possession of the Moscovites. He
has been there a Considerable Time, finding Profit by Merchandise: For, there
is a vast Resort to that City from China, Indostan, Persia, Moscovy, and other
Provinces of Europe and Asia. The Roads to it, are daily covered with the
Caravans of Trading People. And the River Volga can hardly sustain the
Innumerable Multitude of Vessels that Transport Passengers with their Goods
backwards and forwards, between Astracan, and the Regions round about the
Caspian Sea, into which that Mighty River discharges it self.

Isouf is Ingenious, and has pitched upon some Advantageous Way of enriching
himself, which tempts him to take up his Abode in that City, and there end his
Travels; or at least, he will repose himself there, till Fortune presents him
with a fairer Opportunity of increasing his Wealth.

In the mean Time, I perceive by his Letter, that he gets Money apace, lives
very happily, and has the Wit to keep himself free from the Yoke of Marriage,
which embarass'd him so much formerly. He soon put that troublesome Wife out of
his Mind, after he had Divorced her; and he never failed to gratify himself
with new Amors, wherever he came in his Travels. He writes very Comically;
and I cannot forbear smiling, when he tells me, He has had as many Concubines as
the Grand Signior. By which thou will perceive, That Isouf is much addicted to
Gallantry. He frankly confesses, That he first learned this Mode of loving at
large in Persia, especially at Ispahan; where he says, it is a Mark of Honor
for a Man to be good at Intriguing with the Ladies: And he is called a Turk by
way of Disgrace, who frequents not every Evening the Gardens and Houses of
Pleasure in the Suburbs. But he adds, that in India the Liberty of courting
Women is much greater. And that the very Nature of that Climate, disposes a Man
to this soft Passion. In a word, our Amorous Kinsman retains the same Humor
still.

Yet this does not hinder him from prosecuting his necessary Affairs with
Diligence, and Alacrity. He dispatched a Business for me at Archangel in
Russia, and another at Mosco, very dexterously. Which convinces me, that he is
not less Sedulous and Careful in Things which concern himself. He says, the
Moscovites are the greatest Drunkards in the World. Their Chief and most
beloved Liquor, is what the French call, The Water of Life. It Is a Chemical
Drink, extracted from the Lees of Wine, or other Strong Beverages: such as thou
know is common among the Greeks, Armenians, and Franks in the Levant. When
the Moscovites are once got into a House where this Nectar is Sold, and are a
little warmed and elevated with it, they will not depart till all their Money's
is gone: Nay, they will pawn their very Garments from their Backs in a Frolic,
rather than want their Dose of this Inebriating Stuff, and go out stark Naked
in the Coldest Weather that is, fall asleep in the open Streets, and yet are
never the worse for it when they wake, but go to their daily Work with the
greater Ardour. For, it is only the Common People are guilty of this
Extravagance. As for the Gentry and Nobility, they are more close and reserved
in their drunken Debauches.

The Moscovites, according to the Character he gives me of them, are a very
rude and unpolished People; Surly to one another, and extremely rugged to
Strangers. They despise all other Nations in the World, and say, it is
impossible for any Man to go to Heaven, who has not a Moscovite Soul in him.
They profess the Christian Religion, and were formerly of the Greek Church; but
now they have separated themselves, and set up a Patriarch of their own, to
whom so great a Veneration is paid, that the Emperor himself holds his Stirrup
when he mounts on Horseback.

Brother, I desire thee to speak advantageously of Isouf, to the Illustrious
Kerker Hassan, and to the other Bassa's of the Bench. He will be a serviceable
Man to the Grand Signior, if encouraged by some Place of Honor and Profit. I
wish I could say the same of our Cousin Solomon. But he is too Wise in his own
Conceit.

Dear Pesteli, excuse my Abruptness; For my Hours are divided between the
Service I owe to the Sultan, and the Affection I bear my Friends.

Paris, 7th. of the 5th. Moon, of the Year 1661.
LETTER IV. To Orchan Cabet, Student in the Sciences, and Pensioner to the
Sultan.
I Have heard of thy Fame, and the Manner of thy Conversion to the Law brought
down from Heaven: How that from a Christian Priest, thou art become a Mussulman
Abdalla, that is, a Believer and Servant of the True God. May thy Reward, both
here and hereafter, be according to thy Integrity in this Change of Faith and
Religion: For Hypocrites are neither Acceptable to God nor Man. Yet most Men
are Proselyted for Interest, Fear, or other Humane regards. And in the Sense of
the Christians, thou know, a Renegado and a Villain are Reciprocal Terms.

The Insupportable Miseries of Servitude, tempt many to embrace Circumcision,
which at once sets 'em free, and often puts 'em in a Condition to mend their
Fortunes, and live more happily than they did, even before they were Captives:
whilst Ambition and Avarice, are prevailing Motives with others in more
Prosperous Circumstances to be of the Grand Signior's Religion, that so they
may rise in his Favor, and obtain some Considerable Preferment at the Court,
or Office in the Army; like the Ancient Melchites among the Christians, who
were so called, because they always professed the Faith of the Grecian
Emperors, without examining whether it was Orthodox or no. A Sort of Religious
Parasites, who would be any Thing to serve their own Interest, and Adore the
Devil himself, provided their Sovereign showed 'em an Example.

Yet after all, there are some who change their Religion in pure Sincerity,
only compelled thereto by the Dint of Exalted Reason, and Motives of Virtue.
Such as these are Thinking Men, Persons of Bold Spirits, who dare call in
Question the Tradition of their Fathers, examine the Principles in which they
were Educated, dispute every Thing, and bring all to the Standard of Natural
Truth.

I rejoice to hear that thou art one of this Character, and not in the Number
of Counterfeits or Bigots: For such bring no Credit to the Religion they
embrace, but rather a Scandal. Yet the Arms of the Munificent Port are open to
receive all who profess that God is One, and that Mahomet is his Apostle;
leaving the Scrutiny of their Intention, to him who searches the Heart.

Thy Learning gives thee Fair Opportunities of doing Good. Put it to a Right
Use. Convince the Infidels whom thou have forsaken, of their Errors; Confirm
the True Believers, in the Faith without Blemish.

Do this by Discourse, by Writing, and by thine own Exemplary Life, which last
will prevail above Ten Thousand Eloquent Sermons.

In a word, show thy self a True and Faithful Follower of the Prophet on Earth,
and God will translate thee to his Company in Paradise; where Moses will
introduce thee, Jesus will Entertain thee with Joy, and all the 124000 Prophets
will welcome thee to the Pleasures which know no End.

Paris, 21st. of the 5th. Moon, of the Year 1661.
LETTER V. To the Mufti.
WE are apt to admire some Strange Passages which we find Recorded in Ancient
History, and whose Truch is out of the Reach of any Mortal to prove: Yet we
slight the Miracles which are before our Eyes, Evident Matters of Fact, which
no body can contradict. Whence this should proceed, I know not, unless it be
from a Natural Kind of Drowsiness in the Soul, Common to the greatest Part of
Men; like the Sleep of those, who cannot so soon be awakened by the loudest
Noises they are accustomed to, as by the soft and still Idea's of a strange
Dream; So we regard not the Things to which we are daily habituated, though in
themselves never so prodigious: Whilst we start and are amazed at the most
Ordinary Relations of Antiquity, only because they are Novel to us, and we were
not Eyewitnesses of the Things themselves.

I formerly sent a Letter to Cara Hali, the Sultan's Physician, wherein I
mentioned several Physicians of Arabia, who in past Ages, were Eminent for some
Remarkable Cures. But, I tell thee, not one of them could match the King of
France's Success in Curing an Epidemical Distemper, which they call the KING's
EVIL. The General Symptoms of this Malady, are certain Swellings in the Face,
Neck, or other Parts of the Body; sometimes accompanied with Blindness,
Deafness, Lameness, and other Imperfections. Those who are troubled with this
Disease, flock to the King's Court at certain Seasons of the Year, and being
introduced into his Presence, he only touches the Part affected with his Hand,
and an Infallible Cure follows.

They say, this Gift has been Inherent in the Kings of France for many
Generations: And the Priests magnify it as a Great Miracle. But, I tell thee,
all the Prodigy in my Opinion, lies in the Strength of the People's
Imagination, which thou know works half the Cure in many Distempers. The
Priests stand by the King, whilst he touches the Sick: They repeat their,
Gospel, and use certain Prayers and Exorcisms, being vested all in White like
Magicians. These Ceremonies are performed with abundance of Gravity, which
strikes an Awe into the Credulous Patients. And to render the Business yet more
Mysterious; whereas other Physicians take Money of the Sick, this Royal
AEsculapius bestows a Piece of Gold on every one whom he touches, which they
are obliged to wear about their Necks as long as they live. Now whether the
Charm lies in the Gold, or the King's Touch, or the Prayers and Ceremonies of
the Priests, or finally in the Patients Fancy, it matters not much. This is
certain, That Thousands who come to the King's Feet, very much disordered by
this Evil, find a sensible Alteration in their Bodies, before they depart from
his Presence; and in a few Hours or Days at most, are perfectly recovered.

Perhaps, the Kings of France have some Magical or Physical Tincture in their
Blood. Or, it may be, they have found out the Philosopher's Stone, so much
talked of; and delivered it down to their Posterity, as a Part of the Royal
Inheritance. Which enables the present King, to do so many Prodigious Things
both at Home and Abroad, in Peace and in War, besides his Part in Curing this
Sickness. I am no Rosicrucian, nor very fond or credulous of Miracles; yet I
often wonder at the Treasures of this Monarch, which appear Inexhaustible. But
the Ways of Kings are secret, and he of France is singular in his Mysterious
Methods of growing Rich and Great. Neither do all his Magnificent Expenses,
seem to diminish his Wealth. The King of Sueden has been his Pensioner ever
since he began to Reign: And Millions of French Gold, are dispersed among the
German Princes.

These Things cause his Subjects to descant variously. But I referr 'em to thy
Oraculous Judgment, whose Single Tefta is of Ten Thousand Times more Worth,
than the Decrees of a French Parliament.

Paris, 3d. of the 7th. Moon, of the Year 1661.
LETTER VI. To Mirmadolin, Santone of the Vale of Sidon.
NOW I will vent Holy Things, and what the Divinity shall inspire. The World
was in Weeds when Hosain the Prophet was slain, and the Moon put on her
Mourning Dress. The Tymbrels of Persia, Arabia and Babylon were heard in the
Dead of the Night: Their Sound reached to the Third Heaven: The Shepherds ran
to the Heights of the Earth, to discover the Occasion of so much Noise. The
Sentinels of Forts and Castles gave the Alarm, and the Men of War took hold of
the Sword, the Bow and the Spear. The Tygris overflowed its Banks, and
Diarbekir became a Lake. A Dark Body of Clouds overcast the Sky, and poured
forth Thunder, Lightning and Hail. Fire ran along on the Sands of the Desert,
and the Air was all in a Flame. Horror possessed the Minds of Mortals, and the
Angels themselves were Uneasy. The Beasts of the Field ran into Dens and Caves,
and the Dragons were touched with Remorse. Only the more Venomous Kisilbaschi
swelled with Pride: The Poison of Murder and Heresy had puffed up their Souls:
They and their Posterity are accursed to this Day, and to the Hour of the
Irrevocable Sentence.

O Santone, Great is thy Faith, in that thou have abandoned the Shadow of this
World, and separated thy self from the Contagion of Mortals. I revere the
Majesty of thy Sublime Soul, the Intellect ranging at Liberty. Thou daily
gatherest Flowers from the Garden of Eden, and being in the Body, enjoyest the
Sweets of Paradise. Kings would lay down their Crowns to taste of thy
Pleasures, did they but know them, and exchange all the Glory of Empires, for
one Moment of thy Unspeakable Bliss. Thou Companion and Care of Angels, Darling
of the Monarch Omnipotent!

Wherever thou lie down, whether by Day or by Night, the Watchers Above
stand ready with Vmbrella's to skreen thee from the Scorching Beams of the Sun,
the Chilling Darts of the Moon and Stars, and from all Injuries of Weather. The
Elements go out of their Courses to serve thee, and all Nature espouses thy
Interest.

The Merchant hires a Thousand Camels, and loads them with the Choicest Riches
of the Levant. He endures all the Fatigues of a long and dangerous Travel,
through Syria, Arabia and Persia; runs the Risque of Robbers, Diseases, and Ten
Thousand Methods of Death: and after all his Hazards and Pains, is not half so
Happy nor so Rich as thou, who aboundest in Every Thing, because thou desire
Nothing which thou have not, or that is Unnecessary. The Plough-men labor for
thee in the Field, and so do the Artificers in the City. The Noble and the
Vulgar are thy Purveyors, and the Greatest Sovereigns pay Tribute to thee.
Every House is thy Home, and they count themselves Happy, under whose Roof thou
vouchsafest to sleep. They are really so; for Benediction accompanies the
Perfect Man in all his Ways, and the Favors of Heaven over-take them that show
Kindness to him. Thou art Lord of other Men's Estates, and every Man's Field is
thy Inheritance. Thou enjoyest the Riches of this World, without being tainted
with the Vices that attend 'em, and receivest Immortal Assurances and Seals of
the Future Glory, in the Life which is to come. Oh! Happy Estate of the
Righteous! Oh! Life to be truly envied!

As for me, I Am like a Galley-Slave, chained down to his Oar, and forced to Row
Incessantly whither the Master of the Vessel Commands. So am I obliged to obey
the Dictates of my Superiors, whether there be Sin in the Case or no. I am
fastened in the Cares of this Vain World, and the more Particular Anxieties of
State. From all which thou art Happily free.

Oh that it were Lawful for me to shake off the Fretting Yoke, and disintangle
my self from the Snares of Humane Policy! That I might live like the Men of the
First Ages, who honored the Earth as their Common Mother, and made no Envious
Enclosures! They sported Innocently on her Fragrant Bosom, and never molested
their Kind Parent, by Cruelty to any of her Offspring. They sucked the Milk of
her Breast: Her Veins streamed with Wine and Honey. They banquetted on Variety
of excellent Fruits, and no Body thought of Killing and Eating his
Fellow-Animal. The Birds could then range the Air without Fear of the Fowler;
neither did any Yawling Huntsman rouse the Timorous Hare from her Seat. The
Roes and the Hinds could scamper at Pleasure over the Plain, without being
hatter'd to the Mountains and Rocks for Sanctuary; neither did any sly Angler
trepan the Fish of the Rivers. As for the Sea, 'twas then Unknown; No Man as
yet, had ventured on that Perfidious Element, or found out the Use of Ships.
There was in those Days no Foreign Commerce or Traffic, nor any Need of it.
Every Region supplied its Inhabitants with what was Useful and Necessary: And
those Temperate Mortals desired no more. They lived without Irregular
Appetites, free from Ambition, Fraud and Blood.

This is the Life so much desired by me, and which thou actually enjoyest. God
augment thy Felicities and Raptures, that thou may pass from one Vision and
Ecstasy to another, till Gabriel snatch thy Soul away in a Divine Transport,
beyond the Possibility of a Relapse.

Holy Santone, whilst thou art on Earth, pray for me; and when thou art among
the Immortals, do me some Favors which may last for ever.

Paris, 26th. of the 8th. Moon, of the Year 1661.
LETTER VII. To Dgnet Oglou.
MY Business in this Place obliges me to keep Company with all Sorts of People.
Hence I indifferently associate my self with Statesmen, Soldiers, Courtiers,
Priests, Fiddlers, Mechanics, Seamen, or Persons of any Profession, from whom I
can hope for any Improvement: For, there is hardly so despicable a Fellow in
the World, who may not teach an Inquisitive Mind something, to which it was a
Stranger before.

Sometimes I converse with Painters, whom I generally find to be Men of Wit and
Sense, but very lewd and dissolute: However, they serve to divert my
Melancholy, to which thou know I am much inclined. For they are the merriest
Sparks in the World, abounding with smart Repartees, Jests and Comical Stories,
besides a Hundred Mimical Tricks of good Buffoonry to make one laugh; that it
is almost Impossible to be sad in their Company.

They are most of them bred in the Academy, or in Colleges and Schools where
the Sciences are professed: It being in a Manner necessary, That Men of this
Trade should have a Smack of all Sorts of Learning, and especially, that they
should be indifferent good Historians; they being many Times desired to
represent Pieces of Antique and Modern History, without a Pattern. They have a
very Facetious Way also of telling a Story to the Life, as well as of drawing
it so in Picture. They would dissolve the most stiff and morose Hadgi into
Laughter and Jollity, to hear how gracefully they will ridicule the most
serious Matters, and turn every Thing into Burlesque: For they are Admirable
Satyrists by Nature.

Yet these are not all alike, but differ in their Tempers like other Men. Some
of them are Proud and Stately, others Fawning and Abject: And all of them great
Humorists.

It was an odd Whim of Martin Heemskirk, a Famous Painter, that was born at a
Village of the same Name. He died in the Year of the Christians Hegira, 1574.
This Man had amassed together in his Life Time a Vast Quantity of Money; and
having no Wife or Children, nor other Relations of his own to leave it to, he
was resolved to do something, for which he might be talked of after his Death.
I have heard of many dying Men, that have had one Caprice or other in making
their last Will and Testament: But thou will say this of Martin's was Singular.
For, on his Deathbed he bequeathed all his Wealth to be distributed into Equal
Dowries or Portions, wherewith to marry a certain Number of Maids of Heemskirk,
his Birthplace, Yearly, on this Condition, That the New-married Couple, with
all the Wedding-Guests, should dance on his Grave.

It is necessary for thee to know, that since his Death, there has been a great
Alteration of Religion in those Parts: The Inhabitants, which in his Time were
Roman Catholics, are now all Protestants. And at the Time of this Change or
Reformation, as they call it, it was the General Practice of the Protestants,
to demolish all Images and Crosses wherever they found 'em. Now it was the
Custom of the Roman Catholics to set up a Cross at the End of every Sepulcher
of the Dead. Yet, so great a Veneration have the Heemskirkers for the Memory of
this Painter, that whereas there is not a Cross to be seen standing in all the
Country besides; yet his, being of Brass, remains untouched, as the only Title
their Daughters can show to his Legacy.

'Twas a more Cruel and Inhumane Caprice of an Italian Painter (I think his
Name was Giotto) who designing to draw a Crucifix to the Life, wheadl'd a poor
Man to suffer himself to be bound to a Cross for an Hour, at the End of which
he should be released again, and receive a Considerable Gratuity for his Pains.
But, instead of this, as soon as he had him fast on the Cross, he stabbed him
Dead, and then fell to drawing. He was esteemed the Greatest Master in all
Italy at that Time. And having this Advantage, of a Dead Man hanging on a Cross
before him, there is no Question, but he made a Matchless Piece of Work on it.

As soon as he had finished his Picture, he carried it to the Pope, who was
astonished, as at a Prodigy of Art, highly extolling the Exquisiteness of the
Features and Limbs, the Languishing, Pale Deadness of the Face, the Unaffected
Sinking of the Head: In a Word, he had drawn to the Life, not only that
Privation of Sense, and Motion which we call Death; but also the very Want of
the least Vital Symptom.

This is better understood, than expressed. Every Body knows that it is a
Masterpiece to represent a Passion, or a Thought well and naturally. Much
greater is it to describe the total Absence of these Interior Faculties, so as
to distinguish the Figure of a Dead Man, from one that is only asleep.

Yet all this and much more, could the Pope discern in the Admirable Draught
which Giotto presented him. And he liked it so well, that he resolved to place
it over the Altar of his own Chapel: For, thou know, this is the Practice
of the Nazarenes, to Adore Pictures and Images. Giotto told him, Since he liked
the Copy so well, he would show him the Original if he pleased.

What do thou mean by the Original, said the Pope? will thou show me Christ
Jesus on the Cross in his own Person? No, replied Giotto, but I Will show your
Holiness the Original from whence I drew this, if you will absolve me from all
Punishment.

The good old Father suspecting something extraordinary by the Painters thus
Capitularing with him, promised on his Word to pardon him. Which Giotto
believing, immediately told him where it was: And attending him to the Place,
as soon as they were entered, he drew a Curtain back, which hung before the
Dead Man on the Cross, and told the Pope what he had done.

The Holy Father extremely troubled at so Inhumane and Barbarous an Action,
repealed his Promise, and told the Painter, he should surely be put to an
Exemplary Death.

Giotto seeming resigned to the Sentence pronounced upon him, only begged leave
to finish the Picture before he died; which was granted him. In the mean while,
a Guard was set upon him to prevent his Escape. As soon as the Pope had caused
the Picture to be delivered into his Hands, he takes a Brush; and dipping it in
a Sort of Stuff he had ready for that Purpose, daubs the Picture all over with
it, so that nothing could now be seen of the Crucifix: But it was quite effaced
in all outward Appearance.

This made the Pope stark mad: He stamped, foamed and raved like one in a
Phren'sy. He swore the Painter should suffer the most Cruel Death that could be
invented, unless he drew another full as good as the former: For if but the
least Grace was missing, he would not pardon him. But if he could produce an
exact Parallel, he would not only give him his Life, but an Ample Reward in
Money.

The Painter, as he had Reason, desired this under the Pope's Signet, that he
might not be in Danger of a Second Repeal: Which was granted him. And then he
took a wet Sponge, and wiped off all the Varnish he had daubed on the Picture.
And the Crucifix appeared the same in all Respects, as it was before.

The Pope, who looked on this as a great Secret, being Ignorant of the Arts
which Painters use, was ravished at the strange Metamorphosis. And to reward
the Painter's treble Ingenuity, he absolved him from all his Sins, and the
Punishments due to them; ordering moreover his Steward, to cover the Picture
all over with Gold, as a farther Gratuity for the Painter. And, they say, this
Crucifix is the Original by which the most famous Crucifixes in Europe are
drawn.

I need make no other Reflection on this, Than that as the Supposed Murder of
Jesus the Son of Mary, is the Source of all the Christians Devotion; so the
real Homicide which this Painter committed, has made it more intense and
fervent, by how much the Crucifixes drawn after this Pattern, excel all that
were seen before them, in the Tragical Portraiture of the Martyred Messiah.

And, from this Reason it is, that Painters are in so great esteem among the
Italians, because they form the Gods which those Infidels Adore. It is no
wonder therefore, that the Chief Head of their Church, should so easily Absolve
Murder in a Painter, as a Venial Sin, especially when it is done in Ordine ad
Deum, as the Jesuits say, that is, to promote God's Glory, as the Pope easily
persuaded himself this was: Since Idolatry is the main Engine which supports
the State and Grandeur of the Roman Court. And all the World knows, that Holy
City is a Type of Heaven; or at least, the Crafty Priests would fain represent
it so.

My Friend, thou and I have seen enough of their Tricks and Holy Frauds in
Sicily. Praise be to God, they had not Power to pervert us. Our Faith remains
inviolate: We still possess the Integrity of Mussulmans, the Native Attach we
owe to the Prophet, who was sent to Exterminate Idols. In a word, we Adore none
but One God, Creator of the Worlds. May that Incomprehensible for ever keep us
in the same Faith and Practice, till the Release of our Souls.

Paris, 13th. of the 9th. Moon, of the Year 1661.
LETTER VIII. To Lubano Abufei Saad, an Egyptian Knight.
THIS Court is now at Fontainbleau, and all seems to be dissolved in Joy for
the Birth of a Dauphin. The Queen was delivered of this Young Prince, on the
First Day of this Moon. There Is Nothing but Feasting, Dancing and Revelling on
this Account, with Bonefires and Congratulatory Addresses. Only the Duke of
Orleans, the King's Brother has little Reason to be over-merry, since he was
the next Presumptive Heir of the Crown, in Case the King died without Issue
Male: For the Laws of France exclude a Female from Reigning. Yet, this Duke
dissembles his Inward Grief, for being thus put by his Hopes, and appears as
Joyful as the Father himself, He huggs and admires the Royal Babe, wishing him
Health and Long Life in a Compliment, whom he really could rather wish out of
the World; or at least, that he had never come into it. So violent are the
Temptations to a Crown, so strong the Desire of Empire, That the Nearness of
Relation, which endears the Rest of Mortals one to another, enranges the Hearts
of Princes from those of their own Blood, if they stand in the Way of their
Ambition. And I can assure thee, the French do not spare to say, the Duke of
Orleans has enough of this Vice to attempt great Things, were not his Genius
over-awed, by the Matchless Fortune and Spirit of his Brother.

Neither is the King himself Insensible of this; remembering with what Warmth
the Duke received the Flattering Addresses of some Courtiers, during his
Brother's dangerous Sickness, when the Physicians had well-nigh given him over
for a Dead Man.

I was acquainted with this Passage but lately by Osmin the Dwarf, who watches
all the Motions of this Court. He tells me that the King being informed, a
Rumor was whispered among the Grandees of his Death, caused them all to be
sent for, and to pass through his Chamber, whilst the Curtains of his Bed were
drawn open, that they might see their Sovereign alive, though in a bad State of
Health. He says moreover, That the true Reason, why several Lords of late have
been removed from their Offices about the King, is because he resented ill the
too early and passionate Court they made to the Duke of Orleans, on the Report
of his Brother's Death. It Is natural to all Men to love themselves, and to
desire the Disposal of their own Affairs. No Man would be content to have his
Estate given away by his Servants, at their own Discretion. And Sovereign
Monarchs are the most Jealous of all Men in such Cases: Particularly, the King
of France is known to be a Prince very sensible of his Honor, and soon touched
in that Point, by the least Appearance of Dis-respect in his Subjects, and of
Encroachment in his Neighbors.

As for the Duke of Orleans, he is a Prince of no great Character, either as a
Soldier, or a Statesman. Neither has he been much talked of in the World, till
the Beginning of this Year, when he Married an English Princess, by Name
Henrietta, Daughter to the late Murdered King of that Nation.

We have had another Match here also, between the late Duke of Orleance's
Daughter, and the Prince of Toscany. These things occasion various Discourse
among those who pretend to weigh exactly the different Interests of Christian
Courts, especially of such as are concerned in the New Alliances. For, the
Greatest Monarchs here in the West, marry only for Profit and Advantage, to
Fortify themselves by a closer Union with the House to which they are Allied.
Whereas our Eastern Princes only indulge their Passions in the Choice of their
Wives; admitting none to their Embraces, but the most Exquisite Beauties that
can be found. And where they once pitch their Fancy, they neither regard
Riches, Honor, or any other Recommendation, save what their Love suggests;
being themselves Inexhaustible Fountains of Wealth, Nobility and good Fortune
to all who have the Happiness to be in their Favor.

They scorn to sell themselves, and prostitute the Glory of their Diadems to a
Foreign Prince, for the Sake of a little Gold, and much Trouble, with a proud
Female, whom perhaps they never saw. Yet this is the common Practice among the
Princes of the Nazarene Belief; Who consider not, that instead of a Wife, a
Partner of their Empire, and a Friend, they often entertain a Snake, a Traitor,
an Enemy: Especially if she be a Woman of Wit and Intrigue, as most of them
are. This made the now Queen Mother, the Relict of Lewis XIII, suspected by her
Husband; and the present Queen of France is under the like Circumstances: And
it will always be so, where Princes Match themselves after this manner, and
cannot debar their Wives from holding a secret Correspondence with the Family
from which they Descend.

Assuredly, the Ottoman Politics are the most refined and secure of any in the
World; our Religion most Holy, and our Morals most Sound. Which Three are
evident Signs, That God has raised up this Sacred Empire, to subdue all the
Nations on Earth, and bring 'em to the Faith of his Divine Unity.

Paris, 9th. of the 11th. Moon, of the Year 1661.
LETTER IX. To Cara Hali, Physician to the Grand Signior.
I Am now in my Chamber by a Glowing Fire, wanting Nothing that can comfort a
Reasonable Man: Whilst I hear the Winds whistling, the Snow driving upon my
Windows, and the hollow Voices of the Watch proclaiming a Night little less
Cold, than that lasting one they feel in the Artick Circle once a Year. Yet I
wish my self in a Plain, or on the Top of some High Mountain, where I might
feel Nature in the most Rigid of all her Humors. I love Variety, and it is a
Pain to be confined to Pleasure it self, when it is all of one Kind, or what I Am
used to.

It Is to thee, my Dear Hali, I owe this Thought, when you told me once, as we
were walking together in the Cemetery of Sultan Solyman's Mosque, That Man is
made for all Things.

I remember the Elegance and Force of Reason with which you explained your
Sentiments, upon a Loss which I had then sustained by Shipwreck; comforting me
with this Reflection, that all the Gains on Earth are only Burdens; all the
Riches, Honors, Pleasures, and whatsoever is desired by Mortals, are but so
many Clogs to tie us faster to this, Little, Narrow Globe, where we are born to
trample on as our Footstool.

All this is true; but I consider farther, That the Occurrences of this Life
ought to be received with Indifference, and we should be as Cheerful in a
Prison, as in a Palace; because Nothing can happen to us, which was not decreed
by Fate. Methinks I could go as freely to Torments in a Just Cause, as to a
Sumptuous Banquet. I could smile at the Malice of my Persecutors, and triumph
over the Vain Executioners, when I see them sweat at their Inhumane Toil, and
yet can never have their Wills of a Soul cast in such a Mold as mine. Whatever
they may do with my Body, though they excruciate me with a Thousand Inventions of
Cruelty, though they reduce me to Ashes, yet they cannot rob me of my Reason.
Neither Fire, nor Sword, nor Rack, nor any other Instrument of Barbarous Rage,
can hurt my Thoughts. I shall still have the Power of Meditating, in Spite of
'em all: And I esteem that the Specific Happiness of a Rational Creature.
There Is no such Thing as Pleasure or Pain, but what our Opinion makes so. I
have tried to handle Fire; I Have grasped hot burning Coals in the Palm of my
Hand, with which I now write. The devouring Element soon fastened on my Skin,
and eat its way through into my Flesh, whilst I was busy in Contemplating its
Nature and Effects, without being concerned in any Sense of Pain. I kept a tite
Rein, and curbed my Soul. I held it within Compass, and would not suffer it to
winch, or lash, or flounce out of it self, or descend into my Body, to rescue
the Part affected, or be concerned at its Grievance. But when I reflect on the
Inconveniences that might follow, and that it would hinder me from serving the
Grand Signior and my Friends, I threw the Coals away, well satisfied that I had
made the Experiment without prejudicing my Reason, or falling into any Passion
Unbecoming a Man.

I take as much Pleasure in Fasting, as in Eating or Drinking; in Labor, as in
Rest; in Watching, as in Sleep. There Is no Excess or Contrariety in Nature,
which does not afford me as much Delight as Mediocrity, or the Golden Mean it
self. I find Gust in every Thing that happens to me. And this I take to be the
Proper Part of a Mussulman, or of one Resigned to God.

Yet this hinders me not from bustling in the World, and prosecuting my
Business with Alacrity and some Eagerness. We are born for Action, and not
wholly for Thought. It Is a mixed Life we are to lead on Earth. But when I fail
of my End or desired Success in any Undertaking, I am not troubled, considering
I was born to encounter Evil as well as Good in this Mortal State.

In all that I have said. I do not pretend to the Celebrated Apathy of the
Stoics. I feel Pleasure and Pain from the same Objects which thus affects
other Men: But I feel 'em with Indifference, not suffering my Understanding and
Judgment to participate with my Passion and Sense.

I have perceived my self sometimes in Agonies, which I thought exactly
answered the Character of those which dying Persons feel. And I believe they
were in a Degree the very same: Yet I found no Panick Fears upon me, no Dread
of that Amazing Change: But rather certain Blooming Hopes, Young, Tender
Springing Joys, arising from the Thoughts of a New Life, the Unavoidable Effect
of that which we call Death, wherein I promised my self the Pleasure of Fresh
Enjoyments and Diversions, to which I was wholly then a Stranger.

If thou think this too Extravagant, and that Death is not a proper Object
of our Wishes, yet thou will at least acknowledge, That it may furnish us with
sufficient Arguments of Content and Acquiescence, since no Man can avoid it,
and it is sure to entertain us with Novelties which we never were acquainted
with before, which recommends it under a very desirable Figure, because Humane
Nature perpetually covets New Things.

I have seen Persons Condemned to Death here in Paris, who have been offered
Life on certain Conditions not agreeing with their Humor; yet have refused it,
and rather chose Death which they knew would free 'em at once from all their
Present Troubles. And thou know with what Resignation our Greatest Bassa's
submit their Necks to the Executioners, when the Grand Signior thinks fit to
call for their Lives. All that they reply to the Fatal Mandate, is, The Will of
my Sovereign Lord be done. They at once gather up all the Strength of their
scattered Reason, and shrink their dilated Souls to a Point. Then with a
Re-doubled Force, they shake off their Inclinations to Honors, Riches, and the
Pleasures of this Life, as a Man rowzes from a long Dream or Trance. With
Smiles and a profound Submission they kiss the Royal Firm, being awakened to
the Thoughts of more illustrious and Serene Joys than this gross Earth affords,
even to the Ineffable Pleasures of Eden, the sure Reward of those that die in
Obedience and Peace: Since they are to be esteemed Martyrs, as well as those
who meet Death in the Field of the Sacred Combat, in the War for our Holy Faith.

Oh! That it were my Lot thus to expire in Honor, to have my last Breath mixed
with the Devout Aspirations and Suffrages of True Believers, that so my Example
might edify others, and the Public Character of an Untainted Loyalty might
benefit my self: Whilst Fame proclaimed it before my Arrival at the Invisible
Regions, to prepare the Ghosts of Just Men to bid me welcome, and give me a
kind Reception, who am yet wholly a Stranger in those Parts of the World: For
Death it self cannot banish me out of the Universe. And there is my last Comfort.

Thou my dear Physician, wilt conclude, I Am Melancholy by this Kind of
Discourse. But I tell thee, it is only another way of Expressing the Secret
Pleasure and Tranquillity of my Soul, which is more to be valued by him that
enjoys it, than all the Laughter and Exravagant Mirth in the World. These only
ruffle our Passions, and raise a Dust in our Eyes: whereas the other compose
and purify our Reason, giving us a Constant Prospect of Things Past, Present,
and to Come. So that we can never be at a Loss, but always ready equipped for
the worst Contingencies. Hali, Adieu.

Paris, 15th. of the 12th. Moon, of the Year 1661.
LETTER X. To the Same.
THE Court of France in all things endeavors to imitate the Ancient Grandeur
of the Roman Emperors, and their Policy. As they had their Amphitheatres,
whereon were exhibited all Sorts of Shows and Spectacles to divert the People
in Time of Peace; so have these their Theaters whereon according to the more
Acceptable Mode of the present Age, are represented the Various Kinds of Virtue
and Vice; Men's Follies, and Perfections; Modern Humors, and the Ancient
Morality; Intrigues of Love, and of State; Surprising Actions of War, and the
Subtle Overtures of Peace; The Tyranny of Sovereigns, and Rebellion of
Subjects. In fine, whatsoever is treated of in Books, is here Acted to the Life
on the Stage, and with so much Advantage of Scenes, Interludes, Music, Dances,
Language, Wit, Humor, and the like Charming Circumstances, That a Man at some
Hours cannot better pass away his Time, than in being present at these
Entertainments. Where all that he has read, either in Ancient or Modern
History, deserving Remark, shall be successively presented to his View, as
efficaciously as if the Persons were now living, and in presence, whose Actions
each Play describes.

There you shall be introduced as it were, into the Court and Camp of the Grand
Cyrus: You shall accompany Alexander the Great in his Expeditions through Asia:
You shall see him die of Poison at Babylon, and the Macedonian Empire
Cantoniz'd among his Officers: You shall behold all the Roman Caesar's in their
Rise and Fall: With whatsoever Particularities were observable in this or any
other Renowned Monarchy on Earth; not excluding the last and most Universal
Empire of the Ottomans. For these Infidels presume to act over again, the Part
of Tamerlain, and lead about in Dramatick Triumph, the Encag'd, yet still
Invincible Bajazet. In Habits, which only become the destined Conquerors of the
World, these Slaves dare personate the Glorious Solomon, Mahomet the Great, the
Victorious Selim, and even Amurat himself, the Stoutest Emperor that ever
Reigned: I mean, the Uncle of our present Sovereign.

Besides True History thus represented, tho Spectators are sometimes diverted
with Fabulous Entries of Gods, Nymphs, Fauns, Satyrs, Muses, Graces, Monsters,
and whatsoever we find in the Ancient Poets.

There you shall see Prometheus fetching Fire from Heaven, to give Life to his
Men of Clay; Lycaon transformed into a Wolf, for his Inhospitable Carriage to
Jupiter; Ganymede snatched up into Heaven by an Eagle, and made Jupiter's
Cup Bearer, for his singular Beauty. It is pleasant also to see Phryxus with
his Sister Hell, swiming over the Hellespont on the Back of a Ram, with a
Golden Fleece; whilst she for Fear, falls off, and is drowned: And from her
Name [Helle] that Sea is supposed to be so called. In the mean while, Phryxus
swims forward, and arrives at Colchis, where he sacrifices the Ram, and hangs
the Golden Fleece up in the Temple; which was afterward stole away by Jason
and his Argonauts. It is equally diverting, to see the Artifice of the Scenes
and Machines, which represent Jupiter transforming himself into a Shower of
Gold, and so descending into Danae's Lap, when he begets Perseus on her, who
subdued the Gorgons, and with Medusa's Head, turned the Cephen Nobles into
Statues. In a word, all the Ingenious Fictions of Orpheus, Homer, Hesiod, Ovid
and the rest of the Greek and Roman Poets, are here translated, not so much
from one Language to another, as from Words to Actions, and from Dead,
Inanimate Characters, to Living Figures of the Things themselves. For these
sort of Plays are acted by Men, Women and Children culled out, and Educated for
that Purpose. And the Managers are at a vast Charge, for Variety of Proper
Scenes and Dresses for every Occasion; each Actor being exactly Apparelled
according to the different Quality of the Persons represented, and the Mode of
the Age and Country wherein they lived.

These Sort of Divertisements, are very agreeable both to the Court and the
City. The King takes great Delight in them, especially in Ballets and
Pastorals, which consist chiefly of good Songs and Dances, mixed with bold and
uncouth Entries of Antiques, representing Monsters and Devils, as the
Christians usually describe 'em.

But there was lately a check given to their Sport, by an Accident which has
surpised all People that hear of it, and has puzzled the most Intelligent
Heads to give an Account of so strange an Occurrence.

On the 19th. of this Moon, the King and the whole Court were present at a
Ballet, representing the Grandeur of the French Monarchy. About the middle of
the Entertainment, there was an Antique Dance performed by Twelve Masquerades,
in the supposed Forms of Demons. But before they had advanced far in their
Dance, they found an Interloper amongst 'em, who by increasing the Number to
Thirteen, put 'em quite out of their Measures: For they practice every Step and
Motion beforehand, till they are perfect. Being abashed therefore at the
unavoidable Blunders the Thirteenth Antique made 'em commit, they stood still
like Fools, gazing at one another: None daring to unmask, or speak a word; for
that would have put all the Spectators into a Disorder and Confusion. Cardinal
Mazarini (who was the chief Contriver of these Entertainments, to divert the
King from more serious Thoughts) stood close by the Young Monarch, with a
Scheme of the Ballet in his Hand. Knowing therefore, that this Dance was to
consist but of Twelve Antiques, and taking Notice that there were actually
Thirteen, at First imputed it to some Mistake. But afterward when he perceived
the Confusion of the Dancers, and that they could not procced, he made a more
narrow Enquiry into the Cause of this Disorder. To be brief, they convinced the
Cardinal, that it could be no Error of theirs, by a kind of demonstration, in
that they had but Twelve Antique Dresses of that Sort, which were made on
purpose for this particular Ballet; whereas the Thirteenth Dancer was disguised
after the same manner. Therefore they concluded, that either the Devil or some
body else, had put a Trick upon 'em. That which made it seem the greater
Mystery was, that when they came behind the Scenes to uncase, and examine the
Matter, they found but Twelve Antiques, whereas on the Stage there were
Thirteen.

The preciser Sort of Bigots gave it out for certain, That the Devil was
amongst 'em: Whilst others more probably say, 'Twas only some Envious or
Ambitious Dancing Master, who was either resolved to be revenged for not being
one of the Twelve, or designed to show his Parts Incognito, against another
Opportunity, and in the Interim, set the Court a wondering at his Singular Skill
and Dexterity: For it was observed, That one of the Thirteen far surpassed all
the Rest, and did Things to a Miracle.

Be it how it will, it has brought to Memory a Passage that happened on the
like Occasion at a Town not far from Paris, about Eighteen Years ago, yet was
not half so much talked of then, as it is now: Which was the Reason, I took no
Notice of it in any of my Letters. But now they are big with it: It Is the
general Discourse of all Companies, who make Comparisons of that Event with
this. Perhaps 'twill not be unpleasant to thee to know it.

In the Year 1644. toward the latter End, a Company of Stage Players were at a
Place called Vitry, entertaining the People with Comedies; But there happened
something really Tragical to one of the Actors. This Man was to perform the
Part of one Dead, and then he was to revive again by Magic. He acted his Part
too truly, and baffled the Necromancers Art. For when he touched him with his
Talisman, as the Rules of the Play required, in Order to his Resurrection, the
Inanimate Trunk could not obey. The Man was Dead indeed.

Whether he overstrained himself in imitating the Silent, Still, and
Irrecoverable Privations of that Passive State, and gave his slippery Soul a
strong Temptation, with a fair Opportunity to escape its Bonds; Or, whether
Heaven had a Particular Hand in so Remarkable a Catastrophe, I will not presume
to divine. But this and the other Occurrence, has put the People quite out of
Conceit with Plays.

Sage Hali, remember the Arabian Proverb, which says, It Is not good to Jest
with God. Death or the Devil. For the First neither can, nor will be mocked;
the Second mocks. all Men, one Time or other; and the Third puts an Eternal
Sarcasm on those that are too familiar with him. Adieu.

Paris, 30th. of the 1st. Moon, of the Year 1662.
LETTER XI. To Dgnet Oglou.
GOD unravel my Soul, reverse my Faculties, turn my Nature inside out, make me
a Monster of a New Predicament, or annihilate me, which he pleases, if I am not
true to my Trust: Yet the Ministers of the Port suspect me.

By the Thoughts of Mahomet our Holy Lawgiver, whilst he was climbing the
boundless Heights of the Firmament, I Have a Heart like the Roman Curtius, who
bravely leaped into the Fathomless Abyss to save his Country from Ruin. They
mistake Mahmut, who think he will be pimp'd out of his Loyalty by Frowns or
Smiles, Flatteries or Threats, Gold or Tortures. I Would run the Risque of
Damnation it self to serve my Sovereign, or to do any Thing becoming a Man of
Honor. Yet my Superiors use me like a Villain or a Traitor. Their Letters are
full of Reproaches and Threatenings, as if I were not worthy to live. It Is
strange to me, whence all this Malice should proceed; and that after I have
done and suffered all that could be expected from a Mussulman in my Post, to
demonstrate my Incorruptible Fidelity to the Grand Signior, I should still be
persecuted as a Tiafer, and Enemy to the Ottoman Interest. I know not what to
think of it.

If I have done any Thing which deserves Death or Imprisonment, why do they not
send for me to Constantinople, and execute Justice on me? Or if I am not
thought fit to continue any longer in this Post, why do they not call for my
Commission, and give it to some Body better qualified? Either of these would be
a merciful Proceeding, compared with the more Cruel and Ignominious Way they
have invented to murder me; For, now they put me to a lingering Death, by
continually corroding and wasting the Piece of my Soul, which is my Life, with
Contempts and Reproaches.

I am not at all troubled when they tax me with Atheism, or say, I Am a
Kysilbaschi, a Libertine, a Christian, a Heathen Philosopher; or when they are
pleased to make a Monster of me, a Mungrel Gallimaufry, a walking Hotchpotch,
compounded of Jew, Turk, Nazarene and Epicure. In loading me with these
opprobrious Titles, they rank me with some of the Greatest Mortals, and engage
even our Holy Prophet himself to espouse my Cause, and vindicate my Reputation;
since he is in these very Terms blasphemed by the Followers of Jesus: Those
Infidels forgetting that their own Messiah was after the like Manner traduced
by the Jews, who called him Impostor, Magician, Heretic, Devil, and I know not
what. This has been the Lot of all Holy Men and Prophets, to be envied and
aspersed by the Grandees of the Nation and Age wherein they lived: Because they
boldly reproved their Vices, and taught them the sincere Maxims of Virtue both
by Word and Example. And though I have not Vanity enough to list my self in the
Number of Prophets, or Perfect Men; yet I have Reato conclude, That all this
Persecution is raised against me, on the Account of the Liberty I take to
reprehend the Errors and Failings of those, who are Slaves to the Grand Signior
as well as I: Though I have been commanded to do this by the most August
Ministers of the Empire. But great Men in Power, love not to be told of their
Faults. They would live Arbitrary as Sovereigns, without the least Check or
Control. They will rather cherish a Thousand Flatterers and Sycophants, than
suffer one Diogenes to live.

But that which vexes me most, is, That they glance upon me in some
Expressions, as if I were false to the Trust which is reposed in me. A Crime
for which I ever had an Invincible Abhorrence, and which would sooner tempt me
a Thousand Times to die, than to be once guilty of it. Thou know my Temper,
and I need say no more.

I should have burst with Grief and Indignation, had I not given my Resentments
this Vent, and that to a Friend, who by knowing my Affliction, takes one Half
of it for his own Share, and so I Am eased.

Paris, 2d. of the 4th. Moon, of the Year 1662.
LETTER XII. To Abrahim Eli Zeid, Hadgi, Preacher to the Seraglio.
THEY have a Proverb here in the West, which says, All is not Gold that
glisters. And it is frequently verified in their own Priests, who are generally
the greatest Hypocrites in the World.

I had not been long in this City, before I sent a Letter to Bedredin,
Superior of the Dervises of Cogni in Natolia, whose Soul is now with God;
wherein I gave him an Account of the Converse I once had with a Jesuit. For,
pretending to be a Student and Retainer to the Clergy, I could not avoid the
Company of Ecclesiastics: Besides, It was my Interest to insinuate into their
Acquaintance; and to tell the Truth, I have made it a great Part of my Business
to gain a Familiarity with Priests, and Dervises ever since I came hither.

There was Abundance of Reason for this, on several Accounts. For I improved my
self much by the Society of those amongst them that are Learned; and I edified
not a little by the very Ignorance and Follies of others. From some I squeezed
out Secrets of State, and the Designs of Cabals: By others I penetrated into
the Mysterious Vices of their own Order. In a Word, all of them taught me
something or other which I knew not before; and I never had Occasion to repent
of keeping them Company.

I contracted a particular Friendship with an Honest Friar or Two in this City,
who were Persons of Candor and Learning: But, now they are Dead. Besides, I
have had no small Intimacy with Cardinal Richlieu, and his Successor Mazarini.
I tell thee, if I had not coveted the Friendship of these Princely Priests, yet
it had been impossible to escape their Knowledge, as obscure a Figure as I
make. For, it was their constant Practice, thus to seek out all the Strangers
and Travelers in this City, under Pretense of that Great Regard they had for
Men of Merit; but in Reality, to pump out of them Foreign Secrets.

Cardinal Richlieu professed a great Kindness to me, because I had been at
Constantinople and in other Parts of the Grand Signior's Dominions. He seemed
also to value me not a little for my Skill in Interpreting Greek, Sclavonick,
and other Languages of the East. What he thought of me in's Heart I cannot
divine; but I have Reason to think, he suspected me for a Mussulman. And yet I
wonder he never searched for the main Proof, the Mark of Circumcision. Perhaps,
'twas an Effect of his Good Nature, as being loath to ruin me Irrecoverably.
But, I rather ascribe it to Providence, which would not suffer him, it may be,
to make so Fatal a Reflection: Yet, by his Order some Years ago, I was
Imprisoned for Six Moons. What the Meaning on it was, I could never dive into.
But, I had a shrewd Jealousy of a certain Transylvanian Resident at this Court,
who perhaps might do me some ill Offices. The World's like a Lottery, wherein
we must expect to meet with many Unlucky Chances.

By what I have said, thou will easily perceive, That though the Priests make a
fair Semblance of Piety, Mortification, and other Religious Virtues, yet they
are great Busy-Bodies, and wholly taken up in Secular Affairs.

If this were the Worst Character they deserve, they might pass for very Good
Men, and necessary Instruments of the Public Welfare: Because, they have the
Tutelage and Guardianship of all Men's Consciences; they form 'em in their
Youth, and govern 'em in their Ripest Years. Besides, they have many Advantages
of studying the Politics, more than other Men, as being all Educated in the
Academies, where if they be not very dull, they cannot fail of becoming good
Historians, and Indifferent Statesmen. For, their Libraries abound with all
Manner of Ancient and Modern Writers; and their Conversation is generally
refined and pregnant in Intrigues.

But they corrupt their Learning, with false Maxims which they borrow from an
Intolerable Pride and Sensuality; persuading themselves, that they are as far
above other Men, that is, the Laity, as those are above the Beasts; That God
has bestowed on them a Dignity Superior to that of the Greatest Temporal
Monarchs; and, in fine, That this Earth is a Paradise, and themselves the Gods
and Lords of it.

When I speak at this Rate of the Nazarene Priests, understand me not without
Restriction. There are some Good and Holy Men amongst them Persons of
Unblemished Manners, and Incorrupt Sincerity. But, these are very rare; and the
French Priests are esteemed the most sincere of any within the Pale of the
Roman Church.

As for the Italian Clergy, they are mere Libertines; the most debauched and
profligate Fellows in the World.

Adonai the Jew, a late Private Agent of the Grand Signior, who had traveled
up and down through all Italy, and resided a considerable Time in the Chief
Cities and Towns of Note, made many curious Observations and Remarks on the
Lives of the Priests, which he set down in his Journal. This I have by me now,
it being sent me, according to my Desire, after his Death by Zeidi Alamanzi,
his Successor in that Station, who is at present at Venice.

I have perused this Relation my self, with no small Pleasure; and believe
'twill not be unwelcome to thee, to give thee an Abstract of what he says.

It is possible, he may exaggerate some Things, and deliver himself too
partially in others, out of the Natural and Inherent Aversion the Jews have for
the Christians: But thou will find, that in the Main, he insists only on such
Reflections as it becomes any Man to make, who has the least Spark of Common
Morality and Reason.

In the First Place, he finds Fault with the Ecclesiastics, in that they
abstain from Marriage themselves, yet recommend that State to the Laity as a
very Holy Sacrament and Mystery of Religion: Whilst they indulge themselves at
the same Time in all Manner of Lasciviousness, wallowing in Fornication,
Adultery, Incest, and Sodomy it self. He says, there is hardly one Priest in
Ten, who does not keep Two or Three Harlots; and the most Recluse Dervises, are
either Pimps to other Men's Lusts, or they indulge their own with the most
infamous Courtezans and Catamites. These Pretenders to Perfection and Sanctity;
are often found Masquerading and Revelling about the Streets, in the Time of
Carnaval, with a Company of Whores for their Attendance. Nay, all the Year
round their Monasteries are no other than Stews or Brothel-Houses. They
introduce Women into their Cells in a Monastic Habit, and so they pass for Men
who come to visit them as Friends, Relations or Travelers. These Ladies of
Pleasure lie thus concealed for many Days and Nights together. And the Superior
of the Convent winks at this for a little Money, being most commonly as bad as
any of them.

These Holy Fathers, go marching and slouching along the Streets, in the most
Mortified Manner Imaginable. You would take 'em for perfect Santones and
Idiots. Yet this is all but Mummery, whilst they are the most glozing
Hypocrites in the World, mere Devils in a City, and abounding in wicked
Thoughts and Practices.

Adonai tells a pleasant Story of a young Monastic of St. Dominick's Order at
Rome. This Monk was no Noble Extraction, and his Parents were very rich, and
powerful in the City. On which Account he was indulged many Liberties, denied
to the rest of his Religeous Brethren. He was permitted to carry good
Quantities of Gold and Silver about him, for his Personal Expenses; and to wear
a Secular Habit, suitable to his Birth and Quality. But this Liberty had like
to have proved fatal to him one Night during the Carnaval.

It was late, and very dark, when this Religious Bully was beating the Streets,
upon the Hunt for Whores; and walking under certain Piazza's near the River
Tyber, he was accosted by a Woman masked, and in a very good Dress; who spoke
to him frankly, asking him the Way to Il Rotundo. This is the Name of a Church
in Rome, dedicated to All the Saints: In the Time of the Gentiles, 'twas called
Pantheon, or the Temple of all the Gods. The Monk being in one of his Rambling
Equipages, and his Inclinations equally bent on Pleasure; having also a Hundred
Florins about him; presently made Answer, He would conduct her to the Place she
enquired for. She, after some counterfeit Essays of a modest Repulse, at length
accepted his Offer: And by the Way, he persuaded her into a Tavern. The cunning
Nymph managed her Business so well, that the Monk overheated with Wine, and
other costly Entertainments, grew so in Love with her, that he forgot she was
to go to the Pantheon, and offered to wait on her home. She accepted the
Motion; and telling him, her House was seated on the Banks of the Tyber, they
returned the same Way as they came.

When they arrived at the Piazza's, where they first met, Three Persons
appeared, muffled up in Cloaks: Two of which suddenly seized the Monk, holding
their Ponyards at his Breast; whilst the Third, disclosing the hidden Light of
a Dark Lanthorn, which he held in his Hand, fastened on the Lady, and made her
unmask. As soon as he saw her Face, he stamped and raved, menaced and swore, he
would be the Death of that Villain who had debauched his Wife. All this was but
a fore-laid Design. In a Word, After all the Parts of an abused, incensed,
revengeful Husband, acted to the Life; at last through the Intercession of the
Two other Ruffians, and the Monk's penitent and submissive Address, it was
concluded to spare his Life and only strip him naked; leaving him in that
Condition to seek his Fortune among the Watch.

This was soon put in Execution, and the Free-booters, with all their Prey,
securely marched off. The poor Monk, thus miserably abandoned, without
Garments, Money, or any Thing to comfort him in his Calamity, or to bribe the
Watch, gave himself over to Melancholy and Despair, in regard this Accident
would bring an Eternal Infamy on him, and he should be no longer able to show
his Face in Rome, the Seat of his Nativity; nor among any of his Kindred and
Friends. Sometimes he thought to drown himself in the Tyber; or else to
counterfeit a Phrensy, and so run bawling, driveling, and talking Nonsense
through the Streets; hoping the rest would never be divulged.

Whilst he was in these pensive Thoughts, irresolute what to do, the Watch
walking their Rounds, bolted upon him on a sudden; and seeing a naked Man, at
that Time of Night, in such a solitary Place, at first were startled, as though
they had met a Ghost; but recollecting themselves better, they boldly seized
his Person, and examined how he came in that Condition.

It was in vain for him to beg, entreat, and promise any Thing, if they would
not expose him to open Shame. This did but increase their Curiosity and
Suspicion. In a Word, the Place of their Rendezvous being very near the same
Tavern where this unfortunate Monk had regaled his Strumpet, they led him
thither, and kept him Prisoner till the Morning. He that kept the House
remembered his Face again; and knowing that the Governor of Rome had a secret
Enmity against the Monk, and all his Race, sent him private Intelligence of
this Adventure, encouraging him to take this Opportunity of Revenge; hinting
withal, That he need not take notice, that he knew the Monk, but only punish
him as an ordinary Fellow, breaking the Laws of the City.

The Governor, glad of this Occasion; when the Monk was brought before him,
ordered him to be whipped through the very Street, where his Monastery stood.
This was done accordingly; and as he passed by the Gate, his Brethren, seeing
him in that Condition, rushed out, and rescued him from the Executioner's
Hands; breathing Revenge against the Governor, and all that were concerned in
putting this Dishonor on their House, and the whole Order.

I must be forced to break off, before I have informed thee of half their
Tricks; lest I should tire thee with the Length of my Letters. Besides, it is
necessary for me to conclude, unless I would miss my Opportunity: For the Post
tarries for no Man.

Venerable Hadgi, live thou to enjoy the Serene Pleasure of Virtue and
Innocence, and pray for Mahmut, that he may never be stained with the
Corruptions and Vices of Infidels, among whom he resides.

Paris, 18th. of the 5th. Moon, of the Year 1662.
LETTER XIII. To the Chiaus Bassa.
THE French King's Genius seems altogether bent on Martial and Politic
Affairs; and though he allows some Moments to his Love, yet the greatest Part of
his Time is consecrated to the Necessary Affairs of State, and to the
Improvement of Military Discipline. This has been his Course ever since the
Death of Cardinal Mazarini. That Minister, whilst he was living, endeavored
Nothing so earnestly as to divert the Young Monarch from minding Business, by
Plays, Ballets and other soft Entertainments. But as soon as he was dead, the
King began by Degrees to forsake his Youthful Recreations, and look into the
Affairs of his Government.

The first Bold Stroke of Regal Authority which he gave, was the Suppressing
the Superintendant of the Finances, a very Ancient Office in France, but much
abused of late by those who have enjoyed it. For, having the Management of the
Royal Revenues, it has been found out, That they embezzel'd them to their own
private Uses, purchasing Houses, Castles, Towns and the fairest Estates in the
Kingdom for them and their Posterity.

The last in this Office, was the Sieur Fouquet; who, besides the waste he made
of the King's Money in this Kind, was laying up an Extrordinary Provision of
Arms and Powder in Belle Isle, a Seaport of France: which gave the King so
great a Suspicion of his ill Designs, That he went in Person after him as far
as Nantes; and being there farther informed of a private Correspondence held
between the Sieur Fouquet, and some Malcontents of Cardinal de Retz's Party,
he caused him to be arrested, and sent Prisoner to the Wood of Vinciennes: From
whence he has been since brought to the Bastile. This was done in the 9th Moon
of the last Year; and was the Occasion of erecting a New Chamber of Justice, to
enquire into the Conduct of those who were employed by Fouquet in the
Management of the Finances.

The great Discoveries this Chamber has already made, of the Cheats and Tricks
practiced by those through whose Hands the King's Revenues have passed, will,
its thought, move the King to establish it as a perpetual and Sovereign Court
of Inquisition: So that not the Value of an Asper shall henceforth be paid out
of the Royal Treasury, without the Approbation of this Chamber. He has also
retrenched many superfluous Offices in his Household, that he may the more
easily support the Charges of those that are Necessary.

Thou will better comprehend the Wisdom of this Prince, when thou shall know,
that he trusts Nothing absolutely to his Ministers, but pries into every Thing
himself. He examins Matters of the smallest Moment, as narrowly as the most
Important Concerns. He makes daily Reformations among his Domestic Servants,
and New-Models both the Army and the State. Which is also no small Argument of
his Courage, and the Greatness of his Spirit, in that he dares contradict the
Methods of all his Progenitors; take the Frame of this Mighty Government, as it
were to Pieces, and having mended every Thing that was amiss, join it together
again; but after a Pattern wholly depending on his own Judgment. This has
astonished the Greatest Statesmen of the Age, who consider the Boldness of the
Undertaking, and yet cannot find one false Step in his Measures. For whereas
formerly, the Princes of the Blood, the Officers of the State, the Governors
of Provinces, with other Grandees, have given frequent Trouble to the Kings of
France, and not seldom raised Civil War, when any Thing disgusted them (so
great was their Power, and so small their Dependence on the King:) This Monarch
has, by a Happy Effect of his Judgment and Resolution, given so dextrous a Turn
to the whole System of the Public, that the Princes find themselves more
aggrandiz'd than Ever; the Officers of the Crown perceive their Dignity
increased with New Lustres, and the Governors of Provinces exercise a Stronger
Hand over their Subjects; yet all of them are reduced to an entire Dependence
on the King himself, not being in a Capacity ever to Rebel again. Which is
esteemed a Miracle of Policy.

As he has thus gained the Point of his Subjects at Home, and established his
Realm in the most perfect Economy that can be imagined; so he has recovered a
particular Honor Abroad, that till this Time has been always disputed between
the Crowns of France and Spain.

It seems an Ambassador from Sueden arrived at the English Court in the 10th.
Moon of the last Year: The French Ambassador sent his Coaches to honor his
Public Entry, as is Usual between Friends. But the Spanish Ambassador,
designing to affront the French, sent his Coaches also to attend the Ceremony,
accompanied by his own Servants and a Rabble of Idle Persons whom he had hired
on Purpose. These fell on the French as they were passing along the Street,
killed several of them, and by Force stopped their Coaches, till those of the
Spanish Ambassador were got before them; the Pre-eminence of Place being the
Chief Thing aimed at.

This was highly resented at the French Court, and every body thought that a
fresh War would break out again between the Two Nations on this Account. The
angry Young Monarch commanded the Spanish Ambassador resident here to depart
the Kingdom; and when another was sent to supply his Place, the King forbad him
to enter his Dominions. Complaints were made at Madrid, and all Things tended
to a Rupture. Till at Length the King of Spain, having promised to make
Satisfaction, his Ambassador war received at this Court, who assured the King,
That his Master disavow'd the Action of his Minister in England, and had given
express Command to all his Ambassadors in Foreign Courts, not to dispute the
Place with those of France, but to yield it to the latter, where they should
both be present at the same Entry. This was declared in the Presence of Thirty
Foreign Ministers residing at this Court. Which has raised a vast Reputation to
the King of France among all his Neighbors, and struck the greater Reverence
into his Subjects at Home.

In a word he is looked upon as the most Fortunate Prince in Christendom, and
every State courts his Friendship. He gives the Law to the rest of Europe, yet
remains himself Arbitrary and above Control.

How long his Affairs will continue at this Height, is known only to God, who
exalts and abases whom he pleases; who is the sole Monarch of all Things,
Reigning for ever without the least Shadow of Revolution or Change.

Paris, 12th. of the 7th. Moon, of the Year 1662.
LETTER XIV. To the Same.
IT was late when I finished my other Letter, being the Hour of the Devil's
Range, when the Infernal Spirits are permitted to air themselves in this Upper
World. Methought I heard the Clattering Echo of the Gates of Paradise, which
are shut at that Season to keep out the Demons from entering and disturbing the
Repose of the Blessed. This made me conclude so abruptly, lest some busy
Scribe of the Dark Regions, should have inserted Evil in my Letter whilst I
were asleep. I recommended my self to God, and went to Bed. After Two Hours
Rest awaking, I perceived by the Crowing of the Cocks, That the Troops of Hell
were retired to their Den, chased down by Arcturus, and the Guardian
Constellations of the South, and by the Angels of the Second Watch. Then I
arose, and cheerfully addressed my self to God, praising him for the Successive
Benefits of Day and Night, and extolling his Magnificent Works, with the
exquisite Order that he has established in the World. Remembering also that I
was a Man, and not born to sleep, but to serve the Grand Signior and my
Friends, I readily set Pen to Paper again, to give thee a farther Account of
the French King and his Court, with such Occurrences as have happened of late.

This Monarch is very Singular in his Conduct, and Manner of Life; not brooking
to be confined to the Maxims of others, but squaring all his Actions by Rules
of his own: Yet it is difficult to find a Fault in his Proceedings. He hears the
Advice of his Counselors and Friends; and when they have done, he convinces
them in many Things, That they are under a Mistake; which makes 'em admire the
Force of his Reason, and the Readiness of his Wit, especially when they see the
Events answering Expectation.

Neither is he altogether so Intent on State-Matters, but that he sometimes
gives himself the Diversion of a Familiar Discourse with the most Ingenious
Artists of all Sorts, who find themselves much improved by the Quickness of his
Invention, and the Solidity of his Judgment in the Mechanics: For he is an
Excellent Gun-Smith, Sword-Cutler, Armour-Maker, and every Thing that becomes a
King to profess.

He is a good Architect also, and takes vast Delight in Buildings, having laid
the Foundations of several Magnificent Structures, Palaces of a Noble Design,
and intended to outvy the most Polite and Glorious Fabrics, of Ancient Greece
and Rome. For, I tell thee, this Monarch would not willingly come short of any
of the Caesar's.

At the Beginning of this Year, he aggrandiz'd his Court, by a Promotion of
Sixty Two Knights of the Holy Spirit. I have often mentioned this Order in my
Letters to the Ministers of the Port; and thou that have beeen in France
know, That it is the next Step to being made Peer of the Realm. I shall only
inform thee, that during the Ceremonies of this last Promotion, the Dukes of
Vendosme and Longueville had a Feud about the Precedence, which at last was
adjusted in Favor of the Former. In a Word, the King declared the House of
Vendosme to have a Right of Priority before all other Princes, and to succeed
in the Throne it self, next after the House of Bourbon.

This is looked upon as a Bold Effort of Royal Power, and has startled all the
Court. No less surprised were they to see the Duke of Lorrain resign all his
Estates to the King of France, reserving only the Possession of 'em during his
Life,

And, now the King having weathered the Point with all his Enemies, both
Foreign and Domestic, studies Nothing more earnestly, than to divert his
Queen, and to let his Subjects taste the Sweets of Peace, the Effect of his
Matchless Fortune, to which even Crowned Heads find themselves compelled to
stoop and submit.

On the 5th. of the foregoing Moon, by his Appointment was held a Tournament or
Carousel, as the French call it. This is a Sort of Exercise on Horseback, in
Imitation of the Ancient Manner of Fighting with Spear and Shield.

The Place where they run, was raild about, and Magnificent Choiscs erected for
the Queen and Ladies of the Court to sit in, as Spectators. The Divertisement
was very Pompous; And the King was one of the Combatants. The Rest were the
Duke of Orleans the King's Brother, the Prince of Conde, the Duke of Enguien
Son to the Prince, and the Duke of Guize. Each of these led a Troop of Horse
into the Field. That of the King's was habited after the Manner of the Old
Roman Knights. The Duke of Orleans's made a Figure like the Persians; the
Prince of Conde's represented the Ottomans. The Duke of Enguien's Troop were in
Indian Habits; and the Duke of Guise's appeared like the Salvages of America.
It would be too tedious to describe the Particular Magnificences of each.
Suffice it to say, That they were all prodigiously Majestic and Rich in their
Equipage. The Courses also they made, were Brave and full of Gallantry. But the
Prize, which was a Diamond of Great Value, was adjudged to the Prince of Conde
by the Queen Mother.

One of the Former Kings of France, lost his Life at this Royal Exercise, being
run through the Eye into the Brain by the Spear of an English Knight then at
the French Court, and one of the Combatants: For which Reason, the Following
Kings of France, forbore to expose themselves to the like Danger. But this
Young Mars fears nothing, being as Venturous and Bold as was Sultan Amurat, the
Trophies of whose Victorious Combat with the Persian Challenger at the Siege of
Babylon hang up in the Treasury to this Day, as Monuments of his invincible
Courage and Strength. Sultan Achmet also took great Delight in throwing the
Lance with his Courtiers in the Atmeidan. These are Sports fit for Kings and
Great Generals. And some of the Roman Caesar's themselves would play the
Gladiators.

It is not lawful for me to censure or reflect on the Actions of my Sovereign.
But I will tell thee what the French say of him by Way of Contempt; That he
never Combated in his own Person, with any Thing but Timorous Hares and Hinds.
It makes me blush to hear the Great Emperor of the East thus blasphemed by the
Profane Mouths of Infidels. And it were to be wished, he would do some
surprising Action, to raise himself another Character. I say no more, but
recommend thee to God and the White Angel.

Paris, 12th. of the 7th. Moon, of the Year 1662.
LETTER XV. To Zedi Alamanzi, a Merchant at Venice.
THOU have obliged me beyond my Expectation, in that Ample History of thy Life,
which thy Letter contains. I esteem thee not the worse, because thou were born
of Christian Parents; but rather put the higher Value on thy Merit, in that
being bred in Superstition and Error, Thou have voluntarily embraced the Truth,
without any Prospect of advancing thy Interest.

When a Man of a Noble Stock, born to Riches and Honors, bred in Softnesses
and Delights, and actually possessed of a fair Estate, shall thus abandon his
Country, his Relations, Friends and Acquaintance, with all his Native Rights
and Enjoyments, purely for the Love of God, resigning himself wholly to the
Will of Destiny, and the Conduct of Providence, without consulting his own Ease
and Delight in this World; it is an Evident Sign of a Faithful Heart, and that
his Integrity is without Stain.

All this and much more, it seems, thou have done, and therefore thou can
not fail of being Happy in this World, and in Paradise.

I am extremely pleased in reading the various Adventures of thy Youth, thy
early Inclinations to visit Foreign Countries, and thy Actual Travels through
Europe, Asia, and Africa. This is the only Way to learn true and complete
Wisdom. For, a Man edifies a Thousand Times more by his own Personal Experience
of Things, than by all the most Elegant Descriptions, that can be made by
others. Besides the Advantage of becoming expert in the several Languages and
Dialects of the Earth; which he can never learn so perfectly in Books, as by
conversing with the Natives of each Country through which he passes.

Beyond all this, there is an infinite Pleasure in seeing the Variety of
Objects, which every where expose themselves to a Travelers Eye. There is
nothing more delightful to Humane Nature, than to try all Things. Man is cloyed
with what is too Familiar to him. The most Magnificent Palace, would appear as
a Prison to him that were always Confined to it. The Greatest Fields, and most
shady Groves, would afford us no Refreshment, if we had not Liberty to straggle
out of them when we pleased. Man is Naturally wild as other Animals, and it is
as bad as Death to be restrained of his Freedom. I had rather at certain
Seasons, range in a Wilderness, all overrun with Weeds and Briars, than in the
most Regular and Fragrant Garden in the World. I would willingly choose the
Fatigue of Climbing up a High, Steep, Craggy Mountain, for the sake of a new
and larger Prospect; before the Ease of walking always in a Low Valley, or Even
Plain, though graced with never so many Inviting Objects, which must always be
the same: So fulsom are the very Pleasures we are daily accustomed to.

I doubt not, but that it was very agreeable to thee in thy Journeys, when
every Remove thou made'st from Stage to Stage, promised thee Something Novel
and fresh. A Man in such Cases, is apt to think the Sun himself New, who has
shined upon him from his Nativity: The Air, the Earth, and Waters, appear not
the same Elements, in different Places; or if our Reason convinces us their
Nature is not changed, yet we look upon 'em as Masquerades, every Day in a New
Dress: Especially when we go from one Region and Climate to another, the
Strangeness of the Disguise is heightened. So Infinite a Variety presents its
self to those who travel.

But nothing affords a Man greater Delight, than to be familiarly acquainted
with the different Habits, Laws, Customs, Manners, and Religions of Mortals
like himself. To see 'em in one Part of the World Adoring the Sun, because he
shines on 'em but once A Year, whilst all the Rest of the Time they are shut up
in Continual Darkness, very near being starved with Cold, and making hard
shifts to live; in another to behold 'em grimacing, and hear 'em cursing that
Glorious Planet, because he is always to near 'em, rendering their Countries
Barren, drying up their Water, and scorching their Persons almost to Death;
must needs be delightful to a Contemplative Man. And for ought we know, the
Laughter of Democritus might be the Result of as good Thoughts as Heraclitus's
Tears. Who would not smile to see some paying Divine Honors to the Scar-Crow
of their Garden, to a Tree, a Hog, a Dog or any Thing they first cast their
Eyes on in the Morning as they do in Lapland? And yet who can forbear to weep,
when he sees Men professing to believe the Laws of Moses, and the Messiah, (who
both preached up the Divine Unity) pretending to the Purest Religion in the
World, and bred in the Study of the Sciences; worship Stocks and Stones,
Pictures and Images, Nails, Rags, Bones, Hairs, Bits of old Wood, or any Thing,
that their cunning Priest impose upon 'em as Adorable?

Happy art thou, Zeidi, who art freed from these Superstitions of the
Nazarenes; and Thrice Happy, in that thou have changed 'em for the Faith
unblemished, the Doctrines of Truth and Reason, the Practices of Sincere
Morality and Virtue. Thou have not shunned a Rock, to fall into a Quicksand, nor
abandoned Idolatry, to sink into Atheism: But thou have escaped from Narrow
Gulphs and Streights, into a Free and Open Sea; from the Dark Fogs and Mists of
Frozen Christianity, to the bright Empire of the Osmans, the Serene Company of
True-Believers, where Charity and Zeal are in their Genuine and Primitive
Warmth.

Since the Time that thou first lifted'st up thy Finger to Heaven, and made a
Confession of One God, and Mahomet his Apostle, none of the Imaum's or Mollah's
have ever attempted to circumvent thy Reason with Feigned Miracles, Foolish
Pilgrimages, Tales of Old Women, Fictions of Poets, or any Holy Frauds. Thou
perceivest nothing but Rightdown Integrity, in the Conversation of the
Faithful. Whereas the Christians whom thou have justly deserted, have a
Thousand Windings and Turnings, Foldings and Intricacies, in their Doctrines
and Lives. So that it is almost as easy for a Blind-Man to walk from Paris to
Constantinople, as for these Infidels to grope out the way to Paradise, through
so many Meanders and Mazes: They are involved in a perfect Circle of Error and
Vice.

Praise be to God, who planted the Moon in the Heavens, and causes the Stars to
dart their Refreshing Rays by Night, Thou art happily delivered out of their
Snares. Let not thy Residence now among them, ever tempt thee to return to the
Religious Vanities of Holy Trifles, which have once made thee Sick at the
Heart. Remember, that thou bear in thy Body the Mark of a True Believer, the
Seal of a Great Sacrament, the Character of a Profound Mystery, Circumcision,
the Emblem of Purity, by which thou art more enobl'd than by the Blood of the
Polonian Lord, thy Father, which streams in thy Veins. For now thou art
incorporated into the Society and Lineage of Ibrahim, the Illustrious
Patriarch, and Friend of God. Consider that thou art as it were engrafted into
the Glorious Stock of the Ismaelites, born to subdue all Things, and in the
determined Time, to possess the Empire of the Universe. Thou have the Honor
also to serve the Grand Signior, Lord of the Climates and Seas, Majestic Heir
of the Ottomans House, Shadow of God on Earth.

Hold fast therefore the Profession of an Unblameable Faith: And whatever
Temptations thou may meet with, keep thy Mind always fixed on the unseen
Joys of Paradise, the Crown of Just and Faithful Men, the Reward of such as
adhere to God and his Prophet, without Flinching.

Mahmut salutes thee in Imagination, with a parting Kiss, and an Affectionate
Squeeze of the Hand. Which thou know, was in all Ages a Token of Hearty Good
Will, and Friendship.

Paris, 15th. of the 9th. Moon, of the Year 1662.
LETTER XVI. To the Kaimacham.
THere is like to be a Breach between this Court and that of Rome, if the Pope
does not condescend to the Demands of the French King, who Styles himself the
Eldest Son of the Church, and therefore highly resents an Indignity that has
been done him of late, in the Person of the Duke of Crequi, his Ambassador at
the Roman Court.

It seems, the Pope's Guards on the 20th. of the 8th. Moon, made an Attempt on
the Life of this Minister, and of his Wife: They also put Barbarous Abuses on
all the French that were in that City: Insomuch as the Duke and Duchess of
Crequi, were obliged to quit Rome privately, and retire into Toscany; being
advised to take this Course, by all the Cardinals and other Grandees, that are
Friends to France.

The King received News of this, by an Express which came from the Duke of
Crequi on the 11th. of the 9th. Moon. And he was passionately touched at so
Sacrilegious an Injury, whereby he is not only wronged himself, but the Law of
Nations is violated in a most Notorious Manner.

Wherefore to show his Resentments, on the same Day that the Courtier came from
Rome, the King ordered the Lieutenant of his Guards, to tell the Pope's Nuncio
at this Court, That he must forthwith depart the Kingdom, under the Conduct of
Thirty Horse. This was performed accordingly, and the Nuncio was hurried away
immediately, without suffering him to speak with any Person living, save those
who were to accompany him to the Frontiers: And this Order was publicly
proclaimed in Paris. The King also wrote to the Pope, demanding Satisfaction
for so horrible an Outrage, and caused Dispatches to be sent to all the
Cardinals in Rome, advising them to contribute what lay in their Powers,
toward a good Understanding between the Pope and him, protesting that
otherwise the Calamities which might follow, were not to be laid to his Charge.
This is a modest way of Threatening, used by Christian Princes who do not always
speak in Thunder, like our Eastern Monarchs when they menace War.

I relate this as a Thing, which though it appear of small Moment at the
Beginning, yet its Consequences may be great and extensive, if the French King
and the Pope should come to an open Rupture. All the Princes in Europe would
find themselves engaged on one Side or other. And we Mussulmans might live to
see the whole State of Christendom disjoynted, alienated, and embroiled in Wars
among themselves; whereby they would lay their Countries naked and open, to the
invincible Arms of the Ottomans, a Lineage of high Renoun, and destined to
subdue All Things.

But it is thought the Holy Father at Rome, will not farther provoke so daring
and powerful a Monarch as him of France, by justifying the Insolences of his
Janissaries, who proceeded to that Height of Fury, as to discharge Guns into the
Windows of the French Ambassador, killed several of his Retinue, and
assassinated the Duchess of Crequi in her Coach, as she passed along the
Streets;

Illustrious Minister, these are Violations not practiced by the most Barbarous
Savages. And it is an evident Sign of a decaying Empire, where the Public Faith
is thus perfidiously broke. God infatuates the Infidels, that he may speedily
bring 'em to Ruin: Whereas he daily enlightens the Just Followers of the
Prophet, and directs them in the ways of Prosperity and Peace.

Paris, 3d. of the 11th. Moon, of the Year 1662.
LETTER XVII. To Mohammed, the Illustrious Eremit of Mount Uriel in Arabia.
IN the Name of God, Benign and Merful, I approach the Residence of great
Sanctimony, the Tremendous Solitude, the Cave blessed by frequent Visitations
of Angels, and by the former Presence of the most Sublime among Mortals,
Mahomet the Legate of the Eternal, the Plenipotentiary of Alla, King of Heaven
and Earth. Alla! There is but One! Whose Name resounds through all the Orbs
Above, when pronounced by the Faithful Adorers of the Divine Unity on Earth:
And the Echo thereof from the Adamantine Gates of Paradise, reaches the Abyss
of Hell, striking the Infernal Spirits with Horror and Astonishment. They
tremble at the Sound of the Dreadful Word, which chains them up in their
Prisons of Darkness. Whereas had they Faith, they would rather rejoice,
believing, that the same Word will one Day release 'em from their Torments. For
such is the Clemency of the Omnipotent, as our Holy Doctors teach.

O Mohammed, Friend of the Most High, and Tenant to his Prophet; I have
experienced, that it is good and wholesome to begin every Thing we do or say,
in the Name of God. Whosoever does otherwise, either fails in the Progress, or
the End of his Design, and so remains in Confusion. Tagot creeps into his
Enterprise, and through Malice spoils it, robbing a Man of his Crown: Or
Negidher, the Spirit of Envy, winds himself in, and entangles it: Or Ablis, the
Demon of Melancholy, casts a Damp on it, and bereaves the Undertaker of his
Joy. Such is the Fate of those who through Profaneness, Sloth, or Contempt,
forget to pay the due Veneration we owe to the Author and Source of Providence,
and Good Success.

Let us not therefore think the Time misspent, which is taken up in the Praises
of Him who has neither Beginning nor End, Father of all the Ganerations in this
Visible World, and that Other which is concealed from Mortals. He is the
Governor of our Lives, and our sole Patron in all Necessities. Let us extol
and magnify his Attributes without End.

I am by Nature Contemplative, and Thoughtful; but I must needs acknowledge,
That I owe to my Education among the Musselmans the Force of my Faith and
Religion. The various turns of Fortune and Experience, which I have had in the
World, could never yet blot out the impressions of my Early Years, or diminish
the Reverence I have for our Holy Prophet. I often revolve in my Mind, the
Series of past Ages, and the Histories of former Times; the Origin of Nations,
and the Various Laws, Religions, Wars and Changes. I traverse the different
Epocha's of the Posterity of Ibrahim, and the Gentiles, comparing the Date of
Israel's Transmigration out of Egypt, with the Years of Nabonassar and the
Olympiads, In all of them I find great Obscurity, Contradiction and
Doubtfulness, which puts me upon examining the Records of Egypt and the
Assyrians. The Antiquity of both is very great, and yet it comes far short of
the Chinese Chronology, and that of the Indian Bramins.

When I have tired my Soul with a vain Search of that which can never be
discovered; When I consider the Probability of an Universal Deluge in the Time
of Noah, and the Arguments which almost demonstrate the contrary, comparing
this with the Flood of Deucalion, and that other of Ogyges: In a Word, when I
reflect on the numberless Incongruities that are found in the Registers of Past
Ages, I cannot but conclude, there is as much Reason for me to believe, That
God has determinately thus dark'ned the Knowledge of Mortals, as that he
confounded their Language at Babel, according to the Celebrated Relation of
Moses. Whence it will be but lost Labor for us who live in these later Times,
to seek for any Assurance or Certainty of the Truth in Matters of so Remote and
Early a Date.

Wherefore leaving every Nation to their own Traditions, the Jews to the
Manuscripts of Moses, and their Rabbi's, the Gentiles to the Fragments of
Hermes Trismegistus, Orpheus, Homer, Hesiod, Theophrastus and other Sages of
Egypt, Phoenicia and Greece; I, for my Part, acquiesce to the Volume of
Majesty, the Great Alcoran; and to the Writings of our Holy Doctors, Arabians,
the Sons of Ismael; not puzzling my self with endless Disputes and Questions;
nor censuring others who Worship God after their own Way, and the Documents of
their Fathers; but firmly believing, That he who serves God according to the
Dictates of his Reason; who is Just to Men and Beasts, and in all Things
conserves an Innocent Purity of Life; is as Acceptable to the Great Creator,
and Impartial Judge of the Universe, as he that has had the Happiness to be
instructed in the Positive Injunctions of Heaven, the Revealed Will of the
Omnipotent. And this I take to be the Sense of our Holy Lawgiver, of the
Messiah, and of all the Prophets in General.

Doubtless, that superlatively Merciful and Indulgent, connives at the
Frailties of Mortals; He pities the Invincible Ignorances of some, and the
Fatal Necessities of others. He knows the infinite Variety of our Bodily
Constitutions, and the equally different Bent of our Souls. He considers the
Force of the Elements and Climates wherein we live, and the unconquerable
Influence of the Stars under which we were Born. The whole System of Human
Nature with its most hidden Circumstances, is exposed to the Eyes of him who
sees All Things. He is no Stranger to the Anatomy of his own Works. Therefore
he requires no more of Men, than can be expected from the Faculties with which
he has endu'd 'em. Neither will he damn any Man for an Involuntary Evil.

O Mohammed, this is my Faith, my Hope, and my Confidence. Otherwise I should
despair every Moment. If I am guilty of Error and Presumption, Correct me in
thy Wisdom. For, before thee, I am but as an Idiot.

Paris, 22d. of the 12th. Moon, of the Year 1662.
LETTER XVIII. To Hasnadar-Bassi, Chief Treasurer to his Highness.
THE French have newly felt the Motions of a Joy, whose Birth and Growth was
like that of a Mushroom, sudden and swift, the Product of a very little Time,
and which ended in Mourning and Tears. The Moon of November beheld a Daughter
born to the Queen of France: But that Planet had hardly carried the News
through all the Signs of the Zodiac, and commanded the Stars of France to
celebrate a Dunalma; before she was obliged to be the Messenger of more sad
Tidings, and to proclaim the Death of this Young Princess, to the
Constellations that assisted at her Birth.

In a Word: She was born on the 18th. of the 11th. Moon, and died on the 30th.
of the 12th. It looks as if she only came into the World to be a Witness of the
Conclusion of the Peace between her Father, Lewis XIV. and her Grandfather,
Philip, the King of Spain; and so return to the Region of Separate Souls.

This Peace was in General Terms signed and sealed long ago, but there remained
some Difficulties in adjusting the Limits of the French Conquests, which were
referred to the Management of Commissioners on both Sides: And these, after
they had debated the Matter for the Space of Two Years, at St. Omers, Arras,
and Metz, at length finished their Negotiation on the 25th. of the 11th. Moon,
of the last Year. Which was just Seven Days after the Nativity of the French
Princess.

This Royal Infant also lived to see Dunkirk, one of the strongest Seaports in
the World, re-deliver'd to her Father by the English, in whose Hands it had
been, ever since 'twas first taken from the Spaniards. The King took Possession
of this Important Place in his own Person, entering the Town on the 2d. of the
last Moon.

It Is looked upon as a grand Oversight in the English, thus tamely to part with
a Fortress which is inexpugnable be Land, and commands the Northern Seas. But
Money overrules all other Considerations. And, it seems, the English Court had
Occasion for Gold.

There is lately a good Understanding established between this King and the
Emperor of Germany. They often write Friendly Letters one to another, and seem
to be perfectly reconciled. To speak the Truth, this may be called the Pacifick
Year among the Inhabitants of Europe. For, excepting some Skirmishes and
Bravado's of War between the Spaniards and the Portugueze, all the Rest of
Christendom is in Peace. And the Portugueze have so strengthened themselves by
marrying their Infanta to the English King, that what through his Assistance
and the Aid of France, she has almost reduced Spain to a Necessity of making
Peace.

Thou will say the Portugueze have overreach'd the English in the Dowry they
give with their Infanta. This is only the Town of Tangier in Barbary. A Place
which will cost them far more to defend against the Moors, than it is really
worth. For, those bold Africans will perpetually assault the Town, and oblige
the King of England to maintain a vast Garrison in it, besides a Multitude of
other Expenses. This makes the Portugueze secretly smile, to find themselves
handsomely rid of Two great and burdensome Charges, a Daughter of the Royal
Blood, and an Old Fortress of no Use or Service, save only to diminish the
Public Treasure, and make away with some Thousands of Men every Year.

Illustrious Grandee, it is no small Encouragement to the poor Exiled Mahmut,
that though he be malign'd, slandered, and persecuted by his Enemies, yet he
still finds Protection and Friendship from the Principal Ministers. And that
instead of Checks and Reproaches, to which I was formerly accustomed, my Salary
is now augmented to the Proportion of my Necessary Expenses; Money is sent me
with a Liberal Hand, and my Slanderers are put to Silence and Shame.

Thou may accquaint the Divan, that there is now at this Cour, the Eldest
Son to the King of Denmark. What his Business is, People conjecture variously.
Some say it is Love, others affirm 'twas only the Desire of seeing Foreign
Courts drew this Prince from his Native Country.

Thou may also inform them, that the Duke of Savoy has married a Princess of
the Blood Royal, they call her Mademoiselle de Valois. Eliachim the Jew lies
dangerously sick of a Fever.

As for me, who never had my perfect Health since I came to Paris, yet I retain
a sound Mind, and a Heart inviolably devoted to the Interest of the Grand
Signior: Whom God long preserve on the Throne of the Ottomans.

Paris, 10th. of the 1st. Moon, of the Year 1663.
LETTER XIX. To the Kaimacham.
HERE is a Man come to this City, a Calabrian by Birth, and of all Countries by
Education; For he has been a Traveller from his Infancy, if what he relates of
himself be true. He speaks all or most of the Languages of Europe very
fluently, and is resorted to by People of diverse Countries, under the Character
of a Fortune Tellers and Physician. He performs both Parts to the Admiration of
all that have been with him.

The Princes and Nobles of France visit him daily, and so do Persons of Meaner
Birth. They discover to him their Secret Maladies, and this Apollo seldom fails
of Success in curing them. He bestows Ten Hours A Day in freely conversing with
People of all Ranks and Qualities; healing the Diseases of some, and telling to
others their Future Destinies.

I went to his Chamber one Day, not to learn my Fate (for I have little Faith
in Modern Prophets or Astrologers; Nor to be cured of any Distemper, having no
Esteem for Quacks and Empericks; besides, I was in good Health at that Time)
but Curiosity was the only Motive which led me thither, that I might improve my
self in other Respects by this Stranger's Company, and learn something which I
knew not before of Foreign Courts, whereby I might become more Serviceable to
the Grand Signior in this Station, and farther unravel the Secrets of Christian
Princes. For so it often falls out, that a Man reaps some Considerable
Advantage from the Society of Travelers and Men of Experience: And I had good
Reason to hope for some Profit by this Man's Acquaintance, who is thought
worthy to be Courted by the Grandees of France.

Wherefore I addressed my self to him with Abundance of Ceremony and Regard;
using also as much Dissimulation as I thought necessary to conceal my self and
the Design I had in coveting his Friendship. I seemed a great Admirer of
Judicial Astrology, and told him I was very ambitious to learn the Rudiments of
that Science from him, having heard his Skill highly commended not only by
Vulgar Fame, but by the Mouths of Men of Sense and Quality, who gave him a fair
Character. I said a great deal more to insinuate my self into his good Opinion.
But there being Company with him, he returned my Compliments with much
Civility, and desired me to come to him at a more convenient Season, and to
leave my Name, that he might order his Servants to give me a kind Reception at
any Time, if he himself should be out of the Way, because it was Common to send
many from the Door without introducing 'em. I told him my Name was Titus of
Moldavia, and that my Business at Paris was to study in the Academy, in Order
to my Preferment in the Church. When he had taken this down in Writing, with
the Hour and Minute of the Day, after the Manner of Astrologers, he begged me
to excuse the Necessity he was under of returning to his Company; and so I took
my Leave.

Not many Days after, I went to him again, full of Hopes that I should benefit
much by his Company. But as soon as he saw me, he surpised me with this
Language:

"Sir, you have ventured much in coming to me: For now it is in my Power, to
discover you and your Business in this City. But if I should betray any Man, my
Gift would be taken from me. I am neither a Follower of Moses, Jesus or
Mahomet, nor of any Sect that is now extant on Earth: But I adore the Spirit
and Soul of the Universe, which is Eternal and Infinite. Therefore I hate no
Man for his Religion, let it be what it will. And you that are not what you
seem to be, shall receive no more Hurt from me in this Place, than the
Coadjutor of Paris: For I am of no Party or Faction. All Men are equally my
Friends, who do me no Wrong, and every Place is my Home."

Thou may imagine that I was in no small Astonishment at this Discourse. But
recollecting my Spirits, and considering it had always been my Opinion. That
these Fortune Tellers deal by Confederacy; and suspecting that my Name being
known to him so long before, it was not difficult for him to inform himself
something of me; or that somebody of his Acquaintance who knew me, had seen me
go in and out from him, and so told him some of my Circumstances; I made a Show
of going away dissatisfied, saying, It will be but lost Time to hearken any
longer to you: For I perceive you know nothing of me, in telling me I Am not the
Man I seem to be. No, replied he, with an obliging Kind of Earnestness, you are
an Arabian, and serve some Eastern Prince Incognito. Then he went on, and told
me in a few Words some Former Passages of my Life. He hinted at the Dangers I
had been in, during my Residence at Paris; mentioned my Captivity at Palermo,
and the Rencounter I had with my old Sicilian Master. To be brief, he told me
so many other Things which I knew to be true of my self, that I grew very
uneasy in his Company, and yet durst not depart from him of a sudden, or show
any Discontent. But mustering together all the Dissimulation and Artifice I
could, I turned the Discourse to other Subjects; seeming very Importunate to
learn Astrology of him, and promising him a large Gratuity, if he would teach
me, I fairly took Leave, resolving, if possible, never to see him more,

Never was Man in greater Anxiety, than I was when I came home to my Chamber,
and pondered on what had passed between this Stranger and me. I am not
Credulous of Miracles, Prophecies or pretended Revelations. Yet I protest
solemnly, I could not forbear thinking, he was endu'd with an extraordinary
Faculty of Divining, or at least, that he was an excellent Astrologer. Nay, to
this Day I know not well what to conclude of him. He may, for ought I know, be
a Demon Incarnate, or perhaps he is a Magician. Sometimes I think one Thing,
and sometimes another. If he performs these Prophetic Parts by Confederacy,
still I Am at a Loss how he should come to know so much of me, who always
thought my self the privatest Man in Paris, and have neglected no Methods that
were proper to render me such in Truth. Then I suspect my Old Sicilian Master
is one of this Man's Correspondents, and has told him some of my Circumstances:
For I have no Reason to be jealous of Eliachim the Jew. It must be some such
Way, or else he is more than a Man, that can thus readily penetrate into the
Secrets of a Stranger.

Sage Kaimacham, I pray God defend thee from the Snares of Counterfeits and
False Pretenders.

Paris, 13th. of the 1st. Moon, of the Year 1663.
LETTER XX. To the Captain Bassa.
WHAT I am going to relate would seem Incredible to my self, and for that
Reason I would not give it any Room in a Letter to all the discerning Ministers
of the Port, were it not confirmed by Letters from several Merchants in the
North Parts of Holland to their Correspondents in this City. And they all
agree, That on the 9th. Day of the Moon of November, a Strange Man was seen to
float on the Sea near the Shore, being supported by a Piece of Timber, on which
he sat with a Bottle of Strong Waters in his Hand. Those who first beheld this
Spectacle, were Fishing in a small Boat; and judging him to be the Relic of
some Shipwreck (for there had been Violent Tempests in those Seas about that
Time) made up to him, and took him into their Skiff. He expressed his Gratitude
for this Kindness, in the best Manner he could (for no Body understood his
Language.) And when he was come ashore, he fell on his Knees; and having lift
up his Eyes and Hands to Heaven, he prostrated himself, and kissed the Earth.
His Garments were made of the Skins of Fishes, the Hair of his Head of a Flaxen
Color, and he seemed not to be Faint for Want of Sustenance: Which made every
one conclude, That he had kept up his Spirits with that Chymicai Liquor in the
Bottle, which was near half emptied.

As soon as he saw the Rising Moon, he fell on his Face, and muttered certain
Barbarous Words, knocking his Forehead against the Ground. Then he rose and
danced after a Wild Manner, singing pretty Natural Airs: And at every Stop,
with his Right Hand extended, pointed to that Planet, expressing both in Tone
and Actions much Devotion and Love.

Many Learned Men were sent for, to consider this Stranger, and if possible, by
Signs or other Means to discover from whence he came, and what Fate or Accident
had thus abandoned him to the Fury of the Winds and Waves, to the Extremity of
Hunger, Cold, and Watching; and to the devouring Jaws of Sea Monsters. But all
their Efforts were unsuccessful; They spoke to him in several Languages, and he
answered them, but still in a Dialect different from any of theirs, and
altogether unknown. He seemed to utter his Words in a Tone between whi^ling and
singing; which made some conclude, he was a Chinese, because that People
pronounce many of their Letters after the same Manner So do the Inhabitants of
Tunquin, and Ma^bar, with other Kingdoms in the E^ of Asia, and Letters with
them are as significant as Words with the Europeans. They showed him Globes,
and Maps of the World, done by several Hands, and in various Languages, with
particular Charts of all the Maritine Regions on Earth. But, to no other
Purpose, than to excite his Devotion afresh to the Moon, whose Resemblance he
saw on some of those Papers. He would smile at that Sight, kiss his
Forefinger, and with a Religious Complaisance touch the Figure of that Planet:
Then seeming to be in a wonderful good Humor, he would turn round and fall a
dancing with his Arms stretched, and turned in the same Posture as those who
use Castanets, or Cymbals. Singing all the while a Sort of inarticulate Sounds,
but surprizingly Musical and Sweet. So that Nobody knew what to make of him.

He appeared very temperate, modest, and resigned; refusing no Meats or Drinks
that were offered him; yet neither eat nor drank to Excess. Neither was he
discontented at his Lodging, or any other Usage; though they tried to vex him
several Ways, that they might see how he would vent his Passion. But he smiled
at all, and submitted patiently to every Thing they imposed on him.

One thing was observable, That wherever he saw any Water, he would run to it
immediately, and wash himself, as well as he could in those Circumstances,
never forgetting to sprinkle some toward that Part of the Heaven, where the
Moon was visible. And when they led him into the Fields or Gardens, he would
crop the Grass, and Flowers, and with a composed Look would throw them up in
the Air, adding such Reliious Gestures, as convinced every one, That he did it
in Honor of some Power above. Various were the Conjectures of Men about him;
some were of one Opinion, and others of a quite different. Nobody could
positively conclude any Thing. Neither is it possible, as I Am informed, for the
Wisest Men in those Parts to find out this Mystery.

Perhaps he is such another, as Imaum Rapibabet, a Persian Writer, mentions, who
in the Year of the Hegira 502. was taken up by a Merchant-Ship of India, in the
Streights of Babel-Mandel, pretending to be dumb, but capable of Hearing,
Writing, and expressing himself several other Ways, if any Body could have
understood his Language. At last he was found to be an Ethiopian Slave, run
away from his Master; an Ingenious Fellow, and one that spoke all the Languages
of those Parts; and therefore, that he might be admired, would be sure to write
in a Character of his own Invention, which the greatest Sages could not read.

Mighty Bassa, thou encounterest on that Element, with strange Monsters, and
Creatures under no Name or Predicament that is known, yet none so terrible and
dangerous as Cheats and Impostors. From which I pray Heaven defend thee and me:
For they infest both the Sea and Land.

Paris, 17th. of the 2d. Moon, of the Year 1663.
LETTER XXI. To Nathan Ben Saddi, a Jew (...) Vienna.
THE Term of our long mutual Silence, enjoined us by our Superiors, is now
happily expired; and we have with good Success, managed our separate Parts
without holding any Cerrespondence together. This was only a Trial of our
Fidelity, Conduct, and Obedience: Or perhaps 'twas no more than a Caprice of
Policy, or a vain Whim of State. For, it is usual with great Men, thus to
practice Experiments on those whom they design to employ in the most important
Affairs. Whatever it be, we have acquitted our selves like Trusty Slaves; and
that is enough for us.

This comes to thy Hand by an Armenian Merchant: One in whom I confide. Here
are Abundance of that Nation in Paris and other Parts of France. They travel up
and down from one Country and City to another, under the Pretext of Trading;
but are really Spies, sent from the Princes of the East, to observe the
Counsels of these Western Courts, the Designs of Nazarene Monarchs, and to take
an exact Estimate of the Strength and Riches of these Infidels. For, though
they outwardly profess themselves to be Followers of Jesus, yet in their Hearts
they believe the Alcoran, and Honor Mahmut our Holy-Lawgiver.

There is a Kind of Magic in Truth, which forcibly carries the Mind along with
it. Men readily embrace the Dictates of sincere Reason. Yet those of thy Nation
are obstinate, and shut their Eyes wilfully against the very Light of Nature.
You overvalue your selves and your Lineage; because you are the Posterity of
Isaac, the Son of Sarah the Freewoman and Wife of Ibrahim: reproaching us,
that we are the Offspring of Ismael the Son of Hagar, a Concubine and Slave.
You consider not that Ismael was the Eldest Son of that Glorious Patriarch; and
that by the Law of Moses it is enacted, That the Firstborn Son shall inherit
his Fathers Patrimony, though he were the Son of a base abject Slave, or hated
Concubine. Did Moses make a Law contrary to that of his Fathers; Or, could
Ibrahim the Beloved of God, do any thing contrary to the Divine Will? How then
could he be guilty of disinheriting Ismael his Eldest Son, the Flower of his
Strength, and First-Fruit of his Vigor? Doubtless the Majesty and Light of God
which passed from Adam to Seth Enoch, Noah and Ibrahim, rested also on Ismael,
Heir Apparent of the Divine Promises, Father of many Princes and Noble Nations.

Let those therefore of thy Nation, cease to boast of their Pedigree, and exalt
themselves above the Victorious and Triumphant Ismaelites, Children of a high
Stock, a Race wherein shines forth the Luster of the Ancient Renown, and the
Right of Primogeniture: A Lineage of Illustrious Honor, multiplied as the
Leaves of the Trees, numerous as the Stars of Heaven, prosperous in all Things,
by the Special Benediction of God. Whereas, thou know, the Israelites never
made any great Figure on Earth, and are now reputed no better than Vagabonds
throughout the World.

Your Rabbi's reply to this, by owning that our Father Ismael was indeed a
Great Prince; but that he was withal a Wild and Salvage Man, who supported his
Nobility and Grandeur by Rapine and Blood, dwelling altogether in Deserts and
unfrequented Places; robbing the Caravans of Merchants and Travelers,
oppressing the Poor, and murdering the Innocent. In Fine, they give this
Character of him, That his Hand was against every Man, and every Man's Hand
against him.

To this Accusation they also add another, That the Princes of the East who
descend from Ismael, have all along, even to this Day, established their
Thrones in Cruelty, Massacres, and Patricides. Fathers bereaving their Children
of the Lives they gave 'em; and Children putting their Parents to Death:
Brothers murdering Brothers, and sacrificing their nearest Relations to the
Maxims of a Barbarous Policy, the Restless Suspicions of State. And that all
this is more especially manifest in the Sublime House of the invincible
Ottomans.

These are the Charges of Hebrew Spite, the Slanders which your Doctors cast
on the Progeny of Ibrahim, even on Ismael and his Children, to this Day. But I
would have thee, Nathan, reflect impartially on Things, and suffer not thy
Judgment to be imposed on by the Sophistry of your Scribes. Look back to the
Primitive Times of Israel, examine the Written Law, the Records of Moses and
the Seniors. There thou will meet with frequent Examples of those very Crimes
which you lay to our Charge; true Parallels of the supposed Tyranny and
Inhumane Actions, with which you tax the unblemished Ismaelites.

Did not your Father Jacob supplant his own eldest Brother Esau? Did he not
cheat his Uncle Laban of his Sheep? What was wanting to him of Ismael's Valor
and Fierceness, he supplied with a Fox-like Craft and Subtilty. Yet, how often
did he plunder the Children of Hamor? And boasted afterward of the Preys he
had taken from them with his Bow and Spear.

When your Fathers came out of Egypt, what a Carnage did Moses their Leader
commit, when he commanded the Sons of Levi, to arise with their Swords in their
Hands, and every Man to kill his Brother, his Friend and his Neighbor; so that
there fell that Day, at the Foot of Mount Sinai, Three and Twenty Thousand Men?
Yet for the Sake of this detestable Tragedy he blessed 'em, saying, You have
consecrated your Hands this day in Blood, every Man in the Blood of his
Neighbor. Behold! the Original of your Priesthood, which is the Highest Rank
of Nobility among the Jews.

Remember how your Fathers almost cut off the whole Race of Benjamin, so that
there were not above Six Hundred Men of that Tribe left alive. Forget not also,
how Abimelech of the Tribe of Menasse, got the Sovereignty by Massacring
Seventy of his own Brothers on one Stone. Your own Records say, That God gave
you Kings in his Wrath, among whom there was not one who was not a Man of
Blood. And in the whole Catalogue, you can scarce find Four who were not
tainted with Sacrilege, Idolatry, and other enormous Vices.

In a Word, Nathan, both the Sons of Ismael and Isaac, were but Men; and if
thou have nothing else to object against the Former, but what thou must confess
the latter were equally guilty of; I advise thee henceforth to lay thy Hand
upon thy Mouth, and cease to speak Evil of those, against whom No-Man can
sharpen his Tongue or Pen and prosper.

Paris, 22d. of the 2d. Moon, of the Year 1663.
LETTER XXII. To the same.
I Concluded my other Letter something imperfectly, and short of my Design,
being interrupted by a sudden Deluge of Humors overflowing my Eyes,
accompanied with a Tempest in my Head, which at once took from me the Power of
thinking regularly, and of seeing how to Write. I am often subject to these
Weaknesses of late, and to many other Maladies. My Body sensibly decays; Age
and Care, Watching and Sickness, with a Thousand Casualties beside, have almost
dissolved this congealed Medly of the Elements. Methinks, I aw now no more than
a poor Skeleton, to which Nature and Fortune, have left a dry withered Skin,
for Modesty's Sake, to cover its Nakedness; with a few evacuated Veins and
Arteries; shrunk Sinews, Tendons, Muscles, and Cartilages, to tack this Machine
of Bones together, and keep it in Motion. In a Word, I seem to my self to be
only a Hobgoblin or Ghost in Disguize; I cannot say, Incarnate, (for I Have lost
all my Flesh) but only bagg'd or clouted up in the most contemptible Shreds,
Rags, and antiquated Relics of Mortality, like a Maudlin or Scarecrow. I
hang together by Geometry.

Yet, such as I am at these Years, I still possess at certain Seasons more
serene and vigorous Thoughts, than in the Days of my Youth, when I was full of
Marrow and good Blood. I can feel my Soul sometimes fluttering her Wings, and
briskly shaking off the heavy, slimy Cloggs of Earth, of Sleep, and of
enchanted Life, or living Death. She struts and plumes herself, she mounts
aloft and glides in Happy, though but Momentary Foretastes of Eternal Bliss.
And then lured down again by Charms of her accustomed Ease and Pleasure in the
Flesh, she comes to Hand at Call, and being hoodwinked from the Radiant Light
of Heaven, she tamely perches on the meanest sensual Appetite, which easily
conveys her to her wonted Darkness. This is the changeable State of Mortals,
and we must not expect a fixed Condition on this side the Sepulcher. The Noble
and the Vulgar are equally liable to these Inconstancies of Spirit; neither can
the most exalted State of Sovereign Monarchs, Privilege them from the common
Frailties of Mankind. They are no otherwise distinguished from the Meanest of
their Slaves, than only by the Vastness of their Possessions, their numerous
Retinue, their unlimited Power, and the vain Pageantry of external Honor.

If we examine the Origin of Nobility, and Royal Grandeur; if we trace the
Genealogies of Princes and Potentates up to their Fountain, we shall find the
First Fathers of these noisy Pedigrees to be cruel Butchers of Men, Oppressors,
Tyrants, Perfidious Truce Breakers, Robbers, and Parricides. In a Word, the
most Primitive Nobility was no other than Potent Wickedness, or dignified
Impiety. And all the successive Continuations of it by Inheritance, Election,
or otherwise, even to those Modern Times; are but so many Traducts of
exorbitant Power and Honor, acquired and propagated by the most enormous
Vices, by Practices unworthy of Men, and of which the Authors themselves are
always ashamed. Therefore they cover their unjust Encroachments and Invasions,
with the specious Pretexts of Justice and Virtue, calling that Conquest, which
is no other than downright Robbery, and professing themselves Patrons of Men's
Liberties and Rights, Religion and Laws, whilst in Effect they are the greatest
Oppressors, Hypocrites, Atheists, and Outlaws in the World.

This is not only true in the Race of Ismael and Isaac, of whom I made mention
in my other Letter, but in all the Families which have ever made any eminent
Figure and Noise in the World.

What were the Four renowned Monarchies, but so many Empires of Banditi,
Governments of Free-booters, Pirates and Licensed Thieves? As Diomedes told
Alexander the Great. "I, says he, because I play the private Corsair, and
cruise up and down the Seas with one single Ship, am accused as a Pyrate, Thou
that do the same Thing with a mighty Fleet, art called an Emperor. If thou
were alone and a Captive, as I am, they would esteem thee no better than a
Thief: And were I at the Head of a numerous Army, as thou art, I should be
reverenced as an Emperor. For as to the Justice of our Cause, there is no
other Difference but this, That thou do more Mischief than I. Misfortune has
compelled me to be a Thief, whereas nothing but an intolerable Pride, and
insatiable Avarice puts thee upon the same Course of Life. If Fortune would
prove more favorable to me, perhaps I might become better: Whereas, thy
continual Successes make thee but the worse." Alexander admiring the Boldness
of the Man, and the Resoluteness of his Spirit, gave him a Command in his Army,
that so he might rob and Plunder from thenceforth by Authority.

But, I should have begun higher in Antiquity with the Empire of the Assyrians,
founded by Ninus, in the Blood and Slaughter, Ruin and Destruction of all his
Neighbors, and increased after the same Methods by his Wife Semiramis, who
begging of her Husband, that she might reign for Five Days, and he granting her
Request, she put on the Royal Ornaments, and sitting on the Throne of
uncontrollable Majesty, commanded the Guards to degrade and kill her Husband.
Which being done, she succeeded in the Empire, adding Aethiopia to her other
Dominions, carrying a War into India, and encompassing Babylon with a
Magnificent Wall; at last was killed by her Son Ninyas. Thus was the Assyrian
Monarchy established in Regicides, Massacres, and Carnage. And by the same
Methods 'twas translated by Arbactus to the Medes. He having caused
Sardanapalus, the last, and most effeminate of all the Assyrian Kings, to die
in the midst of his Concubines. Thus was Treachery and Murder handed down with
the Sovereign Power; till at length Cyrus the Persian transferred them to his
Country. Whose Son Cambyses raised the Second Universal Monarchy, on the
additional Ruins of many other Kingdoms, cementing it with the Blood of his
Brother and his Son. Yet, after all, it was translated to the Macedonians, by
Alexander the Great, not without an equal Guilt of Parricide, and other
Exorbitant Vices. From whom at last it devolved to the Romans.

What need I mention the scandalous Birth of Romulus and Remus, the Twin-Sons
of an Incestuous Vestal? Or, their debauched Education under a common
Prostitute, fabulously veiled by the Roman Historians, under the Title of a
Wolf, to render the Origin of their Empire Miraculous? Why should I recount the
Horrid Fratricide committed by Romulus on Remus his Brother; or the celebrated
Rape of Sabine Wives, Virgins, and Widows? It will seem invidious, to call to
Mind the detestable Murder of Titus Tacius, the Good old Captain of the
Sabines, with many other Barbarous Massacres. Yet these enormous Crimes were
the Foundations of the Roman Grandeur and Nobility, so formidable afterward to
the whole Earth. And the Superstructure was answerable, through all the various
Changes and Revolutions of Government, even to the Reign of Augustus Caesar,
under whom Rome gained the Title of the Fourth Universal Monarchy.

This Emperor, though he was esteemed the most Merciful and Just Prince on
Earth, yet he established his Throne in the Blood of his Kindred, sacrificing
the Children of his Uncle to the ends of State: And that he might not deviate
from the Royal Ingratitude of other Princes, he barbarously extinguished the
Offspring of his Fathers Brother, who had adopted him to the Inheritance of
the Imperial Dignity. Scorning by an unkingly Tenderness, to spare the glorious
Names of Antony and Cleopatra, to whom he was so nearly related, and who had
invested him with the Power of being so inhumane.

I will not make thee sick, by rehearsing the abominable Lives and wicked
Actions of the Nero's, Domitian's, Caligula's, Heliogabulus's, Galienus's, and
the rest of those Royal Monsters. History it self blushes to recite such
Prodigies of Impiety, and their very Names are odious to all Generations.

If we pass from these mighty Empires to Kingdoms of less Note, we shall still
trace the Footsteps of the same Vices. Both Ancient and Modern Records are
full of these Tragedies. The Original Kingdom of the Greeks took its Rise from
the Parricide of Dardanus; and the Female Empire of the Amazons, began in the
barbarous Massacre of their Husbands. All Ages and Nations afford us Examples
of this Nature; and the highest Honors, Dignities and Commands were ever
acquired and maintained by the Highest Injustice.

Therefore, Honest Nathan, let thou and I never envy the Nobles and Grandees of
the Earth; but contented in our Humble Posts, sitting under the Vmbrella's of a
happy Obscurity, let us serve the Grand Signior with Integrity and a Zeal void
of Injustice.

Paris, 22d. of the 2d. Moon, of the Year 1663.
LETTER XXIII. To Codarafrad, Cheik, a Man of the Law.
Thou will approve the Sentence that was Yesterday executed on a Frenchman in
this City, who said he was the Son of God, and had persuaded a great many poor
Ignorant People to believe him. He was burnt alive for his Blasphemy, and his
Ashes kicked into a Ditch. Had he been convicted of this horrid Impiety in any
of the Grand Signior's Dominions, he had undergone the like or a more terrible
Punishment: For the Alcoran expressly says, That God has neither Wife, Son,
Daughter, or Companion: And that those shall suffer Eternal Pains, who teach
any such Doctrine. Doubtless, there is but One God, and the Eternal Unity
cannot be divided, or multiplied, to make more Gods in Faction, or procreate an
Offspring of diminutive Dieties. He, the Father of all Things, dwells in
Eternal Solitude, and from an Infinite Retirement beholds the Various
Generations of the Universe; they are all equally his Offspring, and it is
Blasphemy to affirm he has a Son, or a Daughter, or a Companion like unto
himself. For he is increated, unbegotten, and entire: Sole Possessor of his Own
Glory, without Rival or Competitor. There was none before him, neither shall
there be any after him. He is without Beginning or End.

But these Infidels harbor strange Opinions about a Trinity of Gods, and
follow the Doctrines of Hermes, Trismegistus, Plato, Plotinus, and other Pagan
Philosophers, who asserted a Triad in the Deity; and on that Basis, founded all
the Polytheism of the Gentiles. Hence Pythagoras drew his Tetragrammaton, by
playing the Chemical Arithmetician, and extracting a Quaternity out of Three.
But the Poets not puzzling their Heads with the Mysteries of these Divine and
Unintelligible Numbers, delivered their Theology in plain, gross Fictions,
suitable to the Capacities of the Vulgar: One midwifing a Goddess out of
Jupiter's Brains: Another starting a God from his Thigh. But this silly Fellow,
could not derive his Pedigree so near as from a Little Toe of the Divinity.
Therefore, he was deservedly reduced to his First Atoms, and spurned out of
the World.

The French have various Kinds of Punishments for Malefactors; but none more
terrible than Breaking on the Wheel. This is inflicted only on Notorious
Criminals, and the Manner is thus: The Party condemned is fastened to a Wheel,
with his Arms and Legs extended to their full Length and Wideness. Then comes
the Executioner, and with an Iron Bar breaks one Bone after another, till the
miserable Wretch is in the Agonies of Death; and so he is left, to expire in
unutterable Torments: For, some Men of strong Constitutions, will retain Life
in this Condition for Twelve or more Hours together.

Honorable Codarafrad, Though the Executions of the East are more swift and
surprising, than those in the West; yet they are not Comparable to them for
Cruelty: The worst Death being but a Minutes Pain.

Sage Cheick, I reverence thy accomplished Knowledge in the Laws of Equity and
Justice.

Paris, 15th. of the 3d. Moon, of the Year 1663.
The End of the Second Book.
LETTERS Writ by A Spy at PARIS.
VOL. VI. BOOK III.
LETTER I. To Solomon his Cousin, at Chalcedon.
I Commend thee for removing thus from Place to Place, and could wish that thou
would not only exchange thy Residence through all the Cities seated on the
Bosphorus, Propontis, Euxine Sea, and the Hellespont, but visit by turns all
the Famous Marts in the World.

Praise be to God, we are not born in Moscovy, Russia, China, or under the
narrow-soul'd Governments of Lycurgus, Plato, and such kind of Jealous
Lawgivers; where it would be no less Punishment, than the Loss of one's Eyes,
Ears and Feet, if not of Life it self, to travel out of his Native Country, or
for a Stranger to come in, excepting Foreign Ambassadors and Agents, who in
China are forced to travel with their Faces veiled or muffl'd, from the
Confines to the Court, lest they should spy the Disadvantages of the Country.

Doubtless this is repugnant to the Law of Nature and Nations, an Oppression of
Humanity, and directly opposite to the Purpose of God, when he designed and
made us for Sociable Creatures: For, the whole Earth is but as one Country or
Province, common to Men and Beasts. It Is our Element, and therefore we ought to
be free in it, to range where we please, as the Fowls do in the Air, and the
Fish in the Sea, without any Law, Restraint, or Injury. Such a Thought as this,
made Socrates, when he was asked, What Countryman he was, answer, I am a
Native of the Universe, and therefore free to live where I will.

Thou know, our Cousin Isouf has traveled over all Asia and Africa, with
some Parts of Europe. My Brother Pesteli Hali, has also visited many Regions in
the East. Both of them have improved their Estates and Fortunes in the World,
the one at Astracan, the other at Constantinople. Follow their Steps and thou
may have thy Hearts Content. Go, and observe the different Manners of Men,
their various Customs, Laws and Religions. Survey the Mountains, Valleys,
Deserts, Rivers, Lakes, Seas, Cities, Castles, Palaces, and all the other
desirable Objects, which embellish this Globe.

But beware of the Infirmity of most Travelers, who, Camelion-like, change
their Humor and Manners as the Regions vary through which they pass. Mere
Mimicks, Buffoons, and Apes, who place their Excellency in imitating every
Thing they see, or meet with. Thus degenerating from themselves, instead of
Improving their Minds in true Science and Wisdom, and hardening their Bodies to
endure patiently the Injuries of the Elements, with all the Fatigues and
Contingencies of Humane Life, which are the chief Ends of Traveling, next to
that of Learning how to serve our Sovereign, and our Country in a more refined
Manner.

Solomon, never think that thou will deserve the Character of a Prudent
Traveller, if at thy return thou can only boast of Strange and Incredible
Things thou have seen, tell monstrous Romances, and Fictions more Fabulous than
those of the Gentile Poets. Aim at Solid Knowledge, and the Improvements of a
Rational Creature. As thou go out a Mussulman, so return; but with all the
Advantages that may recommend thee for a Person accomplished in History,
Morals, Politics, and Divine Philosophy.

If thou dare not undertake a Ramble at large, go to thy Cousin Isouf at
Astracan, where he is settled in a Way of Traffic and Merchandise. Take thy
Voyage by the Black Sea, and the Palus Maeotis. Cast thy Eyes on the ancient
Kingdom of Colchis, as thou sailest by her Shores; consider the Temper of the
Mingrelians, Circassians and Tartars, with the Rest of the People through whose
Territories thou will pass. And when thou arrivest at Astracan, tell my Cousin
Isouf, that I wished thee to take this Course: He will respect thee for thy
Uncle's Recommendation. Show him this Letter, and let his own Eyes see the
Handwriting of Mahmut, the Aged, Weather-beaten Slave of the Earth's Great
Sovereign; the old Gray, Grisled Watchman of the Sublime Port, which is the
Refuge of Mortals. He will find many Opportunities to advance thee. But I
advise thee to wean thy self from all Fondness, Inconstancy, and Discontent. Be
true to thy Trust, Sedulous and Active, Patient and Resigned. Take all Things
as they come from Destiny, without being peevish, or fretful.

So may God bless thee, and give thee the Riches of the Earth, and the Sweet
Influences of Heaven; make thee happy here, and hereafter. Finally, may thy
Rest be on high, in Paradise.

Paris, the 1st. of the 5th. Moon, of the Year 1663.
LETTER II. To Pesteli Hali, his Brother, Master of the Customs at
Constantinople.
THere is no Doubt, but when thou wast in the Indies the Names of Sultan Dara,
Suja, Aurengzebe, and Morad Batche were not less known to thee, than that of
their Father Cha Iehan, the Grand Mogul. Thy Business as well as Curiosity
called thee often to the Court, where thou have heard the Characters of these
young Princes, whose early Years furnished the World with Matter of Noise, and
great Expectations, and gave the old Monarch that begat 'em, Trouble and Care
enough to keep 'em in Order, and prevent their Machinations against one
another, as well as against himself. For, in those Days he saw his Family
divided into Factions, and a Royal Envy mixed with Ambition, whetting Brothers
and Sisters against each other, who by Nature were made for the Offices of
Reciprocal Love.

Surely, it is but a glorious Infelicity for Children to be thus born Candidates
of a Crown, when each is obliged by a Principle of Self-Preservation, to pursue
his Claim, in a Method wholly repugnant to Humanity, and the Affection that is
due to those of the same Blood: When shaking off all Tenderness and Compassion,
the Sons of one Mother must sheath their Swords in each others Bowels, to
prevent their own Estate, and ravish a Crown by Force, to save their Lives.

Yet this is the Misfortune of all the Eastern Courts, that they cannot see a
Prince ascend the Throne, without the Slaughter of his Brethren, and all that
can be suspected to pretend, or stand in Competition with him for the
Sovereignty.

However, it must be confessed that the Indian Policy in this Point is far more
generous, than that of the Ottomans or Persians. Who either immediately after
their Possession of the Throne, murder in cold Blood all the rest of their
Lineage; or at least imprison them in some dark Dungeon during their Lives, and
not seldom put out their Eyes. And this is owing to the Disadvantage the
unhappy Children of our Monarchs lie under, in that from their Infancy they are
confined to the Seraglio, and educated under the Tutelage of Women and Eunuchs,
even during the whole life of their Father; so that he who is advanced to the
Throne, has all the rest in his Custody the first Hour of his Reign.

Whereas, in Indostan, the Princes of the Blood, are committed to able and
learned Tutors, and as they grow in Years, increasing also in Knowledge, Wisdom
and Courage, they are disposed of, every one suitable to his Capacity. Some
being made Ministers of State, others Generals of Armies, or Governors of
Provinces: Whereby each is put in a Condition to make Parties for himself,
among the Grandees, and those of Inferior Degree, and to fortify his Interest
in Court and City, Country and Camp. Thus an open Field is left for all to try
their Wit and Courage in, for the Sake of Inheritance; and it is more equal to
let them Nobly Skirmish for a Crown, and make a Warlike Lottery for Life or
Death, then set up one with the Advantage and Character of a Butcher, and turn
the Seraill' to a Shambles, always polluted with Royal, Innocent Blood.

But every State pursues its own Maxims; and there are not wanting Men of the
Law, who justify this Inhumane Conduct of our Sultans, as the only means to
prevent Public Distractions and Civil Wars: which always happen, where there
are many Pretenders to the Imperial Dignity. As it lately fell out in the
Indies.

I need not acquaint thee with what particular Dignities and Commands, the
Great Mogul invested his Four Sons. Thou could sufficiently inform thy self
of these Things when thou wast at Dehli, the Capital City of Indostan. Neither
need I say any Thing of Rauchenara Begum, or her Sister Saheb, the Two
Daughters of Cha Iehan. Thou that have been there in Person, know more of
these Things, than I who am obliged to the Merchants and Travelers for all my
Intelligence of the Indian Affairs.

But I can certify thee of something, which has been transacted there since thy
Return to Constantinople, the Fame whereof perhaps is not yet arrived to the
Imperial City.

Know then, that in the Year 1655, a Rumor being spread abroad through the
Provinces of India, that Cha Iehan was dead; each of his Four Sons, began to
lay about him for the Crown. They did all that is usual in such Cases for
Ambitious Persons to do, by courting the Omrahs and Rajas with large Presents
and larger Promises, by obliging the Soldiery with immense Largesses; in a
Word, by rouzing up the Friendship and Integrity of their Adherents, and by
winning over Strangers to their different Parties, with whatsoever else was
thought necessary to carry on a prosperous War against one another: For the
Innate Desire of Reigning, had equally possessed them all. But Destiny, which
appoints and consummates Humane Events, had reserved the Crown for Aurengzebe,
who surpassed all the rest in Policy and Dissimulation.

With profound Craft this Prince overreach'd his younger Brother, Morad-Batche,
and put him in Chains, in the midst of Morad's own Army; pacifying the Officers
with Bribes, and the Common Soldiers with Increase of their Pay, whilst he
sent their General away Prisoner to one of his strongest Castles. This was the
First considerable Stroke he gave toward the gaining a Crown. For, now he was
not only rid of one Competitor, and the most dangerous of all the rest, but
also became Master of his Army and all his Treasure, which being joined to his
own, put him in a Condition, to pursue his good Fortune with Success. Yet the
War lasted almost Six Years, his Brother Sultan Sujah keeping him in Play on
the Side of Bengale, and Sultan Dara near the Capital Cities Agra, and Dehli.

But at last they were both forced to yield to the Fortune of Aurengzebe. In
fine, he was established and now sits on the Throne of his Fathers, whilst they
fell Sacrifices to the Jealousy and Revenge of their Victorious Brother, being,
as I Am informed taken Prisoners, and afterward poisoned or hurried out of the
World some other Way.

Thus passes away Humane Glory, like a Cloud driven before the Wind; or like
the Smoke of a Fire, which looks bright and gay for a while, crackles and gives
Heat to all that are near it, but is either suddenly quenched with Water, or
evaporates into Air, and is no more remembered. Dear Pestheli, consider that
this Earth is not our Native Country: we are Foreigners here below; let us
improve our selves, by every Thing we encounter, in Knowledge and Virtue,
without Learning the Vanity and Vices of Mortals.

Paris, 4th. of the 6th. Moon, of the Year 1663.
LETTER III. To Useph, Bassa.
HEre is great Rejoicing for the Conversion of a certain Protestant Prince to
the Faith of the Roman Church. They call him the Duke of Meklebourgh. He is
said to spring from an Ancient Race of Kings among the Vandals. This Court
caresses him in an extraordinary Manner, as they usually do all Proselytes of
his High Quality; as for poor and vulgar Converts, they serve only to become
the Priests Slaves and Asses.

The King, who is Styled the Eldest Son of the Church, and therefore ought to
appear a living Demonstration of her boasted Virtues, has been very Liberal of
his Favors to the New Devotee, creating him Knight of the Holy Spirit, which
is the most Sublime Degree of Honor in this Kingdom, next to that of being
made Peer of the Realm.

Couriers arrive one at the Heels of another from the Duke of Beaufort, who is
Cruising about on the Mediterranean. But, I cannot get a Sight of any of them,
nor learn what their Expresses contain. The Courtiers and Statesmen here are
the very Whirl-Pools of Intelligence. Whatever News is communicated to them, is
swallowed up and lost for ever in profound Silence. They receive all, but
return none again. However, People take the Liberty to guess, every Man
according to his Reason or Fancy. Some say, the Duke of Beaufort has engaged
with a Fleet of Algerines, and driven 'em into their Harbor with great Loss on
their Side, and Triumph on his. Others laugh at this as only a Court-Romance,
who strive to prepossess the Nation with prosperous Stories of the King's Arms,
both by Sea and Land. Whilst a Third Sort affirm, That those Dispatches come
not from the Duke of Beaufort, who, they say, is dead, being killed by a
Cannon-Bullet, in an Encounter with the Corsairs of Barbary: But, that they are
sent from the next Chief Officers in the Thoulon Fleet, to give the King an
Account of his Death, and receive New Orders.

In the mean while, we are wholly taken up here at present with the Reception
of the Swiss-Embassadours. They made their Public Entry into Paris yesterday,
after they had been magnificently entertained at the Castle of the Wood. A
Thousand Chariots accompanied them through the Streets of Paris. They are brave
Jolly Persons, Sons of Bacchus, and Hirelings to Mars, Stout in a Wine-Cellar,
and no Cowards in the Field.

Courteous Bassa, Thou see, I do not forget my Friends, but send to all by
Turns, the Advices that come to my Hands. I wish thou would favor me with a
short Sketch of thy Pleasure with the Grand Signior, in the Neighboring Plains
of Adrianople.

Paris, 10th. of the 11th. Moon, of the Year 1663.
LETTER IV. To Hamet, Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire.
IT IS hard to determine, whether the French King excel in Martial Affairs, or
in those of State. He is good at Both. His Counsels are Wise, and his Actions
great. A Man both in Body and Mind, formed for Empire: And out-stripping his
Years in all Things save the Affairs of Love. These indeed he pursues with
youthful Vigor and Passion, being by Nature very Amorous, and esteemed the
Handsom'st Prince of this Age, by those who consider a Regular Shape, Graceful
Features, and a Majestic Awfulness in the Face, as the Principal Ingredients
in a Masculine Beauty.

It Is certain, he is very Acceptable to the Ladies, who are the most Competent
Judges in this Case. And they value him so much the more, because his Love
never abates the due Sentiments a Monarch ought to have of his Glory. For he
gratifies both Passions, without suffering them to interfere, manageing his
softest Intrigues with such exquisite Prudence, as he still comes off a Hero.

He has had many Mistresses, and it is a manifest Discovery of his Wit, that he
never fastened his Affections on any that deserved not the same Character. She
that has the greatest Share in his Heart at present, is called the Duchess of
Vaujour; a Woman raised to that Title by the King's Bounty, for the Sake of his
Love. She has a Refined Wit, and that is all can be said in her Praise. For, as
to her Body, 'twould hardly tempt an indifferent Painter to employ his Skill,
unless it were, in describing what the Tailor endeavors to hide, and that is a
Deformity much like mine, a Remarkable Bunch in the Back. Yet his great
Monarch, loves her passionately, and will not be easily crossed in his Amors.

The Queen and his Mother have endeavored by diverse Methods to reclaim him;
but all prove ineffectual. A while ago they set his Confessor to work, who with
Abundance of unseasonable Gravity, represented to the Young Invincible Monarch,
the Ill Consequences of Unlawful Love (for, these Infidels esteem none Lawful,
but what is bestowed only on One Wife.) He said all that was proper for a
Jesuit to urge on such an Occasion, and a great deal more; threatening the
Royal Lover with Severe Penance and I know not what. Impatient of this
Discourse from a Subject, yet respecting the Character he bore as a Priest, the
King with a Reserved Countenance, thanked him for his Pious Counsel, telling
him withal, that for the Future he discharged him from his Service, being
resolved to obey the Old Canons of the Church, and confess to none but the
Priest of the Parish. Thus the poor Jesuit was discarded, and besides the
King's Displeasure, he has drawn upon himself the Censures and Curses of his
whole Order, for disobliging so potent a Monarch, only to please Two peevish
Women.

Illustrious Minister, Kings are as Gods on Earth; and they esteem it a
Profanation of their Divinity, when their Actions are too narrowly scanned by
their Subjects.

Paris, 7th. of the 1st. Moon, of the Year 1664.
LETTER V. To Pesteli Hali, his Brother, Master of the Grand Signior's Customs
at Constantinople.
THE News which thy Letter imparts, would affect me with Incredible Delight,
were such a Thing possible to come to pass. It is a long Time since I have been
weary of dwelling in Paris, and of conversing only with Infidels. There is a
perfect Antipathy between their Humor and mine. And it is no small Violence a
Man does to his Nature in such a Case, when all his Actions and Words are
counterfeited. This goes mightily against the Grain. But I have thought nothing
too much to do or suffer, for our Great Master's Interest. And I Am still of the
same Resolution. Yet Nature it self abhors Force and Restraint. Therefore
'twoud be a vast Comfort to be recalled from this disagreeable Station, and
placed in some other Post, where I might serve God and the Grand Signior with
more Ease.

Besides, I have met with nothing but Persecutions and Reproaches from some at
the Seraglio, ever since I came to this City; as I have often hinted in my
Dispatches to the Grandees, and particularly once to the Noble Kerker Hassan,
Bassa, our Countryman and Friend. Wherein I also implored his Favor and
Intercession, that I might have leave to retire into Arabia, and spend the Rest
of my Days in the Place where I first drew my Breath; or at least, that I might
be permitted to return to Constantinople, and give an Account of my Agency in
these Parts, though it were to the Loss of my Head, if I deserved it.

I perceive that generous Bassa took Compassion on my Sufferings, and has done
his utmost to relieve me. It Is to him I owe the Proposal that was made in the
Divan, of sending me to the Court of the Grand Mogul, there to Negotiate some
Private Affairs of Importance for the Sultan.

There is nothing that I have had a greater Passion for these many Years, than
the Happiness of visiting those remote Parts of the Earth, so venerable for the
Antiquity of their Inhabitants, and the Excellency of their Laws, Customs,
Religion and Government; I mean, the Gentile Indians, and not the Race of the
Moguls, who came out of Tartary, and are but of Yesterday, in Comparison with
the Aboriginal People, whose Genealogies and Possession of that Country,
stretch beyond all the Records in the World beside.

Ever since I read the Journal of thy Travels in the East, I was inflamed with
an ardent Desire to see that Renowned Nation to converse with the Bramins, and
pry into the Mysteries of their Unknown Wisdom, which occasions so much
Discourse in the World.

I know not what ails me, but I promise my self more Satisfaction from their
Books, were I capable of understanding the Language in which they are writ, or
from the Lips of those Priests who have 'em in their Custody; than from all the
Prophets and Sages in the World. I fancy I should find something prodigiously
strange and amazing in their History, yet squaring with Human Reason, and
Probability of Truth. I should meet with Arguments which I cannot yet start, to
prove the Eternity of the World; Arguments clear and demonstrative: such as
would establish this Doctrine, against all Objections that have or can be made
to the contrary.

The Idea which I already entertain of so unmeasurable a Duration, is only
founded on my own Natural Thoughts, and supported by the Concurrent Opinion of
several Ancient Philosophers. But I should hope to see it discovered by these
Indian Records, to be a Truth as bright as the Sun, and fixed as the Center of
the Earth.

There is another Thing, for which I mightily admire the Indians; and wherein I
endeavor to imitate them to the utmost of my Power: That is, the Justice and
Tenderness they show toward the Beasts. It Is a Thing which needs a
considerable Expiation, if by chance they kill any living Creature. But, if
they do it wilfully, out of Cruel Wantonness or Malice, and not in their own
Defense; it is punished with Death, no less than if they had murdered a Man. No
care of Health, or Fear of Dissolution by Sickness, can tempt one of the
Brachman Race, to taste a Bit of Flesh: Much less could they be induced by the
mere pleasure of their Appetites, to commit that which they esteem so enormous
a Sin, and the very Fountain of all other Vices. They count it the greatest
Injustice that can be, to sustain their own Lives, by the Death of any of their
Fellow-Animals; and they esteem it a Pusillanimity unbecoming a Man, when he
dares not venture his Life on the Fruits of the Earth, and the Milk of Cattle,
which he may enjoy in Innocence, and Nature affords him more than enough, of
all Sorts of lawful Nourishment.

This Religious Abstinence, is the Mother of Heroic Virtues; and those who
practice it inviolably, are always in a State to contemn the World, Death, and
all Momentary Things. Hence it is, that the Indians go to the Invisible World
as cheerfully, as they would take a Journey to China, and Persia. Turkey, or any
other Part of the Earth. For they esteem Death no other than a setting out, or
Voyage of the Soul to a more agreeable Religion.

But, I need not insist so much on these Things to thee, who have been among
them, and art familiarly acquainted with their Genius and inclination. I slide
into this Discourse insensibly, by the Pleasure I take in thinking of these
People and their admirable Virtues, as a Man falls in Love with a Beautiful
Woman, by attentively gazing on her, and many Times forgets himself, and the
Business he was about, commits Errors and Indecencies, and through the
Confusion of his Spirits, is quite lost, like one in a Wood.

To return therefore to my Purpose; a Journey to the Indies would be very
pleasant to me on several other Accounts. The very Stars of my Nativity
inclined me to travel, and from my Cradle in my Father's House, I was
transported to Constantinople, many Hundreds of Leagues from the Place of my
Birth. Thou know, what a Romer I Have been since that Time: And I can assure
thee, I retain the same Disposition still. But, there is no Country under the
Moon which I wish to see with greater Earnestness, than Indostan; the very Name
whereof sounds almost as sweet as that of Paradise. Doubtless it is the Eden of
the Earth, in many Respects. And the Inhabitants believe there was no better
for the Original Parents of Mankind to dwell in, ranking the History of Moses
on that Subject in the Number of Celebrated Fables. I approve not this Censure
of the Indians, yet I tell thee as a Mussulman, I dare say, the Mysterious
Writings of Moses are quite misunderstood by the greatest Part of Mankind.
Neither can any Two of his Interpreters, agree exactly which was the Particular
Situation of Paradise. Some plant that Garden in Mesopotamia, others in
Palestine; and a third Sort affirm, it was in Egypt: This Man will have it in
Asia, That in Africa. They are divided in their Opinions. And I might as well
say, 'twas under the Red Sea between them both; and bring as many Cabbalistick
Proofs to defend it. But, it signifies nothing to us, let it be where 'twill.
Every Place is a Paradise, which a Man phansies to be so; and Nothing can beat
me off from the Conceit I have of the Indies

Besides, I should take a vast Delight in my Journey thither; whether I went by
the Way of the Black Sea, and so through the Ancient Kingdoms of Colchis,
Georgia and Cathay, coasting along the Foot of Mount Taurus: Or, by the more
Common Road, through Syria, Arabia, and Persia. Either way would afford Matter
of Thought to a Contemplative Man, whilst in some Places he beholds the Ruins
of Famous Cities, and his Eye revels on the Spoils of Time, of Fire, of War, or
of Earthquakes. In others, he beholds whole Provinces laid Waste, and
dispeopl'd; only meeting here and there a few Cots, Herds, or Tents of Arabs,
Tartars or Circassian Herdsmen; who straggle up and down the pleasant Fields of
Asia, to pick and choose convenient Pastures for their Cattle.

How pleasant would it be to travel through my own Country, and behold the Tents
of the Sons of Ismael, spread over the Plains of the Vast and Horrible Desert?
To meet with Emirs and Sheghs of Arabia, with their Flocks and Herds, Summering
it up and down, and Frolicking from Mountain to Valley at their Pleasure.

From this to pass to another Variety in Persia, would be equally diverting.
What kind of Thoughts should I have whilst on my Bed, within the Walls of
Bagdat, the Stage of so many Great and Renowned Actions, mentioned in Ancient
History! I should call to Mind Semiramis, the Foundress of that Noble City, and
all her Wars with the Indians and other Nations of the East. I should reflect
on her Policy, and the Weakness of her Son Ninyas. I should consider the
various Translations of the Eastern Empire; the Alternate Fate of the Medes,
Assyrians, Babylonians and Persians. And from thence I should Naturally fall
upon the Conquests of Alexander the Great; the Rise of the Macedonian Empire,
the Death of that Mighty Hero in Babylon, and the Cantonizing the Empire among
his Chief Officers. Such Memoirs as these, would waken my Thoughts of the
Vanity of all Human Affairs, as it does at this time: And particularly I
reflect on my Folly, in setting my Heart so much on Traveling to a Country,
which I am never like to see.

For, alas, my Dear Brother, I am not able to endure at this Age, the Hardships
of so long a Journey, as I could in my Youth. Much Sickness has impaired the
Strength of my Constitution. I am grown as tender as an Infant. The least Puff
of Wind is ready to blow out the Flame of Life. And whereas formerly, neither
Heat nor Cold, Hunger or Thirst, Labor or Watching could hurt me; now my
Health receives Damage from every one of these. I could not possibly outlive
the Fatigue and Pain of traveling Two or Three Days together without a Drop of
Water to refresh my panting Soul. An Habitual Fever has made me the Thirstiest
Man in the World. Then I am not able to bear the scorching Heats of the Sun, to
which a Traveller in those Parts is Necessarily exposed. I should daily
dissolve like Wax, or rather exhale in Smoke, in the midst of so many Fervors.
In a Word, my Body is so Infirm, that I am very sure to die, before I can get
Half Way to Indostan, let me take the nearest Road I can.

Yet if the Ministers of the Port shall think fit to send me, I am resigned.
For, I take no farther Care of my Life, than as I may be serviceable to the
Grand Signior.

I intend to write to our Illustrious Friend about it. In the mean time, do
thou for me, what the Prudence of Man, and the Affection of a Brother shall
suggest, as most conducing to the Interest of our Sovereign, and our own
Honor, which we ought to prefer to our Lives.

Our Mother is in Health, and Salutes thee with a tender Embrace.

Paris, 9th. of the 3d. Moon, of the Year 1664.
LETTER VI. To Hamet, Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire.
THis Court of late makes a double Figure; the one of Real Sorrow for the
Duchess of Savoy's Death, who was of the Blood. Royal of France; the other of
Counterfeit Mourning for the Death of Carolus Josephus, Brother to the German
Emperor. For, they inwardly rejoice at this Latter, and wish the whole House
of Austria were laid in their Graves: That Family being the only Obstacle to
the Grandeur, at which the French Monarchy aspires. The only Rub which Cardinal
Richlieu, and his Successor Mazarini found in their Way, when they sought to
exalt the Bourbons to the Empire of the West.

The Rise and Fall of Kingdoms, the various Changes of Government, the
Alternate Fate of Nations, are Themes worthy of a Mussulman's Thoughts;
considering that the Victorious and Happy Osmans at this Day possess the
Territories of ancient Renown, the Provinces and Dominions which formerly made
the greatest Figures and Noise in the World.

What is now become of the most Famous Monarchies of Babylon, Persia, Assyria,
Macedon, Greece and Rome? Look for the Mysterious and Learned Kingdom of Egypt;
the Religious State of the Jews; The most Ancient Kingdoms of the Sicyonians
and Argives; The Commonwealths of Lacedaemon and Athens, with many other
Countries mentioned in the Records of Time, and we shall find them all
Swallowed up in the Universal Empire of the Ottomans.

The Histories of Belus, and how he got the Sovereignty by Hunting; of Ninus
his Son who first taught the World the Methods of Idolatry; of Serimamis,
Ninyas, Sardinapalus, Arbaces, Belochus, and the rest of those Assyrian
Monarchs; sound now like an antiquated Tale, or Dteam. Neither is there any
more Life at this time in the Babylonian and Persian Registers. The mighty Acts
of the Nebuchadnezzar's, Cyrus's and the rest of those renowned Conquerours,
now serve but as Foils to set off the more Glorious Enterprises, and Successes
of our Immortal Sultans.

It Is true, the Persians at this Day retain some Fragments of that once Vast
and Formidable Eastern Empire. And the Germans have a Shadow of the Ancient
Imperial Majesty of the Romans. But both the one and the other, are grown
Effeminate and Weak; they have lost the Virtue, the Power and Fortune of their
Predecessors.

Thou have traveled over all the Dominions of the Sophi, and been an
Eyewitness of the Persian Luxury, Libertinism, and Nakedness. Thou have seen
the Offspring of Heroic Sages, transformed to Swine, Dogs, Asses, and other
contemptible Brutes, as if they would drank of Circe's Cup. So fatal is it to
decline from the Way of Virtue; nay, so impossible even to stand still in that
sacred Path, without being violently pulled backward. In a Word, thou art so
thoroughly acquainted with the Present State of Persia, and all its
Circumstances, that I should appear too officious in pretending to describe
either the Country, or the People that inhabit there.

But, as to Europe, thou professest thy self a Stranger, and have commanded me
to characterise this Quarter of the World; Wherein Germany makes the most
Majestic Figure by Land, England and Holland by Sea: Spain boasts of her Gold;
whilst France treasures it up to pay her Armies, to keep foreign Kings in
Pension, to Build mighty Fleets, and Magnificent Palaces; to corrupt the German
Princes, and make 'em Pimps to her Ambition, Instruments of her designed
Grandeur, which is no less than the Western Empire.

As for the Duke of Savoy, he is a mere Tennis-Ball, or a Shuttle-Cock, bandied
to and fro between the Kings of France and Spain.

The Swisses are Poor and Mercenary. They cannot stay at Home unless they could
banquet on the Turfs and Stones: For all the Flesh, Fruit, and Corn in the
Land, is not half enough to keep 'em alive, and they have little or no Money,
but what they get abroad. This makes 'em all Travelers, and most of them take
up the Trade of War. They serve the Pope, the French King, and many other
Princes for Pay: And where they once engage, they are very true to their Trust.
But, I can tell thee, they would be unwilling to fight for the Grand Signior,
unless he would allow 'em plenty of Wine, which thou know is contrary to the
Discipline of the Mussulman Armies: And these Suisses are the professed Adorers
of Bacchus.

The Hollanders are Industrious and Rich: They mind nothing but Merchandising
and Mechanics. They would fain engross the Trade of the Indies and the Levant,
to themselves. They traffic, that they may be in a Condition to fight, and
they fight to establish their Commerce; having no sense of Honor, but only of
Profit. If they attempt any Conquest, or make an Invasion, it must be in
America, or some other remote Country: For they are only upon the Defensive
among their Neighbors, not daring to be the First Aggressors in a War; in a
Word, they are like a Nest of Pismires, that trudge up and down continually to
get Provision, but sting and bite those under whose Protection they live, if
they have an Opportunity.

It Is thought, the Prince of Orange, who descends from an Illustrious Stock,
will ever long reduce those Republicans to another Form of Government. The
French Style him the Head and Heart of the United States, and these thou
know command the Hands and the Feet.

Germany is counted the Bulwark of Christendom against the mighty Power of the
Ottomans and Tartars. But, in my Opinion, one of our Ambassadors at the
Emperor's Court, gave a truer Description of it, when he compared Germany to a
Great Monster; with many Heads and Tails, which having a desire to break
through a certain quick-set Fence or Hedge, and each particular Head making Way
where it could best among the less entangl'd Branches, were all caught in so
many different Noozes, by the Interposition of strong Trees, and so the Monster
was forced to retire with Shame and Loss: Whereas, he said, the Osman Empire,
was like an Animal with One Head, and many Tails, and that One Head not
encountering the like Difficulties, easily passed through, being followed by the
Tails with one Consent, as the untwisted Ends of a Ten-string'd Cord pass
through a Ring or Hole, when the united Part has lead them the Way.

I should have mentioned Italy, Poland, Denmark, Moscovy, and other Regions of
Europe, but it would be too tedious for one Letter, which I should neither have
Time to write, nor thou Patience to read, at once.

Therefore, I desire thee to accept of this only as a rough Draught, an
Imperfect Sketch of some Parts of the West. But in my future Dispatches, I will
imitate the Painters, and endeavor to draw each Member and Lineament of this
great Body to the Life, as near as I can discern 'em by the Lights I have in
Paris.

Paris, 10th. of the 4th. Moon, of the Year 1664.
LETTER VII. To Kerker Hassan, Bassa.
MAY God multiply his Blessings on thee, and cause thy Heart to sparkle with
fresh Lights and new Joys, like the Sky-Rockets on a Dunalma [or Royal
Holiday.] Accept also a small Present, not worth an Inventory, (consisting only
of a few Pictures, Looking-Glasses, Watches, and other Manufactures of France,)
from the Hands of Mahmut, thy Countryman, Son of thy Fathers Neighbor, and a
Voluntary Slave of those who serve thee, if I had the Honor of an Opportunity.

Neither the Gift, nor he that offers it, is worthy of Esteem. But, thou have
Condescension enough to look on Both with the Eye of a Noble Arab, who knows
not how to value the Sincerity of any Man's Devoir and Affection, which way
soever he expresses it.

I can never forget the former Discoveries of thy Friendship to my Brother
Pesteli and me; and in General, to all those of our House: Which still
encourages me to expect greater Kindnesses; nay, in a manner, assures me of
them: because, I know the Nature of true Generosity is such, that where it once
begins to fasten on an Object, it never ceases to communicate its Favors, till
Damned Perfidy gives a Check to the Current. And may he be Damned that then has
the Impudence to ask for any more.

But Praise be to God, my Case is otherwise; I am not in the Number of the
Ungrateful and Treacherous: And therefore, with Boldness I presume once more to
address to the Dust of thy Feet, illustrious Bassa, begging thy Patronage and
Shelter from the Persecution of my Enemies; whose whole Endeavor is to ruin
me.

Thou know I came to Paris in the Year 1637. of the Christians Hegira. The
Sun had then revisited the Sign he was in at my Nativity, just the Eight and
Twentieth Time. I was a mere Youngster in the World. However, my Superiors
thought me fit for this Employment. How I have acquitted my self in it ever
since, I leave to themselves to judge: Yet, for Fashion's Sake, they will be
always a finding Faults. One Sycophant or other is perpetually Railing against
me, when they find any of the Vizirs and other Grandees in a Humor to hearken
to them. I Fancy it is for Want of Discourse. When they have nothing else to
talk of, then they fall a censuring of poor Mahmut, who undergoes more Fatigues
than a Hundred Thousand such This Word Thlguch was left so in the Italian, and
the Eng. Translator knows not what to make of it.
Thlguch, as they. I cannot imagine, what they aim at; unless it be, that they
would have me turn Christian, and enter my self into some Monastery.

Suffer me, my Noble Friend, to tell thee, that a Man cannot want for
Temptations to such a Change of his Faith, without being confined to a Recluse
Life. He may be a Friar or a Libertine, a Priest or a Layman, A Zealot or an
Hypocrite, a Chimney Sweeper or an Abbot, which he pleases, according as he is
qualified. And I can assure thee, he that would be a good Man, which is beyond
all the Rest, has incentives enough among the Professors of the Nazarene
Worship, though the greatest Part are wicked.

As for me, I never thought that True Religian consisted in Empty Names and
Titles, in Forms and Ceremonies, in Parties and Factions, or in any Thing but
in a Life conform to Reason, and to the Will of God.

They take me here at Paris for a Moldavian Rambler, that has read something
more than the Parish-Clerks. And because they know, I understand Greek,
Sclavonian, and Two or Three Languages more, they would fain make me a Priest,
Doctor, Orator, or any Thing that I would accept of, to serve an Interest. And
I am compelled to use, either a downright Humility, or a forced Pride, that I
may handsomely evade their Courtship: convincing 'em sometimes, that I am not
fit for such Dignities, at other Seasons telling 'em, I am above Inferior
Orders, and that nothing less than an Archbishops Pall, or a Cardinal's Hat
will fatisfy my Ambition.

Thus I really dissemble, and jest my self in earnest out of Ample Estates, to
serve God, his Prophet, and the Grand Signior: Yet am traduced at the Seraglio
for a Hypocrite, an Infidel, and God knows what.

Here Is honest Eliachim the Jew undergoes the same Fate; Whilst those of his
own Party, especially the Rabbi's, proclaim him every where for a Christian;
and the Nazarenes point at him, as a Turk. Only my Landlord where I before
lodged, who is an honest old drunken Fleming, takes Eliachim for a Saint, and
swears he will have him Canonized after his Death: And all this, for no other
Reason, but because Eliachim treats him now and then with a Bottle of Wine: So
partial are all Men to their own Humors and Interests. But the Truth on it is,
Eliachim's an excellent Counterfeit, and my Landlord is not the only Man who
has this Veneration for him. He passes for a very Good Catholic, and a Holy
Man among a great many others. His Looks are so demure, his Mien so composed,
and he has such Godly Discourse with him, about the Sacraments, Indulgences,
Miracles and Graces of the Church, when he is in Company with Christians, That
he would deceive the Spanish Inquisition, and cheat the Devil himself.

Such is the Violence we are forced to use to our selves, who live in these
hazardous Stations. And yet Nobody considers us, or regards our Zeal for the
Grand Signior. Our Reputation, Liberty, and Lives are precarious. We are not
only in perpetual Danger of the Revenge of the Nazarenes who are our real
Enemies; but also exposed to the Envy, Malice and Persecution of those who
ought to be our Friends.

I have often complained of the malicious Calumnies thrown on me by Icingi
Cap-Oglani, and his Associates: And the Ministers were pleased to receive my
Apologies. But now I suspect greater Treachery. I sent an Account to the Reis
Effendi some Years ago, how I was dogged up and down the Streets of Paris, by a
Fellow whom I knew not, and what Apprehensions that put me upon. I will
acquaint thee farther, that being afraid of an Assassine in the Dark, I armed
my Breast with a Quire of Paper, which is known to be Dagger-Proof. I was not
at all mistaken in my Guess. For the last Night, as I was returning home to my
Lodging, between the Hours of Nine and Ten; I received a Stab in my aforesaid
Breast Plate, right against my Heart. It was not so dark but I could perceive
the Person who gave me this Blow; and Self-Preservation taught me immediately
to seize on him, and grapple as close as I could, extending his Arms with mine
at a good Distance from our Bodies. I am but little and short, yet I have a
strong Spring with my Body, when I am once roused, as thou will imagine I was
now. Besides, I have generally a certain Presence of Mind in Time of Danger,
which fails not to prompt me with the readiest and most proper Course to
escape. In a Word, I wrested the Poniard out of the Ruffian's Hand, and stabbed
him dead with it, not thinking it safe to make a Noise, but choosing rather to
die if my Strength failed me, than by crying out for Help, run the Risque of
worse Consequences: For I had long expected some such Attempt as this upon my
Life, from my Enemies at the Port. And concluding this Fellow to be one
employed by them for that Purpose, I thought it no Prudence to have him seized
by the Watch, and punished by the Law, lest he should in Revenge discover me
and my Business to these Infidels. Therefore I played the Executioner my self,
and sent him out of Hand to another World, to prevent his telling Tales in
this. Thou will say there was no Injustice in this, since 'twas in my own
Defense, and to save the Honor of my Sovereign. As he fell, he uttered these
Words in a faint broken Tone, Mahmut, my Death will be revenged before long,
and you cannot escape the Trap that is laid for you. Then he expired.

This made me presently conclude, that he was employed by somebody at the
Port: For, how else should he know my True Name? But upon Second Thoughts, I
cannot be certain, but that he was set at Work by my Old Sicilian Master, since
he knew my Name also. However, I have greater Reason to suspect the Former;
because, it is not probable, that the Infidel would take so Chargeable and
Troublesome a Method to Murder me. Neither had he Provocation enough. Besides,
for ought I know, he may be dead. God only is acquainted with the Truth.
However, to prevent future Assaults of this Nature, and a great many other
Inconveniences, I have removed my self to a New Lodging, in the most obscure
Corner of the City, and very remote from the Place where I lived before, being
resolved also not to frequent the Court, nor any Public Places as I have done
formerly, but to take other Measures for Intelligence.

What I desire of thee is, to represent my Case favorably to the Divan, That
they may approve of my Conduct. Do also whatever else thou judge the Part of
a Countryman and a Friend.

As for the Event, I patiently wait the Appointments of Destiny. For it is in
vain to be too Sollicitous.

Adieu, Highborn Kerker, and forget not Mahmut in his Distress. For, that is
the Time, wherein true Friendship is tried.

Paris, 17th. of the 5th. Moon, of the Year 1664.
LETTER VIII. To Nathan Ben Saddi, a Jew at Vienna.
BE not disheartened at the Troubles which thou encounterest in this World of
Lotteries. But, remember the Adage of thy Rabbi's, That EVIL which is Old as
Night, is yet the Offspring of every Morning. The Ages are measured exactly,
and our Hours are cheker'd with Equal Mixtures of Happiness and Misfortune. We
are not born to our own Desires. And as not a Man of us can remember how he was
formed in the Womb, so have we no Reason to repine at what happens to us since
we came out of it. Whatever Power, Wisdom and Goodness took Care of us then,
and afterward inspired our Mothers and Nurses with Tenderness, and a Thousand
Degrees of Patience beyond what is Recorded of Job, the same will provide for
us to Eternity.

The Desire of Knowledge killed Adam, and the same Lust, propagated with his
Seed, destroys all his Posterity. We can never be satisf'd in our Confinement
to this World, and therefore we flounce and flutter on all Sides, like Fish or
Birds in a Net, to find a Way out: Whilst we do but entangle our selves the
faster, render our Restraint more uneasy, and delay the Possibility of our
Release. Whereas Patience would soon set us free, and rank us among the
Immortals. One thinks to escape by high-drinking; another by Fevers of Love or
Glory; and a Third conceits, he shall by his Gold, be able to bribe the Watch,
who Guard the last Passes of this Life, and persuade 'em to let him Scamper
safe to Paradise. Alas! Alas! All this is but the Sophistry of our Passions.
It Is in vain to think of hastening or retarding our Fate. Our Time is set,
though we know not the Period. Resignation is our best Lesson, and Prudence the
next.

Perhaps thou will call this a Sermon, rather than a Letter. But, I advise thee
to read it with the Eyes of a Stoic; That is, whether it pleases thee or not,
regard it not farther than it agrees with Reason. I would fain ask of the Man
who expects to have his Will accomplished in this Life, whether he can prevail
upon the Sun to rise any Morning within the Artick Circle, or the Moon to
descend, some Night, and sweep the snow off from the top of Mount Athos. So
Inexorable is our Destiny, so unalterable the Decrees of Fate.

Be not troubled therefore at any Thing; but remember that thou art a Part of
the Universe, and that nothing can betide thee, which is not for the Good of
the Whole.

What I have said is, to arm thee against all the Contingencies which may
assault thee unawares, rushing upon thee on a sudden from behind the Veil,
which covers all the Designs of Providence and Nature, Destiny and Chance.

I my self have lately experienced, that it is good to be thus prepared for
future Events, having narrowly escaped Death by a little Timely forecast.

It is not Necessary for thee at this Time, to know all the Circumstances of my
Danger. Suffice it to say, That I was assassinated in the Dark, killed him that
designed to be my Murderer, and am now forced to remove my Habitation.

Eliachim thy Brother in Israel will be at Vienna within Fourteen Days. He will
give thee a farther Account of all Things which it behooves thee to know: with
fresh Instructions concerning my New Lodgings, and the Method we must observe
for the Future in conveying Letters. We cannot be too cautious in the Grand
Signior's Business.

As for our own Lives, let us imagine, they were only sent to serve him, on
whose Life so many Millions of Lives depend.

Paris, 18th. of the 5th. Moon, of the Year 1664.
LETTER IX. To Zeidi Alamanzi, a Merchant at Venice.
I Am obliged to send Circular Letters at this Time, to all the Slaves of the
Grand Signior, who have Business with me at Paris; to inform them, that upon a
very Important Emergency, I am forced to change my Lodgings. I have already
sent away Dispatches to Constantinople and Vienna on this Account to prevent
the Errors they might commit in addressing their Letters. For the same Reason,
I now write to thee. Thou need not enquire after the Occasion of this
Conduct; nor wonder at any Thing that happens to us extraordinary in those
hazardous Posts. We must expect to encounter with Rubs and Obstacles in serving
our Great Master. If these difficulties have but their proper effect, which is
to whet our Inventions, increase our Diligence, and confirm us in our Zeal, all
shall go well.

The Soul of Man never displays her Faculties and Perfections with greater
Luster, than when she is environed with Perils. These are the Trials of
Fortitude, Prudence, Justice and (...) the Virtues. He that sinks under M^nes,
and Cross Events, has either no S^ or ^s asleep.

Courage then, Fellow-Slave, and let thy Heart beat a continual Alarm. Be not
dismayed at any Thing, nor let Self-Love bereave thee of thy Honor: But go on
in thy Duty, and trust thy Soul to God.

Thou live in a City where Virtue and Vice are in Emulation, still striving
to surpass each other: There are not more wicked People in the World than
Venice affords, nor yet more Pious and Good. Follow thou the best Patterns, and
be happy. But do nothing by bare Imitation: For that is the right Way to become
a Hypocrite. Let all thy Actions proceed from Vital Principles of Reason and
Generosity in thy self. And when thou see rare Examples, let 'em serve only
to awaken and rowze thy Innate Virtue.

Send me no Letters till thou have received fresh Orders from the Port. They
will furnish thee with all Necessary Instructions. After that, let me hear from
thee as often as thou will. Thy Dispatches will be always welcome. Let them
contain Matter of Intelligence chiefly, and that of the freshest Date.
Penetrate into the Counsels of the Republic where thou residest. Insinuate thy
self with the Senators and Grandees. Dive into their Hearts, and unlock their
Secrets. Communicate Nothing but the Truth to the Ministers of the Port or to
me. If thou can Discover their Inclinations to a Peace, or their Absolute
Need of it, thou will do an Acceptable Service to the Grand Signior, and to the
whole Empire of the Faithful: For then we can bring 'em to our own Terms.

Zeidi, to God I recommend thee, desiring him to preserve thee from Wine, Women
and Cards, which are the Three Capital Temptations of Venice.

Paris, 1st. of the 6th. Moon, of the Year 1664.
LETTER X. To Murat Bessa.
I Cannot easily divine the Reasons why I am so much neglected by the Ministers
of the Port. Above Four Years have passed away, wherein many Notable Events
have happened; yet nobody thought it worth his Labor to inform Mahmut of any
Thing. So that all the Notices I could gain of Remote Transactions, are owing
either to the Public News of Europe, or at best to some particular Letters of
Merchants residing in this City, with whom I conserve an Intimacy, for the sake
of Intelligence, and for other Causes.

Thus I should have been in Ignorance to this Day, what Issue the Bassa of
Aleppo's Rebellion had, were it not for an Accidental Interview I lately had of
some French Travelers, who came from Constantinople. These informed me of the
sudden Fate of that Bassa, when he was at the Height of all his Grandeur,
within a few Days March of the Imperial City, at the Head of a Potent Army, and
just upon the Point of Accommodation with the Grand Signior. They much extol
his Bravery and Resolution: For the French are Naturally Lovers of such as dare
boldly oppose their Sovereign. They equally condemn the sly Perfidiousness of
Mortaza Bassa, to whose safe Conduct the Generous Rebel trusted his Life, and
by that Easiness lost it. Yet they applaud Mortaza's Loyalty, Courage and
Wisdom, with the Eminent Services he afterward did the Empire, in leading the
Army against Ragotski, Prince of Transylvania, which at length lifted him to
the Government of Babylon.

All these Things had been hid from me, were not the Nazarenes my
Intelligencers. Nor should I have known how the Rebellion was carried on after
his Death by his Revengeful Nephew, by the Son of Cheusaien Bassa, by a Bey of
Egypt, and other Malcontents. Yet such Passages are fit for a Man in my Post
to be acquainted with, that he may have a clear Idea of his Master's
Circumstances, and so apply himself more effectually to serve him.

It had not been amiss, if I had received timely Intelligence of the Death of
Prince Ragotski, in Regard there was always a private Correspondence between
him and this Court. Which ceasing by his Death, it had been worth my Pains to
observe, whether it would be continued by his Successor, or what other Measures
they would take.

It Is true I was acquainted with this, but not by the Ministers of the Port. I
heard also of all the following Commotions in Transylvania, occasioned by the
different Factions of Michael Apafi and Kemini Janos, the Two Rival Princes. I
was not sorry for this News, knowing that the Divisions of the Nazarenes
strengthen the Unity and Force of the Mussulman Empire. I was likewise informed
of the Fate of Mortaza, Bassa of Babylon, who fell a Victim to the Grand
Vizier's Jealousy; with many other Passages. But neither from the Port, nor
from any other Hands could I learn the least Intelligence of the Venetian War,
and what Progress our Arms have made in Candia, Dalmatia, and the other
Dominions of the Republic. Which makes me conclude, that either the Grand
Signor's Residence at Adrianople, abated his Inclinations to Martial Affairs,
which is also the Common Opinion of the Christians here in the West; or, that
the War in Hungary for a while superseded all other Designs.

However it be, it is certain the Successes of the Ottoman Arms in taking
Newhausel, Leventz, Novigrod, and other Places of Strength, with the terrible
Incursions of the Tartars through Moravia and Austria, put the whole German
Empire into a great Consternation. Ambassadors are sent from the Imperial Court
to all the Christian Princes, imploring their Assistance in this General Danger
of Europe.

Here is one arrived at this Court, whom they call Count Strozzi, a Person of
good Address, and Master of much Eloquence. He has prevailed on the French King
to maintain at his own Charges Six Thousand Horse and Foot, to serve against
the Victorious Osmans. A great many Persons of Quality, have listed themselves
as Volunteers; and the meaner Sort talk of nothing but marching to
Constantinople, and driving the Turks back to Scythia, from whence they first
came.

Courteous Bassa, thou will laugh at the Vanity of these Infidels, who consider
not that by the Grace of God, and Miracles of his Prophet, our Emperor is the
King of all the Kings on the Earth, the Mightiest of the Mighty ones; the
Phoenix of Honor, Power, and Unparalleled Majesty; Brother and Companion of
the Sun, Moon and Stars; a Prince of a Mysterious and Sublime Lineage, in whom
are centered all Glory and Excellency; the Shadow of God on Earth!

The Breath of Fame goes before the Van-Couriers of his Armies, purifying all
Places, and filling them with Veneration and Terror. The Dust that is raised by
his Heroic Cavalry, passing through the Air, causes Trembling and Astonishment
in the Hearts of the Christians. The Infidels fall before the Fatal Cymetars of
True Believers.

May the Angel of the House of Ismael continue to prosper the Holy Offspring,
to extend their Conquests, and propagate the Faith unblemished; that the Names
of Alla and Mahomet may be heard in all Climates, and from the utmost Borders
of the Earth.

Paris, 5th. of the 6th. Moon, of the Year 1664.
LETTER XI. To Isouf, his Kinsman, a Merchant at Astracan.
I Have often wondered, why among the Rest of the Nations in Christendom, thou
would not bestow the least Transient Visit on Spain! But upon more mature
Consideration, I find thou art a Man of Judgment in Traveling. That Country
lies under a very ill Character, for the Penury of all Things necessary to
sustain the Lives of the Natives; and by Consequence, it is not to be thought,
they can spare much for Strangers. A very Inhospitable Region, abounding in
Beggars, Thieves and Drones: Full of Wine and Gold, yet barren of Corn, and
Rich People.

Thou will not think this a Paradox, when thou shall consider, That the
Spaniards have all their Corn from France, Germany, or Sicily: And that for
this and other Reasons, Spain is but like a Sieve through which the Immense
Treasures of Peru and Mexico, are drained into other Countries.

You may Travel some Days together in Spain, without seeing any Thing save the
dry Face of a Desert. And if you chance to meet with a House, wherein you may
shelter your self, and your Horse, expect no better than a
Ramezan-Entertainment. For you must fast all Day, and think your self much
respected, if you can get a few Onions, or other Roots and Herbs, with a Morsel
of Bread and Flesh at Night. to keep you from being sensible, That you are
actually starving.

Then the Inhabitants are the Proudest People on Earth. You shall meet with
none but Kings, Princes, Viceroys, or at least Men that conceit themselves
such. They are also Merciless in their Revenge; Cruel, Obdurate, Covetous,
Morose and Inexorable. In a Word, Spain is the Jesuits Paradise; the Jews
Purgatory; and the Hell of Women.

I therefore commend thy Fortune, or thy Prudence rather which would not suffer
thee to fall into the Hands of those Barbarians, nor think it worth thy Pains
to breath an Air infected with so many Vices. Thou have passed through many
more inviting Provinces, and art at last happily seated to thy Mind. Improve
thy Opportunities in doing good.

I sent a Letter to our Cousin Solomon, advising him to give thee a Visit. If
he comes, receive him kindly, and perform the Part of a Kinsman; put all
Expenses to my Account, and remember that no Man is born for himself.

Paris, the 6th. of the 7th Moon, of the Year 1664.
LETTER XII. To Afis Bassa.
ALL Europe is alarmed with the Mighty Preparations which our Invincible
Sovereign is making to invade the German Empire. Great is their Consternation
and Fear, and Couriers are every where running up and down from one Kingdom and
Court to another, to remonstrate the Common Danger, and beg Assistance. Every
Body appears Zealous in a Cause which concerns all Christendom, and the French
King has lent the Emperor Eight Thousand Men.

The Duke of Beaufort is also gone with a Squadron of Ships to encounter the
Corsairs of Argiers, and other Dominions of Barbary.

The Pope has sent to the Emperor's Assistance Six Thousand Foot, and Two
Thousand Horse. And the Rest of the Emperor's Allies are raising Levies for
him as fast as they can: It being current News, that the Grand Signior in
Person, is at the Head of Two Hundred Thousand Men, entering Hungary as a
Conqueror: That he has taken above Forty Towns, ruined all the Country where he
passed through, and that in a little time he will be at the Walls of Vienna.

In the mean time, this Court appears Insensible of the General Danger which
threatens Christendom. They are altogether taken up in Ballets, Plays, and
Feasting, minding their own Interest more than that of their Neighbors, and
revelling as if the King of France were sole Monarch of the World.

Here is arrived a Legate from Rome, to compose the Differences between the
Pope and this Crown. His Name is Cardinal Chisi. He is received with
unparalleled Magnificence, as if he were an Angel from Heaven: For the French
King loves to show his Grandeur on such Occasions. Besides, all the Nations
which are in the Communion of the Latin Church, have an unreserv'd Veneration
for the Roman Mufti, whom they esteem the Successor of Peter the Prince of the
Apostles.

This young Monarch has a large Soul. The whole World seems too little to
satisfy his Ambition. He lays the Foundation of Designs, greater than those of
Alexander, the Conqueror of Asia. He heaps up Money at a prodigious Rate,
raises vast Armies, builds Magnificent Palaces, keeps Kings in Pension,
supports many Princes of Germany; and in a Word, commands more of them, than
does the Emperor himself, who is their Lawful Sovereign.

Yet after all I cannot perceive that he loses any Degree of that Respect which
he owes, and which his Predecessors have always paid to the Grand Signior, who
is the undeniable Arbiter of the whole World.

God grant our Sovereign long Life, perpetual Victories, and a good Stomach to
his Meat, which the King of France wants, to the Accomplishment of his
happiness: For at present he feeds like a Sparrow.

Paris, the 19th. of the 8th. Moon. of the Year 1664.
LETTER XIII. To Hamet, Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire.
Thou will perceive the vast Respect I have for thee, by my frequent
Dispatches. Thy Commands are to me as the Laws and Sanctions of the Ottoman
Empire, which I will never violate. I am no Flatterer; witness my Letters to
some of the Grandees; wherein I have not spared to reprove their Vices, Errors,
and Maladministration. If a Bassa has been unjust, seditious, or engaged in
Rebellious Practices: If he has proved an Extortioner, a Drunkard, or a Tyrant;
he has not escaped without a due Reprimand. I have been bold in correcting,
advising, and giving Counsel to the Greatest Ministers in the Empire. And this
was a Province appointed me by the Flower of Sublime Glory, the Phoenix of
Honor, Sole Favorite and Trustee of the Grand Signior, the Vizir Azem, in
whose Custody were the Seals of Imperial Secrets, Majestic Decrees, and Royal
Edicts: Who being the Primum Mobile of the Refulgent Mussulman State, gave
Life, Activity, and Order, to all the Inferior Orbs, Springs, and Instruments
of Government.

I received this Command many Years ago; and he that gave it me, is gone to the
World of Spirits. Yer the Injunction remains in Force, being stamped with the
Mysterious Signet, the Character of Supreme and Immutable Authority. In
Obedience to which, I have never warped or flinch'd from the duty enjoined me.
And to demonstrate, that I did not do this in a vain Ostentation of the Power
which was given me; I have not failed all along to pay to a Man of Merit, the
Attach and Veneration which was his due.

It Is with inexpressible Pleasure, I throw my self at the Feet of a Wise and
Virtuous Man; with extreme complacency I kiss the Dust whereon he treads, and
unfold all my Faculties, in expressing my Esteem. I am full of Platonic Love,
and build Altars in my Breast, to a Soul deserving the Innocent Sacrifices of
amorous Passions; the Incense of Gratitude, and a pure Affection, an Holocaust
of Integrity and Loyal Friendship.

I protest, by the hopes I have of sitting on the Banks of the Rivers in Eden,
and of being regaled in the delectable Chioscs of Paradise, that I honor thy
Learning and other Sage Perfections; that unblemished Life, those excellent
Morals, and the unparalleled Sweetness of Modesty, which Crowns all thy
Actions. But I will say no more to a Man who cannot hear his own Praises. The
best Method of expressing my Regard, will be to answer thy Expectations, in
presenting thee with the true Pourtraicture of these Western Nations and
People, which thou so passionately covetest.

I must desire thee to excuse the Confusion and want of Order in my Letters;
since I send thee a Medly of Remarks, as they come to my Knowledge and Memory.

It is not long ago since I wrote to Isouf Eb'n Achmed, a Kinsman of mine, a
Merchant at Astracan; and among other Things, I took Notice of his neglecting
to see Spain in his Travels; for he has been in most of the Kingdoms of Europe,
and over all Asia and Africa. In that Letter I described Spain in its worst
Colors, Now I will show it to thee in another Figure, without swerving from
the Truth: For every Country has its Perfections and Excellencies, as well as
its Defects and Blemishes.

If Spain have a barren Soil for Corn, Nature has made Amends for that Fault,
in the Purity of the Air, and the Plenty of Fruits: The Sands of her Rivers are
the most perfect Gold. Her Villages, though few, are greater, and more Populous
than some Cities, witness Madrid. Her Mountains are of Iron, Marble, and
Jasper. Her Valleys underlaid with Lead, Brass, and Silver. Spain of old was
the Tharsis of Solomon, the Ophir of the Phoenicians, and the Peru of Rome.

In those Days the Inhabitants of Spain were Famous for their Fortitude, and
Invincible Constancy. It Is recorded, that the Inhabitants of Sagunto in the
Province of Valentia, when they were besieged by Hannibal, and sore pressed by
the Carthaginians, chose to burn themselves, with their Wives, Children and all
their Wealth, rather than yield to their Enemies.

Their Fidelity also was so remarkable, that some of the Roman Emperors had
always a Guard of Spaniards near their Persons; as the French King, the Pope,
and other Princes do now confide in the trusty Swisses.

But though there remain still some scattered Remnants of the Ancient Virtue
among them, especially in Biscay and Castile, yet the greatest Part of the
Spaniards are degenerated. They make no Figure now in the World, but only for
their Gold, and the Vastness of their Dominions. For they possess the best half
of America, are Lords of Two Mighty Empires, and not without large Territories
in the other Three Quarters of the World. Yet the too great Extent of their
Power has weakened its Vigor; the Affluence of their Wealth, has really
impoverished them; and by straining their Honor too high, they have cracked
it, being now of little or no Eeem in Europe. Their Glory fades, at the rising
Grandeur of France, which makes radiant and swift Advances toward its Zenith.
This young Monarch is already become the Arbiter of all Christendom,

Accomplished Minister, there is nothing in Nature steadfast: The World is but
an Eternal Circulation of Events, Vicissitudes, and Changes without Beginning
or End. Only God remains Immutable, in his own Essence, which is the Center of
every thing. May thou and I meet there, and then we shall be eternally happy.
Adieu.

Paris, 12th. of the 9th. Moon, of the Year 1664.
LETTER XIV. To Musu Abu'l Yahyan, Professor of Philosophy at Fez.
BY the Faith and Obedience I owe to Mohammed our Holy Lawgiver; by the
Alcoran, and all that is esteemed Sacred among the Mussulmans, I swear, thy
long Silence made me conclude my First Letter was unwelcome to thee. But now
I Am convinced to the contrary. Thy generous Answer has removed my
Apprehensions, and filled me with Complacency. Henceforth I shall rest assured
and confident of thy Friendship, promising my self vast Improvements from so
learned a Conversation, though only by Letters at many hundred Leagues Distance.

As to what thou requirest of me, concerning the various Languages of Europe, I
will inform thee the best I can, according to the Observations I have made, and
the Intelligence I have received from Men of Letters, and from Books, which are
the Pictures of learned Souls, Mirrors wherein they may behold their own
Perfections, whilst they are on Earth, and after their Departure to the
Invisibles, other Men may see the Interior Beauties of their Mind represented
to the Life. For Words are the perfect Sculpture of the Intellect, or at least
its Mezzo-Tinto. They are the express Portraicture of Divine and Humane Reason.
Thus the Alcoran is called by some of our Holy Doctors, The True Image of
Original and Increated Wisdom.

Now of all the Words and Languages on Earth, thou know the Pre-eminence has
been for ever given to those of the East, and among them to the Arabian, both
in Regard of its Purity, and of its Antiquity, from whence it is Styled the
Virgin Mother of Languages, the Dialect of the Blessed above.

Thou know, that for this Reason it is, the True Faithful covet no Species
of Learning more ardently than to be perfectly skilled in so Divine a Speech,
wherein the Volume of Celestial Majesty was penned in Heaven before the Throne
of God, and sent down on Earth by the Hand of Gabriel, Prince of the Messengers
who fly on the Errands of the Omnipotent. It was sent I say, to the Prophet,
who could neither write nor read, that the World might be convinced of its
Divine Original. Yet the Incredulous will not believe: Though it is manifest to
any Man of Impartial Sense, That a Person altogether ignorant of Letters, could
not possibly compose a Book, the most Elegant that ever was penned in the
World, and wherein not the least Blemish or Contradiction can be found from the
Chapter of the Preface, to the last Versicle, which winds up the whole Volume.
Oh! obdurate Hearts of Infidels; Oh! wilfully Blind, that shut their Eyes
against the Splendors of Eternal Light: Oh! resolvedly Deaf, that stop their
Ears against the Voice of God and his Prophet, neither will they listen to the
soft Whispers which are wafted from Paradise.

Such are the Nazarenes, who for the Sake of the Greek and Roman Tongues, of
which they are passionately enamored, educate their Children in a fair Way to
believe all the Monstrous Fictions of the Ancient Poets, or at least all the
Lying Tales and Legends of their own Priests, which are Ten Times more Fabulous
than the Former, and more Inconsistent with Reason. And this they do rather
than be at the Pains of learning Arabic, which would instruct them in Truths
as Clear and Serene as the Orient Sun.

I shall say little of these Two ancient Languages of Greece and Rome, in
Regard they being now grown Obsolete, and only to be learned in Schools, thou,
no doubt, art versed in them ad Vnguem, as the Latins phrase it.

That which seems properest for me to inform thee of, is, That the Roman or
Latin Tongue appears like an old Antiquated Mother thrust out of Doors by her
Four ungrateful Daughters, Italian, French, Spanish, and Portugueze. These are
her Natural Offspring, begot during the Roman Conquests in the West, and
degenerating after that Empire was in its Decline. So that now they are taken
for no better than Mongrels or Bastards. In Spanish there is a great Mixture of
Gothish and Moresco Words; the French retain many of their old Gaulish Idioms.
The Italian is corrupted with a Hotch-poth of Words, left by the Vandals, Huns
and Longobards. Yet that Fault is recompensed by Abundance of Greek
Etymologies. As for the Portugueze, it is but a Dialect of Spanish, and lies
under the same Imperfections.

The only pure Maternal Languages now current among the common People in any
Part of Europe, are the Teutonick, Sclavonick, and British: The First is spoken
in Germany to Perfection, but corruptly in Suedeland, Denmark and the United
Provinces. The Second is common to the Hungarians, Moldavians, Poles, Rashians,
and many other Nations. The last is confined to the Welsh, a People inhabiting
a Corner of Great Britain, driven thither by the Victorious Saxons their
Conquerors, above a Thousand Years ago. As for the Rest, they are only mixed
Dialects, and so not worth taking Notice of; excepting one Mountainous Part of
Spain, where the Inhabitants are said to speak Pure Arabic at this Day. They
are supposed to be a Remnant of the Moors.

The Critics here in the West, use to give these following Rules in Reference
to Languages. If you would address to God, speak in Greek or Latin, because of
their Antiquity, Purity, and Majestic Loftiness. If to Kings, speak in
Spanish, in Regard of its low Pronunciation and Gravity: If to Men, use
Italian, to Women, French; to Dogs, Welsh: But if you would affright an Enemy,
or the Devil himself, speak High Dutch.

They relate a Story of a German Ambassador at the French Court, who delivered
his Message in Teutonick; which when a certain Grandee heard, and took Notice
of its harsh and strong Emphasis, he swore 'twas his Opinion, That this was the
Language wherein God cursed Adam, Eve, and the Serpent. The German turning to
him, answered briskly, It Is possible, Monsieur, it may be so; but then I hope
you will grant, that French was the Occasion of this Curse, when the Devil chose
to tempt Eve in that Language for its Effeminacy, wheedling her a la mode de
Paris, to eat the forbidden Fruit.

Renowned Musu, do me the Honor of frequent Letters: Instruct me in Things
whereof I Am ignorant: Make me familiar with the Remarkables of the Country
where thou residest: Transport Fez, with the other Parts of Africa which are
known to thee; transport them I say successively to Paris every Moon, on a
Piece of Paper, and I will send thee all Christendom by way of Exchange: For
thus it becomes the Lovers of Wisdom, to barter for Knowledge.

Paris, 10th. of the 11th. Moon, of the Year 1664.
LETTER XV. To Osman Adrooneth, Astrologer to the Sultan at Adrianople.
THose of thy Profession here in the West are wholly taken up in contemplating
a certain Comet which appears in the Firmament. It Is of that Sort which they
call [Bearded.] And some will have it to resemble a Lion, others say it is like
a Dragon, a Crocodile, a Bear, and I know not what. There is hardly a Species
of Four-footed Beasts, to which the Giddy Rabble do not resemble it. And some
assert it to be the perfect Figure of a Sword.

The Mathematicians are straining all their Skill, to take the true Dimensions
of this Celestial Apparition. The Painters are drawing it to the Life; the
Poets are making Songs and Ballads of it. And the more Learned Sages are
framing Astronomical Schemes, like so many Gins or Traps to catch this Meteor
in. They watch all its Motions, and dog in from one Heavenly House to another;
they track it through the most intricate Paths of the Sky.

If it stands still, or makes a Transient Address to any Planet, Eminent Star,
or Constellation, we are presently alarmed with the News of it, and bid to be
upon our Guard, as if there were some Mischief a-plotting against us Above. The
World is harangu'd with Fatal Predictions of Wars, Famine, Earthquakes, and
other Calamities, the sure Consequences of this supposed Prodigy.

Tell me, thou who art Conversant in the Science of the Stars, and the
Mysterious Philosophy of Nature, what these Comets are? Whether they be only
Exhalations drawn up into the Higher Region of the Air, by the Force of the
Sun; Or, whether they be more solid and durable Substances? Whether they be of
a Posthumous Origin like the Clouds, Hail, Rain, Snow, and other Meteors, the
daily Products of Nature, the Upstart Offspring of the Elements? Or, whether
they are in the Rank of those Beings, whose Antiquity is untraceable, which are
as Old as the World; such as the Sun, Moon, Stars, and this Earth whereon we
tread?

For my part, I believe-'it is no Heresy in Science, whatever it is in Religion,
to start New Maxims. For ought we know, both in the one and the other, what we
call Innovation, is but a Reviving those Principles, which through Desuetude,
or the Corruption of Times are grown Obsolete, out of Date and forgotten, though
really the most Primitive and Ancient Truths in the World.

Thus I cannot forbear thinking there are some other Globes scattered up and
down the Infinite Expanse, beside those whose Continual Brightness exposes them
to our Eyes.

The Moon, it is known, with Venus and other Planets, receive their Light
Gradually from the Sun, by Hemispheres: So that it is certain each of these
Orbicular Bodies is always Dark by Half. And where is the Solecism, if we
suppose there are other Opake Bodies in the Firmament which receive no Light at
all, and by their Nature and Qualities, are Incapable of receiving any but from
within themselves? So we may suppose these Comets to be such solid Globes, made
Resplendent by an Eruption of their Central Fires.

God only knows the Truth in such Cases. And thou art better able to decide
these Questions than I. Therefore referring it to thy Sage Judgment, I pray him
who made the Stars, and orders their Dominion on Earth, to bless thee with
Favorable Influences, That thy Soul may be always like a Land flourishing
under the Sweet Aspects of Orion and the Pleiades.

Paris, 22d. of the 12th. Moon, of the Year 1664.
LETTER XVI. To Hamet, Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire.
THE French have had so many Occasions of Joy of late, that it is hard to
determine, which affects them most nearly.

The Satisfaction which the Pope gave this Monarch, for the Injuries formerly
done to his Ambassador at Rome, began the Triumph of the French Court. I have
already sent Intelligence of that Quarrel, and how high the Resentments of the
King flew, on the same Day that he received the First News of so Barbarous an
Affront. Now I shall acquaint thee, That there ensued a Treaty between them at
Pisa, a City of Italy in the Dukedom of Tuscany, after the French Troops had
terrified them into a State-Penitence, by the menacing Approaches they made
toward the Ecclesiastical Territories, through the Principalities of Modena and
Parma. These Two are Friends to France, and their Interest makes them so, in
Regard that Crown protects 'em from the Pope's Oppression, who is always
esteemed an III Neighbor, by the Italian Princes, whose Dominions lie next to
his. For this Roman Prelate is very Potent and Rich; he would in a short time
be Lord of all Europe in Temporals as well as Spirituals, were he not curbed by
the King of France and his Allies.

This makes all the little Sovereigns round about Rome, stand in Awe of the
Monarch, who was born to command Crowned Heads. Wonder not at the Expression:
For I tell thee, some of the greatest Princes in Europe are his Pensioners.
This very Quarrel with the Pope, has gained the French King Three Cardinals
more than were his Friends formerly.

The Conclusion of the Treaty was, That the Pope should send a Legate de Latere
into France, to pacify the King's Wrath; and that the Militia or Roman Guards
whom they call Sbirri and Corses, should be for ever abolished, and a Pyramid
to be erected over against their Guard-House, with an Inscription in Latin and
French, declaring their Crime and Punishment.

This put the Court of France into a very Jolly Humor. They fell presently to
Feasting and Revelling; and the King's next Project was the Conquest of
Barbary. To this End he sent the Duke of Beaufort with a Fleet of Great Ships,
to clear the Seas of African Corsairs, that so an Army might be safely
transported from Toulon, and landed on the opposite Shore. His Design in this
was to reduce the Inhabitants of those Happy Countries to the old Idolatry of
their Forefathers, to plant there the Nazarene Superstion, and make himself the
Sole Lord and Proprietor of Africa.

I cannot divine what Success he will have in this great Enterprise; but it
appears as if God were angry with the Mussulmans: Such continual Losses they
sustain by Land and Sea.

It is with no small Grief I saw not long ago, the French who served in Hungary
this Campaign, return to Paris laden with the Spoils of True Believers. I
cannot behold the very Cymetars and Ensigns which these Infidels took from the
vanquished Osmans, hang up in their Temples as Trophies of their Victory,
without inexpressible Passion and Regret. It Is said here, the Grand Signior has
lost in Hungary above Thirty Thousand Men this Campaign; whereof Ten Thousand
were killed in one Battle, and a Hundred and Fifty Colors taken, with Sixteen
Cannons.

Besides, these Giafers grate my Ears with another Bravado, boasting that one
French Ship of War fought Seven Hours with Three and Thirty of the Grand
Signior's Galleys, sunk Five, scattered the rest, and came off with a complete
Victory.

It Is a vast Advantage the French have in the Situation of their Country, in
that it is washed on the South by the Mediterranean, on the North by the Main
Sea: So that it is easy for them to curb the greatest Part of Europe on one
Side, and sufficiently molest the Levantines on the other. As for the Western
Parts, this Kingdom is their very Center: where all the Lines of War, Peace,
Commerce and Traffic meet and terminate. She is to Christendom, what Egypt and
Sicily were in former Ages to the Empire of Old Rome, an inexhaustible Granary.
Whatsoever desirable Things, Nature has frugally dropped here and there in other
Regions, are found in this Kingdom as in their Original Seminary. Corn is
plentiful as Grass, Wine is almost as cheap here, as Water with you in some
Parts of Turkey. The Fens and Lakes are covered with Wild Fowl. The Meadows with
Sheep, Deers, Goats and Oxen. There Is nothing scarce but Hens, Eggs, and True
Believers. I had almost forgot their Remarkable Plenty of Sault, the bare
Custom of which, augments the King's Coffers with Four Millions of Zequins
every Year.

France also abounds in Hemp, a most necessary Vegetable, whereof she not only
makes all her own Cordage and Sails, but also furnishes her Neighbors; which
brings in a considerable Revenue. There is an Infinite Plenty of Fruits, and
Trees for Timber, of Iron, Marble, Freestone, and all Things necessary for
Building Ships or Houses, for Defense or Offense by Land or Sea. Neither are
there wanting Mines of Gold, Silver, Tin, Lead, Copper and other Metals whereof
Men make the Instruments of War, and the Entertainments of Peace. In a word,
this Country is so enriched with every thing, that some Historians and
Philosophers have called it the Parent of Plenty, others the Fountain of
Earthly Bliss, the most Incomparable Region of this Globe, the Epitome of the
World, or rather a little World it self.

Serene Scribe, thou will not wonder at the Universal Successes of the French
Arms, when thou considerest these things, and that here the Provinces are
Peopled like Kingdoms, the Cities appear like whole Provinces, for Multitude of
Inhabitants. To say all in a Word, The common Character of France, is the same
which Philosophers give to Nature. That there can be no Vacuum found in it.

Paris, 25th. of the 12th. Moon, of the Year 1664.
LETTER XVII. To Abdel Melec, Muli Omar, President of the College of Sciences
at Fez.
PErmit me to rush into thy Presence, Venerable Patron of Philosophy, without
the usual Formalities of Address, or Punctilio's of Introduction. Let me be
admitted like a Man with Coals of Fire on his Head, as the Custom is at the
Imperial Port, in urgent Cases: For I am newly inflamed afresh with
Pythagorism, Platonism, and Indianism.

Floods, Fires, and other Devastations by War, Famine, Pestilence, Earthquakes,
and such like Contingencies, have either quite abolished the True and Primitive
Science of the First Ages, in most Parts of the Earth; or at least very much
diminished and obscured their Original Splendour.

The best Manuscripts are lost, unless the Indians have preserved 'em. Our
Fathers grew Torpid, Stupefied, and Desperate, under the Public Calamities
which overwhelmed whole Cities, Provinces, Kingdoms, and Empires: There was no
Encouragement for a Scribe or a Man of Letters, to put himself to a needless
Toil in laboring to preserve the Records which came from Heaven: Histories of
the World Invisible, Celestial, Perfect, and Eternal; Traditions of
undiscoverable Antiquity; Pandects replenished with Bright Oriental Wisdom, and
sealed with the Tetragrammaton, which thou know is the Signet of the First
and the Last; even of the Divinity which comprehends all Things, and is it self
comprehended of none.

Had they gone about such a Task, they knew that some ill Fate or other would
swallow their Writings, and bury them in Eternal Oblivion. Hence it is, that at
this Day we can hardly boast of the Footsteps of ancient Knowledge, a few
Fragments and Relics of Primitive Learning, scattered up and down in diverse
Authors, and much adulterated with the vain Opinions and Errors of Aftertimes.
For every Writer was either inclined, or forced, to flatter the Age wherein he
lived, and not oppose their Tenets. So that now there is scarce any True
Philosophy extant on this side the Ganges.

How those Brachmans only had the Happiness to conserve so Sacred a Treasure,
can be no other way made out, than by their own constant Tradition, that the
Deluge of Noah never reached those utmost Borders of the Land toward the East.
And perhaps the same Reason may be given for the untraceable Chronologies of
the Chinese, their Neighbors. For though they differ in the Sentiments and Rites
of their Religion, in their Laws, Customs, and manner of Government, yet they
both agree in affirming the World to be indeterminately Old, putting a certain
Number of Millions of Years, for an uncertain, far beyond it; which is but a
modest Retrenchment of their own Thoughts, as if they were unwilling, it should
be falsely censured that they aimed at an Hyperbole.

They say, That the First Matter is Coeternal with God, as Light is Co-eval
with the Sun, produced also, and depending after the same Manner. For as the
Light diffused through the Air, is not properly the Sun, but an Inseparable
Effect of it; so the Universe is not God, but his Production, ever subsisting
on him, and never to be divided from his Eternal Essence. And for ought I see,
the most significant Language in the World has no other way to express things
of this abstruse Nature. They are too sublime for humane Thought; much more do
they transcend the Power of Speech. All the Dialects on Earth are too barren of
Words, and Words too defective in Sense, to describe the Ineffable Secrets of
Eternity.

As for the various Ranks of Beings, the Infinite Diversity of Forms, resulting
from the First Matter, they think it reasonable to believe, That they were
successively produced in time; every one in its Order, and according to its
Perfection.

I tell thee, it appears much more Rational for me to believe this, than that
the First Matter it self was produced out of nothing about Five or Six Thousand
Years ago, as the Jews and Christians seem to teach. Rather than starve my
Reason with so short and Idea of the World's Age, I would embrace the
Sentiments of Democritus and Epicurus, suppose an Infinity of Spaces and
Worlds, an Eternity of Generations and Corruptions, a Continual Change not only
of Individuals, but of the very Species of things, through the Fatal Concourse
and Blending of Atoms: Yet not denying the Unity of the Divine Essence, nor
undervaluing his Providence all the while. For these things are, in my Opinion,
very compatible one with another.

I do not pretend to be singular, or set up for a Dogmatist. Neither am I
ambitious of being esteemed a Wit, by venting Notions above the reach of Vulgar
Capacities. It Is only the pure Love of Truth, which encourages me to take this
Liberty with thee, who in Matters of Philosophy art the only Master of the Age.

To thee therefore I submit all my Sentiments, as to an Oracle; desiring thy
Impartial Answer, and couching the Faculties of my Soul, in the most humble
Attach to thy Venerable Wisdom, I become mute as a Mommie.

Paris, 30th. of the 12th. Moon, of the Year 1664.
LETTER XVIII. To Mirmadolin, Santone of the Vale of Sidon.
WHat is this World, that on all sides Invades our Senses? This Earth under our
Feet; those Clouds whirling over our Heads; these Winds shaking the Trees; that
Azure Sky, with all its glittering Ornaments? What Is all this but an Eternal
Dream; a mere Shadow of God Almighty's Thoughts? It Is pleasant living in it;
it is also painful. In his Sense this Universe is perfectly good; in ours it is
mixed with evil. He made it for his own Diversion, and our Scrutiny. It Is to us
a Field of Riddles, and Contradictions. In Summer we curse the Heat, and in
Winter blaspheme the Cold. Yet we bless both the one and the other, when we
feel 'em in due Measure and Season. One Hour, this Color pleases the Eye,
another that; and perhaps in the next, it is disgusted at them both. We never
find Rest or Content in any thing. The softest Music at some times grates our
Ears, like the croaking of Toads. The most agreeable Odours, are as the Smell
of a Sepulcher, loathsome and abominable. The most delectable Wines and Savoury
Meats, at such Seasons, are unpalatable as the Beverage and Diet of Hell.
Neither can the more insinuating Charms of Women, put us in a better Humor.
All the whole System of Nature joined together, is not sufficient to afford us
Ease. Nothing but a Ray from the Omnipotent can alleviate our Melancholy, or
give us a taste of our selves. For we are the very Deity in scattered
Fragments; or we are separated Drops of the Divine Essence: Volatile Spirits of
Eternity; by Fate or Chance, fixed in proper Vehicles of Time, and Matter. O
Santone! This whole Corporeal Universe, is but a Web spun from the Bowels of an
Infinite God, and wrought with inimitable Artifice, to catch Immaterial Forms,
Idea's and Souls in, which are the Genuine Offspring of the Eternal Mind. We
Mortals of Humane Race, are but so many Parcels of the Divinity in Disguise,
trapan'd into Bodies, by certain hidden Baits, Magnets and Charms lurking in
Embryo's, with which we have some Sympathy. We are all Gods in Masquerade. So
are the Beasts of the Field, the Birds of the Air, and the Fish of the Sea.

Let us not therefore condemn the Antique Ceremonies of Gentile Religion, which
taught Men to adore the Sun, Moon and Stars; the Elements and all that is
within their Circumference, especially the Souls of departed Heroes, Demigods,
Nymphs, and the rest of those Beings which are the Eldest Progeny of Eternal
Nature. For in so doing, they did but build Altars to the Original Fountain of
the Universe. Since God is in the Winds, in the Rain, in the Thunder,
Lightning, Hail and other Meteors; in the Heavens, and Air, Sun, Moon and
Stars; in the Fire, Earth and Water; in Plants and Animals; finally, since he
is in the Elements, and every thing compounded of them; he is not only in them,
but is these very Things by an Ineffable Production of himself. And when the
Final Consummation shall come, it will be but a withdrawing all the extended
Lines of his Infinity, into their Center, where thou and I, and every divided
Atome in Nature shall meet, be united and swallowed up in Eternal Beatitude.
Amen! Amen! Oh thou Lord and Father of all things, Inexhaustible Abyss of
Miracles which know no End.

Paris, 6th. of the 1st. Moon, of the Year 1665.
LETTER XIX. To the same.
SUpposing it were otherwise than I have said: Grant the Doctrine of Epicurus
true. Believe that we and all things were produced by the Fortuitous Concourse
of Atoms. Yet still we have the same, or greater Reason to value our selves as
diminutive Gods, since in this Sense we must of necessity be Eternal, every
Atome being so, of which we are compounded. In the Opinion of these
Philosophers, there is no such thing as an Origin or Beginning of the Universe:
Each Particle of Matter with them, is as old as the Divinity. We have all
ranged Eternally from one Form and World to another; danced to the measures of
Fate, been Parts of the Orbs above, and of the Caverns below; strayed through
the Heavens and all the Elements; taken an Universal Carier, through Infinite
and Endless Spaces; and are now (as fixed as we seem in these solid Hulks of
Flesh) in the same Hurly-Burly as ever.

These Bodies which we carry about us, are not compounded of the same Atoms as
they were Seven Years ago. There is a perpetual Flux and Reflux of Particles.
We die as fast as we live. Every Moment substracts from our Duration on Earth,
as much as it adds to it. We move, breathe, and do all things by Paradox. Our
very Essence is a Riddle.

With an open Heart therefore, I applaud thy Religious Negligence of Humane
Affairs, in that thou art Divinely careless of thy self, and every thing else,
save only to conserve thy Innocence.

What signifies it, whether we believe the Written Law or the Alcoran; whether
we are Disciples of Moses, Jesus, or Mahomet; Followers of Aristotle, Plato,
Pythagoras, Epicurus, or Ilch Rend Hu the Indian Bramin? Of what Import is it,
whether we pray or not? Whether we kneel before Images, or in a naked Mosque?
'Twill be all one in the winding up. We are but the Machines of Chance. As we
live, so shall we die; and God knows what will become of us afterward; neither
is it worth our while to be sollicitous, since we can be certain of nothing.
Perhaps, every Atome of which we are made, may be scattered from the rest; we
may be transported Piecemeal into Ten Hundred Thousand Millions of Worlds; and
sevenfold as many Years may expire, before Two the minutest Particles of our
Frame, meet together again. We need not be troubled at all this; nothing can
hinder us from being Immortal and Eternal, though it be but in Fragments.

Go on then, Sacred Vagabond, Pious Rambler, Holy Fugitive; go on, to assert in
the course of thy Life, this great Truth, That all things depend on Everlasting
Chance or Destiny. Thy Actions shall reprove the Hypoctites of the Age, who
abound in Specious Words. And thy Divine Indifference shall condemn the Hellish
Zeal of furious Bigots, who think to please God, and atone for their Sins, by
sacrificing Humane Blood, and massacring all that are not of their Faith.

God, or Chance, or Fate, shall transport thee after Death, to Happy Regions,
Immarcessible Joys, and an Endless Succession of Bliss. Every Atome shall find
its Paradise. Thou shall mount by Degrees to Full, Infinite and Eternal
Felicity. Adieu for a time.

Paris, 20th. of the 1st. Moon, of the Year 1665.
LETTER XX. To Isouf, his Cousin, a Merchant at Astracan.
WHen I reflect on thy Happiness, in having been all thy Life at Liberty to
change thy Residence, and ramble whithersoever thy Fancy invited thee, and that
even now at Astracan, thou art no longer confined than by thy own Pleasure or
Interest, I cannot forbear envying thee.

There is an inexpressible Delight in ranging the various Tracts of the Earth.
Whereas, to be perpetually shut up and imprisoned as I am, in a City so close
and high-built, that the very Winds can scarce find a Way into her Interior
Parts, is a perfect Hell upon Earth.

To speak the Truth, Paris may be called a Heap or Aggregate of Cities, built
one upon another, like Pelion upon Ossa, since the Houses here are as high as
the Minarets at Constantinople, and divided like the Air into the lower,
middle, and upper Regions or Apartments: Or rather like the Heavens, whose
Number Astronomers assert to be Nine. For with so many Stories, do some Houses,
nay whole Streets in Paris, lift up their Heads; and every Story or Apartment's
peopled like a Bee-hive. So that in this Infinite Throng of Inhabitants, and
such as come hither about Business, we are ready to be stifled with one
another Breath. Whereas, thou know, in the Cities all over the East, the
Houses are intermixed with Gardens: They are low-built, with Terrasses on the
Top to take the cool Air on by Night, with Parterres, Kas-kaneys, Divans,
Conservatories, and all the other Conveniences for refreshing the Senses, by
Water, Wind, and Odoriferous Smells.

This makes me long to be at Constantinople, Damascus, Mosul, or even at
Astracan, where thou residest, though that City want many Delights, which
others enjoy. However, I should there encounter with Tiara's and Turbants, the
very Sight of which would half cure my Discontent. May my Portion be with
Tagot, if I am not tired with seeing Nothing but these Hats, and Short-Coats,
these ridiculous Franks, these Apes without Tails. And then to hear 'em rant
against the Grand Signior, and all True Believers; to hear 'em blaspheme the
Messenger of God, curse the Alcoran, revile the Mufti, and all the Mollahs,
with a Thousand other Impertinences, which none but such Reprobates, Giaurs,
and Infidels would be guilty of; makes me either wish my self Deaf, or that my
Tongue were at Liberty to answer them. But, much rather would I desire to be in
a Place, where I might enjoy my Ears, to receive the Salem from my Friends that
are Mussulmans, and to hear the Name of God devoutly blessed on any Occasion
that awakens the Sense to Piety.

Oh that I were among my Countrymen, the Arabians, who dwell in Tents, and
frolic about from Hills to Valleys, tasting by Turns the various Sweets of the
Forest and the Plain! The Groves and Meadows, Pastures and Arable Grounds,
Cities and Villages, all contribute to their Delight. They want no Innocent Joy
that the Earth can afford. Their Wealth consists in the Multitude of their
Sheep, Camels, Goats and Oxen. And for them is all their Care, that they may
not want Grass and Water in due Season. As for themselves, they are resigned to
Providence.

So are the Tartars, who sleep in Hords or Wagons; the only Cavaliers of Asia:
Whose Life is a perpetual Campaign, from the Cradle to the Grave. Their Labor
and Ease are derived from the same Fountain; exercising themselves on
Horseback at Seven Years old; and feeding on the Milk of Mares as soon as they
are weaned from their Mother's Breasts. Toil and Recreation with them are one
and the same thing, since they know no other Pleasure but what consists in
Riding, Fighting and Conquering; or else in Death, which they believe
translates them to new Joys, and those more poignant than they knew before.
Therefore they bravely court it at the Point of a Sword, or the Mouth of a
Cannon: Nothing being more scandalous or hateful than a Coward among them.

I protest, the very Idea of Palus Maeotis, and Taurica Chersonesus, with the
Rest of those Horrible Fens and Marshes, on the North of the Black Sea, which
encompass the Dominions of the Tartars, affects me with a Passion, or rather
such a Medly of Passions, as I know not how to name. Those ample Deserts, those
untrack'd Solitudes, appear to my Imagination, like the Limits of this old
Habitable World; and the Frontiers of some new, strange and unknown Region;
some Terra Incognita, where an Universal Desolation and Silence keep their Seat
for ever: Where no Voices are heard but those of uncouth Satyrs, Fauns, and
other Exotic Tenants of the Woods and Moors. No other Sound but the whistling
and roaring of the Winds. No Prospect but that of Trees which have appeared
from the Infancy of Time, and where those are wanting, the Eye is wearied in a
long, endless Waste, which nothing seems to bound, but the declining Arch of
distant Skies, or low, black, melancholy Clouds, skirted with Mists and Fogs,
Eternal Mantles of the Northern Climes.

This is the Figure of those solitary Tracts where I would choose to live,
rather than in a City which stifles me, with too much Plenty of every Thing,
but fresh Air, and honest People.

Isouf, the Contrarieties which we find in Earthly Things, give a Gust to each
other. And, the most Magnificent Palace would seem a Prison, were a Man always
confined to live in it.

Cousin, I wish thee perpetual Liberty, and Happiness.

Paris, 7th. of the 2d. Moon, of the Year 1665.
LETTER XXI. To Hamet, Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire.
AMidst the Variety of Obligations which I have to discharge, I forget not to
obey thy Commands. I have already in my former Dispatches acquainted thee with
the Characters, and some Remarkable Passages of Henry IV. Lewis XIII. Lewis
XIV. Cardinal Richlieu, Cardinal Mazarini, and the Prince of Conde. Now I will
say something of the Famous Marshall de Turenne, whose Fame reaches
wheresoever the French Wars have been talked of for these Forty Years. The Name
of this great General, is Henry de la Tour d' Auvergne, Son to the Duke of
Bouillon.

When his Father was near his Death, he called for both his Sons, whereof this
was the youngest. And among other Exhortations, he recommended in a special
Manner Three Things to their Practice: Never to renounce or change their
Religion: Never to take up Arms against their Sovereign: Nor to provoke the
First Minister.

As to the First, the Marshall de Turenne has hitherto kept it inviolably, but
he has faulter'd in both the other; having revolt-from his Master's Service
during his Minority, and opposed the Interest of Cardinal Mazarini, when the
Parliament persecuted that Minister.

However, this hinders not but that he is a Great Soldier, and besides he is
since reconciled to the King. He seems to be born for Martial Affairs. And they
relate of him, That when he was but Ten Years Old, and his Governor missing
him, had sought up and down every where for him, he at length found him fast
asleep on a Cannon, which he seemed to embrace with his little Arms as far as
they would reach. And when he asked why he chose such a Couch to lie on, he
made Answer, That he designed to have slept there all Night, to convince his
Father that he was hardy enough to undergo the Fatigues of War, though the Old
Duke had often persuaded himself to the Contrary. And to speak the Truth, no
Man was more Careless of his Body than this Prince.

At Fourteen Years of Age he was sent into Holland to serve in the Army under
the Prince of Orange, who was his Uncle. There he applied himself to all the
Discipline of War, doing the Duty of a Private Soldier: Which is the common Way
that Cadets or Younger Brothers take to rise to the most Eminent Offices. He
was equally forward in Labors and Perils, never shunning any Fatigue or
Hazard, which might bring him Glory, yet he was not rash, the Common Vice of
Youth, but tempered all his Actions with an extraordinary Prudence and Solidity
of Judgment, beyond what was expected from him at those Years. Yet, on the
other Side, his Counsels were not slow and Phlegmatic, being of a very ready
Forecast; and he seldom failed in his Contrivances. He was soon promoted to a
Place of Command. And the Exactness of his Conduct raised him a vast
Reputation, so that by Degrees he at last arrived to that Height of Power and
Honor he now possess. He appears Indefatigable in his Body, and of an
Invincible Resolution. He hates Flatterers, that think to gain his Friendship
by praising him. And is equally averse from making Use of such fawning
Insinuations to others, though the Greatest Princes of the Blood, or the First
Minister himself.

He has also a certain Stedfastnese of Spirit which cannot be warped by any
Artificial Addresses, though made to his own apparent Advantage, if they
propose to him any Thing that has the least Semblance of what is base and
dishonorable. Thus he would never consent that the Honor of taking Dunkirk
some Years ago, should be ascribed to Cardinal Mazarini, though that Minister
privately courted him to it, offering him the Greatest Commands in the Kingdom,
if he would do him that Service; and the Marshall knew it might prove his
Ruin, if he did not. Yet such was his Integrity and Love to the Truth, that by
no means would he be brought to condescend to this Meaness of Spirit: Yet,
perhaps it might only proceed from the Aversion which in those Days he had for
the Cardinal. Many times it is evident, That a Natural Passion is made to pass
for a Moral Virtue. Besides, perhaps he was unwilling to be deprived of the
Glory due to him for that Important Service.

He is a Man of few words, and so secret in all his Counsels, that nobody
knows any thing of his Designs, till he puts them in Execution. Every Man
esteems him the most Liberal Prince of this Age, having no other Regard for
Money, than, as it serves the Necessities of his Family, and enables him to
oblige his Friends.

In a Word, whatever Vices he may have, he is yet endu'd with so many Good
Qualities and Virtues, that he is beloved by all the Nation, and in Particular
Favor with his Sovereign, who treats him not as a Subject, but as one of his
most intimate Friends.

May God, who has raised up this Great Genius, to aggrandize the French
Monarchy, continually supply the Grand Signior with Valiant and Expert
Generals, that the Empire of the Faithful Osmans, may increase like the Moon,
but never be in its Wane, till that Planet shall no more appear in the Heavens,
and the Fastening of the Elements shall be dissolved.

Paris, 12th. of the 2d. Moon, of the Year 1665.
LETTER XXII. To Orchan Cabet, Student of the Sciences, and Pensioner to the
Grand Signior.
This Letter was written Originally in Sclavonick.
THE French King has lately received a gross Affront from the Poets. They have
often been Satirical upon his Loves, and now they begin to burlesque upon his
Money. A Day or Two ago, as he was newly risen out of his Bed, he found on a
Table in his Chamber, a Paper containing these Verses. Tu es Issue de Race
Auguste,
Ton Ayeul est Henry le Grand;
Et ton Pere Lowis le Just,
Pour Toy, tu n'es qu' un Louis d' Argent.
Thou know where the Force of the Poet's Wit lies, having traveled in
France and learned their Language. The King smiled at the Reading of it, and
seemed to be pleased with the Frankness of the Author, saying, He was worth a
Thousand Flatterers. He promised likewise to give him Five Hundred Louis's for
his Wit, if he would discover himself, as also to pardon him on his Royal Word.
But the Satyrist would not venture himself, knowing that Kings have more ways
than one to revenge themselves of Private Persons, their Subjects. However,
since the King appeared so well pleased with this, he was resolved to give him
another Touch of his Skill. And the very next Morning in the same Place, the
King found these words: Tu ne le Scaura pas Louis,
Car j'etois seul quand je le fis.
There have been many Conjectures made about the Author of these Lampoons. Some
say one thing, and some another. And there are not wanting such as fasten it on
a Virgin of Collen, now residing at this Court: Her Name is Anne Marie de
Skurman. She is very Learned, and speaks Arabic, Latin, Turkish, Greek,
Italian, French and Spanish, as fluently as her Native Dialect. She is of a
Fine Wit, and piercing Judgment in the Controversies of Philosophy and Religion.

There are several Epistles of hers in Print, some penned in Latin, others in
French, addressed to the Queen Mother, Cardinal Richlieu, Cardinal Mazarini,
and others; besides a Book of Poems, most of them Satyrs* And it is this last
gives the World such a Jealousy of her writing the Lines which were found on
the King's Table. For the Critics hove compared 'em with her Style* and find a
very near Resemblance between them.

But let who will be the Author, I think the French King is wronged in the
Character they give him. For though he has heaped up great Quantities of Gold and
Silver to carry on his vast Designs, yet he is no Miser, being very Liberal to
Persons of Merit.

I send thee this for thy Diversion, and in order to our Future Correspondence.
Take it for an Example, and be as Familiar with me, remembering the Old Latin
Proverb, Manus manum fricat.

Paris, the 11th. of the 6th. Moon, of the Year 1665.
LETTER XXIII. To the Captain Bassa.
MAY thy Heart be Cheerful, and thy Voyage crowned with Success, wherever thou
sailest, Noble Old Tarpaulin, and Favorite of the God of the Sea. The Empire
of the Ottomans has not had so brave a Commander of the Navy these Thirty
Years. God grant thee good Fortune against the Infidels, whether on the White
or Black Seas. Thou art already Famous for thy Exploits on the Latter, in above
Twenty Engagements with the Cossaks, Circassians, and the rest of those
Thievish Countries. But nothing has raised thy Character so high, as the last
Combat thou had with Pachicour, the Renowned Pyrate of those Parts, who
threatened not only his Christian Neighbors, but also the Ottoman Empire with
Infinite Ravages.

But thou have stemmed the Tide of his Glory, humbled the Maritine People his
Confederates, and by that means made thy self a way into the Archipelago and
Mediterranean, where thou ridest as another Neptune, King of the Waters.

Take not this for Flattery; for I tell thee, I have not said so much to a
Bassa of the Se^ these Seven and Twenty Years: Neither indeed had I any Reason.
He that merited the most Applause in all that Time, was the Brave Zornesan
Mustapha. And I addressed no more to him than his due. Fortune did not favor
him, or else he had done great things. As for the Rest, they were generally Men
never bred to Sea-Affairs, but Miniors of the Court, or Bullies of the City,
who were better at making a Noise, than at any Action of Hazard or Importance.
And there were some Bold Renegadoes, but they played fast and loose, and no
body knew where to have 'em.

Treachery infects the whole World; but in these Western Parts it reigns as in
its Center. Here Is nothing but Undermining and Ambushes: One State trepanning
another out of their Guards, and then they play their own Game.

It would be endless to acquaint thee with the Original of the Quarrel between
the English and the Dutch. Let it be enough for thee to know, that these People
are at odds now: And in Regard the Strength of both Nations lies in their
Shipping, they are preparing to cover the Northern Seas with Navies: But the
Islanders still get the best on it. They claim the Sovereignty of those Seas,
and in my Opinion they deserve it. I speak according to my Intelligence; being
assured. that no Nation ever prevailed against 'em on that Element.

They have had a terrible Fight this Summer, wherein the Dutch lost Seventeen
Ships of War, besides Vessels of smaller Note. The Commander of the English
Fleet is called the Duke of York, a Great General, and Brother to the English
King. His Name was famous in France and Flanders, during the Spanish War. And
tho the Land afforded him no farther Occasions of Glory, yet he has found some
in the Sea. Opdam, the Greatest Admiral that ever the Dutch could boast of,
fell a Sacrifice to his Genius.

I am the more Particular in this Relation, because it is fit thou should
know the Characters of all the Brave Heroes living.

Since this Fight, the King of France has sent an Ambassador to the English
Court to mediate a Peace. What Issue his Negotiation will have, is of no great
Import to us, who serve the Grand Signior, Sole Lord of the Four Seas: But I
will tell thee something which it concerns thee to know.

The King of France is a going to cut a Canal through Part of his Kingdom, by
which the Mediterranean may be joined to the Main Sea. This is a vast Design,
and much discoursed of in Europe, being a Parallel to what has been formerly
attempted by some Kings of Egypt, and Emperors of Rome, to join the
Mediterranean and Red Sea together, for the sake of an easier Traffic to the
East Indies.

Thou ought also to be informed of the Duke of Beaufort's Exploits on the
Coasts of Barbary. He is Commander of the French Navy in those Seas, and has
done great Injuries to the People of Algier, Sarcelle, Bougie, and other Ports.

Though these Rebels are deservedly punished for deserting the Protection of the
High Port, yet let us remember, that the Algerines are Mussulmans, and
therefore ought not to be abandoned to the Malice of Infidels.

Mighty Bassa, sail thou in the Strength of God against the Enemies of the
Ottoman Empire. And when thou have finished thy Voyage here below, may a Wind
of Mercy waft thee over the Waters which are above the Firmament, and land thee
safe in one of the Ports of Paradise.

Paris, 3d. of the 9th. Moon, of the Year 1665.
The End of the Third Book.
LETTERS Writ by A Spy at PARIS.
VOL. VI. BOOK IV.
LETTER I. To Achmet Beig.
THIS Court has put on the Exterior Semblance of Mourning, whilst they
inwardly rejoice, at the Death of Philip IV. King of Spain. He deceased on the
17th. of the 9th. Moon. It Is possible their Grief is more real for the Death of
the Duke of Vendosme, a Prince of Royal Extraction, and whilst living not far
removed from a possibility of inheriting the Crown of France. But now he is
gone to the Grave, the General Receptacle of all Mortals, and which makes no
Distinction between the Noble and the Vulgar.

There have been Abundance of Ceremonies performed on the Part of the King, the
Dauphin, the Duke of Orleans, the Duke of Valois, and other Princes of the
Blood, for the Health of the Departed Soul: For the Nazarenes, to give them
their due, fall not short of the True Faithful in believing the Resurrection
and Immortality to come. They consign the Bodies of the Dead to their
Sepulchers, with solemn Rites of Religion, perfuming them with Incense, and
sprinkling them with Holy Water; Rehearsing also certain Sacred Hymns and
Prayers appointed for that Purpose. Neither do they neglect to Fast, and give
Alms, to perform any Pious Office which is practiced by the Mussulmans, for
their Friends who are gone to the Invisible State. They agree with us in
Abundance of good things, and if they mix some Superstitions and Errors, let us
pity their Weakness, and praise God who guides us into the Right Way, and
suffers us no to be seduced into the Way of Infidels. He is the Merciful of the
Merciful, the Joy of the Elect, and the Hope of all Nations. Should he punish
Men according to their Hourly Demerits, the Earth would soon be depopulated,
and void of any other Inhabitants save the Beasts. But he knows our Mold, and
remembers that we are no more than a mere Froth or Spume of the Elements, and
that in a very little time, by the Course of Nature, we shall vanish like
Bubbles which yield to every Blast of Wind. Therefore he spares us, and
connives at our Infirmities, because he is the Lover of Souls.

I speak this as an Incentive to Charity among our selves, and to our
Fellow-Mortals. It seems to me unreasonable, that we should pursue with
Inexorable Hatred all the Followers of Jesus. He was a Holy Prophet, humble,
mild, chaste, and harmless. He did many Good Works himself, and commanded his
Disciples to imitate his Example. He rebuked those amongst them, that would
have called down Fire from Heaven to consume his Enemies: Enjoining them to
return Blessings for Curses, Prayers for Blasphemies, and Good for Evil. There
are those amongst them, who obey his Precepts: As for the Wicked, I am not
their Advocate. If the Greatest Part of the Christians live contrary to the Law
of the Messiah, let us consider also how many Hypocrites, Libertines, Heretics
and Atheists there are among those who profess the Mussulman Faith. Doubtless,
there are Good and Bad of all Religions. And it is impossible to find an
Assembly of Just Men, without a Mixture of Sinners.

As for our Difference with the People of Jesus, in Matters of Worship, it
ought not to make us forget that we are Men, compounded of the same Flesh and
Blood as they. And for ought we know, God who made all the Nations of the
Earth, may accept of their various Rites and Ceremonies in paying him Divine
Adoration.

We that are the Posterity of Ismael, and worship the Eternal after the manner
of our Fathers, who followed the Pattern of Ibrahim the Beloved of God, cannot
deny but that the Law of Moses was of Divine Original: And yet it contains
Precepts and Injunctions, to which we are wholly Strangers in our Practice;
though the Jews, who are the Descendents of Jacob, obey them to this Day.

So we believe what the Alcoran says of the Messiah, That he is the Breath and
Word of God; That he healed Diseases, raised the Dead, wrought many other
Miracles, and preached the true Heavenly Doctrine. Yet there is abundance of
Difference between the Ceremonies which the very Apostles used in the Service
of God, and the Worship established by Mahomet our Holy Lawgiver. But he tells
us, That they who live up to the Law of Jesus, shall go to Paradise as well as
the Mussulmans.

The greatest Scandal which the Christians give us, is their Setting up
Pictures and Images in their Temples, and the Reverence they pay to those
Insensible Pieces of Humane Art. And yet for ought we know, they may be
excusable before God; since they profess openly in the Public Decrees of their
Councils, That the Veneration and Honor they pay to the Figures of Saints and
Angels, is only Relative, their Devotion at the same Time resting not on this
side the Prototypes.

If this be true, I see no more Hurt in their Worship of Images, than in Bowing
and Prostrating before the Alcoran, which is but another Sort of Imagery
representing the Divine Will.

In a word, if the Hieroglyphics of the Ancient Egyptians are allowed to be
Lawful Letters, and Instruments to express the Inward Conceptions of the Mind;
in my Opinion, the Painting and Sculpture which we see in the Churches of the
Christians, ought not to be condemned as an Idolotrous Practice, when it is only
used as an easier way to convey the History of Jesus, and the rest of the
Prophets and Saints, to the Vulgar, who are generally Ignorant of Letters.
Unless we shall say, That the Son of Mary was an Idol, and the Prophets and
Saints were Devils; which God avert from the Mouth of a True Believer.

Paris, 13th. of the 11th. Moon, of the Year 1665.
LETTER II. To William Vospel, a Recluse of Austria.
THY Dispatch came to my Hands, in a good Hour. I perused with Reverence the
Paternal Instructions it contained; the Grave and Judicious Apothegms; the
Sacred Rules and Institutions of a Regular and Spiritual Life; the Morals more
refined than those of Pindar, Epictetus, Seneca or Cato. But pardon me, if I
relish not so well thy Panegyric on some of the newly Canonized Saints; from
which you take Occasion to extol the the Pope's Infallibility, and to exclude
from Salvation, all that are not within the Pale of the Roman Church.

I am a Christian and a Chatholick as well as you. I honor the Apostles and
Martyrs, with all the Primitive Saints, Confessors and Holy Doctors of the
Church. But I can never be persuaded, that a Man for being a Murderer, Traitor,
an Inventor of Cruel Devices, or a learned Sycophant, can merit Heaven, though he
may be ranked in the Red Lines of the Calendar. Much less can I believe, that
all Men shall be Damned, who are not in Communion with the Bishop of Rome.
Certainly the Catholic or Universal Church, is not shut up within the Narrow
Confines of the shattered Roman Empire. Consider Greece, Armenia, Egypt,
Moscovy, Aethiopia, and all the Spacious Territories of Europe, and the East.
How many Millions daily say the Paternoster, and pray in Jesus's Name, yet
never paid Obedience to any but their own Patriarchs and Bishops? Were not all
the Apostles equally in Commission; were not the Churches they founded and
established, equally Holy, and Orthodox? Where then commenced the Mighty
Schism, but in the morose Pride of Victor, who, (for the Sake of Paschal
Niceties) affronted all the Churches in the World, and was for that Reason
severely reproved by a French Bishop of his own Obedience; besides the
Reprimands of Polycarp, and other Prelates of the East? Was not St. John the
Beloved, that rested his Head with Divine Honor on the Breast of Christ, as
privy to the Laws of his Master, as Peter, Paul, or any other Abortive Apostle?
Remember the First General Council at Jerusalem, where James the Brother of our
Lord sat President, decreeing Abstinences exactly opposite to the present
Roman Faith and Practice. And believe at the same time, that 'twas Imperial
Vanity and Pride, which first begot the Fatal Separation. Heresy was but the
Bastard of the Apostolic Canons, cherished, and too much countenanced, by
Constantine and his Successors, till the Fatal Time of Phocas, whose untimely
Death made all things ripe for the intended Usurpation. Oh! Guicciardine! How
truly have thou writ the State of Modern Rome! Worthy as Horace of Eternal
Honor. Thy Faithful Prose equals his Courtly Verse, and merits New Augustus's
to Patronize it.

Believe me, Father William, I have no Spite or Enmity against the Roman
High Priest. I reverence him equally with his Brethren, the Patriarchs of
Constantinople, Jerusalem, Alexandria, and Antioch. I would go beyond this, for
the sake of Conformity to Ancient Custom, and in Obedience to the Celebrated
Council of Nice: I would willingly acknowledge him the Primate of the World.
Let him have the first Place, in God's Name, among the Patriarchs of the
Universal Church. But let him not ride on the Necks of his Equals. Let him not
pretend a Power to cancel the Apostolic Canons; reverse the Traditions of the
Fathers; repeal the Decrees of General Councils; dispense with the Laws of
Nature, Grace, Reason, Morality, and the very Institutions of his Predecessors,
Men, without Question, as Infallible as he. This is not the way to make
Proselytes to the Roman Faith, unless it be of Fools and Knaves. The World has
received New Lights, Father William; and Men begin to hiss Religious Bantering
off the Stage. Nay even they who are most guilty of it, I mean the Roman
Courtiers, Cardinals, and Priests, cannot forbear laughing at the Folly, and
Credulous Easiness of those, on whom they impose their Pious Frauds. The
bigoted Laity are by them esteemed no better than silly Asses, tamely couching
under the Burdens of their Ecclesiastic Lords and Drivers.

Therefore it is time for thee to open thy Eyes, lift up thy Head, and lay aside
Monastic Simplicity. I do not Counsel thee to turn Libertine, or imitate the
Italian Gallantry, which has taught the Priests, instead of Sacred Continence,
to squint a Benediction on some Charming Lady from the Altar, in the Name of
Dominus Vobiscum, or Sursum Corda; even whilst they are preparing for Divine
Revels, to banquet on the Flesh and Blood of God. Oh! Monstrous Perfidy and
Execrable Profaneness! Nor if thou art affronted and revengeful, would I advise
thee to time the Execution of thy Wrath like the Sicilian Vespers, and make the
Bells become the Signals of thy Cruelty; which ought and were designed and
consecrated on purpose, to drill on Harmless Souls to Church, with their dull,
sleepy, jangling Chimes; and with their more Triumphant, Lofty Music, on the
Festivals of Saints, to make devouter Christians dream they are going to Heaven,
instead of to a Massacre. I would not have thee hope to merit Paradise, by
sending thither in Obedience to the Pope, or General of thy Order, the
Majestic Souls of Kings or Emperors, in Vehicles of Sacred Poison, or
Envenomed Eucharists. Believe that those Prelates, Priests, or Monks, who are
thus Divinely Profane, and Mercifully Cruel, shall become Mitered, Vested,
Cowled Monsters, in the fiercest and most violently glowing Dens of Hell; there
with the most exalted Arsenicks, Mercuries, and whatsoever gives the highest
Pains, to languish, pine, and rack away Ten Thousand, Thousand, Thousand Ages,
in Penances of slow Effect; which expiate but very late, the crying Sins of
guilty Murderers, and Bloody Hypocrites.

Yet such as these, since Modern Times, are the only Men thought worthy to be
Canonized for Saints, which made a certain Honest Cardinal cry out in Presence
of the Pope, These New Saints, force me to doubt the Old ones.

Father William, the same Thought begins and ends my Letter. Yours was upon the
stretch, extolling far too high the Largeness of the Roman Church, the
Infallible Power of Popes, the Miracles of these New Saints, etc. And I for my
Part, am a Man abhorring Bigotry. I cannot believe things contrary to my
Reason. I wish the Differences of Mankind in Point of Religion, were rationally
composed; and that the Good of all Sects, Factions, Parties, Churches and
Communions, were united in this Life, as they surely will be in the next.

In the mean time, to the Father without Beginning; to the Son without a
Younger Brother; to the Holy Ghost, the First and the Last; to the Virgin Mary,
the Mother of the Entire Deity, I recommend thee and all good Christians,
hoping to see you in Heaven, though we cannot it seems think alike on Earth.

Paris, 1st. of the 12th. Moon, of the Year 1665.
LETTER III. To Nathan Ben Saddi, a Jew at Vienna.
ACcording to thy Desire, I have procured and sent thee the Alcoran, with other
Writings of our Holy Doctors; Books which will conduct thee into the Right Way
Thou will find in these Volumes, a Spirit of Life and Power. There breathes in
them a certain Vital Principle of Reason; so that whosoever reads them
attentively, may feel (if I may so speak) the very Pulse of intellectual
Wisdom, beating in every Sentence.

There is a vast Difference between these Writings, full of Arguments Clear and
Intelligible; and the Whimsies of thy Rabbi's who abound in Sacred Fables and
Divine Romances.

Who can peruse your Celebrated Misn^ without Disdain? Or look into your more
applauded Talmud, and not feel himself touched with Horror, at the Monstrous
Blasphemies and Ridiculous Forgeries therein contained? Do thou not laugh at
the Story of God's pickling up the Leviathan till the Days of the Messiah; and
that other of the Bull which daily devours the Fodder of a Thousand Mountains?
Or will thou show me the Nest of that Bird from whence the Talmud says, an Egg
falling on the Earth, threw down Three Hundred tall Cedars with its Weight, and
at Length breaking, overflowed Sixty Villages with the Liquid Substance
included in the Shell?

Such as these, must needs be fit Themes for the Contemplations of the
Omnipotent: And yet your Rabbi's teach, that God studies Nine Hours of the Day
in the Talmud. Can any Man of common Piety, hear these Blasphemies and not
tremble? What Affronts are these to Humane Sense? What Impositions on the
Reason of the Credulous Jews? Does the most perfect of all Beings acquire
Knowledge by Degrees, or is the Eternal Intellect improved by reading of Books?
Or if it were so, would he not make a better Choice than of a Volume, which in
the Incredible Stories it relates, exceeds all the Figments of the Poets?

Tell me, Nathan, can thou swallow that loud Lie of the Talmud, which tells
thee, That there was a Lion, who when he roared at the Distance of Four Hundred
Miles from Rome, all the Women that were with Child in that City, being
affrighted at the Noise, miscarried, and the Walls of Rome fell down? And when
he drew nearer by a Hundred Miles, he set up his Throat again, which made so
terrible a Sound, that all the Roman's Teeth fell out of their Heads, and the
Emperor himself felt such Convulsions, as had well-nigh cost him his Life.

Surely the Crow which the Talmud speaks of in another Place, was but a Puny to
thi^ Monstrous Lion; and yet it seems, that Crow swallowed a Serpent that had
eaten a Frog as big as a Village of Threescore Houses, and when he had done
flew into the next Tree. I suppose, that was the Tree which grew in Paradise,
and was Five Hundred Miles high, according to the Talmud. Have I not Reason for
this Raillery, when one of your Rabbi's solemnly swears, he was an Eyewitness
of these Things? Who can forbear to ridicule the Bigotry of those, who give up
their Faith to such Delusions?

Thou will meet with more Rational Entertainment in the Books of the Mussulman
Doctors; more especially, in that Transcript thou have of the Volume first
dictated in Heaven. That confirms the true Law of Moses, but damns the
Impostures of the Talmud, attributing the Invention of such Errors to the Devil.

But thou will ask me, perhaps, what I mean by the True Law of Moses. Shall I
tell thee the Opinion of one of thy own Nation, a Hebrew of the Hebrews, as he
pretends; and for ought I know, of the same Tribe with thy self: For I am a
Stranger to the Genealogies of you both.

Some Years ago here was in this City, a Man who if we may believe him, has
been in all the Cities of the World. The French call him the Wandering Jew; and
he confirmed that Title, by the Profession he made of his Birth, Descent, and
Universal Travels. No doubt but thou have heard of this Man, or at least of
such a Character, and therefore I need not repeat what he said of himself, and
what the Generality of Mankind believe of him. Suffice it to tell thee, that I
was once in his Company half a Day together; when among other Discourses, he
told me, That the true Law of Moses has been lost for above these Two Thousand
Years, except in the North Parts of Asia, where there are an Infinite Number of
Hebrews, but far different in their Religion, from all the Jews in the rest of
the World. He says, the Country where they Inhabit, is environed round with
High and Inaccessible Mountains. I asked him the exact Geographical Situation
of this Country; but received no other Answer, than that it lay beyond the
River Sabbation. Then I remembered what I had read in Esdras, a Scribe of thy
Nation, concerning the Transmigration of the Ten Tribes, who were carried away
Captives by the Assyrians: How they passed through a certain River on dry
Ground, the Waters being divided to the Right Hand and to the Left, and that
after the same manner they should return again in the Latter Days; But that in
the mean time the Region where they live, was hidden from all other Mortals.

Comparing this Passage with what I had heard from the Wandering Jew, I became
almost persuaded, That the People and Country of which he spoke, were the very
same mentioned by Esdras. God only can discern the Truth from Error in
Histories of so remote and Ancient a Subject.

As to their Religion, I was just going to give thee an Account of what he said
concerning it, but am interrupted by Company* Wherefore I am forced to break
off abruptly. Expect a full Relation in my next. I am in haste.

Paris, 4th. of the 1st. Moon, of the Year 1666.
LETTER IV. To the same.
THE Interruption which made me so suddenly conclude my other Letter, lasted
not long; so that I have time enough to perform my Promise by the same Post.

I was about to relate what the Wandering Jew told me of the Religion of those
Remote Hebrews in Asia, which take as follows.

He says, they are a Nation of Philosophers, bound by their Laws to Study the
Liberal Arts and Sciences. They have none but Iron Money current among them; the
Use of Gold and Silver Coins being expressly forbidden by their Laws to prevent
the Temptations of Avarice and Theft: For who would steal or covet a Metal,
which for its Bulk was not easy to be hid, nor for its Beauty very desirable,
being every where common in the Veins of the Earth and served only as a Method
of Barter and Commerce among themselves, where the Inequality of Merchandises
entangled their Traffic, and would not admit of a ready Exchange?

This took from them the Occasion of many unnecessary Arts at Home, and they
had no Temptation to travel abroad; The Chief Design of their Lawgiver being to
oblige them to spend most of their time in Religious and Philosophical
Exercises, and the rest in preparing Necessaries for humane Sustenance. They
had no Need to buy any thing of Foreign Countries, or to build Ships for that
End, who were bound to live content with the Natural Product of their own
Fertile Country: For Luxury has not as yet set Footing in that happy Region, if
we may believe this Traveller. He says, they feed altogether on the Fruits of
the Earth; not admitting any Art or Employment which tends to superfluity; but
only such as serve the necessary Uses of Life, wherein they show an admirable
Dexterity and Skill.

When they travel from one Town to another, which is very frequent, they never
carry any thing to defray their Charges by the Way, or when they arrive at
their Journeys End: All Entertainments of this Nature being free and
reciprocal. Such is the Custom of the Country.

They have no Lawyers among them, but if any Contention arise, it is presently
determined by the Arbitration of the next Neighbors, to whose Sentence all
submit: Every Man being willing to lose something of his Right, rather than
disturb the Public Amity and Peace.

As to the manner of their Worship, they are strict Observers of Purity in
washing, anointing, and shaving their Bodies.

They have Temples also where they assemble every Seventh Day, and having
offered up the First Fruits of the Earth, they sir down in the Courts, and
Banquet together with Joy, whilst the Priests entertain them with excellent
Music, and Songs, in Praise of God and his Works. To this End the Courts of
their Temples are made very large, that they may contain so many distinct
Families; and stately Pavillions are set up, adorned with the Boughs of Green
Trees, with all manner of Flowers carelessly intermixed. But amidst all their
Feasting they are not permitted to taste of Flesh. They eat only the Fruits of
the Earth with Milk, Honey and Oil. And their common Drink is Water and Wine.

At the Age of Sixteen Years, every Man is bound to take the following Oath:

"I swear that I will adore but One God, who brought our Fathers out of Egypt,
and has conducted us by a Mysterious Path to this Land of Promise. I will
Religiously serve him all my Life, for that he has vouchsafed to plant me in
the Family of his Elect, and not either of the Two Tribes who were left behind
in the Land of Delusions. I will do Justly to all Men, neither will I
voluntarily hurt or kill any Living Creature, unless it be in my own Defense. I
will not taste of the Flesh of any Animal, but in all things observe the
Abstinence commanded by Allah to Moses on the Mount. I will Religiously obey my
Prince, to my last Breath, and rather be torn in Pieces by wild Beasts than
betray him, or consent to betray him to another: For he is the Viceroy of God.
I will never conceal my Knowledge of any Conspiracy against him, or my Country,
neither will I discover his Secrets to any, if it should ever be my Honor to
know them. I will observe the Traditions of my Fathers, and teach the same and
no other to my Posterity. In fine, I will in all things obey the Laws of this
Sacred Kingdom, this Region of Peace, this Garden of Bliss. All this I solemnly
swear by the First Father of Light, and by Nothing the Profound Womb of
Darkness, and by Silence the Companion of that Depth which no Created Being can
fathom, which is the same as if I should wish my self annihilated, if I violate
this Oath in the least Point."

These are all the Terms of the Oath, that I can distinctly remember, which I
here insert to show thee what Opinion these People have of the Law which was
given to Moses on the Mount, and how they reject the Two Tribes that were left
in Palestine, and esteem of that Country but as the Land of Delusions;
accounting their own Country the Region of Promise, and themselves the Elect of
God.

One would think, that these were the Posterity of the Ten Tribes that were
carried away Captives by Salmanasar King of Assyria. And this was also the
Opinion of that Wanderer, who told me, that both their Pentateuch was different
from yours; and the Language wherein it is written. For he said, it was rather
a Dialect of Arabic, in which Language thou know God wrote the Ten
Commandments on the Two Tables: Among which one is, Thou shall not Kill. This
Prohibition they say, extends to all Living Creatures, though your Doctors
interpret it as only reaching to Men, and so do the Christians. But the
Mussulmans interpret it thus, Thou shall neither kill Man nor Beast without
Reason. By which Clause, the Beasts are priviledg'd from the wanton Cruelty of
Men, who otherwise would murder them only to make Sport; yet wicked Men are not
exempted from a violent Death, as a Punishment of their Crimes.

This Traveller says also, that the People of that Country are so healthy that
they generally live till they are a Hundred and Twenty Years old, which is
almost twice the Age of other Mortals. This he ascribes to their exquisite
Temperance and Moderation in all things, as also to the Dryness of the Soil,
and to the Force of certain Winds, which continually sweep the Air of this
delectable Region, and purge it of all hurtful Qualities.

If ever it be thy Fortune to see this Person, he will acquaint thee with a
great many more delightful Passages, which it would be too tedious for me to
insert in a Letter. Besides, my Memory is treacherous, and I often forget those
things at one time, which I remember at another: But if thou art sollicitous to
hear more, I will oblige thee with all that I can call to mind of this
Traveller in another Letter.

In the mean time, make a right Use of these Hints, and weigh one thing with
another; examine all things without Prejudice or Partiality. Trust no Man's
Reason but thy own in Matters of a disputable Nature, since thou have as much
right to decide the Controversy, as any Man. And thus thou will never become a
Bankrupt in Religion.

Paris, the 4th. of the 1st. Moon, of the Year 1666
LETTER V. To Mohammed Hadgi, Dervich, Eremit of Mount Uriel in Arabia, the
Happy.
AS I think, this is the last of my Hours in this World, and the First of a New
Life, which I shall commence in Immortality. I perceive, That the Fatal Period,
the Moment of Transmigration, set by Destiny, is approaching. The Crasis of my
Blood is dissolving apace, my Spirit hastens to get loose from these Mortal
Chains: I feel my Soul trying and stretching her Wings, preparing to take her
Eternal Flight to the Region assigned her by God and Nature.

I have not Presumption enough to hope for Paradise, nor am I so abandoned to
Despair as to conclude I shall go to Hell. I rather believe, Aaraf, or the
Place of Prisons, will be my Portion; in Regard I fear the Evils which I have
been guilty of, are not over-balanc'd by my Good Actions. It Is well if Virtue
has counterpois'd Vice in the Course of this Mortal Life. However, I am
resigned, and commit my self to the Indulgent Creator of all Things, who will
not fail to dispose of me according to the Order which he has established in
the Universe.

Methinks were I even in Hell, I could not forbear praising that Fountain of
all Things. I would teach the Devils and Damned a new Lesson of Patience and
Contentedness, of Humility and Devotion, of Generosity and Love, amidst their
Tremendous Torments. I would survey with an Indifference becoming a True
Believer, the Horrid Abyss, with all its dreadful Vaults and Apartments. I
would consider the Wonderful Architecture of those Infernal Prisons, the
inexpugnable Strength of the Walls; their Prodigious Thickness and unmovable
Fastness; I would contemplate every Thing with the Reason of a Philosopher, and
the Piety of a Mussulman, not giving my self up to the Passions of a Fool, and
an Infidel.

All this I imagine were easy to perform in those Fatal Caverns and much more,
but God knows how the Experience of such an Intolerable Anguish and Restraint,
might alter a Man's Mind.

However, I find it Medicinal to think of the last and worst Things, to be
always prepared for Death, and whatsoever shall follow it; For, Surprises are
apt to unman us, and plunder us of our Reason. I was in the Height of a
violent Fever, when I began this Letter; yet now it is abated, and I palpably
feel the gentle Returns of Health and Life. This is owing, in my Judgment, to
the real Belief I had, that my last Hour was come, which I have so long
expected. And I could almost persuade my self, That I shall disperse a Thousand
Maladies, recover out of the most dangerous Paroxysms, and prolong my Days to
Old Age, by the mere Force of these Contemplations.

My Faith in this Point is grounded on Experience: For, I have often found,
That to be armed against Calamities with an even Mind, is either a sure Way to
avoid them, or at least to protract the Season of their Arrival. And, if there
were nothing else in it, but the rendering 'em more easy when they come, 'twere
worth any Man's Pains to try the Experiment.

Doubtless, there is no Terror in Death, but what the vain Opinion of Men
creates. It Is as pleasant for a Thinking Man to die as to live, if it be only
for this Reason, that in his Passage from the Life he has lead before, he shall
not have bare naked Idea's for his Contemplation; but Matter of Fact, and the
most Important, that ever employed the Souls of Men.

O Admirable Sylvan, consider with thy self, whether it will not be highly
grateful to thy languishing Soul, when thou shall perceive demonstratively, by
the Infallible Enthymema's of thy trembling Pulse, that thou art just ready to
be released from the deceitful Sophistry of Humane Life! That thou art near
escaping from a narrow Cage to be upon the Wing at large, to fly into the Ample
Fields of Beauty, Light and Endless Happiness: Reflect also at the same Time, O
Holy Eremite, that I should think it no Pain to be freed from my Confinement to
a stinking Nest of Infidels.

But why should I give them that Reproachful Epithet, when for ought I know, I
am a greater Infidel my self? It Is true indeed, I am of the Lineage of Ibrahim,
Ismael, and the Holy Race; I bear in my Body the Seas of a Divine League or
Covenant between God and Man; I was circumcised in due Time, and gave Supreme
Glory to One God, and Honor to Mahomet his Messenger. I pronounced the Seven
Mysterious Words, whose Sound excites the Harmony of the Spheres, sets the
Angels a dancing, puts all Nature into Motion, and makes the Devil as deaf as a
Beetle. Nay, as our Holy Doctors teach, the very Breath with which that Sacred
Confession is uttered, blows the Ashes of Hell into the Eyes of the Damned, and
strikes 'em blind. In a Word, I have fasted, prayed, given Alms, and performed
all the External Duties of a True Believer, yet I have Reason to fear, that the
best of my pious Actions are not sufficient to cancel my Sins. My Practice runs
counter to my Faith, there seems to be a double Spirit in me, one inclining me
to Good, and the other forcing me to Evil. For, whilst I really in my Heart
believe the Alcoran and obey Mahomet, our Holy Lawgiver, I am compelled to deny
both, to profess the Life and Manners of a Nazarene, to counterfeit an Infidel,
and do a Thousand other ill things, to please the Grand Signior and his Slaves
Thus I play fast and loose with God Almighty; and turn Religion into Cross
Purposes. Yet Heaven knows, and I obtest all the Elements to Witness, that I
would fain be Innocent, and live in unblemished Virtue: But the Fatal
Necessities I lie under, constrain me to a perpetual Course of Vice. Which
makes me sometimes cry out in the Agonies of my Soul, O God! I pray thee,
either to alter my Circumstances, and reform my Nature, or make new Laws more
easy to be kept.

Venerable and Patient Solitary, bear with my importunate Complaints; and
remember that though thou art as an Angel for thy Perfections, yet Mahmut is
but a Man, subject to a Thousand Frailties. Pity him and continue to afford him
thy Sage Counsel; rest also assured, that amongst all his Infirmities, he still
retains an Inviolable Affection, and Dutiful Regard for the Tenant of God's
Prophet.

Paris, 22d. of the 2d. Moon, of the Year 1666.
LETTER VI. To the Kaimacham.
THou may report it to the Divan for a Certainty, That Mirammud the Son of
the Xariph of Salle, is taken Prisoner by the French. That bold Youth has long
roved the Seas uncontrolled; has done many Injuries to the Christians, filled
Salle with Slaves: Now he himself is become a Captive. Such is the Fortune of
War by Sea and Land; to Day Triumphant and Victorious, to Morrow Vanquished and
in Chains.

Yet he lost not his Honor with his Liberty, having bravely defended his
Vessel, and strewn the Decks with slaughtered French; till overpowered with
Numbers, he was compelled to yield. His Enemies extol his Courage, and the
Greatness of his Mind, which would not sink under the Pressure of this
Misfortune. He seemed to have the Command of himself, (which is the most
Glorious Victory) and suffered not his Freeborn Soul, to be led Captive by his
Passions; but behaved himself with such an even Temper, as placed him above the
Pity of his Enemies, and rather made him the Subject of their Emulation. He is
brought to the Court, where he is entertained as a Guest, rather than as a
Prisoner: Being invited to their Banquets, Masks, Plays, and other
Divertisements. Neither is he debarred the Privilege of Hunting, which might
give him the fairest Opportunity to escape. But he is ignorant of the Language
of this Country; and few of the French understand Moresco: So that it is almost
impossible for him to make any Party, or consult his Flight, unless the King's
Interpreter should assist him. Besides, the French have a higher Opinion of his
Generosity, than to apprehend such an Ungrateful Return of the Royal Usage he
finds in this Court.

As for Mahmut, he has not as yet made himself known to this Brave Captive. But
if the Ministers of the Divan shall think it the Interest or Honor of the
Sublime Port to engage in this Affair, I want but a Commission to set Mirammud
safe ashore in Africa.

I will not hazard any thing in an Affair of this Importance, without an Order
from my Superiors. When their Pleasure is once known, the Execution shall be
swift. I wait for thy Commands, as for a Decree of Destiny, which cannot be
repealed.

The God of our Fathers, who multiplied the Seed of Ismael as the Grass of the
Field, and gave them the Sovereignty over many Nations; grant that the Sublime
Port, which is the Nursery of the Faithful, may always take such Measures as
shall advance the Interest of the Mussulman Empire.

Paris, 14th. of the 3d. Moon, of the Year 1666.
LETTER VII. To Hamel Muladdin, Xariph of Salle.
THY Son is no longer a Captive, but a Conqueror: His first Appearance before
the Ladies of this Court was an Equivalent to his Ransom. He is like to do thee
greater Service by his Chains, than when he ranged the Seas. His Beauty may do
more Mischief in France, than all thy Ships of War; since it has already
created such Rivalships and Factions among the Fair Sex, as engages the French
Gallants on many unhappy Rencounters; and in a little time it will be difficult
for the Interressed Sparks, to meet and part with unsheathed Swords. Libels and
Panegyricks, divide the Studies of the Wits; while one flatters, another
Lampoons the Amorous Females; and Mirammud the Illustrious Slave, is all the
Talk. In a word, he finds Royal Usage, having the Liberty of the Court; and all
are pleased with his graceful Deportment, and undisguiz'd Conversation. Every
one affects his Company, and he has the Fate of Princes, Never to be alone. His
Skill in riding, and throwing the Lance, has enflamed the Noble Youth with
Martial Emulations: They esteem Mirammud the most accomplished Person of this
Age.

Can thou now repine at thy Son's Glorious Thraldom? A Captivity, that loads
him with so many Honors? That lays his Conquerours at his Feet? And subdues
all Hearts to his Matchless Perfections? His Followers find Friendship among
the Infidels for his sake: 'Twere to be wished, that equal Humanity were showed
to the Christian Slaves in Barbary. I tell thee, thy Son is so admired and
loved, that all thy Treasure will not redeem him. The French are generous, and
scorn to sell the Brave for Gold. They will sooner give thee thy Son again,
expecting from his Gratitude, a Recompense surpassing the Value of Money; that
is, an Inviolable observing the Conditions of Peace, which they say, thou have
so often broke. Thy Ambassadors are expected here, to consummate a lasting
Friendship. When that is done, thou will quickly see thy Son return, attended
by a numerous train of French, who have vowed to follow his Fortune through the
World, so long as he draws not his Cymetar against their King.

I have dispatched an Account of this Adventure to the Kaimacham, that so the
Sublime Port, which gives the Law to all the Kings on the Earth, may interess
it self on thy Behalf. The French seem to have a profound Attach to the Ottoman
Empire: Whether it proceeds not more from Fear, and the Principles of Policy,
than from any real Love to the Mussulmans, I will not determine. They speak
reverently of the Grand Signior, covet his Friendship, and applaud the
Victorious Enterprises of the True Believers. Indeed they are Naturally a
Martial People, and honor all Men of brave Spirits and daring Resolutions.
They have this particular Reason also to bear Friendship to the Invincible
Osmans, because we are almost continually in Wars with the House of Austria,
the Old Enemy of France. The Germans are wont to say, That the Dragons Head and
Tail are in Conjunction, when the Turks and the French invade the Empire at the
same time. These are numbered among the Constellations by Astrologers, to which
the Germans allude in this Proverb; being ever Jealous of ^ome private Treaty
between the Sultan and the French Court.

God, who is the Wisest of the Wisest, instruct thee to adjust thy Differences
Happily with this Noble Nation, that so thou may see thy Son again in Peace
at Salle.

Paris, the 14th. of the 3d. Moon, of the Year 1666.
LETTER VIII. To Pesteli Hali, his Brother, Master of the Customs at
Constantinople.
UPon my Word, thy Letter came in a Critical Hour, to prevent, for ought I
know, more Mischief than could have been repaired again all the Days of my
Life. I have but just taken my Eyes off from it, and set Pen to Paper, to
express my Thanks to thee for the Care thou take of thy Exiled Brother; for
the Post goes this Night, and I have appointed to meet Eliachim the Jew with
some Armenians within these few Minutes. It had been an Unfortunate Meeting for
me, had not thy Dispatch come so opportunely to give me Warning of our Cousin
Solyman's Perfidy: For these Furr'd-Caps are his Spies and Confidents. The
Back-Blows of Tagot, Negidher, and the Great Devil, be upon him and them. What
have I done to that Ungrateful Villain, to merit such ill Offices from him? But
upon thee be the Mercies of God, the Favors of his Prophet, and the
Benedictions of all good Men and Angels: For thou art to me as one of the
Watchers above, more than a Brother: Thou art the Tutelar Genius of my Life, my
good Demon in time of Danger.

We had designed this Evening for a private Banquet of Wine, which, thou
know, dilates the Hearts of Mortals, unlocks Secrets, and makes the most
resery'd Man in the World too Talkative and Open.

I keep as great a Guard upon my Tongue, perhaps, as another; but God knows how
far I might have been tempted by such good Company, to let it loose for the
sake of Discourse: For these Fellows are soft as the Air in their Address and
Conversation; they appear as Innocent as Santones; sincere as Hadgi's; Loyal
and Courtly as the Pages of the Seraill'. They would wheedle Ninety Nine of
Argus's Eyes out of his Head successively, before he missed One.

They came first to Paris, as Merchants; and no doubt, but Solomon had given
'em Instructions how to insinuate into Eliachim's Acquaintance, and so by
Degrees into mine. For that honest Jew trades with People of all Nations and
Characters.

However it be, I remember, the very Words which thou insertest in thy Letter,
were spoken by me in Company with these Infidels. But I shall find a way to be
even with them, and Solomon too, before they will dream of it.

In the mean time, I pray heartily, that if ever it shall be thy Misfortune to
be in the like Peril; Destiny or Chance, Providence or Fate may raise some
Friend to give thee a Caution; and that thou may not with the Unhappy
Caesar, neglect to read it in time.

I Am now going to encounter these Giafers; perhaps I shall catch 'em in their
own Snares. If not, I Will secure they shall not catch me.

Dear Pesteli, may thy Soul repose under the Protection of God.

Paris, 1st. of the 5th. Moon, of the Year 1666.
LETTER IX. To Dgnet Oglou.
TO whom should I complain in my Adversity, but to my Friend? I have been more
embarass'd within these Two Moons than through all the former Course of my
Life. Troubles of diverse kinds throng in upon me. I seem like a Butt or Mark
whereat every Species of Misfortune, like a skilful Archer, directs the Fatal
Arrows of its Malice. I am near overwhelmed with Calamities. Heaven and Earth
are set against me, and all the Elements conspire my Ruin. Yet no Persecution
appears so terrible as that of Men, nor any Affliction so poignant as that
which proceeds from the Ingratitude and Perfidy of my own Country Men, Persons
related to me by Blood.

Age and much Sickness have confined me to my Bed for a considerable time,
which is no small Alloy to Human Happiness. But to render me perfectly
miserable, the Ministers of the Port are angry with me for being Old and
Infirm, and for not continuing to serve the Grand Signior, with the same Vigor
and Strength as formerly: Else what mean the frequent Reproaches they send me
whilst I am not in a Condition to answer them, or make an Apology for my self?
Would they have me Immortal, and Proof against the strokes of Destiny and
Death, which thou know are Unavoidable? Whilst I were in my Prime, Healthy
and strong as an Eagle, they encouraged me with the fairest Promises in the
World, telling me I should never want for Money, or the Protection of the Grand
Signior. Yet even then I received not my Pension without Murmurs and obscure
Menaces. So hard a thing is it for Courtiers to be touched with any Man's
Necessities. But now they threaten plainly to stop all farther Supplies, unless
I will grow Young again, and do Business as briskly as when I Would numbered but
Thirty Summers. Thus they serve poor Mahmut, as we use Oranges and Limons,
whose vital Spirit when we have sucked out, we throw the rest away as
unprofitable. Yet not one of them will contribute in the least to my Recovery.
Only the generous Cara Hali, our beloved Friend, hearing of my Malady, sent me
a strange Chemical Liquor, with the Celebrated Confection El Razi, some Bezoar,
and the most precious Balm of Gilead: All prepared to my Hand, with Directions,
and leal'd with an Authentic Signet.

These indeed had a mavelous Operation on me. I tried them but Yesterday, and
find my self suddenly restored to some Degrees of Health, as by a Miracle.
Whether it be the vast Esteem I have for that Excellent Physician, with the
Confidence I repose in his Skill and Judgment, has had some Influence on me, or
what else I know not; (yet, we use to observe, that the Patient's good Opinion
of his Physicians is half a Cure:) However, these Sovereign Medicines have
inspired me with a new Energy. And had I not other Afflictions to break my
Heart, I could almost promise my self to reach the Age of Nestor. But my
Unfortunate Stars will have it otherwise, and I am resigned to Destiny.

Thou know my Cousin Solomon, the Turbant-Maker, and art no Stranger to his
Humors and Fortune: What an unsettled Man he has been in the whole Course of
his Life: That no Employment could ever please him, nor he be long fixed in any
Place. How he has rambl'd from Constantinople to Scutari, from thence to
Chalcedon etc. Always murmuring against Heaven and complaining of his hard
Fate, in that he was not bred a Courtier, a Student, a Soldier or any Thing but
what he really is Thou art acquainted also with some of his Religious Caprices,
how he is addicted to doing the Book, making the Triple Knot, and to a Thousand
other foolish Superstitions by which whilst he aspires at the Character of a
Sage, or a Cunning Man, he renders himself more Contemptible than an Idiot;
forfeiting the Esteem of all wise and good Men, for the Sake of a little Fame
and noisy Character among the Empty, Giddy Multitude

But after all, I believe thou art wholly a Stranger to his Secret Malice, and
the Rancour with which he persecuted me, his poor Exiled Uncle. I my self was
deceived by the Subtle Apology he made some Years ago for the Slanders his
Tongue had uttered; when he transferred all the Guilt of that Injury on Shashim
Istham, the Black Eunuch, and Ichingi Cap Oglani, Master of the Pages. But now
I Am convinced he is a Traitor, a Villain, and a Fellow void of Faith or Honesty.

I received a Letter from him within these seven Days, full of Tender and
Insinuating Expressions, thanking me for all the good Offices I had done him,
and for my seasonable Counsel in several Cases. Professing also at the same
time an Inviolable Friendship, and that he would make it his Study to do me
some Effectual Service. Yet the next Post brought me a Dispatch from my Brother
Pesteli Hali, wherein he bids me beware of Solomon; assuring me that he had
good Reason to suspect, that Cousin of mine had some ill Design upon me. This
is certain says my Brother, Solomon boasts to his Familiars not without some
Insult, that there is not a Word or Action escapes his Uncle Mahmut at Paris,
but he is soon informed of it at Constantinople. And that which confirms me in
the same Jealousy with Pesteli is, That he inserts in his Letter to me, some
Passages and Discourses Verbatim, which I must needs own to have been between
me and Eliachim the Jew, with two or three Armenian Merchants, in our most
private Meetings at Eliachim's House or my Chamber. These he learnt from some
of Solyman's most Intimate Companions.

What can I make of all this, but that these Armenians are of Solyman's
Council, his Privado's, his Chronee's, etc. whom having Business of their own
at Paris, that perfidious Wretch has engaged to pry into my Secrets, to give
him a constant Account of what Discoveries they make, and if possible to trepan
me into some Irrecoverable Error in my Conduct, that so he may finally ruin me.

O Mahomet! What is become of the Reverence due to thy Sacred Name, to thy Law,
and to the Book penned in Heaven? Where is the Mussulman Faith and Integrity?
The Religious Fastness of Friendship, with which our Fathers prop'd up one
another in the Service of God and the Empire of True Believers? But there is no
need of exclaiming against Faith and Piety on this Account: Humane Nature it
self is Responsible for the Baseness and Ingratitude of my Kinsman. He no
longer deserves the Character of a Man. I advise thee to shun his Company as a
Pest, a walking Contagion among Mortals.

In a word, dear Dgnet, let not thou and I suffer our selves to be carried away
by a vain Pity or Tenderness for any Man, though he be the Son of a Mother's
Sister; since there is no Trust in Flesh and Blood: But let us learn the Maxims
of French Wisdom, which teach Men to lay the Foundation of their own Happiness,
in smiling at the Misfortunes of others.

Paris, 14th. of the 6th. Moon, of the Year 1666.
LETTER X. To Hamet, Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire.
BEsides the General Characters of Countries and the People Inhabiting there,
it is necessary for thee to be informed of Particular Emergencies, and such
Events, as deserve a Place in the Eternal Records of the Ottoman Monarchy, the
Fifth and Last in the World. That so the Ministers of the August Divan, the
destined Arbitrators of the Universe, Judges of all Humane Affairs, and
Counselors of the Great Sultan, may in the Sacred Code, as in a Mirror,
behold whatever happens in the distant Climates, worthy of Remark.

After the Salutations, therefore, proceeding from profound Humility, entire
Respect, and perfect Friendship, know that a devouring Pestilence has lately
made a Fatal Decimation in the English Territories, especially in London, the
Capital City of that Island, where above a Hundred Thousand Souls, struck with
Invisible Darts from God, went off the Stage of Humane Life, in less than Six
Moons Revolution.

The dire Contagion by Degrees spread farther through the Adjacent Provinces,
and reached the most remote and solitary Corners of the Land: Death set his
Standard up, proclaiming Open War against the Inhabitants; with flying Troops
of Mortal Plagues, he ravaged over the Isle, filling all Parts with doleful
Cries and Lamentations: The Cemeteries were not large enough to hold the
Carcasses of such as fell before the dreadful Conqueror: But open Fields were
turned to Sepulchers, and crammed with Spoils of Humane Race: An Universal
Desolation reigned: Death celebrated Cruel Triumphs every where.

Such as pretend to Astrology and hidden Sciences, will have this to be an
Effect of the late Comet which appeared at the End of the Year 1664. whilst
others attribute it to nearer Naturar Causes; and some conclude it is a
Judgment sent from Heaven, on that Rebellious People, who a few Years before
had involved the Nation in a Civil War, and barbarously Massacr'd their King.
God only knows the Truth that is concealed from Man.

Thou may Register also, That the Queen Mother of France is newly dead, and
the Crook-back'd Prince of Conti. On which Account, this Court is now in
Mourning, and the Churches hung with Black, whilst Melancholy Bells,
perpetually invite the Living to pray for the deceased Royal Souls; and
deep-bass'd Organ Pipes breath out Incessant doleful Aspirations, sounding like
Inarticulate Prayers, and Funeral Sighs, for the departed. In this the
Nazarenes approach near to the Faith of True Believers. They give Alms also, as
we do, and settle Stipends on certain Priests and Derviches, to mumble over
daily Masses for the Dead; which is an evident Sign, That they have Hopes of
Immortality, and look for the Resurrection. Doubtless, there is something Good
at the Bottom of all Religions, though it be overlaid with Errors and Corruptions.

God direct us through the Meanders, which Humane Frailty involves us in; and
grant every Mussulman a Particular Chart and Compass, whereby to steer his
Course through the uncertain Tracts of Mortal Life; that he may at last arrive
in Paradise. For we shall never find the Way thither by General Rules.

Illustrious Hamet, I pray that thou and I may at a destined Hour, encounter
one another in the Walks of Eden, there to converse under Immortal Shades near
to some warbling Stream of matchless Wine or Water; to revolve our past
Fatigues on Earth, and to caress our selves in the Security of Endless Bliss.

Paris, 15th. of the 7th. Moon, of the Year 1666.
LETTER XI. To Nathan Ben Saddi, a Jew at Vienna.
THou and thy feigned Messiah be damned together for Company! Must I be baulkt
of my Money, for the Sake of your New Superstition? How many Messias's have ye
had, Twenty Five at least, besides the Son of Mary, who is acknowledged and
blessed for ever? Must all the World be bubbl'd to Eternity by the Fables of
your Nation? Curse upon your Rabbi's and Cochams, those Pimps to the more
Religious Debaucheries of Mortals. Nathan, I took thee for another Manner of
Man. However, if thou art a Sworn Servant to Sabbati Sevi, the new Sham-King of
the Jews, I have nothing to say to it: Do as thou will. But, I dare be a
Prophet so far as to tell thee, thou will be cursedly left in the Lurch, with
the Rest of the Fools, thy Bigoted Brethren. Let what will be, it behooves thee
as an honest Man to transmit the Bills that are entrusted to thee. Whether
Sabbati Sevi, Ben Joseph or Ben David be the Name of your expected Messiah, I
would not have Been Saddi degenerate. Continue thou Faithful and the few others
that are entrusted with the Sublime Affairs; and let all the Rest of the Common
Jews go to Gehenna, or to the Vale of Tophet, which you please. But I would
fain have thee in the Number of the Righteous, who shall possess Paradise. Some
of thy Letters have encouraged me to hope for this, but thy last makes me
almost despair of seeing thee happy either in This World or the Next: For, thou
writest like one in a Phrensy, raving on Chimera's of strange Honor, Glory and
Power which thou shall shortly enjoy in the Kingdom of thy Fantastic Messiah;
thou art already a Prince in thy own Conceit.

For God's Sake, Nathan, wean thy self from these Religious Fondnesses: Awaken
thy Reason, which is the distinguishnig Character of a Man. Examine the Grounds
of this New Delusion; search into the Birth and Origin of Sabbati Sevi, and
thou will find him to descend of an Obscure and Base Parentage; his Father
being but a Kind of Mungrel Jew, and by Profession an Usurer, which is forbid
by the Written Law of Moses, and in the Great Alcoran it is accounted
Execrable: His Mother a Woman of the Curds, suspected for a Witch, in Regard,
most of that Infidel Nation practice Magic Arts, and Diabolical Charms. And
it is not altogether improbable, that your Counterfeit Messiah was educated
privately by her in the same Studies, whence he learned the Methods of
Enchantments and Illusions, to deceive the Senses and impose on the Reason of
Mankind.

I can tell thee of a Truth, that there are more Eyes on him and his Actions,
than he is aware of; and I my self at this Distance have received a particular
Relation of his Life, from such as knew him a Youth at Smyrna, the Place of his
Nativity. He is accused of many Vices and Extravagances during his early Years.
His Conversation was wild and dissolute, being a noted Inamorato or Stallion
over all that City. For which and some other Crimes, he was expelled the
Synagogue, and banished from Smyrna, by the Mutual Consent of the Mussulman
Cadi, and your own Rulers. He was also excommunicated by the Rabbi's as a
Heretic, for broaching certain Doctrins repugnant to your Law, and the General
Faith of the Jews. All which cannot but be a prevailing Recommendation of him
to the Office of Messiah or King of Israel.

From hence he rambled up and down the Morea and other Provinces of Greece,
leaving a Memorial of Infamy, wherever he set his Foot; continually marrying
and divorcing of Wives, debauching of Virgins, and frequenting the Company of
Harlots, till those Countries grew weary of him, and threatened to chastise his
Wickedness. Then he passed over into Syria and Palestine, beginning to set up
for a Reformer of your Law, and at Jerusalem openly professing himself to be
the Messiah; whereby he drew a Rabble of Lunaticks and Frantic People after
him. But as for the Seniors and Governors, they have rejected him as an
Impostor.

Consider, Nathan, the Fate that befell Ben Cochab, as he called himself, that
is, the Son of a Star, who pretended to be the Messiah in the Days of Adrian,
Emperor of the Romans; Reflect on the Calamities which overwhelmed him and his
Followers, to the Number of Four Hundred Thousand Jews; who all fell with their
False Prophet, Sacrifices to the just Revenge and Fury of that Incensed
Monarch: For they had impudently boasted that by such a prefixed time, he
should be taken Captive and deposed from his Throne by the Messiah, who should
assume the Imperial Dignity, and all the World should obey him. But when those
who survived the Slaughter of their Brethren, reflected on the Author of so
Tragical a Catastrophe, they changed his Name in Contempt and Hatred, calling
him no longer Ben Cochab, the Son of a Star, but Bar Cuziba, the Son of a Lie,
a False Prophet, and Seducer of the Brethren.

Thou have all the Reason in the World, to have no better Opinion of Sabbati
Sevi, since he is rejected by the Wiser Sort of Jews, and has not performed one
Miracle in Confirmation of his pretended Messiasship. Neither has any uncommon
or preternatural Appearance happened before or since he assumed this Dignity.
Whereas all your Rabbi's teach, that no less than Ten Eminent and Remarkable
Prodigies shall precede the Coming of your Messiah. And I remember, thou thy
self about Ten Years ago sentest me a Letter much to the same Effect, telling
me that certain Monstrous Sorts of Men should come from the Ends of the Earth,
whose Eyes shall be as Venomous as Basilisks, with a great many other Stories
of like Nature.

Have thou forgot this, Nathan, or art thou so far infatuated with the bold
Impostures of this Impudent Deceiver, as for his sake, to deny thy former
Faith, reverse thy own Sentiments and disannul the Traditions of thy Doctors?
For shame rowze up thy Intellectual Faculties, and suffer not thy Reason to be
lulled asleep by the Prestigious Umbrages and Charms of a lewd Vagrant, a
Wizard, a Cheat.

Have but Patience at least, till thou see those Signs accomplished which are
to usher in your Messiah, before thou give up thy self to so dangerous a
Credulity. Let the Sun first emit those Pestilential Vapors, which shall kill
a Million of the Koprim or Infidels every Day, as your Traditions threaten. Let
that Luminary be also totally eclipsed for the space of Thirty Days. In a word,
let all the other Prodigies come to pass, which thou thy self did once so
passionately believe: And then I promise thee on the Word of a Mussulman, that
I will be thy Proselyte, and embrace thy Law, and adore thy Messiah; on
condition, that otherwise thou will be my Convert, believe the Alcoran, and
obey the Messenger of God, the Last and Seal of the Prophets.

Paris, 11th. of the 9th. Moon, of the Year 1666.
LETTER XII. To the Kaimacham.
I Am afraid the Divan will be obliged to send another Agent to Vienna, to
supply the Place of Nathan Ben Saddi, who is running mad after the New Messiah
of the Jews. There is no doubt but thou and the other Happy Ministers, residing
at the August Port, have heard of a certain Impostor at Smyrna, by Name Sabbati
Sevi, of Hebrew Race, who calls himself the Only begotten Son of God, Messiah
and Redeemer of Israel; and what Multitudes of doting Credulous Jews he draws
after him. So that there is a Schism broke out between them, and they are
divided into Two contrary Factions both in Smyrna, and all over the Levant. It
is impossible that these things should be concealed from the Resplendent Seat
of Fame, since they have reached even our Ears who dwell at this Distance: Nay
there is hardly a Province or City in all the West, which has not received
Intelligence of so Remarkable a Novelty.

I have received a Dispatch from Zeidi Alamanzi at Venice, wherein he informs
me, that all the Jews of Italy are preparing to visit the Holy Land, and to see
the Face of their long expected Messiah, who they now believe is really come on
Earth, and is that Sabbati Sevi, at Smyrna. They are settling their Affairs, as
fast as they can, acquitting themselves from all Worldly Engagements, and those
who are devout, give themselves up to Prayer and Mortifications; whilst others
spend their time in Feasting, Dancing, and all manner of Mirth. He says, some
of them will sit or stand up to the Nose in Water, for Four and Twenty Hours
together. And this they do in Imitation of Adam's Penance, according to their
Tradition: For they are taught, that the First Father of Mortals, after he was
banished from Paradise, as a Punishment for his Sin, stood a Hundred and Thirty
Years together in Water thus reaching to his Nostrils.

Others of these Superstitious People, will sit naked many Hours together on a
Heap of Pismires, till they are almost stung to Death. A third Sort dig their
own Graves, and going down into them, cause themselves to be covered all over
with Earth, except only their Faces; and in this Condition they will lie till
they are almost famished.

In the mean while, they send Circular Letters from all Parts, congratulating
each others approaching Happiness and Deliverance from the Oppression of the
Gentiles: For so they term all that are not of their own Nation. And in these
mutual Addresses, they fail not to Prophesy, That their Messiah shall in such a
Moon, go to the Great Tyrant, King of the Ismaelites, and Lord of all the
Children of Moab and Edom; (So they blaspheme our Glorious Sultan.) That he
shall depose him from his Throne, and lead him away Captive; after which he
shall have the Dominions of the whole Earth laid at his Feet.

With such kind of wild Stuff, do these deluded People flatter one another and
themselves, as if in a little time they were to be Lords of all Things. So that
no Trading or Commerce goes forward among them: An Universal Stop is put to all
Business; it being esteemed an Inexpiable Sin, to follow their Trades in the
Days of the Messiah, who is to enrich them with the Wealth of all Nations.

Strange Rumors are spread abroad, of the Return of the Ten Tribes over the
River Sabbation, who were carried away Captives by Salmanassar King of Assyria,
and never were heard of since, till they now discourse of their being encamped
in the Desert of Mount Sinai, in their March to the Holy Land. It Is reported
also, that a Mighty Fleet of Ships were seen at Sea, whose Sails were of Satin,
and their Streamers bore the Figure of a Lion, with this Inscription, The Lion
of the Tribe of Judah.

The Christians seem astonished at these things, yet some look on 'em only as
Dreams. As for honest Eliachim here, he is no more moved at these things than
I; only he laughs at the Folly of the Credulous World, and curses the Jews, for
bringing such Contempt on themselves and their Posterity. But Nathan is like
one Hag-ridden, or defiled by the Lamiae of the Night. He has lost all Reason,
and 'twill be no less than a Miracle that must restore it again.

Sage Minister, whilst these Execrable People thus lose themselves for the Sake
of their Counterfeit Messiah, let us continue to honor the True One, even
Jesus the Son of Mary, who is now in Paradise, and our Holy Prophet with him.

Paris, the 21st. of the 9th. Moon, of the Year 1666.
LETTER XIII. To Murat Bassa.
THis has been a Considerable Year of Actions and Events. At the Beginning of
it, I sent to the Port an Account of the Death of the Queen Mother of France,
and of the Prince of Conti: now I will farther inform thee of a War that is
broke out between this Crown and that of England. The Occasion of it was this:
The English and the Hollanders trafficking in America, had some
Misunderstandings and Feuds about the Limits of their several Conquests in
those Remote Parts of the World. The Hollanders being the strongest, did many
Injuries to their Neighbors the English, and domineered over them as their
Lords. The English resenting this very heinously, and grown weary of their
Oppressions, sent Complaints to their King. He to redress his Subjects ordered
his Resident at the Hague, to demand Satisfaction of the States. They refused
to do him that Justice; upon which he was resolved to have Recourse to his
Arms, and accordingly proclaimed War against Holland; making all necessary
Preparations to carry it on. The same did his Adversaries. The French King in
the mean time was obliged by a Treaty with the Hollanders concluded in the Year
1662. to espouse their Quarrels; yet that he might not break with England
rashly, he first sent an Ambassador to that Court to mediate a Peace. But that
proving Ineffectual, he proclaimed a War against that Nation, and commanded the
English Ambassador to depart his Kingdom. The Duke of Beaufort, who is Admiral
at Sea, was ordered to Equip a Gallant Fleet, and join the Dutch-Navy; Which he
performed with all Imaginable Diligence and Expedition. There has been Two
Combats between these Enemies at Sea, and in both the Dutch had the worst of
it: Neither did the French escape without some Loss, having Two of their
Greatest Ships severely shattered, and a Third taken by the English.

The Plague still rages in England, and has almost depopulated whole Provinces.
Whilst a milder Death has robbed France of one of her Greatest Heroes: The
Count d' Harcourt, of whom I have often made mention, is gone to celebrate the
Triumphs due to his Valor and Fortune in another World.

The Emperor of Germany has at last married the Infanta of Spain, after
abundance of Demurrs and Hesitations about that Business. These Nazarenes can
do nothing with Expedition. The Spiritual Courts, as they call them, have more
Tricks and Cramp Words to amuze People with, than an Indian Mountebank or
Juggler. Neither are Sovereign Princes more exempt from their Jurisdiction,
than the meanest of their Subjects. Especially the Court of Rome, can make or
annul Marriages at Pleasure. And they are sure to be Excommunicated, who refuse
to submit to their Orders. This Holy Court can also bind or release Sins, open
or shut the Gates of Paradise, make a Devil a Saint, or a Saint a Devil. In a
word, they can do every thing if there be Gold in the Case. But if that be
wanting they can do nothing but shrug their Shoulders.

Thou may also inform the Divan, that the French King has given Permission to
some of his Subjects, to undertake a Conquest in America, and establish a
Commerce in that Part of the World. Many Vessels are equipped in Order to this
Expedition, and they that are concerned in the Voyage, are as merry as Jason
and his Argonauts, when they were preparing to fetch the Golden Fleece from
Colchos. That Western Continent affords immense Riches, and tempts all the
Nations in Europe, to make an Experiment of their Fortune, in gaining one Part
of it or other. 'Twere to be wished it lay nearer to the Ottoman Empire. No
Record can discover the Origin of the Inhabitants. Yet most Authors conjecture,
that they passed over from the North-East Parts of Asia, where the Streights of
Anian, are very Narrow, and would invite Seafaring Men to seek New Adventures.
Besides, by their being Canibals, it appears very probable, That either they
descended from the Tartars, or the Tartars from them. God alone knows how to
adjust the Differences, and reveal the Secrets of History.

Brave Bassa, It Is no matter from what Stock we are descended, so long as we
have Virtue. For that alone is the only True Nobility. God regale thee with his
Favors.

Paris, 30th. of the 9th. Moon, of the Year 1666.
LETTER XIV. To Pesteli Hali, his Brother, Master of the Customs, and
Superintendent of the Arsenal at Constantinople.
WHen I hear of thy Prosperity, my Heart is dilated like his who has found
hidden Wealth. Yet I am sorry for the Disgrace of the good Old Man, thy
Predecessor: But we must not censure the Conduct of our Superiors. The Justice
of their Actions is not to be called in Question. The Sultan cannot err. This
is an Established Maxim in all Monarchies, especially in that of the Renowned
Osmans.

As for what relates to thee, in this New Advance thou have made; thy own
Experience acquired by many Years Travel and Observation in Foreign Countries,
added to the Knowledge thou have in the Laws, Discipline and Customs of thy own
will be a sufficient Guide, to conduct thee in the Management of thy Business.
Yet despise not the Counsel of others. A Man is never nearer to Ruin, than when
he trusts too much to his own Wisdom. Therefore the greatest Emperors
undertake nothing of Moment rashly or without Advice. Temerity often blasts the
fairest Designs.

It will be of particular Import to thee, to hear of a Tragical Event that has
lately happened to Rezan, a Great City in Russia, by the blowing up of the
Magazine. This Gunpowder does more Mischief than Good in the World. The
Ancients fought as successfully with Bows and Arrows, Swords, Spears and other
Instruments of War, without running the Hazard of blowing up whole Cities into
the Air, in time of Peace. And they could undermine the strongest Castles, even
those situated on Rocks, without the help of this Infernal Dust. Nature taught
'em to be Industrious in defeating their Enemies, and they spared no Labor to
gain the Victory. Our Forefathers were hardy and strong, patient of Toils and
Fatigues: They cut their Way into Mountains of Stone, if any Place of Strength
were built on it, which they had Occasion to besiege. And as they hewed away
that Part of the Rock which supported the Walls, they underprop'd the
Foundation with Wooden Pillars: And when they had finished their Mine, they set
Fire to certain Combustible Matter, which consuming these Supports, the Walls
and Gates that rested on them, sunk down, and left the Fortress naked and open
to the Besiegers

It had been well for the Inhabitants of Rezan, if their City had been only
thus gently dismantl'd, by some Enemy against whom they might have afterward
employed their Courage to defend themselves, or make Composition. But poor
Unfortunate People, they have felt a ruder Shock, an unmerciful Blow of Fate,
their City being in a Minute's time, without the least warning, stormed,
plundered, and laid in Heaps, by an Enemy which gives no Quarter.

This Accident happened on the 15th. of the last Moon, about the Hour of
Vlanamisi. There were Five Hundred Barrels of Powder in the Magazine; and the
Force of the Blow was so violent, that besides the Destruction of that City or
at least the best Part of it, all the Neighboring Villages round about it,
felt its Fatal Effect, some of their Houses shaking as in an Earthquake, others
falling to Pieces.

Assuredly, Heaven is angry with these Infidels, and turns the very Instruments
of their Defense and Safety, into Scourges for their Chastisement. I formerly
sent Saleh the Superintendent, an Account of the like Misfortune that befell the
City of Gravelines in Flanders, and of other terrible Effects of the Wrath of
Heaven in the Low Countries. One Disaster follows close on the back of another;
yet the Infidels are insensible and stupid, as they were in the Days of Noah,
when the Flood came and surprised all the Inhabitants of the Country. That
Prophet gave 'em warning of the approaching Danger. He was Three whole Years in
cutting down Indian Plane-Trees, and preparing Planks, Beams, Pins and other
Necessaries, and Seven Year. more in Building that Wonderful Ship. The Infidels
went by daily, and saw him at Work, but they derided the Patient Apostle, and
taught their Children to mock him, saying, Where is the Water this Ship is to
sail in? After the Ark was finished, it lay on the Ground Seven Moons, till
they had Thrice sacrificed some of Noah's Followers to their Idols.

It was perfected in the Moon of Rajeb, and in the Moon of Saphar was the
Decree of the Chastisement signed, which was to be executed on all of Mortal
Race, save Noah and the Fourscore that were with him, with the Two Pairs of
every Species, which the Four Winds, by God's Appointment, collected together,
and drove into the Ark, and the Body of Adam, which was enshrined and brought
to Noah by Angels out of the Region of Mecca. There was also Philemon the Good
Priest of Egypt, with his whole Family.

Just as the determined Day and Hour of the Flood was come, the Prince of the
Country, stimulated by his Evil Destiny, mounted his Horse with some of his
Retinue; and having sacrificed to their Idols, rode toward the Place where Noah
and his Company were shut up in the Ark, with a Design to burn it to Ashes. He
called out aloud to the Prophet, with Scoffs, saying, O Noah, where is the
Water in which this Ship is to sail? It will be with you incontinently, replied
the Holy Man, before you can remove your Station. Come down, thou Dotard, said
the proud Infidel, otherwise I will burn thee and thy Companions with Fire. O
miserable Man, said Noah, Turn to God, for his Judgments are ready to burst
forth on you.

The Prince Incensed at this, commanded his Slaves to put Fire to the Ark. But
while he was yet speaking, he manifestly saw the Water gushing out on all Hands
round about him, and under his Feet. Then his Heart was troubled, and full of
Anguish and Fear. He hasted to secure himself, with his Family and Goods, in
the Castles which he had built, on the highest Mountains. But alas, the Earth
opened, and broke like a Spiders Web; so violent was the Force of the Waters
which boiled up every where. The Clouds poured down vast Chataracts of Rain,
mixed with Dreadful and Insupportable Thunder and Lightning. The Miserable
Infidels thronged upon one another, cursing and blaspheming their Gods who had
deluded 'em. Great was the Confusion and Cry every where; for such a Calamity
had never been known since the Moon gave her Light. If any were so nimble as to
reach the Foot of a Mountain, yet he could not ascend by Reason of Stones which
fell on his Head, and Torrents of boiling Water that ran down upon him, as if
it had come out of a Cauldron. And suppose he had reached the top, it had been
but a short Delay of his Fate; for in a word, the Waters swelled Forty Cubits
above the Highest Mountains, and all the Living Generations perished.

Son of my Mother, when thou read this Memoir, (for it is a Fragment of an
Ancient Arabic Writing) think on the Day of Judgment, which shall surprise the
World, even as the Deluge did. At that Hour, the greatest Part of Men will not
dream of any such thing, till they see Flames and Rivers of Fire bursting forth
from the Springs and Fountains which before yielded Water, and showers of Fire
descending from Heaven, instead of Rain. For the Elements will change their
Courses, to accomplish the Decrees of him who made them, and to consummate the
Revenge of the Omnipotent against Unbelievers.

Paris, 2d. of the 11th. Moon, of the Year 1666,
LETTER XV. To Useph, Bassa.
SUrely, the Gods of the English are angry with that People, and the Guardian
Spirits of the Isle, have forsook their Charge. I sent a Dispatch at the
beginning of this Year to Murat, Bassa; wherein I informed him of a Destructive
Plague, raging at London, and in other Parts of the Nation. That Pestilence
continues still, but under different Forms, to assault the Living, and augment
the Number of the Dead.

God only knows the Origin of these Epidemical Contagions; whether they derive
their Pedigree from Heaven or Hell; from the Earth, or any other Element.
Perhaps some latent Poisons in the Air, mix with the Breath of Mortals, and by
their subtle Energy, soon dissipate the vital Flame of Humane Bodies, like the
Infectious Blasts of the Wind El-Samiel in Arabia, which in a Moment's time
commit a Rape upon the Lives of Travelers, scorching their Spirits up, and
leaving on the Sands a black, stiff Carcass of Jelli'd Flesh, as though they had
been Thunderstruck: Or, perhaps some Venomous Exhalations from the Minerals
below, transpire through Chinks and Crannies in the Earth, to plunder Mortals
of their Breath, like to the Fatal Vapors in the Cave of Death, not far from
Virgil's Grot' in Italy: Or, who can tell, but that some hidden Meteors above,
or some Malignant Stars, may send down whole Battalions of empoyson'd Atoms,
to invade this Region of Mortality; and in Death's Name, King of the World
Invisible, to claim and carry away a certain Number of Ghosts, pricked down by
Destiny, a Tribute set by Fate? However it be, that whole Island may well be
called at this time the Grand Infirmary of Europe, where Baneful Sickness makes
its Public Residence. The timorous Giafers run from Place to Place, thinking
to escape from Heaven's all searching Pursuivants. They fly from Populous Towns
to Villages; and from these again to unfrequented Deserts, Woods, and Heaths,
carrying their Wives and Children with 'em, and all the Substance of their
Houses. The Roads are covered with the Caravans of doubtful Passengers, who
dread to think of going back, to the Contagious Seats they left behind, yet
know not where to be received anew. So general is the Consternation, so strong
the Fear of those who yet survive, lest they should also catch the Infection
and die.

Besides this, they have felt the strokes of another surprising Calamity;
London, the Capital City of England, being newly consumed by Fire. It is not
certain, whether Design or Chance first kindled the devouring Element. But it
fell out at an unlucky Season, when the Wind was high, and from its Eastern
Quarter, blew the Flames full West, which spreading North and South, demolished
all before them, laying the greatest Part of that Rich and Famous City in Ashes.

Some ascribe this to a Plot of the French; others term it, a Judgment of God,
for their Rebellion, Pride and other crying Sins. Whilst with equal
Probability, a third Sort affirm, 'Twas contrived and put in Execution by a
Cabal of Carpenters and Masons, who wanting Employment, and projecting the
Method of enriching themselves, disdaining also the Inartificial and Obsolete
Form of Buildings, resolved to put this City into a New Figure, and raise it
according to the Models of Foreign Architecture. Every one guesses as his
Affections incline him, or his Conjectures follow the Bias of his Interest.
Men are always partial to themselves and the Cause they have espoused. God only
knows the Truth.

The Superstitious among the Roman Catholics, take Occasion from the timing of
this Horrible Conflagration, to insult over the English Protestants; who from
some obscure Passages in the Book of their Gospel, used to foretell in a
Prophetic Manner, That the Final Ruin and Catastrophe of Rome would happen in
this Year 1666. Whereas by Fatal Experience, more sure than vain Predictions,
they find the Metropolis of their own Nation, reduced to Ashes.

Whoever are the Instruments in these Tragedies, it is certain the Designs of
Fate are still performed. Every Kingdom, State and Community, has its Critical
Periods and Climacters, wherein it suffers Detriment, This Blank the Italian
Preface mentions, and says, it is owing to the Loss of some Part of the Arabic
Letter, supposed to be torn off by Chance, or on some other Occasion.
(...) etc.

Paris, 2d. of the 11th. Moon, of the Year 1666.
LETTER XVI. To Cara Hali, Physician to the Grand Signior.
I Am melancholy, beyond the Description of Painters, Poets, or the lively
Eloquence of Cicero. Methinks, I Am some Exotic Being; a perfect Foreigner on
Earth; a Stranger to his Laws and Maxims. I appear to other Mortals like a
Giafer or Frank in his Western-Dress at Morocco, Babylon, or Constantinople. I
mean not for my outward Habit, (for in that I Am Conformable enough to the Mode
of the Region where I reside) but I Am all Unfashionable within; Ridiculous in
my Sentiments and Conversation. When others laugh, I sigh, and find a Reason to
be sad, in the midst of merry Company. Even Wine it self that exhilarates all
the World beside, does but increase my Melancholy, by adding Strength unto my
laboring Thoughts. It sublimates my Spirits up to Sacred Phrensies. I am all
Lunatic at such a Time. Each Glass creates new Dreams, more wild than the
strange Flights and Raptures of a Santone. My heated Spleen, like Mount Gibel,
belches forth horrid Clouds of Smoke and Vapors, which lay long smothering in
its spongy Caverns; these quickly spread, and cover all the Horizon of my Soul,
rendering it Dark and Gloomy, as the Cymmerian Solitudes, or the more dismal
Valleys bordering on the River Styx, where surly Charon waits to Ferry over the
Caravans of trembling Ghosts, and land 'em in Elyzium.

Oh! that those Fables of the Ancient Poets were but true! Or that I knew but
something certain of our Future State! Whether the Soul survives or no, when
Death has stopped the Circulation of our Blood? And what becomes of that Immortal
Substance, after its parting from the Body? Whether it pass by Transmigration
into the Embryo of some other Animal, as Pythagoras taught; or be united,
swallowed up and lost in the Universal Soul of the World, as Plato did believe?
Or if some other Magnet does attract its Presence; and hidden Sympathies of
Nature teach it to form its self a Vehicle or Body of the Elements? Perhaps,
some Souls unite with Air, whilst others mix with Water, Earth or purer Skies.
This for its horrid Sins in Mortal State, may be by the Eternal Nemesis sunk
down into the Fatal Caverns of Mount Aetna, Strombolo, or Vesuvius; there to
Incorporate with burning Rivers and Lakes of Sulphur and other Minerals, to
hear perpetually the frightful Cracking, Rumbling, and loud Thunders of those
Infernal Vaults: to be without Intermission annoyed with the Eternal Stench of
melted Mines, whose poignant Vapors equally kill it and revive it every
moment, that it may be confined to an endless Circle of Miseries: To feel the
Excruciating Torments which no Tongue can utter; whilst the Incessant Rapid
Motion of those Exalted and most Violent Fires, with which it is embodyed by
Decree of Fate, rob it of the very Possibility of the least easy Thought or
quiet Minute; and at the same time rack it with Infinite Tortures.

Think not my Dear Physician, that it is Impossible a Separate Spirit, can thus
be sensible of Pains. There Is no such thing as a Separate Spirit, save God who
made all Bodies, and therefore was before them. The Angels themselves are
partly Corporeal; so are the Devils. Do not believe then that Mortal Man, who
is in a middle State between these Two, shall by Dying, gain a Privilege above
the most Illustrious Spirits in Heaven. As soon as Death has dislodged us from
One Body; Nature, Providence or Fate, provides us Another, according to our
Qualities, Inclinations and Merits. We may as well by Metempsychosis, become
the Spirit or Soul of a flaming Sulphur-Mine, or at least of some Part of it,
as of a Horse, an Eagle, or a Dove: For such, for ought we know, may be the
Disposition of Divine Wisdom, Justice and Omnipotence.

By the very same Reason another Soul may be transported to the Open, Happy
Skies, where it may either range in boundless, free, and serene Tracts of
Bliss; or be Enfranchised in the Corporations of the Stars, to dwell in Palaces
of Azure, Topazes, and Diamonds; to possess Privinces more Rich than in Peru or
Guinea, where the Rusticks plow up Gold; more beautiful and pleasant, than the
famous Fields of Thessaly. God knows what will become of us after our
Dissolution: But the Ignorance of this one Truth, occasions all my Melancholy.

Death is not formidable of it self, nor all the dolorous Circumstances that
precede it: It Is only what comes after, raises all my Terror. Were I to melt
away in lingering Agues and Consumptions; or to be sooner posted off in high
wrought Fevers, Pleurisies, or Pestilence: Or if it were my Fate to die by
Pistol, Sword or Poison, or any other Kind of Slow or Sudden Death, allotted me
from Chance or Nature, Providence or Fate: Should Heaven consume me in a Trice
by Lightning; or this Globe with equal Swiftness, bury me in some surprising
Earthquake: 'Twould be all one to Mahmut, were it not for the After-Claps, to
which I am a Stranger. I tremble at the Hidden and Unsearchable Force of
Nature: I dread the Irreversible Unknown Decrees of Fate, the Secret Methods of
Eternal Destiny, the Laws and Order of the Other World, in Billetting the
Troops of Humane Souls, that go to Winter there, after this Life's Campaign is
finished.

Once in a Cold and Frosty Evening, as I was traveling over a bleak wide
Plain, and felt the penetrating Blasts of North-East-Winds, with chilling
Sleet, which fell upon me from the Clouds; my Spirits also tired with tedious
Journeys, and my anxious Thoughts were wholly taken up about a Resting Place
that Night, and how to avoid the Assaults of Robbers, with a Thousand other
Perils, threatening a Stranger on the Road, at length I chanced to think of the
Untried and Remote Voyage I must One Day make to Another World. It chilled my
Blood to imagine the disconsolate Naked Circumstances of a Separate Soul, which
for ought I knew, might be bewildered, lost, and forced to wander up and down
through untrack'd Wastes of misty frozen Air, where the Inhospitable Element
affords no Guides, nor Carvansera's to comfortless, poor, straggling Ghosts;
unless they would accept a Lodging in some Cloud, the Cistern and Chariot of
Rain, Hail or Snow; there to Incorporate with the unwelcome Meteors, and be
whirled round the Globe, or else precipitated down to Earth again in Showers;
from thence perhaps to be exhaled by the Sun, and mix with Embryo's of
Lightning, Fiery Dragons, Ignes Fatui, or other Bodies hourly Flaming in the
Welkin, and thus to circulate in Endless Transmigrations. Who knows the
Circumstances of departed Souls, or Laws of a Separate State? Let him declare
what Usage we shall find in that Invisible and Dark Recess from Life: He shall
be then esteemed more than Apollo, by the pensive Mahmut. Not the old Delphick
Oracle could receive greater Reverence from the Inquisitive World; nor Mecca
now from devout Mussulman Pilgrims; or Medina Talnabi, where the Prophet rests
in Peace, than such an one should have from me, who could with unfeigned Truth
discover how we shall be disposed of, when we die. But I am cloyed and
nauseated with the dull Romances of the Priests and Derviches.

My Friend, let thou and I learn to improve the Joys of present Life, and not
by damned Mistakes deprive our selves of double Happiness. But let us so
comport our selves, that our Transmigration may be but from the Pleasures of
Earth to those of Heaven; from one Paradise to another.

Paris, 6th. of the 1st. Moon, of the Year 1667.
LETTER XVII. To Kerker Hassan, Bassa.
THE Blessings of God and his Prophet cheer thy Heart, as thou have exhilarated
mine by thy last Letter; wherein thou encouragest me with the Hopes of being
removed from this disagreeable Post, to one more Delightful and Happy, even to
a Sweet Country Retirement, either in Arabia, or any other Part of the Grand
Signior's Dominions, which is the very Mark of all my Wishes.

I have a Natural Aversion for Great and Populous Cities. They seem to be so
many Magnificent Sepulchers of the Living, where Men are shut up, imprisoned,
and buried from all Commerce with the Elements; or they are like Hospitals and
Pest-Houses, where People crowd, infect, and stink one another to Death with a
Thousand Pollutions. They hive together like Bees, and build their Apartments
in Darkness. Like Nests of Pismires, they trudge up and down all the Summer of
their Youth, to heap up Treasures, that they may spend the Winter of their Old
Age, in loathsome Ease, and benumbed Stupidity; not daring to venture out of
the Purlieu of their nasty, smoaky Habitations, and yet there ready to be
stifled with their own Breath.

It Is with Pleasure I contemplate the Face of the Infant Earth, before it was
deformed by the unnecessary Arts of the Carpenter, Smith and Mason: When Men
had no other Houses, save what they made themselves, every one for his Family,
of the Branches and Boughs of trees, interwoven with Osiers, Reeds and Ivy; and
covered thick with Leaves and Grass to shelter them from Wind, Hail, Rain, and
other Injuries of Weather. Or perhaps some had found out a Den or Cave in the
Earth, or the Hollow of a Rock, for a Sanctuary in such Cases, where they
reposed in perfect Tranquillity, without Fear of Snares or Violence, without
Apprehension of Robbers, or any Tragical Surprise. They went out and in, slept
and waked, labored and rested in safety and quiet. Avarice, Envy and Injustice
had not as yet corrupted the Minds of Mortals. The Earth brought forth Corn,
Herbage, and Fruits, without the Husbandman's or Gardeners Labor: All Places
abounded with Plenty of Innocent Refreshments, and those Primitive Inhabitants
coveted no more. The Cattle and Bees afforded them Milk and Honey, and the
Fountain-Waters were Generous as Wine. This Globe was a complete Paradise, and
no mistaken Zeal had taught Men Religiously to invade one another Rights, and
in a pious Fury to murder their Neighbors, in hopes of meriting Heaven
hereafter. There was no such thing as Bigottry or Superstition to be sound
among any of Humane Race. The Law of Natrue was in Universal Force: Every Man
pursued the Dictates of Reason, without harkening after Religious Sophistry,
and Sacred Fables.

But when once the Lucre of Gold had corrupted Men's Manners, and they not
contented with the Riches and Sweets which they daily cropped from the Surface of
the Earth, had found a Way to descend into her Bowels, stung with an Insatiable
Desire of hidden Treasures; then began Injustice, Oppression and Cruelty to
take place. Men made Enclosures to themselves, and encompassed a certain
Portion of Land with Hedges, Ditches and Pales, to Fence them from the
Invasions of others; For the Guilt of their own vicious Inclinations, filled
them with Fears, and made them Jealous of one another. They built themselves
strong Holds, Fortresses, Castles and Cities. And their Terrors increasing with
their Criminal Possessions, they persuaded themselves, that the very Elements
would prove their Enemies, if not pacisied by Bribes and Presents. Hence sprung
the first Invention of Altars and Sacrifices, and from these vain Panick Fears
of Mortals, the Gods derived their Pedigree. For one built a Temple to the Sun,
another to the Moon, a third to Jupiter, Mars or the rest of the Planets. Some
adord the Fire, others the Water or Wind, Every one set up to himself such a
God as he phansied would be propitious to him. Thus Error being equally
propagated with Humane Nature, they created an Infinite Rabble of Imaginary
Deities, paying to those Idols, the Supreme and Incommunicable Honors, due
only to the Eternal Essence, Father and Source of all things.

Besides, they lived in Intolerable Pride and Luxury, in constant Wars and
Strife, in Darkness, Ignorance and Confusion. I speak of such as dwelt in
Cities, and were incorporated together by one common Interest. For still there
remained some who obeyed the Original Laws of Nature, and the Traditions of
Primitive Humanity. These dwelt in Tents or other Moveable Habitations, as our
Countrymen the Arabs do at this Day, with the Tartars their Brethren. They
scorned to fasten themselves to the Earth, by possessing any Part of it in
Propriety: Every Field and Wood, Hill and Valley, River and Well, were with
them in Common. They straggled whither they pleased.

This is the Life so emulated by me, or instead of that at least, a Retirement
from Cities, that I may breath out my last Hours in a free Air, remote from the
stifling Company and Contagion of Mortals. I long to range at Liberty through
unfrequented Paths of Desert Ground, over wild, unpolished Heaths, from thence
insensibly to fall into some Venerable Solitude, where the dry, mossy Barks of
Trees, in silent Characters proclaim the Antiquity of the Place; and gentle
Whispers of the Winds, instruct the Methods of Platonic Love; inspire strange
Passions, which we never felt before, and teach us to converse with Satyrs,
Nymphs, and other harmless Tenants of the Shades. How great is the Pleasure to
be thus surpised with some harmonious, warbling Stream, or Silent, soft, deep,
Christial River? To speak Incognito with Dryads, Hamadryads, and the Sporting
Eccho's; To lie dissolved in Loose, yet Innocent Enjoyments on the Banks; to
talk with Nature, with Immortal Substances, and with Eternity it self? Oh God!
Is not this ravishing?

It Is difficult to say, whether it would be Pleasant or Painful to return from
these Ineffable Parades of the Soul, to our Domestic Felicities, though even in
a Rural Life, which I acknowledge to be the Happiest on Earth. Yet there to
trace the Herds and Flocks, to walk amidst the High-grown Corn, and Grass, to
pluck the bearded Ears of Barley, to let our Eyes roll over the various Figures
of the Wind-blown Wheat and Millet, our Noses to suck the Fragrant Airs of
Marjoram, Thyme, Oranges and Limons, with Innumerable Spices; our Ears to hear
the Inimitable Melody of Birds, and every Sense to be transported, snathh'd
away and lost in Sacred Ecstacies; must needs be ranked among the Highest Kinds
of Earthly Pleasures.

But to descend from these Enjoyments, to the Meanest and most Common
Diversions of a Country-Life; methinks there is something peculiarly charming in
the very Ellenge Situation of the Houses; whether it be on the Brow of a Hill,
or the Bottom of a Valley; in the midst of a Wood, or the Opening of a Heath;
on the Side of a Road, or in some obscure Corner of the Country. It Is
agreeable, when waking in the Morning, to hear the Bleating of Sheep, Lowing of
Oxen, Screaming, Quacking and Crowing of Geese, Ducks, Cocks, and other
Homebred Animals; to hear the louder Winds, threatening to tear up Trees by the
Roots, demolish Houses, and remove the Globe it self, if possible, from off its
Basis. This would be better Music to me for a Change, than a Consort of
Dulcimers, Theorbo's, Tymbrels and Viols. Humane Nature delights in Variety,
and there is a certain Audacious Curiosity in the Soul, which loves to venture
on Extremes. The Rain, the Dirt, the Stink of Hogs, Camels, Dromedaries, and
other necessary Rural Beasts, would please me better, than the constant tedious
Ease, and Fulsom Sweets of Court or City. I sweat whilst thus shut up within
these Walls: It cloys me to be daily walking in a Circle, to trample always
over the same Ground, in a vast Labyrinth of Houses, where my Senses meet no
new refreshing Objects, but my Ears are hourly nauseated, vexed and tired with
Rattling Din of Coaches, Carts, Artificers, and the harsh Voices of such as sell
Flesh, Fish, and other things about the Streets. My Eyes can find no grateful
Prospects, but dashed with surly rugged Looks of proud and wealthy Infidels; or
with the fly Satyrick Smiles of well-shap'd People, who contemn me for my
Bandy-Legs, and Crooked Back.

In a word, my dear Bassa, I long to feel the gentle Breezes of the East,
purifying my Soul and cleansing it from so many Pollutions. I languish for the
Sight of Turbants and Crescents, for the devout Call of the Muezins on the
lofty Minarets: I die in Contemplation of the Sacred Fasts and Feasts, the
Nocturnal Joys of Ramezan, the Revels and Cheerful Illuminations of Beiram, and
the Imperial Dunalma's. When I think of these things, my Soul bursts forth in
fervent Invocations, and every Faculty cries Alla, Alla.

May that Divine and Immortal One hear my Prayers, and grant me the Happiness
to see the Face of Noble Kerker Hassan, in an Horizon pure and free from the
Defilement of Infidels.

Paris, 14th. of the 2d. Moon, of the Year 1667.
LETTER XVIII. To Isouf, his Kinsman a Merchant at Astracan.
I sent a Dispatch to thee in the Year 1664. wherein among other things, I
recommended our Cousin Solomon to thy Friendship and Patronage, if ever he
should travel to Astracan, as I advised him. For thou know he has a Roaming
Genius, without the Wit to improve himself in any Foreign Country, unless he
has a Friend to guide and take care of him: And then 'twill be a difficult Task
to make him sensible, where he is. He Will always think he is within the Verge of
the Grand Signior's Hunt, where he may domineer at large, under the Notion of a
Retainer to the Sultan. He Is a strange humored Fellow. I know not what to make
of him. He Is as Changeable as Proteus, or a Chamelion: Sometimes Religiously
dull and Phlegmatic, like a Hadgi; at another Season you shall fell his Pulse
beating to the Tune of Youthful Pride, Ambition, Lust, and other Vices. To Day
he would be a Dervich, Santone, or any thing that bears the Form of Holiness: But
when he is slept upon it, the vain Young Convert would return again to the World,
and be a Soldier, Courtier, Professor of the Law, or any Thing that makes a
Figure in the Eyes of Men. So unwelcome are the rigid Paths of Virtue, to a
Soul not well established in its Principles.

And yet our Cousin Solomon, as I am told, is the Mussulman of the Mussulmans,
as to his Exterior. With Hand devoutly laid to Breast, and humblest Couch
of the Head, he gives the Salem to his Friends and Neighbors: Soft, as the
Signs of Mutes in the Seraglio: Humble, as the Grecian Chapman, walking through
the Streets, is forced to imitate, when he is hectored by the Rampant
Janissaries.

But, Oh my Cousin Isouf, it is Grief to say, that Solomon, Partaker of our
Blood, is Base, Ungrateful, and Perfidious: That he should be thus Unnatural,
studying the utmost Period of our Life; instead of Honest, Just, and Noble
Presents, to prolong it.

I had Reason, long ago, to compare him to Pontius Pilate; and if I had gone
on, and scum'd off all the most Enormous Crimes of Humane Race, 'twould be too
little to express his Enmity against Mahmut, the kindest Uncle, and the truest
Friend, that ever poor Solomon could boast of.

But he is Degenerate, and that is too little, without the mournful Sighs of
thee and me, to increase the Aggravation of his Crime.

In Fine, he is our Kinsman, and let us show Mercy. He has been perfidious to
me, and I would retrench the Words I have spoken in his Disgrace. If he comes
to Astracan, do as thou please: But have an Eye over thine own Affairs. Take
not Solomon for an Angel.. He is still but a Turbant maker; a Frolicksom Blade;
and a Merchant that makes a very small Figure.

Cousin Isouf, forget not the Maxims thou have learned in thy Travels: Be true
to thy Friends, and thy self. Honor the Memory of thy deceased Parents. Love
all Men, that are good. And be not remiss in praying for the Soul of thy
deceased Uncle, whenever God shall call for it.

Paris, 26th. of the 2d. Moon, of the Year 1664.
The End of the Sixth Volume.
BOOKS Written by Sir Roger L'Estrange, and Printed for Joseph Hindmarsh and
Richard Sare.
1. FAbles of Aesop and other Eminent Mythologists, with Morals and
Reflections, Folio. 2. Seneca's Morals, by way of Abstract, the Fifth Edition,
Octavo. 3. Select Colloquies out of Erasmus Roterodamus; pleasantly
representing several Superstitious Levities that were crept into the Church of
Rome in his Days; the Second Impression corrected and amended, with the
Addition of Two Colloquies to the former, Octavo. 4. Tully's Offices in Three
Books, turned out of Latin into English; the Fourth Edition corrected, Twelves.
5. A Guide to Eternity, extracted out of the Writings of the Holy Fathers and
Ancient Philosophers; written originally in Latin, by John Bona, and now done
into English; the Third Edition.
The Genuine Epistles of the Apostolical Fathers, St. Barnabas, St. Ignatius,
St. Clement, St. Polycarp, the Shepherd of Hermas, and the Martyrdoms of St.
Ignatius and St. Polycarp, written by those who were present at their
Sufferings, being together with the holy Scriptures of the New Testament, a
Complete Collection of the most Primitive Antiquity for 150 Years after Christ;
Translated and Published with a Large Preliminary Discourse, relating to the
several Treatises here put together. By William Wake, D.D. Chaplain in ordinary
to their Majesty's, and Preacher to the Honorable Society of Gray's Inn,
Octavo. Price 5 s. Humane Prudence, or the Art by which a Man may raise himself
and Fortune to Grandeur; the Sixth Edition corrected and enlarged by the
Author. These Two Last printed for R. Sare at Gray's Inn. Price 1 s. 6 d.

