REPORTS: OR, NEW CASES; WITH Diverse Resolutions and Judgments given upon
solemn Arguments, and with great deliberation. AND The Reasons and Causes of
the said Resolutions and Judgments.

COLLECTED By JOHN MARCH of Grayes Inn, BARRESTER.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for W. Lee, M. Walbanke, D. Pakeman and G. Beadel.
M.DC.XLVIII.

REPORTS, Easter-Term, 15o CAROLI, In the Kings Bench.
IT was agreed by Justice Jones and Justice Barckley (the Lord Chief Justice
and Justice Crook being absent) That if the Sheriff do arrest a man upon mesne
process, and return a Cepi corpus, and that the Defendant was rescued; that no
Action lies against the Sheriff: But if the party be taken upon an Execution,
an Action upon the Case lies against him; and so is the express Book of 16 E.
4. 2, 3. Br. Escape 37. upon which Book Justice Jones said, That it was
adjudged in this Court, as above is said.

2. It was agreed by the Court, That if a man in pleading derive an Estate from
another man, and does not show what Estate he had from whom he deriveth his
Estate, that is a good cause of Demurrer. And Justice Jones said, That if a man
claim a Rent by Grant out of the Land of any other man, it is not sufficient
for him to say, That such an one was seized and concessit; but he ought to
express of what Estate he was seized: So is Dyer. But in this Case it was
agreed, That the showing of what Estate, etc. ought to be material to the
maintenance and support of the Estate which he claims, otherwise it is not
necessary.

3. An Action upon the Case for words, was brought by one who was Journey-man
and ^ore-man of a Shoomakers-shop, which was his living and livelihood, for
these words, viz. It is no matter who has him, for he will Cut him out of
doors. And farther the Plaintiff did aver, that the common acceptance of these
words amongst Shoomakers, is, That he will beggar his Master, and make him run
away: and showed that he was particularly endamnified by speaking of those
words. And the Court was clear of Opinion, that the Action would lie. And these
Rules were taken and agreed. For some words an Action will lie without
particular averment of any damage; as to call a man Thief, Traitor, or the
like; these are malum in se: And some words will not bear Action without
particular averment of some damage; as to say, Such a one kept his wife basely,
and starved her; these words of themselves will bear no Action: but if the
party of whom the words were spoken were in election to be married to any
other, and by speaking of these words is hindered; there with such Averment they
will bear an Action. It was farther agreed, That the words ought to be spoken
to one that knows the meaning of them, otherwise they are not actionable, as in
the principal Case, they were spoken to a Shoemaker; but if they had been
spoken to any other who knew the meaning of them, it had been all one: And
therefore scandalous words which are spoken to one in Welsh, or any other
Language, which the party to whom they are spoken does not understand, are not
actionable. And it was agreed, That some words which are spoken, although of
themselves they are not actionable, yet being equivalent with words which are
actionable, they will bear an Action. And therefore it was said by Justice
Jones, That in Yorkshire (as I remember) Straining of a Mare, is as much as
Buggering: and because these do amount to as much, with averment they will bear
Action. And all words which touch a man in his livelihood and profession will
bear Action. And the Opinion of the Court also was, that the Averment ought to
be, That in this (and show it specially) the Plaintiff was damnified: and so it
was agreed upon these Reasons, that the Action did lie.

4. The Opinion of the Court was upon a Judgment given there, there ought to be
two Scire facias, one against the Principal, the other against the Bail; but
one only is sufficient in the Common Pleas, and that two Nichils returned do
amount to Scire feci.

5. There was a Contract made at Newcastle, that a ship should sail from
Yarmouth to Amsterdam, and there was an Action of Debt brought upon the
Contract at Newcastle, and it was adjudged that the Action would not lie: and
the difference was taken betwixt a particular and limited Jurisdiction, as in
this case Newcastle is; and a general Jurisdiction, as one of the Courts at
Westminster has: for in the first Case, no particular Jurisdiction shall hold
plea of a thing which is done in partibus transmarinis, although the Original
(as the Contract in the principal Case) be made in England; but contrary in
case of general Jurisdiction, as any the Courts at Westminister have.

6. The Custom of London is, that any man in London may pass over, or put over
his Apprentices to any other man within the City.

King and Cokes Case.
7. WIlliam Marshal, and other Bailiffs had an Execution (viz. a Capias ad
satisfaciend') against Coke and others; which Bailiffs came to Coke's house,
and lay one night in his outhouses privily; and the next morning they came to
his dwelling house, and gave him notice of the Execution; but Coke shut the
doors of his house close, so as the Bailiffs could not enter; whereupon they
brake the Glass-windows and the Hinge of the door, endeavoring to enter:
whereupon Coke commanded them to be gone, or he would shoot them:
notwithstanding which, they did continue their ill-doing; whereupon Coke shot
Marshal one of the Bailiffs: and whether this was Manslaughter or Murder, was
the Question. And Rolls argued, that it was not Murder for these causes. 1.
Because the act of the Bailiffs in breaking of the Glass and the Hinge of the
door was an unlawful act, and was at their p^ril. Where the Kings Officer may
break the house to serve any mean Process or Execution, the differences are
such as are in Semaynes Case, C. 5. part 91, 92. 1. betwixt Real and Personal
Actions: In Real Actions they may break the house to deliver seisin to him who
recovereth; contrary in Personal Actions. 2. There is a difference in the case
of the King, and of a common person; where the King is party, in some cases his
Officers may justify the breaking of a house, but not in the case of a common
person. 13 E. 4. 9. 18 E. 4. 4. 4 Rep. 4* 9 Rep. 69. And therefore if they
could not justify the breaking of the house at the suit of a common person;
then in the principal Case, they did a thing which was not warranted by Law:
and therefore the killing of one of them was not Murder. But clearly, if the
Bailiffs had lawfully executed their Office, then it had been Murder. 2. It was
not Murder, because the person was in his House, which is his Castle and
defense, which is a place privileged by the Law. 26. Ass. 23. 3 E. 3. 330,
305. Besides, the party is not bound to tarry till the Bailiffs come in and
beat him. 2 H. 4. 8. 19 H. 6. 31. 34 H. 6. 16. 43 Ass. pl: 31. 3. This
Authority which is given to the Kings Officer, is given by the Law, and if he
execute it according to the Law, the Law will protect him; but if he exceed the
privilege given him by the Law, then all he does is illegal, and he loses its
protection. And he resembled it to the 6 Carpenters case. C. 6. part. Farther,
one may pretend he has such a warrant, when he has it not, of purpose to rob,
or do some other mischief. And it was agreed by all the Justices, nullo
contradicente, that it was not Murder, but that it was Manslaughter; for this
reason especially, because the Officer was doing an unlawful act, not warranted
by Law; and therefore it was at his peril if he were killed. And farther, upon
this difference there ought to be malice in fact or in Law to make Murder; but
in this Case there is none of them, for it is apparent that there was no malice
in fact: and there is no malice implied, for then it ought to be where a man
kills another without any provocation, or the Minister of Justice in the due
and lawful execution of his Office, which is not our Case; for here he did an
unlawful act at the time he was killed; and therefore it was not Murder, but
Manslaughter. There was a Case tried at the Sessions in the Old Bailey, which
was thus: One Lovell had two Maidservants, and one of them without his
knowledge, had received into the house a Chare-woman, who (all being in their
beds) by her negligence let a Thief into the house, and afterward called out
Thieves, Thieves; and afterward Lovell came out of his Bed with a Sword in his
hand, and the Chare-woman calling to mind that she was there without his
privity or his wifes, hid her self behind the Dresser, and Lovell's wife
espying her there, cried out Thieves, Thieves; for which Lovell came and ran
her into the breast with his Sword. And the Opinion of the Justices at the
Old Bailey, and also of all the Justices of the Kings Bench, was, That it was
neither Murder nor Manslaughter: Not Murder, because there was no forethought
malice; not Manslaughter, because he supposed her to be a Thief; and if she had
been a Thief, then it was clear that it was not Manslaughter.

8. It was resolved in the Chancery (as the Judges of the Kings Bench said)
That where the Son is of full age, and is ravished, that the Father shall not
recover Damages, because the Son being of full age might marry himself without
the consent of the Father: and that was the reason given, as I conceive; and
the Case was said to be Sir Francis Lees Case.

9. The Book of Canons is, that the Parson may Elect one Churchwarden, and the
Parishioners another.

10. There can be no Surrender without the Consent of the Reversioner.

11. It was Libelled in the Ecclesiastical Court for these words, Thou art a
Drunkard, or usest to be drunk thrice a week. And thereupon Prohibition was
Prayed and Granted: and it was said and agreed, That so it was adjudged betwixt
Vinior and Vinior, in this Court. The Case in Dyer, 254. b. where the Presentee
was refused, because he was a common haunter of Taverns, etc. was by Justice
Barckley denied to be Law, and so agreed by Justice Jones, the Lord Chief
Justice and Justice Crook being absent: But Justice Barckley was utterly
against the Prohibition. 1. Because the Action in the Ecclesiastical Court is
only pro salute animae. And 2. Because that Drunkenness is in their Articles,
and Presentable. But Justice Jones granted a Prohibition, and said that Linwood
said well, That if all things which are against the Law of God (or words to
that effect) should be tried in the Ecclesiastical Court, the Jurisdiction of
the Temporal Court should utterly be destroyed.

12. If there be an Indictment of Forcible Entry, if it appear that the
Plaintiff had seisin at the time of the Writ brought, there can be no Writ of
Restitution; for the Statute ^aith, If he Enter with Force, or keep him out
with Force: but yet in that case the King shall have his Fine. And there was an
Indictment, which was a principal Case at Bar, which was, That the Defendant
adtunc and adhuc does keep the possession forcibly, whereas the Plaintiff was
in possession. And thereupon a Writ of Restitution was awarded by reason of the
word [adhuc] 3 E. 4. 19. it was adjudged, That where there is Forcible Entry,
and Reteiner with Force, that both are punishable, although the Statute of 8 H.
6. 9. be in the disjunctive.

13. Descent of a Copyhold shall not take away Entry. There ought to be a
custom to enable the Lord of a Manor to grant a Copyhold in Reversion.

14. In the Council of Marches of Wales, they proceed according to Directions*
and they cannot exceed them; and they (...) with Freehold, for it is not within
their (...). And they cannot hold Plea of Debt above fifty pound^.

15. An Assignment of Rent to a Woman, out of Land of which she is Dowable by
Word, is good; but if she be not Dowable of the Land, then the Assignment by
Word is not good, and void; because that in the first Case it is according to
common Right, but in the last, not. 33 H. 6.

16. In a Writ of Error to Reverse a Judgment in an Action of Debt upon an
Arbitrament, the Error assigned was this: That two did refer themselves to
Arbitrament of their two several Arbitrators; and there is no word of
Submission: that the same is Error, and there was Error in the Entry of the
Judgment; the entry of which was in this manner; Consideratum est, and per
Curiam is omitted and left out. And for these Errors, the Judgment was Reversed.

Smith's Case.
17. ONe said of him, Thou art forsworn, and have taken a false Oath at
Hereford- Assizes, against such a one, naming the party. And the Opinion of the
Court (the Chief Justice and Justice Crook being absent) was against the
Action. But they conceived that the Action would have lied, if the Defendant
had said, Thou art forsworn, and have taken a false Oath at the Assizes,
against such an one, with Averment that he was sworn in the Cause.

18. It was said at the Bar, That it was adjudged in this Court in Appletons
Case, That where a man said unto another by way of Interrogatory, Where is my
Piece thou stolest from me? that it was actionable. Justice Jones remembered
this case, where one said, J. S. told me, that J. N. stole a Horse, but I do
not believe him. This with Averment that I. S. did not say any such thing,
would bear an Action. Justice Barkley said, That an Action was brought upon
these words, You are no Thief? and that these words with Averment, which imply
an affirmative, will bear an Action.

19. It was said to a Merchant, That he was a cousening Knave. And the Opinion
of the Court was, (the chief Justice and Justice Crook being absent) that the
words were not actionable, because he does not touch him in his Profession, for
the words are too general: But it was said, That to call him Bankrupt was
actionable. And mall Cases where a man is touched in his Profession, the words
are actionable. But to call a Lawyer a Bankrupt, is not actionable. Justice
Jones said, that Sergeant Heath brought an Action for these words: One said of
him, That he had Undone many; and it was adjudged actionable; because he
touched him in his Profession.

20. Kingston upon Hull is a Particular and Limited Jurisdiction, and they held
Plea of a Bond which was made out of their Jurisdiction; and thereupon a Capias
was awarded against the Obligor, who was arrested upon it, and suffered by the
Sheriff to escape: And the Opinion of the Court was clear, That no escape would
lie against the Sheriff, upon the difference in the case of the Marshalsea,
That if the Court hold Plea of a thing within their Jurisdiction, but proceed
erroneously, that it is avoidable by Error; but if they have not Jurisdiction
of the cause, all is void, and coram non Iudice. 11 H. 4. and 19 E. 4. Acc. So
in the principal Case: for they held Plea of a thing which was out of their
Jurisdiction, and therefore the whole proceeding being void, no Action can lie
against the Sheriff, for there was no Escape.

21. Where a man is Outlawed, and the Outlawry reversed, notwithstanding the
Original does remain, and the cause that the Original was determined was the
Outlawry; and now Cessante causa cessat effectus.

22. A man made a Lease for years, with exception of diverse things, and that
the Lessee shall have conveniens lignum non s^^ccidendo, etc. vendendo arbores,
etc. Now the Lessee cut down Trees, and the Lessor brought an Action of
Covenant: and the Opinion of the Court was, That the Action would lie, and that
it is as a Covenant on the part of the Lessee, because the Law gives him
reasonable Estovers, and by this Covenant he abridgeth his Privilege.

23. Justice Jones said, and so it was agreed by the Court, In what case soever
there is a Contract made to the Testator or the Intestate, or any thing which
arises by Contract, there an Action will lie for the Executor or
Administrator; but Personal Actions die with the Testator or Intestate.

24. The Administrators of an Executor shall not sue a Scire facias upon a
Judgment given for the Testator, because the Testator now died Intestate,
because there is no privity. And so it has been many times adjudged. 1 Rep.
96. a. 5 Rep. 9. b.

The Earl of Oxford and Waterhouse Case, in a Writ of Error to reverse a Fine.
25. WAterhouse levied a Fine, the Earl of Oxford pleaded that he was beyond
Sea at the time of the Fine levied. Waterhouse replied, That he came here into
England in August, within the five years; and upon that they were at issue. The
Jury found, that he came over in July. And notwithstanding the Opinion of the
Court was clear, That the Writ of Error did not lie: For although the Jury have
found that he came over in July; yet the substance of the matter is, that he
was in England, so as he might have made his Claim; and therefore the Fine
should bar him. And Justice Barckley compared it to the Case of 10 Eliz. Dyer
271. b. which Case is a Quaere in Dyer, but Resolved in the 6 Rep. 47. a. A man
brought Debt against an Heir, who pleaded that he had nothing by Descent. The
Plaintiff pleaded that he had Assets in London, and the Jury found Assets in
Cornwall, and good; for the substance is, whether he had Assets or not.

26. If a Nobleman who is not a Baron or Earl of this Realm, in an Action
brought against him, or by him, be named Knight, and Earl of such a place, it
is good, because that although he cannot be sued, or sue another, by the name
of Earl, Baron, etc. yet by the name of Knight he may, and that is sufficient.

27. Writ of Error was brought here, to reverse a Judgment given in Ireland, it
is a Supersedeas to the Execution: for although the Record it self is not sent
over, for fear of losing the same in the water or otherwise, yet a transcript
is made thereof, which is all one. And Justice Barckley compared it to the Case
where a Writ of Error is brought in this Court to reverse a Fine in the Common
Pleas, there the Record it self is not sent, but a Transcript thereof, because
we have not a Cirographer to receive it, but the Transcript is all one.

Sir John Compton's Case upon the Statute of Winchester, 13 Ed. 1. and 27 Eliz.
of Robberies.
28. SIr John Compton Knight, brought an Action against the Hundred of Olison
(or the like name) for a Robbery done upon Red-hill in the County of Surry,
within the aforesaid Hundred, and the Robbery was done upon his man, and five
hundred and ten pounds was taken from him. And in this Case it was agreed by
the Justices, That although there be a remisness or negligence in the party who
was robbed, to pursue the Robbers, or that he did refuse to lend his Horse to
make Hue and Cry; yet this does not take away his Action, nor excuse the
Hundred, if notice be given with as much convenient speed as may be, as the
Statute of 27 Eliz. speaks, for them to make Hue and Cry. And although the
Party who was robbed, does not know the Robbers at the present time, and
thereof takes his Oath before a Justice of Peace, as the Statute of 27 Eliz.
has provided; and afterward comes to know them, and so he affirm, yet this
does not take away his Action. And it was resolved also, that notice given in
one Hundred five miles from the place where he was robbed, is sufficient; and
the reason is, because that the party who is a stranger to the Country, cannot
have conusance of the nearest place or Town. Chief Justice: That notice given
at one Town, and Hue and Cry levied at another, is good. And the Jury found for
the Plaintiff: And thereupon a Quaere was made by one who was of Counsel with
the Hundred, Whether such persons who become Inhabitants after the Robbery, and
before the Judgment, whether they should contribute? And Justice Barckly said,
That all who are Inhabitants at the time of the Execution, should pay it.

29. A Vicar cannot have Tithes but by Gift, Composition, or Prescription: For
all Tithes de jure do appertain to the Parson.

30. A man was bound to the Good Behavior, for Suborning of Witnesses.

Plowden against Plowden.
31. PLowden the Son brought Trespass against Plowden the Father, for taking
the Plaintiffs Wife cum bonis viri. And the Case was, That he did reject and
eject his Wise without giving of her Alimony: for which she had Sentence in the
High Commission-Court; and the Defendant took those Goods for the Alimony of
the Wife. And Justice Barckley said, That the Defendant might plead, Not guilty.

Lister against Hone, in Trover and Conversion for a Hawk.
32. JUdgment was given for the Plaintiff, but it was moved in arrest of
Judgment, because it was not said in the Declaration, that it was a tame Hawk.
Dyer 13 Eliz. 306. b. and 43 E. 3. Acc. And here it was said, That the words of
the Declaration show that it was a wild Hawk; for the words are, For taking
Accipitricem suum, Anglice vocat' a Ramish Fawlcon; and it was said that
Ramish, is as much as to say, inter ramos agens; but that was denied: for a
Ramish Hawk is a Fowl Hawk, by which the contrary is implied, that it was tame.
And here it was farther said for the Defendant, that if [reclamato] be omitted,
[de bonis suis propriis] will not help it. But it was said in affirmation of
the Judgment, that although [reclamato] be omitted, yet, that [de bonis suis
propriis] will help it: and Justice Barckley with all the Justices (except the
Chief Justice, who was absent) did agree very strongly, That the Judgment
should be stayed; because that a Hawk is ferae naturae, and although it be
tamed, yet if it fly away, and has not animam revertendi, then occupanti
conceditur. Vide 27 Hen. 8. And for the words, de bonis suis propriis, they do
nothing, for the Party had but a Right of Possession, and not of Property: and
if it be, it is but a qualified Property, as 7 Rep. 17. b. He agreed, that if a
man has a wild Hawk in his possession, and another man takes it out of his
possession, Trespass will lie; but if it fly away, then Capiat qui capere
potest: And thereupon Judgment was stayed.

Parkinson against Colliford and others, Executors of a Sheriff.
33. THe Case was, That Judgment was given against another man at the
Plaintiffs suit in Debt, in the Common Pleas, and upon that a Writ of Error was
brought in the Kings Bench, and the Judgment affirmed; and upon that a Fieri
facias directed to the Sheriff, who levied the Money, and died, the Writ being
not returned, and thereupon Debt was brought against his Executors: and these
exceptions were taken. 1. That the Writ of Fieri facias was not returned, and
therefore the Sheriff should not be charged in Debt; but otherwise if it had
been returned. 2. That no Debt lies against the Sheriff, although it had been
returned. 3. Admit that it would lie against himself, yet it will not lie
against his Executors, because it is a Personal wrong, and dies cum Persona.
4. That the Fieri facias was awarded out of this Court, and it does not appear
whether it were awarded after the Record removed into this Court or not.
Justice Barckley, with whom all the other Judges did agree, was of Opinion,
That Debt would lie against the Sheriff where he sells goods upon a Fieri
facias, for now he is Debtor in Law, and the Defendant discharged against the
Plaintiff, and ^^e may plead it; and therefore it is reasonable that the
Defendant should be answerable to the Plaintiff, and he took the difference
betwixt Seisin of goods only, and where the Sheriff seiseth and sells them:
for till Sale no Debt will lie against him. And it was said, that Account will
lie against him; and if Account, by the same reason, Debt. As to the return of
the Writ, he said that the Sheriff is not compellable to make it, and therefore
it is nothing to the purpose; and the difference stands, where the Sheriff
returns a Jury, where not: in case of Elegit the Writ ought to be returned, but
not in case of Fieri facias, as is 1 H. 7. Clerk of the Hampers Case. Farther,
I conceive that it will lie against the Executor, and it is not like the Cases
which are Personal, where the action moritur cum Persona: but here the goods
came to the Executors, and therefore it is reason to charge them. And it is not
like the Case in Dier, 10 Eliz. 271. a. where it is said, An Action of Debt
will not lie against the Executor of a Keeper, nor an Escape, for there the
body comes not to the Executor: And this very difference may be collected out
of Dier in the place aforesaid; and the difference will stand where there is a
personal wrong done to him, and where not. And for the Exception, That it does
not appear whether the Fieri facias was brought after the Record removed or
not: To that they said una voce, that it appears that it was upon these words
of Record, viz. That the Record was brought hither, and here remained; and it
is not needful to show, that Error was brought, etc. Justice Jones: I
conceive, that Debt will lie against the Sheriff, because the Sheriff had it
delivered to him to deliver over. And if I deliver money to deliver over, Debt
will lie for him to whom it ought to be delivered. So in this Case. And because
also the Defendant is discharged, and may plead the same, and therefore there
is reason to charge the Sheriff. Farther, I conceive also, that it will lie
against the Executors: And I shall take this difference, where the wrong is ex
maleficio, for there it dies with the person; and where ex contractu, for
there it does not die with the person. If I deliver goods to a man, and he
di^th, an Action of Trover will lie against his Executors. And here the Sheriff
could not have waged his Law, for the Debt is brought upon matter of Record,
upon which wager of Law lies not, but upon simple contract. And the Sheriff
has here made himself Debtor in Law upon Record. Justice Crook: It is reason
to charge the Sheriff, because the Defendant is discharged, and may plead that
his goods were taken in Execution by the Sheriff in satisfaction of the same
Debt. And the Executors may be charged, because no wager of Law lies, because
the Debt is here brought upon matter of Record. And he agreed with Justice
Jones in the difference betwixt maleficium and contractum. And therefore they
did all conceive that the Action would lie. And in Spekes Case in the Common
Pleas, it was voted, that the Action would lie against the Sheriff.

34. In a Habeas Corpus, the Case was thus: A man would erect a Tavern in
Birchin-lane; and the Mayor and Communalty for his disobedience, because he
would not obey them, but would erect a Tavern there against their wills, they
knowing the same to be an unfit place, did imprison him. And the Opinion of the
Court was, That he should be remanded, because that the Mayor and Communalty
had authority over him, and they might appoint him a place in which he might
erect his Tavern. For it is a disorderly Profession, and not fit for every
place. And it was adjudged in this Court, That a Brewhouse ought not to be
erected in Fleet Street, because it is in the heart of the City, and would be
annoyance to it. And if one would set up a Butchers shop, or a Tallow-Chandlers
shop in Cheap Side, it ought not to be, for the great annoyance that would
ensue. And therefore the Mayor and Communalty may redress it. And therefore the
party was remanded, and was advised by the Court to submit to the Government of
the City. Note, the Recorder certified the Custom, That the Mayor might appoint
a place.

35. Upon a Recovery in a Court Baron, against one, he offered here to wage his
Law. And Justice Barckley doubted whether wager of Law would lie in such Case:
To which Justice Jones said, Yes; and Barckly agreed hereunto, because the
Recovery was in a base Court, and not in a Court of Record. Vide 2 E. 4.

36. No ancient Mill is Tithable; but Mills newly erected shall pay Tithes, by
the Statute of 9 E. 2. 5.

Meade against Axe, in a Writ of Error to reverse a Judgment.
37. THe Case was: Axe brought an Action against Meade for these words spoken
of the Plaintiff, a Dyer, by the D^fendant, Thou art not worth a Groat: And the
Plaintiff added, that these words amongst Citizens of such place where they
were spoken, have the common acceptance, and does tant amount as the calling
of him Bankrupt. The Errors which were assigned by Meade Plaintiff in the Writ
of Error were, 1. Because it is added, that the words were spoken inter
diversos ligeos, and does not say Citizens of the place where they have such
acceptance. 2. Because that the Judgment is, Consideratum est, and the words
per Curiam left out. And the Court was clear, that for these two Errors the
Judgment should be reversed: But the Court was clear of Opinion, That the words
of themselves are not actionable, and that the averment in this Case was idle
and to no purpose, because the words of themselves imply a plain and
intelligent sense and meaning to every man. And it was compared to the Cases,
Where there is no Latin for words, there where words of no signification are
put to express them, there they ought to be explained by an Anglice; but where
the words are significant, there needs not any Anglice. Now if you will explain
significant words under an Anglice, contrary to the meaning and true intendment
of the word it self, the Anglice is void: So in our Case of Averment. The
reason which was conceived wherefore the words of themselves are not
Actionable, Because that many men in their beginnings are not worth a Groat,
and yet their credit is good with the world. But if he had laid specially, That
he was damnified, and ha^ lost his Credit, and that none would trust him, upon
this special matter, the words would be Actionable.

Bonds Case.
38. IN Trespass, the Plaintiff declared, That the Defendant entered in his
Land, and did cut down and carry away two Loads of Grass in the Plaintiffs
Soil, in a certain piece of Ground, in which the Trespass was supposed to be
done, to strew the floor of the Church; and that he cut two Load^ there, to
estrew the floor of the Church, and did not say, that it is the same Trespass,
etc. And it was adjudged Error: But the Court was clear, that the Prescription
for cutting of grass to estrew the Church, was good; because it was but in the
nature of an Easement. And so to have a washing-place in the land of another;
and so the custom here in London, to shoot in the land of another, and so for
the Inhabitants of a town to have a way over the land of another to their
Church. But Mr. Rolls who moved the Case at the Bar, said, That it was
adjudged, that Inhabitants of a town by custom, should have an Easement over
the Freehold, or in the Freehold of a Stranger, but not profit Apprender: But,
as I remember, the Plaintiffs Freehold lay near the Church, and for that reason
the Court might conceive the same to be but an Easement. Vide 2 H. 3. cited by
Justice Jones. Vid. Gatewoods Case, 6 Rep. 60. b.

Conysbies Case.
39. UPon the Lease of an House, the Lessee Covenanted that he would Repair the
House with convenient, necessary and tenantable Reparations. The Lessor brought
Covenant, and alleged a breach of the Covenants, in not repairing for want of
Tiles, and dawbing with Mortar, and did not show that it was not Tenantable.
And the Opinion of the Court was, that he ought to have showed it; for the
house may want small Reparations, as a Tile or two, and a little Mortar, and
yet have convenient, necessary and tenantable Reparations.

40. A Writ of Error was brought, and the Error assigned was, want of Pledges:
And the Judgment was reversed, although it was after Verdict. And so was it
adjudged in Dr. Hussies case, and Young and Youngs case, in this Court; and the
Reason was given, because that otherwise the King should lose his Amercement.

41. Fish in the River are not Titheable, if not by Custom.

42. Two referred themselves to Arbitrament, and the Arbitrators arbitrate,
that one of them should pay a certain sum to the other; and the other in
consideration thereof should acquit him of a Bond, wherein they both were
bounden to a third person in a 100 lib. and eo circiter: and it was objected,
That the Arbitrators had arbitrated a thing uncertain, by reason of these
words, eo circiter. But the Opinion of the Court was, That there was sufficient
certainty, because that in this Case it does not lie in their power to know the
direct sum, and because a small variation is not material: but if they (as in
Salmons case 5 Rep.) will arbitrate that one shall be bound in a Bond to
another, and not express in what sum, the same is utterly void, for the
incertainty. Difference was taken where the Arbitrators arbitrate one party to
do a thing which lies in his power, and where not, without the help of a third
person; there the Arbitrament is void: and in the principal Case, the
difference was taken by the Court, where the Bond is forfeit, and the penalty
is incurred, and where not, or the day of payment is not incurred, there
payment at the day is a good discharge and acquittance, but where it is
incurred, it is not. But Justice Jones said, That he might compel the Obligee
upon payment, although the Bond was forfeit, to deliver the Bond by Subpoena in
Chancery; or that he suffer an Action to be brought against him, and then to
discharge it, and pay it.

Goodman against West, Debt upon the Statute of 5 Eliz. Cap. 9.
43. THere was an action brought against the Plaintiff in the Common Pleas, who
procured Process to issue against the Defendant, for his Testimony in his
Cause, and a Note of the Process was lest at the Defendants house, being sixty
miles from London, and twelve pence to bear his charges, which the party did
accept. And the party who served the Process promised the Defendant sufficient
costs. And here Mr. Jones, who was of Counsel with the Defendant, took three
Exceptions. 1. Because the Process was not served upon the Defendant, as the
Statute requires, but a Note only thereof, and it being a Penal Statute, ought
to be taken strictly. 2. There was but 12 d. delivered to the Defendant at the
time of the serving of the Process; which is no reasonable sum for costs and
charges according to the distance of place, as the Statute speaks: and
therefore the promise that he would give him sufficient for his costs
afterward is not good. 3. The party who recovers by force of this Statute
ought to be a party grieved and damnified, as the Statute speaks, by the not
appearance of the Witness: and because the Plaintiff has not averred, that he
had loss thereby by his not appearance, therefore he conceived the Action not
maintenable. For the first, the Court was clearly against him, because it is
the common course to put diverse in one Process, and to serve Tickets, or to
give notice to the first persons who are summoned, and to leave the Process it
self with the last only; and that is the usual course in Chancery, to put many
in one Subpoena, and to leave a Ticket with one, and the Label with another,
and the Writ with the third; and that is the common practice, and so the
Statute ought to be expounded: But if there be one only in the Process, there
the Process it self ought to be left with the party. For the second, the Court
did conceive, That the acceptance should bind the Defendant; but if he had
refused it, there he had not incurred the penalty of the Statute. For he ought
to have tendered sufficient costs according to the distance of the place, which
12 d. was not, it being 60 miles distant. But for the third and last Exception,
the Court was clear of Opinion, That the Action would not lie for want of
Averment, that the Plaintiff was damnified for the not appearance of the
Defendant. And so it was adjudged that the Plaintiff Nihil capiat per Billam.

44. The Opinion of the Court was: That whereas one said of another, That he
will prove that he has stolen his Books; that the words are actionable: for
they imply an affirmative, and are as much as if he had said, That he has
stolen my Books. And so if I say of another, That I will bring him before a
Justice of Peace; for I will prove that he has stolen, etc. although the
first words are not actionable, yet the last are.

Molton against Clapham.
45. THe Defendant upon reading Affidavits in Court openly in the presence and
hearing of the Justices and Lawyers said, There is not a word true in the
Affidavits, which I will prove by forty Witnesses; and these words were
alleged to be spoken maliciously. And yet the Court was clear of Opinion, that
they will not bear Action. And the reason was, because they are common words
here, and usual where an Action is depending betwixt two, for one to say, That
the Affidavit made by the other is not true, because it is in defense of his
cause. And so it was here. The Defendant spoke the words upon the reading of
the Affidavits in a cause depending betwixt the Plaintiff and the Defendant.
And therefore if I say, That J. S. has no Title to the Land; if I Claim or
make Title to the Land: Or if I say, That J. S. is a Bastard, and entitle my
self to be right Heir, the words are not actionable, because that I pretending
Title, do it in defense thereof. And Justice Barckley said, That there are two
main things in Actions for words, the words themselves, and causa dicendi; and
therefore sometimes, although that the words themselves will bear Action, yet
they being considered causa dicendi, sometimes they will not bear Action. Now
in our Case causa dicendi was in his own defense, or his Title, and therefore
they will not bear Action.

46. Outlawry was reversed for these two Errors. 1. Because it was not showed
where the party Outlawed was inhabitant. 2. Because it was showed that
Proclamations were made, but not that Proclamation was made at the
Parish Church where, etc.

Buckley against Skinner.
47. THere was Exception taken, because that the Defendant pleaded and
justified the Trespass, cum equis; and said nothing to the Trespass done porcis
and bidentibus. And the Opinion of the Court was, That the Plea was
insufficient for the whole. And Justice Jones said, That if several Trespasses
are done to me, and I bring Trespass, and the Defendant justify for one or
two, and says nothing to the other, that the whole Plea is naught, because
the Plea is entire as to the Plaintiff, and the demurrer is entire also. But
Justice Barckley was of Opinion, that the Plea was naught quoad, etc. only; and
that Judgment should be given for the other. Vide 11. Rep. 6. b. Gomersall and
Gomersalls Case.

48. A man pleaded a descent of a Copyhold in Fee: The Defendant to take away
the descent pleaded, That the Ancestor did surrender to the use of another,
absque hoc, that the Copyholder died seized. And the Opinion of the Court was,
That it was no good traverse, because he traversed that which needed not to be
traversed; for being Copyhold, and having pleaded a surrender of it, the party
cannot have it again if not by surrender. Like the Case of a Lease for years,
Helliers Case. 6* Rep. 25. b. For as none can have a Lease for years but by
lawful conveyance, so none can have a Copyhold Estate, if not by surrender:
But if a man plead a descent of inheritance at the Common Law, there the
defendant may plead a feoffment made by the Ancestor absque hoc, that he died
seized, because he may have an estate by disseism after the feofment. Traverse
of the descent, and not of the dying seized, is not good; so was it adjudged in
this Court. Vide 24 H. 8. Dyer.

49. It was moved in Arrest of Judgment upon an Action of Trespass upon the
Statute of 2 E. 6. cap. 13. because that the Plaintiff said, that the Defendant
was Occupier only, and did not show how he occupied, or what interest he had.
And the (...) ^pinion of the Court was, that he need not, because here he makes
no Title; and whosoever it be that takes the Tithe is a Trespasser. And
therefore Justice Jones said, That it was adjudged in this Court, that an
Action lies against the disseisor for the Tithes: so against a servant: and so
if one cut them, and another carry them away, an Action lies against any of
them.

50. The Parish of Ethelburrow in London alleged a custom, that the greater
part of the Parishioners have used to choose their Churchwardens; and they
chose two, the Parson chose a third. The Official of the Bishop gave Oath to
one of them chosen by the Parish, but refused to swear the other, and would
have sworn the party chosen by the Parson, but the Parish was against it; upon
which the Parson Libelled in the Ecclesiastical Court. And a Mandat was here
praid, That the Official swear the other who was chosen by the Parish; and a
Prohibition to stay the Suit in the Ecclesiastical Court. Upon the Mandat the
Justices doubted, and desired that Presidents and Records might be searched;
and at length, upon many Motions, Presidents and Records showed, a Mandat was
granted. But there being Suit in the Ecclesiastical Court, b^ the other whom
the Parson chose, a Prohibition was granted without any difficulty: But at
first the Counsel prayed a Prohibition for not swearing the other; which the
Court refused to grant, because there was no proceeding in the Ecclesiastical
Court, and a Prohibition cannot be granted where there is no proceeding by way
of Suit.

Vaughan against Vaughan; in Action upon the Case upon Assumpsit.
51. THe Defendant did promise that he would make such a Conveyance of certain
Lands: and pleaded, That he had made it, but did not show the place where it
was made: And the Court was clear of Opinion, that he need not; for it shall be
intended upon the Land. And so in case of performance of Covenants, it is not
needful to show the place where, etc.

Norrice and Norrices Case.
52. Copyholder for life, where the custom is, That if the Tenant die seized,
that he shall pay a Heriot: The Lord granted the Seigniory for 99 years, if the
Tenant should so long live: And after that he made a Lease for 4000 years.
Tenant for Life is disseised, (or more properly, ousted) and died. Here were
two Questions: 1. Whether there were any Heriot to be paid, and admitting there
were, yet who should have it, whether the Grantee for 99 years, or he who had
the 4000 years? And the Court was clear of Opinion in both points without any
argument, 1. That a Heriot was to be paid, not withstanding that the Tenant did
not die seized, because he had the estate in right, and might have entered,
although he had not the possession. And Justice Barckley compared it to the
Case in C. 3. Rep. 35. a. in Butler and Bakers Case, where a man has one acre
of Land holden in Capite, and a hundred acres of Socage Land, and afterward he
is disseised of the Capite Land, and afterward makes his will of all his
Socage Land, in that case he is a person having of Capite Land, as the Statute
speaks. And yet that right of Capite Land shall make the devise void for the
third part; for notwithstanding the disseisin, yet he is Tenant in Law. And as
to the second point, the Court was clear of Opinion also, That he in remainder,
or he that had the Estate for 4000 years (for note the Action was brought by
him in the Remainder for the Heriot) should not have it: And their reason was,
because the Tenant for life was not the Tenant of him who had the future
interest of 4000 years, but of him who had the interest for 99 years. But they
were not clear of opinion, that the Grantee for 99 years should have the
Heriot. Justice Barckley was, that the Grantee for 99 years should have it. But
Justice Jones (there being then none in Court but they) haesitavit. And the
reason of the doubt was, because that eo instante that the Tenant died, eodem
instante, the estate of the Grantee for 99 years determines. Justice Jones put
this Case: A Seigniory is granted for the life of the Tenant, the remainder
over in fee; the Tenant dies, Who shall have the Ward? Justice Barckley said,
he who is Grantee of the particular estate: but Jones seemed to doubt it. Vide
44 E. 3. 13.

Jews against Jones in a Writ of Error.
53. JUdgment was given for Jones against Jews in an Action brought in the
Common Pleas: And Jews here brought a Writ of Error, and assigned for Error,
That he was an infant at the time of the Action brought against him; And that
he appeared by Attorney, whereas he ought to appear by Guardian, or procheine
amy: The defendant pleaded in avoidance of this Writ of Error, That there was
no Warrant of Attorney. The Plaintiff allegando, showed the Error before; And
the Defendant pleaded in nullo erratum est. And the Judgment was reversed. But
the Opinion of the Court was, That the better way had been for the Plaintiff to
have demurred in Law: for there being no warrant of Attorney, there was no
appearance at all; and so are the Books, 38 E. 3. and 14 E. 4.

54. In Vtburt and Parhams Case, it was agreed, That a man may be Nonsuit
without leave of the Court, but he cannot discontinue his Suit without consent
of the Court.

Davis and Bellamies Case in Attaint.
55. THe Defendant brought Attaint, and the Verdict was affirmed; and Costs
prayed upon this Rule, that where the Plaintiff shall have costs, there the
Defendant shall have costs: But they were denied by the Court; for that ought
to be taken in the original Action, and not in case of Attaint; But upon the
restituatur, there costs shall be given; but that is in the original Action.

56. If two joynt-tenants be of a Rectory, and one sueth for Tithes by himself
only; it is n^ cause of Prohibition: So if a Feme Covert sue solely upon a
desamation, a Prohibition shall not be granted.

57. The Sheriff of a County made a Warrant Bal^ivis suis, to arrest the body
of such a man, and the Bailiffs of the Liber^y return a Rescous. And Exception
was taken to it, because that the Warrant was, Ballivis suis; and the Return
was made by those who were not his Bailiffs; and it was adjudged: for the
Liberty might be within his Bayliwick, and so are all the Presidents. And there
was another Exception, because the place of the Rescous was not showed, and for
that the Book of 10 E. 4. was cited; for there the Rescous was, adtunc and
ibidem, and did not show the place. To that it was answered by the Court, and
agreed, that adtunc and ibidem is altogether uncertain, if the place be not
showed; but in the principal Case, the place was showed at the first, and
always after; that tunc and ibidem only without naming of the place, and
adjudg^d good. For that tunc and ibidem throughout the Declaration, has
reference to the place first showed; and it was adjudged good.

58. Outlawry was reversed for this Error, because that the Exigent was, Secund
exactus ad Com' meum ibidem, etc.

59. A Hundred may prescribe in Non decimando, and it is good; for it is the
custom of the County, which is the best Law which ever was. But a Parish or a
particular Town cannot prescribe in Non decimando: And thereupon a Prohibition
was granted. And a Prohibition was granted in this Court, upon this surmise,
That the Custom was, that Tithes should not be paid of Pheasants.

60. If there be no Venire facias it is not Error, but it is helped by the
Statute: But if there be a Venire facias, and it is erroneous, it is not helped
by any Statute.

Trinity-Term, 15o CAROLI, in the Kings Bench.
61. A Man indicted others at the Sessions House in the Old Bailey, who were
acquitted; and the Defendants Counsel did remove the Indictment into the Kings
Bench, and prayed a Copy thereof, to the end they might bring a Conspiracy, or
have other remedy for the wrong done unto them. And it was denied by the whole
Court, unless the Recorder will say, That there appeared malice in the
prosecution: For a man shall not be punished for lawful prosecution upon just
ground without malice, although the parties be acquitted by Law.

The King against the Inhabitants of Shoreditch.
62. MAster Keeling Clerk of the Crown in the Kings Bench did exhibit an
Information against the Inhabitants of Shoreditch for not repairing the
Highway. And the Issue was, Whether they ought to repair it or no? And it was
said by the Court, That by the Common Law, the Inhabitants of a Parish ought to
repair all Highways lying within the Parish, If prescription did not bind some
particular person thereto; which was not in this Case. And in this Case some of
the Inhabitants would have been Witnesses to prove that some particular
Inhabitants lying upon the Highway had used time out of mind to repair it, but
were not permitted by the Court, because they were Defendants in the
Information; wherefore the Jury found, That the Inhabitants ought to repair the
way.

63. Two men and their wives were Indicted upon the Statute of Forcible Entry,
who brought a Certiorari to remove the Indictment into the Kings Bench. Some of
them did refuse to be bound to prosecute according to the Statute of 21 Iac. c.
8. and therefore, notwithstanding the Certiorari, the Justices of Peace did
proceed to the trial of the Indictment: and here it was resolved, That whereas
the Statute is, The parties Indicted, etc. shall become bound, etc. That if one
of the parties offer to find Sureties, although the others will not, yet that
the cause shall be removed; for the denying of one or any of them shall not
prejudice the other of the benefit of the Certiorari, which the Law gives unto
them: And the Woman cannot be bounden. And it was farther resolved, that where
the Statute says, That the parties Indicted shall be bound in the sum of ten
pounds, with sufficient Sureties, as the Justices of the Peace shall think fit,
that if the Sureties be worth ten pounds, the Justices cannot refuse them,
because that the Statute prescribes in what sum they shall be bound. Like to
the Case of Commission of Sewers, 10 Rep. 140. a. That where the Statute of 3.
H. 8. cap. 5. enables them to ordain Ordinances and Laws according to their
wisdoms and discretions, that it ought to be interpreted according to Law and
Justice. And here it was farther resolved, that after a Certiorari brought, and
tender of sufficient Sureties, according to the Statute, all the proceedings of
the Justices of Peace are coram non Iudice.

The Argument of the Lord Chief Justice, in the Case between James and Tintny,
in a Writ of Error to reverse Judgment given in the Common Pleas for Tintney
Defendant, in a Replevin brought by James: the Case was thus, vis.
64. STowel was Lord of a Manor, and James one of the Tenants, and there the
custom was, That the Steward of the Manor might make Laws and Ordinances for
the well-ordering of the Common. And the custom was also to Assess a penalty
or a pain upon those who brake those Laws and Ordinances. And also to prescribe
to distrain for the penalty. The Steward made an Ordinance, That he who put his
Cattle beyond such a bound, that he should pay 3 s. 4 d. James offended against
this Ordinance, upon which the penalty was assessed, and a distress taken by
Tintny Defendant in the Replevin, Plaintiff and Baily of the Lord of the
Manor; And Judgment was given for him in the Common Pleas, and damages
assessed: Upon which a Writ of Error was brought. In this Case it was agreed by
the whole Court, that the Custom was reasonable: And the difference taken where
the Law or Ordinance takes away the whole profit of the Commoners, and where it
abridgeth it only, or adds limits or bounds to it, as in this Case. And farther
it was agreed, That the Commoners are bound to take notice of these Ordinances.
But in this Case, the Er^or which was assigned was this, That damages were
given for the Defendant, where no damages ought to have been given: And of that
Opinion was the Lord chief Justice, that no damages ought to have been given;
and with him agreed Justice Jones; but Justice Crook and Justice Barckley, e
contra. It is clear, that at the Common Law, the Defendant shall not have
damages, although as to some intent the Avowant be as it were a Plaintiff and
Actor. 21. H. 6. 2. 6. H. 4. 11. 35* H. 6. 47. Then the Question arises only
upon these two Statutes, viz. 7. H. 6. cap 4. 21. H. 8. c. 19. And first,
whether our Case be within the Letter of these Laws; Admitting that not,
Whether within the mischief, so as that it shall have the same remedy. And I
conceive, it is not within the Letter or Equity of these Statutes: Not within
the Letter; for they speak, Where a man distrains for Rents, Customs and
Services, or damage ^easant. And in our Case, he does not distrain for any of
them; for it is manifest, that he does not distrain for Rents, Services, or
Damage feasant: And it is as clear, that he does not distrain for Customs; for
he distrained for a penalty assessed by Custom. 1. In Alcocks case it was here
resolved, That where a prescription was alleged to distrain for an Estray, and
found for the Avowant, that no damages should be in that case. For it was here
resolved, that the Customs intended in 21 H. 8. cap. 19. are Customs which are
Services. 2ly. I hold it not within the Equity; for the mischief at the Common
Law was, That damages were not to be recovered for such Rents, Services, etc.
And this penalty is no Service. And I conceive clearly, That it was not the
meaning of the Makers of the Act of Parliament to extend to such penalties. And
here I further take the difference which is in Pilfords case in the 10 Rep.
116. In all cases where a man at the Common Law cannot recover damages: If a
Statute give damages, there he shall recover no costs; for the same is an Act
of Creation, which gives remedy where none was given before. But where there is
an Act of Addition, which increases the damages at the Common Law, there
notwithstanding he shall recover costs also. So in our Case, these being Acts
of Creation which give remedy where there was no remedy before, shall be taken
strictly according to the Letter, and shall not extend to such penalties as in
our case: And upon this difference he cited the Cases in Pilfords case, and
especially the Case upon the Statute of 5 E. 6. of Ingrossers; the Plaintiff
shall not recover costs, but only the penalty given by the Statute grounded
upon 37 H. 6. 10. I agree, That there be many Presidents in the Common (...)*
That damages have been allowed in our very Case; but that is the use of the
Clerks, and passed sub silentio, without any solemn debate or controversy.
Vide Greislies case, and the first Case of the Book of Entries, Presidents and
Judgments in this Court. Pasch. 33 Eliz. Rot. 292. Halesworth against Chaffely.
A Judgment of the Common Pleas was reversed for this very point. M. 36 Eliz.
Ruddal and Wilds Case. M. 44 and 45 Eliz. Rot. 22. Shepwiths Case. Avowry for
relief a stronger case, Judgment was reversed, because damages was assessed,
Hill. 14 Iac. Rot. 471. Leader against Standwell in a Replevin. Avowry was made
for an Amercement in a Leet, and found ^or the D^fendant, and damages assessed.
But the Entry upon the Record was thus, Super quo nullo habito respectu, etc.
The Plaintiff was discharged of the damages, because nulla damna debent esse
adjudicanda per Legem terrae; but he shall have his costs. But it was objected
by Justice Crook, That by the Statute of 4 Iac. c. 3. which gives costs and
damages to the Defendant in certain Actions there specified where the Plaintiff
shall recover damages, and that where the Plaintiff is Nonsuit, or verdict
pass against him, That Demurrer has been construed to be within that Statute.
Notwithstanding that it is an Act of Creation, I agree that: and answer, that
Demurrer is within that Statute, and the mischief of it, but it is not so in
our Case; for in our Case there is no such mischief: For there is no color to
extend it beyond the words of the Statute. For which cause I conclude that the
Judgment in this case ought to be reversed.

65. A Clerk of the Court dwelling in London was chosen Churchwarden, and
prayed a Writ of Privilege, which was granted. And it was agreed by the whole
Court, That for all Offices which require his personal and continual
attendance, as Churchwarden, Constable, and the like, he may have his
Privilege; but for Offices which may be executed by Deputy, and do not require
attendance, as Recorder and the like; (from which the Justices themselves shall
not be exempt) for them he shall not have his Privilege. And where he has his
Privilege, for the not obeying thereof, an Attachment lies.

Swift against Heirs, in Debt upon the Statute of 2 E. 6. for setting out of
Tithes.
66. THe doubt in this Case did arise upon two several Indentures found by
special verdict, which were made by the Vicar and Subchauntors Corrols of
Lichfield; one 2 E. 6. the other 2 and 3 Phil. and Mar. The Question upon the
Indenture of 2 E. 6. was, Whether the Grant upon the Habendum, be a grant of a
Freehold to begin at a day to come, or not. The chief Justice, Justice Crook,
and Justice Barckley, were clear of Opinion, That it was a grant of a Freehold
to begin at a day to come. And for that the Case is thus: In the Indenture of 2
E. 6. there is a recital of a former Lease for years: And by this Indenture in
2 E. 6. another Lease was to begin after the first Lease determined, the
remainder in Fee to another: And upon that the three Justices before were clear
in their Judgments, That it was a Grant of Freehold to begin at a day to come,
which without doubt is void, 8 H. 7. 39 H. 6. and Bucklers case, 3 Rep. And in
8 H. 7. the difference is taken betwixt the grant of a Rent in esse, and Rent
de novo. A Rent de novo may be granted in futuro, but not a Rent which is in
being. But Justice Jones in this Case was of Opinion, That here is not any
grant of a Freehold to begin at a day to come, because in this case the Lease
does begin presently, because the Lease recited is not found by the Jury, and
therefore now it is all one as if there had been no Lease at all; contrary in
the case of the King, because it passes a good estate of Inheritance to the
Grantee. And therefore if I make a Lease for years unto a man after the
expiration of such a Lease, where in truth there is no such Lease in being, the
Lease shall begin presently. The Question upon the Indenture of 2 and 3 P. and
Mar. was no more but this. The Vicar and Subchauntors of Lichfield made a Grant
of all their Tithes in Chesterton, and name them in certain, and in specie, as
Tithe-wool, Tithe* Geese, Pigs, Swans, and the like, and that in a distinct
clause, with especial Exception of four certain things. After which came this
clause, All which were in the Tenure of Margaret P^toe: And the Jury sound that
none of these Tithes were in her Tenure: And whether that Grant were void or
not, was the Question; And resolved by the whole Court nullo contradicente,
That the Grant notwithstanding this fall^ reci^al, was good, For these reasons.
But first it was resolved, That where they grant all their Tithes in
Chesterton, that it is a good grant, and has sufficient and convenient
certainty, 13 E. 4. and ^^^lands Case: There are two Generalities, 1. Absolute.
2. Gen^^al in particular; ^o here* And in our Case it is as c^r^ain, that
demand in an Action may be for them by the name of all their Tithes in
Chesterton. So in the like manner an Action of Ejectione firm will lie: For an
Ejectione firm will (...) for Tithes as it has been adjudged here. If the
King grant all his Lands, it is altogether uncertain and void; but if the King
grant all his Lands in Dale, or which came to him by the dissolution of such an
Abbey, it is good, because it is a general^y in particular. And it was agreed,
that convenient certainty is sufficient: And therefore it was said by Justice
Jones, That if I grant all my Rents in Dale which I have of the part of my
Mother, that he conceives the same to be good. The first reason wherefore this
grant shall be good notwithstanding the false recital, was this, because the
words here, All which, etc. are not words of denotation or restriction, but of
suggestion or affirmation, and therefore shall not make void the Grant. And
here the difference was taken between the Case of a common person, and of the
King; Suggestion which is false in the Case of the King, makes the Patent void;
but contrary in the case of a common person: And therefore i^ the King be
deceived either in point of profit or in point of Title, his Grant is void, 9
H. 6. Where he is not deceived in point of profit, he shall not avoid the
Grant. 26 H. 8. The second reason, That a Deed ought to be construed Vt res
magis valeat quam pereat, 34 H. 6. A man having a Reversion, devises his land
in Manibus, thereby the Reversion passes, 9 E 4. 42. Release of all Actions
against Prior and Covent, shall be construed and intended all Actions against
the Prior only, for an Action cannot be brought against the Covent. Farther, by
this construction you would avoid this deed; and by the Rule of Law, the deed
and words of every man shall be taken very strong against himself, ut res magis
valeat, as is said before. And it is against reason to conceive that it was the
meaning of the parties that nothing should pass. A third reason was, because
the grant was a distinct clause of it self. And the words which were objected
at the Bar to be restrictive, were in another distinct clause, and therefore
shall not restrain that which was before; for words restrictive ought to be
continued in one and the same sentence: Wherefore they having granted all their
Tithes in Chesterton by one clause, the false recital afterward in another
clause shall not make the grant void. See 3 and 4 Eliz. Dyer in Wast, 31 Eliz.
the Lord Wenworths Case in the Exchequer upon this Rule of distinct clauses:
And Atkins and Longs case in the Common Pleas, upon which cases Justice Jones
did rely. The fourth reason was, That construction ought to be made upon the
whole Deed: And it appears by the context of the Deed, That it was the
meaning of the parties to grant the Tithes by the Deed. Further, the Exception
of the four things shows, That it was the meaning of the parties to grant all
things not excepted, as the Tithes in this Case; For exceptio firmat Regulam;
And to what purpose should the Exception be, if they did not intend to pass all
other things not excepted? See 4 Car. H^skins and Tr^ncars Case, Sir Robert
Napwiths Case, 21 Iac. cited by the chief J^^tice to that purpose. Wherefore it
was agreed by the whole Court, that Judgment should be given for the Defendant.
And the Opinion of the Court was clear also, That although some of the Tithes
had been in the Tenure of Margaret Pet^e, that yet the grant was good. And that
was after Argument upon the Demurrer, to avoid all scruples to be after made by
Counsel; because it was conceived, That some of the Tithes were in her Tenure.

Crisp against Prat in Ejectione firm.
67. THe Case upon the four Statutes of Bankrupts, viz. 34 H. 8. 13 Eliz. 1
Iac. and 21 Iac. was thus: Ralph Brisco 9 Iac. purchased Copyhold to him and
his Son for their lives, the Remainder to the Wife in Fee. 11 Iac. he became an
Inholder; and about twelve years after, a Commission of Bankrupt is obtained
against him; And thereupon the Copyhold-land is sold by the Commissioners to
the Defendant. Ralph Brisco dies, and his Son John Brisco entered, and made the
Lease to the Plaintiff: The Defendant entered upon him, and he brought an
Ejectione firm. And Judgment was given upon solemn argument by the Justices
for the Plaintiff. The first point was, Whether an Inholder be a Bankrupt
within these Statutes: And it was resolved by all the Justices, viz. Jones,
Crook, Barckley, and Bramstone chief Justice, that an Inholder quatenus an
Inholder is not within these Statutes: Justice Barckley and Justice Jones, one
grounded upon the special Verdict, the other upon the Statutes, did conceive,
That an Inholder in some cases might be within these Statutes. Justice Barckley
did conceive upon this special Verdict, that this Inholder was within them;
because it is ^ound, That he got his living by buying and selling, and using
the Trade of an Inholder. And he conceived upon these words, Buying and selling
in the verdict, and getting his living thereby, although that the Jury have
also found him an Inholder, that the same is within the Law. And he agreed,
That he who lives by buying or selling, and not by both, is not within the
Law; but in our case the Jury have found both, And it has been adjudged, That
he who buys and sells cattle, and stocks his ground with them, that he may be a
Bankrupt within those Statutes. I agree, that a Scrivener was not within 13
Eliz. for he does not live by buying and selling, but by making use of the
moneys of other men; but now he is within 21 Iac. But in our case the Inholder
buys his grass, hay, and grains, and provision also for his Guests, and by
selling of them he lives. But he agreed, That if the Jury had found, that he
was an Inholder only, and not that he did get his living by buying and selling,
that in that case, he was out of the Law: And for these reasons, he did
conceive, That this Inholder, as by the special Verdict is found, was within
the Statutes of 13 Eliz. and 21 Iacobi. Justice Jones: An Inholder may be, or
not be within these Laws upon this difference. That Inholder who gets his
living merely by buying and selling (as many of the Inholders here in London
do) they are within these Statutes: But those who have Lands of their own, and
have hay and grain and all their provisions of their own, as many have in the
Country; those are not within the Statutes. Farther he said, That buying and
selling does not make men within these Statutes, for then all men should be
within the Statutes; but they ought to be meant of them who gain the greatest
part of their living thereby, and live chiefly or absolutely thereby. But
Bramston chief Justice, and Justice Crook were clear of Opinion, that an
Inholder could not be a Bankrupt neither by the Statutes, nor according as it
is found by the special Verdict. And their reason was, because that an Inholder
does not live by buying and selling, for he does not sell any thing, but utter
it: He which sells any thing does it by way of contract; but an Inholder does
not contract with his Guests, but provides for them, and cannot take
unreasonable rates, as he who sells may; and if he does, he may be Indicted of
Extortion, which the seller cannot. Wherefore they concluded, that an Inholder
is not within the Statute of 13 Eliz. and 1 Iac. Justice Crook remembered these
Cases; Webb an Inholder of Vxbridge brewed in his house, and sold his Beer to
his Guests: And it was adjudged in the Exchequer, that it was not within the
Statute of Brewers. And Bedells Case, who being a Farmer bought and sold
cattle; and adjudged, that he was not a Bankrupt within these Statutes. And he
put th^se cases upon this reason, That where the Statutes said, Get their
living by buying and selling, that it ought to b^^or the greater part; that
they gain the greater part of their living thereby. And he said, that if a
Gentleman buy and sell Land he is not within the Statutes; for it ought to be
taken, those who buy and sell personal things. The second point. It was agreed
by all, that Copyhold is within the Statute of 13 Eliz. and 1 Iac. First,
because it is no prejudice to the Lord, because there ought to be composition
with the Lord, and the Vendee; And although the sale ought to be by Indenture,
yet the Vendee ought to be admitted by the Lord. And the difference in Heydons
case in 3 Rep. was agreed. Secondly, It is expressly within 13 Eliz. and
therefore within 1 Iac. also by way of recital, although the Statute of 1 Iac.
has new provisions. And by the Statute of 21 Iac. it was said, That these
Statutes shall be construed most beneficial for the Creditors, because their
ground is suum cuique tribuere, 5 Eliz. Dyer. Vmpton and Hides Case, The Acts
of Explanation shall be taken most beneficial and liberally. And the Statute of
13 Eliz. says expressly, That the Commissioners shall dispose of Lands, as well
Copy as Free. But although a Copyhold be not within the later part of 13 Eliz.
expressly, yet by connection it is. And the Statute of 13 Eliz. guides the
Statutes 1 and 21 Iacobi. Justice Jones did agree, That the Copyhold is within
13 Eliz. but not the person of the Copyholder, although the person be within 1
Iac. And the chief Justice said, That his Opinion was, that upon the Statute of
21 Iac. which is, That these Statutes shall he taken liberally: that Copyholds,
although they had not been named, had been within these Statutes. It was said
by Justice Barckley, who argued for the Defendant. That the verdict has not
found within 13 Eliz. because the verdict has not found fraud expressly, but
badges only thereof. See Meriel Littletons Case in the Chancellor of Oxfords
Case, That the Fraud ought to be expressly found, but so it is not here; for
here it is found, that the Son was an Infant at the time of the purchase; and
also that the purchase was with the money o^ the Father, which are only
inducements of Fraud: But he argued it was within 1 Iac. because the Father
has caused o^ procured this conveyance to his child, as the Statute speaks And
here is Fraud apparent, Et quod constat clare non deb^verificari, And therefore
if a man enfeoff his Son, it is Fra^^ apparent, and ought not to be found
particularly. But it was resolved by all the other Justices, That here was not
fraud apparent, and therefore it ought to be found by the Jury. The third and
chief point in this Case was, He being no Inholder at the time of the purchase,
and afterward becoming an Inholder, whether he were within the Statute of 13
Eliz. And it was resolved he was not. But here Justice Barckley, who argued for
the Defendant, was against it. And he argued, that if a man purchase and sell,
and afterward become a Tradesman and Bankrupt, that that was not within the
Statute; but if he keeps the Land in his hands, there he conceived him within
the Statute, as it was in this case. And he was against the Book of the
Chancellor of Oxfords Case, of relation to divest the Advowson; and he said, It
is not like to the Case in 6 and 7 Eliz. there cited. I^ Eriches Case in the 5
Rep. there is a Rule taken, that A verbis legis non est recedendum; and in our
Case it is within the express words of the Statute, which are, That if any
person which hereafter shall become a Bankrupt, etc. And here, he after became
a Bankrupt. But it was resolved by the others, with whom Justice Barckley did
concur after, that it was not within the Statute. Justice Crook argued, That it
is not within the words of the Statute, which are, If the offender purchase,
and that the sale shall be good against the offender: and here, he was not
offender at the time of the purchase; and using no Trade, shall he be punished
for that after? Besides, here the so^ should be punished for the offense of the
Father, which the Law of God will not suffer. Smith and Cullamers Case, 2 Rep.
he ought to be endebted at the time, otherwise he is no offender; And he might
give away his goods before he was in Debt. And the mischief here will be, That
Lands purchased 40 years before should thereby be defeated. And I hold, that it
a man ba a Tradesman, and afterward leaves his Trade, and th^n purchases, and
afterward becomes a Tradesman again, and a Bankrupt, that he is not within the
Statute. But Justice Jones was of opinion, that i^ he be a Tradesman at the
time, although not an offender, yet he is within the Statute. But the chief
Justice did argue, that he ought to be an offender, and the thing which makes
him to be an offender is his intent to defraud his creditors. Jones: It shall
be hard in this Case to cause the estate to be reached by this Statute, for
perhaps it was for the marriage of the son, and perhaps the son might sell it,
and after the father become Bankrupt, it would be hard to void the sale. The
Chancellor of Oxfords case was a stronger case, for there the party was
Indicted. And if a man be Accomptant to the King, and afterward sell, yet the
sale shall be avoided by the King. But if he be not accomptant and ^ell^th, and
afterward becomes Accomptant, the sale shall not be defeated. And here he
became Inholder after the purchase, and being a clear man at the time of the
purchase, he shall not now be within the Statute. Chief Justice: If that should
be permitted, all things which the party did should be defeated, and therefore
he agreed, That although he be a Tradesman, yet if he be not in debt; if he
purchase for another, or give unto another, if no fraud be found, it is not
within the Statutes. And Judgment accordingly was given for the Plaintiff.

Young against Fowler.
68. YOung brought an Action upon the Case against Fowler for disturbing of him
to execute the Office of Register to the Bishop of Rochester; and upon Not
guilty, pleaded: the Jury gave a special verdict. They found that the Office
was granted by one Bishop to one for life, which was confirmed by the Dean and
Chapter; which Bishop died, and afterward John Young was created Bishop. And
then they found that the Office was grantable in Reversion time out of mind,
etc. And that John Young Bishop did grant the said Office of Register to John
Young his son now Plaintiff in Reversion. (And that the Office was to be
executed by the said John Young or his Deputy, which John Young the son was but
of the age of 11 years at the time of the Grant; but they found that he was of
full age before the Tenant for life died. And then they found that John Young
the Bishop died; and that his Successor granted the Office to the Defendant,
who executed many things concerning the Office: And whether upon the whole
matter the Defendant were a disturber or not, was the Question: And it was
adjudged by all the Justices without any solemn and open argument, that the
Defendant was a disturber: But the case was argued by Counsel on both sides,
whose arguments and reasons were briefly following. Maynard for the Plaintiff;
There are two points. 1. Whether the grant be good within the Statute of 1
Eliz. 2ly, Whether the Grant to an Infant be good: And he held it was, because
it was to be executed by his Deputy. The word of the Statute of 1 Eliz. are,
[Of any thing belonging to the Bishoprick] and in our Case the Office of
Registry is belonging to the Bishopric. The second doubt is, Whether the Grant
in Reversion be convenient; and I hold it is, although not absolutely, yet
necessarily: And therefore we are to see, 1. What conveniencie is requisite;
and 2. Whether such conveniencie be within the Law: For that, it ought to be
enquired, How this office has used to be granted, and the use ought to guide
the conveniencie. See the Bishop of Salisburies Case; a grant of an Office to
two, which has not been used to be so granted, is not good. Pase. 1 Car. Rot.
207. the Bishop of Chichesters Case. Where the Question was upon the usual
Grant of Fees: and there because it was found that there was a grant of greater
Fees than the use and custom warranted; It was adjudged good for so much as
the custom did warrant, and void for the residue. And the Statute it self
speaks of usual Rent; all which proves, That use ought to guide the
conveniencie. 2d Point, That the grant to an Infant was good, because it is
granted to be executed by his Deputy. I grant, that an Infant cannot be an
Attorney, because an Attorney cannot make a Deputy. And this Grant is not
inconvenient ex natura rei, neither to the Grantor, nor to the Grantee. 1. It
is not inconvenient ex natura rei, for such an Office is grantable to one and
his heirs, which by possibility may descend to an Infant, and there he shall
execute it by Deputy; and the same inconvenience is in this Case, if there be
any* And if the execution of an Office may be by Deputy where the party is not
able, the same reason is in this Case. 2. It is not inconvenient to the
Grantor, because as it is presumed, when a man grants an Office to one and his
heirs, that he s^^s that the same by possibility may descend to an Infant; so
he says in our Case, at the time of the grant, he is an Infant. 3. It is not
inconvenient to the Grantee, for it is for his benefit. 27 H. 8. 28. 8 E. 4. 7.
But here it may be objected, That this Office does concern the Commonwealth,
and if the Infant commit any offense he shall not be punished, because i^
should be inconvenient: To that I answer, that the Infant ought to execute it
by his sufficient Deputy, and he himself shall be charged for any escape, and
by forfeiture of his Office as any other may. Besides, you shall never
prejudice any i^ praesenti, for the future prejudice which by possibility may
happen to the Commonwealth, 10 E. 6. 14. Stone and Knights Case. Hill. 3 Car.
Rot. 119. An Infant was bound by arbitrament. Trin. 3 Car. Rot. 119. An Infant
was bound for hi^ schooling. But it may be farther objected, That it concerns
the administration of Justice, which an Infant cannot do. To which I answer,
that he may make a Deputy, who ought to be adjudged sufficient by the Ordinary,
and he may well execute it 26 H. 6. Grants 12. An Infant elected Parson to
serve a Cure who shall be examined by the Ordinary, 21 E. 4. 13. An Infant may
be Mayor, 18 E. 3. 33. 26 E. 3. 63. An Infant who come in by purchase, makes
him more liable than he who comes i^ by descent. But in our Case, the grant a
fortiori shall be good because it is executory. And he took the difference
between an Executory grant as here, which by possibility may be mad^ good, (as
in out Case it was, because that the Grantee was o^ full age before the Office
fell in possession) and where an interest vests immediately: Farther, he
conceived the Case the stronger, because the Deputy came in by the allowance of
the Ordinary. Ward for the Defendant. There are four Questions 1. Whether a
grant to an Infant in possession be good. (...) conceive not; 1. quoad naturam
rei, it is not good, because that by that Grant the Commonwealth is prejudiced.
2. The Office does concern the administration of Justice; and there^fore cannot
be granted in Fee, and by consequence there shall be no descent of such
Judicial Office, as has been objected by Mr. Maynard, 1 Rep. I agree, that the
Grant of a Parkership to an Infant is good and where it was objected, that it
may be prejudicial by possibility, I conceive it apparens nocumentum; as 5 Rep.
101. and therefore the like Nuisance, as the case is there put, may be
destroyed. 9 E. 4, 5. Winters Case, Clerk of the Crown. 12 and 13 Eliz. Dyer
293. 9 Rep. 96. Mich. 40, 41 Eliz. Scamblers case; It was adjudged, That an
Infant is not capable of a Stewardship of a Manor; and the reason is, because
that thereby the Tenants may be prejudiced; so in our Case the Commonwealth.
Trin. 13 Car. Rot. 493. our very case in the Common Pleas, was adjudged.
Further, an Infant is not capable of this Office, because Misfeasans and
Nonfeasans may be, and he shall not be punished for it; for an Infant at the
Common Law, is not liable to an Action of Wast, or an Action upon the case. 8
Rep. 95. Doct. and Stud. The 2. Question, Whether the Grant to him and his
Deputy, make the Grant good: I hold it does not. 7 Eliz. Dyer 238. b. 9 Rep.
38. 10 E. 4. 1. 39 H. 6. 54. The Officer is chargeable for his Deputy, and not
the Deputy himself: And if it be so, if this Grant should be good, here should
be a Misdemeanor in the Office, and none should be punished for it; which
should be inconvenient: for the Deputy cannot be charged, nor the Officer in
our Case, because he is an Infant, and therefore the Grant is not good. The 3.
Quest. Whether this subsequent Act of the Infant coming of full age, before the
falling of the Office into possession, has made the Grant good. I hold, that
not, upon the common Rule, Quod initio non valet, etc. So is the Bishop o^
Salisburies Case, Sir George Reignalls Case, and 27 H. 6. 10. The 4. Question,
Whether this Grant in Reversion to a man of full age, be good at the Common
Law? and I hold it is not; because it is a judicial Office, which is not
grantable in Reversion: with which agrees 11 Rep. Auditor Curles Case. The 5
Question, Whether it be within the Statute of 1 Eliz. And I hold it is not,
because that must take effect from the time of the granting of it, as the
Statute speaks. 6. I conceive it is not a necessary Grant, because it is not
within the exception of the Statute, Et exceptio firmat Regulam. It was
objected, That Usage makes these Grants good. I conceive the contrary, That
Usage is not a Rule to measure a thing, whether it be convenient or not. And a
grant may be good, which is not used. And the Courts of Justice ought to judge
what is convenient or necessary, and what not. So in Litt. and the
Commentaries, Say and Smiths case. Besides, it is not Necessary, for he stands
but for a Cipher, and does nothing, and therefore not Necessary. Besides, it is
inconvenient, and takes from the Successor honorem munificentiae, for by the
same reason that he may grant one, he may grant all the Offices in Reversion,
so as his Successors shall not have one to grant; and by this means shall take
away a flower of the Bishopric. 10. Rep. 61. a. The Opinion of Popham Chief
Justice: An Office is not Grantable in Reversion by the Bishop. But the Court
was clear of Opinion, without Argument for the Plaintiff, That the Grant is
good. Crook he denied that such an Office is not grantable in Fee, and
instanced in the Ushers Office and Chamberlains of the Exchequer, which are
Judicial Offices, and yet granted in Fee: And it was denied that this is an
Office of Judicature, but Ministerial only. To that which was objected, That
the Action does not lie against an Infant; It was answered, That an Action upon
the case does lie against an Infant Executor; an Action upon the Case will lie
against an Infant for a Nuisance, or for words, by the common Law. And in our
Case he shall forfeit his Office. An^ Infant may be Executor, in which greater
confidence and trust is reposed; and in our Case the Grant to an Infant is not
void ab initio, but voidable only upon contingent; And (...) conceive, that if
the usage will warrant it, That he may grant all the Offices in Reversion: and
upon that difference depends the Opinion of Popham, in the 10. Rep. for there
it does not appear, that the Custom was to grant in Reversion: And therefore it
was not good. Barckley: The King may grant i^ Reversion without any Custom. 9
Eliz. Savages Case. And there is no question, but that Custom may make an
Office grantable in Reversion, in the case of a common person. 1 H. 7. Crofts
case. Also the case of the Usher of the Exchequer granted in Fee. And there is
no question, but a Judicial Office may be granted to one and his Heirs. And the
Office of Warden of the Fleet, which is an Office of great trust, is granted in
Fee. And as such Offices may descend to an Infant; so a Feme covert may have
such an Office, for she may have a husband who may execute it; and so an Infant
may have a deputy. 7 H. 6. There is a difference amongst Infants; an Infant,
before the Statute of 10 Eliz. might have been Presented to a Benefice, and he
was Parson de facto. So a mere Lay man: but the same ought to be understood of
an Infant who was of age of discretion. A Preb^ndary was granted to Prideaux,
at the age of 3 years, and was adjudged void, because he was not of age of
discretion; but if he had been, it had been good. And I conceive, that it is
necessary and convenient that it should be granted in Reversion, for by that
means the Office would never be vacant, and should be always provided of those
who were sufficient to execute it. So in our Case the Infant may be instruct^d
before he come of full age. And farther, as an Infant when he is Presented, is
to be allowed or disallowed by the Ordinary; so the Deputy is by the Court. The
Statute of 1 El. makes against you; for although it be not within it, yet it
may be good at the common Law, like the concurrent Lease, which is good at the
common Law, and not within the Statute of 1 Eliz. The rest of the Justices did
all agree with Barckley. And Justice Jones said, that Scamblers Case, cited by
my Lord Coke in Institutes 3. b. was adjudged contrary, That an Infant was
capable of a Stewardship in Reversion; and he said that it was adjudged in the
Exchequer, that an Ignorant man was capable of an Office in Reversion; which
does not differ from our Case.

Sir John Saint-Johns Case.
69. THe Lady Cromwell was possessed of diverse Leases, and conveyed them in
trust, and afterward married with the said Sir John Saint-Iohn; and afterward
she received the money which came of the trust, and with part of it she bought
Jewels, and part she left in Money, and died. And Sir John Saint-Iohn took
Letters of Administration of the goods of the Wife: And the Ecclesiastical
Court would make him accomptable for the Jewels, and for the Money; and to put
them into an Inventory. And the Opinion of the Court was, That he should not
put them into the Inventory, because the property is absolutely in the husband,
and he has them not as Administrator; but things in action he shall have as
Administrator, and shall be accomptable for them: and in that case a
Prohibition was granted as to the Money. It was moved again this Term, That the
Lady Saint-Iohn did receive part of the Money, put it out, and took Bonds for it
in the names of others, to her use; and the Spiritual Court would have him
account for that, and thereupon a Prohibition was prayed; but the Court would
not grant it. And there Barckley differed in Opinion, and so did the Court,
some being for it, and some against it. The reason given wherefore the
Prohibition should not be granted, was, because the Money received upon the
trust, is in Law, the Moneys of the Trustees, and the wife has no remedy for
it, but in Court of Equity; and therefore that the husband should have it as
Administrator. The reason urged wherefore the Prohibition should be granted,
was, because here the trust was executed, when the wife had received the Money,
and by the Receipt the husband had gained property therein as husband, and
therefore should not be accomptable for it. Farther, here the Ecclesiastical
Court should determine the trust, of which they have no Jurisdiction, for they
have not a Court of Equity. And the Court ruled, That the Counsel should move
in Chancery for a Prohibition, for in Equity the money did belong to the wife.
And here it was agreed, That if the Trustees consent that the wife shall
receive the money, as in our Case the contrary does not appear, that there the
husband might gain a property as husband; but because the Court conceived, that
the Ecclesiastical Court had not Jurisdiction, a Prohibition was granted. And
here it was agreed, That if a woman do convey a Lease in trust, for her use,
and afterward marries, that in such case, it lies not in the power of the
husband to dispose of it; and if the wife die, the husband shall not have it,
but the Executor of the wife; and so it was said, it was resolved in Chancery.

70. Barckley and Crook, there being no other Justice at that time in Court,
said, That upon a Petition to the Archbishop, or any other Ecclesiastical
Court, no Prohibition lies. But there ought to be a Suit in the Ecclesiastical
court. And by them, a Libel may be in the Ecclesiastical court, for not
repairing a way that leads to Church, but not for repairing of a highway:
and upon suggestion that the Libel was for repairing a highway, a Prohibition
was granted.

71. Many Indictments were exhibited severally, against several men, because
each by himself, suffered his door to be unrepaired, and it was showed in the
Indictments, that every one of them ought to repair: And thereupon it was
moved, that they might be quashed; but the Court would not quash them without
certificate, that the parties had repaired their doors; but it was granted,
that Process should be stayed, upon motion of Counsel that reparation should be
immediately done. But at the same time, many Indictments, for not repairing of
the highway, which the Parishioners ought to have repaired, according as it
was found by Verdict, the same Term were quashed for the same defect: But in
truth, there was another fault in the Indictment, for that it was joint one
only, whereas there ought to have been several Indictments; but they were
quashed for the first defect.

72. A Replevin was brought in an Inferior Court, and no Pledges de retorno
habendo, were taken by the Sheriff, according to the Statute of West. 2. c. 2.
After the Plaint was removed into this Court by a Recordari, and after Verdict
given, it was moved in arrest of Judgment, want of Pledges; for th^se reasons,
because the Pledges de retorno habendo, are given by that Statute, as 2 H. 6.
15. and 9. H. 6. 42. b. And that Statute says, That Pledges shall be taken by
the Sheriff, and therefore no other can take them, notwithstanding that Pledges
might be found here in Court. And 3 H. 6. 3. and F. N. B. 72. a. say, That
where Pledges are found, that they shall remain, notwithstanding the removal of
the Plaint by Recordari: and the reason is, because the Sheriff is a special
Officer, chosen to that purpose by the Statute, and therefore no other can take
them. Besides, there would be a failer of Justice, if the Court should put in
Pledges, for then there might be no remedy against the Sheriff, for that he
found no Pledges, and no remedy against the Pledges, because they are not found
according to the Statute, and so a failer of Justice; and by that means the
Sheriff should frustrate and avoid the Statute; for no Pledges should ever be
found, and so he should take advantage of his own laches and wrong. Farther, it
was objected, that these proceedings are the judicial act of the Court, and
therefore the Court will not alter or diminish them. L. Entries 1. and 3 H. 6.
And farther, it was said, That the cases of Young and Young, and Dr. Hussies
case, adjudged in this Court, That Pledges may be found at any time before
Judgment were, in Action upon the Case, and not in Replevine, as our case is,
for which there is special Provision made by the Statute. But it was answered,
and agreed by the whole Court, that Pledges may be found by this Court: for the
Pledges given by the Statute of West. 2. are only to give remedy against the
Sheriff; and if the Sheriff do not his duty, but surceaseth, we may as at the
Common Law put in Pledges, and yet notwithstanding remedy may be against the
Sheriff upon the Statute for his neglect. And farther it was agreed, That
Pledges may be found at any time before Judgment, as in Young and Youngs Case,
and Dr. Hussies Case it was adjudged: And Judgment was affirmed.

73. There can be no second Execution granted out, before that the first be
returned.

74. Two Joyntenants of a Rectory agree with some of their Parishioners, that
they shall pay so much for Tithes: and notwithstanding, one of them sueth for
Tithes in the Ecclesiastical court; and a Prohibi^ion was prayed, because that
one of them cannot sue without the other; and the Court would not grant it: and
their reason was, because although that one of them cannot sue without the
other by our Law; yet perhaps, the spiritual Court will permit it.

75. Husband and Wife brought a Writ of conspiracy, and it was adjudged that
it would not lie. And Jones cited this case, That Husband and Wife brought an
Action upon the Case against another for words, viz. That the Husband and Wife
had bewitched another; and it was not good, because that the wife cannot join
for Conspiracy made against the husband, nor for trespass of Battery, as the
Book is, 9 E. 4. But Justice Crook was of Opinion* That the Conspiracy would
well lie, because that the Indictment was matter of Record, and therefore not
merely Personal: but the whole Court was against him: and Justice Barckley took
the difference, where they sue for Per^onal wrong done to them, there they
shall not join; but where they have a joyn^ Interest, as in case of a Quare
impedit, there they shall join.

Thurston against Ummons in Error to Reverse a Judgment in Bristow.
76. THurston brought an Action upon the Case against Vmmons, and declared,
That the Defendant brought an Action against him, at the Suit of Hull, and
without his privity: And thereupon did arrest and imprison the Plaintiff, by
reason whereof all his Creditors came upon him, and thereby that he had lost
his Credit, etc. And a Verdict was found for the Plaintiff, and thereupon Error
brought; and two Errors were alleged. 1. That the Action will not lie, because
in truth there was a just Debt due to Hull, in whose name he sued. 2. Because
it is not showed, that the causes of Actions, which the other Creditors had
against him, did arise within the Jurisdiction of the Court of Bristow. And
notwithstanding the first Error alleged, Judgment was affirmed by the whole
Court upon this difference; where Hull himself sueth or commenceth Suit against
the Plaintiff, there although by that Suit he draw all the Creditors upon the
back of him, and so perhaps undo him, yet because it was a lawful act; no
Action upon the Case lies against him: But where one commenceth Suit against
another, in the name of another, and without his privity, that is Maintenance,
which is a tortious Act, and therefore an Action will lie: so in the principal
case. As to the second Error alleged, the Court differed in Opinion. Barkley:
That the damages were ill assessed, because they were given as well for the
Actions brought by the other Creditors. But Justice Bramston contra, That the
damages were well assessed, because that the Actions brought by the Creditors
were added for aggravation only, and the cause of the Action was the Arrest and
Imprisonment, like the case where a man speaks words which are in part
actionable, and others only put in for aggravation, and damages is assessed for
the whole, it is good. There was a third Error assigned, That the Venire facias
was, de Warda omnium Sanctorum de Bristow, without showing in what Parish.

Child against Greenhil.
77. Child brought Trespass against Greenhill for Fishing in seperali piscaria
of the Plaintiff, and declared that the Defendant pisces ipsius cepit, etc. And
Verdict found for the Plaintiff. And it was moved by Saint-Iohn in Arrest of
Judgment, because the Plaintiff declared of taking of pisces suos, whereas the
Plaintiff, they being ferae naturae, has not property in them. Register 94,
95. and F. N. B. and Book Entries. 666. No count, that the Defendant cepit
pisces ipsiu^, but ad valentiam, etc. without ipsius. So Fines Case in Dyer. 7
H. 6. 36. 10 H. 7. 6. 12 H. 8. 10. by Brudnell. 13 E. 4. 24. 7 Rep. case of
Swannes. And the Book of 22 H. 6. 59. is overruled by the case of Swannes. 34
H. 6. 24. And the same is matter of substance, and therefore not helped after
Verdict. An Action of Trover and Conversion against husband and wife quia
converterunt, is not good, and it is not helped after Verdict, because it is
matter of substance. Rolls for the Defendant; I agree, that lepores suos, or
pisces suos, without any more, is not good. But where he brings an Action of
Trespass for taking them in his Soil, there it is good, because it is within
his Soil. So in our case, for taking pisces suos in his several Piscary: and
with this difference agree 22 H. 6. 59. 43 E. 3. 24. so Regist. 93, and 102. 23
H. 6. tit. Tresp. 59. and 14 H. 8. 1. and the Book of 43 E. 3. says, That in
Trespass, the Writ shall not say, Damam suam, if he do not say, that it was
taken in his Park or Warren, or says damam domitam, or as the Book is in 22 H.
6. in my Soil or Land; and by Newton, he shall say there damas suis. And admit
that it was not good, yet I hold, that it is helped after Verdict, because it
is not matter of Substance; for whether they be pisces suos or not, the
Plaintiff shall recover damages. Justice Barckly: It is true, that in a general
sense they cannot be said pisces ipsius, but in a particular sense they may;
and a man may have a special or qualified property in things which are ferae
naturae, three ways; ratione infirmitatis, ratione loci, and ratione
privilegii: and in our case the Plaintiff ^ath them by reason of Privilege.
And it was agreed by the whole Court, That Judgment should be affirmed, upon
the very difference taken by Rolls, that where a man brings Trespass for taking
pisces suos, or lepores suos, etc. and the like, that the Action will not lie.
But if he bring Trespass for fishing in his several Piscary, as in our Case, or
for breaking of his Close, and taking lepores suos, etc. there it will lie.

Pitfield against Pearce.
78. IN an Ejectione firm, the Case was thus. Thomas Pearce the Father, was
seized of Lands in Fee, and by Deed, in consideration of Marriage, did give and
grant this Land to John Pearce, the now Defendant, his second Son, and to his
Heirs after his death, and no Livery was made: Thomas Pearce died, the Eldest
Son entered, and made a Lease to the Plaintiff, who entered, and upon Ejectment
by the Defendant, brought an Ejectione firm. Twisden: The only question is,
whether any estate passes to the Son by the Deed; and it was said, there did,
and that by way of Covenant. And it was agreed, That in this Case if Livery had
been made it had been void, because that a Freehold cannot begin at a day to
come. But I may Covenant to stand seized to the use of my Son after my death.
So a man may surrender a Copyhold, to take effect after a day to come. Com.
301. So a man may bargain and sell at a day to come. 1 Mar. Dyer. 96.
Chudleighs Case. 129. 20 H. 6. 10. A use is but a trust betwixt the parties,
and 7 Rep. 400. There need not express words of Covenant, to stand seized to an
use. 25 Eliz. Blithman and Blithmans case, 8 Rep. 94. Besides, these words dedi
and concessi, are general words, and therefore may comprehend Covenant: and
words shall be construed, that the Deed may stand, if it may be. 8 Ass. 34. 7
E. 3. 9. But I agree, that if the intent appears that it shall pass by
transmutation of possession, that there it shall be so taken; but here his
intent does not appear to be so, for if there should be Livery, then the son
should take nothing, for the reason before given, which is against his meaning.
Mich. 21 Iac. Rot. 2220. Buckler and Simons Case. Dyer 202. Vinions case. The
cases cited before, are in the future tense, but the words are here, I give,
etc. 36 Eliz. Callard and Callards Case; Stand forth Eustace, reserving an
estate to my self and my wife, I do give thee my Land: and the better Opinion
was, That in that case it did amount to a Livery, being upon the Land, for his
intent is apparent. Mich. 41 and 42 Eliz. Trelfe and Popwells Case, adjudged in
such case, That an use shall be raised: For which it was concluded, that in
this case there is a good estate raised to John Pearce by way of Covenant.
Rolls: I conceive, that not estate is raised to John Pearce by this conveyance.
It was objected, That it shall inure by way of Covenant, to raise an use. I
agree, that if the meaning of the party may appear that he intended to pass his
estate by way of raising of an use, otherwise not. And here is no such
appearance. Foxes Case in 8 Rep. is a stronger case; and here it does not
appear that he meant to pass it by way of use. But by the word [give] he
intended transmutation of possession. 8 Rep. Bedells case, Mich. 18. Car. Rot.
2220. in the Common Pleas it was adjudged, That a gift of a Remainder after the
death of the grantor was void; wherefore he concluded for the Plaintiff, and so
Judgment was given by the whole Court. And Justice Jones said, When a man makes
a doubtful Conveyance, it shall be intended a Conveyance at the Common Law. And
it shall not be intended that the Father would make him Tenant for life only
punishable of wast.

Mich. 15o Car' in the Kings Bench.
79. IT was moved for a Prohibition to the Counsel of the Marches, and the Case
was such: A man seized of Lands in Fee, made a Feoffment to the use of himself
for life, the remainder in tail to I. S. He in the remainder Levied a Fine. And
the Counsel of the Marches, upon a surmise, That the Tenant for life died
seized, according to their Instructions, would settle the possession upon the
heir of Tenant for life, against the Conusee. For their Instructions were made,
That where a man had the possession by the space of three years, that the same
should be settled upon him, until trial at Law were had. But the whole Court
was against it, because it does appear that he had but an estate for life, and
so the possession appertained to him in the remainder. And here it was said by
Justice Barckley, that their Opinion has been, That the possession of Tenant
for life should be the possession of him in the Remainder, as to this purpose.
Note that the Principal case here was (although the Case before put was also
agreed for Law) thus: Tenant in Tail levied a Fine, to the use of himself for
Life, the remainder in Fee to I. S. and died: In that Case the Council in the
Marches would settle the possession upon the heir of Tenant in tail, against
the Purchaser, who held in by the Fine which had barred the estate tail, by
which the Issue claimed; and the whole Court was against it, for which cause a
Prohibition was granted.

80. Habeas corpora was directed to the Porter of Ludlore, to bring the bodies
of John Shield and William Shield into the Kings Bench; the case shortly (as
appears upon the retorn) was this. Powell the Father brought a Bill, in the
nature of an Information, against the said John and William Shield, before the
Council of the Marches in Wales, for an unlawful Practice, Combination, and
Procurement of a clandestine Marriage in the night, betwixt Mary Shield a
Maidservant, and the Son of Powell, who was a Gentleman of good credit and
worth, the Parson also being Drunk, as he himself swear, and the same also
being without Banes or License; for which offense they were severally Fined to
the King, and an hundred Marks damages given to the Plaintiff, and farther
ordered by the Council, that they should be imprisoned till they paid their
several fines to the King, and damages to the Party, and found Sureties to be
bound in Recognisance for their good behavior, for one year, and till they
knew the farther Order of the Council: and these were the causes which were
returned. And upon this retorn, Glynn, who was of Counsel with the Prisoners,
moved many things; and many of them, as was conceived by the Court, altogether
impertinent. But the Objections which were pertinent were these. First, That
the Council of the Marches, as this case is, have no Jurisdiction, because the
clandestine Marriage is a thing merely Spiritual, and therefore not within
their instructions. The second was, That they have exceeded their Instructions,
in that they have given damages to the party above fifty pounds. For by their
Instructions, they ought not to hold Plea where the Principal or Damages exceed
fifty pounds. But as to the first he said, there may be this Objection* That
they did not punish them for the clande^^in^. Marriag^ which in truth is a
thing merely Spiritual, but for the unlawful Practice and Combination, and for
the execution of it. To which he answered, That they have not Juristiction of
the Principal, and therefore not of the Accessory: (here note that it was
afterward said by Bramston Chief Justice, That the unlawful Practice and
Combination was the Principal, and the clandestine Marriage but the Accessory;
which was not contradicted by any.) Farther, it was objected by Glynn, That
they were Imprisoned for the damages of the Plaintiff, and it does not appear,
whether it was at the Prayer of the Party, as he ought by the Law. Banks, the
Kings Atturny-General contrary. And as to the first, Their Instructions give
them power to hold Plea of unlawful Practices and Assemblies: And this is an
unlawful Practice and Assembly, and therefore within their Instructions: And
although that Heresy, and clandestine Marriage, and such offenses, per se are
not within their Instructions, yet being clad with such unlawful circumstances
and practices, they are punishable by them. As to the second he said, The
Instruction which restrains them that they do not hold Plea above fifty
pounds, is only in civil Actions, at the several suit of the party: But there
is another Instruction, which gives them power, where the cause is criminal, to
assess damages according to the quality of the Offense, and at their
discretions. As to the third Objection, he said, That the Retorn, being that
they were in execution for the damages, it ought to be meant at the Prayer of
the Party, otherwise it could not be. For which causes he prayed th^^ the
Prisoners might be remanded. And the whole Court (Crook being absent) were
clear upon this Retorn, That they should be remanded; because it appears that
their Fines to the King were not paid: And therefore, although that the other
matters had been adjudged for them, yet they ought to be remanded for that one.
And as to the Objections which were made, the Court agreed with Mr. Attorney,
except in the point of Damages, and for the same reasons given by him. But as
to the point of the Damages, whether they have gone beyond their Instructions,
and so exceeded their power in giving above fifty pounds damages or not; It
seemed to the Court they had; and as it seemed to them, if the Retorn had been,
That the Kings Fines were paid, it would have been hard to maintain that the
assessing above fifty pounds damages, was not out of their Instructions: but
because the Kings Fines were not paid, they were Remanded, without respect had
thereunto; for the reasons given before.

81. It was said by the Court, That when Judgment is given in this Court
against another, and Execution upon it, and the Sheriff levieth the money; the
Lord Keeper cannot order that the money shall stay in the Sheriffs hands, or
order that the Plaintiff shall not call for it: for notwithstanding such Order
he may call for it. And it was farther said by the Court, That an Attachment
shall not be granted against the High Sheriff for the contempt of his Bailiffs.
And a Writ of Error is a Supersedeas to an Execution; but then there ought to
be notice given to the Sheriff: otherwise, if he notwithstanding serve the
Execution, he shall not run in contempt, for which an Attachment shall be
granted.

82. Sergeant Callis came into Court, and moved this case: Chapman against
Chapman, in Trespass done in Lands within the Duchy of Cornwall, which were
Borough-English, where the custom was, that if there were an estate in Fee in
those Lands, that they should go to the younger Son, according tthe custom;
but if in Tail, the should descend to the Heir at Common Law: And it was moved
by him, that the custom was not good, because it cannot be at one time
customary, and go according to the custom, and at another guildable. And the
whole Court (Crook only being absent) were against him, that the custom was
good.

Hicks against Web.
83. IN Trespass for a way, the Defendant did justify, and said, that he had a
way not only ire, equitare and averia sua fugare; but also carrucis and
carreragiis carriare. The Plaintiff traversed it absque hoc, that he had a way
not only ire, equitare, etc. in the words aforesaid: and thereupon they were at
issue, and found for the Plaintiff. Glynn moved in arrest of Judgment, that the
Issue was ill joined, because it was not a direct affirmative, but by
inducement only. And the whole Court was against him. And Justice Jones said,
That if I say, that not only Mr. Glynn has been at such a place, but also Mr.
Jones, without doubt it is a good affirmative, that both have been there. But
they all agreed, that the pleading was more elegant than formal.

84. In the Case betwixt Brook and Boothe: Justice Barckley said, that it is a
Rule, That if there be two things alleged, and one of necessity ought to be
alleged, and he relies on-only upon the other, it is no double Plea: As if a
man plead a Feoffment with Warranty, and relieth upon the Warranty, it is not
double.

85. Justice Barckley said, That the Court of the Exchequer, they may make a
Lease for three Lives, by the Exchequer-Seal.

Clarke against Spurden.
86. IN a Writ of Error to reverse a Judgment given in the Court of Common
Pleas, the case was shortly thus: A. wife of I.S. intestate, promises to B. to
whom Adnistration was committed, that if he shall relinquish the Administration
at the request of C. and suffer A. to Administer, that A. will discharge B. of
two Bonds. In Assumpsit brought by B. in the common Pleas, he alleged that he
did renounce Administration, and suffered A. to Administer, and that A. had not
discharged him of the two Bonds. And it was found for the Plaintiff. And
thereupon Error was brought, because B. does not show, that he did renounce the
Administration at the request of C. And Rolls for the Plaintiff, in the writ of
Error, did assign the same for Error. Justice Barckley (all the other Justices
being absent) held that it was Error; for consideration is a thing meritorious,
and all ought to be performed, as well the request on the part of C. as the
permission of the part of B. which ought to be showed: For perhaps B. was
compelled to relinquish it in the Ecclesiastical Court, as it might be; for of
right the wife ought to Administer. And therefore it ought to have been
averred, that it was at the request of C. And therefore, if it had been that he
should renounce at the charge of C. it ought to be averred, that it was at the
charge of C. And it was adjourned.

87. A man Libelled in the Spiritual Court, for Tithes for barren cattle: and
it was moved for a Prohibition upon this suggestion, viz. That he had not other
cattle than those which he bred for the Plough and Pale; and thereupon Barckley
being alone there, granted a Prohibition. And the same Parson also Libelled for
Tithes of Conies; and for that also he granted a Prohibition, for they are not
Titheable, if not by custom: And here Barckley said, That if Land be
Titheable, and the Tenant does not plough it, and manure it; yet the Parson may
sue for Tithes in the Ecclesiastical Court.

North against Musgrave.
88. IN Debt upon the Statute of 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. c. 12. the words of
which Statute are, That no man shall take for keeping in pound, impounding, or
poundage of any manner of distress, above the sum of four pence, upon pain of
forfeiture of five pounds, to be paid to the party grieved. And the Plaintiff
showed that his Cattle were distreyned and impounded, and that the Defendant
took of him ten pence for the poundage: And thereupon the Plaintiff brought an
Action for the penalty of five pounds, and found for the Plaintiff. And the
Judgment was, That he should recover the five pounds, and damages, ultra and
praeter the money taken for the poundage. And thereupon a Writ of Error was
brought, and three things assigned for Error. First, because the Action was
brought for the penalty of five pounds only, and not for the six pence which
was taken above the allowance of the Statute, which ought not to be divided.
Which was answered by Justice Barckley (all the other Justices being absent)
That notwithstanding it is good; for true it is, that he cannot bring his
Action for fifty shillings, part of the penalty, because it is entire; but here
are two several penalties, and he may divide and disjoyn them if he will, or he
may wave the six pence. For quilibet potest renunciare, juri pro se introducto.
The second was, That he does not demand that which is ultra and praeter the
four pence given by the Statute: and yet the Judgment is given for that, which
is not good: To which Justice Barckley said, That the Judgment was good. For no
judgment is given for that which is ultra and praeter the four pence, but only
for the four pounds, because he does not demand it. And we cannot judge the
Judgment to be erroneous by Implication. The third Objection was, That Costs
and Damages are given, which ought not to be upon a penal Law. For he ought not
to have more than the Statute gives; and therefore upon the Statute of
Perjury, no Costs are given: so upon the Statute of Gloucester of Wast, the
Plaintiff shall recover no more than the treble value. But Rolls who was on the
contrary, said, That there are many presidents in the common Pleas, that
Damages have been given upon this Statute. But Barckley and Jones, who
afterward came, and seemed to agree with Justice Barckley in the whole, was
against it, That no Damages ought to be given; and desired that the Presidents
might be viewed. But here Rolls offered this difference: Where the penalty
given by the Statute is certain, as here, upon which he may bring Debt, there
he shall recover Damages: but where the penalty is uncertain, as upon the
Statute of Gloucester, for treble damages, the Statute which gives the treble
value, and the like; there, because it is uncertain, he shall have no more*
Barckley asked Mr. Hoddesdon, If the Informer should recover Damages. And he
and Keeling Clerk of the Crown, answered, No; but said Damages should be given
against him* and it was adjourned.

89. Skinner Libelled in the Ecclesiastical Court for the Tithes of Roots, of a
Coppice rooted up. And Porter prayed Prohibition. And it was said by Jones and
Barckley Justice^^ no other Justice being present, That if cause were not
showed before such a day, that a Prohibition should be awarded because it is ad
exheredationem, and utter destruction of (...)* And the Opinion was, that the
Branches should be privileged. And a man shall not pay Tithes of Quarries of
Ston^* And Barckley said, It had been adjudged, That a man shall not pay Tithes
for Brick and Clay.

90 A. said to B. Have thou been at London to change (...) Money thou stolest
from me? And it was Objected, That these words are not actionable, because they
are an Interrogator^ only, and no direct affirmativ^. But by Barckley and Ione^
(the other Justices being absent) the words are actionabl^. For the first
words, Have thou been at London, are the word^ of Interrogation; and the
subsequent words, viz. The (...) thou stolest from me, is a positive
affirmation. And Barckley said, That it had been oftentimes adjudged, That
words (...) Interrogation should be be taken for direct affirmation. Ione^ also
agreed to it; and he said that this Case had been adjudged, That where a man
said to I. S. I dreamed this night that you stole an Horse, That the words are
actionable. And if these and* the like words should not be actionable, a man
might be abusive, and by such subtle words always avoid an Action.

91. A. said of B. that he took away money from him with a strong hand, and
alleged that he spoke those words of him innuendo felo^ice: and for them the
Plaintiff brought an Action upon the Case. And by Barckley and Jones (none
other being present) the Action does not lie: ^or he may take money from him
manu forti, and yet be but a Trespasser; and therefore the Innuendo is void,
for that will not make the words actionable, which are not actionable of
themselves.

92 Justice Jones said, that it was a question, Whether a Bar in one Ejectione
firm, were a Bar in another. And Justice Barckley said, that it is adjudged
upon this difference, That a Bar in one Ejectione firm, is a Bar in another,
for the same Ejectment; but not for another, and new Ejectment: to which Jones
agreed.

Dickes against Fenne.
93. IN an Action upon the Case for words; the words were these: the Defendant
having communication with some of the Customers of the Plaintiff, who was a
Brewer, said, That he would give a peck of Malt to his Mare, and she should
piss as good Beer as Dickes does Brew. And that he laid ad grave damnum etc.
Porter for the Defendant; that the words are not actionable o^ themselves; and
because the Plaintiff has alleged no special Damage, as loss of his Custom,
etc. the Action will not (...) Rolls: that the words are actionable: and he
said, that it had been adjudged here, That i^ ^ne say of a Brewer, That he
brews naughty Beer, without more saying, these words are actionable, without
any special damage alleged. But the whole Court was against him (Crook only
absent) That the words of themselves, were not actionable, without alleging
special damage; as the loss of his Custom, etc. which is not here. And
therefore not actionable. And Barckley said, That the words are only
comparative, and altogether impossible also. And he said, that it had been
adjudged, that where one says of a Lawyer, That he had as much Law as a Monkey,
that the words were not actionable; because he has as much Law, and more also.
But if he had said, That he has no more Law than a Monkey, those words were
actionable. And it was adjorned.

Hodges and Simpsons Case.
94. A Man brought an Action of Trover and Conversion against husband and wife,
of two Garbes, Anglice, Sheaves of Corn; and said that they did convert those
sheaves ad usum ipsorum, viz. of the Husband and Wife. And here were two things
moved by Hyde. First, that he showed the Conversion to be of two Garbes,
Anglice, Sheaves of Corn: which plea is naught and uncertain. And Courts ought
to have certainty; but here it is not showed, what Corn it was. And the Anglice
is void, and therefore no more than Trover and Conversion of so many Sheaves,
which is altogether uncertain; and therefore not good. The other thing is, That
the Plaintiff says, that the conversion was ad usum ipsorum, which cannot be,
for the wife has no property during the life of the husband; and therefore
cannot be ad usum ipsorum. And he cited two Judgments in the point, where it
was adjudged accordingly. And Justice Barckley said, that it had been many
times so adjudged. But Justice Jones said, that there may be a Conversion by
the wife to her use, as in this case to bake the Barley into bread, and to eat
it her self. And Bramston Chief Justice said, that a wife has a capacity to
take to her own use; for there ought of necessity to be property in the wife,
before the husband can have by gift in Law: and they desired to see Presidents.
And therefore it was adjourned, as to this point. But by the whole Court, the
other was not good.

More of the Case of North and Musgrave.
95. MAynard for the Plaintiff, in the Writ of Error, That the Judgment was
erroneous: First, because the damages and costs were given, where none ought to
be given, being a penal Law: and therefore no more than the penalty shall be
recovered. And he remembered the rule taken in Pilfords case. 10 Rep. 116. a.
and he cited diverse Presidents also for it. Cokes Book of Entries 31 and 41.
And Presidents upon the Statute of Perjury. 38, 39. Secondly, because he
divided the Penalty given by the Statute, which ought not to be, for by such
means the offender should be doubly vexed; for he might sue him after for the
six pence praeter and ultra that which was taken for the distress. And he said,
it is like to the case of an Annuity, which is entire and cannot be divided.
Thirdly, he said, That the Judgment it self was erroneous, because that
Judgment is given for more than he demands. For the Judgment is, quod recuperet
5. li. ultra and praeter, that which is above the 4 d. given by the Statute.
Rolls contrary, that the Damages and Costs are well given; and the same is out
of the rule of Pilfords case: because that the Action is no new action, but the
thing is a new thing, for which the old Action is given: And the Damages and
Costs are here given for the Suit and Delay, and not for the Offense. And he
cited also Presidents for him, viz. The new Book of Entries 163, 164. For the
second point, he said, That they are several penalties which are given, and
therefore he might bring his Action severally for them, if he would. As to the
third point, That Judgment is given for more than the party declares: it is not
so, for then the Judgment shall be made vicious by Implication, which ought not
to be. And as to dividing of the penalty and Judgment, the same was good by the
whole Court, for the reasons before given. As to the giving of Costs, Jones and
Bramston Chief Justice conceived, that they were well assessed, upon the
presidents before cited: But Barckley doubted thereof, and did conceive that no
costs should be given in this case, and that upon Pilfords case 10 Rep. As to
the Presidents, he said, that they did not bind him; for perhaps, they passed
sub silentio. And afterward it was adjorned.

Johnson against Dyer.
96. IN an Action upon the Case for words, the Defendant having speech with the
Father of the Plaintiff said to him, I will take my Oath that your Son stole my
Hens. For which words the Plaintiff brought the Action. But did not aver that
he was his Son, or that he had but one Son. And it was holden by the whole
Court (Crook being absent) that the plea was not good.

Leake and Dawes Case.
97. LEake brought a Scire facias, in the Chancery, against Dawes, to avoid a
Statute; and the Case, as it was moved by Sergeant Wild, was such: Hopton
acknowledged a Statute to Dawes, and afterward conveyed part of the Land
liable to the Statute to I. S. who conveyed the same to Leake, the plaintiff;
and afterward the Conusor conveyed other part of the Land to Dawes, the
Defendant, who was the Conusee, by bargain and sale: the Conusee extended the
Lands of Leake, the Purchaser; who thereupon brought this Scire facias, to
avoid the Statute, because that the Conusee had purchased parcel of the Land
liable to the Statute, and so ex^inguished his Statute. And this case came by
Mittimus into the Kings Bench. And here it was moved by Sergeant Wild, for
Dawes the Defendant, in arrest of Judgment. And taken by him for Exce^^ion,
That the bargain and sale is alleged to be made to Dawes, but it is not
showed, that it was by Deed enrolled; but yet it is pleaded, That Virtute
cujus, viz. of Bargain and Sale, the Conusee was seized, and does not show*
that he entered. And here it was said by the Court, There are two points. First,
Whether an Inrolment shall be intended, without pleading of it? Secondly,
Admitting not what Estate the Bargaine^ has, as this Case is? As to the first
Justice Jones took this difference. Where a man pleads a bargain and sale to a
stranger, and where to himself. In the first case, he need not plead an
Inrolment; but contrary in (...). Barckley agreed it, and took another
difference, betwixt a Plea in Bar, and a Count: In a Count, if a man p^^ad a
grant of a Reversion without attor^ment, it is good; contrary in Bar: so in
this Case. The second question is (admitting that the Deed shall be intended
not to be enrolled without pleading) What estate Dawes the Conusee has before
Entry, the Deed not being enrolled. For it was agreed by the whole Court, That
if he be a disseior, or if he has but an estate at will, that the Statute is
suspended. And first, whether he has an estate at will, at the common Law, or
not, without Entry. Barckley: that he had. But Jones and Bramston, contrary;
and it seemed that he had an estate at will, by the Statute. And put the case
of feoffment in Bucklers case. 3. Rep. Where the Feoffee enters before Livery,
that he has an estate at will: and Barckley agreed therein with him, for the
possibility of inrolment. But Jones conceived that an estate at will, could not
be executed by the Statute. And it was adjorned.

Curtisse against Aleway.
98. THe Case was thus: A woman was dowable of certain Land, within the
Jurisdiction of the Council of the Marches, of which I. S. died seized. She
accepted a Rent by parol of the Heir, out of the same Land, in satisfaction of
her Dower. And afterward there was a Composition betwixt them for defalcation
of that Rent. Afterward there was an Action brought before the Council of the
Marches for the Arrerages of the Rent: where the question was, Whether the Rent
were in satisfaction of her Dowe^, or not: and it was moved by Moreton for a
Prohibition. And it was granted by the Court; because the same did concern
Freehold, of which they have not Jurisdiction, for by the express Proviso of
the Statute of 34 H. 8. of holding of plea of Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments,
or Rents. But because that it appeared by the Bill, that the woman was dead, so
as the realty was turned into the personalty, viz. into Debt. And therefore it
was conceived by Evers Attorney of the Marches, That although it was not within
the Jurisdiction before, yet being now turned into a personal Action, that they
have Jurisdiction. But Jones and Barckley Justices, were of a contrary Opinion;
and Jones said, That an Action of Debt for Arrerages would not lie before them,
because it touched the realty; which was denied by none but Evers Attorney.

Edwards against Omellhallum.
99. IN a Writ of Error, to reverse a Judgment given in Ireland, in an
Ejectione firm; the Case was this, as it was found by special verdict: A
Mortgager made a Lease for years, by Deed indented, and afterward performed
the Condition, and made a Feoffment in Fee; the Lessee entered upon the Feoffee,
who re-entred; and the Lessee brought an Ejectione firm. And the only
question, as it was moved by Glynn, was; Whether this Lease, which did inure by
way of Estople, should bind the Feoffee, or no: and by him it did, and Rawlyns
case in the 4 Rep. 53. expressly, and 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. Dyer agrees. And
the whole Court (Crook only absent) without any argument, were clear, That it
should bind the Feoffee: for all who claim under the Estople, shall be bound
thereby, vid. Edriches case 13 H. 7.

100 Sergeant Iermayn came into the Court, and showed cause why a Prohibition
should not be granted in the case of Skinner before; who Libelled for Tithes of
Coppice rooted up. He agreed that for timber trees, above the growth of twenty,
no Tithes should be paid; and so he said was the common Law, before the Statute
of 45 E. 3. which was but a confirmation of the Common Law. And he said, That
as the body of the tree is privileged, so are the branches and root also;
which is a proof, that where the body is not privileged, there neither shall
be the root ^or branches. And in our Case he Libels for roots of underwoods,
and the underwood it self being titheable, therefore the roots shall be also
tithable. And he said, that the (...) are not parcel of the Land. But Justice
Barckley was against it; for they are not crescentia, nor renovantia, as Tithes
ought to be; and therefore no Tithes ought to be paid for them: and he said,
that a Prohibition has many times been granted in the like cases. But Dr.
Skinner did allege a custom for the payment of Tithes of them. And upon that
they were to go to trial: And here it was said, that Dr. Skinner had used to
have some special particular benefit of the Parishioners, in lieu of Tithe of
Roots. And thereupon Barckley said, That it is a Rule, where the Parishioner
does any thing which he is not compellable by the Law to do, which comes to
the benefit of the Parson; there if he demand Tithes of the thing, in lieu
whereof this is done, that a Prohibition shall be granted. And there is another
rule: That Custom may make that titheable, which of it self is not titheable.
And here he said to Dr. Skinner being then in Court, That he had two matters to
help him, and if any of them be found for him, that a Prohibition ought not to
be awarded.

101. Justice Barckley said, That if a man be living at the day of Nisi prius,
and dies before the day in Banck, the Writ shall not abate. So if a man be
living the first day of the ^^rliament, and dies before the last day, yet he
may be Attainted: and the reason is, because in the eye and judgment of Law,
they are but one day by relation, which the Law makes.

102. There were three Brothers, the Eldest took Administration of the goods of
the Father, and after Debts and Legacies paid, the younger Brothers sued the
eldest in the Ecclesiastical Court, to compel him to distribute the Estate. And
thereupon a Prohibition was prayed, and denied by the Court: for they having
Jurisdiction of the Principal, may have Jurisdiction of the Accessory.

103. A. Libelled against B. in the Spiritual Court, for these words: Thou art
a Drunkard, and usest to be Drunk thrice a week. And upon that 150 Caroli, in
Easter-Term (as you may see before) a Prohibition was prayed, and granted. And
now Littleton the Kings Solicitor came in Court, and moved for a Consultation:
and he said, that the Statute of Articuli Cleri gave power unto the
Ecclesiastical Court to have conusance of those and the like words. Register 49
F. N. B. 51. They may hold plea for defamation; as for calling Adulterer, or
Usurer. 13 H. 7. Kellaway. 27 H. 8. 14. And he cited many Judgments in the like
cases, where Prohibitions had not been granted: and amongst others this Case.
Mich. 20 Iac. inter Lewis and Whitton Libel in the Ecclesiastical Court, for
calling him Pander, and no prohibition granted. And the like Case was for
calling another Pimp, and no Prohibition granted. Justice Jones: That a
Prohibition should be granted; for they have conusance of defamation, for any
thing which is merely Spiritual, or which does concern it, where they have
conusance of the principal, else not: as in Heresy, Adultery, and the like:
but in this Case they have not Conusance of the principal. True it is, that it
is peccatum: But if they should punish every thing which is Sin, they would
altogether derogate, and destroy the Temporal Jurisdiction. And therefore if I
say, that another is an Idle man, or envious, these are deadly Sins; and yet
they have not Conusance of them. And he cited Coltrops Case, adjudged in the
Common pleas, which was our very Case in point: and there he said that upon
solemn debate it was adjudged, That a Prohibition should be awarded. Bramston
Chief Justice agreed. Barckley contrary, That a Consultation should be awarded:
and he said, in many Cases, although they have Jurisdiction of the principal,
yet they shall not have Conusance; as in the Case of 22 E. 4. tit'
Consultation. But he said, that the Offense of Drunkenness is mixed, and is an
offense against the Spiritual, and Common Law also; and if it be mixed, both may
hold plea: and Adultery and Murder are the common effects of Drunkenness; which
are offenses against both Laws, and therefore he shall be punished by both. But
yet Barckley yielded to the Judgment cited by Jones. And therefore the whole
Court (Crook being absent) was, That a prohibition should be awarded.

104. Rolls moved this Case: The Parishioners of a certain Parish in
Devonshire, did allege a Custom to choose the two Churchwardens of the Parish,
and they did so; the Parson chose another: and the Archdeacon swore one of the
Churchwardens chosen by the Parish, and refused to swear the other, but would
have sworn him who was chosen by the Parson. And because they did refuse him,
they were Excommunicate. Rolls prayed a Mandat to the Archdeacon, to compel him
to swear the other chosen by the Parish; and a Prohibition also, by reason of
the Excommunication. And he cited a preeedent for it, which was the case of
Sutton-Valence in Kent. And the whole Court (Crook being absent) inclined to
grant them: for they said, they conceived no difference betwixt London and the
Country, as to that purpose: for as in London they are a Corporation, and may
take Land for the benefit of the Church: So throughout England, they are a
Corporation, and capable to take, and purchase Goods for the benefit of the
Church. And therefore they did conceive there was no difference. See the case
before, the case of the Parish of Saint Ethelborough, London.

105. Keeling moved to quash an Indictment of Rescous, because it is showed
that the Rescous was at W. and does not show that W. was within this County;
and if it was not within the County, then it was an Escape, and no Rescous: And
we cannot aver in this case, that it was out of the County. Farther, it was not
showed where the Rescous was, so that upon the matter it is no Arrest; nor was
the Indictment vi and armis, as it ought to be. As to the first, the Court
strongly inclined, that they might well intend it to be within the County,
because the Indictment says, in Com. meo. apud W. tent. But for the other
Exceptions, the Indictment was quashed.

106. In Trespass of Assault and Battery, and Wounding, the Defendant pleaded
Not Guilty, as to the Wounding; and pleaded special matter of justification as
to the Assault and Battery; and found for the Plaintiff; and it was moved in
arrest of Judgment, That the plea was repugnant, for Assault and Battery does
imply Wounding, and therefore it is repugnant for him to justify it, for it is
a confession of wounding. But Justice Crook and Justice Barckley (the others
being absent) were clear, that the plea was good; for so is the common form of
pleading: and farther, he might be guilty of the Battery, and not of the
wounding: for Crook said, Wounding implied Assault and Battery; but not e
contra.

Brooks against Baynton.
107. IN a Writ of Error to reverse a Judgment given i^ the Court of Common
pleas, in Trespass for assault battery and wounding; it was assigned for Error,
by Maynard, That there was variance betwixt the Original and the Declaration;
for the Original was only of Battery and Wounding of himself; and he declared
of Battery and wounding of him and his horse also; for he said, that quendam
equum, upon which the Plaintiff equitavit, percussit, its quod cecidit, etc.
and that was not helped by the Statute. But Rolls contrary, and here is no
variance: for the alleging of striking of the horse was only inducement to
allege the Battery of himself; for he does not bring the Action for the
beating of his horse, for it was not alleged that it was his own horse, but
quendam equum; and for that reason, by the whole Court the Judgment was
affirmed.

More of the Case of Leake against Dawe^.
108. Sergeant Mallet for the Plaintiff, That the Scire fa^^^s is good,
notwithstanding the exceptions, for these reasons. First, because it is not a
Declaration, but a Writ; which is not drawn by Counsel; and it is to declare
the matter briefly; but if it were in a Declaration, yet I hold it good,
because he says, that it was modo and adhuc seisitus existit, which as I
conceive, helps it: and besides, it is not his title, but the title of his
Adversary, which he is not bound to plead so exactly as his own title. See for
that, 14 Eliz. Dyer. 204. 2 Car. beswixt Green and Moody, in Audita Querela, he
showed that there was Debt brought upon a Lease for years, to begin at a day to
come, and did not show whether the Lessee entered before the day or not, so as
he might be a disseisor: and yet notwithstanding it being in Audita querela,
which is an equitable Action, it is good. Hill. 1 Iac. betwixt Blackston and
Martin in this Court, a Scire facias was brought to avoid a Statute, and it was
showed that the Defendant was Tenant, but does not show how Tenant; but it said
ad grave damnum, which could not be, if he were not lawful Tenant; and
therefore adjudged good, notwithstanding that general allegation. See new Book
of Entries, Mollins case, 98, 99. a strong case to this purpose. Besides, he
said, That here issue was taken upon another point, Whether he bargained or
not; and therefore he conceived in this Scire facias, that it is not h^r^
needful to show the Inrolment; and for these reasons, prayed Judgment for the
Plantiff. Sergeant Wild for the Defendant, That the showing of the Inrolment is
not helped by the Issue joined, being matter of substance; for he says, that
virtute cujus, and of the Statute of 27 H. 8. of uses, that the Defendant was
seized, and we ought not to intend an Estate by any other means or seisin, than
himself has alleged. And therefore it ought to be adjudged upon his own
pleading, whether the Defendant has any estate without inrolment or entry, by
force of the Statute of Uses. And I conceive he has not. True it is, that all
circumstances ought not to be pleaded, but the substance, viz. the Inrolment;
and therefore it ought to be pleaded, as Fulmerston and Stewards case is in the
Commentaries, and 2 Eliz. Dyer. And no estate passes without Inrolment: not a
Fee-simple; for then there ought to be Inrolment according to the Statute: and
no estate at will can pass without Entry, for that is as opposit' in objecto,
that a man shall be tenant at will against his will; for his Entry proves his
intent to hold at will. For Littleton says, By force whereof he is possessed;
so that there ought to be possession to make an Estate at will. And in case of
a Lease for years, although it be true that he is a Lessee for years to many
purposes before Entry, yet an Entry ought to be pleaded. And Dyer 14. is non
habuit; non occupavit is no good plea in a Lease for years; contrary in the
case in a Lease at will; which is a strong proof, that he is not Lessee at will
before entry. 3 Iac. betwixt Bellingham and Fitzherbert. 5 El. Dyer. 10 Eliz.
Mockets case, and Mich. 15 Iac. betwixt Coventry and Stacie, resolved that a
release to the Bargainee before Inrolment is not good: And by consequence he
has not an estate at will before Inrolment, or Entry made; for if he had, the
Release should be good. 18 H. 8. the Lord Lovells case, that no estate at Will.
Lastly, Parrolls font plea, and the case of a man shall not be taken to be
otherwise than he has pleaded it; and he having pleaded that virtute cujus,
and of the Statute of Uses, that the Defendant was seized, he shall be
concluded thereby. 5 H. 7. A man showed, that another licenced him to enter
into his land and occupy for a year, it is not good, but he ought to plead it
as a Lease. Besides, the virtute cujus is not traversable, as the 11 Rep.
Pridle and Nappers case is* Rolls accord, and he said, That if it shall be
construed, That the Conusee shall have an estate by Disseisin, the Plaintiff
ought to plead it, that the Defendant was seized by way of disseisin. And where
it was objected, That this is a Writ, and not a Declaration, he answered, It is
a Writ and Declaration also; and therefore he ought to declare his case at
large, and the defect of the Conveyance, viz. the want of Inrolment is not
supplied by the virtute cujus. And he having made that his Title, you ought to
judge upon it, and not otherwise. But the whole Court, viz. Bramston Chapter Just.
Crook, Jones, and Barckley, Justices, That the Scire facias was good, for it
was said that the Defendant perquisivit sibi and heredibus suis, and concludes,
virtute cujus, and of the Statute of Uses, he was seized; which is a good
averment that he has a Fee, and it was not material how he has it: and he
need not show his Title so fully, being a stranger to it. And this being an
equitable Action, if the Court upon this Writ shall conceive sufficient matter,
upon which the Plaintiff may bring his Action, it is good: and the Court ought
to give Judgment for him: for being but matter of form, it is not material,
unless a Demurrer had been special upon it. And wheresoever there is
damnification, there the Court ought to give Judgment for the Plaintiff,
notwithstanding a defect of form in the Writ. And Barckley said, That if a man
be seized of Bl. acre and Wh. acre, and acknowledges a Statute; and afterward
makes a Lease for years of Wh. acre, the remainder over in Fee, and then the
Conusee purchase Bl. acre, and extends the land of the Lessee for years; he
held, that he in the remainder should have an Audita querela, or a Scire facias
for the damnification, which came to his interest. And he held, that he who had
but interesse termini should have an Audita querela, That one jointly only
might have an Audita querela, and that the death of one of them should not
abate the Writ. And he held that Cestui que use before the Statute, might have
an Audita querela: all which proves it to be but an equitable Action, upon
which the Law does not look with so strict an eye, as upon other Actions. And
as to the Objection which was made by R^lls, that he ought to show, That the
Conusee had an estate by disseisin: Jones was against that, for that no man is
bound to betray his Title. And for these reasons it was adjudg^d by the whole
Court, That the Judgment should be affirm^d.

109. A Writ of Error was brought to reverse a Judgment given in the Common
pleas, and after a Certiorari, and Error^ assigned, they in the Common pleas
did amend the Record. And by the whole Court (Crook only absent) they cannot
do it, for after a transmittitur, they have not the Record before them. And
Barckley said, That the difference stands betwixt the Common Pleas and the
Kings Bench, and betwixt the Kings Bench and the Exchequer. For the Record
remains always in this Court, notwithstanding a Writ of Error brought in the
Exchequer-chamber; and therefore we may amend after. Wherefore the Court said,
that if the thing were amendable, that they would amend it. But the Court of
Common Pleas cannot.

Sewel against Reignalls.
110. THe case was thus: Husband and Wise did join in an Action of Debt in the
right of the Wife, as Administratrix to I. S. And the Defendant being arrested
at their suit, did promise to the Husband, in consideration that the Husband
would suffer him to go at large, that he would give him so much. The husband
and wise did join in an Action upon the Case, upon the promise made to the
husband alone. And upon Non assumpsit pleaded, it was found for the Plaintiff.
Porter moved in arrest of Judgment, that the promise being made to the husband
only, that they ought not to join in the Action. Barckley: the Action is well
brought, for the husband is Administrator in the right of the wife: for
otherwise the consideration were not good. For if he were not Administrator,
then he could not suffer him to go at large: and then if he be Administrator in
the right of his wife, the promise which is made to the husband, is in judgment
of Law also made to the wise; and they ought to join in the Action. But Crook
Jones, and Bramston Chief Justice contrary, That ^^e Action will not lie,
because the promise is of a collateral thing, and not touching the duty due to
the wise, as Executrix, for then perhaps it would have been otherwise. And they
said (against the Opinion of Barckley) that this sum received should not be
assets in their hand. And Bramston said, that it is not like the case, where a
man promises to the father of Jane Gappe, in consideration of a marriage to be
had betwixt his daughter and him, that he would make her a Jointure; there as
well the daughter as the father may bring the Action. And it was adjourned.

111. A Parson Libelled in the Ecclesiastical Court for Tithes. And after
Sentence Rolls moved for a Prohibition upon the Suggestion of a Modus
decimandi; but it was not granted, because too late. But Rolls took this
difference, and said, that so had been the Opinion of the Court, where the
party pleads the Modus, and where not; for if he plead it, there
notwithstanding a Sentence, Prohibition has been granted; contrary where he
does not plead it. But notwithstanding the Court refused to grant a Prohibition.

112. The Parishioners of a Parish, together with the Parson, sued the
Churchwardens in the Ecclesiastical Court, to render Account, and recovered
against them, and Costs taxed. Afterward the Parson released the Costs, and
notwithstanding the Parishioners sued for the Costs: and thereupon a
Prohibition was prayed; because that the Costs are jointly assessed, and the
release of one would bar the others. But the Opinion of the whole Court, that a
Prohibition shall not be granted: For the costs recovered there, an Action
might be sued in the Ecclesiastical Court: and therefore although that in our
Law, the release of one shall bar the others; yet the Action being sued there,
and they having conusance thereof, the same is directed according to their Law.
And therefore it has been adjudged, that if the husband and wise sue in the
Ecclesiastical Court for the defamation of the wife, and Sentence be given for
them, and Costs taxed, and afterward the husband releas^th the costs, in the
suit commenced in the Ecclesiastical Court, it shall not bar the Wife, for the
reasons given before.

Brook and Booth against Woodward Administrator of John Lower.
113. IN Debt upon a Bond, the Defendant prayed Oyer of the Condition, which
was entered, in haec venba. The Condition of this Obligation is such, That if
the Obligor did deliver to the Plaintiffs two hundred weight of Hops in
consideration of ten pounds already paid, and fifty five pound to be paid at
the delivery; and the Plaintiffs to choose them out of twenty four Bags of the
Obligors own growing, and to be delivered at F. at a day certain. Provided,
that if the Plaintiffs should dislike their Bargain, that then they should lose
their ten pounds: and if they liked they should give ten pounds more, etc. Upon
Oyer of which, the Defendant pleaded, that the Plaintiffs non elegerunt. And
upon that the Plaintiffs did Demur in Law: and showed for special cause of
Demurrer, that the Plea was double. Withrington for the Plaintiffs, that the
Plea is double, in that the Defendant has alleged, that he was ready, and
that the Plaintiffs non elegerunt; which are both issuable pleas, and each of
them, of it self (admitting no request of the part of the Defendant requisite)
is sufficient in bar of the Action. Besides, he conceived, as this case is,
that the first act ought to be done by the Defendant; for he ought to show the
bags, and request the Plaintiffs to make election. And he compared it to the
case in 44 E. 3. 43. and also to Hawlins case, 5 Rep. 22. Farther, he conceived
that the Defendant ought to have alleged, that he had twenty four bags, and
twenty four bags of his own growing: for if he have not them, it was impossible
for the Plaintiffs to make choice, and by consequence the condition broken.
Twisden contrary, That the plea is not double, for the alleging himself to be
ready, was but inducement to the subsequent matter, quod non elegerunt. And he
relied only upon their election; and in proof thereof he relied upon the Books,
1 H* 7. 16. and 24 E. 3. 19. Farther, here no notice is requisite, not he ought
not to aver that he had them; for he being bound to deliver them, he is estopt
to say that he has them not. 19 Eliz. Dyer 314. and 3 Eliz. Dyer. As to the
showing of them, we ought not to do it, for the Plaintiffs ought to do the
first Act, viz. Request the Defendant to show the bags for them to make choice
of. And the whole Court strongly inclined against the Plaintiffs, for the
reasons before given, and they advised them to waive the Demurrer, and plead de
novo; which they did.

Thorps Case.
114. IN an Action upon the Case upon Assumpsit, it was agreed by the whole
Court, That where there is a mutual promise, viz. A. promises to B. that he
will do such a thing; and B. promises to A. that in consideration thereof,
that he will do another thing; If A. bring an Action against B. and allege a
breach in non faciendo, and says that he is ready to do the thing which he
promised, but that the other refused to accept of it: Notwithstanding the
breach is well laid, and the Action well lies; for it was idle, and more than
the Plaintiff was compelled to do, to show that paratus est to do the thing
which he promised: So that if there were a breach upon the part of the
Defendant, it is sufficient, and if there was a breach on the Plaintiffs part,
the Defendant ought to bring his Action for it. And the difference was taken by
Bramston, Where the promise is conditional, and where absolute, as in our case.
And agreeing with this difference, it was said at the Bar and Bench, That it
was adjudged.

115. Hutton moved to quash certain Presentiments, because they were taken in a
Hundred-Court, which is not the Kings Court; and therefore coram non Iudice. It
was said by Justice Jones, That a Hundred may have a Leet appendant to it; and
then they were lawfully taken. Barckley and the whole Court answered, because
it does not appear to the Court, whether there was so or not, that the
Presentiments were void.

116. Concerning damage clear, It was agreed, that it was hard that the
Plaintiff should be stopped of his Judgment until he had paid his damages clear.
For perhaps, if the Defendant be insolvant, the Plaintiff should pay more for
damages clear, than he should ever get. And therefore the Court was resolved to
amend it. This damage clear, is twelve pence in the pound of the damages given
to the party in this Court, and two shillings in the Common pleas. See the
Register, where is a Writ for damage clear.

Harris against Garret.
117. IT was agreed by the whole Court, that it is no good plea to say, That
such an one was bound in a Recognisance, and not to say per scriptum obligat';
and to conclude that it was secundum formam Statuti, does not help it. But in a
Verdict it was agreed to be good. And according to this difference, it was said
by the Court, That it was adjudged in Goldsmiths case, and Fulwoods case.

118. It was agreed by the Court, that upon a Certiorari to remove an
Indictment out of an Inferior Court, that the Defendant shall be bounden in a
Recognisance to prosecute with effect, viz. to Traverse the Indictment, or to
quash it for some defect. And if he does not appear, an Attachment shall issue
out against him.

Justice Crooks Case.
119. IT was agreed by the Court, That although a Bill be preferred in the
Starchamber against a Judge for Corruption, or any other, for any great
misdemeanour; yet if the Plaintiff will tell the effect of his Bill in a
Tavern, or any other open place, and by that means scandalize the Defendant;
that the same is punishable in another Court, notwithstanding the suit
dependant in the Starchamber: And so Jones said, that it was adjudged in a Bill
in the Starchamber against Justice Crook; which was abated, because it was
brought against him as Sir George Crook only, without addition of his Office
and Dignity of Judge.

Trinit. 16o Car' in the Common Pleas.
120. AN Apothecary brought an Action upon the Case, upon a promise for diverse
Wares and Medicines, of such a value, and showed them in certain. The Defendant
pleaded in Bar, that he had paid to the Plaintiff tot and tantas denarior'
summas, as these Medicines were worth, and does not show any sum certain. And
the plea was holden to be no good plea; wherefore Judgment was given for the
Plaintiff.

121. A Contract was made betwixt A. and B. Mercers, That A. should sell to B.
all his Mercery Wares, and take his Shop of him: In consideration of which, A.
promised that he would not set up his Trade in the same Town. And adjudged a
good Assumpsit in the Kings Bench, as Littleton Chief Justice said. But if one
be bound that he will not use his Trade, it is no good Bond.

122. Rolls moved this Case: A Writ of Error was brought upon a Judgment given
in Yarmouth, and the Case was thus: A. and B. were bound to stand to the
Arbitrament of I. S. concerning a matter which did arise on the part of the
wise of B. before coverture. I. S. awarded, That A. should pay to B. and his
wife ten pounds, at a place out of the Jurisdiction, And thereupon, upon an
Action brought upon the Bond, a Breach was assigned for not payment of the money
at the place. And here it was objected, That it was Error, because it was there
assigned, for Breach, the not payment of the money at a place out of
Jurisdiction: and for that cause the Judgment was not well given. Secondly,
because that the Award was, That payment should be made to B. and his wi^^
which was out of the Submission. But notwithstanding, Judgment was affirmed by
the whole Court. For as to the (...) issue could not be taken upon payment or
not payment o^ of the Jurisdiction; because it was not Traversable. As (...)
the second, the Controversy did arise by reason of the wi^e and therefore the
Award was within the Submission, bei^^ made that the payment should be to both.

123. It was said by the Court, that it was one Kellway Case, adjudged in this
Court, That a Promise made to an Atturny of this Court, for Soliciting of a
Cause in Chance^^ was good; and that it was a good consideration, upon whi^^
the Atturny might ground his Assumpsit: For it was res^^ved, That it was a
lawful thing for an Atturny to Solicit.

124. The Court would not give way for Amendments Inferior Courts.

125. By Jones and Barckley Justices, If there be an insufficient Bar, and a
good Replication, after a Verdict, the^^ shall be a Repleading. Contrary, where
there is no Verdict.

Smithson against Simpson.
126. A. And B. were bound to stand to, and observe su^^ Article, Agreement,
Order, or Decree, as the Kings Council of the Court of Request should make. A
brought an Action upon the Bond against B. and pleaded that the Kings Council
of the Court of Request made such Order and Decree, and that the Defendant did
not observe it. The Defendant pleaded, That the King and his Council did not
make the Decree: and adjudged by the Court that the Plea was not good.

127. Sir Matthew Minkes was Indicted of Manslaughter, and found Guilty, And it
was moved by Hol^orne, of Counsel with Sir Matthew, that the Iudictment was
insufficient, because there was dans, etc. without adtunc and ibid. according
to Presidents; as also because it was plagam sen contusionem, which is
uncertain: as also that the party killed languebat a pred' 15 die, usque
decimam sextam. And he said, That there was no time between those two days, but
it ought to have been, That he languished from such an hour till such an hour;
and that, he said, were the ancient Presidents. And he said, That an Indictment
that A. killed B. inter horam decimam and undecimam was adjudged to be naught.
And he took many exceptions: all which were disallowed by the Court. For which
cause Sir Matthew prayed his Clergy, and had it.

Pasch. 17o Car. in the Common Pleas.
Weeden against Harden.
128. Custom to pay Tithes in kind for Sheep, if they continue in the Parish
all the year; but if they be sold before shearing-time, but an halfpenny for
every one so sold. And custom in the same Parish also, to pay no Tithes of
Loppings or Wood for fire, or Hedges, etc. The first is an unreasonable custom;
for by such means the Parson shall be defeated of his Tithes. But the last
custom is good, by the whole Court.

Sir Edward Powells Case.
119. THe Lady Powell sued Sir Edward Powell her husband, in the High
Commission Court for Alimony. Whereupon a Prohibition was prayed in this Court,
and granted. Sergeant Clark who argued for the Prohibition: The Spiritual Court
cannot meddle with any thing which is not redressable by them: they may compel
a man tractare uxore^, or Divorce them; but not grant Alimony, which does
appertain to the Judges of the Common Law. 7 and 8 H. 3. there is a Writ
directed to the Sheriff, to set out reasonable Estover^ for the Alimony of the
wife. President since the Statute of 1 Eliz. where Prohibitions have been
granted in this Case. viz. Sir William Chenyes Case, Mich' 8 Iac. in Comm'
Ban^^, who committed Adultery, and was separated, and the wi^e sued for
Alimony, and a Prohibition granted. P. 8 Iac. A Prohibition granted. And by the
Statute of 1 Eliz. they have not power to hold Plea of Alimony. The words of
the Statute are, Reform, Redress, etc. And it is not apt to say that Alimony
shall be Reformed, or Redressed. And besides Alimony is a Temporal thing, and
charge a man's Inheritance: and therefore they shall not intermeddle with it
Sergeant Rolls contrary, She may sue for Alimony in the Ecclesiastical Court;
but if they proceed to Fine or Imprisonment, then a Prohibition lies. They
have power of Separation, which is the principal; and therefore of Alimony,
which is Incident. And the High Commission have the same power given to them by
the Statute of 1 Eliz. as the Spiritual Court has, and therefore they may
meddle with Alimony. And where it was before objected, The great inconvenience
to the party, by the citing him out of his Diocese, for by that he should lose
the advantage of his Appeal: Rolls said, It was good for any within the
Province, and that is the Court of the Province. Banks Chief Justice: Although
that there be Presidents, that the High Commission have ho^den Plea of Alimony,
and granted the same, yet it was not Law. And although though that Alimony be
expressed in their Commission, that does not make it Law, if it be not within
the Statute. As to the citing out of the Diocese, he conceived the Commission
should be useless, if they might not do it: and therefore he granted a
Prohibition. Crawly, Reeve, and Foster Justices, agreed. But they doubted
whether the citing out of the Diocese were good or not, for the great prejudice
which might ensue to the party in losing his Appeal. And in answer to the
Objection of Rolls, the Chief Justice said, That the Ecclesiastical Court had
not Jurisdiction of Alimony; but if they had, yet all the Jurisdiction of the
Spiritual Court is not given to the High Commission, by the Statute of 1 Eliz.
And they all agreed, That they might as well charge my Land with a Rentcharge,
as grant Alimony out of it; and a Prohibition was granted.

130. No Sequestration can be granted by a Court of Equity, until the Process of
contempt are run out. And by Reeve and Foster Justices, The granting of
Sequestration of things ^^llateral, as of other Lands or Goods, is utterly
illegal.

131. Whereas upon Suggestion of a Modus decimandi, a Prohibition was granted:
now a Consultation was prayed as to Offerings, and granted; because the Modus,
etc. does not go to the personalty.

132. Upon a Jury returned, a stranger who was not one of the Jury, caused
himself to be sworn in the name of one who was of the Jury. And he against whom
the Verdict passed, moved the Court for a new Trial upon that matter. But the
Court would not give way to it; because it appears to them that he is sworn
upon Record. But all the Court agreed that he might be Indicted for that
Misdemeanour: and by Reeve and Foster Justices, the parties may have an Action
upon the Case against him.

133. It was taken for a Rule by the Court, That no Amendment should be after a
Verdict, without a consent.

134. Trover and Conversion against husband and wife, and declared that they
did convert ad usum little. The Jury found the wise not guilty. And by the
Court, this naughty Plea is made good by the Verdict.

Sir Richard Greenfields Case, in the Kings Bench.
135. THou (innuendo Captain Greenfield) have received money of the King to buy
new Saddles, and have co^sened the King, and bought old Saddles for the
Troopers. T^ver: It is not actionable. 8 Car. The Mayor of Tiverto^ case: One
said of him, That the Mayer had cousened all h^^ Brethren, etc. not actionable,
9 Iac. in the Kings Bench, Tha^ the Overseers of the Poor had cousened the poor
of their Bread* not actionable. 26 Eliz. in the Kings Bench, Kerby and Wallers
case, Thou art a false Knave, and have cousened my tw^ Kinsmen, not actionable.
K. is a cousening Knave; not actionable. 18 Eliz. in the Kings Bench. Sergeant
Fenner has cousened me and all my Kindred, is not actionable. Words are
actionable either in respect of themselves, or in relation to the person of
whom they are spoken: where Liberty is infringed, the Estate impaired, or
Credit defamed; there they a^ actionable. Mich. 29 H. 8. Rot. 11. Villain, is
not actionable. Morgan and Philips case. That he is a Scot, actionable* because
he is an Alien born. Hill. 1. Car. in Com. Ban. Si^ Miles Fleetwoods case. Mr.
Receiver has cousened the King* actionable in respect of his Office of
Receivership. And se^ it was afterward adjudged upon Error brought in the
Kings Bench. If these words had been spoken of the Kings Saddler, they had been
actionable, for thereby he might lose his Office: but there is no such
prejudice in our case; and he is of another Employment, and is but for a time
only. But by Heath Justice, and Bramston Chief Justice, the words are
actionable, for it is not material what employment he has under the King, if
he may lose his employment or trust thereby. And it is not material whether the
employment be for life or years, etc.

136. A Lawyer who was of Counsel may be examined upon Oath as a Witness to the
matter of Agreement, not to the validity of an assurance, or to matter of
Counsel. And in examining of a Witness Counsel cannot question the whole life
of the Witness, as that he is a Whoremaster, etc. But if he has done such a
notorious fact which is a just exception against him, then they may except
against him. That was Onbies case of Gray's Inn; and by all the Judges it was
agreed as before. And by Reeve Justice, If a Counselor say to his Client, that
such a Contract is Simony, and he says, he will make it Simony, or not Simony:
And thereupon the Counselor that a Simoniacal Contract, it is no offense in
the Counselor.

Pasch. 17o Car. in the Kings Bench.
137. PRescription to have Common for all his cattle Commonable, is not good,
for thereby he may put in as many beasts as he will. But a Prescription to have
Common for his cattle commonable levant and couchant, is a good Prescription.
And it was said, that that was Says case of the County of Lincoln adjudged in
this Court.

138. In Tompson and Hollingsworths case, it was agreed, That a Court of Equity
cannot meddle with a cause after it has received a lawful Trial and Judgment
at the Common Law, although that the Judgment be surreptitious.

139. The Statute of 31 Eliz. enacts, That if a man be presented, admitted,
instituted, and inducted upon a Simoniacal contract, that they shall be utterly
void, etc. Whether the Church shall be void without deprivation, or sentence
declaratory in the Spiritual Court or not, was the Question in a Quare impedit
brought by Sir John Rowse against Ezechiel Wright. Rolls and Bacon Sergeants,
That it is absolutely void without sentence declaratory, etc. Where the Statute
makes a thing void, it shall be void according to the words of the Statute,
unless there shall be inconvenience or prejudice to him for whom the Statute
was made. The Statute of 8 H. 6. cap. 10. That an utlagary shall be void if
process do not issue to the place where the party is dwelling; yet it is not
void before Error brought. The Statutes of 1 Eliz. and 31 Eliz. That all
Leases by a Bishop not warranted etc. shall be void: They are not void, but
voidable only; which agrees with the reason of the Rule given before. The
Statute of 18 H. 6. 6. That if the King grant Lands by Patent not found in the
Office, that the Patent shall be void; it is void presently, M. 30 H 6. Grants
92. and Stamford 61. although they be matter of Record. The Statute of 31 Eliz.
is expressly that it shall be void, frustrate, and of none effect; therefore by
the Rule before given, it shall be absolutely void. M. 10 Iac. Stamford and Dr.
Hutchinsons case. Resolved that an Incumbent presented by Simony cannot sue for
Tithes against his Parishioners; a villain purchases an Advowson, the Church
becomes void, the Lord presents by Simony, and the Clark is admitted,
Institute, and Inducted, yet it is void, and does not gain the Advowson to the
Lord. Institut. 120 a. If an Incumbent take a second Benefice, the first is
merely void. 4 Rep. Hollands Case. The difference is, where it is of the value
of 8 l. where not. And there is difference betwixt avoidance by Statute, and
avoidance by the Ecclesiastical Law. Avoydance is a thing of which the Common
Law takes notice, and shall be tried by Jury if it be avoydance in fact; if an
avoydance in Law, by the Judges. If a Parson does not read the Articles
according to the Statute of 13 Eliz. it is ipso facto void, without sentence. 6
Rep. 29. Greens case 30 Eliz. Eatons case. Instit. 120. a. express in the
point. And the difference is, that before the Statute of 31 Eliz. it was only
voidable by deprivation; but now by the Statute it is absolutely void. Mich. 9*
Iac. Cobbert and Hitchins case. Mich. 42 Eliz. Baker and Rogers case. 2 Iac.
Goodwins case, in Com' Banc. in all which cases it was not resolved, but passed
tacitly, and without denial, That a Presentation by Simony was void, without
declaratory Sentence. It was objected, that it is clear by the Ecclesiastical
Law, it is not void without a Sentence declaratory. It is answered, Of things
of which our Law and the Ecclesiastical Law take conusance, we are only to
rely upon our Law, and not upon the Ecclesiastical Law: especially when the
Ecclesiastical is repugnant or contrary to our Law, as in this Case it is. The
Judges of the Common Law shall judge the Church void, or not void. Fitz.
Annuity 45. 12 and 13 Iac. in the Kings Bench, Hitchin and Glovers case, in an
Ejectione firm. In this case it was resolved, That if I. S. marry two wives,
the Judges of the Common Law may take conusance of it: yet marriage is merely
an Ecclesiastical thing. It was objected, That the first branch of the Statute
of 31 Eliz. that it shall be void, etc. Secondly, that it shall be void as if
he were naturally dead, etc. So that the adding of these words (as if he were
naturally dead) in the later clause, prove that it was the meaning of this
Statute, that it should not be void in the first case, without Sentence
declaratory. It is answered, There is a difference in words, not in substance,
or the intent, and qui haeret in litera, etc. Iermin and Tailor Sergeants, That
it is not void before Sentence, etc. First, Admission, Institution, and
Induction, are Judicial acts, and done by the Bishop: and therefore shall not
be void before an act done to make them void, which is Sentence declaratory, or
deprivation. Secondly, the Statute of 31 Eliz. says, it shall be void, not
that it is, etc. Thirdly, the Ecclesiastical L^w is, That no Presentation, etc.
shall be void before Sentence, etc. Fourthly, the Ecclesiastical Law is Judge
of it, etc. Plenarty shall be tried by the Bishop, not by Jury. 6 Rep. 49. a.
Refusal shall not be tried by Jury, but Death shall. 5 Rep. 57. 9 H. 7.
Profession shall be tried by the Spiritual Court, 4 Rep. 71. b* 4. vid. 4. Rep.
29. a. the credit which our Law gives to the Ecclesiastical Law. It is there
put, That one was divorced without his knowledge, which was said to be a
strange case. Fifthly the Presentee by Simony does remain Incumbent de facto,
although not de jure; and that by the words of the Statute which makes the
Church void, as to the King only, not as to the Incumbent, without declaratory
Sentence: and the Church is no more capable to have two Incumbents, than a
woman to have two husbands. There is a difference where the Incumbent presented
by Simony is alive, the same is not void in facto, without sentence
declaratory: but if he be dead, there itis. And this difference stands upon the
two clauses in the Statute of 31 Eliz. And the Statute of 17 Car. of Election
of Burgesses, taken notice of Avoidance de facto and de jure. Trinit. 16 Car.
in Com. Banc. Ogelbics case. One was Presented within the age o^ twenty three
years, it did not give Lapse without notice: for it was avoidance in Law, not
in Fact. vid. Stat. 9. Eliz. for Excommunicating a striker in the Churchyard,
etc. This Statute of 31 Eliz. differs from the Statute of 1 Eliz. for not
reading of the Articles. Those Statutes say, that it shall be void ipso facto,
but not so in our Case. And the Cases cited for Authority in the point, are
betwixt party and party, and not in case of a third person, as our case is. 18
Eliz. Dyer A mere Layman is presented, it is not ipso facto void, without
Sentence. So it is of one within the age of nine years; for he cannot govern
others. Trinit. 4 Iac. in the Common Pleas, Cook and Stranges case. The King
Presents, and before Institution Presents another, it is good: but in the
interim, the King ought to repeal his first presentment, and that is a
revocation, vid. Dyer 292. a. where it is a Quere, Whether he need not to
allege that a Repeal was brought and showed, etc. The King grants, and
afterward makes a second Grant of the same thing. There are many Examples in
Brook and Fitzherbert, that it is not good without a Repeal. But this Case,
viz. of 6 H. 8, 9. extends only to ^and, and not to an Advowson, etc. But it
was resolved by all the Judges, That the Church was void by the Statute of 31
Eliz. to all purposes, and to all persons, as to the P^r^shioners, as to a
stranger, who brings Trespass, or Ejectione firm as to the King, as to him who
Presents; and that without deprivation, or Sentence declaratory in the
Ecclesiastical Court: And accordingly Judgment was given.

Hichcocke against Hichcocke.
140. THe Case was this: The Vicar did contract with a Parishioner to pay so
much for increase of Tithes, and died; and his Successor fued in the
Ecclesiastical court for them. And a Prohibition was prayed, and granted by all
the Justices. And here it was said, That a real Contract made by the Parson,
and confirmed by the Ordinary, could not be altered in the Spiritual Court. And
by Sergeant Mallet; a real accord though it be between Spiritual Persons, and
of Spiritual things yet it is only questionable at the Common Law. 20 E. 3.
Annuity 32. 38 E. 3. 6. 8 and 19. And by Sergeant Clarke, Real composition by a
Parson, who claims not any increase of the endowment to the Parsonage, shall
not bind his Successor. The words of the Contract here were, inter se
convenerunt: and that is no real Composition, although that the Bishop call it
so, realis Compositio, and his calling of it so does not alter the nature of
it, but it remains a Personal agreement; and so shall not bind the Successor,
although it be confirmed by the Bishop. A Parson cannot do any thing to the
damage of his Successor. The Vicar took Oath, That they were not for increase
of Tithes: the Ordinary being a stranger to the Composition, is not made a
party by his Confirmation, nor is the Composition altered by it. Littleton
Sect. 335. The Lord confirms the Land to the Tenant, the same does not alter
the Tenure, nor prejudice the Lord. The power of the Bishop, augendi and
minuendi the Portion of the Vicar, is by the Common Law, for general Cure of
Souls. The Parson and Vicar have privity betwixt them. 40 E. 3. 28. 31 H. 6.
14, 16 Ass Annuity 32. 2 Rep. 44. Plow. Com. 496. 21. E. 3. 5. 10 H. 7. 18.
Dyer 43 and 84.

141. A Prohibition was prayed to the Court of Requests, and the Case was thus:
A Feme sole possessed of a Term, conveyed the same over in Trust for her, and
Covenanted with I. S. whom she did intend to marry, that he should not meddle
with it, and for that purpose took a Bond of him. They intermarried: he may
intermeddle with it, but he shall not have it; and by Equity he cannot assign
it, by reason of the Covenant before marriage. A Feme sole conveys a Term in
Trust, and then marries; the husband assigns it, the Trust, not the Estate
shall pass, by Reeve and Foster. But by all the Judges a Prohibition shall not
be, for it is matter only for Equity: But if they direct Demisit, or non
demisit, Assignavit, or non, etc. then they exceed their Jurisdiction, and a
Prohibition heth.

142. A woman brought a Writ of Dower, and recovered, and upon a suggestion
made upon the Roll that the husband died seized, a Writ of enquiry of Damages
issued forth. And before the Retorn thereof, a Writ of Error was brought; and
it was by Steward against Steward; and two things were moved: 1. Whether Error
would lie before the Retorn of the Writ of Enquiry, or not. 2. Whether the Writ
of Error be a Supersedeas to the Writ of Enquiry. And by Tailor and Rolls
Sergeants, That Error does not lie before Judgment upon the Writ of Enquiry.
And this case they compared to Medcalfes case 11 Rep. 38. But by Sergeant Bacon
it is well brought. Dower is by the Common Law, and damages are given by the
Statute of Merton, and that is the main Judgment. 5. Rep. 58, 59. And the very
case is put in Medcalfes case, 11 Rep* and distinguished from other cases. And
it was argued by another Sergeant, That the Error was well brought, because
that in Dower the Judgment does determine the Original: and therefore at the
Common Law Error will well lie. And the damages are given by the Statute of
Merton, but that does not alter the Judgment, or the nature of the Action. It
differs from the case of Judgment in an Ejectione firm, and Account; for after
such Judgments No^suit may be: but not so in the case of Dower, in which
Judgment is, quod recuperet, etc. A Precipe is brought against two, one pleads
to issue, the other an insufficient Plea, upon which Judgment is given. No
Error lies before Judgment be given for the other: for the whole matter is not
determined. But in several Precipes against two, it is otherwise. 34. H. 6. 18.
Fitz. Scire facias. 11 Rep. 39. a. b. In case of Ejectione firm it is a Quere
if Error may be brought, etc. And Banks Chief Justice said That it had been
adjudged both ways: but that differs from our case, for in that damages are
given by the Common Law. Judgment is, in a Quare impedit Error may be brought
before, etc. which is like to our case, for damages in both cases are given by
Statute. And where it was objected, That thereby damages should be lost; He
answered, No. For the Kings Bench may award a Writ of Enquiry of Damages. And
the 11 Rep. is express Authority. 2. The Error is no Supersedeas, etc. 11 Iac.
in Tincke and Brownes case, it was ruled and resolved, That a Writ of Error
brought, was not a Supersedeas to the Writ of Enquiry of damages. But it was
resolved by all the Judges, that the Error was well brought, for the reasons
before given: and that Error is a Supersedeas to the Writ of Enquiry. And it
was entered for a Rule, That in all Writs of Enquiry of damages, notice ought to
be given as well in Real as Personal Actions.

143. If a Prisoner will remove himself by a Habeas Corpus, he shall pay the
Costs of the Removal: but it the Plaintiff will remove the Prisoner, he shall
pay reasonable charges.

144. Dickenson Libelled against Barnaby in the Spiritual Court for these
words: D. is a Beastly Queen, Drunken Queen, Copper-nose Queen, and she was one
cause wherefore Barnaby left his wife, and has mispended five hundred pounds,
and that she keeps company with Whores. And a Prohibition was prayed and
granted, because that the words are not actionable.

145. Hill. 16. Car. in this Court. A. a poor man sold his estate for twenty
pound yearly, to be paid during his life: for the security of which, the Vendee
was bound to A. and another in a thousand pounds; the other releaseth the Bond,
the money not being paid. A. is compelled to have Relief of the Parish for his
maintenance. The Churchwardens and A. exhibited a Bill in the Court of
Requests, and there had remedy.

146. A. and B. his wife Present to a Church, to which they have no Right.
Question, Whether that does grant any thing to the wife or no? Resolved, No.
For the wife is at the will of her husband, and Presentation is but
Commendation, or the Act of the husband, etc. And it is not like unto an Entry
in Land by them. Mich. 16 Car. betwixt Nesson and Hampton. Otherwise it is when
the wife has Right.

Sir John Pits Case.
147. IN the case of Sir John Pits Philizor of London, it was moved, that his
Executors might have the profits of the Writs which are to be subscribed with
his name, forasmuch as all Process of the same suit ought to have the same name
subscribed to them: for the attendance of them being necessary, they ought to
have the profits according to it. Tooleys case, Hobarts Reports. The reason
which was given to the contrary was, because there was another Officer, who is
to answer any damages, by reason whereof he is to have the benefit.

148. Judges are the only Expositors of Acts of Parliaments, although they
concern Spiritual things, Searles case, Hobarts Rep. 437. 4. E. 4. 37, 38.

149. If horses be traced together, they are but one distress. And note,
Fetters upon a horse leg, may be distreined with the horse.

Hillary 16o Car. in the Kings Bench.
150. A Merchant goes beyond Sea, and marries an Alien. It was resolved, that
the Issue is a Denizen; for the husband being the Kings subject, the wife is
not respected, because she is at the will of her husband, and also because they
are but one person in Law. Bacon and Bacons case.

151. If a Town has a Chapel, and bury at the Mother Church, and therefore
have time out of mind repaired part of the Wall of the Church, it is good to
excuse them of repairing the Church. Inhabitants of such a place prescribe to
repair a Chapel of Ease: and in regard thereof, that they have time out of
mind been free from all Reparations of the Mother Church, it is good. But if
such a Chapel has been built within time of memory, then they ought to have
proof of some agreement, by virtue of which they are discharged of Reparations
of the Mother Church. Pasch. 17 Car. in the Kings Bench. The Inhabitants within
the Parish of H. having a Chapel of Ease, and custom that those within such a
Precinct ought to find a Rope for the third Bell, and to repair part of the
Mother Church: in consideration of which, they have been freed from payment of
any Tithes to the Mother Church. Whether it be a good Custom, or not, Quaere,
for it was Adjorn.

Hillary 16o Car in the Common Pleas.
152. WHere the Ecclesiastical Court has conusance of the cause, there
proceedings, although they be Erroneous, are not examinable in this Court. And
it was given for a Rule, That it is no cause to grant a Prohibition.

153. The Sheriff in the Retorn of a Rescous, said, that he was in Custodia
Ballivi Itinerantis. And that a Rescous was made to his Baily Itinerant; and it
was not good: otherwise, if he had been Baliff of a Liberty, for the Law takes
notice of him. And therefore the Court did award that the Rescousers should be
dismissed, and that the Sheriff should bring in the man by a certain day at his
peril. Otherwise it is in the Kings Bench.

154. One cannot be Attorney within age, because he cannot be sworn.

155. Commissioners have a Warrant, and they execute it with another who is a
stranger to the Warrant; It is good, and the other person is but surplusage.

156. A Prohibition after Sentence shall not be granted but in some especial
case.

157. It was Ordered by the Lords House of Parliament, That only Menial
servants, or one who attended upon the person of a Knight or Burgess of the
Parliament, should be free from Arrest.

158. Administration is granted to the wife, the husband having many children.
Whether it be in the power of the Ordinary to make distribution, or not. First,
if there be an Executor, then not. Secondly, After distribution there may be a
Debt which was not known at the time, and then the Administrator should pay it
of his own goods. And therefore there can be no distribution. On the other
side, it was said, If the Ordinary shall not distribute, then if a man dies
Intestate, and has goods of the value of an hundred pounds, and Administration
be committed to the wise, she should have all, and the children nothing; which
would be hard.

159. A thing which may be tried by a Jury at the Common Law, is not triable in
Chancery: for in the first Case, if they give not their Verdict according to
their Evidence, an Attaint lies: but in the other there is no remedy.

160. After a Writ of Error granted, a Warrant of Attorney cannot be filed, if
the party be alive who made, the Warrant: but otherwise if he be dead.

161. A Declaration cannot be amended in matter of Substance, without a new
Original: otherwise of Amendments of matter of Form.

162. The Statute of 5 and 6 E. 6. cap. 1. and 1 Eliz. c. p. 2. prohibit any
man to be absent from Church, having no ^awful or reasonable cause. A man was
sued in the Ecclesi^stical Court for being absent from Church; and he pleaded
^mething by way of excuse. Hyde Sergeant prayed a Prohibition, because they
ought not to hold Plea of the excuse: but the Court did agree that they might
hold Plea of the excuse, otherwise upon a false suggestion you would defeat the
Ecclesiastical Court of all Conusans in such cases. And therefore they were all
against the Prohibition, and by the Court they ought to plead their excuse
there; and if they will not admit of it, then a Prohibition shall be granted.
And note, that it was said by Banks Chief Justice, that before the Statute of
1 Eliz. the Ecclesiastical Court might punish any person for not coming to
Church, pro reformatione morum and salute animae.

163. Where there are several Modus alleged, there several Prohibitions shall
be granted; but where diverse are sued jointly, and they allege one Modus only,
there they shall have but one Prohibition, by Reeve and Foster Justices, the
others being absent.

Pasch. 15o Car in the Kings Bench.
Edwards and Rogers Case.
164. THe Case was thus: Tenant for life, the Reversion to an Idiot; an Uncle
heir apparent of the Idiot levied a Fine and died, Tenant for life died, the
Idiot died: the only Question was, Whether the Issue of the Uncle who levied
the Fine should be barred or not: Jones: that it should; his chief reason was,
because the Son must make his conveyance by the Father, and as to him he is
barred. As in a Writ of Right, he ought of necessity to name his Father, and
that by way of Title, so here. But Crook and Barckley contrary; and their
reason was, because that here the Issue of the Uncle does not claim in the
right line, but in the collateral. Secondly, because the naming of the father
here is not by way of Title, but by way of pedigree only. Note, that Sergeant
Rolls in the Argument of the Sergeants case (which was the very point) said,
that this case was adjudged, according to the Opinions of Crook and Barckley,
viz. that the fine should not bar the Issue. The Sergeants Case aforesaid was
Trin. 17 Car.

165. Pain the elder and Pain the younger were bound jointly and severally in
an Obligation to Dennis, who afterward brought Debt upon the Bond against
both. And after appearance, Dennis entered into a Retraxit against Pain the
younger; and whether this were a discharge of the elder also, was the Question.
And this Term it was argued by Maynard for the Defendant, that it was a
discharge of Pain the elder also, for it does amount to a Release; and it is
clear, that a release to one, shall discharge both. Rolls contrary, that it
goes only by way of Estoppel, and not as a release, and therefore shall not
bar. Barckley Justice: that it amounts to a Release, and therefore shall
discharge both. 7 E. 4. Hickmots case in the 7 Rep. the Plaintiff shall not
have judgment where he has no cause of Action. And here by his Retraxit he
has confessed, that he has no cause of Action, and therefore he shall not
have judgment. Further, a Retraxit is not an Estoppel, but a Bar of the Action;
besides, here he has altered the Deed, and it is not joint, as it was before,
like as where he interlines it or the like, there the Deed is altered by his
own act, and therefore the other shall take advantage of it. Crook Justice
contrary; for it is not a Release, but quasi a Release; and if the Oblig^e
sueth one, and covenanteth with him that he will not further sue him, the same
is in the nature of a Release, and yet the other shall not take advantage of
it. So in this case, 21 H. 6. there ought to be an actual Release, of which the
other shall take advantage, and therefore in this Case, because it is but in
the nature of an Estoppel, the other shall not take advantage of it.

Sprigge against Rawlenson.
166. IN a Writ of Error to reverse a Judgment given in the Common Pleas in an
Ejectione firm, the Case was: R. brought an Ejectione firm against S. and
declared of an Ejectment de uno mesuagio and uno repositorio. And the Jury
found for the Plaintiff, and assess^d damages entire: upon which a Writ of
Error was brought here, and the Error which was largely debated was, that Rep.
sit^rium, which was here put for a Warehouse, is a word uncertain, and of
diverse significations, as appears by the Dictionary. And therefore an
Ejectione firm de uno repositorio is not good, and by consequence the damages
which are jointly assessed are ill assessed. And in an Ejectione firm seism
shall be given by the Sheriff, upon a Recovery, as in a Precipe quod reddat,
and therefore the Ejectment ought to be of a thing certain, of which the
Sheriff may know how to deliver seifin, otherwise it is not good. Barckley and
Crook Justices were, that the Judgment should be affirmed, and that it was
certain enough; but Jones and Bramston Chief Justice contrary, that it was
utterly uncertain. For that is Repositorium in which a man reposeth any thing:
and an Ejectione firm de uno tenemento is not good, because there are several
^enements. So here, because there are several Repositories, and the Sheriff
cannot tradere possessionem: and afterward Barckley released his Opinion, and
judgment was given, that the Judgment given in the Common Pleas should be
reversed.

Trinit. 17o Car' in the Common Pleas.
167. A Man having a Legacy devised unto him out of a Lease for years, which
Indenture o^ Lease was in the hands of a Stranger, The Legatee su^d the
Executors in the Spiritual Court to assent to the Legacy. And Evars Sergeant
prayed a Prohibition, because they order that the Lease should be brought into
Court, which they ought not to have done, being in the hands of a stranger. But
the Prohibition was denied by the whole Court, for they may make an executor
assent to a Legacy out of a Lease, and therefore may order that although that
the Lease be in the hand of a third person, that it shall be brought in to
execute it. For the Order, although it be general, binds only the Defendant;
and it was agreed by the Court, that assets or not assets is triable by them.

Juxon against Andrews, and others.
168. IN an Ejectione firm, the Defendants pleaded not guilty, the Jury found
them not guilty for part, and guilty in tanto unius messuagii in occupatione,
etc. quantum stat super ripam; and whether this Verdict were sufficiently
certain, so as the Court might give judgment upon it, and execution thereupon
might be had, was the question. And by Whitfield Sergeant the Verdict is
certain enough: it has been adjudged that where the Jury find the defendant
guilty of one Acre, parcel of a Manor, that it was good: so of the moiety of a
Manor which is as uncertain as in this case. And it is as certain as if they
had said, So many feet in length, and so many in breadth; for if the certainty
appears upon the view of the Sheriff, who is to deliver the possession, it
suffices: and Clark Sergeant who was of the same side said, that it is a Rule
in Law, Quod certum est quod certum reddi potest, and this may be reduced to
certainty upon the view of the Sheriff, and therefore it is certain enough.
Besides, it is the finding of the Jury who are lay gents. M. 8. Iac. in the
Kings Bench, an Ejectione firm was brought for the Gate House of Westminster,
and the Jury found the Defendant guilty, for so much as is between such a room
and such a room, and adjudged good, and here it is as uncertain as in our case.
Mich. 19 Iacobi. Smalls case in Hobarts Rep. The Jury in an Ejectione firm
found the Defendant guilty of a third part, and good. Mallet Sergeant, that the
Verdict is uncertain, and therefore not good. And it is not sufficient that the
certainty appear to the Jury, for it behooveth that certa res deducatur in
judicium. Institut. 227. a. 3. E. 3. 23. b. 18 E. 3. 49. 40 E. 3. 5 Rep.
Playtors case. Secondly, here is no certainty for the Sheriff to give
execution, for so much in length or in breadth, that is, quod stat super ripam,
does not appear. And thirdly, thereupon great inconvenience will arise, that no
attaint will lie upon such uncertain Verdict, so as the defendant shall be
without remedy: and the whole Court (except Justice Crawley) Banks, Reeve, and
Foster, did resolve that the Verdict was insufficient for the incertainty; and
all agreed, That there is great difference betwixt Trespass and Ejectione
firm, for such Verdict in Trespass may be good, for there damages are only to
be recovered, but in an Ejectione firm the thing it self. And their reason in
this Case was, That although the certainty may appear to the Jury, yet that is
not enough, for they ought to give judgment, and oportet quod certa res
deducatur in judicium. And they agreed, that if they had found him guilty of a
Room, it had been good, and so the Cases on the Acre of Land, and of the third
part of a Manor is good, for those are sufficiently certain, for of them the
Law takes notice. The Opinion of Crawley, wherefore the verdict should be good,
was, because the demand here was certain, although the Jury found it in tanto,
etc. And where there may be certain description for the Jury it is good enough,
and the rather because the Verdict is the finding of lay gents: and he compared
it to the case of the Gate House aforesaid: but he agreed, that if the Writ of
Ejectione firm had been brought de tanto unius messuagii, etc. quod stat super
ripam, that it would not have been good, but the Verdict is good for the reason
aforesaid. But Justice Reeve said, that that which is naught in the demand, is
naught in the Verdict, and therefore naught in the judgment, and therefore the
Court would not give judgment, and therefore a Venire facias de novo was
prayed, and granted by the Court.

169. Couch libelled against Toll ex officio in the Ecclesiastical Court for
Incontinencie without a Citation or presentment, and for that the Defendant was
excommunicated; and Gotbold prayed a Prohibition, which was denied by Crawley
and Reeve Justices (the others being absent) and it was said by Reeve, That
where they proceed ox officio a Citation is not needful, but put case it were,
yet they said, that no Prohibition is to be granted as this case is, because,
that where the Ecclesiastical Court has Jurisdiction, although they proceed
erroneously, yet no Prohibition lies, but the remedy is by way of Appeal, and
there he shall recover good costs: and it was said by Crawley, That if the
party be returned cited, and he is not cited, That an Action upon the case
lies.

170. A woman libelled in the Arches against another for calling of her Jade,
and a Prohibition was prayed and granted, because the words were not
defamatory, and do not appertain unto them. And Reeve said, that for Whore or
Bawd no Prohibition would lie, but they doubted of Queen.

171. Bacon Sergeant prayed a Prohibition to the Court of Requests upon this
suggestion, That one Executor sued another to account there, and an Executor at
the Common Law before the Statute of West. 2. cap. 11. could not have an
account for cause of privity, and now by that Statute they may have an account,
but the same ought to be by Writ, and therefore no account lies in the Court
of Requests. Secondly, they have given damages where no damages ought to be
given in an Account. And lastly, they have sequestered other Lands, which is
against the Law; and for these reasons he prayed a Prohibition. Whitfield
Sergeant contrary.

1. It is clear that an account by Bill lies for an Attorney in this Court,
and so in the Kings Bench and Exchequer: and as to damages it is clear that in
an account a man shall recov^^ damages upon the second judgment, but as to the
sequest^^ion he could not say any thing, but further he said, That it was not
an account but only a Bill of discovery against Trustees, who went about to
defeat an Infant, and upon the reading of the Bill in Court it appeared that
the suit was merely for the breach of a trust, and for a confederacy and
combination, which is merely equitable. Wherefore a Prohibition was denied
because it was no account, but as to the Decree for sequestring other Lands,
the Prohibition was granted.

Trin. 17o Car' in the Kings Bench.
172. East brought an Action upon the Case upon an Assumpsit against Farmer,
because that where the Plaintiff had sold to the Defendant so much wood, the
Defendant in consideration thereof did assume and promise to pay so much money
to the Plaintiff, and to car^^ away the wood before such a day; the Defendant
pleaded the he paid the money at the day aforesaid, but as to the carrying of
it away before the day, he pleaded non assumpsit, and the Jury found that he
did not pay the money at the day, but as to the other they found that he did
assume and promise as aforesaid, and it was moved in Arrest of judgment, that
the finding of the Jury was naught, for being but one Assumpsit and the same
being an entire thing, it could not be apportioned, and therefore they ought to
find the entire Assumpsit for the Plaintiff, or all against him. And the Court
agreed all that, and awarded, that there should be a Repleader; and the Chief
Justice Bramston said, That for the reason given before the Defendants plea was
not good, and therefore the Plaintiff might have demurred upon it, which he
has not done; and therefore they agreed, that the Verdict was naught for the
reason aforesaid.

173. Williams was indicted at Bristow, upon the Statute of 1 Iac. cap. 11. for
having two wives, and upon not Guilty, pleaded, the Jury found a special
Verdict, which was thus: That the said Williamt married one wi^e, and was
afterward divorced from her causa adulterii, and afterward married the other,
and if that were within the Proviso of that Statute which provides for those
who are divorced, was the Question. And it was resolved without argument by
Bramston Chief Justice, and Heath Justice (the other being absent) That it is
within the Proviso, for the Statute speaks generally of Divorce, and it is a
penal Law: and Heath said, That by the Law of Holy Church the parties divorced
causa adulterii might marry, but parsrea not without license, and he cited the
case of Anne Porter of late in the Kings Bench, who was divorced causa
saevitiae, and afterward married one Roots, and upon an Indictment upon this
Statute it was doubted and debated whether it were within the Proviso of this
Statute or not? but resolved it was not, because only a Divorce a
cohabitatione, and a temporal separation until the anger past, but the divorce
here is a vinculo matrimonii.

174. One was chosen to be Clerk of a Parish Church, and was put in and
continued Clerk three or four years, but was never sworn; and now a new Parson
put him out, and swore another in his place. Keeling and Rolls Sergeant prayed
a Writ of Restitution, and compared the same to the Case of disfranchisement,
where Restitution lies. But Bramston and Heath Justices (the other absent)
would not grant it. And the Chief Justice said, that the Doctor had not power
to oust him; for he said that it is a temporal Office, with which the Parson
had not to do: and further, they conceived that the Clerk has remedy at Law,
wherefore they would not award a Writ of Restitution, but they said, that if
the Clerk was never sworn they would award a Mandat to swear him, to which the
Counsel assented.

Trin. 17o Car. in the Common Pleas.
175. WHite exhibited a Bill in the Court of Request against Grubbe for Money
due upon account; upon which Mallet moved for a Prohibition, because it is no
other than in the nature of a debt upon account, of which a Court of Equity
has no Jurisdiction, for by such means the King should lose his Fine, the
Defendant should be put to another Answer upon his Oath, and which is above
all, they would refer the merits of the Cause to others, and according to their
Certificates make a Decree, so that by this means they would create Courts of
Equity without number. Sergeant Clark contrary against the Prohibition, for he
said the Defendant had exhibited a Cross Bill, and so had affirmed the
Jurisdiction, and he ought to have demurred to the Jurisdiction; and he said
that where parties assent to a Decree, there the Kings Bench will not grant a
Prohibition. For he said, that by the same reason that a man may choose
Arbitrators, he may elect his Judges; and further, he said that the suit was
for moneys due for diverse things delivered by the Plaintiff being a Chandler in
a Country-town, which he ought to prove to be delivered, and he had no proof:
but Crawley and Reeve Justices, the others being absent, granted a Prohibition,
because it is no other but an Action of debt upon account; and Crawley said,
that the particulars are out of doors by the account, and in debt brought, it
is sufficient to say, that the Defendant was indebted to him for diverse
Commodities. And they accounted, and upon the account the defendant was found
to be in debt to him such a sum, etc. And note, it was said in the Bill that
the Plaintiff had no Witnesses to prove the delivery of the things aforesaid,
and notwithstanding they granted a Prohibition. for they said, there is no
remedy in the Court of Requests if you have no proof. But is was said that the
Defendant in the Court of Requests had confessed the delivery of the things in
his answer there. For which cause the Judges said, that this confession there
might be given in evidence against him at Law.

176. Three covena^^ed jointly and severally with two severally, and afterward
one of the Covenanters married with one of the Covenantees: by Sergeant Mallet
the Covenant is gone; besides, a man cannot covenant with two severally, as a
man cannot bind himself to two severally. Further, they joined in in Action
where the covenant is several, that which they should not do. Crawley and Reeve
Justices did conceive that a man might covenant with two severally, because
that it differs from the case of a Bond, for a covenant sounds only in damages,
but they conceived clearly that they ought not to join in action, and it was
adjourned.

177. It was said in a Case at the Bar by Sergeant Godbold that it was a Rule
in the Kings Bench, That although an Attorney be dead, yet the Warrant of
Attorney might be siled, which was not denied by the Court here.

Lawson and Cooks Case.
178. IN a second deliverance, which was entered Hill. 16 Car. Rot. 1530: the
Case was thus: A man had a Rentcharge in Fee, and for Arrerages thereof, did
distrain, and then granted the same over. And the Question here was, Whether he
ought to avow or justify; and the doubt rested upon this, viz. Whether the
arrerages be gone by the grant of the rent, notwithstanding the distress before
taken, or not. By Sergeant Ca^lis the arrerages are lost, for without question
he cannot have debt. And he cannot avow, for that depends upon the inheritance
which is gone by the grant, 4 Rep. 5. Ognels case, and 19 H. 6. 42. b. Acc. And
here he has avowed and not justified, as ^e ought for to excuse himself of
damages, and therefore it is naught. But he took this difference betwixt the
Act of God, and the Act of the party, as here it is; where it is by the Act of
God, as where there is grantee for another life of ^^ent, and cestuy qui vie
dies, or where a man has rent (...) the right of his wife and she dies, in
those cases the arresages shall not be lost: But where a man grants over the
rent as in our Case which is his own Act, there the arrerages are lost.
Institut. 285. A man entitled to waste accepts of a surrender, it destroys his
Action, otherwise where it is by act of Law. So if a man bring debt for twenty
pounds, and afterward accepts ten pounds, that shall abate the Writ, because
that it is his own Act; and this difference may be collected out of the book of
19 H. 6. Besides, until avowry it does not appear upon Record for what the
distress is taken, whether for rent, or for damage feasant. Sergeant Godbold
contrary, that he ought to avow, because the rent in this case is not gone; and
he said, there was a difference between this Case and Ognells case, for there
was no distress taken before the rent granted, as here is; and there the
privity is gone, and the distress follows the rent, but here we have a pledge
for the rent which is the distress, and return of the cattle if it be found for
us, 19 H. 6. 41. a. Where the distress was lawfully taken at the beginning,
there we may avow, and it is good to entitle us to a retorn, 22 E. 4. 36. Where
there is a duty at the time of the distress, there he shall always avow and not
justify, and at least it turns the Avowry into a Justification in our Case, so
as you shall not make us Trespassers, but that we may well justify to save our
damages. Crawley Justice: that the Avowry is turned into a Justification, and
that there is sufficient substance in the Plea to answer the unjust taking the
distress. Justice Reeve: that it is good by way of Avowry, for the distress
being lawfully taken at the time, it shall not take away his avwry, and
therefore he shall have Retorn, for that was as a gage for the rent, and
therefore differs from the other Cases. Justice Foster put this Case at the
Common Law: Distress was taken, and before avowry Tenant for life died, Whether
he shall avow or justify. But all agreed, that at the least the Avowry is
turned into a Justification, but it was adjourned.

179. The Court demanded of the Protonotharies, Whether a man might make a new
assignment to a special Bar; and they said no, but to a common Bar only, viz.
that the Trespass (if any were) was in Bl. Acre, there ought to be a new
assignment by the Plaintiff: but Reeve and Crawley Justices (the other being
absent) held clearly, that the Plaintiff might make a new assignment to a
special Bar; and further they said, that the Plaintiff if he would might trise
the Desendant upon his Plea, but we will not suffer him to do so, because that
his Plea is merely to make the Plaintiff to show the place certain in his
Replication in which the Trespass was done.

180. The Disseisee levieth a Fine; by Reeve and Crawley, Justices, it shall
not give right to the Disseisor, because that this Fine shall enure only by way
of Estoppel, and Estoppels bind only privies to them and not a stranger, and
therefore the Disseisor here shall not take benefit of it, and therefore they
did conceive the 2 Rep. 56. a. to be no Law, Vid. 3 Rep. 90. a and 6 Rep. 70. a.

181. Sergeant Callis prayed a Prohibition to the Court of Requests for cause
of priority of Suit, but by Foster and Crawley Justices (the other being
absent) priority of Suit was nothing, the Bill being exhibited there before
Judgment given in this Court.

182. The Case of White and Grubbe before being moved again, it was said in
this case by Reeve and Foster Justices, that where a man is indebted unto
another for diverse wares, and the debt is superannuated according to the
Statute of 21 Iac. cap. 16. and afterward they account together, and the party
found to be indebted unto the other party, in so much money for such wares, in
that Case although that the party were without remedy before, yet now he may
have debt upon account, because that now he is not bound to show the
particulars, but it is sufficient to say, that the Defendant was indebted to
the Plaintiff upon account, pro diversis mercimoniis, etc.

183. A Prohibition was prayed unto the Council of the Marches of Wales, and
the Case was thus: A man being posfessed of certain goods, devised them by his
will unto his wife for her life, and after her decease to I. S. and died. I. S.
in the life of the wife did commence Suit in the Court of Equity, there to
secure his Interest in Remainder, and thereupon this Prohibition was prayed.
And the Justices, viz. Banks Chief Justice, Crawley, Foster (Reeve being
absent) upon consideration of the point before them, did grant a Prohibition,
and the reason was because the devise in the remainder of goods was void, and
therefore no remedy in equity, for Aequitas sequitu^ legem. And the Chief
Justice took the difference, as is in 37 H. 6. 30. Br. Devise 13. and Com.
Welkden and Elkingtons Case, betwixt the devise of the use and occupation of
goods, and the devise of goods themselves. For where the goods themselves are
devised, there can be no Remainder over; otherwise, where the use or occupation
only is devised. It is true that heir looms shall descend, but that is by
custom and continuance of them, and also it is true that the devise of the use
and occupation of Land is a devise of the land it self, but not so in case of
goods, for one may have the occupation of the goods, and another the Interest,
and so it is where a man pawns goods and the like: For which cause the Court
all agreed that a Prohibition should be awarded.

Trin. 17o Car. in the Kings Bench.
184. A Man was sued in London according to the custom there, for calling a
woman Whore, upon which a Habeas corpus was brought in this Court; and
notwithstanding Oxfords case in the 4 Rep. 18. a. which is against it, a
Procedendo was granted: and it was said by Sergeant Pheasant who was for the
Procedendo, and so agreed by Bramston Chief Justice and Justice Malle^, That of
late times there have been many Procedendo's granted in the like case in this
Court.

185. An Orphan of London did exhibit a Bill in the Court of Requests against
another for discovery of part of his estate. And Sergeant Pheasant of Counsel
with the Defendant came into this Court and Prayed a Prohibition, upon the
custom of London, That Orphans ought to sue in the Court of Orphans in London:
but the whole Court which were then present, viz. Chief Justice Bramston, Heath
and Mallet Justices were against it, because that although the Orphan had the
Privilege to sue there, yet if he conceive it more secure and better for him
to sue in the Court of Requests, then he may waive his privilege of suing in
the Court of Orphans, and sue in the Court of Requests; for quilibet potest
renunciare juri pro se intraducto, etc. and Heath said, that he always
conceived the Law against the Case of Orphans, 5 Rep. 73. b. But which is
stronger in this Case, the Court of Orphans did consent to the Suit in the
Court of Requests; and therefore there is no reason that the Defendant should
compel the Infant to sue there, wherefore they would not grant a Prohibition,
but gave day until Mich. Term to the Defendants Counsel to speak further to the
matter if they could.

Trin. 17o Car. in the Common Pleas.
Dewel against Mason.
186. IN an Action upon the Case upon an Award, the case was this: The Award
was that the Defendant should pay to the Plaintiff eight pound, or three pound
and Costs of suit in an Action of Trespass betwixt the Plaintiff and Defendant,
as appears by a note under the Plaintiffs Attorneys hand, ad libitum
defendentis, etc. And the Plaintiff does not aver that a note was delivered by
the Attorney of the Plaintiff to the Defendant; and the Defendant pleaded Non
assumpsit, and it was found for the Plaintiff, and it was moved in arrest of
Judgment for the reason given before: Rolls contrary, that there needs no
averment, and he said it was Wilmots case adjudged in this Court, Hill. 15 Car.
where the Case was, that the Defendant should pay to the Plaintiff such costs
as shall be delivered by note of the Attorneys hand: and it was here adjudged
that there needs no averment, because it was to be done by a stranger, but
otherwise it had been, if it had been to be done by the Plaintiff himself: and
by the Justices, the only question here is, Whether the Attorney shall be taken
for a stranger or not? Justice Foster: that the Defendant ought first to make
his election; which is, to pay either the eight pound which is certain, or the
costs which shall be delivered by a note of the Attorney. Besides, here the
Attorney is a stranger, because the suit is ended, and to the Defendant he is
totally a stranger, and therefore he ought to seek him to have the note
delivered to him. But notwithstanding he did conceive that as this Case is,
Judgment ought to be stayed, because the Plaintiff has not well entitled
himself to the Action, because he has not averred that there were costs
expended in such a suit: and in the Case ci^ed by Rolls, the Plaintiff did aver
the costs uncertain. Justice Crawley: it is without question, the Defendant
has Election in this case* but as this Case is, he ought to have notice: and
if the Case had been such, that the Plaintiff himself had been to have
delivered the note, then without question there ought to be notice, and here
the Attorney is no stranger, but is a servant to the Plaintiff, as every
Attorney is, And I conceive, that if the Case had been that the Plaintiffs
servant had been to deliver such a note, that there notice ought to be given:
And for want thereof, in this Case I conceive that the Judgment ought to be
stayed. Banks Chief Justice: I doubt upon the different Opinions of my
Brethren, whether Judgment ought to be stayed or not. I agree that the
Defendant has Election in this Case; and further, I agree that where a thing
is to be done by the Plaintiff or D^fendant himself, there notice ought to be
given; but otherwise, in Case of a stranger, and upon this difference stands
our Books: as 10 H. 7. and all our Books: but the Question here is, Whether the
Attorney be a stranger or not? and I conceive that it is not in the power of
the Plaintiff to compel him to bring the note, and is all one as a stranger,
and therefore the Defendant ought to seek the Attorney to deliver this unto
him: but the Case was adjourned, because Justice Reeve was not present in Court.

187. A. said to B. Thou have killed my Brother: for which B. ought an Action
upon the Case; and by Sergeant Whitfield it will not lie, because it is not
averred that the Brother of the Defendant was dead at the time, and if he were
not dead, then it is no slander, because the Plaintiff is not in danger for it,
4 Rep. 16. a. Snaggs Case, A^^. Sergeant Evers contrary, because the words
imply that he is dead, and besides, in the (Innuendo) it is also showed that he
was ^ead, for that is the innuendo C. etc. fratrem nuper mortuum: But by the
whole Court the words are not actionable without averment that he was dead, and
the Innuendo does not help it, Hobarts Rep. p. 8. Miles and Jacobs Case, acc.

188. A Frenchman had his Ship taken by a Dunkirk upon the Sea, and before that
it was brought infra praesidia of the King of Spain, it was driven by a
contrary wind to Waymouth; and there the Dunkirk sold the Ship and Goods to a
Lord in Waymouth: whereupon the Frenchman having notice of his ship and goods
to be there, libelled in the Admiralty pro interesse suo, against the Lord the
Vendee of the Ship, showing that it was taken by Piracie and not by Letters of
Mart, as was pretended, and thereupon a Prohibition was prayed, and by Foster a
Prohibition ought to be granted, for whether the Dunkirk took it by Letters of
Mart or as a Pirate, it is not material, the sale being upon the Land and infra
corpus comitatus; and so he said it was adjudged in such a case, for whether
the sale were good or not, Non constat. Justice Crawley conceived it should be
hard that the sale being void, if it were taken as a Pirate, or by Letters of
Mart, not being brought infra pr^sidia of the King of Spain, that by this means
you should take away the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty, but he said he did
conceive it more fit for the Frenchman to have brought a Replevin, which he
said lies of a Ship, or Trover and Conversion, and so have had the matter
found specially. Banks Chief Justice conceived that there should be a
Prohibition, otherwise upon such pretense that it was not lawful prize, and by
consequence the sale void, you would utterly take away the Jurisdiction of the
Common Law. But because there was some misdemeanor in the Vendee, the Court
would not award a Prohibition, but awarded that the buyer should have
convenient time given him by the Court of Admiralty to find out the seller to
maintain his Title, and in the mean time that he give good caution in the
Admiralty, that if it be found against him, that then he restore the ship with
damages. But note, the Court did agree (Justice Reeve only absent) that if a
ship be taken by Piracie, or if by Letters of Mart, and be not brought infra
praesidia of that King by whose subject it was taken, that it is no lawful
prize, and the property not altered, and therefore the sale void; and that was
said by the Pr^cto^ of the Frenchman to be the Law of the Admiralty.

Rudston and Yates Case.
189. RVdston brought an Action of debt upon an Obligation against Yates for
not performance of an Award according to the Condition of the Bond: the
Defendant pleaded that the Arbitrators Non fecerunt arbitrium, upon which they
were at issue, and found for the Plaintiff; and it was now moved in arrest of
Judgment by Trevor, that the Defendant was an Infant, and therefore that the
submission was void, and by consequence the Bond which did depend upon it: and
he conceived the submission void, First, because it is a Contract, and an
Infant cannot contract: and he took a difference betwixt acts done which are ex
provisione legis, and acts done ex provisione of the Infant; an Infant may bind
himself for his diet, schooling and necessary apparel, for that is the
provision of the Law for his maintenance; but a Bond for other matters, or
Contracts of other nature which are of his own provision, those he cannot do.
Secondly, an Arbitrator is a Judge; and if an Infant should be permitted to
make an Arbitrator, he should make a Judge, who by the Law is not permitted to
make an Attorney, which were against reason. Thirdly, it is against the nature
of a Contract, which must be reciprocally binding; here the Infant should not
be bound, and the man of full age should be, which should be a great mischief.
And where it is objected, it may be for his benefit: To that he answered, that
the Law will not leave that to him to judge what shall be for his benefit, what
not: and to this purpose amongst other he cited it to be adjudged, That where
an Infant took a shop for his trading, rendering ren^, and in debt brought for
the rent the Infant pleaded his Infancy, the other replied that it was for his
benefit and liv^lihood, and yet it was adjudged for the Infant. vid. 13 H. 4.
12. and 10 H. 6. 14. Books in the point, and therefore he prayed that Judgment
might be stayed. Bramston, Heath and Mallet Justices, (Barckley being then
impeached for High Treason by the Parliament) were clear of Opinion, That the
submission by an Infant was void; and they all agreed, That if the Infant was
not bound, that the man of full age should not be bound; so that it should be
either totally good, or totally void. But Ward who was of Counsel with the
Plaintiff said, that the case was not that the infant submitted himself to the
award, but that a man of full age bound himself, that the Infant should perform
the Award, which was said by the Court quite to alter the Case. To that Trevor
said, that the case is all one; for there cannot be an Award if there be not
first* submission: and then the submission being void, the Award will be void,
and so by consequence the Bond: and to prove it, he cited 10 Rep. 171. b. where
it was adjudged that the nonperformance of a void Award did not forfeit the
Bon^ and many other Cases to that purpose. And the Court agreed That if the
Condition of a Bond recite, that where an Infa^^ has submitted himself to an
Award, that the Defendant does bind himself that the Infant shall perform it,
that the sam^ makes the Bond void, because the submission being void, all^
void, and therefore day was given to view the Record.

190. A. and B. are indicted for murder: B. flies, and A. brings a Certiorare
to remove the Indictment into the King^ Bench; Whether the whole Record be
removed, or but part^ Keeling the younger said, that all is removed, and that
the^ cannot be a Transcript in this Case, because he said the Writ says,
Recordum and processus cum omnibus ea tangentibus: but the Chief Justice
doubted of it, and he said that the Opinion of Markham in one of our Books is
against it; and he said it should be a mischievous case if it should be so, for
so the other might be attainted here by Outlawry who knew not of it; and note,
that Bramston Chief Justice said, That the Clerk of the Assizes might bring in
the Indictment propriis manibus if he would without a Certiorare.

190. A man was outlawed for Murder, and died: his Administrator brought a Writ
of Error to reverse the Outlawry, and it was prayed that he might appear by
Attorney, and by Bramston Chief Justice and Justice Mallet (none other being
then in Court) it was granted that he might, for they said that the reason
wherefore the party himself was bound to appear in proper person is, that he
may stand rectus in Curia, and that he may answer to the matter in fact; which
reason fails in this case, and therefore the Administrator may Appear by
Attorney.

191. One said of Mr. Hawes these words, viz. My Cozen Hawes has spoken
against the Book of Common Prayer; and said it is not fit to be read in the
Church: upon which Hawes brought an Action upon the case, and showed how that
he was cited into the Ecclesiastical Court by the Defendant, and had paid
several sums, etc. The Defendant denied the speaking of these words: upon which
they were at issue, and it was found for the Plaintiff; and now it was moved by
Keeling for stay of Judgment, That the words are not Actionable; as to say, A
man has spoken against a penal Law, which does not inflict punishment of life
and member, will not bear Action; and the punishment which is inflicted by the
Statute of 1 Eliz. cap. 2. is pecuniary only and not corporal; but in default
of payment of the sum, that he shall be imprisoned for such a time, which
merely depends upon the non-payment, and is uncertain: And by the same reason
he said, to say of a man, that he has not Bow and Arrows in his house, or not
a Gun: or to say of a man, That he has spoken against any penal Law
whatsoever, would bear Action, which should be unreasonable: wherefore he
prayed that Judgment might be stayed. Brown contrary; the words are actionable,
because that if it was true that he spoke them, he subjected himself to
imprisonment by the Statute of 1 Eliz. although not directly, yet in default of
payment; so as there might be corporal damage: and to prove it, he cited Anne
Davies Case 4 Rep. 17. a. where it is said, that to say that a woman has a
Bastard will bear Action, because that if it were true, she was punishable by
the Statute of 18 Eliz. Further, he said, that if the words are not Actionable,
yet the Action will lie for the special damage, which the Plaintiff has
suffered in the Ecclesiastical Court. Justice Mallet: the words of themselves
are not Actionable, because that the corporal punishment given by the Statute
does depend upon the nonpayment, and is not absolute of it self; but the Action
will lie for the temporal damage, and therefore he conceived that the Plaintiff
ought to have Judgment. Justice Heath: that the Plaintiff ought to have
Judgment for the pecuniary Mulct is a good cause of Action, there being in
default of payment, a corporal punishment given. But here is not only injuria,
but damnum also; which are the foundations of the Action upon the Case: and if
the words of themselves be not Actionable, yet the Action will lie for the
damage that the Plaintiff here suffered by the citation in the spiritual Court.
Bramston Chief Justice doubted it, and he conceived it hard that the words
should bear Action, because as he said the corporal punishment does merely
depend upon the not payment: and upon the same reason, words upon every penal
Law should bear Action; and therefore this being a leading Case, he took time
to consider of it. It was said, To say of a man, that he had received a Romish
Priest, was adjudged Actionable, and that was agreed, because it is Felony. At
another day the Case was moved again, and Justice Mallet was of the same
Opinion as before, viz. That the words themselves were not actionable, but for
the special damage that the Action would lie; and he said, that one said of
another, That he was a Recusant; for which an Action was brought in the Common
Pleas, and he conceived the Action would not lie. Justice Heath was of the same
Opinion as before, that the words o^ themselves would bear Actio^ and ^e
conceived, That if a man speak such words of another, that if they were true,
would make him liable to a pecuniary, or corporal punishment, that they would
bear an Action, and here the Plaintiff was endamaged, and therefore without
question they will bear an Action. Bramston Chief Justice, as before also; That
the words are not Actionable, neither of themselves, nor for the damage; not of
themselves, for no words which subject a man to a pecuniary Mulct if they were
true, either at the Common Law, or by the Statute, will bear an Action: For by
the same reason, to say that a man has erected a Cottage, or to say that a man
has committed a Riot, would bear Action, 37 Eliz. in the Common Pleas. One
said of another, That he did assault me, and took away my Purse from me* and
upon Not Guilty pleaded, it was found for the Plaintiff, and Judgment was
stayed, because he might take his purse from him, and yet be but a Trespasser:
So as it appears that words ought to have a favorable construction, to avoid
multiplicity of Suits: and if these words would bear an Action, by the same
reason words spoken against every penal Law should bear Action, which against
the reason given before should be a means to increase Suits. And he took it for
a rule, If the words import scandal of themselves, by which damage may accrue,
then the words will bear action without damage, otherwise not, and therefore
the damage here shall not make the words Actionable which of themselves are not
actionable, as I conceive they are not. Besides, by this means the Act of a
third person should prejudice me, which is against reason, as here the Act of
the Ordinary by the Citation and damage thereupon accrued, which perhaps might
be ex officio only, for which cause he conceived that Judgment should be
stayed, but because there were two Judges against one, Judgment was given for
the Plaintiff.

Mich. 17o of the King, in the Common Pleas.
192. BAine brought an Action upon the Case against -- for these words, viz.
That he kept a false Bushel, by which he did cheat and cosen the poor; and he
said in his Declaration, That he was a Farmor of certain lands, and used to sow
those lands, and to sell the Corn growing on them, and thereby per majorem
partem used to maintain himself and his family* and that those words were
spoken to certain persons who used to buy of him, and that by reason of those
words, that he had lost their custom; the parties were at issue upon the words,
and found for the Plaintiff, and it was moved by Sergeant Gotbold in arrest of
Judgment, that the words were not actionable, because that the Plaintiff does
not allege that he kept the false Bushel, knowing the same to be a false
Bushel, for if he did not know it to be a false Bushel, he was not punishable,
and by consequence no Action will lie; and compared it to the case, Where a man
keeps a Dog that uses to worry sheep, but he does not know of it, no Action
lies against him for it: but yet notwithstanding, Banks chief Justice and
Crawley were of Opinion, that the words were Actionable, for of necessity it
ought to be taken that he kept the Bushel knowingly, for otherwise it is no
cousenage; and here being special damage alleged, which was the loss of his
custom, as he had pleaded it, the maintenance of his livelihood, they hold the
words clearly actionable, and gave Judgment accordingly. Note, the other Judges
were in Parliament.

193. Doctor Brownlow brought an Action upon the case for words against (...)
spoken of him as a Physician, which words were agreed to be Actionable, but yet
Sergeant Gotbold conceived that although that the words were actionable, that
the Plaintiff had not well entitled himself to his Action, because although
that he said that he is in Medicinis Doctor, yet because he does not show that
he was licens^d by the College of Physicians in London, or that he was a
Gr^d^ate of the Universities according to the Statute of 14. H. 8. cap. 5. that
therefore the action will not lie, see Doctor B^unchams case 8 Rep. 113. ^.
where he showed the Statute a^or^said, and pleaded it accordingly, that he was
a Graduate of the University of Cambridge, wherefore he prayed that Judgment
might be stayed. Banks Chief Justice and Crawley doubted whether the Act were
a general Act or not; for if it were a particular Act, he ought to have pleaded
it; otherwise that they could not take notice of it; but upon reading of the
Statute in Court, they agreed that it was a general Act, wherefore they gave
day to the party to maintain his Plea.

194. By Banks Chief Justice: upon an Elegit there needs no Liberate,
otherwise upon a Statute: and note, the Elegit does except Averia Corucae.

Dye and Olives Case.
195. IN an Action of false Imprisonment, the Defendant showed, that London
has a Court of Record by prescription, and that the same was confirmed by Act
of Parliament, and that he was one of the Sergeants of the Mace of that Court,
and that he had a Warrant directed unto him out of that Court to arrest the
Plaintiff pro quodam contemptu committed to the Court for not paying twenty
shillings to K. B. and that in pursuance of the command of the Court, he
accordingly did arrest the Plaintiff. Maynard: that the justification was not
good, because the Defendant does not show what the contempt was, nor in what
Action, so as it might appear to the Court whether they had Jurisdiction or
not: And if such general Plea should be tolerated, every Court would usurp
Jurisdiction, and every Officer would justify, where the proceeding is C^ram
non Iudice and void, and thereby the O^^icer liable to false Imprisonment,
according to the case of the Marshal^ee in the 10 Rep. And here the pleading is
uncertain, that the Jury cannot try it: and he put the case of the Mayo^ of
Plymouth. The Mayor has Juris^iction in D^bt, and Trespass is brought there,
which is Coram non Iudice. But in this Action the par^y is imprisoned pro
quodam contemptu, shall this be a good Justification in a false imprisonment
brought against the Officer? certainly no. Sergeant Rolls contrary, that the
Plea was good, because that the Defendant has showed that the Court was holden
secundum consuetudinem, and therefore it shall be intended that the contempt^
was committed in a Case within their Jurisdiction; and therefore he cited the 8
Rep. Turners Case, to which Maynard replied, that that does not make it good,
because that issue cannot be taken upon it. At another day, the Judges gave
their Opinions; Justice Mallet: That the Plea is not good, because that it is
too general, and non constat whether within their Jurisdiction or not: and
where it was objected that he is a Minister of the Court, and ought to obey
their commands, and therefore it should go hard that he should be punished for
it, he conceived that there is a difference betwixt an Officer of an inferior
Court which ousts the Common Law of Jurisdiction, and one of the four Courts at
Westminster; for where an Officer justifies an Act done by the command of an
Inferior Court, he ought to show precisely that it was in a Case within their
Jurisdiction; and he cited 20 H. 7. the Abbot of St. Alb^rs case. Justice Heath
contrary; the party is servant to the Court, and if he have done his duty, it
should be hard that he should be punished for it: and he agreed that there is a
difference betwixt the Act of a Constable and a Justice of Peace, and the Act
of a Servant of a Court, for the Servant ought to obey his Master; and although
it be an inferior Court, yet it is a Court of Record, and confirmed by Act of
Parliament and all that is confessed by the Demurrer. Bramston Chief Justice:
that the Plea is naught, because that it is too general and uncertain; true it
is, that it is hard that the Officer should be punished in this case for his
obedience to which he is bound, and it is as true that the Officer for doing of
an act by the command of the Court, whether it be just or unjust, is excused,
if it appear that the Court has Jurisdiction: but here it does not appear that
the Court has Jurisdiction; and if the Court had not Jurisdiction, then it is
clear that the Officer by obeying the Court when they have not Jurisdiction,
does subject himself to an Action of false imprisonment, as it is in the Case
of the Marshalsy in the 10 Rep. but it was adjorned, etc.

The Bishop of Hereford and Okeleys Case.
196. THe Bishop of Hereford brought a Writ of Error against Okeley, to reverse
a Judgment given in the Common Pleas: the point was briefly this. One under the
age of twenty three years is presented to a Benefice, Whether the Patron in
this case shall have notice, or that lapse otherwise shall not incur to the
Bishop, which is grounded upon the Statute of 13 Eliz. cap. 12. And upon debate
by the Counsel of the Plaintiff in the Writ of Error, that which was said being
upon the general Law of notice, nothing moved the Court against the Judgment
given in the Common Pleas upon solemn debate, as it was said, and therefore
they gave day to show better matter, or else that Judgment should be affirmed.
The Reasons of the Judgment in the Common Pleas were two. First, upon the
Proviso of the Statute, which says, That no Lapse shall incur upon any
deprivation ips^ facto without notice. Second reason was upon the body of the
Act; which is, That admission, institution, and induction shall be void, but
speaks nothing of presentation; so as the presentation remaining in force, the
Patron ought to have notice, and that was said was the principal reason upon
which the Judgment was given: and upon the same reasons the Court here, viz.
Mallet, Heath, and Bramston* Justices, held clearly that the notice ought to be
given, or otherwise that Lapse shall not incur: but they agreed that if the Act
had avoided the presentation also, that in such case the Patron ought to have
taken notice at his peril, being an avoydance by Statute, if the Proviso help
it not.

Mich. 17o of the King, in the Common Pleas.
197. A. Said of B. that he kept false weights; for which words B. brought an
Action upon the case, and showed how that he got his living by buying and
selling, but did not show of what profession he was; and by all the Court, viz.
Foster, Reeve, Crawley, and Banks in the Common Pleas, the Action will not
lie. First, because he does not show of what Trade or profession he was; and it
is too general to say that he got his living by buying and selling. Secondly,
because although that he had showed of what Trade he was, as that he was a
Mercer, as in truth he was, that yet the words are not actionable, because
there is nothing showed to be done with them, or that he used them: and it can
be no scandal, if the words do not import an act done by the false weights, for
he may keep them and yet not use them; and he may keep them that another do not
use them; and the keeping of false weights is presentable in Leet, if the party
use them, otherwise not. And where one said of another, That he kept a false
Bushel, by which he did cheat and cosen the poor; the same was adjudged
actionable, that is, True; and differs from this case, for there he said, he
not only kept them, but used them, and cheated with them; but it is otherwise
in our case: and this case was compared to Hobarts Reports, where one said of
another, That he kept men which did rob upon the Highway: and adjudged that
the words were not actionable, for he might keep them and not know of it.
Banks: the action upon the case for words is to recover damages: and here it
can be no damage. First, because he does not show of what profession he was:
and Secondly, because although he had showed it, yet the words will not bear
Action: and Judgment was given against the Plaintiff.

198. It was moved by Sergeant Wild, That depositions taken in the
Ecclesiastical Court might be given in evidence in a Trial in this Court; and
the Court was against it, because they were not taken in a Court of Record; and
they said, although the parties were dead, yet they ought not to be allowed;
and by Banks Chief Justice, no depositions ought to be allowed which are not
taken in a Court of Record. and Foster and Reeve were of Opinion, that although
the parties would assent to it, yet they ought not to be given in evidence
against the constant rule in such case. Crawley contrary, for he said, that a
writing which by the Law is not Evidence, might be admitted as Evidence by the
consent of the parties.

200. A man was bound to keep a Parish harmless from a Bastard-child, and for
not performance thereof, the Obligee brought Debt upon the Bond: the Defendant
pleaded that he had saved the Parish harmless, and did not show how the
Plaintiff replied, and showed how that the Parish was warned before the
Justices of Peace at the Sessions of Peace, and was there ordered by Record to
pay so much for the keeping of the child; and because the Defendant had not
saved him harmless, etc. The Defendant pleaded, Null tiel Record, upon which the
Plaintiff did demur. And here two things were resolved: First, that the Plea
Null tiel Record upon an Order at Sessions of Peace is a good Plea, because that
an Order at the Sessions of Peace is a Record. Secondly, that notwithstanding
Judgment ought to be given for the Plaintiff, because the D^fendants bar was
not good, in that he has pleaded in the affirmative that he has saved the
Parish harmless, and does not show how as he ought to have done: but he ought
to have pleaded non damnificatus, and that had been good without any further
showing, which he has not done, and therefore the Plea was not good; and it
was agreed that the same was not helped by the Demurrer, because the same was
matter of substance, but the Plaintiff might take advantage of it
notwithstanding, and therefore Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

201. In Debt Judgment was given against the principal, whereupon a Scire
facias issued forth against the Bail, and Judgment upon Nihil dicit was given
against them: whereupon a Writ of Error was brought, and Error assigned, that
there was no warrant of Attorney filed for the Plaintiff; and upon debate
whether the warrant of Attorney ought to be filed or on, the Court seemed to
incline their opinion upon these differences, but gave not any Judgment. First,
where it may appear to the Court, that there was a warrant of Attorney, and
where not. If there was not any warrant of Attorney, there they cannot order the
making of one; but if there was one, they conceived that they might order the
filing of it. Second difference, Where the warrant wanting, were of the part of
the Defendant, and where of the part of the Plaintiff, in the Writ of Error: if
it be of the part of the Plaintiff, such a warrant of Attorney shall not be
filed, because he shall not take advantage of his own wrong: the last thing
was, where the Record by the lachess of the Plaintiff in the Writ of Error is
not certified in due time, there the warrant of Attorney shall be filed: And the
Books cited to warrant these differences were, 2 H. 8. 28. 7 H. 4. 16. 2 Eliz.
Dyer 180. 5 Eliz Dyer 225. 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. Dyer 105. 15 Eliz. Dyer 330.
20 Eliz. Dyer 363. and 6. El. Dyer 230. Note, that it was said by Crawley, That
it is all one where there is no warrant of Attorney, and where there is; and he
said, there are many Presidents accordingly, and that the same is helped by the
Statute of 8 H. 6. cap. 1, 2. But Banks Chief Justice contrary, That it is not
helped by the Statute of H. 6. and so it is resolved in the 8 Rep. 162. And he
caused the Pro^onotharies so search Presidents, but yet he said they should not
sway him against the printed Law, because they might pass sub silentio. And the
Chief Justice observed also, that the same is not helped by the Statute of 18
Eliz. for that helps the want of warrant of Attorney after Verdict only, and not
upon Nihil dicit, as this case is, or upon wager of Law, or upon confession, or
non sum informatus: And the Court said, That it shall be a mischievous case,
that Attorneys should be suffered to file their warrants of Attorney when they
pleased; and therefore they gave warning, that none should be filed after the
Term, and willed that the Statute of 18 Eliz. cap. 16. should be put in
execution.

Mich. 17o Car. in the Kings Bench.
202. ACertiorare was directed to the Commissioners of Sewers, who according to
the Writ made a Certificate, to which Certificate diverse exceptions were taken
by Saint-Iohn the Kings Solicitor. First, that it appears not by the
Certificate, that the Commission was under the Great Seal of England, as it
ought to be by the Statute of 23 H. 8. cap. 5. Secondly, the Certificate does
not express the names of the Jurors, nor show that there were twelve sworn, who
made the pr^sentment, as by the Law it ought to be, but only quod praesentatum
fuit per Iurator'; so that there might be but two or three. Thirdly, it appears
by the Certificate, that it was presented by the Jury, That the Plaintiff ought
to repair such a Wall, but it is not showed for what cause; either by reason of
his Land, prescription or otherwise. Fourthly, they present that there wants
reparation, but does not show that it lies within the Level and Commission.
Fifthly, there was an Assesment without a presentment, contrary to the Statute,
for it is presented that such a Wall wanted reparation, and the Commissioners
assessed the Plaintiff for reparation of that Wall and another, for which there
was no presentment. Sixthly, the Tax was laid upon the person, whereas by the
Statute it ought to be laid upon the La^d Seventhly, there was no not^ce given
to the Plaintiff, which as he conceived ought to have been, by reason of the
great penalty which fol^ows for non-payment of the Assesment: for by the
Statute the Land ought to be sold for want of payment. These were the Principal
exceptions taken by the Solicitor. Lane the Princes Attorney took other
exceptions. First, because they assess the Plaintiff upon information; for they
said that they were credibly informed, that such a Wall wanted reparation, and
that the Plaintiff ought for to repair it; whereas they ought to have done it
upon presentment, and not upon information, or their private knowledge.
Secondly, that they assessed the Plaintiff, and for not payment sold the
distress, which by the Law they ought not to do, for that enables them only to
distrein; and it was intended by the Statute, that a Replevin might be brought
in the Case for it gives Avow^y or Justification of a distress taken by reason
of the Commission of Sewers, and there ought to be a Replevin, otherwise no
avowty; and if Sale of the distress should be suffered, then that privilege
given by the Parliament should be taken away, which is not reasonable: Keeling
of the same side, and he said, that it was adjudged, Pasch. 14 Car in this
Court in Hungers case, That the certificate of the Commissioners was
insufficient, because that it was not showed that the Commission was under the
Great S^al of England, as by the Statute it ought to be: and the Judges then in
Court, viz. Mallet, Heath and Bramston, strongly inclined to many of the
exceptions, but chiefly to that, that there wanted virtute Literarum Paten. But
day was given to hear Counsel of the other side.

203. A man acknowledges a Statute, and afterward grants a Rentcharge, the
Statute is afterward satisfied, Whether the grantee of the rent may distrein
without suing a Scire facias was the Question, which was twice or thrice
debated at the Bar; but because it was before that Mallet the puisne Judge was
Judge, the Court gave order that it should be argued again.

Thornedike against Turpington in the Common Pleas.
204. IN Debt upon a Bond, the Defendant demanded Oyer of the Condition, and
had it, which was, that the Defendant should pay so much in a house of the
Plaintiffs at Lincoln. The Defendant pleaded payment at Lincoln aforesaid, upon
which they were at issue, and the Venire facias was De Vicines civitatis
Lincoln, and found for the Plaintiff. And now it was moved in arrest of
Judgment, that it was a mis-trial; because the Venire facias ought to have been
of the body of the County, and not of the City, which was also a County of it
self: but it was resolved by the Judges, viz. Foster, Reeve, and Banks chief
Justice, (Justice Crawley only against it) that the trial was good: and this
resolution was grounded upon the Book of 34 H. 6. 49 and 50. pl. 17. there
being no authority in the Law (as was agreed) in point to this case, but the
Case aforesaid. And it was taken for a rule, that where it does not appear upon
the Record, that there is a more proper place for trial, than where the trial
was, that there the trial is good: but here is not a more proper place.
Further, the chief Justice said, that it was not possible to be tried in the
body of the County, because that the payment was to be in the City; and he
said, it is true, that if a man speak generally of the County of Lincoln; it
shall be intended of the body of the County, and not the City, because that the
City is but derivative out of the County: and further he said, that the Judges
are bound to take notice of a County, not of a particular liberty: Yet it was
resolved here, because the trial was in the most proper place, and could not be
otherwise, that the Venire facias was well awarded, and the trial good. See the
Book of 34. H. 6.

Bailey against Garford.
205. Bailey brought an Action of Debt upon a Bond against Garford executor of
another: the Defendant pleaded Non est factum of the Testator, upon which a
special Verdict was given, viz. That the Testator was bound in that Bond with
two others jointly and severally; and that afterward the Seals of the two
others were eaten with mice and r^ts; and whether now that were the Bond of the
Testator or not was the Question: which the Jury referred to the Court, and it
was now argued by Sergeant Whitfield for the Plaintiff, that the Obligation
stood good against the Defendant, notwithstanding the eating of the Seals of
the two others: and his reason was, Because that where three are bound jointly
and severally, that is all one as if they had been several Obligations: for as
when three are bound jointly and severally there may be one Precipe, one
Declaration, and one Ex^cution against them all together; so when three are
bounden jointly and severally, there may be several Precipes, several
Declarations, and several Executions against them, so it is as it were several
and distinct Obligations, and therefore the avoiding of part, is not the
avoiding of the whole. Further, he put cases where a Deed which is entire may
be void in part, and good for the residue, 14 H. 8. 25 and 26. 9. H. 6. 15. and
Piggots Case, 11 Rep. 27. Where it is resolved that if some of the Covenants of
an Indenture, or conditions of a Bond are against the Law, and some good and
lawful, that in that case the covenants and conditions which are against the
Law, are void ab initio, and the others shall stand good: and he cited the 5
Rep. 23. Matthewsons Case, as a strong case to this purpose. But the Court
said, that that case of the 5 Rep. differed from this case: for there certain
persons covenant separatim, and there the breaking of the Seal of one of the
parties from the deed shall not avoid the whole deed, for it is as several
deeds; but here they are bound jointly and severally, which alter^th the case.
Besides, he said the Book in 3 H. 7. 5. made not against it, for there it shall
be taken that they were bound jointly and not severally as in this case; and he
cited a Rep^rt in the point, which was Trinit. 2. Iae. in this Court betwixt
Banning and Symmonds, where the Case was, That twenty ^^ght Merchants were
bound jointly and severally (as^^ur case is) and three of their seals were
broken from the de^d, but notwithstanding it was resolved that the deed did
(...) good against the others (note, that the Court doubted of that Report, and
therefore ordered that the Roll should be searched) and the Objecti^^ here,
that it is joint, is worth nothing, because it is several also; and he said,
that i^ two levy a Fine, one within age, and the other of full age, he said it
is good in part, and voidable in part; and if a Fine, which is a matter of
Record, may be good in part and voidable in part, afor^iori he conceived a
matter in fait, as a Bond: and (...) of the Fine he said was Englishes case
adjudged: and he would have taken a difference betwixt Rasing, Inter^^^tion and
Addition, as is in Piggots Case, that the same shall avoid the whole deed. But
that the breaking of the Seal of one should not avoid it but for part. But the
Court said, That it was clearly all one, wherefore he prayed Judgment for the
(...) Sergeant Pheasant contrary, That the whole deed is avoid^d, and non est
factum of the Defendant, it is not the same B^^d in nature and effect as it was
before, and as 5 Rep. 119 W^elpdales Case, is if the deed were altered by
inter^^^ation, ^odition, rasure and breaking of the Seal, there the D^^^nd^nt
may plead non est factum, because it is not the same deed: so in this case it
is not the same deed, for whereas it was joint at the first, now if the deed
should stand good against the Defendant only, it should be his Bond only, where
it was his Bond, and the Bond of another at the first, and so not the same
Bond; and 3 H. 7. 5. ought to be taken of a Bond joint and several, because
that most Bonds are so, and then it is clear our very Case, and there it is
resolved, That if two be bounden in a Bond, and the Seal of one is dissolved
and taken from the Bond, that it avoids the whole deed, and it is not an
Obligation joint and several, but joint or several at the Election of the
Obligee, for he cannot use both; and when he has by his own Act deprived
himself of this Election (as in our Case) which goes in prejudice of the
Obligor, who is the Defendant, the whole Bond is thereby gone, for by that
means the Defendant only shall be charged, where both were; and therefore he
conceived that if I grant unto a man an Annuity, or a robe, if the grantee
release one of them, both are gone, because he has deprived himself of
Election: so in this case: he by his default should prejudice the defendant
here, which ought not to be, and he compared this case to Laughters case, C. 5.
Rep. 21. Besides, if the whole deed should not thereby be avoided, it should be
a great prejudice to the Defendant, in as much as if all happen to be in
execution for the debt due upon that Bond, as by the Law they may, and the one
escape, the same should give advantage to the others to have Audita querela,
and by that to discharge themselves, which the Defendant here should lose, if
the Obligation should stand in force as to him only, 8 Rep. 136. Sir John
Needhams case, If a woman Obligee takes one of the Obligors to be her Husband,
the same is a discharge to the other. Two commit a trespass, the discharge of
one is the discharge of both, yet it is there joint or several at the will of
the party who releaseth. But it may be objected, that it is a Casual act here,
and therefore shall not be so prejudicial to the Plaintiff here. To that he
answered, That that shall not help him, because it is his own lachess and
default; and the same Objection might have been made in Piggots case, where the
Obligation is altered in a material place by a stranger without the privity of
the Obligee, and yet there it was resolved that the same shall avoid the deed.
Besides, if the Obligee had delivered the same over to another to keep, and it
had been eaten with Rats and Mice, yet that would not excuse him, and by the
same reason shall not help the Plaintiff here. Matthewsons Case, C. 5 Rep.
differs much from this case, because there the Covenants are several, and not
joint as in this Case, and therefore if the Covenan^ee does release to one of
the covenanters, that shall not discharge the others. For the Cases of 14 H. 8.
and Piggots Case they differ much from our Case, for there the covenants or
conditions against the Law are void ab initio by the construction of the Law,
and no alteration as in our case by the Act or default of the party by matter
ex post facto, and therefore those Covenants or Conditions against the Law
cannot vitia^e those which were good and according to Law, because they took
not any effect at all. So if a Monk and another be bound, the Bond is void as
to the Monk, and good as to the other, because there is no subsequent
alteration by the party; but the same is void by construction of law ab initio:
and upon the same reason stands the Case of the Fine put of the other side. For
which causes he prayed Judgment for the Defendant. Note, the Court, viz.
Foster, Reeve, Crawley and Banks Chief Justice did strongly incline that
Judgment ought to be given for the Defendant; and their reason was, That if the
Obligee by his Act or own lachess discharge one of the Obligors, where they are
jointly and severally bound, that the same discharges them all: but gave day
for the further debating of the Case, for that this was the first time it was
argued.

207. By Justice Foster and Banks Chief Justice, a Trust is not within the
Statute of 21 Iac. cap. 16. of Limitations; and therefore no lapse of time
shall take away remedy in Equity for it; but for other Actions which are within
the Statute, and the time elapsed by the Statute, there is no remedy in Equity;
and that (they said) was always the difference taken by my Lord Keeper
Coventry: but Justice Crawley said, that he had conferred with the Lord Keeper,
and that he told him that remedy in Equity was not taken away in other Actions
within this Statute.

208. It was said by the whole Court, that they never grant an Attachment
without an Affidavit in writing.

209. The Case before of the warrant of Attorney, was betwixt Firburne and
Cruse, and was entered Trinit. 17 Car. And now it was resolved upon reading of
Presidents in Court, that no warrant of Attorney shall be made or filed,
because that it is an error and not helped, being after judgment in Nihil
dicit, and that none of the presidents came to our case. The greatest part of
presidents were these, viz. the first was 1 Car. Tailor against Thellwell, the
same appeared to be upon demurrer, and no Judgment given. Another was Mich. 3
Car. Peasgrove against Brook, and in that Case it did not appear that any Writ
of Error was brought. Another was, Paseh. 5. Car. Tailor against Sands. Another
Hill. 6. Car. Smith against Bland, in that it was conceived to be amendment
only; and it was agreed for Law, that where there was a warrant of Attorney, it
might be amended for any defect in it, as where there is a misprision of the
name or the like, as it is resolved Br. amendment 85. and so is 1 and 2 Phil.
and Mar. Dyer 105. pl. 6. expressly, where Alicia for Elizabetha in the warrant
of Attorney was amended; and that after a Writ of Error brought by construction
of the Statute of 8 H. 6. and so is 9 E. 4. Br. amendment 47. And Justice Reeve
said, it cannot appear to us by any of the said Presidents, whether there was a
warrant of Attorney or not: and perhaps upon examination it might appear to the
Judges that there was a warrant of Attorney, which is helped by the Statute of 8
H. 6. and that might be the reason which caused them to order that it should be
filed; but that does not appear to us, and therefore the presidents were not to
the purpose. Besides, it does not appear by any of them whether judgment were
given or not; and before judgment it may be amended, as the Book is, 9 E. 4.
14. br. amendment 47. Besides, in one of them the Plaintiff did neglect to
remove the Record, which is the very case in Dyer, and that was the reason that
the warrant of Attorney was filed, but in this Case there appearing to be no
warrant of Attorney it is not helped by the Statute of 8 H. 6. and after a
Judgment, and that upon Nihil dicit, which is not helped by the Statute of 18
Eliz* and there is no Lachess in removing of the Record by the Plaintiff, and
for these reasons the whole Court was against the Defendant in the Writ of
Error, that it was Error, and therefore ought not to be amended. Note, that in
this Case it was moved that the warrant of Attorney might be filed in this
Court, after Error brought in the Kings Bench: but observe, that if it had been
a thing amendable, that had been no impediment to it, for things amendable
before Error brought, are amendable after, and if the inferior Court do not
amend them, the superior may, and so it is adjudged 8 Rep. 162. in Blackm^res
case. and so is the Case express in the point, 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. Dyer 105.
pl. 16. Where a warrant of Attorney was amended in Banco after Error brought
and the Record certified. This is only my own observation upon the Cale.

Mich. 17o Car. in the Kings Bench.
210. AN information was brought for the King against Edgerley Carrier of
Oxford, because that where by the custom of England no Carrier or other person
ought to carry above two thousand weight, and that with a Wagon having but two
wheels, and but four horses, that the Defendant had used for the space of a
year last past to drive Quoddam g^statorium, Anglice a Drag or Wagon, Cum
quatuor rotis and cum inusitato numero equorum, viz. with twelve Horses betwixt
Oxford and London, and he had used to carry with it five thousand weight, so
that he had dug and spoiled the way in a Lane called Lobbe-Lane, that the
people could not pass. To which the Defendant pleaded Not Guilty, and was found
guilty by Verdict; and many exc^ptions were taken to the Information: all which
were over ruled by the Cour^, viz. Mallet and Heath Justices, and Bramston
Chief Justice, to be (...): the first was, That he drove a Wagon Cum i^usitato
numero equorum, and does not show the certain number of them, and therefore the
Information which was in the nature of a Declaration was not good for the
incertainty. But per Cu^iam the same was mistaken, for it says, that he drove
with eleven horses. The second exception was, That the usual weight which it
ought to carry is not showed; but that was ruled also to be a mistake, for it
says 2000 weight. The third was, that it is not showed in the Information that
the way did lead to other Market Towns than from Oxford to London; but it was
ruled to be good notwithstanding that exception, because that the place a quo,
and the place ad quem is set down. And it is not material whether it lead to
other towns or not. The fourth exception was, That the Nuisance is said to be in
a place called Lobbe-Lane, and it is not showed of what quantity or extent that
Lane is, viz. how many poles or the like: but it was ruled to be good,
notwithstanding that, First, because that the Jury have found that the way was
stopped that the people could not pass; and if it was so, then it is not material
how long it was. Secondly, Lobbe-Lane is said only for the certainty of the
place, that the Vi^^e might come from it: for of necessity it will be a Nuisance
through the whole way betwixt Oxford and London. And Lastly, the Nuisance is
laid to be through all Lobbe Lane, and therefore it is good notwithstanding
that exceptson also. And therefore the matter and form of the Information being
admitted good, then the Question was, what Judgment sh^ould be given in this
Case; whether that the Carrier should repair it at his own costs, or should be
fined for the Nuisance to the Commonwealth or not? Justice Mallet: there are
several Judgments in Cases of Nuisance; if it be an assise quia levavit, or quia
exaltavit, it ought to be part of the Judgment, that the Defendant demolish it
at his own costs: so where a Nuisance is to a River, 19 Ass. pl. 6. But our Case
differs much from the case of the River, for that is a Highway which leads
to a Port to which all resort, and therefore a stronger Case: but he conceived
that the Judgment should not be that he should repair it, because it is said in
the Information, that the Township ought, and therefore it differs from those
Cases: and he doubted whether he should be fined or no, because that the
information is not vi. and armis, and not against any Sta^ute, for then it
should be a contempt, and so fineable: but notwithstanding he agreed, that he
should be fined. First, because it is laid to be Contra pacem Domini Regis,
and ad nocumentum of the Kings people, which is a contempt, and therefore
fineable. Secondly, because that although it is not laid to be vi and armis,
yet it is laid to be a rooting and spoiling, which implies fo^^e; 11 Ass. and
19 Ass. 6. where a Nuisance was with force, there the Defendant was fined: Then
admitting that the Defendant shall be fined; the Question then is, What fine
shall be set upon him? and he said, that it shall be Secundum quantitatem
delicti, and salvo wainagio suo, according to the Statute of Magna Charta, cap.
14. and West. 2. So that we ought not to assess a Fine upon any Freeholder to
take away his contenement; no^ upon any Villain to take away his wainage; and
he said, that he conceived that the fine set upon him ought to be the less, for
the great prejudice which might come to the Defendant, because that the
Township might have an Action upon the Case against him, because they are bound
to repair it, and therefore he cited 27 H. 8. 27. Further, he took exception to
it, that it is not showed of what value or estate the Defendant is, so as we
might know what fine to impose; for such fine ought to be imposed Salvo
w^inagio suo as aforesaid: and he compared it to the Case in 4 E 4. 36. a Juror
is demanded, and does not appear, he shall be fined to the value of his estate
for a year: but that ought to be enquired of by the Jury, and not set by the
Court, because they do not know the value of his estate, so in this Case: but
notwithstanding he agreed, that he should be fined, because it appears to us
how great his fault was, and the fine ought to be as aforesaid, and therefore
he set a fine upon him of four Marks. Justice Heath: two things are here
considerable, whether there shall be any Judgment as this Case is; and
admitting that there shall, what Judgment shall be given; and he agreed that
Judgment should be given, because that the Information is good, as well for the
form as for the matter of it: it is good for the matter of it, because Malum in
se and ad nocumentum publicum, and therefore it is properly p^^^shable in this
Court, and the rather now, because not punishable in another Court, the
Star Chamber b^ing now taken away: and it is good for the form of it, for it
has sufficient certainty, as is before showed. Now for the judgm^nt what shall
be given, he agreed that he should b^ fined and imprisoned; for imprisonment is
incident to a fine, but he did not determine what the fine should be, he agreed
the Rule that the fine shall be secundum quantitatem delicti, and that cannot
be so ^ittle as it is made: for although Lobbe-Lane be laid in which the
Nuisance should be, that is only for necessity, that there may be a certain
place for the Vis^e, but of necessity the N^^ance is through the whole Highway
betwixt Oxford a^^ London. And because we will not offend as the Star Chamber
did by assessing too high fines, for which it was justly condemned; so upon the
other side, we ought not to set so small fines, that we injure Justice, and be
thereby an occasion to increase such faults where we ought to suppress them:
and therefore he conceived the fine set by Mallet too little; but he agreed,
that the Judgment should be fine and imprisonment; but he adjorned the setting
of the fine, until he had consulted with the Clerks, whether it should be
inquired of by Commission, or other good information. Bramston Chief Justice,
that the Information is good for the matter and the form: but he objected, that
where it is said, that he did drive quoddam gestatorium, that gestatorium is a
word uncertain, and that therefore the Information should be insufficient; but
he agreed that notwithstanding that, that it was good by reason of the Auglice*
for that reduces it to certainty; and he cited the Case betwixt Sprigge and
Rawlinson, P^seh. 15 Car. in this Court; where the Case was, that a man brought
an Ejectione firm de uno repositorio, which word was put for a Warehouse, and
resolved that it was naught for the incertainty, but the Chief Justice here
said that it had been good if it had been explained by an Anglice, and so he
said it was resolved in that Case, and therefore he agreed that the Information
here was good notwithstanding that exception by reason of the Anglice, this
offense is an offense against the Commonwealth, and such an offense for which a
man may be indicted, for it is said in the Information to be ad nocumentum
Ligeorum Domini Regis, wherefore he agreed that the Judgment should be a fine
with Capiatur, and he said, that it cannot be part of the Judgment in this
Case, that the Defendant should repair it, because it is said in the
Information expressly, tha^ the Parishioners ought to repair it: and the Chief
Justice said, (and so Justice Heath which I before omitted) that the Township
cannot have their Actions, for so there should be multiplicity of Actions,
which the Law will not suffer; but he conceived that if any man had a special
and peculiar damage, then he might have his Action, otherwise not: as if a man
were bound by prescription or tenure to repair that place called Lobbe-Lane, or
any part of it, then he might have his action upon the Case against the
defendant, otherwise not: he agreed that the fine should be secundum
quantitatem delicti* but yet not too high, because the other Parishes may have
their Information in like manner against the Defendant, but he agreed to adjorn
the setting of the fine.

Southward against Millard.
209. IN an Ejectione firm, the Defendant pleaded Not Guilty. Upon which a
special Verdict was found. Nicholls possessed of a Term for 1000 years, devised
the same to E. his daughter for life, the remainder to John Holloway; and made
Low the Husband of the Daughter his Executor and died: John Holloway devised
his interest to Henry and George Holloway, and made Oliver and others his
Executors and died; afterward Low spoke these words: If E. my wife were dead,
my estate in the premises were ended, and then it remains to the Holloways. E.
died, the Executors of John Holloway made the Lease to the Plaintiff, and Low
made the Lease to the Defendant, who entered upon the Plaintiff, who brought
Ejectione firm; and whether upon the whole matter the Defendant were guilty or
not of the trespass and ejectment supposed, the Jury referred to the Court: and
the points upon the Case are two. First, whether the words spoken by Love the
Executor be a sufficient assent to the devise or not: admitting that it is,
then the Second Point is, Whether the assen^ came in due time or not, as to the
interest of John Holloway in the remainder, because he died before the words
spoken which should make the assent; and as to that, the p^int is no other, but
that the Legatee dies before assent to the Legacy, whether assent afterward
came too late, or that the Legacy shall be thereby lost or not, that is the
Question: and by Justice Mallet, it is a good assent, and that in due time, And
here some things ought to be cleared in the Case. First, that the devise to
John Holloway in the Remainder is good by way of executory devise. Secondly,
that the devise by John Holloway to Henry and George is a void devise, because
but a possibility. Thirdly, that the assent to the first devise is an assent
also to him in the remainder. And lastly, that if an Executor enter generally,
he is in as Executor and not as devisee: all which are resolved in Lampetts and
in Matthew Mannings Case. Now these Cases being admitted, the Question is,
Whether that Low the Executor here has made a sufficient Declaration, to take
the Term as Devisee in the right of his wife, or not: for he has his Election
to take it as executor, or in the right of his wife; and as I conceive he has
made a good Election to have it as Legatee in the right of his wife. The last
words, viz. That then it remains to the Holloways, which is impossible by Law
to be, because that the devise to them was void, he did not weigh, because but
additional, and the first words of themselves are sufficient to make an assent,
it is not a transferring of an Interest, but an assent only to it, which was
given by the first Testator, and after assent, the devisee is in by the first
Testator, and that being but a perfecting Act like an Attornment, and
admittance of a copyholder, the Law always favors it, for the Law delights in
perfection, and therefore an assent by one Executor shall bind all, so an
assent by one Infant-Executor above 14 years shall bind the other, so an
assent to the particular Tenant is good to him in the Remainder; Admittance of
a Copyholder for life, is admittance of him in the remainder: which Cases show
that an assent being but a perfecting act, the Law shall always make a large
construction of it: and he said, that Mannings case in the 8 Rep. is the very
Case with our Case, as it appears in the pleading of it in the new Book of
Entries 149. b. and also in Mannings Case aforesaid, but that Case was not
resolved upon that point, for the devise there was, paying so much, and the
devisee being also executor paid the money, and therefore it was ruled to be a
sufficient assent to the Legacy, and therefore our case may be doubted
notwithstanding that case; and for my part I conceive it a good assent to the
Legacy in our Case. And for the second point, I hold that the assent comes in
due time to settle the Remainder, although that John Holloway were dead before,
for otherwise by this common casualty of death, which may happen so suddenly
that an assent cannot be had before, or by the wilful obstinacy of the
Executor, that he will not assent, Legatees should be defeated of their
Legacies, which would be a great inconvenience. Besides, I hold that the devise
by John Holloway was void, he having but a possibility at the time of the
devise, and therefore that it remain to his Executors, and by consequence, that
the Ejectione firm brought by their Lessee will lie. Justice Heath acc. for
the Plaintiff: Three things are here considerable. First, whether there need
any assent at all of the Executor to a Legacy. Secondly, whether here be an
assent or not. Thirdly, whether this assent come in due time or not. The first
has been granted, that there ought to be assent, for the great inconvenience
which might happen to Executors if Legatees might be their own carvers, and so
are all our Books except 2 H. 6. 16. and 27 H. 6, 7. which seem to take a
difference; where the Legacy is given in certain and in specie, there it may
be taken without assent, but where it is not given in certain, there it cannot;
but he held clearly the Law to be otherwise, that although it be given in
certain, yet the Legatee cannot take it without assent of the Executor; for so
the Executor should be subject to a Devastavit without any fault in him, or any
means to help himself, which should be very inconvenient. Then the second thing
here to be considered is, Whether there be an assent or not: It is clear, that
if an Executor enter generally, he shall be in as Executor, and not as Legatee,
for that is best for him to prevent a Devastavi^; and it is as clear, that if
he declare his intention to be in as Legatee, that then he shall be so: then
the Question here is, Whether the words in our Case be a sufficient declaration
of the mind of the Executor to take the same as Legatee in the right of his
wife or not: and I hold that it is. He agrees that the second words are not so
weighty as the first; but he held the first words are sufficient of themselves
to make an assent: and when he says, that then it remains to the Holloways,
that proves that he took notice thereof as a Legacy, and that he would have it
in that right, although in truth the devise by John Holloway was void, so as it
could not remain to them. For the third, he held that the assent came in due
time, otherwise it might be very prejudicial to Legatees, for else by that
means they may be many times defeated of their Legacies: for put Case that an
Executor will not assent, and the Legatee dies before he can compel him to
assent, or that the Legatee dies in an instant after the devisor, in the 5
Rep. Princes Case it is resolved that an Infant under 17 may not assent to a
Legacy, nor the administrator Durante minori aetate; then put case that the
Legatees die during the administration, durante minori aetate, in whose time
there cannot be an assent, It would be a v^ry great mischief, if that in any of
these Cases the Legatees should be defeated of their Legacies, when by
possibility they could not use any means to get them: wherefore he held clearly
that the assent of the Executor after the death of the Legatee came in good
time, and therefore he concluded for the Plaintiff. Bramston Chief Justice also
for the Plaintiff. For the first point, he held that there is a good assent;
and he said, that Mannings Case has the very words which our Case has, but my
Lord Cook did not speak of these words in the Report of the Case, because he
conceived that the payment of the money was a sufficient assent to the Legacy:
but further I conceive, that it differs fully from Mannings Case, for there it
is found expressly, that the Executor had not Assets, and therefore it should be
hard to make him assent by implication, thereby to subject himself to a
Devastavit; for as I conceive, an Executor shall never be made to assent by
implication where it is found that he has not Assets, but there ought to be an
express assent, by reason of the great prejudice which might come unto him, but
in our Case it is not found that Low had not Assets: an Infant cannot assent
without Assets; but if there be, then it shall bind him, and perhaps that was
the reason that my Lord Coke did not report any thing of these words, whether
they were an assent or not; and his passing over them without saying any thing
of them, seems partly to grant and agree, that they did not amount to an
assent. A man devises unto his Executor paying so much, and he pays it, it
is a good assent to the Legacy; so is Matthew Mannings case 8 Rep. and Plowden
Comment. Wel^den and Elkingtons case: and he said, that an assent is a
perfecting act which the Law favors, and therefore he said that it was
adjudged, that where an Executor did contract with the devisee for an
assignment of the Term to him devised, that it was a good assent to the
Legacy. For the second point also he held clearly that the assent came in due
time; for otherwise it should be a great inconvenience, for by that means it
should be destructive to all Legacies; for of necessity there ought to be an
assent of the Executor, and if he will not assent, and the Legatee dies before
he can compel him to assent, or if the Legatee dies immediately after the
Devisor before any assent to the Legacy, in the first Case it should be in the
power of the Executor, who is a stranger, to prejudice me; and in the latter
Case, the Act of God should prejudice me, which is against two Rules of Law,
that the Act of a stranger, or the act of God shall not prejudice me, wherefore
without question the assent comes in due time. Besides, If a Legatee dies
before assent to a Legacy, the same shall be assets in the hands of his
Executors; and the Legatee before assent has an interest demandable in the
Spiritual Court. An Executor before probate shall not have an Action, but he
may release an Action, because that the right of the Action is in him: so in
this Case, although that the Legatee before assent has not an interest
grantable, yet he has an Interest releasable. A man surrenders Copyhold-Land
to the use of another, and the surrenderee dies before admittance, yet his
heir may be admitted; and this Case is not like those Cases put at the Bar,
where there is but a mere possibility, and not the least Interest; as where the
grantee of a reversion dies before Attornment, or the devisee before the
devisor, in those Cases the parties have but a mere possibility, and therefore
countermandable by death: but it is otherwise in our Case, as I have showed
before, and therefore I conclude that here is a good assent, and that in due
time, and therefore that the Ejectione firm brought by the Plaintiff well
lies.

Dale and Worthyes Case.
212. DAle brought a Writ of Error against Worthy to reverse a Judgment given
in the County-Palatine of Chester; and the Writ of Error bore Test before the
Plaint there entered, and whether the Record were removed by it or not, was the
Question: and the Court, viz. Mallet, Heath and Bramston were clear of opinion,
without any solemn debate, that the Record was not removed by that Writ of
Error, because that if there be not any plaint entered at the Test of the Writ,
how can the Processus according to the Writ be removed, when there is no
Processus entered? and that failing, all fails; and besides, it is mere for
delay of Justice: and they agreed, that a Writ of Error bearing Test before
Judgment is good, as is the book of 1 E. 5. 4. because that there the
foundation stands good, and it is the usual course of practice for the
preventing and superseding of Execution.

Tuder against Rowland.
213. AN Ejectione firm was brought; and in the Writ was vi and armis, but it
wanted in the Declaration, and whether it were Error or not, or whether it were
amendable or not, was the Question: and Shaftoe for the Plaintiff held clearly
that it was not Error; but the Court did not hear it at that time: the Case was
Entered Pasch. 16 Car. Rot. 333.

214. Bolstrood prayed a Prohibition to a Court Baron, as also an Attachment
against the Steward for dividing of Actions to bring the same within their
Jurisdiction to defeat the Common Law, as also for refusing to suffer the
Defendant to put in any other Attorney for him than one of the Attorneys of
that Court: and the Court awarded a Prohibition, and the Steward Darey of
Lincoln's Inn, then at the Bar, the Court ruled that he stand committed until he
had answered to interrogatories concerning that misdemeanor; and they said,
That an Attorney at Common Law is an Attorney in every inferior Court, and
therefore ought not to be refused.

Rudston and Yates Case, entered Hill. 15 Car. Rot. 313.
215. RVdston brought an Action of Debt upon a Bond against Yates; the
Defendant demanded Oyer of the deed and condition thereof, and upon Oyer it
appeared, that the Bond was conditioned to perform an award: to which the
defendant pleaded that the Arbitrators made no arbitrament; upon which they
were at issue, and the Jury found this special Verdict, that the Defendant
Yates and one Watson submitted themselves to Arbitrament, and found that the
Arbitrators made an Award, and found the Award in haec verba; but further, they
found that Watson was within age at the time of the submission: and whether
upon the whole matter the Arbitrator had made any award or not, the Jury left
it unto the Court; so as the Question is no other, but whether an Infant may
submit himself to an award or not: for it was agreed, that if the submission
were void, that the award was void, and by consequence the Bond void; and note,
that the Case was, that Yates bound himself that Watson who was an Infant
should perform the Award; and the Condition recites, that where Watson who was
an Infant had submitted himself to an award, that the Defendant binds himself
that he should perform it, etc. So then if the Submission be void, all is void;
no submission, no award, and so no breach of the Condition, and therewith the
Books agree, 17 E. 4. 5. 19 E 4. 1. 28 H. 6. 13. 5 Rep. 78. 10 Rep. 131. b. And
by Justice Mallet, the submission is void, and void in part, void in all, for a
submission is an entire thing, and therefore cannot be void as to the Infant,
and stand good as to the man of full age. There are but two Books express in
the point, 14 H. 4. 12. and 16 H. 6. 14. and none of those are of any
authority; in the first there is no debate of the Case. And the second is a
flat quere: and as I conceive the better Opinion is, that the award is void;
for where it is there objected that it may be for the avail of the Infant, Br.
tit. Coverture and Infancy 62 says Quere of that, for it may be that the
recompense given by the award, may be of greater value than the Law would give
in the Action, and therefore by possibility it may be a disadvantage unto him;
and the Case betwixt Knight and Stone, Hill. 2. Car. in this Court, Rot. 234.
where this very point was in question, it was resolved that if the Infant had
been bound to perform the award, that the Obligation had been void. Further, it
was agreed, that if it appear afterward to be to his prejudice, that that
shall make the award void; but the principal point was not adjudged, because
that the parties agreed. But whereas it was then, and now also objected, That
if an Infant cannot submit himself to an Arbitrament; that thereby he should be
in a worser case than a man of full age, for he may have done a Trespass which
subjects himself to damages by suit in Law, which if he cannot discharge by
this way, he should be in a worse condition than a m^n of full age, for he
should lose that advantage. To that he answered, that if an Infant should be
permitted to that, he might have loss thereby, for he has not discretion to
chu^e a comp^tent Arbitrator, and an Arbitrator might give greater damages than
the cause did require: and he is worse than a Judge of the Court is, he is not
sworn, a Judge is: Besides, an In^ant has diverse privileges which the Court
would allow, but an Arbitrator not. If an Infant make default, the same shall
not bind him; so if he confess an Action, the same shall not bind him, and
therefore he is in better Case without submission, than by it: and if an Infant
cannot choose an Attorney, much less a Judge, for an Arbitrator is a Judge: an
Infant cannot bind himself Apprentice, although it may be pretended to be for
his benefit; so 21 H. 6. 31. he cannot choose a Bailiff, yet that is for his
benefit; he cannot give an acquittance if he do not receive the money, 5 Rep.
Russels case, but if it be apparent for his benefit, it may be good, as a Lease
of Ejectment to try a title made by an Infant is good, because it is apparent
for his benefit: an Infant is in custodia Legis, and therefore we are bound by
Oath to defend him. Besides, an Infant has not power to dispose of his goods
himself, and then how can he give such a power to another? For which reasons he
conceives the submission void; and if no submission, no award; and therefore he
gave Judgment against the Plaintiff, Quod nihil capiat per ^illam. Justice
Heath also against the Plaintiff: True it is, that in this Case a stranger is
bound that the Infant shall perform the award, but that recites the submission
by the Infant; and the issue is, whether they made any award or not, so as the
ground is, whether there be any submission or not; for no submission, no award,
that so by consequence Judgment ought to be given against the Plaintiff: and he
held clearly that the submission is void, that an Infant cannot submit himself
to an Arbitrament: the Judgment of Arbitrators (provided that they keep
themselves within their Jurisdiction) is higher than any Judgment given in any
Court; for if they err, no Writ of Error lies to reverse their Judgment, and
there is not so much as equity against them, and therefore it should be a hard
case, that an Infant should have power to submit himself to that which should
be final against him, and no remedy; for, consensus tollit errorem: wherefore
he conceived that the submission was void; and if that which is the ground
fa^ls, all fails. An Infant may take any thing, for that is for is advantage,
and cannot prejudice him; and the Church l^ke an Infant is in perpetual
Infancy, and conditionem meliorem facere potest, but deteriorem nequaquam: And
where it was objected in this Case, that this submission might be for the avail
of the Infant, and therefore should be good; he answered, and took this for a
rule, that an Infant shall never submit himself to any thing under a pretense
of benefit, which by possibility may prejudice him; and with that agrees the
better Opinion of 10 H. 6. 14. that it shall not bind him because it may be to
his prejudice, for they may give greater damages than peradventure the Law
would give in any Action brought against an Infant. But 14 H. 4. is not any
Authority. Where it was objected, that it shall be voidable at the election of
the Infant; To that he answered, that it is absolutely void, and therefore
there cannot be any Election; and it should be hard, that the man of full age
should be bound, and the Infant not: an Infant shall not be an accomptant,
because that Auditors cannot be assigned to him; and he conceived that an
Infant cannot bind himself an Apprentice, but it is usual in such cases for
some friend to be bound for him; and as this Case is, it appears by the Award
that it might be for the prejudice of the Infant. For the Arbitrators award,
that the Infant shall pay five pound for quit-Rents and other small things; now
what these small things were Non constat, and they might be such things, for
which by the Law the Infant was not chargeable; and by the same reason that
they may assess five pound, they might have set twenty pound and more; and it
should be inconvenient that an Infant should have such a power to submit
himself to the Judgment of any which might charge him in such manner. Besides,
part of the Award is void for the incertainty, for it is said small things; and
it does not appear what in certain; and void in part, void in all; and for
these reasons he gave Judgment against the Plaintiff. Bramston Chief Justice
agreed, that the submission is void, and not voidable only, as it was objected;
for then it should be tale arbitrium until reversal of it. 10 H. 6. and 14 H.
4. are no Authorities; or if they be, the best Opinion is for the Infant, as it
has been observed, and Knight and Stones Case cited before is no authority,
for no Judgment was given in the Case. But all in that case agreed, that the
award was void; because it was awarded that the Infant upon the payment of an
hundred pounds should make a release, which proves that the submission was also
void; because that if it should be good, by the same reason the release. Where
it was objected, that it shall be voidable at the Election of the Infant; To
that he answered, that the submission ought to be either absolutely good, or
absolutely void; for the end of an Arbitrament is to conclude and compose
controversies, and the Arbitrators are Judges to determine them; which should
never be done, if it should lie in the power of the Infant to make good or
frustrate the Arbitrament at his Election; for which cause, to say that it
shall be conditional is against the nature of an Arbitrament; and to say, that
it shall bind the Infant absolutely cannot be; and to say, that it shall bind
the one and not the other is unequal: Besides, there can be no election in this
case; for if he were within age, nothing binds him, if at full age he ought to
perform it* Besides, the Arbitrament it self, as this Case is, and as it was
before observed by Heath, is void: for the award was, That the Infant should
pay five l. for quit-Rents and other small things, and it does not appear what
those small things were; so that for any thing that appears, it might be for
such things for which the Infant by the Law was not chargeable, and therefore
is void for the incertainty; and void in part, void in all; and by the same
reason as the Arbitrators might award five pound, they might award twenty pound
or more. But he conceived that if it had appeared in certain, that the things
had been such, for which the Infant is by the Law chargeable, perhaps it had
been good; but here it does not appear what the things were, and therefore it
was not good. Trinit. 4 Car. Pickering and Jacobs case, it was resolved that a
Bond taken for necessaries of an Infant was good, 8 E. 4. Arbitrators Award
more than the debt is, the same is naught; so here, for any thing that
appears to the contrary, the Award was to pay such things as the Infant was
not liable to pay; and therefore void. But note Reader, I conceive that an
Infant cannot submit himself to an Arbitrament for things for which by the Law
he is chargeable, for the reason given before, because the Arbitrators may
charge him farther than by the Law he is liable; which should be to his
prejudice, and he has not any remedy for it. Judgment was given against the
Plaintiff, Quod nihil capiat per Billam. The Case was entered Hill. 15 Car. Rot.
313.

The Sergeants Case, Trin. 17o Car. in the Common Pleas.
216. THe Sergeants Case was this. A. seized of Land in see, B. his Brother
levied a Fine come ceo to C. B. had issue D. and died. A. died without issue,
C. entered: D. entered and gave it to C. and R. his wife, and to the heirs of
their two bodies. C. levied a Fine come ceo with proclamations to D. C. and R.
have issue L. C. dies: D. confirms to R. his estate, to have to her and the
heirs of her body by C. begotten. R. dies, D. enters, L. oustes him, D. brings
enter in the Quibus. In this Case there are two points; First, Whether the Fine
levied by B. shall bar his Issue as this Case is, or not: and that is the very
point of Edwards and Rogers Case, Pasch. 15 Car. in the Kings Bench: and
admitting it shall not bar D. then the second point is, what is wrought by the
confirmation, if by that the Issue in Tail shall inherit or not, and that is
the very point in the 9 Rep. Beaumonts Case.

Saunderson and Ruddes Case in Common Pleas, Trin. 17 Car.
217. SAunderson brought an Action upon the Case for words against Rudde; the
Case was this: The Plaintiff being a Lawyer, was in competition for a
Stewardship of a Corporation; and the Corporation being met together for
Election of a Steward, the Plaintiff was propounded to be Steward, and then the
Defendant being one of the Corporation, spoke these words of the Plaintiff to
his Brethren of the Corporation: He (praedict the Plaintiff innuendo) is an
ignorant man, and not fit for the place: and he said, that by reason of
speaking of these words, that they refused to elect him Steward; and whether
these words were actionable or no, was the Question. This case was argued twice
in Trinity-Term by Callis and Gotbold Sergeants, and the Judges seemed to
incline to opinion, That the words were Actionable, but yet no judgment is
given.

Seldom against King in Common Pleas, Trin. 17 Car. Regis.
218. IN a Replevin the Case was thus: A man granted a rent out of certain
Lands, and limited the same to be paid at a house, which was another place off
the Land; and in the grant was this clause, that if the rent were behind, and
lawfully demanded at the house, that then it should be lawful for the grantee
to distrein: the Rent was afterward behind, and the grantee distreined, and
upon traverse taken upon the demand, whether this distress upon the Land (which
had been good in Law if there had not been a special limitation of demand at a
place off the Land) be a good demand as this Case is, was the point. Mallet
Sergeant: the distress is a demand in it self, and there needs not any other
demand, although the rent be to be paid off the Land as here. And it was
adjudged in this Court about 3 years past, that the distress was a sufficient
demand: but I confess that a Writ of Error is brought in the Kings Bench, and
they incline there to reverse it, and there is no difference where the rent is
payable upon the Land, where not, and so it was adjudged, Trin. 3 Car. Rot.
1865 or 2865. betwixt Berriman and Bowden in this Court: and he cited also Fox
and Vaughans Case, Pasch. 4 Car. in this Court, and Sir John Lambs case, Trin.
18 Car. Rot. 333. in this Court, both adjudged in the point; and he cited many
other Judgments. Iermyn Sergeant contrary, that the distress is no sufficient
demand as this Case is: he ought to demand it at the place appointed by the
grant, for it is part of the grant, and the words of the grant ought to be
observed, 28 H. 8. Dyer. 15. and in the Comment. 25. a. it is said, that Modus
legem dat donationi, and therefore by the same reason that the grantor may
appoint the time and place of payment, as here he has done; by the same reason
he may appoint a place for the demand* and that he shall make that demand
before he distrein; for the same is neither repugnant nor impossible, nor
against the Law, and therefore good, and by consequence ought to be observed:
and then he answered the Cases which were cited to be adjudged against him. In
Symmons* Case in the Kings Bench there it was resolved that a distress was a
demand in Law, and a demand in Law is as strong as a demand in fact, as it was
said by Justice Barckley in debate of that Case. But note, that in that Case
there was no time in certain limited: and further, in that Case the Rent was
payable upon the land, and therefore in that Case I agree that a distress will
be a good demand, because that the demand is to be made upon the land, but it
is not so in our Case. In Sands and Lees case, Trin. 20 Iac. in this Court,
there also the rent was payable upon the land. Berriman and Bowdens Case, Trin.
3 Car. cited before, I agree was our very Case in point, but there Judgment was
given upon Confession, and therefore does not rule our Case; and in Sir John
Lambs Case there was no Judgment given, and therefore that does not rule our
Case; but Melsam and Darbies case M. 6 Car. Rot. 389. in the Kings Bench a Case
in the point, where Judgment was reversed upon a Writ of Error there brought
for want of demand, and Seldom and Sherleys case in that Court, a Case also in
the point was reversed, Mich. 16 Car. in the Kings Bench upon a Writ of Error
brought for want of demand: wherefore I conclude, that there ought to have been
an actual demand at the house according to the grant in our Case, and therefore
the Traverse in this Case taken by the grantor is well taken. Note, that
Justice Crawley said, that Lambs Case was adjudged that there needed no
demand, and he said, that there were three Judgments accordingly in this Court:
but Rolls Sergeant said, that Darbies Case was reversed in the Kings Bench for
want of a demand. But note, that Foster and Reeve Justices, did incline that
there should be a demand, and so Banks Chief Justice, for he said, that it is
part of the contract, and like a condition precedent; for as in a condition
precedent, a man ought to perform the condition before he can take any thing by
the grant, so in this Case the grantee ought to make a demand to enable him to
distrein, for before the demand he is not by the manner of the grant (which
ought to be observed) entitled to a distress: wherefore he give direction to
the Counsel that they would view the Records, and show them to the Court; and
further he said to them, that where it appears, that the Rent was demandable
upon the land, that those cases were not to the purpose, and therefore wished
that they would not trouble the Court with them.

Levet and Sir Simon Fanshawes Case in Common Pleas, Trin. 17. Car. Regis.
249. LEvett brought debt against Sir Simon Fanshawe and his Wife as Executrix
of another, and sued them to the Exigent, and at the return of the Exigent, the
Defendant Sir Simon Fanshawe came in voluntarily in Court, and prayed his
Privilege because he was an Officer of the Exchequer: and whether he should
have his privilege in that case or not, was the question, and that rests upon
two things. First, because he is sued, as this case is, merely for conformity
and necessity-sake, and in the right of another, viz. in the right of his wife
as Executrix. And secondly, because he demands his privilege at the Exigent.
Whitfield Sergeant, that he ought to have his privilege, and he cited
Presidents as he said in the point, as Pasch. 44 Eliz. in the Exchequer, James
Ashtons case s^rvant to the Treasurer, and Pasch. 23. Iac. Rot. 131. Stantons
case also in the Exchequer, in both which cases he said husband and wife were
sued in the right of the wife, and the husband had his privilege. But he cited
a Case which was nearer our Case, and that was Hill. 8. Iac. in the Exchequer,
Wats and Glovers case, where husband and wife were sued in the right of the
wife as Executrix; and he said, that it was overruled that the husband should
have his privilege 22 H. 6. 38. and 27 H. 8. 20. in those Cases the husband
and wife were sued in the right of the wife, and yet the husband was allowed
his privilege: But see Reader 34 H. 6. 29. and 35 H. 6. 3. against it: And
note, that many of these cases come to the second point, whether he may demand
his privilege at the Exigent or not; but for that see 9 E. 4. 35. Br.
Privilege 22. and 10 E. 4. 4. Br. Privilege 40. Rolls Sergeant contrary, that
the Defendant ought not to have his Privilege; and he said, that use,
practice, and reason is against it; and he took these differences. First, where
the Defendants are coming to make their appearance, and are arrested, as in 22.
H. 6. 20. and where they are sued in one Court, and the husband demands his
privilege, because he is an Officer in another Court, as in our Case.
Secondly, where he is Defendant, and where he is Plaintiff. And lastly, where
he is sued in his own right, and where in the right of another, as in our Case.
For in the first of these differences he shall have his privilege, in the
latter not; and it is to ouste this Court of Jurisdiction, and therefore shall
be taken strictly. Besides, if in this Case the Defendant should have his
privilege, we should be without remedy; for we cannot have a Bill against the
wife, and we have no remedy to make the wife to appear; and therefore it should
be a great prejudice to us, if he should have his privilege. Wherefore he
prayed that the Defendant might not have his privilege. Note, that Banks
Chief Justice seemed to agree the differences put by Rolls, and also he
conceived that point considerable, whether the Defendant had not surceased his
time in this Case, because he demands his privilege at the Exigent, and not
before. And note, the whole Court, viz. Foller, Reeve, Crawley and Banks Chief
Justice seemed to incline, that the Defendant should not have his privilege,
because that the Action was brought against him and his wife, in auter droit,
viz. in the right of the wife as Executrix: but no Judgment was then given.

Hillary 17o Car' in the Common Pleas.
Moss and Brownes Case.
220. Moss exhibited a Bill in the Court of Requests against Brown, and in his
Bill set forth that the Defendant was indebted unto him in the sum of 400
pounds for wares delivered to him: and further, he showed how that the
Defendant was decayed in his estate, and was not able to pay him, and therefore
he was content to accept of an hundred pound for the whole; and that the
Defendant at the payment of the said hundred pound, required the Plaintiff to
give him a general release, and then promised him in consideration that he
would make him a general release, that he would pay to him the residue of his
debt whenever God should please to make him able; and the defendant diverse
times afterward did renew his promise with the Plaintiff. Further, he showed
that now a great estate to such a value is fallen to the Defendant, and that
now he is able to pay him, and notwithstanding refuses so to do; which is the
effect of the Plaintiffs Bill. To that the Defendant answered and pleaded the
Statute of Limitations of Actions: and the Court of Requests would not admit
this Plea. But note, the Defendant pleaded first the general issue, that he
made no such promise, upon which they were at issue, and found against him; and
afterward he pleaded the Statute of Limitation, and upon the whole matter
Sergeant Clarke moved for a Prohibition. First, because the Bill is in the
nature of an Action upon the Case at the Common Law, and whether he promised or
not promised is triable at Law. Secondly, because the Court refused the ^^ea of
the Statute of Limitations, which they ^^ght not to do, because there is no
remedy in Equity against a Statute. Sergeant Whitfield contrary, that no
Prohibition ought to be granted. First, because the Plaintiff has no other
remedy but in Equity, because that the Assumpsit made before the release is
discharged by the release, and the Assumpsit which was after, is void; because
there is no consideration, the debt being released before. Secondly, our case
is not within the Statute of Limitations, for it is but a trust reposed in the
Defendant that he would pay the residue when God should make him able: and
being a bare trust, is not taken away by the Statute of Limitations. But he
agreed for any Action which is within the Statute, and is superannuated, that
there is no remedy in Equity. But in answer to that it was said by Clarke, that
there is no trust expressed in the Bill. But notwithstanding that, it was
resolved by the whole Court, viz. Foster, Reeve, Crawley Justices, and Banks
Chief Justice, that no Prohibition ought to be granted, for the reasons given
before by Whitfield; and they said, that although no trust be expressed, yet if
it appears upon the whole Bill that there is a trust, it is enough, and he
needs not to express it. And note, there was an order of the Court of Requests
produced by Clarke, by which it was ordered, That the parties should take issue
only upon the subsequent promise, and should not meddle with the first, which
as the Court conceived made the Case a little worse; notwithstanding the Court
would not award a Prohibition; for they said, so long as they order nothing
against the Law, it is good, and they ought to be Expositors of their own
Orders: and therefore if it appears upon the merits of the Cause, and the
body of the Bill, that they have Jurisdiction of the Cause, and proceed as they
ought, be their Orders what they will, it is not material; and therefore it was
resolved by the whole Court that no Prohibition should be granted in this Case.

Hill. 17o Car. in the Common Pleas.
221. DVdley who was a Parson did libel in the Arches against Crompton for
scandalous and defamatory words, which words were these: Thou, (meaning the
Plaintiff) lie, thou art a fool, and (putting his hand behind him) bid him
kiss there: and further said to him, Thou have spent (so much a year) in
drunkenness: and Sentence was given for the Plaintiff, and now four years after
Sentence the Defendant prayed a Prohibition, and the Court, viz. Foster, Reeve,
Crawley Justices, and Banks Chief Justice, were against the Prohibition
because the Defendant came too late; but if he had come in due time, the three
Justices did incline that a Prohibition would have lien, because that the words
are words only of passion and anger, and God forbid that all words spoken only
in wrangling and anger should bear Action: But the Chief Justice inclined that
the Defendant was punishable in the Ecclesiastical Court for those words; for
he said, that the suit there is pro salute animae and reformatione morum, and
it was fit that his manners should be reformed, who spoke such words of a man
in Orders and a reverend Minister. And he said, that although that he held not
that where there is no remedy at Law, that there they might sue in the
Ecclesiastical Court; yet he said, that in many cases, where there is no remedy
at Law, yet there is remedy in the Ecclesiastical Court, and so he conceived in
this Case. But that which made Justice Reeve to doubt whether a Prohibition
should issue as this Case was, or not, was for the incertainty of their
Sentence, which was for speaking of these words contained in the Articles, aut
eorum aliqua, which he said is therefore not good, for he said, that Judgments
or Sentences ought to have these two things, Veri^y and Certainty, and if there
want any of these two, it is not good; and if it should be suffered it were a
mischievous case, for by this ^ick they might hold Plea of words not within
their Jurisdiction, and we should not have power to prevent it; for if some of
the words should be actionable, some not, they might by this way hold Plea as
well of words which were not actionable or punishable by them as of those which
were. To which Foster agreed; but Justice Crawley and the Chief Justice
conceived that no Prohibition would lie notwithstanding that, for that might be
the course amongst them; and although it be uncertain, yet it may be allowed by
them for Law: and Reeve was of opinion, that a man might be indicted at the
Assizes before the Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer for speaking of such
defamatory words, and that he grounded upon the Commission of Oyer and
Terminer, which gives them power to hold Plea de prolationibus verborum, and
he conceived that a man might be fined for them. But the Chief Justice
contrary, for the Commission gives them power to hold Plea secundum legem and
consuetudinem Angliae: Now if the speaking of such words be not punishable by
the Law and Custom of England, then we cannot hold Plea of them by way of
indictment or otherwise at the Assizes for them.

222. It was said by the whole Court, that a bare Information at the Bar is not
sufficient to cause the Court to examine any man upon Interrogatories;
wherefore they ruled, that the party should make an Affidavit.

223. Judgment was given against the principal, and after a Scire facias was
brought against the Bail, who appeared and pleaded Null tiel Record of the
Judgment given against the principal, upon which day was given to bring in the
Record in Court, at which day the principal tendered his body in discharge of
the Bail, and now it was prayed by Pheasant Sergeant, that it might be
admitted; but Reeve, Foster and Banks Chief Justice inclined against it: True
it is, that the condition of the Bail is, that they render his body
(indefinitely) withoue limiting any time in certain when they shall do it, or
pay the condemnation: but yet they conceived, that if they appear and plead
such a dilatory Plea as this is, that thereby they have waived the benefit of
bringing in his body: and Justice Foster said, that the same being general and
uncertain, the Law ought to determine a time certain when it shall be done, for
otherwise by the same reason that they may do it now, they may do it twenty
years after, which should be inconvenient and against the meaning of the
condition. And Reeve said, that if this trick should be suffered, that the Bail
might plead such a dilatory Plea, and afterward bring in the body of the
Principal, the Plaintiff should lose all his costs of suit which he had
expended in the suit against the Bail, which would be mischievous. But Justice
Crawley, that the usage has always been, that the Bail might bring in the body
of the Principal at any time before judgment given against them upon the Scire
facias, and there are many presidents in this Court to that purpose. To that
the Court seemed to agree, if they plead not such a dilatory Plea, as in this
case: Therefore the Court awarded, that the Pronotharies should consider of it,
and should certify the Court what the use has been in such case.

224. Sergeant Pheasant came to the Bar, and said to the Court, that anciently
(as appears by our old Books) the usage was, that the Sergeants in any
difficult point of pleading, did demand of the Court their advise concerning
it, and accordingly were used to be directed by the Court; wherefore he humbly
prayed of the Court to be resolved of this doubt. A man was imprisoned for not
submitting to Patentees of a Monopoly, after seven or eight years past, and
then he brought an Action of false Imprisonment, and that is grounded upon the
Statute of Monopolies, 21 Iac. c. 3. whether in this case the Defendant might
plead the Statute of 21 Iac. c. 16. of Limitations of Actions, or not, was the
Question. But the whole Court was against him, that they cannot be Judges and
Counselors, and that they ought not to advise any man, for by that means they
should prevent their Judgment; and they confessed that that was the use, when
the Sergeants used to count at the Bar, as appears in our Books. But they
said, you shall never find the same to be used since they counted and declared
before they came to the Bar, and these Counts and Declarations are upon Record,
wherefore the Court upon these considerations would not advise him.

Dewel and Masons Case.
225. THis Case of Dewel and Mason, which see before, pl. 184. came now again
in debate, and it was adjudged by the whole Court, viz. Foster, Reeve, Crawley
Justices, and Banks Chief Justice, nullo contradicente, that the Plaintiff
ought to have Judgment, and that upon these differences. First, where the
Defendant is to do a single Act only, and where he has election of two things
to do. Secondly, the second difference stood upon this, that no notice is to be
given, or tender made of a thing which lies not in the power or proper
conusance of the Plaintiff, so as the difference stands where it is a thing
which lies in the conusance of the Plaintiff, and where not: and therefore
where the award was that the Defendant should pay to the Plaintiff eight pound,
or three pound and costs of suit, as should appear by a note under the
Attorneys hand of the Plaintiff, it was resolved in that Case, that although
the Attorney be in some respect as a servant to his Master, yet to this purpose
he is a mere stranger, and therefore the Plaintiff was not bound to make any
tender of that note, but the Defendant ought to have gone to the Plaintiffs
Attorney, and required a note of him of the costs of suit, so as he might have
made his Election: But they all agreed, that where it is a thing which lies in
the knowledge of the Plaintiff, that there he ought to have made a tender, or
given notice, but in this Case it lies not in the knowledge of the Plaintiff,
and he cannot compel the Attorney to make it, wherefore it was resolved that
the Plaintiff should have Judgment.

226. A man libelled for Tithes in the Ecclesiastical Court, and in his libel
he set forth, how that the Tithes were set forth, but that the Defendant did
stop and hinder the Plaintiff to carry them away any other way than through the
Defendants Yard, and when he was carrying them that way, the Defendant being an
Officer did attach them for an Assessment to the poor, and did convert them to
his own use, upon which a Prohibition was prayed, because that the Tithes being
set forth an Action of Trespass lies at the Common Law: but Sergeant Clarke
was against the Prohibition, because that the Libel is grounded upon the
Statute of 2 E. 6. cap. 13. which is, That if the Parson, etc. be stopped or let
in carrying his Tithes, that the party so stopping or letting should pay the
double value, to be recovered before the Ecclesiastical Judge. But
notwithstanding that, it was resolved that a Prohibition should issue, because
he that will sue upon the Statute ought to mention the Statute, or to make his
demand secundum formam Statuti. But here the Plaintiff does not sue upon the
Statute, for he does not mention it nor the double value as he ought; for they
all agreed, that he ought to ground his Action upon the express clause of the
Statute for the double value, wherefore a Prohibition was granted.

227. It was resolved upon the Certificate of the Pronotharies, viz. Gulson,
Cory, and Farmer, that the custom of the Court was, That if a man sueth another
for such a sum, or thing for which the Plaintiff ought to have special Bail,
and does not declare against him in three Terms, that the Defendant being
brought to the Bar by a Habeas Corpus, ought to be discharged upon an ordinary
appearance, and that they said is the course and practice in the Kings Bench,
and that was now resolved to be as a certain Rule from thenceforth in this
Court by all the Judges, viz. Foster, Reeve, Crawley, and Banks Chief Justice.

228. It was said by Justice Reeve, that if A. being seized of an Advowson,
grant the next presentation to B. and B. makes a Bond to A. to pay him twenty
pounds when the Church shall fall void, that that is Simony; and so he said it
was adjudged in this Court in Pooles Case: and the whole Court did agree that
it was Simony; for otherwise by this way the Statute should be utterly
defeated: and note, that it was said by Sergeant Rolls at the Bar, That it had
been often ^adjudged, that the Obligor could not avoid such an Obligaion
without special averment.

Palm against Hudde.
329. Palm brought a Quare impedit against Hudde, and the case was thus: It
was debated by Sergeant Godbold, the Plaintiff brought a Quare impedit against
the Defendant, the Defendant showed how the King was entitled by reason of
Simony, and that the King had presented the Defendant, and that he was persona
impersonata of the presentation of the King; the Plaintiff denied the
Simoniacal contract, upon which they were at issue, and it was found for the
Defendant, so as that Judgment was given for the Defendant. And the same
Plaintiff brought this second Quare impedit against the same. Defendant, who
pleaded all the matter before and the Judgment, but did not say that he was now
persona impersonata, but that he was tunc persona impersonata, and that was
said by the Sergeant to be naught: for he said, that at the Common Law, no
Parson might plead to the Title of the Parsonage but only in the abatement of
the Wr^t, or such like Pleas: s^e Lib. Entries 503, and 522. and 8 Rep Foxes
case: and he said, that that is a Plea at the Common Law, and not upon the
Statut^ of 25 E. 3. for then he ought to have pleaded, that Est persona
impersonata, and not that fuit, and that to enable him to plead to the Title of
the Patronage, according, to the Statute, for he who will plead according to
the Statute ought to pursue it, or otherwise his Plea is not good, and he
cannot plead to the Title of the Patronage without showing that he is persona
impersonata: the Books are clear 7 Rep. 25, 26. 15 H. 7. 6, and 7. 2 R. 2.
Incumbt. 4. 4 H 8. Dyer 1. and 27. And to say, that tunc fuit persona
impersonata, is but an argumentative Plea, that because he was then, so he is
now, and such P^ea is not good, for it ought to be positive and not by way of
argument, or illation. Besides, it may be that he was persona impersonata,
tunc, and not tunc, for he might resign or be deprived after, or the like, and
therefore it is a Non sequitur that he was persona impersonata then, and
therefore now, and it shall be intended rather that he is not persona
impersonata nunc, for paroles font Plea, and the Plea of every man shall be
taken strong against himself; wherefore he concluded that the Plea was not
good. Foster agreed that the Parson cannot plead to the Title of the Patronage
without showing that he is persona-impersonata; but the Question here is, as he
conceived, Whether the Plaintiff be not stopped by this recovery and Judgment
yet remaining in force to say the contrary. Banks Chief Justice: It is true,
that generally the Parson without showing that he is persona impersonata,
cannot plead to the Title of the Patronage. But whether the Defendant cannot
plead the Record and Judgment, yet in force against the Plaintiff, without
showing that he is persona impersonata, that is the Question here. Note, it was
the first time it was argued.

Harwel against Burwel in a Replevin in the Kings Bench.
230. THe Case was thus: A man acknowledged a Statute to the Plaintiff, and
afterward granted a Rentcharge to the Defendant, afterward the Statute is
extended and safied and then the grantee of the Rent distreins. And whether he
might distrein without bringing a Scire facias, was the Question. And by
Sergeant Rolls, he cannot distrein without a Scire facias brought* and he took
it for a Rule, That because the Conusee came in by matter of Record, he ought
not to be put out or disturbed without matter of Record, for if that should be
suffered, it would be a great discouragement to Debtees to take this manner of
security for their debts: and the Conusor cannot enter without bringing a Scire
facias; and if the Conusor himself cannot enter, it is a good argument a
fortiori that the grantee of a rent cannot distrein without a Scire facias; and
that the conusor himself cannot enter without bringing a Scire facias, vid. 15
H. 7. 15. 4 Rep. 67. Fullwoods case. And the grantee of the Rent is as well
within the ground and rule before put as the conusor himself, and therefore he
compared the case to the case in the 10 Rep. 92. that he who claims under
another ought to show the original conveyance. But he took a difference where
the party comes in by act of Law, and where by the act of the party; he who
comes in by act of Law, shall not be put to his Scire facias, for so he should
be without remedy, and if that should be permitted, it should a be subtle way
for the conusor to avoid the possession of the conusee, and then he himself to
take benefit of it, and that should be a fine way to defeat the Statute.
Besides, by this way if the Statute should be satisfied by casual profit, or if
the time should be expired and the Statute satisfied by effluxion of time, if
in that Case the grantee should be permitted to distrein the beasts of the
conusee for a great Rent, perhaps before that the Conusee by possibility might
remove from the Land, it would be a great disturbance to the Conusee. Besides,
if a stranger enter upon the conusee, the conusee upon his regress may hold
over: but not so in this Case, where the grantee of the Rent distreins, and
that should be also a great prejudice to the conusee. But it was objected that
the grantee of the rent could not have a Scire facias, and therefore if he
might not distrain, he should be without remedy; To which he answered, that if
it should be so, it is his own fault, for he might have provided for himself by
way of covenant. But he conceived that he might have a Scire facias; for he
said, that it is a Judicial Writ issuing out of the Rolls, which might be
framed and made according to the case of any man: and it is not enough to say,
th^^ there was never such a Writ granted in the like case, but he ought to show
where it was ever denied: besides, it is not always necessary that he that
shall have this Writ should be party to privy to the Record, as app^areth by
these Books, 46 Ass. Scire facias 134. 32 E. 3. Scire facias 101. and 38 E. 3.
12. Br. Scire facias 84. Again, it is not necessary that the Scir^ facias
should be either ad computandum, or ad rehabendum terram, as it was objected,
for as I have said before, it may be framed according to the case of any man,
and vary accordingly: wherefore he prayed Judgment for the Plaintiff: and note,
that at this time Justice Heath seemed to incline for the Plaintiff.

Thorn against Tyler in a Replevin.
231. THe Plaintiff showed that the Defendant took certain Beasts of the
Plaintiff such a time and place, and detained them against gages and pledges,
etc. The Defendant as Baily of the Manor of the Lord Barckley made conusance
of the taking of the cattle; and said, that long time before the taking of
them, the Lord Barckley was seized in see of a Manor in Gloucestershire,
within which there were Copyhold-Tenants time out of mind, demiseable for one,
two, or three lives: that there was a custom within the same Manor, that if
any copyhold-tenant did suffer his message to be ruined for want of repairing,
or committed waste, and that is presented by the homage; that such tenant so
offending should be amerced, and that the Lord had used time out of mind to
distrein the beasts as well of the tenant as of the under-tenant of such
custom^ry tenements, levant and couchant upon such customary tenements for such
amercement, and further said, that one Greening was tenant for life of a
customary tenement within that Manor, and made a Lease unto the Plaintiff for
one year, and that 15 Car. the homage did present that Greening had suffered
his Barn, parcel of the customary Tenements aforesaid, to fall for want of
repair, for which he was amerced to ten shillings; and that in July 16 Car. the
Defendant as Bailey of the Lord Barckley did distrein the Plaintiffs cattle,
being under-tenant for the said amercement upon the said customary tenement,
and so he made conusance and justified the taking of the beasts as Bailey of the
Lord Barckley: The Plaintiff confessed that Greening was tenant, and that he
made a Lease to the Plaintiff for a year; and further he confessed the want of
repairing and presentment, and the amercement upon it, but he denied that there
is any such custom: upon which they were at issue, and the Jury found for the
Defendant that there was such a custom, and it was moved in arrest of Judgment
that the custom was not good, because it was unreasonable; for here the Tenant
offended, and the under-tenant is punished for it, which is against all reason
that one should offend and another should be punished for it. Besides, the
under-tenant here is a stranger, and the custom shall never extend to a
stranger, and therefore the custom to punish a stranger who is not a Tenant of
the Manor is a void custom. Further, it was said that the amercement properly
falls upon the person, and therefore being personal it cannot be charged upon
the under-tenant. But notwithstanding all these Objections, it was resolved by
all the Justices upon solemn debate, that the custom was good, and therefore
that the avowant should have Judgment. Justice Mallet. custom si aliqua defalta
fuerit in reparatione to amerce the tenant and to distrein averia sua, vel
averia subtenentis levant and coucbant upon the customary tenement, is a good
custom. I agree that a custom cannot extend to a stranger who is not within the
Manor, and therewith agrees 3 Eliz. Dyer 194. b. pl. 57. Davis Rep. 33. a.
and 21 H. 6. and many other Books* but the matter (...) is, whether the
Plaintiff be a stranger or not, and I conceive that he is no stranger but a
good customary tenant, and he shall have any benefit or privilege that a
customary tenant shall have, although he holds but for one year, and by the
same reason that he shall enjoy the privilege of a customary tenant he shall
undergo the charge; for Qui s^ntit commoduin sentire debe^ and ^nus; and by the
general custom of England every Copyholder may make a Lease for one year, as is
resolved in the 4 Rep. 26. ^. and it is good; and if so, then the Plaintiff
here comes in by custom, and is no stranger but a good customary tenant, and
therefore the custom may well extend to him: as there is Dominus pro tempore,
so there is tenens pro tempore, and such is the Plaintiff here: and he held,
that the wife that ^ath her widows estate, according to the custom of the
Manor, is a good customary tenant. A woman Copyholder for life, where the
custom is that the husband shall be tenant by the courtesy, dies, I hold the
husband in that case a good customary tenant. In Gloucester where this Land is,
there is a custom that Executors shall have the profits for a year, and I
conceive them good customary tenants. Besides, this under-tenant here is
distrainable by the Lord for the rents and services reserved by the Lord, or
otherwise by this way he might defeat the Lord of his services. The custom was,
That a woman should have her widows estate; the Copy-tenant made a Lease for
one year and died, and adjudged that the woman should have her widows estate as
excrescent by Title Paramouns, the estate made for one year: see Hab. Rep. And
as these the estate of the wife was derivative; so here: and although it be not
the entire Copyhold estate, yet it is part of it, and a continuation of it, and
is liable to every charge of the Lord, 6 Rep. Swains case; wherefore he
concluded that the custom is good, and that the avowant ought to have Judgment.
Justice Heath: the custom is good both for the matter and form of it* where it
was objected, that for a personal injury done by one, the cattle of another
cannot be dis^teined, I agree, that it is unjust that where alius peccat alius
plectitur; but our case differs from that rule, for this was by custom, for
Transit terra cum onere, he who shall have the land ought to undergo the
charge. Besides* wheresoever a custom may have a good beginning, and ex certa
and rationabili causa, it is a good custom, Bracton lib. 1. cap. 3. But this
might have a reasonable ground at the beginning, for here the punishment is a
qualification of the Law: for where by the Law the Copyhold-tenant is to
forfeit his copyhold-tenement for waste, either voluntary or permissive, now
this penalty is abridged and made more easy, and therefore is very reasonable,
43 E. 3. 5. and 44 E. 3. 13. custom, that if a tenant be indebted to the Lord,
that he may distrein his other tenants for it, is not good; but if it were for
Rent, it should be good, because, it may be, the tenants at the first granted
it to the Lord, 22 H. 6. 42. 12 H. 7. 15. and 35 H. 6. 35. custom to sell a
distress is good, and yet it cannot be done but by Act of Parliament. And where
it was objected that the amercement is personal, and therefore cannot extend to
the Plaintiff; to that he answered, that it is not merely personal, but by
custom (as aforesaid) is now made a charge upon the Land, and therefore not
merely personal. Besides, if the custom in this case had been, that the
Plaintiff for waste should forfeit his Copyhold-tenement, it had been
reasonable a fortiori in this case that he shall be only amerced: wherefore he
concluded, that the custom is good, and therefore that the avowant should have
judgment. Bramston Chief Justice: that the custom is good, and that he
conceived to be clear. First, he conceived that the custom is reasonable as to
the Copy-tenant, for clearly by the Common Law, if he suffer, or do waste, he
shall forfeit his Copyhold, and therefore this custom is in mitigation of the
penalty; and therefore is reasonable, and that is not denied; but the only
doubt here is, whether the custom to distrein the under-tenant for an
amercement laid upon the tenant be a good custom or not: and he conceived it
is, for the custom which gives the distress knits it to the Land, and therefore
not merely personal as it was objected. And if the custom had not extended to
the under-tenant, he might have distreined him, for otherwise the Lord by such
devise as there is, viz. by the making of a Lease for one year by the Tenant
should be defeated of his services, 3 Eliz. Dyer 199. resolved, custom to seize
the cattle of a stranger for a Heriot is not good, because that thereby the
property is altered. But custom that he may distrein the cattle of a stranger
for a Heriot is a good custom, because the distress is only as a pledge and
means to gain the Heriot: and in our case the Land is charged with the
distress, and therefore the cattle of any one which come under the charge may
be distreined for it, and therefore he held clearly that the custom was good,
and that the avowant should have Judgment. Justice Barckley at this time was
impeached by the Parliament of High Treason.

232. A man was indicted for murder in the County Palatine of Durham, and now
brought a Certiorare to remove the Indictment into this Court; and it was
argued by Keeling at the Bar, that Br' Domini Regis de Certiorare non currit in
Com' Palatinum. But the Justices there upon the Bench, viz. Heath and Bramston,
seemed strongly to incline, that it might go to the County-Palatine; and they
said, that there were many presidents in it* and Justice Heath said, that
although the King grant Iura Regalia, yet it shall not exclude the King
himself; and he said, their power is not independent, but is corrigible by this
Court, if they proceed erroneously; and he said, that in this case the party
was removed by Habeas corpus; and by the same reason that a Habeas corpus might
go thither, a Certiorare might: for which cause it was awarded, that they
return the Writ of Certiorare, and upon the return they would debate it.

Hillary 17o Car' in the Common Plea^.
^ayton against Grange in a second deliverance.
233. JOhn Layton brought a second deliverance against Anthony Grange, and
declared of taking of certain Cattle in a place called Nuns-field in
Swassam-Bulbeck, and detainer or them against gages and pledges, etc. The
defendant made conusance as Baylift to Thomas Marsh, and said, that long time
before the taking alleged, one Thomas Marsh the father of the Plaintiff was
seized of the Manor of Michel-Hall in Swass^^-Bulbeck aforesaid* of which the
Land in which time (...) of mind, etc. was parcel, and that one Anthony Cage
and Dorothy his wife, and Thomas Grange and Thomasine (...) of the Land in
which, etc, as in the right of the sai^ Dorothy and Thomasine their wives in
de^esne as of s^e, and that they held the Land in which, etc. as of his Manor
of Michel-Hall, by soccage, viz. fealty; and certain Rent payable at certain
days, and that the said Thomas Marsh was s^i^ed of the said services by the
hands of the said Anthony Cage and Dorothy his wife, Thomas Grange and
Thomasine his wife, as by the hands of his very Tenants and he derived the
Tenancie to one Sir Anthony Cage, and the Seigniory to Thomas Marsh the son, by
the death of the said Thomas Marsh the Father, and because that fealty was not
done by Sir Anthony Cage, he as Bailey of the said Thomas Marsh the son did
justify the taking of the said cattle ut ins^a feodu^^ and dominium sue, etc.
The Plaintiff by Protestation said, that Non (...) the Lands aforesaid of the
said Thomas Marsh, as of his Manor of Michel-Hall in Swassa^^-Bulbeck
aforesaid by soccage, viz. fealty and rent, as aforesaid, and pro placito said,
that the Defendant took the cattle as aforesaid and detained them against gages
and pledges, and then traversed, Absque hoc, that the said Thomas Marsh the
Father was seized of the said services by the hands of the said Anthony Cage
and Dorothy his wife, and Thomas Grange and Thomasine his wife, as by the hands
of his very Tenants: upon which the defendant did demur in Law, and showed for
cause of demurrer, that the Plaintiff had traversed a thing not traversable;
and if it were traversable, that it wanted form, and this Term this Case was
debated by all the Judges, and it was resolved by them all, that the Traverse
as it is taken, is not well taken. Justice Foster, that the Traverse taken by
the Plaintiff is not well taken at the Common Law, the Lord was bound to avow
upon a person certain; but now by the Statute of 21 H. 8. cap. 19. he may avow
upon the Land, and this avowry clearly is an avowry upon the Statute, for it is
infra feodum and dominium sua, etc. and so is the old Entries 565. then the
Question here is, whether the Plaintiff be privy or a stranger; ^or i^ he he a
stranger, then clearly at the Common Law he may plead no plea, but out of his
Fee, or a Plea which does amount to so much as appears by the Books, 2 H. 6.
1. 17 E. 3. 14, and 15. 34 E. 3. Avowry 257. and many other Books as you may
find them cited in the 9 Rep. 20. in the case of Avowry, and here it does not
appear but that the Plaintiff is a stranger, and therefore whether he be
enabled by the Statute of 21 H. 8. to take this traverse or not, is the
Question: and I conceive that he is: true it is, as it was objected, that this
Statute was made for the advantage of the Lord, but I conceive, as it shall
enable the Lord to avow upon the Land, so it shall enable the Tenant to
discharge his possession, as if the avowry were upon the very tenant, and so is
the Institutes 268 b. and so is Brown and Goldsmiths case in Hobarts Rep. 129.
adjudged in the point, and the Plaintiff here who is a stranger is in the same
condition, as a stranger was at the Common Law, where the Avowry was made upon
the Land for a Rentcharge, in such case he might have pleaded any discharge
although he were a mere stranger, and had nothing in the Land, so may he now
after the Stat. of 21 H. 8. Then admitting that the Plaintiff might take this
Traverse by the Statute; then the Question is whether the Plaintiff has taken
a sufficient Traverse by the Common Law or not: for the Statute says, that the
Plaintiff in the Replevin or second deliverance shall have the like Pleas as at
Common Law, and I conceive that this plea is not a good plea at the Common Law.
And now I will consider whether if the Plaintiff had been a very Tenant, he
might have pleaded this plea or not; and I conceive that if this traverse had
been taken by a very tenant, it had not been good. I agree the 9 Rep. 35
Bucknels case, that Ne unque seisie of the services generally is no good plea,
but Ne unque scisie of part of the services is a good plea; and so is 16 E. 4.
12. and 22 H. 63. and the reason that the first Plea is not good, is because
that thereby no remedy is left to the Lord, neither by avowry, nor by writ of
customs and services. And therefore the plea here is not good, because it is a
traverse of the services generally. Besides, here the traverse is not good,
because that the Plaintiff has traversed the seism, and has not admitted the
tenure: and it is a rule in Law, that no man may traverse the seism of
services, without admitting a tenure; and therewith agrees 7 E. 4. 28. 20 E.
4. 17. and 9 Rep. Bucknells case; and then if the very tenant could not have
taken this traverse, much less a stranger here. Further, here the tenure was
alleged to be by rent and fealty, and the avowry was for the fealty, and the
Plaintiff has traversed the seism as well of the rent which is not in demand,
as of the fealty, and therefore the traverse is not good. But it was objected,
that seism of rent is seism of fealty, and therefore of necessity both ought to
be traversed. I agree, that seism of rent is seism of fealty, but it is no
actual seism of the fealty in point of payment, or to maintain an assise for
it, as is 44. E. 3. 11. and 45 E. 3. 23. and the distress here is for actual
seism of fealty. Every traverse ought to be adidem, as 26 H. 8. 1. and 9 Rep.
35. but here the traverse is of the Rent which is not in question, and
therefore is not good in matter of form. Wherefore he gave Judgment for the
avowant. Justice Reeve: the first thing here co^siderable is, whether this be a
conusance at the Common Law, or upon the Statute; and I hold clearly that it is
within the Statute; and for that see new Entries 597 and 599* and 27 H. 8. 20.
and it is clear that the Lord has Election either to avow upon the Statute, or
at the Common Law; and that is warranted by Institutes 268. and 312. 9 Rep. 23.
b. 36. a. and 136. a. and then admitting, that it be an avowry upon the
Statute. The second point is, whether the Plaintiff be enabled by the Statute
to take this traverse or not, for it is clear, that at the Common Law the
Plaintiff could not have this Plea, for a stranger could not plead any thing,
but horse d^^son fee, or a plea which did amount to as much. I agree the Books
of Br. Avowry 113. and 61. and 9 Rep. 36. and 27 H. 8. 4. and ^0. and Br.
Avowry 107. and Instit. 268. which are against me; yet I conceive under favor,
that notwithstanding any thing that has been said, that the Plaintiff is not
enabled by the Statute to take this traverse; and I ground my Opinion upon the
Reason at Common Law, as also upon the Stat^^e; the first reason at the Common
Law, I ground upon the Rule in Law, res inter alios act^, alteri nocere non
debet, it is not reason that he who is a stranger shall take upon himself to
plead to the Title of the Tenure, with which he has nothing to do in prejudice
of the very Tenant, and this reason is given by the Books of 22 H. 6 and 39 E.
3. 34. My second reason is grounded upon the maxim in Law, which is, That in
pleading every man ought to plead that which is pertinent for him and his Case.
And that is the reason that the Incumbent at the Common Law cannot plead to the
right of the Patronage wherein he has nothing, but the Patrou shall plead it,
as appears by the 7 Rep. 26. and many other Books there cited; and these are
my reasons at the Common Law, wherefore the Plaintiff being a stranger cannot
plead this Plea. Secondly, I ground my self upon the purvieu of the Statute to
prove that the Plaintiff cannot plead this plea, the words of which are, That
the Plaintiffs shall have such Pleas and Aid-prayers as at the Common Law: and
if the Plaintiff could have pleaded this Plea by the Statute, the Statute would
not have enacted that there should be the like Aid-prayers as at the Common
Law, for if the Plaintiff might plead this plea, then there need not any
Aid-prayer; and as at the Common Law no Aid-prayer was grantable of a stranger
to the avowry, so neither is it so now; and to prove that he cited 27 H. 8. 4.
19 Eliz. New Entries 598. and 26 H. 8. 5. against the Institutes, 312. a.
Besides, the Statute gives the like pleas as at the Common Law, and therefore
no new pleas, and that caused me to give those reasons before at the Common
Law: and if this should be suffered, every wrangler by putting in of his
cattle, should put the Lord to show his title, which would be a great prejudice
to him. The Statute of 25 E. 3. c. 7. enables the possessor to plead to the
title of the Patronage, and that it is not till induction if it be against a
Common person, which he ought to show, otherwise he is not enabled to plead to
the title, as it is in the 7 Rep. 26. a and Dyer fol. 1. b. But note, there the
Statute enables him to plead to the title; which is not so in our Case, the
general words of the Statute of West. 2. have always received construction at
the Common Law, as appears by 18 E. 3. 3. 10. 22 E. 3. 2. and 9 Rep.
Bucknells case, and 11 Rep. 62, 63. there you may see many Cases cited which
have the like words of reference to the Common Law, as the Statute in that
Case, and there always they have received construction by the common Law: the
Authorities cited before against me, are not against me, for they say that the
Plaintiff after this Statute may have any answer which is sufficient, so
clearly by these authorities the answer ought to be sufficient, and that is the
question in our Case, Whether the answer be sufficient or no, which as I have
argued, it is not; because the Plaintiff is not enabled to take this traverse
by the Common Law; and the Statute does not give any other Plea than at the
Common Law. 26 H. 8. 6. is express in the point, That the Plaintiff being a
stranger, is not enabled by this Statute to meddle with the tenure; wherefore I
conceive that the Plaintiff is not a person sufficient within the Statute to
take this traverse without taking some estate upon him, as in see for life or
years, etc. But for the latter point, admitting that the Plaintiff were enabled
by the Statute to take this traverse; yet I hold clearly, that as this case is,
he has not pursued the form of the common Law in the taking of it: and I agree
the rule that the Plantiff cannot traverse the seism without admitting of a
tenure, and therefore the traverse here is not good, because he takes all the
tenure by protestation. Besides, I agree that traverse of seism generally is
not good, 9 Rep. Bucknells case; and I agree that traverse of seism per manus
is not good without confessing the tenure for part: and here he takes all the
tenure by protestation, and therefore not good, 18 E. 2. Fitz. Avowry 217. is
express in the point that the traverse is not good. Wherefore I conclude that
Judgment ought to be given for the avowant. Justice Crawley, that Judgment
ought to be given for the avowant; he held clearly that the avowry is within
the Statute, and that being within the Statute the Plaintiff is enabled to take
this traverse, and that he grounded upon the Books of 34. H. 8. Br. Avowry 113.
24. H. 4. 20. 9 Rep. 36. and Hobarts Rep. 129. Brown and Goldsmiths Case. Then
he being enabled by this Statute to take this plea as a very tenant, the
Question is, Whether the Traverse here per manus be good or not, and he held
not; but he ought to have traversed the tenure as this Case is: that the
traverse of the seism per manus generally is not good, I ground me upon the 9
Rep. Bucknells Case 35. a. and I agree the third rule there put, that Ne unque
seisie per manus is a good plea, but that must be intended where the Plaintiff
confesses part of the tenure, which he has not done in this Case, as it
appears by the fourth rule there taken, which is an exception out of the
precedent rule, upon which I ground my opinion, and therefore the traverse here
is not good. Besides, Homage and Fealty are not within the Statute of
Limitations, and therefore not traversable: and if it should be permitted, the
rule in Bevills Case 4. Rep. 11, 12. and Com. 93. Woodlands Case, which resolve
that they are not traversable, should be by this means quite defeated. Further,
in this Case the fealty only is in demand, and the Plaintiff has traversed the
seism of the rent as well as of the fealty, which is not good. I agree the Book
in the 9 Rep. Bucknells Case fol. 35. that seism is not traversable but only
for that for which the avowry is made, if not that seism be alleged of a
superior service (for which the avowry is not) which by the Law is seism of the
Inferior service, with which agrees 26 H. 8. 1. and 21 E. 4. 64. But in our
Case seism is not alleged of a superior service, for which the avowry is not
made but of an inferior, viz. of a rent which is inferior to fealty (as the
Books are of 21 E. 3. 52. Avowry 115. and 19 E. 4. 224.) and which of right
ought to be so, unless a man esteem and value his money above his conscience;
and therefore the traverse of the rent which is inferior service and not in
demand, is not good. Besides, you cannot traverse the seism of the fealty
without the traverse of the seism of the rent, because the seism of rent is the
seism of fealty, and the rent is not here in demand, and therefore not
traversable, and therefore you ought to have traversed the tenure; for although
it be said, that rent which is annual is inferior to all other services, 4
Rep. 9. a. yet it is resolved that the seism of rent is seism of all other
services: further, I conceive that if you avow for one thing, you need not to
allege seism of other services. 24 E. 3. 17. and 50. seems to cross the
other authorities before cited; but I believe the latter authorities. Wherefore
I conclude that Judgment ought to be given for the avowant. Banks Chief
Justice: I conceive that it is a plain avowry upon the Statute, and therefore I
need not to argue it; here are two Questions only. The first, Whether this
Plaintiff, who is a stranger, be enabled by the Statute of 21 H. 8. to plead in
Bar of this conusance or not. Secondly, admitting that he be enabled by the
Statute to plead this plea, whether the traverse be here wel^ taken or not. To
the first, I hold that he is enabled by the Statute to take this traverse: but
for the second, I hold clearly, that the traverse is not well taken: here the
Plaintiff and Defendant are both strangers, so as here is neither the very Lord
nor the very Tenant. And now I will consider what the Common Law was before the
Statute, it is clear that by the Common Law a stranger might plead nothing in
discharge of the Tenancie, nor could plead a release, as the Books are 34 E. 3.
Avowry 257. and 38 E. 3. Avowry 61. he could not plead rien arrere, or levied
by distress, he could plead no Plea but horse de son fee, or a Plea which did
amount to so much. I confess that the Book of 5 E. 4. 2. b. is that the Tenant
in a Replevin could not plead horse de son fee, but the Book of 28 H 6. 12. is
against it. True it is, that in some special Case, as where there is Covin or
Collusion in the avowant, there the Tenant shall set forth the special matter,
as it is in 9 Rep. 20. b. Now there are two Reasons given in our Books;
wherefore the Plaintiff in a Replevin being a stranger, could not plead in Bar
of the Avowry. The first is, that the Seignory being in question, it is matter
of privity betwixt the Lord and the Tenant. The second, that the Law does allow
unto every man his proper plea, which is proper to his Case, and that he ought
to plead and no other, as appears by the Books, 12 Ass. p. 2. 13 H. 8. 14. 2.
H. 7. 14. 13 H. 7. 18. Lit. 116. 35 H. 6. 13. and 45 E. 3. 24. Now seeing that
the Plaintiff being a stranger could not plead this Plea at the Common Law, the
Question now is, Whether he be enabled by the Statute to take this Plea or not;
the words of the Statute are, That the Plaintiff and Defendant shall have the
like Pleas and Aid-prayer as at the Common Law; and therefore it was objected
that it does not give any new Plea; true it is, that by the express words
thereof that it gives not any new Plea, but yet I conceive that any stranger is
enabled to plead any plea in discharge of the Conusance by the equity of this
Statute; at the Common Law avowry was to be made upon the person, and therefore
there was no reason that the Plaintiff being a stranger should plead any thing
in Bar of the Avowry of Conusance, but now the Statute enables the Lord to avow
upon the Land, not naming any person certain, it is but justice and equity that
the Plaintiff should be enabled to plead any thing in discharge of it. I
compare this Case to the Case in the 3 Rep. fol. 14. Harberts Case, where it is
resolved that s^ossce of a Conusor of a Statute being only charged, may draw
the other in to be equally charged; and if execution be sued against him only,
that he may discharge himself by Audita querela for so much. 8 E. 4. 23. a.
there the Defendant avowed for a rentcharge, the Plaintiff showed how that one
E. leased the Land to him and prayed in aid of him, and resolved that he should
not have aid because the avowry is for Rentcharge, so as the Plaintiff might
plead any plea that he would in disch^^ge of the land; now by the same reason,
where the lands of the Plaintiff were charged with a rentcharge, he might at
the common Law have pleaded any thing in discharge of his land; by the same
reason where there is an avowry upon the Land according to the Statute, the
land being charged, the Plaintiff may plead any thing in discharge thereof; and
this is my first reason. My second reason is, that this Law has been construed
be equity, for the benefit of the Lord, and therefore it shall be construed by
equity for the benefit of the Tenant also, Instit. 286. b. My third reason is,
Although the Plaintiff be a stranger and claims no interest in the Land, yet
for the saving of his goods he may justify this plea; I may plead an assault
upon another who endeavoreth to take away my goods, and I may justify
maintenance where it is in defense of my interest, as it appears in 15 H. 7.
2. and 34 H. 6. 30. Fourthly and lastly, upon the authorities in Law after the
making of this Statute, I conceive that the Plaintiff may well take the Plea,
27 H. 8. 4. The plaintiff prayed in aid of a stranger and had it, which could
not be ^t the Common Law, as appears by 3 H. 54. and 34 H. 6. 46. and many
other Books; and for Books in the point, 34 H. 8. Petty Brook 235. Institutes
268. 9 Rep. 36. and Hobarts rep. 150, 151. Brown and Goldsmiths Case: wherefore
I hold that the Plaintiff may by the equity of the Statute plead this plea. But
it was objected by my brother Reeve, that by the Statute of 25 E 3. c. 7. It is
enacted that the possessor shall plead in Bar, and therefore the incumbent
before induction cannot plead in Bar, as it is resolved in 4 H. Dyer 8. 1. and
31 E. 3. Incumbt. 6. and upon the same reason he conceived it should be hard in
our Case, that the Plaintiff who is but a stranger, not taking upon him any
estate, should be admitted to plead this plea; especially the Statute in this
Case saying, that the Plaintiff shall have the like pleas as at the Common Law:
To that I answer, that by the Statute of 25 E. 3. it is enacted that the
possessor shall plead in Bar, and therefore clearly there he ought to show that
he is possessor: otherwise he cannot plead in Bar, and therefore not like to
our Case: and the Novel Entries 598, 599. does not make against it, for there
it was not upon the Statute, and 26 H. 8. 6. is express that the Plaintiff
being a stranger is enabled by the Statute of 21 H. 8. to take this plea:
Wherefore I conclude this point, that the Plaintiff is enabled by the Statute
to plead any thing in Bar of the avowry: But for the second point, I hold
clearly that the traverse as it is here taken is not well taken, it is only an
equitable construction that the Plaintiff shall plead this plea, as I have
argued before, and therefore he ought to pursue the form of the Common Law, in
the form of his traverse, which he has not here done, and therefore the
traverse is not good, and where the seism is not material, there it is not
traversable, and in this Case the seisim of the fealty is not material, for it
is out of the Statute of Limitations, and therefore not traversable: and so is
it in the Case of a gift in tail, and grant of a Rentcharge, it is not
traversable, because that the seism is not material, 7 E. 4. 29. Com. 94. 8.
Rep. 64. Fosters Case. Secondly, where the Seigniory is not in question, there
no traverse of seism, so it is in Case of Writ of Escheat, Cessavit Rescous,
etc. and therewith agree the Books of 22 H. 6. 37. 37. H. 6. 25. and 4. Rep.
11. a. Bevills Case. Thirdly, where the Lord and Tenant differ in the services,
there no traverse of the seism but of the tenure, but where they agree in the
services, there the seism may be traversed, and therewith agree the Books of 21
E. 4. 64. and 84. 20 E. 4. 17. 22 Ass. p. 68. and 9 Rep. 33. Bucknells Case;
and therefore the traverse here is not good. First, because it is a general
traverse of the seism per manus, the tenure not being admitted as it ought to
be by the fourth rule in Bucknells Case, and therewith agrees 23 H. 6. Avowry
15. Besides, it is a Rule in Law, That a man shall never traverse the seism of
services, without admitting of a tenure, and in this Case he took the tenure by
protestation, and therefore the traverse here is not good, and therewith agre^^
15 E. 2. Avowry 214. Further, the traverse here is not good, because he has
traversed a thing not in demand, which is the rent, for he ought to have
traversed the seism of the fealty only for which the distress was taken, and
not the rent as here he has done, and therewith agrees 9 Rep. 35. a. and 26
H. 8. 1. But as this Case is, he could not traverse the feal^y only because
that seism of rent is seism of fealty, and therewith agrees 13 E. 3. Avowry
103. 3 E. 2. Avowry 188. and 4 Rep. 8. b. Bevills Case, and therefore he ought
to traverse the tenure. True it is, as it was objected by my Brother Foster,
that seism of Rent is not an actual seism of fealty as to have an assise, but
is a sufficient seism as to avow. And we are here in Case of an avowry, and
therewith agrees the 4 Rep. 9. a. Bevills Case: wherefore I conclude that
Judgment ought to be given for the avowant. Here note, that it was resolved by
all the Judges of the Common Pleas, that a traverse of seism per manus
generally without admitting of a tenure is not good, and therefore see 9 Rep.
34. b. and 35. a. which seems to be contrary.

Hill. 17o Car, in the Kings Bench.
Hayward against Duncombe and Foster.
234. THe Case was thus: The Plaintiff here being seized of a Manor with an
advowson appendant, granted the next avoidance to I. S. and afterward
bargained and sold the Manor with the advowson to the Defendants D. and F. and
a third person, and covenanted with them that the Land is free from all
encumbrances. Afterward the third person released to the Defendants, who
brought a writ of Covenant in the Common Pleas, and there Judgment was given
that the Action would lie. Whereupon Hayward brought a Writ of Error in this
Court. The point shortly is this, Whether the Writ of covenant brought by the
Defendants without the third person who released were good or not; and that
rests only upon this, Whether this Action of covenant to which they were all
entitled before the release, might be transferred to the other Defendants only
by the release or not. And it was objected, that it could not, because it is a
thing in Action, and a thing vested which cannot be transferred over to the
other two only by the release; but that all ought to join in the Action of
covenant notwithstanding. Rolls contrary, because that after this release it is
now all one as if the bargain and sale had been made to those two only, and now
in an Action brought against them two, they may plead a seoffment made to them
only, without naming of the third who released, and so it is resolved in 33 H.
6. 4, and 5, and 6 Rep. fol. 79. a. Besides this covenant here is a real
covenant, and shall go to assignees, as it is resolved in 5 Rep. Spencers Case;
and here is as violent relation as if the seoffment had been made to them two
only. It was objected by Justice Heath, What if the other died? It was
answered, perhaps it shall there survive, because that it is an Act in Law, and
the Law may transfer that which the Act of the party cannot, because that
Fortior est dispositio legis quam hominis, etc.

Booremans Case.
235. BOoreman was a Barrister of one of the Temples, and was expelled the
house, and his Chamber seized for non-payment of his Commons, whereupon he by
New digate prayed his writ of restitution, and brought the writ in Court ready
framed; which was directed to the Benchers of the said Society: but it was
denied by the Court, because there is none in the Inns of Court to whom the
writ can be directed, because it is no body corporate, but only a voluntary
Society, and submission to Government; and they were angry with him for it,
that he had waived the ancient and usual way of redress for any grievance in
the Inns of Court, which was by appealing to the Judges, and would have him do
so now.

Bambridge against VVhitton and his wife.
236. IN an Ej^ctione firm upon Not Guilty pleaded, a special Verdict was
^ound, and the case upon the special verdict this; A Copyhold Tenant in fee
does surrender into the hands of two Tenants, unto the use of I. W. immediately
after his death, and whether it be a good surrender or no, was the question.
Harris: that the surrender is void. Estates of Copyholds ought to be directed
by the rule of Law, as is said in 4 Rep. 22. b. 9 Rep. 79. and 4 Rep. 30. And
as in a grant, a grant to one in ventre sa mier is void, so also in a will or
devise, and as it is resolved in Dyer 303. p. 50. so it has been adjudged that
the surrender to the use of an Infant in ventre sa mier is void: and as at
Common Law a Freehold cannot begin in futuro, so neither a Copyhold, for so the
surrenderer should have a particular estate in him without a donor or lessor,
which by the rule of Law cannot be: and he took a difference betwixt a D^vise
by Will, and a Grant executed; in a devise it may be good, but not in a grant
executed: and here he took a difference where the Grant is by one entire clause
or sentence, and where it is by several clauses, 32 E. 1. tail 21. Dyer 272.
p. 30. Com. 520. b. 3 Rep. 10. Dowties Case, and 2 Rep. Doddingtons case. For
instance, I will put only the Case in Dyer and the Comment. A Termor grants his
Term habendum after his death, there the Habendum only is void, and the grant
good; but if he grant his Term after his death, there the whole grant is void,
because it is but one sentence: So I say in our Case, because it is but one
clause, the whole grant is void. Another difference is, Where the distinct
clause is repugnant and where not; where it is repugnant there it is void and
the grant good, quia utile per inutile non vitiatur: But in our Case, as I have
said before it is one entire sentence, M. 13. or 23 Iac. in this Court, Rot.
679. Sympson and Southwells Case, the very Case with our Case. There was a
surrender of a Copy tenant to the use of an Infant in ventre sa mier after the
death of the surrenderor, and there it was resolved by all the Judges except
Dodderidge that the surrender was void, First, because it was to the use of an
Infant in ventre sa mier, and Secondly, because it was to begin in futuro,
which is contrary to the rule in Law; and Copy-tenants as it was there said,
ought to be guided by the rules of Law: but Dodderidge doubted of it, and he
agreed the Case at Common Law, that a freehold could not commence in futuro,
but he doubted of a Copyhold; and he put the Case of surrender to the use of a
Will; But he said, that Judgment was afterward given by Coke Chief Justice in
the name of all the other Judges that the surrender was void, and therefore
Quod querens nihil capiat per billam, wherefore he concluded that the surrender
was void, and prayed the Judgment of the Court.

Langhams Case.
237. LAngham a Citizen and Freeman of London was committed to Newgate by the
Court of Aldermen, upon which he prayed a Habeas corpus, which was granted,
upon which return was mane, First, it is set forth by the return, that London
is an ancient City and Incorporate by the name of Mayor, Comminalty and
Citizens, and that every Freeman of the City ought to be sworn, and that a
Court of Record had been held time out of mind, etc. before the Mayor and
Aldermen. And that there is a custom, that if any Freeman be elected Alderman;
that he ought to take an Oath cujus tenor sequitur in haec verba, viz. You
shall well serve the King in such a Ward in the Office of Alderman of which you
are elected, and you shall well entreat: the people to keep the Peace and the
Laws and Privileges within and without the City: you shall well observe and
duly you shall come to the Court of Orphans and Hustings if you be not hindered
by Command of the King, or any other lawful cause: you shall give good counsel
to the Mayor: you shall not sell Bread, Ale, Wine, or Fish by retail, etc. Then
is set forth a custom, that if any person be chosen Alderman, he shall be
called to the Court, and the Oath tendered to him; and if he refuse to take it,
then he shall be committed, until he take the Oath. Then is set forth, that by
the Statute of 7 R. 2. all the customs of the City of London are confirmed. And
lastly, is set forth that the 11 of Ian. Langham being a freeman of London, and
having taken the Oath of a freeman was debito modo electus Alderman of
Portsoken-ward, and being habilis and idoneus was called the first of February
to the Court of Aldermen, and the Oath tendered to him, and that he refused to
be sworn in contemptum Curiae, and contra confuetudines, etc. wherefore
according to the custom aforesaid, he was committed by the Court of Aldermen to
Newgate, until he should take the Oath, and haec fuit causa etc. To this retorn
many exceptions were taken. Maynard: the retorn is insufficient for matter and
form; for form it is insufficient, for the debito modo electus, without showing
by whom and how, is too general: then it is insufficient for the matter, for he
is imprisoned generally, and not until he takes the Oath, which utterly takes
away the liberty of the subject, for by this means he may be imprisoned for
ever. Besides, here is no notice given to him that he was chosen Alderman, but
they elect him, and then tender him the Oath, without telling him that he was
chosen Alderman, and therefore the retorn not good, for it ought to be certain
to every intent. Further, the Oath is naught and unreasonable, for he ought to
forswear his Trade, for if he sell Bread, Ale, Wine, or Fish before, now he
must swear that he shall never sell them by retail after, which is hard and
unreasonable, for perhaps he may be impoverished after, and so necessitated to
use his Trade, or otherwise perish; wherefore for these reasons he conceived
that the Retorn was insufficient. Glynn upon the same side, that the Retorn is
insufficient, and he stood upon the same exceptions before, and he conceived,
that notice ought to be given to him that he was chosen Alderman, for this
reason, because of the penalty which he incurs, which is imprisonment; and he
compared it to the Cases in the 5 Rep. 113. b. and 8 Rep. 92. That the feoff^e
of Land or a Bargain of a reversion by Deed indented and enrolled shall not
take advantage of a condition for not payment of Rent reserved upon a lease
upon a demand by them without notice given to the lessee for the penalty which
insues of forfeiture of his Term. So in our Case, he shall not incur the
penalty of imprisonment for refusing to be sworn, without notice given him that
he (...) chosen Alderman. He took another exception to the Oath, because he is
to swear, that he shall observe all Laws and Customs of the said City
generally, which is not good; for that which was lawful before, p^radventure
will not be lawful now; for some Customs which were lawful in the time of R. 2.
are now superstitious, and therefore are not to be kept. Further, it is to keep
all the customs within and without the City, which is impossible to do.
Wherefore for these reasons he conceived the Retorn not to be good, and prayed
that the prisoner might be discharged. Saint-Iohn Solicitor of the same side.
The custom to imprison is not good. Besides, here the imprisonment is general,
so that he may be imprisoned for ever, which is not good; and the Statute
confirms no customs but such as are good customs: I agree that a custom for a
Court of Record to fine, and for want of payment to imprison may be good,
because the custom goes only to fine and not to imprisonment; the Case of 1 H.
7. 6. of the custom of London for a Constable to enter a house and arrest a
Priest, and to imprison him for incontinencie comes not to our Case, for that
is for the keeping of the peace, which concerns the Commonwealth, as it is said
in the Book, and therefore may be good: but it is not so in our Case. A
Corporation makes an ordinance, and injoyns the observance of it under pain of
imprisonment, it has been adjudged that the Ordinance is against the Statute
of Magna Charta, that Nullus liber homo imprisonetur, etc. and therefore
naught: and that is the 5 Rep. 64 a. Clerks Case, and therewith agrees the
case of the City of London, 8 Rep. 127. b. Mich. 14 and 15 Eliz. Marshalls Case
in Harpers Reports, there a Habeas corpus was directed to the Mayor of Exeter,
who returned a custom there that none but a freeman should set up a shop there,
and if any other did, that he should be imprisoned, and it was adjudged no good
custom, Mich. 21 E. 1. in the Common Pleas, Rot. 318. upon a Habeas corpus the
custom of Cambridge was returned, which was that the Vice Chancellor might
imprison a Scholar taken in a suspicious place, I conceive the same no good
custom, but it is not resolved. Besides, I conceive the return here is
insufficient, because that no notice was given to the party that he was chosen
Alderman, which I conceive ought to have been for the great penalty which
follows, wherefore he prayed that the prisoner might be discharged. White of
the same side; the retorn is not good for want of notice; and he said, that it
does not appear that he was present at the election, and no other notice
appears by the Retorn; and he said, that the tender of the Oath did not imply
notice: further he said, that the Oath is not good, because he is to abjure his
Trade. Besides, it is said in the Retorn that the custom is, That Si aliquis
liber homo be elected Alderman, etc. and does not say habilis and idoneus, as
it ought to be, and therefore no good. True it is, that it is averred in the
Retorn that he was habilis and idoneus, but it is not alleged to be part of
the custom, and therefore that does not help it, wherefore he prayed that the
prisoner might be discharged. Gardener, Recorder for the City, that the Retorn
is sufficient; and first for the debito modo electus, where it was objected
that the same was too general; to that he answered, that no traverse can be
taken upon it, and therefore it is sufficient, for there is not such certainty
required in a Retorn upon a Habeas corpus as in pleading, as it is resolved in
the Case of the City of London, 8 Rep. 127. b. 128. a. and according to that it
is resolved in 9 H. 6 44. a. where it is said, that if the cause in it self be
sufficient upon the Retorn, it suffices although it be false; and although
there be not so precise certainty in it, and there it is resolved that the
party cannot take issue upon the Retorn, and yet there is no prejudice by it,
for if it be false you may have a Writ of false imprisonment, and therewith
agrees 11 Rep. 99. a. h. James Baggs Case and Anne Bedingfields Case, 9 Rep.
19. whereupon a Ne unque accouple in legal Matrimony pleaded, the Bishop
certified quod infra nominat' E. and A. legitimo matrimonio copulati fuerunt,
to which Certificate (says the Book) being brief and direct in the point; no
exception was ever taken; and if a Retorn upon a Haleas corpus should have all
circumstances, it would be so long and perplexing, that there would be no end
of it: and he conceived the retorn sufficient notwithstanding that Objection.
Now for the exception that the Plaintiff had not notice of his election to be
Alderman; to that he answered, that it appears clearly that he had notice,
for it app^a^reth that the same day that he was elected, he was called to take
the Oath, and that was tendered to him, and he refused to be sworn, which
certainly implies, that he had notice. For the exception that the Oath is
unreasonable, because he was to abjure his Trade, which is in prejudice of the
Commonwealth, from the using of which no man can bind himself, much less abjure
against it: To that he answered, that notwithstanding that the Oath is lawful,
and you forswear no more than the Law does prohibit you, for it does not extend
to all Trades, but only to such as sell Bread, Ale, Wine and Fish; and it is
against Law and Reason, that he who has the Jurisdiction of Bread, Ale, etc.
and may punish the misusage of it, that he should exercise the same Trade
himself; wherefore he conceived that notwithstanding that exception the Retorn
is sufficient* For the objection to the Oath that he ought to swear that, he
will keep all the privileges of the City, whereas in truth there are many
Privileges, which are now unlawful, although that before they were lawful, and
therefore, the same ought not to be kept; to that he answered, that the Oath is
good notwithstanding that Objection, for i^ ought to be intended that he shall
keep all privileges and customs reasonable which agree with the times in which
we live, and not such as are superstitious and unreasonable. For the Objection,
that the custom is unreasonable, because it trencheth much upon the liberty of
the Subject, and against the Statute of Magna Charta that the body of a Freeman
should be imprisoned, and the rather because here the imprisonment is general,
and he may be imprisoned for ever: to that it was answered, that the City has
customs as unreasonable as in this Case, as the custom in L. 5 E. 4. 30. 11 H.
6. 3. and 2 H. 4. 12. That the Creditor may arrest the Debtor before the day of
payment to give better security, and that is altogether against the Rule of
Law. Besides they have a custom which you shall find in 1 H. 7. 6. and 2 H^^ 4.
12. That a Constable upon suspicion of incontinencie may enter the house of a
stranger and arrest the body of the offender and commit him to prison, and that
is a good custom, and yet it is against the Law, and trencheth also upon the
liberty of the Subject. Besides, they have a custom, that no person being not
free of the City shall keep shop there, and that is adjudged a good custom,
although it be to restrain trading, which is against the rule of the Law also,
8 Rep. 125. The Case of the City of London. And for the objection that it is
unreasonable, because that the imprisonment is general: to that he said, it was
a good objection if it were true, but that is mistaken; for the retorn is
expressly that he shall be imprisoned until he has taken the Oath, which is not
general, for if he take the Oath he shall be discharged; and here he said that
this Government by Aldermen in this City is one of the most ancient Governments
in the Kingdom, beyond time of memory, and is a Government which of necessity
ought to he supported, or otherwise the City would immediately be brought to
ruin, for we cannot hold a Court without thirteen Aldermen, which ought to
have care of the Orphans, and make Laws for the well government of the City,
and that is of great consequence to all the Kingdom, and concerns the
Government of it; and if this City be well governed, the whole Kingdom will
fare the better, and at this time we want many Aldermen, and if these shall
escape, by the same reason others will do so, and so the Government utterly
should fail. And where it was objected that it is usual to make them to take
the Oath, and accept a fine of them after: To that he said, that they would not
do so now in this Case; for he said, that the party chosen is an able man, and
a man whom they respect, and not his money: And therefore he said that the
custom to imprison him for refusing is more reasonable than if the custom were
to fine him; for he said, that that Custom is the most reasonable custom, which
is most fit for the attaining of its end; and he said, that imprisonment is
most apt for the obtaining the end: for when we accept a fine, there is no end
of it, for he may be chosen after; and how can the Government be supported
which is the end of the election if all should be fined, wherefore the custom
to imprison is more reasonable, than if the custom had been to fine; because it
is more apt to attain the end; which is to maintain the Government: it is said
in 38 Ass. p. 22 Br. Imprisonment 100. That it was resolved 2 Ma. in
Parliament, that imprisonment almost in all Cases is but to detain him until
he makes a fine, and if he tender that to be discharged. To that he said, that
the same ought to be understood, where a fine is imposed, but we do not intend
to accept of a fine. Further he said, that there is a Judgment in the point,
and that is the Statute of 3 Iac. cap. 4. which injoyns an Oath for Recusants
to take, and for refusal that they shall be committed until, etc. here he said
that an Act of Parliament has done it in the like Case, and therefore he
conceived the custom reasonable: and then he cited many presidents of
commitment in this very Case. 2 H. 5. John Gidney was dealt with in the same
manner, 8 E. 4. Charles Faman was imprisoned, 36 H. 8. Thomas White, 1 Iac. Sir
Thomas Middleton, all which were imprisoned for refusing to take the Oath. And
lastly, he cited one 3 Iac. and that was Sir William Bonds Case, who was
imprisoned by the Court of Aldermen for the same cause, and it came judicially
in question; and he said, that upon solemn debate it was resolved, that he
should be remanded; wherefore he concluded that the commitment being by a Court
of Record, and that for a contempt against the Court, and that for not
observing of the customs of the City which is against the Oath of a freeman,
and which are confirmed by Act of Parliament, that the commitment is good and
lawful, and therefore prayed that the prisoner might be remanded. And now this
Term it was resolved by the Judges upon solemn debate, that the retorn
notwithstanding any of the said exceptions was sufficient. Justice Mallet: the
Retorn is sufficient in matter and form, but for the matter of it, I shall not
ground my self upon the custom, but upon part of the record, which is upon the
contempt, for although I agree that Consuetudo loci is of great regard, yet I
conceive it is not strong enough to take away the liberty of a freeman by
imprisonment. Power to imprison the body of a freeman cannot be gained by
prescription or grant; and a grant is the ground of a prescription, and
therefore if it be not good in a grant, not in a prescription: and I conceive
that it is the Common Law only, or consent to an Act of Parliament, that shall
subject the body of a freeman to imprisonment; and it is resolved in the 5 Rep.
64. acc. in Clerks Case, and agreed in 8 Rep. 127. That a constitution cannot
be made by a Corporation, who have power to make Bylaws upon pain of
imprisonment; because it is against the Statute of Magna Charta; wherefore I
conceive the power to imprison the body of a freeman cannot be gained by
custom: but although it cannot be gained by custom, yet Qui non transeunt per
se, transeunt per aliud, it will pass as a thing incident to a Court of Record;
and therefore although I hold that the custom to imprison is not good, yet I
hold that the imprisonment here by a Court of Record for a contempt made unto
it, as appears by the Retorn here it was, is good; for in the conclusion of
the Retorn it says, that he refused in contemptum Curiae, etc. And that it is
incident to a Court of Record to imprison, 8 Rep. 38. b. it is there resolved,
that for any contempt done to a Court of Record the Judges may impose a fine;
and 8 Rep. 59. b. It was resolved, that to every fine, imprisonment is
incident. Further, I conceive, that by the same reason that a Court of Record
may imprison for a fine, they may imprison for a contempt, and in 8 Rep. 60. it
is said, that to imprison does belong only to Courts of Record: but which is in
the point, it is resolved, 119. b. in Doctor Bonhams Case, that it is incident
to every Court of Record, to imprison for a contempt done to the Court: and he
said, that if a Court of Record should not have such a coercive power, they
should be in effect no Court. Wherefore he conceived that the refusing to take
the Oath being a contempt, and that to a Court of Record, as it appears by
the Retorn, that they may lawfully commit him for this contempt. For the
objection that the debito modo electus, without showing how, is too general: To
that he answered, that it is only matter of inducement, and there is no
necessity to show all matter of inducement. For the objection that he had not
notice of the election: To that he answered, that here is good notice, for by
the Retorn it appears, that according to the custom after he was elected, he
was called to the Court, and the Oath tendered to him, and he refused, which
without doubt implies notice, and quod constat clare non debet verificare; and
as after appearance, all exceptions to process are taken away, as the Books of
9 E. 4. 18. and 12 H. 4. 17, and 18. and many other Books are, so I say in this
Case, after appearance, you shall never say that you had not notice, for by
your appearance you admit it and the process good. For the Objection to the
Oath, that it is not good, because it makes a man abjure his Trade, which is
against Law and Reason: To that I answer, that the Aldermen are entrusted with
the assize of Bread and Ale, and so with Wine and Fish, and therefore as it is
unreasonable, so it is against the Law, that during his Office he should use
the Trade of which he has Jurisdiction and power to regulate, and to punish
the misdemeanors of it; and therefore it is enacted by the Statute of 12 E. 2.
cap. 6. That no Officer of a City or Borough shall sell Wine or Victuals during
his Office. It is true, that this Statute is repealed by the Statute of 3 H. 8.
cap. 8. but there is a Proviso in the Statute that it extend not to London, so
as the Statute of 12 E. 2. is in force still as unto London. Then the Oath
makes him to abjure no more than the Law forbids him to do, and which to do by
him were unlawful, wherefore that exception is not good. For the exception that
the imprisonment is general; to that I answer, that it is mistaken, for it is
only until he take the Oath, and therefore the retorn is good notwithstanding
that exception also: Now the end of imprisonment being obedience, and the party
here not obeying but refusing to take the Oath, for which he is committed; for
my part, I conclude that he be remanded to prison. Justice Heath: that the
Retorn is good in matter and form; and I ground my self upon the custom, for I
conceive that it is a good custom, because that the ground of it is good and
reasonable, which is the Government of the City, for that totally depends upon
the custom; and I hold that the refusing to take the Oath only is no sufficient
cause of imprisonment; but as it is an introduction to the support of
Government, by keeping of the customs and privileges of the City, which every
one by the Oath of a freeman is bound to keep; and this custom is not against
the Statute of Magna Charta, 9 H. 3. cap. 29. For that says that no freeman
shall be taken and imprisoned, etc. but per legem terrae: Now Consuetudo loci
est lex terrae, for in the Statute of 52 H. 3. cap. 3. There the Law and custom
of the Realm are joined together as Synonyma, words of the same intent. For the
Objection, That the custom is not that they who shall be chosen Aldermen,
should be idonei and habiles, but it is only averred in the Retorn, that
Langham here chosen to be Alderman is idoneus and habilis: to that I say, that
we are to judge upon the Retorn as it is before us, and if upon the whole
matter there appears sufficient matter for us to adjudge the commitment
lawful, be it true or false we ought to judge according to it; and if the
Retorn be false, you have your remedy by way of Action upon the Case; and in
this Case it is expressly averred that the party chosen is idoneus and habilis,
and it lies not in your power or in ours to gain say it, wherefore I conceive
that exception worth nothing. I agree that the Statute does not confirm ill and
unreasonable customs, but here I say (as before) that this custom has a good
and lawful foundation, and therefore it may be well confirmed; and the Oath
although it be in general Terms, yet it ought to be taken, that he do keep and
observe such reasonable and lawful Privileges and no other. For the notice, I
say, that it is manifest, that he had notice; which he conceived would be good
evidence to a Jury, and that upon such evidence they would find for the
Plaintiff; and for the debito modo electus, he conceived it is good enough,
because that in the Retorn upon a Habeas corpus such precise certainty is not
required as in pleading: and for the imprisonment it is not in general, and so
may happen to be perpetual, as was objected; but it is until he take the Oath,
wherefore upon the whole matter I conceive the retorn is sufficient, and that
the prisoner ought to be remanded. Bramston Chief Justice: the custom is good,
and none of the exceptions to the Retorn good, and therefore the prisoner ought
to be remanded. The Question upon the custom is only whether this custom, as it
is here set forth by the retorn, to imprison the body of a freeman be good or
not; and as I have said before, I hold it to be a good custom, and that upon
this difference, that a custom generally to imprison the body of a freeman is
not a good custom. But a custom (as it is here) for a Court of Record to
imprison the body of a man who is chosen a great Officer for refusing to take
the office upon him without which the Government cannot subsist, is a good
custom: Besides, here being a contempt refusing to take the Oath, the Court may
imprison the body for it, without any custom to help it, for it is incident to
a Court of Record to imprison. I agree the Case which was objected by Master
Solicitor of 21 E. 1. where the custom of Cambridge is, that the
Vice Chancellor may imprison a Scholar taken in a suspicious place, that is no
good custom, for it no way concerns the supportation of Government or the
Commonwealth, and they may punish him another way, which may be good and as
effectual as imprisonment: but not so in our Case, for if in this time in which
there are many Aldermen wanting, all should be fined, what will become of the
Government? Further, I agree that the custom to imprison for foreign buying and
selling is no good custom; upon the difference before taken: all great Officers
have a proper Oath belonging to them, which is very needful for the greater
engagement of men in the due execution of their Offices, which so much concerns
the Public; and if they refuse to take it, they are punishable for it; and
this place in which Master Langham is chosen Alderman is the most great place
of Government in the Realm, and of greatest consequence to the whole Kingdom,
and therefore if it should not be supplied with Aldermen, who is it who does
not see the great inconvenience which would follow? and therefore I hold that
the custom to imprison until he take the Oath, and so by consequence the Office
upon him (for refusing of the Oath is refusing of the Office) is a good custom;
now for the Oath, it is the usual Oath which has been taken time out of mind,
etc. And it is reasonable and well penned. For the Objection that it is
unreasonable, because it makes a man to abjure his Trade: To that I answer,
that it is reasonable, and makes him abjure no more than the Law forbids him to
do, for it is not reasonable that he who has the Jurisdiction of assise of
Bread and Ale, Wine and Fish, that he during his Office should sell those
things by retail. Now that the Mayor and Aldermen of London have this
Jurisdiction, see the Statute of 31 E. cap. 3. 10. for Fish; the Statute of 23
H. 8. cap. 4. for Ale and Beer; and 28 H. 8. cap. 14. for Wine, where in these
Cases power is given to all Head-Officers of Cities, Buroughs and
Towns-corporate to punish the Offenders against the rates and Assizes of the
things aforesaid: and by the Statute of 12 E. 2. cap. 6. it is expressly
ordained, that no Officer of a City or Borough should sell Wine or Victuals
during his Office. I confess this Statute is repealed by the Statute of 3 H. 8.
but yet there is a Provision in that Statute that it extend not to London: then
the Law being that none of those things shall be sold by any Officer by retail
during his Office; the Oath which makes a man to abjure that which the Law
forbids, of necessity ought to be taken as lawful: besides, there is a Writ
grounded upon the Statute of 12 E. 2. which you shall find in the Register 184.
a. and Fitz. N. B. 173. b. that the party grieved might have directed to the
Justices of assizes, commanding them to send for the parties, and to do right,
etc. Wherefore I hold the Oath good and lawful notwithstanding this Objection.
For the point of notice, I conceive it is not needful, and if it be, I ask who
it is ought to give notice in this Case, and I say that no person is tied to do
it, wherefore he ought to take notice of it at his peril. For the debito modo
electus, I say that it is good, being in a Retorn upon a Habeas corpus, and it
is said, that it was secundum consuetudinem, which includes all things needful
for the objection. That it is averred in the retorn that he was idoneus and
habilis, but that it is no part of the custom that it should be so, for it is
only in general, Si aliquis liber homo, and does not say habilis and idoneus,
and therefore the custom should not be good: I answer, that it is averred in
the Retorn, that it is so, that he is elected, and that is sufficient for us to
ground our Judgment: but further, I conceive that the debito modo helps it,
wherefore upon the whole matter I conclude that the custom is good, and the
Retorn sufficient, and therefore that the prisoner be remanded.

Pasch. 18o Car' in the Common Pleas.
Barrow against Wood in Debt.
238. IN Debt upon an Obligation brought by Barrow against Wood, the Defendant,
demanded Oyer of the condition, and ei legitur, etc. and the effect of it was
this, That the Defendant should not keep a Mercers-shop in the Town of
Tewkesbury; and if he did, that then within three months he should pay forty
pound to the Plaintiff: upon which the Defendant did demur in Law, and the
point is only whether the condition be good or not. Sergeant Evers: the
condition is good, because it is no total restraint, for it is a restraint here
only to Tewkesbury, and not to any other place, wherefore I conceive the
condition good. I agree the Case in 11 Rep. 53. b. where a man binds himself
not to use his Trade for two years, or if a husbandman be bound he shall not
plough his Land, these are conditions against Law, because where the restraint
is total, although it be temporal, there the condition is not good; but the
condition is not totally restrictive in our Case: and he compared this Case to
the Case in 7 H. 6. 43. feoffee with warranty; Proviso, that the feoffee shall
not vouch it is a good condition, because not totally restrictive; for although
that the feoffee cannot vouch, yet he may rebut: so in this Case, although the
Obligor cannot use his Trade in Tewkesbury, yet he may use it in any other
place. And the Condition is not against Law; for if it were such a condition,
then I agree it would be naught; but yet the Bond would stand good, for this is
not a condition to do an act which is Malum in se, for there the condition is
naught and the Bond also, as 2 E. 4. 2. b. by Cook and Instit. 206. b. But
although a man cannot make a feoffm^^t upon condition that the feoffee shall
not alien, yet the feoffee may bind himself that he will not alien, and the
Bond is good; and so I say in our Case, and if the condition in this Case
should not be good, it would be very inconvenient; for it is a usual thing in a
Town in the Country, for a man to buy the shop of another man and all his Wares
in it, and if (the same being a small town, where one of that profession would
serve for the whole Town) he who bought the shop and wares should not have the
power to restrain him (the same being the ground and reason of the contract)
from using of that trade in that pla^e, it would be very inconvenient,
wherefore he conceived that the condition was good, and prayed Judgment for the
Plaintiff. Sergeant Clarke for the Defendant, that the condition is not good,
for it is against the Law, and void, because it takes away the livelihood of a
man, and that is one of the reasons against Monopolies, 11 Rep. 86, and 87. And
that I conceive is grounded upon the Law of God, for in Deuteronomy. chap. 24. ver. 6.
it is said, that you shall not take in pledge the nether and upper millstone,
for that is his life. So that by the Law of God the restraining of any man from
his Trade which is his livelihood is not lawful. And surely, our Law ought not
to be against the Law of God; and that is the reason, as I conceive, wherefore
by our Law the Utensils of a man's Profession cannot be distreined, because by
that means the means of his livelihood should be taken away. And 2 H. 5. fol.
5. b. by Hull, the condition is against Law, and yet the case there is the very
Case with our case, for there a man was bound, that he should not use his Art
in D. for two years; whereupon Hull swore by God, that if the Obligee were
present he should go to prison till he had paid a fine to the King, because the
Bond is against Law, and therewith agrees the 11 Rep. 53. b. and 7 E. 3. 65. A
Farmer covenants not to sow his land; the covenant is void: so as I conceive
that although the condition be restrictive only to one place, or for a time,
yet because it takes away the livelihood of a man for the time, the condition
is against Law, and void; and he cited a Case in the point against Clegat and
Batcheller, Mich. 44 Eliz. in this Court, Rot. 3715. where the condition of a
Bond was, That he should not use his Trade in such a place; and it was adjudged
that the condition was against Law, and therefore the Bond void; and for these
reasons he prayed that Judgment might be entered, that the Plaintiff nihil
capiat per billam. Justice Reeve did produce some Presidents in the point; and
he said that the Law as it had been adjudged, stood upon this difference
betwixt a contract, or Assumpfit, and an Obligation: A man may contract or
promise that he will not use his Trade, but he cannot bind himself in a Bond
not to do it; for if he do so it is void. And for that he cited Clegat and
Batchellers Case before, that the obligation in such Case is void; and he said,
that the reason which was given by one, why the Bond should be void, was
grounded upon the Statute of Magna Charta, cap. 29. which wills, That no
freeman should be ousted of his Liberties but per legem terrae; and he said,
that the word Liberties did extend to Trades; and Reeve said, that by the same
reason you may restrain a man from using his Trade for a time, you may restrain
him for ever. And he said, that he was confident that you shall never find one
Report against the Opinion of Hull, 2 H. 5. For the other part of the
difference, he cited Hill. 17 Iac. in this Court, Rot. 1265. and 19 Iac. in the
Kings Bench Braggs case; in which Cases he said, it was adjudged against the
Action upon a Bond, but with the Action of the Case upon a promise that it
would lie. But note, that all the Judges, viz. Foster, Reeve and Crawley
(Banks being absent) held clearly, that if the condition be against the Law,
that all is void, and not the condition only as was objected by Evers, and it
was adjorned.

Apsly against Boys in the Common Pleas in a Scire facias, to execute a Fine
upon a Grant and Render, Intrat Trin. 16 Car. Rot. 112.
239. THe Case upon the Pleading was this: A fine upon a Grant and Render was
levied in the time of E. 4. upon which afterward a Scire facias was brought,
and Judgment given, and a Writ of seisin awarded but not executed. Afterward a
fine Sur co^usans de droit come ceo, etc. with Proclamations was levied, and
five years passed, and now another Scire facias is brought to execute the first
fine, to which the fine Sur conusance de droit come ceo is pleaded; so as the
only Question is, Whether the fine with Proclamations shall bar the Scire
facias or not. Sergeant Gotbold for the Plaintiff, it shall not bar; and his
first reason was, because not executed, 1 Rep. 96, 97. and 8 Rep. 100. If a
disseisor at the Common Law before the Statute of Non-claim, had levied a fine,
or suffered Judgment in a Writ of Right until Execution sued, they were no
bars, and a fine at Common Law was of the same force as it is now, and if in
those Cases no bar at Common Law until Execution, that proves that this
interest by the fine upon grant and render is not such an interest as can bar
another fine, before execution. Besides, this Judgment by the Scire facias is a
Judgment by Statute, and Judgment cannot be voided but by error or attaint.
Further, a Scire facias is not an Action within the Statute of 4 H. 7. and
therefore cannot be a bar, 41 E. 3. 13. and 43 E. 3. 13. Execution upon Scire
feci returned without another plea; and it is not like to a Judgment; for there
the party may enter, but not here. Besides, it shall be no bar, because it is
executory only, and in custodia legis, and that which is committed to the
custody of the Law, the Law does preserve it, as it is said in the 1 Rep. 134.
b. and he compared it to the Cases there put, and a fine cannot fix upon a
thing executory, and the estate ought to be turned to a right to be bound by a
fine, as it is resolved in the 10 Rep. 96. a. and 9 Rep. 106. a. Com. 373. And
the estate of him by the first fine upon grant and render is not turned to a
right by the second fine. Lastly, the Statute of 4 H. 7. is a general Law, and
in the affirmative, and therefore shall not take away the Statute of West. 2.
which gives the Scire facias, and in proof of that he cited 39 H. 6. 3. 11 Rep.
63. and 68. and 33 H. 8. Dyer 15. I agree the Case which has been adjudged,
that a fine will bar a Writ of Error, but that is to reverse a Judgment which
is executed, but here the Judgment is not executed, and therefore cannot be
barred by the fine: wherefore he prayed Judgment for the Plaintiff. Note, that
it was said by the Judges, that here is no avoiding of the fin^, but it shall
stand in force, but yet notwithstanding it may be barred; and they all said,
that he who has Judgment upon the Scire facias upon the first fine might have
entered; and they strongly inclined, that the Scire facias is barred by the
fine, and does not differ from the Case of a Writ of Error; but they delivered
no opinion.

Taylers Case.
240. THe Case was thus* The Issue in Tail brought a Formedon in Descend. and
the Defendant pleaded in Bar, and confessed the Estate Tail; but said, that
before the death of the Tenant in Tail I. S. was seized in fee of the lands in
question, and levied a fine to him, and five years passed, and then Tenant in
Tail died; and whether this plea be a bar to the Plaintiff or not was the
Question; and it rested upon this, Whether I. S. upon this general Plea shall
be intended to be in by disseisin or by feoffment; for if in by disseisin, then
he is barred, if by feoffment, not: and the opinion of the whole Court was
clear without any debate, that he shall be intended in by disseisin, and so the
Plaintiff is Bar, as the Books are, 3 Rep. 87. a. Plow. Com. Stowels Case, and
Banks Chief Justice said, that it shall not be intended that Tenant in Tail
had made a feoffment to bar his issues unless it be showed, and it lies on the
other part to show it; and a feoffment is as well an unlawful Act as a
diss^isin, for it is a discontinuance.

Commins against Massam in a Certiorare to remove the proceedings of the
Commissioners of Sewers.
241. THe Case upon the proceedings was thus: Lessee for years of Lands within
a level, subject to be drowned by the Sea, covenanted to pay all assessments,
charges and taxes, toward or concerning the reparation of the premises: A
wall which was in defense of this level and built straight, by a sudden and
inevitable Tempest was thrown down; one within the level subject to be drowned,
did disburse all the money for the building of a new wall; and by the order of
the Commissioners a new wall was built in the form of a Horshooe; afterward
the Commissioners taxed every man within the level toward the repaying of the
sum disbursed, one of which was the lessee for years, whom they also trusted
for the collecting of all the money; and charge him totally for his land, not
levying any thing upon him in the reversion, and also with all the damages,
viz. use for the money. Less^e for years died, the lease being within a short
time of expiration, his executor enters, and they charge him with the whole;
and immediately after the years expired, and the executors brought this Certior
are, upon which there was many questions. Justice Mallet: I conceive that the
proceedings of the Commissioners are not lawfully removed into this Court,
because as I conceive no Certiorare lies to remove their proceedings at this
day, because that their proceedings are in English upon which I cannot judge,
for all our proceedings ought to be in Latin. Besides, I cannot judge upon any
Case if it be not before us by special verdict, demurrer, or writ of Error, and
it is not here in this Case by any of those ways; and if it be here by
Certiorare, yet we are not enabled to judge as this Case is; for the conclusion
of the writ is, Quod faciamus quod de jure and secundum legem, etc. fucrit
faciend. And as I have said before, we cannot judge upon English proceedings,
and they have power to proceed in English by the Statute of 23 H. 8. cap. 5. by
which Statute they have a kind of Legislative power given, for it does not
reserve any power to us, to redress their proceedings; and as I conceive no
writ of error lies at this day to correct their proceedings, because that they
are in English; and if they have Jurisdiction and proceed according to it, we
have no power to correct them; because that the Statute leaves them at large to
proceed according to their discretions. But where they have no Jurisdictio^,
there we may correct them. True it is, that before the Statute of 23 H. 8.
there are many Presidents of Certioraries to remove the proceedings of the
Commissioners of Sewers into this Court, for then their proceedings were in
Latin, but I do not find any since the Statute: wherefore I conclude that no
Certiorare will lie in this Case, and then the proceedings not being lawfully
removed I cannot judge upon them, wherefore I speak nothing to the matter in
Law contained in the proceedings of the Commissioners. Heath: I conceive
notwithstanding any thing alleged by my brother Mallet that this Court is well
possessed of the Cause, and may well determine it: the Question here was no^,
whether the Cause be well removed, but whether the Commissioners have well
proceeded as this Case is, or not; I hold that the cause is well removed by the
Certiorare; there is no Court whatsoever but is to be corrected by this Court:
I agree that after the Statute no Writ of Error lies upon their proceedings,
but that proves not that a Certiorare lies not, they are enabled by the Statute
to proceed according to their discretions, and therefore if they proceed
secundum aequu^ and bonum, we cannot correct them; but if they proceed (...)
they have no Jurisdiction, or without Commission, or contrary to their
Commission, or not by Jury, then they are to be corrected here: if a Court of
Equity proceed where they ought not, we grant a Prohibition. Without question
in trespass or Replevin their proceedings are examinable here; and I see no
reason but upon the same ground in a Certiorare they cannot make a decree of
things merely collateral, or concerning other persons; here they have certified
their Commission, and that the assessment was by a Jury of twelve men, but if
they had certified that it was per sacrament. Iuratorum generally without
saying twelve men, it had not been good, as it was by us lately adjudged,
because that for any thing appears to the contrary it might be by two or three
only, where it ought to be by twelve; and I conceived they have well done here
in laying all upon the lessee for years: by the Law of Sewers, all which may be
endamaged; or have benefit, are chargeable, and it is in their discretion so to
do. But in this case they may charge the lessee or lessor (if not for the
special covenant of the lessee) at their discretions, for the Statute says
owners or occupiers; and I conceive that the covenant here does bind the
lessee, for it is presumed that he has considerable benefit for it, and the
Commissioners may take notice of it. But if the covenant does not bind the
lessee, yet I for my part will not reverse their decree for that, because that
where they have Jurisdiction they may proceed according to their discretions,
and he covenanted to pay all taxes concerning the premises, and here it
concerns the premises although the wall be in a new form: and it was objected,
that it is now fallen upon an executor, which is hard; which is not so because
the testator was chargeable, and here the executor occupies although it be but
for a short time, and he was an occupier at the time of the decree, and
therefore it is reason that he should be charged. But it was further objected
that he has not assets; I answer, that was not alleged before the
Commissioners; and if an Action be brought against executors at the Common Law,
and they plead, and take not advantage of not having assets, it is their own
fault, and therefore shall be charged: so here. But it was further objected,
that the Commissioners have not Jurisdiction of damages, viz. with the interest
of the money. But I hold clearly otherwise, that they having Jurisdiction of the
principal, shall have Jurisdiction of the damages; wherefore I conclude that
the Commissioners have well done, and that their decree is good. Bramston Chief
Justice: in this Case there are five points. First, whether the covenant shall
extend to this new wall or not. Secondly, whether this collateral covenant be
within their Jurisdiction or not. Thirdly, whether their power do extend to an
executor or not. Fourthly, whether they have Jurisdiction of damages or not.
And lastly, whether their proceedings be lawfully removed by this Certiorare or
not: for the latter I hold that their proceedings are lawfully removed, and
that the Certiorare lies at this day to remove their proceedings; but I
confess, if I had thought of it, I would not have granted it so easily, but it
was not made any scruple at the Bar, nor any thing said to it, and hereafter I
shall be very tender in granting of them. True it is, before the Statute of 23
H. 8. they were common, but there are few to be found after the Statute, and we
ought to judge here as they ought to judge there, and we cannot determine any
thing upon English proceedings, and at first I put that doubt to the Clerks of
the Court, Whether if we confirm their decree, we ought to remand it, or
whether we ought to execute it by Estreat into the Exchequer or not, and they
could not resolve me, wherefore I much doubted whether we might proceed to
question their decree upon this Certiorare or not. But because I was informed
that the parties by agreement have made this case as it is here before us upon
the Certiorare and have bound themselves voluntarily in a recognisance to stand
to the Judgment of the Court upon the proceedings as they were removed upon the
Certiorare by the agreement of the parties, therefore I did not stick upon the,
Certiorare, because what was done was by consent, and consensus tollit errorem,
if any be. Now for the points as they arise upon the proceedings of the
Commissioners* and for the first, I hold that the covenant does well extend to
this new wall; and the making of it in the form of a horshooe is not material,
so as it be adjoining to the land as it here was, for that may be ordered
according to their discretions: it is a rule in Law, that the covenant of every
man ought to be construed very strong against himself; and although that in
this Case the new wall be not parcel of the premises, as it was at the time of
the covenant; because that the wall then in esse and to which the covenant did
extend was a straight wall, yet according to the words of the covenant, this
tax is toward the reparation of the premises, and if it should not extend to
this new wall, the covenant should be idle and vain; and clearly, the meaning
of the parties was, that it should extend to all new walls. For the second
point, I hold the covenant, although it be a collateral thing, within their
Jurisdiction: true it is, as it is said in 28 H. 8. that contracts are as
private Laws betwixt party and party: but you ought to know that their
Commission gives them power to charge every man according to his tenure,
portion, and profit; and he who is bound by custom or prescription to repair
such walls is not within the words of their Commission; yet it is resolved in
the 10 Rep. 139, 140. in Kighleys case that the Commissioners may take notice
of it, and charge him only for the reparations, where there is default in him
and the danger not inevitable; and by the same reason you may exclude this
covenant to be out of their Jurisdiction, you may exclude prescription also. I
agree that where the covenant is merely collateral, as if a man who is a
stranger covenants to pay charges for repairing of such a wall, that that is
not within their Jurisdiction, because he is a mere stranger, and cannot be
within their Commission; but in our Case it is otherwise, for the covenantor is
occupier of the land, and it has been adjudged, that if lands or chattels are
given for the reparation of a Sea-wall, that it is within their Jurisdiction,
and they may meddle with it, and that is as collateral as the covenant in
question, wherefore I hold that the covenant is within their Jurisdiction. For
the third point, I hold that they may well charge the executor, for the
executor here has the lease as executor: but it was objected, That the term is
now determined, and peradventure the executor has not assets; To that I
answer, that it is admitted that he has assets, for the Commissioners cannot
know whether he has assets or not, and therefore he ought to have alleged the
same before the Commissioners, and because he has not done it he has lost
that advantage, and it shall be intended that he has assets by not gainsaying
of it. Fourthly, for the damages, I first chiefly doubted of that, but now I
hold that it is within their Jurisdiction: Put case that one in extreme
necessity, as in this Case, disburse all the money for the reparations or the
wall, or Sea-bank, if the Case had gone no further clearly, he shall be repaid
by the tax and levy after; and I conceive by the same reason they have power to
allow him damages and use for his money; for if it should not be so, it would be
very inconvenient, for who would after disburse all the money to help that
imminent danger and necessity if he should not be allowed use for his money?
and the Lessee here is only charged with the damages for the money collected
which he had in his hands, and converted to his own use, and therefore it is
reasonable that he should be charged with all the damages. Besides, they having
conusans of the principal, have conusans of the accessory as in this Case of
the damages, and he urged Fitz. 113. a. to prove that before the Statute of 23
H. 8. they had a Court, and were called Justices: but he held as it was agreed
before, That no Writ of Error lies after this Statute, but yet he said that
the party grieved should be at no loss thereby; for he said, that where the
party cannot have a Writ of Error, nor Audita querela, there he shall be
admitted to plead, as in 11 H. 7. 10. a. Where a Recognisance of debt passed
for the King upon issue tried, and afterward the King pardons it, the party
after Judgment may plead it, because Audita querela does not lie against the
King, and where a man is not party to a Judgment, there he cannot have a Writ
of Error, but there he may falsify, so I conceive that he may in this Case,
because he cannot have a Writ of Error; and I conceive as it has been said
before, that after the Statute of 23 H. 8. the Commissioners of Sewers have a
mixed Jurisdiction of Law and equity. For the Certiorare I will advise hereafter
how I grant it, although I conceive (as I have said before) that a Certiorare
lies after the Statute, and is not taken away by the Statute, and I conceive in
some clearness that it may be granted where any fine is imposed upon any man by
Commissioner, which they have authority to do by their Commission; as appears
by the Statute to moderate it in Case that it be excessive. But as I have said
before, because that the parties by agreement voluntarily bound themselves by
Recognisance to stand to the judgment of this Court upon the proceedings as
they are certified, that made me at this time not to stand upon the Certiorare,
wherefore I do confirm the decree.

242. Rolls moved this Case: A. did suffer B. to leave a trunk in his house,
Whether B. might take it away without the special leave of A. was the Question.
Justice Mallet, leave is intended; but Rolls conceived that he could not take
it without leave.

Hammon against Roll, Pasch. 18. Car. in the Common Pleas.
243. IN an Action upon the Case upon Assumpsit, the Case upon special verdict
was this: A. and B. were bound jointly and severally in a Bond to C. who
released to A. afterward there being a communication betwixt B. and C.
concerning the said debt, B. in consideration that C. would forbear him the
payment of the said money due and payable upon the said Bond till such a day
promised to pay it, etc. C. for default of payment at the said day, brought
this Action upon the Case. B. pleaded the general issue, and thereupon the
whole matter before was found by the Jury. Sergeant Clarke: here is not any
good consideration whereupon to ground an Assumpsit, because by the release to
one obligor the other is discharged; and then there being no debt, there can be
no consideration, and therefore the promise void, because it is but nudum
pactum. Rolls contrary, that there is a good consideration; because that
although by the release to one obligor, the debt of the other be discharged sub
modo, viz. if the other can get it in his power to plead, yet it is no absolute
discharge; for if he cannot get it into his hand to plead it, he shall never
take advantage of it, and then if it be no absolute discharge, but only sub
modo, viz. if he can procure it into his hand to plead, then the consideration
is good, for perhaps he shall never get it. Justice Foster asked him if by this
release the debt be not entirely discharged: to which he answered, No, as to B.
only, but sub modo as I have said before; but he said, and with him agreed the
whole Court, that the Law is clearly otherwise that the debt is entirely gone
and discharged; and then clearly there can be no consideration in this Case.
Justice Reeve: every promise ought to have a consideration, and that ought to
be either benefit to him that makes it, or disadvantage to him to whom it is
made, and in this Case the consideration which is the ground of the Assumpsit
is neither benefit to him that made it, nor disadvantage to hi^ to whom it was
made, because there was no debt; for it was totally discharged by the release
made to A. Crawley agreed to it; Banks Chief Justice was absent. But because
the obligation was laid to be made in London; and no Ward or Parish certain put
from whence the Visne should come, they conceived clearly that it was not good.

Pasch. 18o Car. in the Kings Bench.
Heamans Habeas Corpus.
144. RIchard Heaman was imprisoned by the Court of Admiralty, upon which he
prayed a Habeas corpus, and it was granted, upon which was this retorn, viz.
First the custom of the Admiralty is set forth, which is to attach goods in
causa civili and maritimi, in the hands of a third person* and that upon four
defaults made, the goods so attached should be delivered to the Plaintiff upon
caution put to restore them if the debt or other cause of Action be disproved
within the year, and after four defaults made if the party in whose hands the
goods were attached, refused to deliver them, that the custom is to imprison
him until, etc. Then is set forth how that one Kent was indebted unto I. S. in
such a sum upon agreement made Super altum mare, and that Kent died, and that
afterward I. S. attached certain goods of Kents in the hands of the said
Heaman for the said debt, and that after upon summons four defaults were made,
and that I. S. did tender caution for the re-delivery of the goods so attached
and condemned, if the debt were disproved within the year; and that
notwithstanding the said Heaman would not deliver the goods, for which he was
imprisoned by the Court of Admiralty until, etc. Widdrington of Counsel with
the prisoner, took this exception to the Retorn, that it appears by the
Retorn that Kent who was the debtor was dead before the attachment, and you
shall never attach the goods of any man as his goods after his death, because
they are not his goods, but the goods of the executor in the right of the
testator. Besides, although the attachment be upon the goods, yet the Action
ought to be against the person, which cannot be he being dead, wherefore he
prayed that the prisoner might be discharged. Hales; that the attachment is
well made, notwithstanding that the party was dead at the time of attachment,
for it is the custom of their Court so to proceed, although that the party be
dead. Besides, he said that although that the party were dead, yet the goods
are bona defuncti, and to prove that he cited 10 E. 4. 1. the opinion of Danby
and Catesby. That the grant of Omnia bona and catalla sua by an executor will
not pass the goods which he has as executor, because they are the goods of the
dead. But note, that it was here said by Bramston Chief Justice, that it had
been adjudged diverse times against the opinion aforesaid, that it passes the
goods which the executor has as executor: and he said, that if a man has a
judgment against an executor to recover goods, the Judgment shall be that he
recover bona defuncti. To that the Court said, that the Judgment is not quod
recuperet bona defuncti, but quod recuperet the goods which fuerunt bona
defuncti. For the objection, that the plaint ought to be against the person,
which cannot be when he is dead, to that Hales said, that in the Admiralty the
Action is against the goods, and therefore the death of the person is not
material; to that Justice Heath said, that it is the party who is charged, the
goods are only chargeable in respect of the person, and you shall never charge
the goods alone, but there ought to be a party to answer. Hales: if they have
Jurisdiction, they may proceed according to their Law, and we cannot hinder it:
to which Heath said, take heed of that, when it concerns the liberty of the
Subject, as in this Case. And note, that Bramston Chief Justice asked the
Proctor of the Admiralty then present this Question, Whether by their Law the
death of the party did not abate the action; and he said that it did; then said
the Chief Justice, it is clear that an attachment cannot be against the goods
the party being dead; wherefore by the whole Court the custom to attach goods
after the death of the party is no good custom; and therefore they g^ve
Judgment that the prisoner should be discharged.

245. Note, that Bramston Chief Justice and Heath Justice said in evidence to a
Jury, that a Will without a Seal is good to pass the Land, and that it is a
Forgery expressly by the Statute of 5 Eliz. cap. 14. to forge a Will in writing.

Pasch. 18o Car' in the Kings Bench.
Fulham against Fulham in a Replevin.
246. THe Case was thus: Henry the 8 seized of a Manor in which are Copyholds,
grants a Copyhold for life generally, and whether this be a destroying of the
Copyhold or not, was the Question. And it was argued by Harris that the grant
was utterly void, because the King was deceived in his grant, for he said, the
King had election to grant it by Copy, and therefore it shall not be destroyed
by a general grant without notice, and cited many Cases to prove that where the
King is deceived in the Law, his Grant shall be void; but Bramston Chief
Justice and the Court said, that it never recited in any of the Grants of the
King what is Copyhold, and they were clear of Opinion that the Grant was not
void. But whether it destroy the Copyhold or not, so as the King has not
election to grant the same after by Copy, that they agreed might be a Question.
Sergeant Rolls at another day argued that the Copyhold was destroyed by the
Kings grant, but he agreed that it is not reason that the Patent should be
utterly void, for that he said would overturn all the Kings grants, for there
is not any Patent that ever recited Copyhold, and therefore the Question is,
whether the Copyhold be destroyed or not, and he argued that it is, because
there needs not auy recital of Copyhold, Br. Pat. 93. It is agreed that where
the King grants Land which is in lease for term of years of one who was
attainted, or of an Abbey or the like, that the grant is good without recital of
the lease of him who was attainted, etc. For he shall not recite any lease but
leases of Record, and therewith agrees 1 Rep. 45. a. and Dyer, fol. 233. pl.
10, and 11. Now he said there is no Record of these Copyholds, and therefore
there needs not any recital of them, and therefore the King is not deceived.
Further he said, that no man is bounden to inform the King in this Case, and
therefore the King ought to take notice, and then the reason of the Case of a
common person comes to the Kings Case, because the Copyhold was not demiseable
for time as before, according to the nature of a Copyhold, and therefore of
necessity is destroyed, and the Court as I said before, did conceive the Case
questionable.

Burwell against Harwell in a Replevin.
247. THe Case was shortly thus: A man acknowledged a Statute, and afterward
granted a Rentcharge: the land is extended, the Statute is afterward
satisfied by ^ffluxion of time, and the grantee of the rent did distrain; and
whether he might without bringing a Scire facias, was the Question. And the
Case was several times debated at the Bar, and now upon solemn debate by the
Judges at the Bench, resolved. But first, there was an exception taken to the
pleading, which was, that the avowant says, that the Plaintiff took the
profits from such a time to such a time, by which he was satisfied, that was
said to be a plea only by argument, and not an express averment, and therefore
was no good matter of issue, and of this opinion was Justice Heath in his
argument: but Bramston Chief Justice, that it is a good positive plea, and the
Plaintiff might have ^ravers^d without that, that he was satisfied modo and
forma, and in Plowd. Comment. in Buckley and Rice Thomas (...), ut, cum, tam,
quam, are good issues. Now for the point in Law, Justice Mallet was for the
Avowant, that the distress was lawful, the grantee of the Rent cannot have a
Scire facias, because he is a stranger, and a stranger cannot have a Scire
facias, either to account, or have the land back again. The Cases which were
objected by my Brother Rolls, viz. 32 E. 3. tit. Scire facias 101. Br. Scire
facias 84. and Fitz. Scire facias 134. That the feoffee shall have a Scire
facias, do not come to our Case, for here the grantee of the Rent is a stranger
not only to the Record but to the Land, which the feoffee is not. Further, it
was objected, that the Grantee of the Rent claims under the conusor, and
therefore shall not be in a better condition than the Conusor; there are diverse
Cases where grantee of a rent shall be in better condition than the Conusor;
the Lord Mountjoyes Case: a man makes a lease for years rendering rent, and
afterward acknowledges a Statute, and afterward grants over the rent, now it
is not extendable. Besides, it was objected, that if this should be suffered it
would weaken the assurance of the Statute and disturb it: I agree that may be,
but if there be not any fraud nor collusion, it is not material, and then he
being a stranger, if he cannot have a Scire facias, he may distrain: it is a
Rule in Law, Quod remedio distituitur ipsa re valet, si culpa absit* 21 H. 7.
33. Where there is no Action to avoid a Record, there it may be avoided by
averment, etc. 18 E. 4. 9. and 5 Rep. 110. 32 Eliz. Syers Case; a man indicted
of felony done the first day of May, where it was not done that day, he cannot
have an averment against it, but his feoffee may. 12 H. 7. 18. The King grants
my land unto another by Patent, I have no remedy by Scire facias. 19 E. 3. Br.
Fauxifer of recovery. 57. F. N. B. 211. 20 E. 3. 6. 9 E. 4. 38. a. A man grants
a rent, and afterward suffers a recovery, the grantee shall not falsify the
recovery because he is a stranger to the recovery, but he may distrain, which
is the same Case in effect with our Case: for which cause I conceive that the
distress is good, and that the Replevin does not lie. Justice Heath: the
distress is unlawful, for he ought to have a Scire facias, clearly the conusor
ought to bring a Scire facias, See the Statute of 13 E. 1. Fulwoods Case, 4
Rep. 2 R. 3. and 15 H. 7. and the reason why a Scire facias is granted, is,
because that when a possession is settled, it ought to be legally evicted.
Besides, it does not appear in this Case when the time expired: besides, costs
are to be allowed in a Statute as Fulwoods Case is, and ^he same ought to be
judged by the Court and not by a Jury, which is a reason which sticks with me,
see the Statute of 11 H. 6. it is objected that the Grantee of the rent cannot
have a Scire facias, it will be agreed that the conusor himself cannot enter
without a Scire facias, and I conceive a fortiori not the Grantee of the Rent.
I do not say here there is fraud, but great inconvenience and mischief if
arrerages incurred for a great time (as in this Case it was) shall be all
levied upon the conusee, for any small disagreement, as for a shilling, without
any notice given to him by Scire facias, and he should be so ousted and could
not hold over. I hold that of necessity there ought to be a Scire facias, and
he ought to provide with the Grantor to have a Scire facias in some fit time,
but I hold that the Grantee here may well have a Scire facias. I agree the
Cases where it is to avoid a Record, there ought to be privity, as the Books
are, but here h^ does not avoid the Record, but allows it, for the Scire facias
ought to be only to account, 38 E. 3. The second conusee of a Statute shall
have a Scire facias against the first conusee, and I conceive that by the same
reason the Grantee of the rent here shall have it, and in that Case there is no
privity betwixt the first conusee and the second conusee; for which cause he
did conclude that the distress was unlawful, and that the Reple^in would well
lie. Bramston Chief Justice for the Avowant, that (...) may well distr^in, and
cannot have a Scire facias, but if he may have a Scire facias, yet he may
distrein without it. There is no authority in the Law directly in the point in
this Case: I agree that if there be any prejudice to the conusee, there it is
reason to have a Scir^ facias. It was objected, that it is a constant course to
have a Scire facias in this Case. But I believe you will never find a Scire
facias brought by the Grantee of a rent, or other profit apprender. Besides,
the best way to judge this Case is to examine what the Scire facias is which
ought to be brought, and what the Judgment is which is given upon it, whether
he may recover the thing in demand or not, vid. 32 E. 3. Fitz. Scire facias
101. and 47 E. 3. 11. which are brought to have account, and to show cause
wherefore he should not have the land: see Fitz. Scire facias 43. v. The old
Entries, the Judgment which is given thereupon, and the demand there is quod
tenement. praed. redeliberatur, and may the grantee in this Case have the land
and thing in demand? certainly not; and that gives sufficient answer to the
Cases objected by my Brother Heath, where the second conusee shall have a Scire
facias against the first. Besides, you shall never find in all our Books that a
man shall have an attaint or a writ of error, but he who may be restored to the
thing lost by the judgment or verdict, 2 R. 3. 21 Dyer. 89. 9 Rep. the Lord
Sanchars Case; so in debt and erroneous Judgment upon it, wherewith agrees
Doctor Druries Case, 8 Rep. 12. and 18 E. 3. 24. the feoffee shall have a Writ
of Error, because he shall have the land, and see 32 E. 3. Scire facias 101.
And the grantee shall not have a Writ of Error in this Case upon erroneous
Judgment, and for the same reason he shall not have a Scire facias, and the
grantee cannot have a Scire facias for want of privity, and therefore I
conclude that he cannot have a Scire facias, for if he might, certainly it
would have been brought before this time, either for this cause, or for some
other profit apprender. It was objected that he shall not be in better
condition than the conusor, that is regularly true as to the right, but he may
have another remedy. It was objected that the reason why that a Statute without
a Scire fatias shall not be defeated is, because he is in by Record, and
therefore shall not be defeated without Record, but that is not the true
reason, but the reason is, because the conusee ought to have costs and damages,
besides his debt, as is Fullwoods Case 4 Rep and 15 H. 7. 16. is, that the
Chancellor shall judge of the costs and damages. But 47 E. 3. 10. and 46 E* 3.
Scire facias 132. by all the Judges that they lie in averment. But here an
inconvenience was objected, that great arrerages should be put upon the conusee
for a little mistaking; to that he said, that of a small mistake the Court
shall judge, and it shall not hurt him, but if he hold over being doubly
satisfied, it is reason that he pay the ar^erages; and he put this Case, A man
acknowledges a Statute, and afterward makes a lease to begin at a day to
come, the l^ssee shall have a Scire facias* for where remedy does fail, the Law
will help him; for which cause he concluded, and gave Judgment for the avowant.

Trin. 18 Car' in the Kings Bench.
Paulin against Forde.
248. AN Action upon the Case brought for words; the words were these: Thou art
a thievish Rogue, and have stolen my wood, innuendo lignum, etc. Gardener: the
words are not actionable, because it shall be intended wood standing or
growing, and not wood cut down, and so he said it had been adjudged; so if a
man says of another, that he has stolen his Corn or Apples, the words are not
actionable, because they shall be intended growing. Bramston Chief Justice,
that the words are actionable, because that wood cannot otherwise be meant, but
of wood cut down, because it is Arbor dum crescit, lignum dum crescere nescit,
for which cause he conceived that the words were actionable; and it was
adjorned.

Chambers and his wife against Ryley.
249. ACtion upon the Case for words, the words were these: Chambers his wife
is a Bawd, and keeps a Bawdy House: for which words the Action was brought, and
the conclusion of the Plea is ad damnum ipsorum. Wright: the words are not
actionable, because it is not the wife that keeps the house but the husband,
and therefore the speaking the words of the wife cannot be any damage to him;
but admit the words were actionable, the husband only ought to bring the
Action, because the speaking of the words is only to his damage. Bramston Chief
Justice: the wife only is to be indicted for the keeping of a Bawdy House, and
therefore she only is damnified by the words, and the husband ought to join in
the Action, but that is only for conformity, and the conclusion of the Plea is
good, for the damage of the wife is the damage of the husband, and therefore ad
damnum ipsorum good. And here it was agreed, that to say that a woman is a
Bawd, will not bear an Action; but to say, she keeps a Bawdy House, will.
Porter, who was for the Action cited a Case, which was thus. One said of the
wife of another, that she had bewitched all his beasts; and she and her husband
joined in an Action, and upon debate it was adjudged good; and there the
conclusion also of the plea was ad damnum ipsorum.

Rickebies Case.
250. RIckebie was indicted in Durham for Murder, and afterward the Indictment
was removed into the Kings Bench, where he pleaded his Pardon; which Pardon had
these words in it, viz* Homicidium feloniam, felonicam interfectionem, necem,
etc. seu quocunque alio modo ad mortem devenerit. And note, there was a Non
obstante in the Pardon of any Statute made to the contrary; and whether these
words in the Pardon were sufficient to pardon Murder or not, was the Question.
Hales for the Prisoner said, that the Pardon was sufficient to pardon Murder,
and in his argument first he considered whether Murder were pardonable by the
King at the Common Law or not, and he argued that it was; the King is
interessed in the suit, and by the same reason he may pardon it. It is true,
that it is Malum in se, and therefore will not admit of dispensation, nor can
an appeal of Murder which is the suit of the Subject be discharged by the King
but the King may pardon Murder although he cannot dispense with it: see Bracton
lib. 3. cap. 14. And the Law of the J^ws differs from our Law* and so the
constitution of other Realms; then the question is, Whether this Prerogative of
the King to pardon murder be taken away by any Statute or not; and first for
the Statute of 2 E. 3 cap. 2. upon which all the other Statutes depend: that
Statute made was only to prevent the frequencie of Pardons, but not totally to
take away the Kings Prerogative, for the words of the Statute are, That
offenders were encouraged because that Charters of Pardon were so easily
granted in times past, etc. And the Statute of 13 R. 2. cap. 2. admits the
Power and Prerogative of the King of pardoning Murder notwithstanding the
former Statute; for that Statute prescribes the form only; and 13 R. 2. in the
Parliament-Roll, Number 36. the King says, Saving his Prerogative. The next
thing considerable here is, admitting Murder pardonable by the King, Whether in
this Pardon there be sufficient words to pardon murder or not, and he argued
that there was; and first for the word (felony) and he said, that by the Common
Law pardon of felony is pardon of murder; the Statute of 18 E. 3. cap. 2.
inables Justices of Peace to hear and determine felonies; and in 5 E. 6. Dyer
69. a. it is holden clearly that the Justices of Peace by virtue of that act
have authority to inquire of murder, because it is felony; and in Instit. 391.
a. By the Law at this day under the word (felony) in Commissions, etc. is
included Petit Treason, Murder, etc. Wherefore murder being felony, the pardon
of felony is the pardon of murder. Further he said, that the pardon of
manslaughter is a good pardon of murder; for he said that murder and
manslaughter are all one in substance, and differ only in circumstance, as the
Book in Plowd. Comment. fol. 101. is, and if they were diverse offenses, then
the Jury could not find a man indicted of murder guilty of manslaughter, as it
was in the Case before cited. The last words are, and quocunque alio modo ad
mortem devenerit, which extends to all deaths whatsoever; and if it should not
be so, the Statute of 13 R. 2. should be in vain. I agree the Books of 1 E. 3.
14 22 Ass. 49. and 21 E. 3. 24. objected on the other side, that the pardon of
felony does not extend to treason, with which the Institutes 391 agrees, they
make not against me; see the Statute of 25 E. 3. cap. 2. and the Books of 9 E.
4. 26. by Billin. and 8 H. 6. 20. by Strange, they are but bare opinions. It
was objected that an Indictment at the Common Law shall not extend to murder
unless the word (Murdravit) be in the Indictment: I answer, that a pardon of
felony may pardon robbery, and yet here ought to be also Robberia in the
Indictment. A pardon need not nor can follow the form of Indictments, the
offense apparent, it suffices. Further, he argued that the King might dispense
with the Statute of 2 E. 3. and 13 R. 2. by a Non obstante. It was objected,
that the Kings grant with a Non obstante the Statute of 13 R. 2. cap. 5. of the
Admiralty is not good, and that so of a pardon o^ murder with a Non obstante:
to that he answered, and took this difference, Where the subject has an
immediate interest in an Act of Parliament, there the King cannot dispense with
it, and such is the case of the Admiralty; but where the King is entrusted with
the managing of it, and the subject only by way of consequence, there he may:
see 2 R. 3. 12. and 2 H 7. 6. It was objected, that the King cannot dispense
with the inquiry of the Court upon the Statute of 13 R. 2. cap. 1. To that he
answered, that the inquiry is the Kings suit, and therefore he may dispense
with it: See 5 E. 3. 29. It was objected further, that the Pardon says, Vnde
indictatus est. To that he answered, That if it be left out it is good without
it, for the same is only for information; See 36 H. 6. 25. And the words of
pardon are usual to say, Vnde indictatus vel non indictatus, utlegat' vel non
utlegat' and that would avoid all Pardons before if it should be suffered, and
for these causes he concluded and prayed that the Pardon might be allowed.
Shaftoe of Gray's Inn at another day argued for the King, that the pardon was
insufficient, and first he said, That the words of the pardon were not
sufficient to pardon murder. For the words Homicidium and Feloni^am
interfectionem are indifferent words, and therefore shall not be taken in a
strict and strained sense. It is true, that killing is the Genus, but there are
several Species of it and several offenses. Now for the word (Felony) I
conceive that the pardon of Felony will not pardon murder, vide 33 H. 8. 50.
fol. 4. Dyer. But yet I conceive that felony in the general sense will extend
to murder, but not in a Pardon, for there ought to be precise and express
words, and so are the Books of 8 H. 6. 20. by Strange, and 22 H. 7. Keilway 31
b. express in the point, Hill. 2. Iac. Institut. 391. a. and Stamford Pleas of
the Crown, 114. a. If a man be indicted for an offense done upon the Sea, it is
not sufficient for the Indictment to say Felonice, but it ought also to say
Pyratice. And pardon of all felonies is not a Pardon of all Pyracie; by the
same reason, here pardon of Felony is no pardon of Murder. For the ^ast words,
Quocunque alto modo ad mortem pervenerit, these words do not pardon Murder,
because they are too general, vide 8 H. 4. 2. and 29 Ass. Pl. 24. And clearly
if there were but these general words they would not pardon Murder. I was
objected that these words are as much as if murder had been expressed in the
pardon. To that he answered, that the Statute of 13 R. 2. cap. 1. says that
the offense it self ought to be expressed, and does not say by words
equipollent; and the Title of the Statute is, that the offense committed ought
to be specified. In all Pardons the King ought to be truly informed of the
form, as also of the Indictment and proceeding upon it: See 6 Rep. fol. 13. and
here is no recital in the Pardon, 9 E. 4. 28. 8 H. 4. 2. Pardon of Attainder
does not pardon the felony, and pardon of the felony does not pardon the
Attainder. I agree that the King may pardon his suit, but the same ought to be
by apt words. The words of Licet indictatus, or non indictatus, will not help
it, it goes to the proceedings only, and not to the matter. Besides, the Law
presumes that the Patent or Pardon is at the suggestion of the party; and
therefore if the King be not rightly informed of his Grant, he is deceived, and
the Grant void; and perhaps if the King had been informed that the fact done
was murder, he would not have pardoned it; and the words Ex certa scientia
shall not make the Grant good, where the King is deceived by false suggession
of the party: See Altonwoods Case, 1 Rep. 46. a. and 52. b. 9. E. 4. 26. b. is
an authority in the point: by Billing Charter of Pardon ought to make express
mention of murder, or otherwise it will not pardon it; and 22 H. 7. 91. b.
Keilway, Pardon of all felonies will not pardon murder, Br. Charter de pardon
10. there ought to be express words of murder in the pardon: See the Old
Entries 455. 2 H. 7. 6. by Ratcliffe objected, that the King may pardon murder
with a Non obstante, that I agree, but if ought to be by express words: See
Stamford Pleas of the Crown, fol. 103, 104. and 19. a. Where it is said, that a
pardon of all felonies does not extend to murder. Besides, I conceive that a
Non obstante cannot dispense with the Statute of 13 R. 2. I agree that where
there is a penalty only given by the Statute, there the King may dispense with
it. I agree the Book of 2 H. 7. 6. there it was a penalty only. I agree also
that the King may dispense with the Statute of Quia emptores ^errarum, as the
Book is, N. B. 3. 211. f. But when a Statute is absolute and not Sub modo,
there he cannot dispense with it: See 18 Eliz. Dyer 352. and 8 Rep. 29. Princes
Case, Institut. 120 a. and Hobarts Rep. 103. The King with a Non obstante
cannot dispense with the Statute of Simony, because it is a positive Law and
not Sub modo, and this Statute of 13 R. 2. is for the common good. It was
objected that the King may pardon murder by the Common Law, and that the
Statute of 13 R. 2. takes away the inquiry only; further, it was objected, that
the Statute of 2 E. 3. did allow that the King might pardon murder, but not so
easily; and the Statute of 13 R. 2. is sa^^ng our Regality, by which was
concluded that his Prerogative is saved. Bracton fol. 133. a. says, that the
Kings pardoning of murder was contra justitiam, and Register fol. 309. Se
defendendo, and per infortunium only are pardonable; and that well expounds the
Statute of 2 E. 3. cap. 2. which enacts that Charters of Pardon shall be only
granted where the King may do it by his Oath; that is to say, where a man kills
another Se defendendo, or per infortunium. And for the saving of the Regality,
which is in the Statute of 13 R. 2. to that I say, that the Judges ought to
judge according to the body of the Act, and that is express that the King
cannot pardon murder. 5 E. 3. 29. and Kelway 134. there it is disputed, but yet
it came not to our Case, for that is only of a pardon of the Kings suit: and
for these reasons he prayed that the pardon might not be allowed. Keeling for
the King, that the pardon is not sufficient to pardon murder: The Kings pardons
ought to be taken strictly, and so is the 5 Rep. The Question here is not,
whether the general words shall extend to murder; but whether it ought to be
precisely expressed in the Pardon or not, and he held that it ought; and h^
held that the King cannot dispense with the Statute of 13 R. 2. by a Non
obstante the Books of 2 R. 3. and 2 H. 7. 6. and 11. Rep. 88. That the King may
dispense with a Penal Law he agreed, but he said that this Act of 13 R. 2.
binds the King in point of Justice, and therefore the King cannot dispense with
it; and Institutes 234* the King by a Non obstante cannot dispense with the
buying and selling of Offices contrary to the Statute, because it touches and
concerns Justice. Wherefore he prayed that the Pardon might not be allowed.

FINIS.
THere is lately Reprinted Mr. March's Actions for Slanders and Arbitrement^^*
Sold by Mris Walbanck at Grays Inn-Gate in Grays-Inn-Lane.

An Exact TABLE to these REPORTS, Alphabetically composed by the Author.
Abatement of Writ. See Title Writ. Acceptance.
WHere a Witness has not a reasonable sum delivered to him, for Costs and
Charges, according to the distance of place, as the Stat. of 5 Q 9. says, yet
if he accept it, it shall bind him. See Tit. Witnesses. 1.
Account.
For what things a Husband who is administrator to his Wife, shall be
accomptable in the Ecclesiastical Court; for what no^. pa. 44. pl. 69 Where an
account by Bill lies for an Attorney of the Common Bench, Kings Bench, or
Exchequer; and where i^ an account a man shall recover Dam^mages upon the
second Judgment. 99, and 100 pl. 171. In Debt upon an account it suffices to
say that the Defendant was indebted to the Plaintiff upon an account pro
diversis mercimoniis without reciting the particulars. 102. pl. 175.
Action upon the Case.
Where if a man sue another, in the name of a third person, without his
privity, an Action upon the Case will lie against him, where not? 47 pl. 76.
Where o^e who is not of the Jury, cau^seth himself to be sworn, in the name of
one returned of the Jury, and gives his Verdict, either party may have an
Action upon the Case against him. 81. pl. 132. A man returned cited in the
Ecclesiastical Court where he was not cited, shall have an action upon the
case. 99. pl. 169.
Action upon the Case for words.
What words shall be actionable, and what not? pa 1. pl. 3. pa. 7. pl. 17, 18,
and 19. pa. 15. pl. 37. 19. pl. 44. 20. pl. 45. 58. pl 90. 59. pl. 91, and 93.
76. pl. 119. 82. pl. 135. 107. pl. 184. 109. pl. 187. 113. pl. 191. 115. pl.
192. 116. pl. 193. 119. pl. 197 146. pl. 217. 62. pl. 96. 211. pl. 248. and
212. 149.
Actio personalis moritur cum persona.
What shall be said to be an Action personal, and to dye with the person, what
not? 9. 13, and 14.
Alimony.
Where a man puts his Wife from him, he is compellable by the Ecclesiastical
Court to allow her Alimony. 11. pl. 31. The High Commission Court had not power
to allow Alimony. 80. pl. 129.
Amendment.
Where amendment may be in the inferior Court after Error brought, where not?
72 pl. 109. No amendments allowed in Courts below. 78. pl. 124. No amendment
after a Verdict without (...). 82. pl 133. A Decla^ation cannot be amended in
substance* without a new Original, otherwise o^ (...). 93. pl. 161. A Warrant
of Attorney may be amended after Error brought. 121. pl. 201. and 129. pl.
209. In an Ejectione firm vi and arms was in the Writ, but wanted in the
Count, whether it be amendable or not? quaere pa. 140. pl. 113.
Appendant.
Leet may be appendant to a Hundred. 75. pl. 115.
Apportionment.
Where a Debt or other duty may be apportioned, and several Actions brought,
where not? 57. and 61. Assumpsit, being an entire thing, cannot be apportioned.
100 pl 172. Where an Arbitrament shall be said to be uncertain, where not? 13.
pl. 42. Where an Award shall be said to be according to the submission, where
not? 77. pl. 122. The submission of an Infant to an Arbitrament is void. 111.
pl. 189. 141. pl. 215.
Arrerages.
Grantee of a Rent charge in see, distraines for Arrerages, and then grants it
over, whether the Arrerages are lost or not, quaere. 103. pl. 178
Assent and Consent.
An Executor is compellable in the Ecclesiastical Court to assent to a Legacy.
96 pl. 167. What shall be said a good assent to a Legacy? and where an assent
after the death of the Devisee shall be good, where not? 137. pl. 209.
Assets.
Where Assets, or not Assets may be tried by the Spiritual Court? See Tit.
I^risdiction.
Assignee and Assignments.
A Feme sole conveys a term in trust, and marries; the Husband assigns it
over, the trust passes, not the Estate. 88. pl. 141.
Assumpsit.
Where there is a mutual and absolute promise, he that brings the Action needs
not to say, q^od paratus est, to do the thing which he promis^d, and that the
other refused to accept it; otherwise, where the promise is conditional. 75.
pl. 114. Promise not to exercise ones Trade in such a Town is good, otherwise
in case of a Bond. 77. pl. 121. 191. pl. 238. Promise made to an Attorney of
one Court, for Solicitation of a Cause in another Court, is a good
consideration upon which to ground an Assumpsit. 78. pl. 123. Promise is an
entire thing, and cannot be apportioned. See Tit. Apportionment.
Attachment.
An Attachment lies against the Steward of an inferior Court for dividing of
Actions. 141. pl. 214. See more of Attachments in Title Contempt.
Attorney.
Infant cannot be an Attorney. 92. pl. 154. An Administrator brought a writ of
Error to reverse the Outlawry of the intestate, for murder, and allowed to
appear by Attorney. 113. pl. 190. An Attorney at Common Law, is an Attorney in
every inferior Court, and therefore cannot be refused. 141. pl. 214.
Audita querela.
In an Audita querela the Law does not require such strictness of pleadi^g, as
in other Actions. 69. pl. 108.
Averment.
Where, and in what Cases, an Averment shall be good and neces^ary, and where
not. 1. pl. 3. 15. pl. 37. 19. and 62. pl. 96.
Avowry.
Grantee of a Rent charge in Fee, distrains for Arrerages, and then grants it
over, whether he ought to avow, or justify, quaere. 103. pl. 178.
Bailiff.
SHeriff of a County makes a Mandat Bal^vis suis to take the body of a man, and
the Bailiffs of a Liberty retorn a Rescous, and good. 25. pl. 58.
Bankrupts.
An Inholder is not within the Statutes of Bankrupts. Copyhold Land is. No
Inholder at the time of the purchase, but afterward not, within the Statutes.
34 pl. 67.
Baron and Feme.
What things of the Wives are given by the Law, and the intermarriage to the
Husband, what not? and what things he shall gain by Letters of Administration
after her decease. 44. pl 69. Baron and Feme cannot join in a Writ of
Conspiracy, in what other Cases they may join. 47. pl. 75. See 212. pl. 249.
Whether Trover and Conversion against a Baron and Feme, and a count of a
conversion ad usum (...) be (...) or not; quaere. 60 pl. 94. Se^ 82. pl. 134.
Feme ^ole conveys a (...), her Hus^and that shall ^e, covenants with her (...)
to intermeddle with it, and yet after marriage assigns it over, the Feme shall
have remedy in Equity* 88 pl. 141. Baron and Feme present to a Church, to which
they have no right, this gains nothing to the Feme; otherwise when they enter
into Land, or when the Feme has right. 90. pl. 146. One said of the Wife of
another that she was a Bawd and kept a Bawdy House, for which they joined in
Action, and declared ad damnum ipsorum, and held good. 212 pl. 249.
Bar.
Bar in one Ejectione firm, ^is a Bar another brought for the same Ejectment,
but not for a new Ejectment. 59. pl. 93. Plea in bar, uncertain, is naught. See
Tit. Pleadings, etc. Tenant for life, the Reversion to an Idiot, an Uncle heir
apparent to the Idiot, levyes a Fine, and dies, Tenant for life dies, the Idiot
dies, whether the Issue of the Uncle, who levied the Fine, shall be barred by
it, or not, quaere. 94. pl. 164. and 146. pl. 216.
Certiorari.
UPon a Certiorari to remove an Indictment of ^orcible entry denier of one,
shall not (...) the others, of the benefit of the Certiorari, they offering
security according to the Statute of 21 Iac', and the Sureties being worth ten
pounds cannot be re^used, and after a Certiorari brought, and tender of
sufficient sureties, the Justices proceedings are coram non judice. 27. pl. 63.
A. and B. were indicted for a murder, B. flies, and A. brings a Certiorari to
remove the Indictment into the Kings Bench, whether all the Record be removed,
or but part, quaere. 112. pl. 190. Certiorari lies to remove the proceedings of
the Commissioners of Sewers. See Title Sewers.
Cessante causa cessat effectus.
Outlawry reversed, the Original is revived, for Cessanto cause, etc. 9. pl.
21.
Chancery.
After Execution and Moneys levied, the Lord Keeper cannot order the Money to
remain in the Sheriffs hands, or that the Plaintiff shall not call for it. 54.
pl. 81.
Charter of Pardon.
Whether a Pardon of the King of Felony, homicide, etc. does pardon murder, or
not? quaere. 213. pl. 250.
Commission and Commissioners.
Commissioners execute a Warrant with a stranger to the Warrant, yet good. 92.
pl. 155.
Confirmation.
Baron and Feme Donees in special Tail^ the Baron levies a Fine, and dies, he
in the Reversion confirms to the Wife her Estate to have to her and her Heirs
of her body by the Husband-ingendred, what is wrought by this Confirmation,
quaere. 146. pl. 216.
Consideration.
What shall be said a good Consideration upon which to ground an Assumpsit,
what not? 55 pl. 86. and 78. pl. 123.
Contempt
Attachment ought not to be granted against the Sheriff for Contempt of his
Bailiffs. 54. pl. 81. Upon Error brought, notice ought to be given to the
Sheriff, otherwise he shall not incur a Contempt for serving execution. 54. pl.
81. No Attachment, without an Affidavit inwriting. 129. pl. 208. Attachment
lies against the Steward of an inferior Court, for dividing of Actions. 141.
pl. 214.
Copyhold.
Copyholds not granted in Reversion, except by Custom. 6. pl. 13. Copyhold is
within the Statutes of 13 Q. 7. and 1 Iac. 1. of Bankrupts. 36. The King grants
a Copyhold for life generally, whether this destroys the Copyhold, or not?
quaere. Descent of a Copyhold shall not take away an entry. 6. pl. 13.
Coram non judice.
After a Certiorari brought to remove an Indictment of forcible entry, and
tender of sufficient sureties according to the Statute of 21 Iac. the
proceedings of the Justices of peace are coram non judice. 27. pl. 63.
Presentiments taken in an Hundred-Court, are coram non judice. 75 pl. 115.
Corporation.
Churchwardens in London are a Corporation, and may purchase Lands to the
benefit of the Church: but Churchwardens in the Country, though a Corporation,
are capable only to purchase Goods to the benefit of the Church. 67. pl. 104.
Covenant.
A man makes a Lease, and that the Lessee shall have conveniens lign^m non
succidend' and vende^d' arbores, the Lessee cuts down Trees, the Lessor may
bring an Action of Covenant. 9. pl. 22. Lessee of a house Covenants to repair
it with convenient, necessary, and teneatable R^parations, in Covenant the
Lesser alleges a breach in not repairing, for want of Tyles and daubing with
Mortar, and does not show that it was not tenentable, and therefore naught. 17.
pl. 39. A man by Deed conveys Land to his second Son by these words, I do give
and grant this Land to I. S. my second Son and his Heirs after my death; and no
livery made, and dies; the Estate passes not by Covenant, and therefore the
Son takes nothing. 50. pl. 78. Covenant with two severally, and good. 103. pl.
176.
Counsel and Counselors.
Counsel says to his Client, that such a contract is Simony, and he says,
that Simony or not Simony, he will do it, and thereupon the Counselor makes
this Simoniacal contract, this is no offense in him. 83. pl 136.
Custom and Perscription.
By the Custom of London, a man may transfer over his Apprentices to another.
3. pl. 6. By the Custom of London, the Mayor may restrain any man from setting
up his Trade within the City, in a place unapt for it, and for his disobedience
may imprison him. 15. pl. 34. Custom to cut Grass in the soil of another to
strew the Church, good Custom. 16. pl. 38. Custom or Prescription in non
decinando by a Hundred is good, but not by a Parish or particular Town. 25. pl.
59. A Law or Ordinance, where the Custom will warrant it, that he that puts in
his beasts in the Common beyond such a limit or bound, shall pay 3 s. 6 d. is a
good Law. 28. pl. 64. Custom that if a man have see in Land, that it shall
descend to the youngest Son, and if Tail, that then to the Heir at Common Law,
is a good Custom. 54. pl 82. Prescription to have Common for all beasts
commonable is naught; but for all beasts commonable levant and couchant, is
good. 83 pl. 137. A Hille has a Chapel, and buries at the Mother Church, and
for this, have time cut of mind repaired parcel of the wall of the Church, it
is good for to excuse them from repairing the Church. Inhabitants of a place
prescribe to repair the Chapel of ease, and in regard of this, that they have
been time out of mind freed from all reparations of the Mother Church, good
prescription 91. pl. 151. Hille has a Chapel of ease, and a Custom that those
with in such a precinct ought to find a Rope* for the third Bell, and repair
part of the wall of the Mother Church, in consideration of which they have been
freed of payment of any Tithes to the Mother Church, whether this be a good
Custom or not; quaere ubi supra.
Damage Clear.
WHat Damage Clear is; and the prejudice that a man may have in this, that he
cannot have his Judgment before that he has paid the Damage clear. 76. pl.
226.
Damages and Cost.
Heir apparent ravished of full age, his Fat^er shall not recover Damages. 5
pl. 8. In Attaint, the Verdict was affirmed, and the Defendant in the Attaint
prayed Costs, but was denied by the Court. 24 pl. 55. A man distrai^s for a
Penalty asse^^ed by Custom, and distrainable by Custom, and upon a Beplevin
brought, Judgment was given for the Avowant, and Damage assessed, and whether
Damage ought to have been given, or not; quaere. 38. pl. 64. Where Damages
entire shall be naught, and where not; 47. pl. 76. and 96. pl 166. and 47. pl.
76. Where Costs and Damages shall be recovered upon a Penal Law, where not? 56.
pl. 88. 61 pl. 95. Prisoner removing himself by Habeas corpus, shall pay the
costs of the removal, otherwise where he is removed by the Plaint^ff. 89. pl.
143. In an Account a man shall recover Damages upon the second Judgment. 99.
pl. 171.
Debt.
A Sheriff levies money upon a Fieri fa cias; Debt will lie against him, and if
he dies, against Executors. 13. pl 33. In Debt upon an Account, it suffices to
say that the Defendant was indebted to the Plaintiff upon an Account pro
diversis mercimoni^^, without reciting the particulars. 102. pl. 175. and 105.
pl. 182.
Defamation.
If a man Libel in Court Christian for calling of him Drunkard, Prohibition
lies. See Tit. Prohibition. 1. D. Libelled in the Ecclesiastical Court for
these words; She is a bea^^ly qu^an, a (...) q^ean, a copper-^os'd q^ean, and
(...) and has (...) 500 l. and (...) with whor^s and Reg^^s: upon which a
Prohibition was prayed and granted. 89. pl. 144. A woman Libelled in the
Spiritual Court against one for calling her Jade, upon which a Prohibition was
prayed, and granted: but if it be Libelled for calling one whore or bawd, no
Prohibition lies. 99. pl. 170. By the Custom of London an Action lies for
calling a woman Whore, and ruled a good Custom. 107. pl. 184.
Default and Appearance.
Administrator of one Outlawed for murder, brought Error to reverse the
Outlawry, and was allowed to appear by Attorney. 113. pl. 190.
Demands and Demandable.
Grantee of a Rent to be paid at the house, and if the Rent be behind and
lawfully demanded at the house, that then it shall be lawful for the Grantee to
distrain, whether a distress upon the Land be a sufficient demand as this Case
is, or not; quaere. 147. pl. 218.
Denizen and Alien.
Merchant goes beyond Sea, and marries an Alien, who have Issue, the Issue is a
Denizen. 91. pl. 150.
Deprivation.
Where a Church shall be void, without sentence of Deprivation. See Title Void
and Voidable.
Devises.
Devise of Goods to one for life, the Remainder to another, the Remainder is
void. 106. pl. 183.
Divorce.
A man divorced causa adulterii is within the Proviso of the Statute of 1 of
King James ca. 11. but not a man divorced caus^ saevitiae. 101. pl. 175.
Discontinuance.
A man may Nonsuit without the consent of the Court, but not Discontinue
without the Courts consent. 24. pl. 54.
Dispensations.
Whether the King by a Non obstante in his Charter of Pardon may dispense with
the Statute of 13 R. 2. ca. 1. or no^; quaere. If you peruse this Case, you
shall find much excellent learning upon that point in what Case the King may
dispense with Statutes, in what not. 213. pl. 250.
Distress.
Horses traced together are but one Distress, Fetters upon a Horse-leg may be
distrained with the Horse. 91. pl. 149.
Distribution.
Whether the Ordinary after Debts and Legacies paid may enforce a Distribution,
or not; quaere. 65. pl. 102. and 93. pl. 158.
Double Plea.
Where two things are alleged, and the one of necessity only, or by way of
inducement, and the party relies only upon the other, that is no double Plea.
55. pl. 84. and 74. pl. 113.
Ejectione Firm.
Ejectone Firm de uno repositorio; naught for the incertainty. 96 pl. 166.
Ejectione Firm de tanto unius messuagii etc. q^a^tum ^^at super ripam, is
naught for the incertainty, and so where the T^over of the Jury is such, it is
naught. 97. pl 168.
Elegi^
Upon an Elgit there needs no Liberate, otherwise upon a Statute. Note, the
Elegit excepts averia Caru^^. 117. pl. 194.
Equity.
Certain special Cases where there shall be remedy in Eq^ity, where not. pa 83.
pl. 1^8. 88. pl. 141 90. pl. 145. 93. pl. 159. 99. pl 1^1 102 pl. 175. 105. pl.
182. 106. pl. 183. and 129. pl. 207.
Errors.
In Error to reverse a Judgment in Debt upon an Arbitrament, Judgment was
reversed, first because that in the reference to the Arbitrament, there was no
word of the submission. Secondly, because that the entry of the Judgment was,
consid^ratum est, and per Curiam omitted. 7. pl. 16. In an Act^on for words,
Judgment was reversed, because that it was averred, that the words were spoken
inter diversos ligeos, and does not say Cives of the place, where they have
such an acceptance* as also for that the Judgment was Consideratum est, and
per Curiam Omitted. 15 pl 37. In Trespass, the Defendant justifies by a special
Custom, by Virtue of which he did it, and does not say, quae est eadem
transgressio, for which Judgment was reversed. 16. pl. 38. Judgment was
reversed for want of Pledges. 17 pl. 40. Outlawry was reversed, because it did
not appear where the party outlawed was inhabitant; as also for that it did not
appear that Proclamations were made at the Parish Church where, etc. 20. pl.
46. Judgment reversed for the appearance of an Infant by Attorney. 24. pl. 53.
O^tlawry reversed because the Exigent was Secund. exact' ad Com' Meum ^bm',
etc. 25. pl. 58. A. Wife of I. S. intestate promises to B. to whom
Administration was committed, that if he would relinquish Administration at the
request of C. and permit A. to Administer, that A. would, etc. in Assumpsit by
B. he showed, that he renounced Administration, and permitted A. to Administer,
but does not show that it was at the request of C. by Barkley Just. it is
Error. 55. pl. 86. Judgment ought not to be judged erroneous by implication.
56. pl. 88. and 61. pl. 95. A Writ of Error upon Dower, well lies, before the
Retorn of the Writ of Enquiry of damages; but whether a Writ of Error lies in
an Ejectione firm, before Judgment given upon the Writ of Enquiry, quaere. 88.
pl. 142. Want of Warrant of Attorney for the Plaintiff after Judgment upon
nihil dicit, is Error, and not amendable. 121. pl. 201. and 129. pl. 209. Writ
of Error bearing Test before the Plaint entered is naught, otherwise, where is
bears Test before Judgment. 140. pl. 112. In an Ejectione firm the Writ was
(...) and armis, but it wanted in the Count, and whether this is error, or
amendable, or not, quaere. 140. pl. 213.
Escape.
Upon mean Process, if the Sheriff retorn a Cessi and Rescous, no Action lies
against him for the escape, otherwise in case of Execution. 1. pl. 1.
Estoppel.
Morgager makes a Lease for years by Deed indented, after performs the
condition, and makes a Feoffment in ^ee, the Feoffee claiming under the
Estoppel, shall be bound by the Lease. 64. pl. 99. If a man bind himself to
deliver any thing, he is estopped to say, that he has it not. 74. pl. 113.
Estoppel binds only parties. 105. pl. 180.
Evidence to an Inquest upon Issues joined.
Depositions taken in the Ecclesiastical Court, cannot be given in evidence at
Law, though the parties were dead. 120. pl. 198.
Executions and prayer in execution.
A second Execution cannot be granted, before the retorn of the former. 47. pl.
73. Where a man is imprisoned for the Kings Fine, and upon a Habeas co^pus it
is returned that he is in Execution also for the Damages of the party, it ought
to be intended at the prayer of the party. 5a. pl. 80.
Executor and Administrator.
An Executor or an Administrator may maintain an Action for any Co^t^^ct made
to the Testator, or In^estate, or for any thing which rises ex contractu. 9.
pl. 23. Administrator of an Executor shall not sue a Scire Fa^' upon a
Judgment given for the Testator. 9. pl. 24. A Sheriff levies moneys upon a
F^^ri Fas' and dies, Debt will lie against his Executors. 13. pl 33. Whether
the Executor of a Ph^llizer shall have the profits of the Writs which are to ^e
subscribed with his name, or his Successor, quaere. 90. pl. 147.
Expositors of Statutes.
The Judges are the sole Expositors of Acts of Parliament, though they conc^rn
Spiritual matters. 90 pl. 148.
Extinguishment and Suspension.
Three covenant jointly, with two severally, after one of the covenantors
marries one of the covenant^es, whether the covenant be good or not. 103. pl.
176.
Fine to the King.
IF a Carrier spoil the Highways, by drawing a greater weight than is
warrantable by the Custom of the Realm; he is ^inable to the King. 145. pl.
210.
Fines of Lands.
Disseisee levies a Fine to a stranger, this does not give the right to the
Disseisor. 105 pl. 180. Tenant for life, the Reversion to an Idiot, an U^cle
Heir apparent to the Ide^^ levies a Fine, and dies, Tenant for life d^eth, the
Ide^t dies, whether the Issue of Uncle who levied the Fire ^^albe barred by
this, or not, quaere. 4. pl. 164. and 146. pl. 216.
Forcible Entry.
Restitution cannot be awarded to the Plaintiff, if it does appear that he has
seisin, yet the King shall have his Fine: and if the Indictment be adtunc and
adhuc, the Defendant keeps the possession forcibly, where the Plaintiff was in
possession, Re-restitution shall be awarded. 6. pl. 12.
Forgery.
To forge a Will in writing, though without a Seal, is forgery within the
Statute of 5 Q. ca. 14.
Freehold.
What shall be said a grant of a Freehold to commence at a day to come, what
not. 31. pl. 66.
Gardens of a Church.
WHere the Custom is for the Parishoners to choose the Churchwardens, the Person
by color of the Cannon cannot choose one; and if the Minister of the Bishop
refuse to swear one of them chosen by the Parish, a Mandat lies to enforce him
to it: and if the Parson thereupon does Libel in the Ecclesiastical Court, a
Prohibition lies. 22. pl. 50. and 67. pl. 104. The Gardens of a Church in
London are a Corporation, and may purchase Lands to the use of the Church: and
in the Country they are a Corporation, capable to purchase Goods to the benefit
of the Church. 67. pl. 104.
Good behavior.
A man was bound to his good behavior for suborning of Witnesses. 11. pl. 30.
Grants of common persons.
Grant of all Tithes in C. is a good grant, for it is not absolutely general,
but a general in a particular. 31. pl. 66. Where a Grant shall be good
notwithstanding a false recital. ibidem. The King may grant an Office in
Reversion, without Custom, but not a Common person, or a Bishop. 42, and 43.
Where a Trust is grantable over: See Tit. Assignee and Assignments. 1. An
Executor grants omnia bona and catalla sua, this shall pass the Goods which he
has as Executor. 205.
Grants of the King.
The King may grant an Office in Reversion, without Custom. 42, and 43. Grants
of the King need not recite Leases not of Record, nor Coppyholds. 206. pl. 246.
Habeas Corpus.
UPon a Habeas Corpus, if all the causes returned shall be adjudged for the
Prisoner, but one, yet he ought to be remanded for this one. 53, and 54.
Hariots.
Copyholder for life, where the Custom is, that if the Tenant die seized that
he shall pay a Hariot, the Lord grants the Seigniory for 99 years, if the
Tenant should so long-live, and after makes a Lease for 400 years, Tenant for
life is disseised, and dies, who shall have the Hariot; quaere. 23. pl. 52.
Hue and Cry.
What Hue and Cry shall be sufficient upon the Statute of Winchester and 27 Q.
of Robberies.
Ieofail.
NO Venire Fac' is helped by the Statute of Jeofailes, but not an erroneous
one. 26. pl. 60. If a man plead an affirmative plea, as that he has saved one
harmless, and does not show how, it is naught. See pa. 49. and is matter of
substance, and therefore not helped by the Statute, upon a general Demur. 121.
pl. 200. See pa. 49.
Implicative and Implie.
Judgment ought not to be judged erroneous by implication. 56. pl 88. and 61.
pl. 95.
Incertainty.
Trover and conversion of two Garbs, and counts of a conversion of two Garbs,
Anglice Sheafs of Rye, the count is uncertain and void, and the Anglice does
not help it. 60. 94. Where a Verdict uncertain shall be void. 97. pl. 168.
Ejectione Firm de tanto unius me^nagii, etc. quantum stat super ripam, is
naught for the incertainty. ubi supra.
Indictment.
Upon an acquittal, and removal of the Indictment into the Kings Bench, the
Court refused to grant a Copy of it to the party acquitted, that he might bring
a conspiracy, except it did appear that there was malice in the prosecution.
26. pl. 61. Moved to quash Indictments for not paving of doors, because it was
not shown that they o^ght to pave t^em: which the Court would not grant,
without a Certificate that the doors were paved. Indictments quashed, because
joint, where they ought to be several. 45. pl. 71. Indictment of Rescous
quashed, because it was not shown, where the Arrest was, as also, for that, vi
and armis wanted in the Indictment. 67. pl. 105. Exceptions to an Indictment of
Murder, all disallowed by the Court. 79. pl. 127. One not returned of a Jury,
causes himself to be sworn in the name of one that was, and gives Verdict, he
may be indicted for this misdemeanor. 81. pl. 132.
Infant
Grant of an Office of Truff to an Infant to execute by Deputy, is good: or a
grant to him in Reversion is good; for it may be granted in see, and so descend
to an Infant; or a Feme Covert may have such an office, because that by
possibility she may have a husband which may execute it. 38. pl 63. Where an
Action shall lie against an Infant, where not. 39, 40, 41, and 42. Infant
cannot be an Attorney, because he cannot be sworn. 92. pl. 154. Infant cannot
submit to an Arbitrament, and if he does, it is void. 111. pl. 189. and 141.
pl. 215.
Informations.
Information lies against a Carrier for spoiling the highways, by drawing an
extraordinary weight contrary to the custom of the Realm, upon which he shall
be fined and imprisoned. 135. pl. 210.
Inrolments.
Where a man in pleading of a bargain and sale ought to plead an inrolment,
(...) where not. 62. pl. 97. and 69 pl. 1^^.
Instance and Instant.
Copyholder for life (...) grants the Seigniory for 99 years, if the Tenant
should live so long, the Tenant dies, whether the Grantee for 99 years shall
have the Heriot by force of this instantany title, or not; quaere. 23. pl. 52.
Intent and Intention.
Where an Estate shall pass by way of raising of a use, and where by way of
transmutation of possession, according to the intention of the party. 50. pl.
78.
Ioynder in Action.
A promise is made to a Baron of a Feme Executrix, in that right as Executrix,
whether they may join in action or not; quaere. 72. pl. 110. Three covenant
with two severally, they cannot join in action. 103. pl. 176. One said of the
wife of another, that she was a bawd, and kept a bawdy house, upon which they
joined in action, and good. 212. pl. 249. Baron and Feme cannot join in
conspiracy. 47. pl. 75,
Issues joined.
In Trespass, the Defendant justifies, and says quod hab^it viam non solum
ire, equitar^, and aver^a sua fugare, verum etiam caruc^s and carreragiis
carriare, etc. the Plaintiff Traversed it in the words aforesaid, and it was
resolved that the Issue was well joined. 55. pl. 83. What words are sufficient,
upon which an Issue may be taken, what not. 207. pl. 247.
Jurisdiction.
(...) Courts at (...) may hold Plea (...) 3. pl. 5. If a particular and
limited Jurisdiction hold plea of a thing out of their Jurisdiction, all is
coram non judice, and void. 8. pl. 20. The Jurisdiction of the Council of the
Marches of Wales, of what things they may hold plea, of what not, and of what
value See Title wales. 1, 2, 3. Court which has Jurisdiction of the principal,
shall have Jurisdiction of the accessory also. 52. pl. 80. and 66. pl. 103. See
Tit. Distribution. 1. and pa. 201. If a man be sued in the Ecclesiastical Court
for not coming to Church, and pleads in excuse of it according to the Statute,
the Ecclesiastical Court may hold plea of the excuse. 93 pl. 162. Legatee may
sue an executor in the Spiritual Court for to make him assent to a Legacy; and
if it be issuing out of a Lease for years, they may order the Lease to be
brought in Court, though it be in the hands of a third person, but this binds
only the Defendant, and Assets or not Assets is triable by them. 96. pl. 167.
In false imprisonment brought against an Officer of an inferior Court, if he
justifies the arrest by virtue of a Warrant directed to him out of the Court,
he ought to entitle the Court to jurisdiction, or otherwise his plea is naught,
and the action will lie against him. 117 pl. 195.
Justification.
In Trespass, if the Defendant justifies for part, and says nothing to the
other part, the plea is insufficient for the whole. 21 pl 47. In false
imprisonment brought against the Officer of an inferior Court, if he iustifies
the arrest and imprisonment by virtue of a Warrant directed to him out of that
Court, he ought to i^ti^le the Court to Jurisdiction, or otherwise his
justification is naught. 117. pl. 195.
Leases.
IT is the course in the Excequer, that they may make Leases for three lives by
the Chequer-Seal. 55. pl. 85.
Legacy.
Executor is compellable in the Ecclesiastical Court to assent to a Legacy. 96.
pl. 167. What shall be said a sufficient assent to a Legacy, what not, and when
it shall come in due ^ime, when not. See Title Asse^t and Consent. 2.
Letters of Mart or Reprisal.
If a Ship be taken by Letters of Mart, and is not brought infra presidia of
the King who granted the Letters, it is no lawful prize, and the property not
altered, and therefore the sale void. 110. pl. 188.
License.
A man may be Nonsuit without the License of the Court, but he cannot
discontinue without the consent of the Court. 24. pl. 54.
Limits and Limitations.
If a Debt be superannuated by the Statute of 21 of King James ca. 16. which
limits a man to bring his action within 6 years, and after the parties account
together, and he is found to be indebted so much for such wares, though the
party were before without remedy, yet now he may have Debt upon the account.
105. pl. 182. and 129. pl. 207. A Trust is not within the Statute of 21
aforesaid, and therefore no time lapsed shall take away remedy in equity for
it. 129 pl. 207 See pa 15^.
Maintenance.
IF a man commence an Action at the suit of another without his privity, it is
Maintenance. 47. pl. 76.
Mandat.
Mandat granted to swear a Churchwarden elected by the Parish, where the Parson
would have put one in by force of the Canon Law. See Tit. Gard^ins of the
Church. 1. Mandat granted to swear a Parish-Clerk who continued two or three
years in quiet possession, not being sworn, and whom the new Parson would have
put our without cause. 101. pl. 174.
Name.
AN Earl of any other Realm may implead, or be impleaded, by the name or title
of Knight and Earl of such a place, and good, because the Knight is not local,
though the Earl be. 19. pl. 26.
New Assignment.
A man may make a New Assignment to a special bar, as well as to a common bar,
if he will. 105 pl. 199.
Nonsuit.
A man may be Nonsuit without the consent of the Court, but not Discontinue
without the consent of the Court. 24. pl. 54.
Notice.
What notice upon the Statutes of (...) 12 E 1 and 27 (...) of Robberies shall
be sufficient, what not. 10 pl. 28. Upon Error brought, notice ought to be
given to the Sheriff, otherwise he shall not incur a contempt, for serving
execution, for which an Attachment shall issue. 54. pl. 81. In all Writs of
enquiry of Dan^^ges, as well in real as personal actions, notice ought to be
given. 82. The Defendant upon an award was to pay to the Plaintiff 8 l. or 3 l.
and costs of suit expended in an Acton of Trespass betwixt the Plaintiff and
Defendant, as should appear by a Note under the Attorney's hand of the
Plaintiff, etc. the Plaintiff is not bound to cause his Attorney to give notice
or make tender of the note to the Defendant, but he ought to seek the Attorney,
and request it. 108. pl. 186. and 156 pl. 225. If one be presented to a
Benefice under the age of 23 years, no Lapse shall incur to the Bishop without
knowledge given to the Patron. 119. pl. 190. The King grants a Copyhold for
life generally, whether the Copyhold be destroyed or not, q^aere: which depends
upon this, whether the King be bound to take notice of it to be a Copyhold, or
not. 206. pl. 246.
Obligation.
IF a man be bound not to exercise his Trade in such a Town, the Obligation is
void. See Tit. Assu^psit. 2. If an Infant bind himself to perform an award,
the bond is void; so if a stranger bind himself that an Infant shall perform
an award, the bond is void. 111. pl. 189. and 141. pl. 215. Three are bound
jointly and severally in an Obligation, the Seals of two of them are eaten with
Mise and Bats; whether this shall avoid the bond as to the third person, as
well as to the other two; qu^re. 125. pl. 205.
Office and Officers.
Where an Infant may be an Officer, where not, and what office may be granted
in see, what not. See Title Infant. 1. The King may grant an Office in
Reversion, without Custom, but not a common person. 42, and 43. Bishop may
grant an Office in Reversion, if the Custom will warrant it, otherwise not. ubi
supra. Parson cannot put out the Clerk of the Parish, without cause, if he
does, no Restitution lies, but he has his other remedy, for it is a temporal
office. 101. pl. 174.
Orphans.
An Orphan may waive the Court of Orphans, and sue in Equity, for it is a
privilege which the Orphan has, and q^ilibet potest renunciare juri prose
introducto. 107. pl. 185.
Outlawry.
Outlawry reversed, the Original stands. 9 pl. 21.
Physicians.
IF a Physician bring an action against one for scandalous words to his
profession, it is not sufficient for him to say, that he is in medicinis
Doctor, but he ought to show that he was licensed to practice by the College
of Physicians in London, or that he was a Graduate of one of the Universities.
116. pl. 193.
Place.
A man pleads a Conveyance made of Land, according to promise, and shows not
where it was made, he need not, for it shall be intended to be made upon the
Land, so in case of performance of covenants. 22. pl. 51. The place of Rescous
ought to be shown. 25. pl. 57.
Pleadings and Pleader.
If a man in pleading derive an Estate from any man, he ought to show what
Estate he had, from whom he derives his Estate, if it be material to the
maintaining and supporting of the estate which he claims, otherwise not. 1. pl.
2. In Trespass, if the Defendant justifies for part, and says nothing to the
residue, the plea is sufficient for the whole. 21. pl. 47. Trover and
conversion of two Garbs, Anglice Sheass of Rye; the count is uncertain, and
naught, and the Anglice does not help it. 60 pl. 94. Where a man in pleading a
bargain and sale, ought to plead an inrolment, where not. 62. pl 97. and 69.
108. A man is not bound to plead the title of his adversary, or a stranger, so
exact as his own title. 62. pl. 97. and 99. pl. 108. In Trespass of assault,
battery and wounding, the Defendant may plead not guilty as to the wounding and
justify the assault and battery without any repugnancy. 98. 106. It is no good
plea to say that such a one was bound in a Recognizance, but he ought to say,
per scriptum obligatorium; and to conclude that it was secundum formam statuti
will not help it, but in a Verdict it was agreed to be good. 76. pl 117.
Apothecary brought an action upon the case upon a promise for diverse wares and
medicines of such a value, the Desendant pleads in bar that he paid to the
Plaintiff tot and tantas denariorum summas as the medicines were worth, and
shows no sum in certain, and therefore naught. 77. pl. 120. A. and B. were
bound to stand to and observe such order and decree as the Kings Counsel of the
Court of Requests should make: A. brought an action against B. and pleaded that
the Counsel of the King of the said Court made such order and decree, and that
the Defendant did not observe it; the Defendant pleaded that the King and his
Counsel did not make the decree, which is naught. 78. pl. 126. Where a bad plea
shall be made good by Verdict. See Title Verdict 2. If a man plead an
affirmative plea, as that he has saved the Plaintiff harmless, and does not
show how, it is naught; otherwise of a negative plea, as non damni^icatus, etc.
121. pl. 200. What shall be said to be an argumentative plea, what not. 207.
pl. 247.
Pleas of the Crown.
Bailiffs endeavor to break open a house, to serve an Execution upon the
owner, who not desisting upon his threats, he shot and killed one of them, it
is not murder, but manslaughter. 3 pl. 7. Many notable resolutions upon the
Statutes of Winchester, and 27 Q. of Robberies. 10 pl. 28.
Pledges.
Judgment reversed for want of Pledges. 17. pl. 40. In a Replevin brought in
an inferior Court and no Pledges de retorno habendo taken by the Sheriff
according to the Statute of W. 2. ca. 2. upon the plaint removed into the Kings
Bench, that Court may find Pledges, and that any time before Judgment. 46. pl.
72.
Presentiments in Courts.
Presentiments taken in an Hundred Court were quashed, because that it is not
the Kings Court, and therefore coram ^on judice. 75. pl. 115.
Privilege.
If the Clerk of a Court be elected into any office which requ^res his personal
and constant attendance, as Churchwarden, or the like, he shall have his
privilege, otherwise not, as for watching and warding, and the like. 30. pl.
65. Ordered by the upper House of Parliament 16 Caroli, that only menial
servants, or such as tend upon the person of a Knight or Burgess should be
privileged from arrest. 92. pl. 157. Debt against a husband and his wife as
executrix, who are sued to the Exigent, and at the retorn of it, the husband
(being an officer in the Exchequer) came into Court and demanded his
privilege, and whether as this case is he shall have it, or not; qu^ere. 149.
pl. 219.
Prohibition.
A man libelled in the Ecclesiastical Court against one for these words, Thou
art a drankard, and usest to be drunk thrice a week, upon which a Proh^bition
was prayed and granted. 6. pl. 11. and 66. pl. 103. If the Ecclesiastical Court
proceed upon a Canon which is contrary to the Common Law, Statute Law, or
Custom, a Prohibition lies. 22. pl. 50. and 67. pl. 74. Two joint Tenants of
Tithes, the one sues in the Ecclesiastical Court without the other; or a Feme
Covert solely for de^amation, this is no cause of Prohibition. 25. pl. 26. and
pa. 47. pl. 112. See pa. 93. pl. 112. Upon a Petition to any Ecclesiastical
Judge, without suit there, no Prohibition lies. 45. pl. 70. A man is
compellable in the Ecclesiastical Court to repair a way which leads to the
Church, but upon a Libel there to repair a highway a Prohibition lies. 45. 70.
Tenant in Ta^l levied a Fine to the use of himself for life, the Remainder in
see to I. S. and died, the Counsel of the Marches would settle the possession
upon the Heir of the Tenant in Ta^l, against the purchasor, upon which a
Prohibition was granted. 51. pl. 79. Libel for Tithes for barren Cattle, upon a
suggestion that the party had no cattle but for plough and pale, Prohibition
was granted: the same Parson libelled for Tyth of Coneys, upon which a
Prohibition was also granted. 58. pl. 87. No Prohibition after sentence in the
Ecclesiastical Court. 73. pl. 111 and 92. pl. 156. Many men recover Costs in
the Spiritual Court, one of them releases, the others sue there for their
costs, this is no came of Prohibition Baron and Fe^^e recover costs there for
defaming the wife, the Baron releases, this will not ba^ the wife. 73 pl. 112.
See. pa 25. pl. ^6. and pa. 4^. pl. (...). Contract betwixt the Vicar and a
(...) shi^ner to pay so much for (...) Tithes, the Vicar dies, his (...) in the
Ecclesiastical Court for them, (...) on which a Prohibition was granted, by
reason of the real contract which is a temporal thing. 8^ l. 1^0 Libel in the
Ecclesiastical Court for these words: (...) upon which a Prohibition was
granted. 89. pl. 144. Where the Ecclesiastical Court has con^sance of the
cause, though they proceed erroneously, a Prohibition will not lie. 92. pl.
152. See pa. 98. pl. 169. (...). The Ecclesiastical Courts may hold plea of an
excuse for not going to Church, and no Prohibition lies. 93. pl. 162. Where
there are several Mo^^ses, there several Prohibitions shall be granted; where
one Moa^s, only, though diverse parties, all shall have but one Prohibition.
94. pl. 163. If the Ecclesiastical Court proceed against a man without
Citation, where they have Jurisdiction, no Prohibition lies, the remedy is by
way of Appeal. 98. pl. 169. See pa. 92. pl. 152. (...). Legatee may sue an
executor in the Sp^ritual Court, for to assent to a Legacy: and Assets or not
Assets may be tried by them, and no Prohibition lies. 96. pl. 167* A woman
Libelled against another for calling of her lade, upon which a Prohibition was
granted: but for Whore or Eawd no Prohibition lies; quaere whether or not for
Quan. 99. pl. 1^0. If a man be sued in the Court of Requests to account there,
a Prohibition lies. See Title S^^^^stratica. 1. and 2. A man exhibited a (...)
in the Court of Requests for moneys due upon an account, upon which a
Prohibition was granted, for that it is no (...) than Debt upon an account:
further they referred the (...) the (...) to ^^^ers, which (...) of Prohibition
102. pl. ^ 5* (...) If a Ship ^e taken at Sea, whether b, Letters of Mart, or
by ^itacy, if it be sold infra co^pus conitatus, and the party Libels against
the vendee in the Admiral^y, a Prohibition lies. 110. pl. 188. Upon deciding of
Actions in an inferior Court, a Prohibition lies. 141. pl. 214.
Property.
In Trover and Conversion for a Hawk, if he does not say that it was reclaimed,
the Action will not lie, for that it does not appear he had a property in it;
and to say that he was possessed of it ut de bonis suis propriis will not help
it. 12. pl 32. A man brought Trespass for fishing in seperali ^^s^eria sua, and
declares that the Defendant ^^^es ipsius c^pit: and good, for that he had a
qualified property in them, ratione privilegii. 48 pl. 77. If a Ship be taken
by Letters of Mart, and is not brought infra pr^^si^ia of the King who granted
them, the property is not altered. 110 pl. 118.
Quilibet potest renunciare juri pro se introducto.
AN Orphan may waive the Court of Orphans, and sue in Equity, for it is a
privilege which the Orphan has, and quilibet potest renunciare, etc. 107. pl.
185.
Recital.
WHere a false Recital shall not avoid a grant. 31. pl 66. Grants of the King
need not to recite Leases not of Record, nor Copyholds. 206. pl. 246.
Recognizance.
It is no good plea to say, that such a one was bound in a Recognizance, and to
conclude that it was secundum ^ormam statuti, but he ought to say, per scriptum
obligatorium. 76. pl. 117.
Records.
An Order of the Sessions of peace, is a Record, and therefore the plea of null
tiel Record of Sessions of peace, is a good plea. 121. pl. 200.
Relation.
If a man be living at the day of Nisi prius, and dies before the day in Bank,
the writ shall not abate, so if a man be living the first day of Parliament,
and dies before the last, yet he may be attainted, for that they are but one
day by relation. 65. pl. 101.
Releases.
Release to a bargainee before inrolment, is not good. 70. If diverse recover
costs jointly in the Ecclesiastical Court, and after one of them releases, this
is no bar to the others in a (...) there for their costs; so where a baron and
feme recover costs there in the right of the wise, and the baron releases, this
shall not bar the wife. 73. pl. 112. See Title Prohibition. Two men are bound
jointly and severally to a third, who sues the bond against both, and after
appearance, enters a Retraxit against one, whether this shall amount to a
Release, so that it shall discharge the other or not; quaere. 95. pl. 165.
Remainder and Reversion.
The King may grant an office in reversion, but not a common person, nor a
Bishop without Custom. 42, and 43.
Remover of Records.
A. and B. were indicted for a murder, B. flies, A. brings a Certiorari to
remove the Indictment into the Kings Bench, whether all the Record be removed,
or but part; quaere. 112. pl. 190. Writ of Error bearing Test before the
plaint entered, is naught, and the Record is not removed by it; otherwise,
where is bears Test before Judgment. 140. pl. 212.
Reparations.
The inhabitants of a Parish are bound by the Common Law to repair the
highwayes within the Parish, except prescription bind any particular persons
to it. 26. pl. 62. A man is compellable in the Ecclesiastical Court to repair a
way which leads to the Church, but not a highway. 45 pl. 70.
Repleader.
Where there is an insufficient bar, and a good Replication, after a Verdict,
there shall be a Repleader: contrary where no Verdict. 78. 125.
Replevin.
Replevin lies of a Ship. 110 pl. 188.
Requests.
A. is bound to B. to deliver to him two hundred weight of Hops, and B. to
choose them out of 24 bags, etc. whether B. is bound to request A. to show the
bags for him to make his election or not; quaere. 74. pl. 113.
Rescous.
For a Rescous upon mean process, no Action lies against the Sheriff,
otherwise, in case of Execution. 1. pl 1
Restitution.
Clerk of a Parish is put out by the Parson without cause, no writ of
Restitution lies. 101. pl. 174. Barrister of one of the Temples was expelled
the house, whereupon he prayed his writ of Restitution, and denied, because
that there is no body in the Inns of Court to direct unto, they being no body
corporate. 177. pl. 235.
Retorn of a Sheriff.
Sheriff in retorn of a Rescous, says, that he was in custodia ballivi
itinerant^s, and that Rescous was made to him, the retorn is naught, because
the Law takes no notice of the Baylie itinerant. 92. pl. 153.
Revocation.
The King presents, and before institution presents another, whether this be a
Revocation of the former presentation, or not; quaere. 86.
Scire Facias.
UPon a Judgment in the Kings Bench there ought to be two Scire Faciases, one
against the principal, the other against the Bail, but one only suffices in
the Common Pleas, and two Nihils returned, amount to a Scire feci. 3. pl. 4. A
man acknowledges a Statute, and after grants a Rent, the Statute is satisfied,
the grantee of the Rent may distrain, without suing^a Scire Facias. 124. pl
203. 159. pl 230. and 207. pl. 247.
Sequestration.
No Sequestration ought to be granted by a Court of Equity until all the
process of contempt are run out: and the sequestring of things collateral is
illegal. 81. pl. 130. For sequestring of collateral things, a prohibition was
granted to the Court of Requests. 99. pl. 151.
Sewers.
Diverse Exceptions taken to the proceedings of the Commissioners of Sewers,
upon Certificates of them. 123. pl. 202. and 191. pl. 241. Resolved upon
question, and debate, that a Certiorari does lie to remove the proceedings of
the Commissioners of Sewers. 192. pl. 241:
Supersedeas.
Writ of Error brought here to reverse a Judgment given in Ireland, is a
Supersedeas to the Execution. 10. pl. 27. A Writ of Error is no Supersedeas of
it self without notice. 54. pl. 81. Writ of Error is a Supersedeas to the Writ
of Enquiry of Damages. 88. pl. 142.
Tenant at will.
WHether a bargainee before inrolment or entry, shall be a Tenant at will, or
not; quaere. 62. pl. 97. and 69. 108.
Tender.
The defendant upon an award was to pay to the plaintiff 8 l. or 3 l. and costs
of suit expended in an action of Trespass betwixt the plaintiff and defendant,
as should appear by a note under the Attorneys hand of the plaintiff, etc. the
plaintiff is not tied to cause his Attorney to tender the note to the
defendant, but the defendant ought to seek the Attorney, and request it of him.
108. pl. 186. and 156. pl. 225.
Traverse.
A man pleaded the descent of a Copyhold in see, the Defendant to take away the
descent, pleads that the ancestor surrendered to the use of another, absque hoc
that the Copyholder died seized, the Traverse is naught. 21. pl. 48. A man was
bound to pay money at such a place, in debt brought against him, he pleaded
that he paid the money at the place, this is not traversable. 77. pl. 122.
Trespass.
An action of trespass lies upon the Statute of 2 E. 6. against any man that
takes the Tithes. 21. pl. 49. Trespass for fishing in s^perali piscaria of the
Plaintiff. 48. pl. 77.
Trover and conversion.
Trover and conversion lies of a Ship. 110. pl 188.
Tithes.
A Vicar cannot have Tithes, but by dotation, composition, or prescription, for
all the Tithes de jure appertain to the Parson. 11. pl. 29 Fishes in a River
are not tythable but by Custom. 17. pl. 41. An action lies upon the Statute of
2 E. 6. against any man that takes the Tithes 21. pl. 49. Custom in non
decimando by a Hundred is good, not by a Parish or Town. 25. pl. 59. A man
shall not pay Tithes for Cattle which are for plough and pale only: nor for
Conies, except by Custom, and if the Tenant does not plough and manure his
land, yet the Parson may sue him for Tithes. 56. pl. 87. A man shall not pay
Tithes of roots of a Coppice rooted up, nor of Quarries of Stone, nor for Brick
and Clay. 58. pl. 89. and 64. pl. 100. It is a rule that where a Parishioner
does any thing, which he is not compellable by the Law to do, which comes to
the benefit of the Parson, there if he demands Tithes of the thing, in lieu of
which that thing is done, a Prohibition lies: And also it is a rule, that
Custom may make that tythable, which of it self is not tythable. 65. Custom to
pay Tithes in kind for Sheep, if they continue in the Parish all the year, but
if they be sold before shear-time, but a half penny for every one so soid,
naughty custom: Custom in the same Parish to pay no Tithes for loppings, or
wood for fire, or hedging, is a good Custom. 79. pl. 128. Modus decimandi goes
only to the realty, the Tithes, and not to the personalty, the Offerings. 81.
pl. 131. Incumbent presented by Simony, cannot sue his Parishioners for Tithes.
84 pl. 139. Hille which has a Chapel of ease, has a custom, that they ought
to find a rope to the third Bell, and repair part of the wall of the
Mother Church, in consideration of which, they have been free from payment of
Tithes to the Mother Church, whether this be a good custom, or not; quaere. 91.
pl. 151.
Variance.
IN Trespass for assault, battery and wounding the plaintiff, the plaintiff
declares and says, that quendam equum upon which the pla^ntiff rid, percussit,
ita quod c^cidit, etc. this is no variance, for that the alleging of the
striking of the horse, was only an inducement to the battery of himself. 98.
pl. 107.
Venire Facias.
A man brought Debt upon a Bond conditioned to pay so much in a house of the
plaintiffs in Lincoln, the defendant pleaded payment at Lincoln aforesaid, upon
which they were at issue, and the Venire Fac' was de vicinet' Civitatis
Lincoln', and found for the plaintiff, and it was moved, that this was a
mis-trial, for that the Venire ought to have been of the body of the County of
Lincoln, and not of the City, but resolved to be good. 124. 204.
Verdict.
Where the Jury find the substance, though they vary in the circumstance, yet
it is good. 9. pl. 25. Where a bad plea shall be made good by a Verdict. ^2.
pl. 134. In an Ejectione Firm, the Jury find the defendant guilty in tanto
unius messuagii in occupatione, etc. q^aentm stat super ripam, and not guilty
for the residue, the Verdict is naught for the incertainty. 97. pl. 168. See
pa. 100. pl. 172.
Void and Voidable
The Statutes of 31 Q. ca. 6. enacts that if a man be presented, instituted and
inducted upon a Simoniacal contract, that the Church shall be utterly void,
etc. in this case it is void, without deprivation or sentence declaratory. 84.
pl. 139.
Wager of Law.
A Man cannot wage his Law against matter of Record. 14. A man may wage his Law
against a Recovery in a Court Baron, because it is no Record. 15. pl. 35.
Wales.
In what manner the Council of the Marches of Wales proceed, and of what they
may hold plea. 7. pl. 14. 51. 79. 52. pl. 80. and 63. pl. 98.
Warrant of Attorney.
Though the Attorney be dead, yet the warrant of Attorney may be filed. 103. 177.
Where a warrant of Attorney may be filed after Error brought, where not. 93. pl.
160. 121. pl. 201. and 129. pl. 209. Warrant of Attorney may be amended after
Error brought. ubi supra.
Wills and Testaments.
A Will without a Seal is good to pass land. 206. pl. 245.
Witnesses.
In Debt upon the Statute of 5 Q. ca. 9. it was resolved, that it suffices to
leave a note of the process at the house of the witness; and though there be
not a reasonable sum delivered to him for costs and charges, according to the
distance of place, as the Statute says, yet if he accept it, he is bound: he
that will maintain an Action upon this Statute, ought to aver that he was
damnified. 18. 43. A Lawyer of Counsel may be examined upon oath as a witness
to the matter of agreement, not to the validity of the assurance or to the
matter of Counsel. And in examining of a witness, Counsel cannot question all
the life of the witness, as whether he be a whoremaster, etc. but if he has
done any notorious fact, which gives just exception against him, this may be
taken. 83. pl. 135.
Writ and Abatement of it.
If a man be living at the day of Nisi prius, and die before the day in bank,
the writ shall not abate. 65. pl. 101.
FINIS.

