A MODEST APOLOGY FOR THE Students of Edinburgh BURNING A POPE DECEMBER 25.
1680.

Humbly Rescuing the Actors from the Imputation of Disloyalty and Rebellion,
with which they were charged in a LETTER, etc.

-- Manet alta mente repostum
Convitium Papae, spretique injuria. --
LONDON: Printed for Richard Janeway, in Queens-Head Alley in Paternoster Row:
1681.

Mr. --
I Was not a little amazed when I received Intelligence by your last, of that
sudden removal, not to call it Banishment, of you with other Students from
Edinburgh; and the rather, because I understand from other hands, that what you
represented to me to be only the innocent divertisement of burning a Pope, is
interpreted by the Government to be no less than some formed Combination, or
Plot, that may tend in its consequences to the dissetlement thereof.

You may remember, that before you went, I gave you a hint of the Bigottry of
the Scotch Presbyterians, and of the high resentments they usually have of the
least intrenchment on what they call their Religion, and of the
ungovernableness of their Principles, by which they think themselves obliged to
promote it, and oppose what ever may be contrary to it, though by never so
Tumultuous and Rebellious Methods. And that I gave you a friendly caution, not
to concern your self in any of those kind of Freaks, and I hope that Item might
have prevailed so far, as to have prevented your being engaged, at least so
deeply as others, in this so ill-resented enterprise, especially at such a time
when all occasions are sought for, all artifices are used (by those whose
interest it is) to precepitate those who call themselves Protestants, into
disloyal and mutinous Practices; and I would the rather suppose you have
declined to intermeddle at this time, since what always was the true Protestant
principle, is now so become their interest, that no provocation should tempt
them, no specious pretext allure them to give their Adversaries so very great,
as well as often sought-for advantage against them.

I doubt not but you are sensible how much the murdering the late Archbishop
has been improved to the disgrace of the Presbyterians; a fact so contrary to
Policy, as well as Christianity, that if evident proof had not laid it upon
men who went under that Character, the Argument, cui bono, would have
unavoidably laid it at the Papists door.

The Hamiltonian and Cameronian insurrections are fresh in memory; and how the
Popish party have improved them to their advantage, cannot be forgot; so that
why you should enter into Bonds and Covenants, and so give jealousies to the
Government at such a time as this, I cannot imagine; for believe me, it is laid
to your charge, that you not only covenanted amongst your selves, but also
combined with the Apprentices, raised Tumults, yea, continued them, and that by
a violent opposition, after you were formally discharged by the Magistrates.
For, I pray you, how durst you venture upon what you did in opposition to the
Magistrates, unless you had the underhand assurance of some potent Assistance?
Nay further, as if all this had been a small matter, as a note of distinction
you put Blew Ribbons in your Hats, making that the Trumpet, as well as Color
of your Rebellion, and affronting the Nobility and Magistrates in the open
Streets; yea, and as a piece of revenge, threatened to burn the Provosts House,
which not long after was unfortunately done: So that some are apt to think
there must be other designs put into your Heads than merely burning a Pope in
Effigy; for if that were all (though even that had been unseasonable enough)
why did you herd together in Companies, and not rather, being satisfied with
what was already done, apply your selves to your Studies? Pray let me
understand from you how things are in relation to this affair: For my part, I
see no such proportion betwixt the fault and the penalty, betwixt burning a
Pope, and shutting up the College, if there were no more underhand design in
your enterprise than was at first pretended to

Your Loving Friend A. B.

SIR,
YOurs I received and read: I wonder not to find you take so much notice of a
thing so Childish and Trivial, as was our late Pageantry in burning the Pope,
etc. The mighty opposition it had the fortune to meet withal, is enough to make
it considerable: But 'twas no small surprise to me to hear a person so
discerning as your self, capable of being abused by such sorry Artifices, as
our Adversaries have made use of to make us appear Guilty. Were it not that I
assure my self, that your blaming us at so great a rate, proceeded from the
want of a right Information of what we have done, and what has been done
against us, it might go far to lessen that high deference and value I have
always had of your Judgment. I shall endeavor to disabuse you; The
Interruption of my public Studies afford me sufficient leisure: only let me
premise, that I do not promise all that might be said in our excuse, nor, it
may be, all that my self could say were it convenient: The thing it self
speaks, where I am silent; and I know that to labor it, were to imply that
it is not so easy to Apologize.

I doubt not, but that it is the Protestants Interest as well as Principle, to
keep themselves within the bounds of Allegiance, and to be careful to do
nothing which may render them suspected to the Government. And I no less
believe, that no true Protestants have any other Plot in the world, but to keep
in their stations, and firmly unite together, and suffer the Papists, when ever
they shall be minded to make an attempt, to split upon the Rock. It Is true, the
Principles of the Protestants are too full of honest simplicity, to engage them
in any endeavor, to work the Papists, or any of them, to such a ferment as
might precipitate them to any rash enterprise, though they might foresee never so
much advantage thereby to themselves, or the Protestant Cause.

The Papists on the other hand, though they have no Principles that will oblige
them thereunto, yet seem to apprehend it as their Interest, to forbear to be
the first Disturbers of the public Peace, if they can by any Artifice allure
the Protestants to begin: And therefore they owning no such strait-laced
Principles, no such narrow, confined Christianiy as that of the Protestants,
are not afraid to make use of all the Privy Frauds imaginable, which may
conduce to exasperate them to any unwarrantable undertaking.

All this, Sir, I readily grant you. And what advantage they have made this
way, themselves who are best acquainted with their success, as well as conduct
of their own Infernal intrigues, are most able to determine.

But this we are sure of, that the success has not been so monstrous great, as
to render all other courses unnecessary. The Real Plots that they have
cunningly made men, whose well meaning (if any they could have) has outrun
their Prudence and Duty, to engage in, have not so much contributed to the
Grand Design, but that there is still something left to be accomplished by
Fictitious ones. We all know how industriously they endeavored to affix a
Sham-Plot upon the Presbyterians in England, and how little they wanted of
laying the Top stone of that contrivance: But having failed there, they, like
men whom difficulties and disappointments do but animate, resolve to practice
upon Scotland. And pursuant to this Resolution, they have there lain in wait,
ready to improve every occasion that might present it self, where they might
have the least Vmbrage to affix an imputation of Sedition and Rebellion.

Sir, you only take notice in your Letter of the real Plots that Protestants,
or such as pretend to be so, have been wheadled into by the Papists, and are
pleased to reckon us amongst those Gulls; but you seem quite to forget the
forged Plots that they would throw upon Protestants that are altogether
innocent, especially where they think they have got a plausible pretext for
such an Imputation. Give me leave therefore to put you in mind of that part of
their Diabolical design; and to assure you that the College of Edinburgh is now
one instance of it, amongst others in the Kingdom of Scotland.

But before I proceed further, it will be convenient, for the prevention of
being misunderstood, to tell you, That I would not in the least insinuate, that
the Magistracy there does concern it self to subserve so villainous an Intrigue,
as that whereof I accuse the Papists. No, God forbid I should: They are persons
that have given such ample, and so often repeated Testimonies of their zeal to
the Protestant Religion, and of their great care for the preservation of it,
that there is not the least ground for the most malicious and most disaffected
person to the Government, once to suspect such a thing of them. What I say is
this, That some persons there are, who beyond all peradventure, in subserviency
to the forementioned devilish Resolution of the Papists, have so
misrepresented this innocent design of ours to the Magistracy, and so fly-blown
it to them, as to make it appear quite another thing than what we intended it:
And then I must needs say, the Magistrates could act no otherwise than
according to the Information they received. Take this Item along with you, that
I am not vindicating Disloyalty and Rebellion, but modestly excusing persons
not yet convicted, from those horrid Imputations. And I do not see, that though
the Magistrates have appeared against persons, whom I endeavor to prove are
innocent as to any disloyal Design, and who, I say, were aspersed as such by
the cursed malice of others, that I must needs be thought therefore to reflect
upon the Magistrates sincerity.

And as I would not have you think, Sir, I design to reflect on the Magistracy;
so I would not have you believe I intend to Justify our selves, that we went on
with our divertisement after the Magistracy discharged us; much less that I
concern my self to defend every particular unpremeditated extravagance, which
the violence of an unexpected opposition might draw on. Let them who are better
able than I, determine whether in the former we did well or ill; and for the
latter, let it suffice, that I assure you, I verily believe, if we had met with
no opposition, the whole business had been as unexceptionably managed, as 'twas
innocently contrived: However, even as 'twas, I doubt not but to make it appear
that it is great injustice to blame us, as if we did seditiously combine
together with a design to give an avowed affront to Authority, and therein lay
the groundwork of a more wretched Rebellion. When I shall come to tell you the
great tenderness we used, as little as might be to entrench upon Authority,
though we went on with our design; and the subtle artifices on the other hand
that were used to inflame us, you will easily perceive there was not very much
in the whole management, but what might easily have been excused and passed by,
had it not been represented through such magnifying Glasses, as it is more than
evident it was.

Having said thus much, to prevent the wiredrawing of any thing I shall
afterward have occasion to say, it is time I should go on and give you the
Reasons that first prompted us to undertake what we did; and as the thing was
really first motioned by some of our own number without any foreign
instigation, so were the reasons, in a manner, peculiar to our own
Circumstances. We considered the great Progress our Popish Adversaries made in
their Conspiracies, and that their designs were by this time so far advanced,
that there wanted but a little more to put a Period to our present Government
as well as Religion: For let none imagine that the PLOT is altogether
disbelieved in Scotland. We considered, that we who look upon our selves as a
Seminary of Protestants for the service of Church and State, as Providence
shall dispose of us, had not hitherto given any Public Testimony of our
Abhorrence of the Romish superstition. We considered what disadvantageous
Representations might possibly have been made in foreign parts, of the bias of
the Kingdom of Scotland; and we further considered what false measures may have
been taken of us accordingly both at home and abroad, and how much the wicked
Conspirators might be encouraged thereby to a vigorous prosecution of their
Hellish designs. When we considered all these things, we thought fit at once to
give an innocent proof of our own settled aversion to Popery, and also (as much
as in us lay) to give the Lie to those misrepresentations and false measures
that have been made and taken of that Kingdom. And possibly we might do our
Adversaries therein a kindness too, by undeceiving them, and letting them see,
that when they reckoned we were all of us such blocks as were fit to take any
shape they should be pleased to give us, they reckoned without their Host.

We resolved therefore to burn the Pope; and we could not imagine that our
enterprise should be looked on as Seditious, much less Rebellious, because it
was carried on by persons of various Interests and Inclinations, most of whose
Parents are not in the least suspected to carry on any design contrary to the
Public Establishment either in Church or State. Had it been only managed by
such, whose own, or whose Parents dissatisfactions with the Government, whether
Ecclesiastical or Civil, might be presumed to dispose them to increase
Jealousies, and foister Tumults and Sedition to undermine, at any rate, what
they disliked, we might have suspected possibly to see it branded with the
odious imputations you seem to cast upon it. We might then have thought that
the disadvantageous circumstances of the undertakers would, with some
shallow-headed people, have derived a Taint upon their innocent Design: But
when we know that most of us who were concerned in it were fully satisfied with
the establishment by Law in our respective Kingdom; and when we knew also, that
some of the undertakers had such education in the Families of some, whose
employment in the Affairs of State were sufficient to free them of the least
suspicion of any design against the Peace of it; when we knew all this, we
could not once imagine that our enterprise should be looked upon, and
prosecuted as a Crime of so horrid a Nature.

We were the rather confirmed in this belief, when we reflected upon the nature
of the thing it self; for so purblind were we, that we could not foresee which
way the Public Peace should come to be concerned in it: We were satisfied that
there was no such dependence between either the Civil or Ecclesiastical
Government of Scotland, and the Church or State of Rome, as that an affront to
the latter must needs redound upon the former. Some of us indeed could not but
call to mind, that we have heard that our now Principal, once taking the
liberty in the Pulpit to mention the vulgar suspicion of the French-Kings
illegitimacy, either had, or was in hazard of a severe reproof from the
Magistracy for his unseasonable boldness; because then there was a strict
Alliance between Great Britan and France. But we knew of no such Alliance
between the Three Kingdoms and the Triple Crown, and therefore did not fear,
that a grating upon the latter, should have affected the former by consent: we
thought there was not such concord between them, that the beating upon the one
string should cause the other to sound by symphony. And further, if the Pope
might be declared against in the Pulpits, and his Usurpation abominated there
without the Imputation of an affront to any of the Nobility, (and we have not
heard that this has, nor suspect it ever will while his Majesty lives, be
proclaimed Rebellious and Seditious) we imagined that in a way suitable to our
years and circumstances, we might venture a fling at him too, and -- Burn him.

And we had this further encouragement to believe our selves upon secure
ground, That the very same manner of expressing a detestation of Popery, by
Burning the Pope, has been practiced in London, and in other places of England,
without any Imputation of Disloyalty or Sedition that ever we heard of: And we
were so foolish as to think, that what was permitted in a Kingdom (I may be
permitted to say it) as well Governed as that of Scotland (saving that it is not
in so Military a manner, etc.) might also have been allowed here.

These, Sir, were the Reasons that we had to undertake a design of this nature;
these were the Inducements that led us, or mislead us into a belief, that we
should meet with no opposition in the prosecution of it, but from those of the
Popish Interest: And we thought that if such should smell it beforehand, they
would endeavor by all the Address and Cunning imaginable, so to order matters,
as to lay an obstruction in our way; and therefore we thought fit to oblige
those whom we acquainted with the contrivance, to secrecy. How well grounded
that fear was, the sequel has instructed us.

We feared likewise, that if the Papists should come to discover it, and could
not otherwise hinder us, they might attempt to do it by violence; this
suspicion was increased in us by observing the Marquess of Huntly was in Town,
and that unwonted numbers of Papists, Scots and French especially, daily
resorted thither; and we knew full well that some Students, who would readily
promise their concurrence upon the forementioned inducements, might as easily
be prevailed with afterward upon the prospect of any difficulties to desert
us. For this alone Reason we proposed a Paper to be subscribed, wherein we
promised our assistance one to another; for as on the one hand we were
ambitious (if no interruption at all should be given us) to engage as many
Students as was possible, that the Ceremony might appear rather the unanimous
acting of our whole Society, than that of some particular Students only; so on
the other hand, we were resolved, if the Papists should have attempted us, to
defend our selves.

This, Sir, is that Bond and Covenant which your Letter mentions: And (to deal
ingenuously with you) whether our ignorance of the nicety of the Laws of
Scotland in this particular may have ran us into an error or no, I am not able
to determine. I know that Kingdom has been so often burnt in the hand with
Solemn Leagues and Covenants, and with Bands of Association and Mutual Defense
upon all occasions, that the Laws may possibly have arrived to such a
tenderness in that point, as to make it Capital for any number of persons to
subscribe a Paper, though it contain no more than a mutual promise to meet on
such a day, at such a place, to play a Game at Football. If the Laws be so, I
acknowledge our Ignorance ought to be no excuse. This I must needs say, if we
were mistaken, the Practice of some of our Predecessors here, and of the
Students of Glasco, and (I believe) that also of the other Colleges in
Scotland, led us into the mistake; for we have heard, that upon such occasions
which the Students take to be of a general concern to them, it has been usual
for them to subscribe a Paper of mutual Assistance; and the outrages which have
been sometimes committed in pursuance thereof, have never been so aggravated
(that we know of) by the subscription, as to cause them to be looked on as
other than a Boyish Combination. As to what concerns the present Subscription,
I do confidently assure you, Sir, that my self, and all others, so far as I
ever could apprehend, who subscribed, took our selves to be obliged thereby to
no more than to a mutual concurrence to the Burning of the Pope, and to a joint
defense of our selves against the injurious disturbance of the Papists, if they
should have offered any: And you will the easilier believe that that must have
been the sense of that obligation, because at that time we could not foresee
that any of us should be called in question for it by lawful Authority.
Besides, let any considerate man think whether the sorry forfeiture of Half a
Crown (the only penalty of that obligation) were so great a matter as to engage
any in a Rebellion: Can any man suppose that if we had designed any such
matter, we would not have condescended upon a rounder sum? Add to all this our
peaceable demeanor, before, in, and after the Action, and what greater
evidence can there be of the meaning that we took our selves to be obliged in?
So that though I do believe in my Conscience there was no one who could take it
in a bad sense; yet let us suppose that some such there were, who being more
Eagle-eyed than the rest, did foresee that some were like to be called in
Question, and had a mind to lay the foundations of their security, by obliging
all to a mutual adherence to one another against Authority, if such a thing
should happen; yet I am sure they were disappointed of their end, if such they
had; for to my knowledge there was none of them that ever attempted any thing
agreeable hereunto, either by force to prevent the apprehension of their
Companions, (though there were none of us who did not privately resent the
rushing in of Soldiers into the College, and the breaking open our Chambers at
midnight) or to Rescue them after they were apprehended, or to defend the
Statue till it should be consumed, or any other thing which might look like a
forcible opposing Authority, otherwise than as I shall impartially tell you in
the progress of my Story; and how far that was such a violent opposition to
Authority, as you are pleased to accuse us of, leave you to determine.

In the same Paper, to prevent all misconstruction, we took care expressly to
declare that the reasons of our Undertaking was not to put an affront upon any
person whatsoever other then the Pope, and that that was the only end of it.
For 'twas here only that we could possibly imagine the Shoo would pinch, and
therefore took what care we could to enlarge it in the Instep. And this is that
I presume which you intend by the unseasonableness you charge us with.

However, our business was not so closely carried but that it got wind, and
coming to the Lord Provosts ear, was quickly carried to the D. and L.
Chancellor. Both of them are greatly enraged thereat, and theatning to cut down
the Attempters, etc. they resolve by all means to prevent it; and in order
hereunto the Town-Mayor is sent to the Principal of the College on Thursday at
Midnight to cause him to interpose: the Principal accordingly, the next day
came into the Schools, and offered a contrary Bond to be Subscribed by the
Students, which was generally refused by all, unless some of the first year.

The next night the Town-Mayor being sent again, apprehended two English
Gentlemen, and some others who were supposed to be the principal Actors. These
they carry to the Town-Guards, where they were examined by the Town-Council
there met on purpose, and then delivered to the Gray-Coats, and by them under
pretense of speaking with the General, conveyed with Matches burning, etc. to
the Canon-gate Toll-booth, and there received and Imprisoned by a Company of
Red-Coats. And hereby being put out of the Jurisdiction of the Provost, there
was no redress to be expected but from the Privy Council.

The next thing to prevent the design, was a Proclamation prohibiting all
Merchants and Tradesmen to suffer their Apprentices or Servants to go abroad on
Christmas day.

And lastly, for the grand reserve, when the day came, the Provost contrary to
the Privileges of the City, suffered all the Forces that were in the Suburbs
or parts adjacent, to March in, and Post themselves in the most convenient
places for preventing our design. Genesis Daliel, with the Livetenant and a
Squadron of his Majesty's Horse-Guard, and other Companies on Foot, goes to
secure the Grass-Market, as being the place of ordinary Execution. E of Mar
with Two Companies Marches toward the Parliament-Close to guard the Cross. And
there indeed, as being the Gentile place of Execution, we designed to
effectuate our purpose. The Kings Life-Guards seeing no appearance of ought in
the Grass-Market, March up the Castle-hill, fearing ('it is like) we would choose
the properest place, and burn the grand Saucerer where the little inferior ones
usually were. The City-Militia are ranked in the middle of the High Street to
defend it. Another Company of Foot sent to double the ordinary Guards at the
Holyrude-house for the security of the Duke's Person.

By all this Martial preparation against us, all this noise of Drums,
Kettle-Drums and Trumpets, all this appearance of Colors flying, drawn Swords,
Matches burning, etc. wherewith at this time the whole City was full, you will
think, Sir, you had reason to charge us as you did with a formed Combination
against the Government. Sure you cannot now imagine but that we were engaged in
a Rebellion no less formidable than that of Ireland. All this dust could not be
raised for nothing: It may be so. But you question me, How durst we venture our
selves against such Puissance, unless we relied upon some potent assistance?
Believe me, Sir, we intended sport, and not to fight; and therefore had the
courage to begin our March, not only without knowing of any Auxiliaries, but
also without being provided of any Arms our selves. It Is true, our numbers
increased by an unsought-for Accession of a great many Tradesmen and
Apprentices still as we marched along, who it seems were as eager for the
pastime, and as ready to expose Popery as our selves: Yet I protest to you,
that we thought our selves enough to rout all the Forces we came to fight, and to
storm all the Castles we came to besiege, without the assistance of any; and
therefore we never had any former correspondence, much less combination with
these Volunteers. No, we never in the least acquainted nor desired the
concurrence of any but those of our own Society.

We thus attended the Statue in its Pontificalibus down the High-School Wind,
and up Blackfriars Wind to the High Street. You will admire how we got any
place free almost to perform the execution in: yet we did; but seeing the armed
opposition that was drawing on all sides, and being careful of keeping the
peace, without further Ceremony, than the reading of a short Accusation, we set
it on fire with a couple of Flambeaus: at the sight whereof Pereat Papa, being
loudly resounded, made it seems a terrible reverberation in some ears. L. L.
being nearest, was soonest alarmed, and having been many years in the Kings
service, and (as they say) never drawn his Sword in anger before, now draws it
in defense of the Pope; some who were nearest, rudely demanded Hansel, etc. But
this was not all, for making a furious pass at one of the unarmed Actors, he
lost his footing, and unluckily fell prostrate before the Statue. Some informed
his Lordship that it was a mistaken Devotion, for the Timber-Popes had no Toes.
So that arising, he commanded his Soldiers, who were but just now come up, not
being able altogether to keep pace with his Lordships Zeal, to extinguish the
Flames. And we who resolved to make no other opposition than by thronging
together to hinder any access to the Statue till it were thoroughly kindled;
after we had crowded a little while, departed, and left it to the discretion of
its defenders. By this time it was all on flames, for we stuffed it well within
with Rosin, Pitch, Gunpowder, and such like combustible stuff, designedly, that
our stay about it, after 'twas on fire might be the less. So that you cannot
but observe Sir, that however blameable we might be in burning it after the
Public Authority had appeared against us, yet we used all imaginable care that
it should be done in a manner as little offensive as might be. After our
departure the Soldiers did what they could to put an end to the burning. I
doubt not but you would have smiled to have seen what cruel Drubs the merciful
Soldiers gave his Holiness with the Buts of their Muskets; though the choice
were hard, yet it was their kindness, rather to knock him o'th head, than see
him die before their eyes, the unhallowed death of a Heretic. Yet could not
all their care rescue him from the deplorable Fate; for being informed of the
Gunpowder, they thought it their wisdom to retire, lest by being too nearly
concerned for the Popes safety, they might hazard their own. And 'twas well
they did so in so seasonable a time; for immediately the flames reached the
Powder; and the Pope expired in a -- Stink.

But we have not done with him: A more Canonical Adventure yet remains: The
little boys of the Town, such as you would have suspected by their magnitude
were scarce yet so well lettered as to spell Po-pe-ry; they take courage and
resolve to do something: and finding the Relicts of the shattered head which
the violence of the Powder had severed from the body, tie a string to it, and
drag it up the Street to the Castle-hill. The Kings Forces too missing so
principal a part, and storming to quit a prize so considerable to such
Diminutive enemies, like men of courage who scorn to be easily baffled, Troop
about, and put on brave resolutions, rather to dye like men upon the place,
than not recover what they had lost. Believe me, there was no great need of
such superlative Valor, for the little Mirmidons had no stomach (I assure you)
to fight so redoubted an enemy, if they could avoid it, and therefore retreat
as orderly as they came: but their stratagem proved unsuccesful, for can we
doubt but they had one? They had to do with old Soldiers who understood
Martial Discipline too well to untwist while their enemies were in a capacity
of rallying, and who therefore make an eager pursuit in Battalia; and falling
in upon a small party that was to justify the Retreat, they discomfit them,
and pressing hard upon the main body of the Mirmidons; you may think for a
while there was a sharp rancounter! The Mirmidons, I assure you, showed as much
manhood as their enemies; but alas! being inferior, though only in point of
discipline, after a tough resistance they were forced to fly; but the rout was
not so total, but that a party of them came off entire with half of the booty,
which they secured in a Well, and after when the field was clear, took up and
delivered to the public Executioner to do his office upon. The other half of
the Booty fell into the enemies hands. I think after some struggling to whom it
should belong, one of the Trumpeters got it --!

But enough of this. Sir, I am afraid you will scarce believe but that in
telling so ridiculous a business, I impose upon you. I must confess I should
not have had the faith to have believed it my self, unless I had such grounds
for it as I think could not easily prove false. But it is time to return.

All this while those Students who were apprehended on Friday night or Saturday
morning, continued in prison. On Sunday night the Kings Advocate, Sir George
Makenzy, ordered thereunto by the Council, examines the two English Gentlemen,
Whether they were not instigated by Letter from the Lord Gray? They denied it.
Then he asked, Whether they had any Letter of instigation from any body else?
They answered, None. He proceeds, and, if they will not confess, threatens them
with the Boot; an Engine which I who have been born in a Freer Air, may have
leave without reflection to call slavishly barbarous. But at length finding
them resolved to adhere to their answers, and that he could not by any means
extort any thing from them which could be so much as a probable ground of
pinning the Contrivance upon the Lord Gray, etc. he was content to take bond of
1100. Marks a-piece for further appearance at the Councils pleasure, and to
dismiss them.

On Monday at night the Kings Advocate examined the rest of the Prisoners, and
threatened them with the Boot if they would not confess who writ the bond. One
of them confessed he writ a paper which the rest subscribed, but denied it to
be a bond. Then they were interrogated, Whether they designed an affront upon
any of the Nobility? They answered, That to prevent that very misconstruction,
they had declared the contrary in that paper. Then the Advocate desired him who
had owned the Writing, to swear as to that clause of it wherein they protest
against any intention to affront, etc. whether any instigated him to put it in
or no? He being conscious to himself, that no body had instigated him to any
part thereof, and not being aware of the snare, took the Oath as the Advocate
had tendered it. Then they were examined, Whether there had been any of the
Whig-Ministers or Citizens at any of their Consultations? And the Advocate
finding by the resoluteness of their denial, there had been none, was content
to discharge them upon bond for further appearance, as before.

Now might we have applied our selves to our studies, and all things been
quieted, had not some of the Soldiers (to what ends, themselves best know)
given us an occasion (I do not say a reason) to herd together again, by
assaulting and cutting one of the Students quite through the skull, before the
very gate of the College, and that without the least provocation; and not only
so, but by great indignities offered to others of us in other places of the
Town. It seems it was a pity that things should be so soon composed. Something
further was yet to be done, to drive us on to a greater extremity! They that
knew the humor of young Students, how unwilling they are to put up affronts
either from Townsmen or Soldiers, and how apt they are to herd together in such
cases, and join in their mutual defense, could not be far to seek for a way to
push them forward to things not otherwise excusable than by the heat of young
blood, and the inexcusableness of the provocations.

For my own part, when I consider how frequent it has been for the Students in
Edinburgh, and in other places of Scotland, upon less provocations to commit
far greater outrages, I cannot but think that our Extravagancies at this time
(though I am far from vindicating them) were extraordinary moderate. The truth
is, we so far considered how much we were concerned at such a time as this to
avoid any thing that might have a mutinous aspect, that I am confident we would
have put up all those indignities that were offered us, had not another thing
which intervened, given us a much more sensible touch. 'Twas this:

A little after the first disorders were over, the Principal and Regents go to
the Palace with a design to have made an apology to his R. Highness; but being
denied admittance (for the paroxism of indignation was not yet over) they
return. But they go again, and are admitted. We were apprehensive that they had
in our names, without acquainting us, made a submission, and begged pardon for
burning the Pope. These thoughts, I confess, galled us; and therefore to show
how much we continued in the same mind, we unanimously got blew Ribbons in our
hats with this Motto, NO POPE; and went in a body (or herd if you will) by the
Provost's house (which it is like was taken for an affront to him): When we were
come into the High Street, we cried, No Pope, No Pope. What persons they were
who might take themselves further to be affronted by this, I do not know; or if
any met with any real affronts, they may partly thank themselves. Sir, Lads are
Lads, and will act as such; and though we nor can nor will upon a deliberate
reflection on all that passed, justify our selves in those particulars wherein
through the heat of a youthful frolic, we exceeded the just bounds of
moderation; yet this we must have leave to say, for we cannot but think it,
That those persons who pretend to exceed us as much in discretion and prudence,
as they do in years, and yet could not forbear as unjustifiable provocations
and returns on the other hand, have either forfeited that advantage of
discretion they pretended to above us, or given us too great cause to suspect
they had a malicious design of increasing the Mutiny. I could give you
instances even in this kind. We know who they were that threatened to tread
under his feet those who durst wear a blew Ribbon before him. And who they were
that cuffed and beat one of us (by what authority himself knows) for
indiscreetly saying, That all this stir was for burning the Pope. Persons from
whom (of all others) such words and such actions were little expected. I could
tell you more. But my business is not to particularize other men's
Extravagancies, but, so far as 'twill bear, modestly to apologize for our own.

Sir, I do assure you this assuming to our selves Ribbons, is a thing that is
done amongst us every year, as a badg whereby we may be distinguished from
others, and known to our selves: for you must know, we wear not Gowns and Caps
as they do in the English Universities. It Is true, we never wore such
distinguishing Ribbons at this time of the year; nor ever Ribbons with Motto's
before. But what of all that? It Is no consequence that we must needs therefore
be said to combine together (as ou are pleased to suppose) to the dissettlement
of the Governmenty; or that we designed to make a party, and invite others
thereunto to raise and carry on a Rebellion; And that this should be the
Trumpet as well as Color of it. No; had this been our design, What should have
induced us expressly to refuse to permit the Apprentices to wear the same kind
of Ribbon, when they applied themsel^es to us to that end? Or if other
Gentlemen besides our selves (or the Apprentices afterward) did think fit to
wear Ribbons of that color, what was that to us, who could not hinder them?
When you may see by this instance of the Apprentices, that we were so far from
desiring any to wear the Ribbon but our selves, that we did what we could to
hinder others?

However, when we saw by the imprisonment of the Printer who had done no more
than barely printed No Pope upon our Ribbons, and by other assurances, how
disgustful this was like to prove to the Magistrates, we all pulled them from
our hats. And if some one or two imprudent Students did afterward resume them,
I may, Sir, expect it from your justice, that you will not blame the whole
Society upon that account.

And I hope to find the same Justice when I tell you, That some rash
inconsiderate Lad might perhaps in passion say, that the Provost deserved to
have his house burnt. Though such words were not only without the knowledge and
approbation of the rest, but even condemned by the speaker upon a sober
reflection; who I am persuaded might say them without any premeditated design.
You know it is usual for one man in anger to tell another, He deserves to be
hanged, or he will be hanged, without ever intending to prove the Executioner.
It Is true, if the party should be afterward found hanged in good earnest, and
no account given how it happened, there might be some reason to suspect the
Threatner.

Sir, the House was burnt, and burnt designedly, there is no question: but how,
or by whom, I am not able positively to inform you. I am sure when I heard it,
I was in a strange surprise, knowing that it would not be easy for us to
decline the odium; and therefore though I was conscious of my own innocence in
particular, and believed as much of all the rest; yet for my farther
satisfaction I was curious to go immediately to the most daring and undertaking
among us, and such whom I assured my self must have been concerned, if any
were. But I pumped in vain; for I found them all in a surprise equal to my own,
and as much detesting such a Villainy. And I have reason to believe, that had
they known any such thing, they durst have confided in my secrecy, though
possibly had it been so, their confidence would have proved false bottomed. And
I am the rather inclined to pronounce them innocent, because I found them all
able, by a succession of witnesses, as it happened, to prove where they had
been all that time. And though diligent inquiry has been made at Dyddiston,
Libberton, and other places adjoining to Priest field; yet I hear not of any
one of our number that was seen any time that day or night thereabouts.

And I could further confirm our innocence by the late report we heard, that
one of these poor Boys has been since booted: And though it might have been
expected that the extremity of that horrible Torture might have made him accuse
himself or others of things that never entered into his or their thoughts; yet
it is said he asserted their innocence with admirable courage; and being taken
out, bid the standers-by consider how great that innocence must needs be, when
it had enabled him to undergo those torments which he doubted not would have
forced confessions of the greatest of Villainies from the stoutest of
themselves! But I shall rather supersede this Argument, than once believe men
could have acted so great cruelty upon children.

Sir, that I may be plain with you, there wants not ground to believe, That
some persons might think if they could cunningly and secretly fire the house of
Priest-field, it would be an easy matter to raise a belief that it was done by
us. They knew that the circumstances of the foregoing disorders, especially the
words which they knew they could prove some of us in passion had spoken, would
be evidence sufficient to suspect, if not convict us of the fact, unless we
could with equal probability lay it some where else; and that they hoped might
be prevented by a secret management on their side. But whether or no they have
thus managed it with a cunning and secrecy equal to the contrivance, possibly
we may know more hereafter. At present, we know thus much, that there was a
Gunpowder Barrel with the Castle stamp upon it, found the next day in that part
of the Park that is nearest to Priestfield. And as I am informed, some asking
the Governor of the Castle, To whom, and when he had delivered any Barrels of
Gunpowder? received this answer, That of late he had not delivered any, but one
to the Halyrud-house, to furnish the Gaurds withal. But having this last
particular only by flying report, I will not be positive in it: But be that as
it will, I see not how we can once imagine how any of the Students should come
by a Barrel so marked, for that such a Barrel was found is most certain: I
think none will say they either stormed the Castle, or plundered the
Halyrud-house for it. Besides, you cannot but have heard of the attempt that
was made to fire a House in Edinburgh, it is like if the Incendiary had not been
taken and discovered to be one of the Marquess of Huntlies men, we might have
been charged with that too; and you have heard of the apprehensions the
Citizens at present have, that that wicked design of burning their City is not
yet lade aside. And the World knows that London was burnt -- and by whom.

I will not urge your Argument of Cui bono: If it be of any force, let it
prevail only so far, as to make you believe us innocent, till you hear we are
proved guilty. And let not a perfunctory reading of the late Proclamation in
Scotland against us, cause you to mistake it so far, as to imagine we are
directly charged therein of this horrid Fact, much less already proved guilty
of it; for though it be something perplexed, yet upon due examination you will
find, that it is only positive, that there is convincing proof that the House of
Priest field was burnt down by throwing in Fireballs.

I deny not that we were accused as guilty before the Council, and (as it is
like) that all the probable circumstances were with the utmost industry
aggravated in the Information, we may believe that nothing which the utmost
malice of our Adversaries could suggest was omitted, because of the measures
that the Council thereupon took: It was no small thing which induced them to
summon before them those who had given bond for their appearance, and upon
their appearance to Imprison them again, and then to shut up the Gates of the
Schools of the College: And in the next place, by the Proclamation, to command
all and every of the Students within twenty four hours to depart Fifteen Miles
at least from Edinburgh.

It Is (as I am informed) our Principal offered that those who should be found
guilty of these disorders, might bear the punishment themselves; and thought it
hard, that all should be involved in a general ruin, before it appeared how
many were guilty: And knew not whether it was regular first to punish them, and
then examine whether they deserved it -- And how this examination could be
taken in their absence -- much less, whether a submission by proxy would be
admitted: -- And desired his Advocates might be heard argue it, whether it were
so agreeable to Law, that a College established by Parliament, without Act of
Parliament should be dissolved?

Sir, there is one thing more I must not forget to tell you; it is, that though
the Proclamation take care, that such whose Parents or Tutors will give caution
for their good behavior might abide behind; yet matters were so ordered, that
though the English Gentlemen offered such caution, yet the Clerks of the Council
delayed first, and at last, after they had been consulting at the
Halyrud-house, positively refused to accept it; and so the time allowed being
near an end, and they fearing to be trapanned, were in all have necessitated to
go out of Edinburgh on foot, and take post at the next Stage.

Thus, Sir, I have given you an impartial account of the whole procedure, so
far as I am able; and though I do not pretend that what I have said will
vindicate us in every particular; yet this I may say without any imputation of
Impudence, that upon the whole matter, it is evident our crimes are not near so
odious as you have been made to believe. I may say it, had there been no
opposition, nothing, either in the contrivance or management of the whole
Action, could have been justly liable to blame. It Is true, we have been
indiscreet, rash, have acted like our selves, in that when we heard of
opposition we desisted not. I am heartily sorry we went on, when we see, that
what we were a going about, for the manner of it, was disgusted by the
Magistrates. But that we designed a Rebellion, were abetted by others
thereunto, endeavored to make a party to carry it on, to the dissetlement of
the Government, or that we did so much as avow affronts to the Magistracy, is
wickedly false. Even those extravagancies which we did commit, may most of them
be accounted for, by the unexpectedness of the opposition we met withal, and
the great provocations we thought we received from particular persons. And it is
no mean Argument that we are not so really guilty as your Letter would make us,
if it be soberly considered that such trivial, boyish freaks, were improved
with such a mighty pother to make us appear so. Who can imagine but that there
have been exceeding false Glasses used, when our Childish divsrtisements have
been represented to the Magistrates as formidable Combinations against the
State? What a Mountain has been made of our Molehill! Thus can men make every
Stake in a Hedge, when they have a mind to pull it up, a Public Nuisance! Thus
can wicked men who have an itch to be combating, make Images of Straw appear
real enemies! Thus can they contrive to dissolve Seminaries of Learning, when
according to the old method, they are ushering in Devotion by Ignorance! Good
God! what terrible Batteries may we not expect, when such extraordinary
diligence is used already to force earth for the Mounts?

Well, God bless His Majesty say I, and let him live to disappoint the Malice
and Hopes of his greatest Enemies; for we may possibly have such a Successor,
who is resolved to look upon peoples professing their detestation of Popery to
be a Crime equal to Rebellion: And every public owning of the Protestant
Religion, to be an intolerable affront to his Person.

Sir, it is time I conclude; If I have been already too tedious, you will
ascribe it to the zeal I have at once to satisfy your commands, and to wash of
those black and horrid imputations which your Letter involves me and others in.
I should be sorry that your self, or any other considerate person should take
me to be guilty of that Bigottry you speak of, much more sorry to see you
continue to think me capable of thoughts of Rebellion: You know how much I have
always, since I understood the difference of any thing, detested those both
Principles and Practices. I am entirely of your mind, that Protestants cannot
more prejudice themselves, and the interest of their Religion, then by
endeavoring to promote it by undue courses, or to defend and secure it by
associations not warranted by Law. If by all I have said, I have been able to
rescue my Loyalty from that taint it may have received in your opinion, upon
the account of my being in some measure concerned in what you so highly decry;
'twill be the greatest satisfaction imaginable to

February 168^. SIR, The devoutest of your Servants N. M.

FINIS.

