The Lord Churchill's LETTER to the KING.
SIR,
SInce Men are seldom suspected of Sincerity when they act contrary to their
Interests; and tho my dutiful Behavior to your Majesty in the worst of times,
(for which I acknowledge my poor Services much over-paid) may not be sufficient
to incline You to a charitable Interpretation of my Actions, yet I hope, the
great Advantage I enjoy under Your Majesty, which I can never expect in any
other Change of Government, may reasonably convince Your Majesty and the World,
that I am acted by a higher Principle, when I offer that Violence to my
Inclination, and Interest, as to desert Your Majesty at a time when Your
Affairs seem to challenge the strictest Obedience from all Your Subjects, much
more from one who lies under the greatest personal Obligations imaginable to
Your Majesty. This, Sir, could proceed from nothing but the inviolable Dictates
of my Conscience, and necessary concern for my Religion (which no good Man can
oppose) and with which I am instructed, nothing ought to come in competition;
Heaven knows with what partiality my dutiful Opinion of Your Majesty has
hitherto represented those unhappy Designs, which inconsiderate and
self-interested Men have framed against Your Majesty's true Interest and the
Protestant Religion. But as I can no longer join with such to give a pretense
by Conquest to bring them to effect, so will I always with the hazard of my
Life and Fortune (so much Your Majesty's due) endeavor to preserve Your Royal
Person and Lawful Rights with all the tender Concern and dutiful Respect that
becomes, Sir,

Your Majesty's Most dutiful and most obliged Subject and Servant.


