The true and Exact Portrayture of ^ MAHOMET ye 4th: fourteenth Emperor of the
Turks now reigning in 1663
MatthAei, Florentinus Pinxit:
Io: Chantry sculp:


A New Survey OF THE Turkish Empire AND GOVERNMENT, IN A Brief HISTORY deduced
to this present Time, and the Reign of ^he now GRAND SEIGNIOR MAHOMET the IV.
The present and XIV. Emperor. With their Laws, Religion and Customs. As also an
Account of the Siege of NEWHAUSEL.

LONDON. Printed for Henry Marsh at the sign of the Princes Arms in
Chancery Lane. 1663.

To the Right Worshipful, Sir ANDREW RICCARD, Knight, and Governor of the
Levant Company.
THis Turkish Breviary and Abstract, as of right and due addresseth it self to
your Hands, in which the Administration of our Intelligence and Commerce with
that Nation is very worthily and prudently placed. Be pleased therefore among
other lesser Concerns of your Surintendence therein, to suffer your Name to be
interested in the Patronage of this Brief SVRVEY.

The Prefixing whereof was partly designed to compose and civilize those horrid
and dire conceptions we have of those Barbarous Arms; by letting the World see,
that persons of the greatest Humanity have and do maintain a constant and
amicable Corespondence with them; partly to let their present Dread and
Puissance do service to those fair and obliging atractions for which your Name
is no less Famous, and partly to vindicate the Truth of the Discourse ensuing,
when we offer it at so known an Altar, and to so competent a Judge and Patron.

And that advantage with your own Eminence will justly engage an Ambition to
sound your Name in the general Voice and Discourse of the World, which is now
busied with this Mighty Monarch; whose Glories and Successes will have this
further felicity, that they have harmlesly reached us, under your particular
Protection.

And under that let the World also be taught, the great and admirable effects
of Sobriety and Abstinence, and the mischiefs of Riot and Excess: For this
Asian People, once the nauseated and basest dregs of the World, odious for
their Luxury, and Infamous for their Slavery, (the necessary consequents
thereof) are now by their temperance and abstemiousness, (the injunction and
Discipline of an absurd Religion) become the Mightiest Nation, and greatest
Lord of the Universe: and by irresistible and over bearing approaches, have
given the Empire of Germany (the reeling, staggering Remnant of the Fourth
Monarchy a Cup of Trembling.

God in his good time heal those Breaches, and pardon the many provoking sins
of Christendom, and continue us in our undeserved peace, and your Noble Self
and Family therein, in all Honor and prosperity.

So prays Your Humble and Devoted Servant H. Marsh.

ERRATA.
THe Reader is desired to mend and observe a mistake; in Page 8. Line 25 for
1633. read 1640.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
WHile the noise of those barbarous Armies, that now prevail in Hungaria, and
dangerously threaten the adjacent Hereditary Dominions of the German Emperor,
as Archduke of Austria, do resound through the whole Christian world; which
may justly fear the second part of that Tragedy, which the in^undation of the
Goths and Vandals terribly effected in those parts of Europe, that now are the
next affrighted Neighbors to this Invasion; It will be a satisfactory
endeavor, I presume, to give some account of this terrible Enemy; whose
distant efforts give us the secure and quiet contemplation of his strength and
power, while it employs other Regions of Christendom in hasty and tumultuous
Action, and has hurled them into a general distraction and consternation.

I will not be curious to dive into this providence and grand Affair of the
world, unto which so many strange events seem to be chained, as that the Fate
of the Universe is judged by some to be concerned therein; but he that shall
consider and peruse some modern Treatises which hint at this very thing, and
shall likewise weigh with himself those great mutations and changes which have
been wrought in this Kingdom, especially the late blessed Restitution, must
believe that some extraordinary Revolution is at hand, and that ours, and the
like in other parts, are but the precursory and predictory signs of some
Conclusive wonder.

The expectation of the world has long labored under the discourse and
disputes about Antichrist, variously conceived by a multitude of Writers, as
also about the period of the Roman Empire, which now is visible only, and has
been so for some ages in the House of Austria, supported by the Grandeur of the
Spanish Monarchy: and it is now no vain and groundless an opinion of the same
that one or both of these Mysterious Intrigues in humane judgment will in this
present juncture be determined, at least some greater light be given by this
clashing and collision of the Eastern and Western Princes the success whereof
will decide whether Caesar aut Nullus, a Caesar or No Body.

The Reader therefore I hope will take in good part this brief Account of the
Customs, Laws and manners (subjoyned to this brief History of this Formidable
Nation) as they are described by a worthy hand, a person of quality und
experience.

A NEW SURVEY OF THE Turkish Empire.
PART. I.
The Rise of the Turkish Empire, and its Present Greatness.
THis Puissant, and almost numberless people, in their Armies and Hosts, which
like Xerxes his Forces, drink whole Rivers dry as they march, came from most
contemptible and petty Originals; and like the Roman Empire, which began from a
collected rabble of loose and outlawed persons, was founded in a Company of
theiving Shepherds, who wandering up and down like a running disease, infested
and disquieted all places they came to, and at last grew to such considerable
strength, like a Snow-ball, that they became suspect to the Monarchs of the
East, both Pagan and Christian.

The rise of the Turkish power.
The first appearance which rendered them Famous and Notable to the world, was
under the conduct and leading of their Captain Tangrolipix, who was called in
by the King of Persia, to aid him against the potent and prevailing Armies of
the Saracens, which having readily undertaken, and strenuously and succesfully
atcheived; this Auxiliary took occasion to carve for himself, and erect a new
Principality and Empire, as well as upon his friends, whom he pretended to
rescue, as upon their common enemies territory, making both of them the equal
prey of his ambition of Sovereignty and Dominion.

This new Family continued in this Usurpation and Intrusion with various
success one hundred and seventy years, to the year of our Lord, 1300. But
standing solely upon its own legs, neither strengthened nor secured by any
alliances, and wasted with a continual War with the former just Propietors of
the Land they had treacherously and forcibly wrested, it expired its dying,
gasping breath into a younger slip of the same House, for now the Zelzuccian
Name and Fortune was transmitted to the Oguzian Tribe (which were the two, and
only Descendants of this people) whom Fate had adopted to the reserve and
residue of her greatest and benignest Favors, which she decreed to double upon
it; for having made an essay of the formers aptness to glory, and laid the dead
colors in it, of a Majestical and August Form and Feature; drew it perfect
afterward in this beautiful and fair proportion, in which we now see the
Turkish Empire.

The rise of the Ottoman family.
The Infant Darling of this rising greatness, was the famous Ottoman, to whom
the grand Seignors refer, and ambitiously entitle their Surname, who having
precariously obtained a small quantity of ground from his Neighbors, upon
protestation of his quiet and peaceable demeanor, partly by courage, and
partly by treachery, overran the whole Country of Bythynia, in the Lesser
Asia; and dying, left the design of enlarging and extending his Dominions to
his Son and Successor Orchanes, whose Sons immense Fortune, like the Collossus,
bestrid the Hellespont, and conveyed the Turkish Ensigns into Europe, whose
delicious and useful soil, so pleased andentic ed those Conquerours, that the
Imperial Seat was first fixed here at Adrianople, to which most of the vicine
Princes were forced to come and pay tribute and homage: such was the slavish
condition of Servia and Bulgaria, and most part of Slavonia, afterward
swallowed up in absolute Mahumetanism, and made Provinces of this monstrous
Seignory.

But that which constituted, and was as the formal being thereof, was the
Conquest and Possession of Constantinople, now called Stamboli, the Magnificent
Throne of the Eastern Empire, which resigned its glories to victorious Mahomet,
May 29. Anno Dom. 1450. and transferred its imperial Title to that Regal claym,
his Ancestors had enjoyed. This irrecoverable loss, and lop of one of the
greatest and chiefest members of Christianity, so stunned the Greeks, and other
petty Princes, who yet maintained their Dominions, that most of them were
either suddenly reduced, or tamely yielded themselves, which was the fate of
the Epirots (though they held out for a while, by the unexampled conduct and
felicity of Scanderbeg,) the Rhodians, the Cypriots, and Isles of the
Mediteranean Sea, and lastly, in the Reign of Solomon, of Moldavia, Valachia,
part of Transylvania and Hungaria, whether he peirced and passed as far as
Vienna, (and beyond it, in other part, of Austria) which by the fear of his
approach, saw her Suburbs, and Houses, and Gardens of pleasure fired and
ruined, that he might have no shelter for his men, when he should attempt the
siege, which he did, but in vain: but such was his importunate ambition of
effecting a total conquest of that Country, in which he had been partly
succesful to the gayning of the better half of that Kingdom of Hungaria, and
seizing Buda the Capital City thereof, that he made several expeditions in
person, even in his old Age, and dyed at his return from taking Zigeth, though
gallantly defended to the last man, by Count Serinus, great Ancestor to the
Emperors Generalissimo, now in that Kingdom. Not to mention the Augmentation of
this Empire, by the triumphal accessions of Egypt, and remoter parts of Asia
the Great, both Nations of the same Religion.

The death of Solomon.
From the time of this Solymans Decease, about 1566. till now, little or no
attempts were made this way by his Successors, for Amurath his Son, Mahomet and
Achmat, were Princes given to quiet, and Home Delights, so that most men
conjectured, this Empire was at its Zenith and Solstice, and full stop, and
would decline as fast as it rose; and that glory wearied with such a train of
greatness, would flag at last, if not be pulled back again with the weight of
them, and crush it to nothing.

The death of Achmat the first.
And this was almost concluded on, when after the death of Achmat, there
immediately followed such Convulsions in that State, and recedings from those
observed rules of policy, which were the security of its Establishment, viz.
the saving the lives of the younger brethren of the Emperor, as Achmat did by
Mustapha, and he by Achmats three Sons; Osman, who at tweelve years of age had
the Government transferred to him from his Uncle Mustapha, and was
afterstrangled by the tumultuary Janissaries, Amurath or Morat, and Ibrahim (the
Father of the present Emperor) who all reigned successively; of which three,
Morat proved a most Heroique Prince, and of as great if not greater spirit then
any of his Progenitors. He dyed in 1633. at the siege of Bagdat, alias Babylon,
(whether he had designed the Janissaries for slaughter and extirpation, as being
the causes and Agents of all those troubles and disloyalties which had happened
to his Brother and Uncle, intending in their room to erect a new kind of
standing Militia, which should be more absolutely at his command. Being asked
upon his deathbed, occasioned by a violent Fever (in the said year 1640.) whom
he would appoint to succeed him, he disdainfully and angrily replied, Will
there be any more worlds when I am dead? He was thought to have favored the
Christians for his Mothers sake, and therefore chose this expedition against
the Persian. His immature fate was much lamented by his Subjects, for his
justice and temperance, and care of them; but welcomed by the Janissaries, who
began to perceive his drift against them, and who notwithstanding saluted his
Brother Ibrahim with the Imperial dignity the year abovesaid.

Ibrahim immediately upon his Assumption renewed the League with the Emperor
of Germany, which had been concluded by Achmat in 1612. and had been thitherto
punctually and inviolably observed: but the Galleys of Malta meeting with his
wealth, coming from Cairo and Alexandria, and carrying them, and one of his
dear Sultana's, which was on board, away for that Island, put him into such a
rage, that without present restitution he vowed to attaque Christendom: Which
immediately he commenced against the Venetians, as abettors, if not accomplices
in the fact, upon whose Trade and Territories he might wreak his fury, which
would be spent in vain against that impregnable Isle, which had blemished the
prowess and glory of his Ancestors: and having rigged a Fleet, and raised an
Army, he set upon the Isle of Candy by Sea, and by Land upon Dalmatia, resolved
against any agreement or accommodation soever, and with various fortune
maintained the War, till the Janisaries tumulting again, deposed him, and set
up his Son Mahomet the Fourth, a stripling, and whom they might govern as they
pleased. He died in the said fatal year 1648. the murderous Revolution of
Princes; but how, is not certain: For such is the knack of this Tyranny, that
the world cannot tell, whether the Prince or his Slaves do die the fairest.

Of the present Reign of Sultan Mahomet the Fourth:
SUltan Ibrahim being thus deposed, his Eldest Son Mahomet was with general
applause saluted Emperor, and his Mother the Sultana was highly complemented:
His Name did much conciliate the affection of the people for his great
Grandfathers sake, Mahomet the Third, whose memory was highly honored and
beloved, and because of his comeliness of Feature, and towardliness of Mind,
which promised the revival of all his Ancestors virtues in himself.

There had been frequent changes by death, and disgrace of the Prime Visiers in
the next preceding Reigns: It is a Dignity far greater then our Lord
Chancellor, for he commands supremely both in peace and war, at home and
abroad, but of such short and uncertain possession, especially of late, that
the Turks have a Proverb, The greatest Persons and Officers in that government,
are but at best fair statues of Glass. He that administered this place at the
Emperors Assumption, was an old Statesman and a person of good success and
conduct, and of as good age and experience, and who questionless laid those
Noble principles and elements of glory and ambition in this young Monarch,
which the Christian world now sadly feels. For from that disreputation, and
despicableness of the Turkish power, by reason of those confusions and
intestine troubles, which for some years before had besotted, and as was hoped,
had emasculated the Policy, Prudence, Valor, and Courage of that Empire; he at
the first instant of his Government gave manifest signs of a Mercurial and
Martial Disposition, and with his own active Genius, (the example of Princes
being the great Engine of worth) soon buoyed up the Spirits of his people to
their former pitch of fortiude, and bravery of mind, awakened and restored
their lost discipline: and to whet their new furbished Scimitars, resolved to
employ them altogether against the Christians, upon the irreconciable quarrel
of Religion, the great Incentive to Heroical enterprises, especially amonst the
Turks, where zeal always fights half the Battle.

To this purpose he resolved to prosecute the War against the Venetians, which
his Father had begnn, and though at his first entrance upon it, Fortune seemed
to oppose his designs, and severely to exercise his glorious and aspiring mind,
with a very great defeat given his naval Forces by the Sea, the greatest ever
given them since Lepanto fight, wherein he lost forty eight Galleys, 6
Galiasses, 12 Mahones and 9 Ships, and his Admiral Bassa slain in the fight in
the Haven of Foggia; and this success disabling his command at Sea, he made no
more of it then his Noble Ancestor Selymus the Second, who beaten at Lepanto,
after his conquest of Cyprus, said merrily, Lepanto is but the shaving of my
beard, Cyprus is the loss of a limb.

Venetians Victory over the Turks.
In the year 1654. the Venetians obtained another Victory over the Turks, having
fought them two days together in the Dardanelles, the straight of the
Hellespontick sea between Asia and Europe, famous for the story of Leander and
Hero, where now the Turks have two Castles built, in lieu of Sestos and Abydos,
made more impregnable very lately by some modern Fortification, for better
security against the Venetians, The Grand Seignior himself advised the method
of it, and was present at the beginning, and finishing the work, wherein he
takes much satisfaction. Turks fleet overthrown.
At this Naval encounter no less then 6000 Turks were slain, and Amurath Bassa,
Captian Admiral of the Port was mortally wounded, and twenty ships of War and
Galleys taken, besides as many sunk and spoiled.

This Defeat so incensed the Grand Seignior that the Prime Vizier (being
obnoxious to his anger and displeasure, for other matters, some whereof were
noysed to be of treasonable Consequence aganist his Life) was by a private
Council ordered to be strangled, and he accordingly was executed; about which
time the sparks of that Conflagration which at this present is mastering Hungary
began to appear, for a party of Turks attempted the surprisal of Vesperin, a
Garrison of the Emperors, which annoyed the freedom of their correspondence;
but their design being discovered, they were forced to retreat with the loss of
900 men, and so the peace continued in a kind of doubtful and suspicious
entertainment by both parties, who made slight and mutual inroads into one
another limits, without any declaration or notice taking of a War, which the
Turkish Governors studied to dissemble.

The death of the Grand Vizier begat several Factions in the Soldiery and
chief Officers, whom he in his life time had tampered with, hoping to make a
party for himself, and transfer the Imperial Dignity from this ancient Ottoman
Family to his own house, an attempt never heard of before in that Government,
which has showed the most awful reverence to the majesty of their Prince,
beyond all others whatsoever.

The seeds of this Treason broke out and appeared two years after in 1656, in
the tumults raised by the Janissaries, but abetted by some of the Bashaws of his
Council and Intrigue at Constantinople, where they massacred several of the
Divan (the Emperors Council and Court of Justice) strangled the Vizier Bassa in
revenge of his Predecessor, forced the Sultana or Empress, Mother of the Grand
Seignior, who managed her Son, and the administration of Affairs, to fly to
the old Seraglio for safety, and made search for the Muphtee, by whose Consent
and Advice (which the Great Turk always asks in matters of life and death) the
aforesaid Vizier had been put to death, resolving to depose the Grand Seignior,
and set up his Brother

To this purpose they laid aside all the former Principal Officers to secure
themselves from the punishment of their Rebellion, and placed others in their
room, who had encouraged and prompted them thereunto: These men mistrustful of
their violent beginnings, and dreading more violent ends, forbore those
desperate actions and Councils which this Revolt at first threatened, intending
first to secure themselves, and establish their interest: And thus they applied
themselves to the Sultan, with deep protestations of their Loyalty and dutiful
Intentions, and that the exhorbitant abuses and oppressions of his Officers had
caused the late Troubles, which they hoped to remove, and restore his Majesty
to the affection of the Janisaries, which those Ministers had debauched from
him. And to make this appear they proceeded vigorously in carrying on the War
against the Venetians in Dalmatia, and Candia, as the most acceptable, and
which made them likewise more grateful to the people, so that the Venetians to
reinforce the places they held in Candia, dispatched away some new Regiments,
Volunteers and others, under the command of Prince Horatio Farnese, of the
House of Parma, who did that Republique good service, in several enterprises
against the Enemy; as did their General Zeno in Dalmatia, where the Morlacks,
who at the beginning of the war revolted from the Turk, merited also very
exceedingly, from the said Seignory.

The grand Seignior in the mean while doubtful of these fair shows, and their
pretenses to him, by some of his trusty Eunuchs, and at the advice of his old
friends, had insinuated so far into some of the principal of the new statesmen
with proffers of his greatest favors, setting likewise before them the danger
of continuing this force upon him, for that the Bassa of Damascus was said to
be upon his March to Constantinople, that they resolved to save their own
stakes, and by a timely submission and discovery, prevent others from doing it
before them; And this was almost done as quick as thought, and the news of it
not published sooner then by his solemn appearance in Constantinople, who at
his return from this his joyful cavalcade, gave order for the strangling of the
Ringleaders of the late defection, some of whom were even those who had
declared their return to their obedience, so unpardonable a crime is Rebellion
amongst those Barbarous Nations, who have no Scripture, Rule, and Command
obliging their Allegiance, that there is no place left for Repentance, in any
hopes of mercy or forgiveness.

In this naked composure of the state which had been dismembered of her chiefest
Ministers, it was not an Act of grace or of choice to prefer, but of the
greatest necessity and care, to find some worthy and fit person for the dignity
of Vizier Azem, or Prime Vizier, who should be able to undertake this Corruens
Imperium, and to sustain, likeanother Atlas, the tottering ruinous Fabric of
this overpoyzed greatness.

Much consultation among the Grandees themselves there was, who should be the
man Nominated by them in this hazardous and variating condition of the state,
to the Grand Signior, whose own consideration of his, and the public safety,
had pitched upon the aforesaid Bassa of Damascus whom not long before he had
dismissed out of the Seraglio to that command (it being the custom to breed
Christian noble Children, to the number of a hundred, for the immediate service
of the Emperor, who according to his favor, or their abilities and parts
disposes them afterward to the best Provinces, and prefers them to the highest
dignities, and those are called at their initiation, Itchoglans, and are taught
the Rules and Policys of the Government) as having perceived in him some
aptitudes to his service, in the resemblance of his own disposition. Advantaged
by the near equality of Age.

This prudent person beyond the expectation of his years, not exceeding twenty
four, courageously but modestly accepted of the charge, and behaved himself so
discreetly, yet confidently therein, that he allayed and awed that discontented
and mutinous humor of the Janissaries, partly by extraordinary munificence, and
partly by just severity: as he gained upon the peoples respect by his free and
uncorrupted Justice, so that of all the Ministers that the Seraglio ever bred,
or the Government produced, there has been none exceeded him therein, and his
Fortune is highly paramount to them all. And this is he who at present commands
and menageth the victorious Army of these Infidels with that fairness for which
he is universally famed.

Yet had he no better luck then his Master at his entrance upon the Government
(in which he was installed in Constantinople with most extrordinary Pomp and
solemnity) the first care whereof, as to Foraign business was the equipping and
recruiting of the Fleet going to Sea against the Venetians, who braved the
Grand Seignior and the Port (as Constantinople is called) at the mouth of the
Dardanelles, and had continued there a month, on purpose for an Engagement.

June the 26. the Turkish Fleet set sail, consisting of 28 great ships, nine
Galleasses, 60 Galleys, and 30. Mahons, The Venetian Navy had 28. great Ships,
24. Galleys, besides 7. of Malta, and 7. Galiasses, who keeping in the Channel,
the Turk could not pass without fighting.

There were two Batteries raised on both sides the straight, to facilitate the
going out of the Turkish Fleet, by causing the Venetian to desert their
station, A great Fight in the Dardanelles.
which nevertheless they would not abandon, but stood the shot of the Castles
and them, and upon the advance of the Tukish Fleet, part of theirs under the
command of Captain Mocceingo, making more boldly to the shore, got a stern of
the whole Navy, and so hemmed them in: after a sharp and tedious encounter this
Armada, was wholly overthrown by sword, fire, and water, 40. Galleys were
taken, with 9 Mahones, the 28. Ships butnt, the Captain Bassa only saving
himself with 14. Galleys. The number of Turks slain, was reputed no less then
5000. and 4000. taken, and as many Christian slaves set at liberty. The
Venetians lost their Captain General Marcello, 500. Mariners and Soldiers, of
whom the Maltese did brave service: in room of Marcello, the gallant Moccenigo
was elected General by the Senate, and a chain worth two thousand pound,
bestowed on him besides.

In September, the same year, the Noble General being recruited, following his
success, landed and took the important and strong Island of Tendos, (the
Grecian Harbor, when they besieged Troy) and soon after took the Island of
Lemnos, after a difficult seige, for the Turks esteemed it as impregnable, and
having repaired and provided the Fortress with all necessaries for defense, it
lying within view of the Enemy, and a great annoiance to their trade and
provision by Sea, departed toward Scio, and now the hopes of an accommodation
by a Treaty, which was maintained at this time by their Secretary Bellarini^,
were evaporated into the Turks fury, who caused the said Secretary to be
secured, and the Treaty to be laid aside. For these losses nothing discouraged
but rather heightened the Grand Signior and Vizier, nor did they give over the
design of reducing Candia, which was only feasible by success at Sea, as being
an Island, but Achmat breathing nothing but Revenge and Honor, with fierce
language, and stern looks upbrayded the Bashaws for employing such base
cowardly fellows, and then cheerfully bade them equip another Fleet, and he
would design and appoint the Commanders, whom his own observation had
recommended to his choice.

In the same time the Land service in Dalmatia, went hotly on, but so as it
showed the Turks had not totally recovered the use of their Arms; and while a
greater experience could be gained He thought it not advisable to hazard an
expedition in person, or venture the reputation of his Prime Vizier, in so
minute an enterprise; reserving that design till he had trained and accustomed
his men to that service, to the same end keeping his Army in continual service
in Candia, though with little effect. The Turks severity and Policy.
For nothing of consequence was atcheived of either side, and those small
successes that were, were equal and mutual, now the one, and then the other
prevailed, as if they bartered and exchanged Victory. For which lazy progress,
notwithstanding, on purpose to show his severity against such remiss and
unactive Commands, though it were hardly possible to effect more with the force
he had, upon the Island, He sometime after caused the Bassa, Governor thereof,
to be put to death, at his return from that Government; the like fate befell the
Bassa of Bosnia, for his slow and fruitless menage of the war in Dalmatia
aforesaid.

Another Fleet as the grand Seignior threatened was again rigged, and in August
the same year defeated in the same place by the same General, the Emperor
himself coming to the Castles to view the encounter, which was gallantly
maintained on both sides, and the loss nothing so considerable to the Turk; for
that he set to sea with a potent Fleet the next month, the Venetians having
lost their General by a casual lighting of the shot of a tire of Cannon from
the Isle of Scio, into his magazine of powder, which here blew him up, and
other Nobles with him into the air.

The Turks get conquest.
With this Fleet the Turk regained the Isle of Tenedos, though with a great
ruin to themselves; for the Venetian Fleet, who had braved and affronted them
all this Summer, being gone to take in fresh water, the Turkish Fleet took the
opportunity, and landed there a great Body of men; who storming it, were at
first repulsed; but preparing for a general onslaught, the Venetian Garrison
working a Mine under the Fort, disposed the powder therein, with a Match fitted
to it; when quitting the place, and getting on shipboard, the Turks taking
possession, were blown with the Fort into the air. The Venetian Fleet
returning, and perceiving what had happened, the Turks Fleet being at hand,
prepared for the encounter, which was again resolutely performed, the Grand
Seignior being in view again, and concerned in the regaining of the aforesaid
Island; but in fine the Venetians got the Victory, sinking twenty of the
Galleys, and taking four more: the rest sheltred themselves within the
Dardanelles. So often was that little Republic in one year successful against
this potent Enemy. Besides that, it has sustained their whole Naval Force (and
their strongest efforts by land) f r twenty years together, without any
considerable loss, and with very inconsiderable helps and supplies from other
Christian neighbor Princes. But there is a great deal of difference and odds
betwixt an united and entire State, whose virgin Generosity had almost tired
this lustful Leviathan; and divided Dominions, not only by distances, Limits,
Laws and Customs, but Religion also, and prostituted likewise to his ravishing
Arms by others interests, designs, and ambition.

After his return from that short Expedition, the Grand Seignior continued at
Constantinople, busy in reforming his Court, and Officers, and other abuses in
the Seraglio, which by the depravity of the times, and those breaches and
corruptions in the State, had prevailed to custom; sloth, and Epicurism, and
Pride the mother of Faction, and the specific direct bane and ruin of this
arbitrary Government, were extremely predominant; and corruption by bribery, to
which the Turkish Ministers of State are most strongly inclined, was never so
boldly licentious; so that the virtues of another Hercules was requisite to
purge out these enormities: The Grand Seignior excellent in Government.
Yet such was the excellency of this Princes judgment, such his severe
government of himself and commands, and punishments of others, and the strict
execution of them, that by this he quickly reduced things to the former state;
denying himself the ordinary use of those pleasures, for whose excesses his
predecessors are so infamous to Christendom.

This sharp and rigid proceeding with all sorts of persons, especially the
Soldiers of his Guard, putting the hard yoke of Discipline upon their necks
again; began to grate and gall, and make them to wince against the Government;
and therefore a Persian war was concluded: which Kings Ambassador had his head
taken off for making a denunciation thereof at Constantinople. But a nearer
European quarrel presenting it self, a Truce and Peace was afterward patcht up
betwixt them.

Prince Ragotzi enters Poland.
The Swede proving very successful in Poland in 1656 and 1657. by taking most
of the Towns and Cities of that Kingdom, and wanting men at present to
maintain them, fairly invited Ragotzi Prince of Transylvania to come and take
share of the spoil, promising him a part of tht conquest for his labor: To the
same purpose Oliver Cromwell courted him; and many transactions of that nature
there passed between them. Recalled by the Grand Seignior.
Ragotzi no way disliking the bargain, and being next neighbor, out of
covetousness and ambition came in with a great Army, and assisted the Swede at
the siege of Cracovia, which at last was yielded, and put into his hands. The
news hereof hastily alarmed the Turkish Court; who resenting this growing
greatness of the Swede, and the ill neighborhood they were like to have from
him, if once he could fix and settle himself in Poland; the Grand Seignior
commanded Ragotzi, as his Tributary and Vassal, (for, for many years those
Princes, like the other of Vallachia and Moldavia, have received their
investiture from the Turk) to abandon his League with the Swede, and to return
home, restoring the Polander the places he had taken. Ragotzi not daring to
refuse, marched back again; and upon his arrival was met with a Chiaux,
commanding him to resign his Principality to his Cousin Radus, for that he had
presumed without the Grand Seigniors command or license to invade the King of
Poland, and make war with a Prince in league and amity with him; and withal, to
resign his Forts, and places of strength. To the first he seemingly yielded;
but the other he would by no means hearken to: and thereupon making use of his
Forces, reassumes his former Title, and prosecuted the Turk with open war: And
at the beginning with very good success, though his confederate the Prince of
Vallachia was routed, and 8000 men slain, as he was marching to his assistance;
defeating the Turkish Army and Bassa of Buda at Lippa, 6000 men taken and
killed, and the Victory followed thirty leagues: where hearing of the advance
of the prime Vizier with 80000, he retired in haste; and making opposition
about Alba Julia to the whole Force of the Turk, was there worsted: a little
before which, he had vanquished his competitor Radus (and after besieged and
taken the Castle wherein he had thought to have secured himself) and put him to
death.

Before and after this overthrow, he had importuned the Emperor of Germany by
many instances at Vienna, to undertake the protection of his Country, offering
to give him caution of what Towns he should please: but the Emperor delaying a
timely interposition (yet giving the Turk occasion of a quarrel by underhand
assisting Ragotzi with some men) Ragotzi died of his wounds (received at Alba
Julia,) and with grief, at Waradin: Which being defended for a while after by
Colonel Gaude a Scotchman, was yielded upon terms to this prime Vizier, being
the immediate earnest of those present conquests in Hungaria.

The Transilvanian Troubles.
In the mean while, Radus the competitor of Ragotzi being put to death by him as
abovesaid, the prime Vizier named another to the Principality of Transylvania
at the end of the year 1659. a Nobleman by descent allied to the former
Princes, by name Michael Apaffi, (though vulgar error call him Abassi) who at
the appointment of the Grand Seignior was accepted by the States thereof, when
they perceived it was in vein to struggle for Ragotzi's Interest against the
whole power of the Sultan, without any assistance from the Emperor, who in
this declension of that Princes fortune abandoned the quarrel, and left them to
themselves, nor would hearken to any overtures made to him for his protection,
upon what ever terms of resignation or Dominion, and his Envoys publicly
declared to the Turk as much, who measuring his designs by those fears and
jealousies which this punctual satisfaction signified, was the more incited to
a pursuance of those resolutions, which had been taken up sometime before at
the Port. The Emperor complies with the Turk.
And by this means Transylvania was quite lost, and absolutely in the power of
the Turk, with some further advantages gained for his intended invasion of the
adjacent provinces of Hungaria and Austria.

Leave we that Kingdom for a while which is to be the Doleful and Tragical
Conclusion of this Narrative, and retrospect to the grand Seigniors,
Home-affairs, which diverted him from an immediate prosecution of his success
in Europe; for the Bassa of Aleppo (where resides the greatest English Factory)
in 1659. broke out into a Rebellion, and threatened a conjuncture with the
Persian, declaring for Reformation in Government and Religion, the latter
especially, having for better pretense made some new fangled expositions of the
Alchoran, more to the humor of the preciser and and rigid zealots of the
Mahumetan Religion.

By virtue whereof, and some former discontents which were not yet quite purged
out of the Soldiery, who were distributed, and had their possessions in those
Parts, under his command (for the Grand Signior allows each Horseman such a
porportion of ground, for which he is to be in a readiness to do him service)
he had amassed a very considerable Army, several inferior Bashaws dependants,
and retainers to the former Prime Vizier, whose quarrel they espoused,
resorting to him from their respective Governments.

With this power he marched toward Constantinople, and came on his way thither
as far as Scutary, within four miles of that City, and thence sent in his
demands, which swelling to that daring presumption, as to require a resignation
of the Imperial Title, to a pretended Son of the late Emperor Morat, an
impostor of his own setting up, such another as Perkin Warbeck (to whom he gave
all honors and observances becoming the state of a Sultan;) and in his right
and Title encountered and overthrew two distinct Armies of the Grand Seignior,
that were in have dispatched to obstruct the increase of more adherents, and
favorers of his enterprise.

He continued in this posture, like a cloud hovering over Constantiple, big
with some ruinous storm, till this successeful Prime Vizier having amassed his
European Forces, The Expedition for Asia.
passed the Bosphorus into Asia, with 50000. men, (more proparing to follow
him) being the choice of the Turkish power, and with good speed advanced after
the Rebel, who knowing the courage both of the Leader, as having been his
Neighbor at Damasco, and the Soldiers, after a long consultation with his
Council of War, resolved immediately in all humble and frankest manner to
submit themselves to the Sultans mercy, dismissing the common Soldiers to
shift for themselves; which being done so unexpectedly, the Vizier gave notice
of it by an express with as much favor to their persons as the case deserved,
to the Grand Signior, who gave them all his pardon, with some extra ordinary
respects for the Bassa of Aleppo, but presently after, when there was no danger
of the Rebellion, and all things were quieted thereabouts, at the instance of
some Enemies of his at Court, but more truly by reason of State, and the
Policy of the Government, which never pardons that Crime, The Bassa of Aleppo
strangled.
he and thirty more were suddenly strangled, their heads chopped off and set upon
poles against the Emperors Seraglia at Constantinople.

I his treacherous and cruel dealing after pardon given, and such a Loyal
Rendition of themselves, when as they might have hazarded the whole Empire,
raised in the friends of the deceased, a thirst of revenge, having yet their
Arms in their hands, and the Soldiery as prone to new troubles as they could
wish them, and hereupon instantly ensued another defection, as great altogether
as the former, but the authority of Leaders was wanting to manage it to effect.
Nevertheless upon the first news of it, the Grand Seignior resolved to march
himself in person to make a final end, and root out the seeds of those
commotions, which were so apt upon every occasion to burst forth.

Preparation was made accordingly for a solemn expedition, and the Rebels
cursed and devoted by the Priests to destruction, the Janissaries and Spahies
mustred, and upon their march, the Sultana, the Mother of the Emperor
appointed Regent in his absence, when news came that all was quieted again, and
the chief Authors of the late defection were fied and escaped into Persia.

The Emperor being but just in his way, having effected his business, thought
it advisable, while the Army was in motion into those parts, to treat with the
Persian, who doubting he might bend his Forces upon him, was willing to come to
agreement, and so a Peace was confirmed between them; At his return to
Constantinople, he was welcomed as if he came from a Triumph, but that which
pleased him more then the vain glorious pomp of his magnificent Reception, was
the news of a Victory obtained by his Forces in Candia against the Venetians,
who having employed the Prince Almeric de Este, of the House of Modena, as
General for that service, who carried with him some Regiments of French, the
said Regiments in an expedition into the Country, toward Candea, with a design
thereupon, were met by the Bassa, and after a Brave Encounter, and much
gallantry on both sides, were defeated, very few escaping back again to their
Garrisons. This loss, and the unagreeableness of the Climate so affected the
said Prince, that he shortly after dyed there, (the grave of many a gallant
person, that have sacrificed their lives against, and for this Infidel) and was
brought by Sea back again, to be enterred with his Ancestors.

The E. of Winchel. Ambassado Extra^rdinary to the grand Seignior.
At the end of winter 1660. arived at the Port, after very bad weather, the
right honorable the Earl of Winchelsea His Majesty's Ambassador extraordinary,
in the place of Sir Thomas Bendish, who succeeded Sir Sackvile Crow in that
employment in 1648. to the Grand Seignor. He had Audience in very great State,
and as usual, the day thereof was treated at Dinner in the Divan, by the Chief
Vizier, and He and His Retinue vested with rich Turkey Habits, out of which it
is not lawful to see the Emperor, and through the two outermost Courts of the
Seraglio, Conducted into the innermost, and thence to a great Hall, leading
into his Chamber, the floor whereof was covered with Velvet, embroydered with
Pearl, etc. the Capitzi Bassa and his assistants, leading him by the Arm to
kiss his Majesty's sleeve, as they did several Gentlemen beside, that were of
his Retinue, but of this an account has been lately given; but I may not omit
that it is certainly reported, the Grand Signior being highly affected with his
Majesty's Restitution, should say, That if he were to choose his God, or his
Religion, he would choose the King of Englands.

All things now seemed to be in a serene condition, and calm from the late
troubles, which had tempested this Monarchy; And discourses there were that the
Grand Signior would now at last hearken to an accommodation, with the state of
Venice, and consequently restore a free Trade and commerce to his Dominions,
which had been endamaged and spoiled by frequent Depraedations.

But as deep waters run smooth and stiller then shallow brooks, so was it in
this seeming tranquillity of affairs, not but perhaps there might be due to the
Sacred number of 1660. and the particular glories of his Majesty's Restitution,
and the fortune of England, the same general peace and quiet, which once blessed
the world in the reign of Augustus Caesar (with reverence to that sacred
Miracle) for that the universal Cessation which France boasts to have given
Christianity, by the late accord with Spain, was clearly influenced by his
Majesty's Native Star, and the necessities of Fate, which attended the
prosperous Culmination of his greatness, as could be instanced and
demonstrated, were it not beyond the purpose of this discourse.

Yet so much concerns it, that the Grand Signior took his deliberate Enterprise
upon Christendom, from the very juncture of this peace; (being as understanding
and conversant in the Affairs of Europe as our selves) particularly his ancient
League which France, gave him opportunity of such Intelligence, which he never
maintained with the Spaniard, as his necessary enemy.

For he knew well, that the state of Christendom could never endure a vacation,
nor could be free from the vicissitudes of Interest, when so many Monarchs at
leisure had opportunity to project their ambition.

Nor was he ignorant of these Animosities which perplexed the late Election of
the Emperor at Frankeford, nor with what industry the French managed their
lust after the Imperial Dignity.

Certain it was that the Arms of that Puissant Nation must be employed upon
another Enemy, whose ever ill luck it should be to receive them; and that he
knew would be the House of Austria or some other vicine Power, if, which was
more favorable to his design, he did not amuse all Princes, and then take his
best advantage.

These undoubtedly were the encouragements of this his Expedition and violent
irruption into Hungary, he using the same method of Conquest which his
Progenitors had fortunately experienced by occasion of the divisions and
security of their Neighbors. And therefore unlookt for, or at least wise not
provided against, while the German Emperor stood upon his wrong guard, and
dreaded the loss of Alsatia (which jealousy likewise armed the adjacent
Princes) he like a deluge entered Hungary, and auspiciously began the race of
his Glories.

Now the better to conceal his designs upon Europe, and to color his aspect
upon those parts, he gave order for a removal of his Court to Adrianople,
pretending the salubrity of the place, and the freer prosecution of his
pleasures, and vacation from business, and the toil of the Government, leaving
the Sultana his Mother, and the Vizier to the care thereof, as he had done
before in his expedition into Asia; Hither accordingly he came attended as
usually, with a great Train or Army, but now augmented to an Host, as a guard
of his Person; still entertaining the Emperors Ambassador, with shows and
flourishes of Peace and good Correspondence, till the Vizier having amassed and
drawn down the Asian Forces over into Europe, while the Europeans were
embodying about Belgrade, it was plainly manifest, what this preparation
portended.

Yet the relics of the late Transilvanian defection, were still voyced to be
the object of this expedition, and to settle the other Provinces of Moldavia
and Valachia, in a perfect subjection to the grand Seignior, they for some late
years having fluctuated and wavered in their duty toward him, and still ready
upon all occasion, or change of their Princes, to break out into open Hostility
and disquiet, and disturb the provinces nearest them, and to take part with
any Revolt of others, and help and assist it to a formidable, and very
considerable puissance.

The Turks policy at his entrance into Hungary.
But in the mean while they approached and entered the Hungarian limits without
leave, and enlarged their quarters into the Towns and Villages belonging to the
Emperor, contrary to the Tenor of the former, and yet existing League, which
appointed the bounds of their Jurisdiction; nevertheless, complying in all
things with the Hungarians, and paying their Quarters justly, nor taking the
least thing from them without satisfaction, which was made Capital by the Prime
Vizier, who caressed the Inhabitants, and treated them very humanely and
civilly upon any address or complaint made to him.

The gross of this Army, when made up by the Auxiliary Tartars, who are hired
to wait upon his expeditions, forces marching also from all parts (even out of
Dalmatia, where he resolved to stand only upon the defensive part, against the
attempts of the Venetians) amounted in all to near two hundred and fifty
thousand men; disposed of afterward into several parts and commands, a
Resolution being taken to commence the War.

The Hungarians in the mean while had armed themselves under the Commands of
the two Counts, Serinus and Forgatz, whose Ancestors had been terrible to the
Turks, and were famous for their martial exployts and atchivements, but
subjected by the Emperors order to his Generallissimo, Count Montecuculi, which
at first bred a discontent in the Hungarians, who have no affection for the
Germans, nor would ever cheerfully engage with them, except out of envy or
emulation; and this is and was one of the chief causes of that little
opposition and inconsiderable resistance, that has been made against this
present-Invasion.

The cause of this misunderstanding has been very ancient, upon the account of
Religion, and much ado there has been to keep the Hungarians in obedience and
fealty to the Emperor of Germany, as their King and Sovereign, which from
being Elective, is now, and has for many years been made Hereditary; that
force upon their Privilege, Rights and Liberty, interwoven with more violent
constraints upon their conscience had caused a very great averseness to this
Foreign Government, and a general defection in 1610. and those years; for
fuller satisfaction whereof, we must refer the Reader to the Turkish History.

Upon the same score it was that Bethlehem Gabor Prince of Transylvania entered
Hungary, some few years after, and possessed himself of the Fortress of Newhuse
alias Newhausel, the Governor whereof was delivered bound unto him by the
Inhabitants, with Presburg and other places, and designed (having the Regalia
in his hands which were deposited at Presburg) to Crown himself, with the
consent likewise of the States and the People, he being of the same Reformed
persuasion; but the Emperors Successes in Bohemia against the Prince Elector
Palatine (with whom Bethlehem was in Confederacy) and the King of Denmark also
soon after, made him relinquish his design, and secure himself at home, by
which means the Hungarians were forced to submit, but yet so that they have
always had a hankering and ready proneness to any alteration, and a grudging
at, and indisposition to the House of Austria, whose prerogative they have in
all their Assembles highly disputed and debated.

The Hunrians cajoled.
And as a further incentive and reason to this reluctance, may be added, the
general fair and civil usage in point of Religion and Taxes, which the Turks
every where observes in those places of the same Kingdom (which are far the
better half thereof) that are in and under his subjection and dominion; not
intently and prudently considering, that forbearance and lenity is merely a
temporary bait and lure to debauch them from their duty to a Christian Prince.
For he that will but reflect on the miserable and calamitous condition of the
Greeks and other Provinces which have been long subdued, and have no dependence
and vicinity to Christendom, but are swallowed up in a total Conquest; is
sufficiently warned against those insinuating treacherous kindnesses, and
popular captations, which will certainly end in most unsufferable slavery and
bondage, even to the snatching away their children, and enhansing the Tax of
money to the tribute of life, upon their Mahumetanized Posterity, carried every
year for the Grand Signiors service to Constantinople, and there employed and
educated in his Seraglia.

Count Forgatz unhappy engagement.
But to return, these misunderstandings betwixt them, and the rumor of the
French design, either upon Alsatia, in Germany, or Italy, to the amusing all
the Princes thereof, and causing them to stand upon their own guards, which
removed the fear of their supply or ayding of the Emperor, put the Turk upon
present action, part of which Army advancing upon the Enterprise, were
adventurously, and inconsiderately engaged by Count Forgats, who with a party
of six or seven thousand Germans and Hungarians together, was appointed to
attend their motion, and observe which way they steered, and to be ready to put
releif and succor into what places so ever the Infidels should attaque. The
Count and his men indeed behaved themselves very gallantly, but their number
was far inferior to the multitudes that pressed upon him, whereupon ensued a
total Rout of his party, most of whom were cut in pieces, the rest hardly
escaping to the body of the Army, and Count Forgats himself into Newhausel,
being the nearest the place of his defeat.

The occasion of his so sudden Engagement, was to dispossess the Turk of a
Bridge they had laid upon Danubius, having put 3000 men over to secure it, but
the pouring in of multitudes upon them occasioned their discomfeiture. Forgats
was highly questioned for this rashness, because of the slain there were 400.
Gentlemen, and of the Prisoners 800. had their heads cut of, in the presence of
the Emperors Ambassador, which were afterward sent to Constantinople, as an
evidence of their Victory.

Upon the news hereof, General Montecuculi suspecting the seige of the
aforesaid Newhausel, had clapped in a supply of a thousand Germans, with
Provision and Ammunition proportionable. This Town is of a late standing, as
its name imports, being built for a Frontier, upon a convenient level in a
morass, the River Niutre gliding within a stones cast of the wall: and within 8
miles of the River Waegh; It is a modern and very regular Fortification,
consisting of six great Bastions or Bulworks, with Flankers; well stored with
Cannon; the Town having but two Gates, the upper and the lower; There is in it
a very large Market place, wherein is a place built at one corner to lodge the
Garrison Soldiers and their Arms, being most of them Germans, who confide not
in the Hungarians; but upon this necessity they were mixed together.

The Turk besieged Newhausel.
The Turk coming before the Town, passed his Army over the Nitre, by a bridge
laid thereupon, a little below the lower gate, (where the River is nearest the
Town) out of reach of the Cannon, and entrenched upon the beginning of August
this year, and begirt it round, and made his approaches, by thundering day and
night from two great Batteries, on which were mounted a hundred Cannon, so that
the shots he made were numberless. By which fury he battered almost all the
Houses and Churches of the Town down into Rubbish, but made no considerable
Breach, which he might attempt. Notwithstanding, the Prime Vizier, being
resolved to carry the Town, one way or other, concluded on an Assault, September.
14. before break of day, and brought Scaling-Ladders, Faggots, and other
necessaries to fill up the Trenches, The Turks beaten off again.
but was so gallantly and stoutly received by the Defendants, that he was forced
to sound a Retreat, having lost 8000. men at a Breakfast, and the Trenches
filled with Carcasses of the slain. They began their fierce onslaught with the
cheerful noise of Alla, Alla, but ended it very silently and heavily;
notwithstanding the Vizier continued his Resolution of gaining the place, or
perishing before it; having promised the Grand Seignor to Conquer and take four
principal places, on forfeiture of his Head; but before I proceed further, it
will be requisite to give you a Copy of the Summons, to the Governor of this
Place.

I That through the Grace of God, and through the Miracles of our Prophet, who
is a Son of both Worlds, and by whom there is happiness and glory, I that am
the first of the Council, and General of the most mighty Emperor of the Turks,
That is the King of all Kings upon Earth: To you Adam Forgats, that are the
Chief among the Nobility of Hungary, do make known, that through the Command of
my Gracious Lord, I am come with his Forces before Newhausel, to reduce it to
his obedience; wherefore if you shall deliver up the Place to us, you shall
have liberty to march out with what belongs to you from the Highest to the
Lowest, and to what Place you please, and he that will rather stay, shall keep
his Goods and Estate; but if you will not yield, we will take it by force, and
every man of ye from the Highest to the Lowest shall be put to the Sword. If
the Hungarians did but know the good Intentions of the Mighty Emperor, they
and their Children would bless God for them. Peace be to the Obedient.

In the Interim, to revenge himself of the affront, he received before the
Town, he divided his Army into three parts, one part whereof was ordered to
march into Moravia and Austria, and front the Emperors Forces, and the other
into Silesia, while he continued the Seige, which said Armies passing over the
River Waegh, made most terrible Havoc, spoiling and burning thirty miles
together. They passed the said River the 21. of August, but were forced back
again with loss, The Tartars make an irruption into Moravia.
yet the day following they came on with 30000. and after some opposition gained
the pass of the River, 200. Dragoons being slain in defense of the passage, and
put the Imperial Forces to a retreat toward Presburg. After those came a body
of 20000. Tartars, who took in several walled towns, which they burnt to ashes,
with all the adjacent villages, possessing themselves of the narrow passages
between the Hills, and massacring many thousands of people, putting others in
chains, and in fine overbearing all in his way without resistance; At the same
time, the pass of Jalunca was attempted, the only entrance into Silesia, but
they were forced to retreat, re infecta.

Lamentable was now the condition of those poor Christians, who were exposed to
those outrages, and could not prevent the suddenness of the danger, there being
no Armies nor places at hand, wherein, or to which they might have recourse for
safety. The Austrians only by the benefit of the Garrisons had opportunity to
secure, and to put themselves into a posture of defense by raising every fifth
man to bear Arms against this furious and desolating Enemy.

Count Serini into the Turks Country.
But to requite the incursion of these barbarous Tartars, the Counts of Serini
and Budiani carried the like ravagement and ruin into the Turk sh Provinces,
where they spared nothing they could destroy, and left as little of what they
could carry away with them, and so revenged in part, having also defeated and
slain a party of 3000 Turks, and taken a convoy of 300000 Rix Dollers, and
other provisions designed for the Leagure of Newhausel, with good speed
returned to the German General; having notice that the other body of Tartars
was advancing to join with the Wallachians, and Moldavians, and that they were
already come as far as Clausenburg, and to the gates of Zachmar, (where the
Hussars on the 29. of August had sallied out and killed diverse of them;)
preventing also thereby the danger of being intercepted by forces from
Newhausel.

The Emperor of Germany himself, at the terror of this inroad, left his City of
Vienna (now filled with the Country people, who flockt thither for refuge, and
made sad Relations of their ruins) to Lintz another City in Austria, and thence
by his Agents and Expresses gave notice to the Princes of the Empire of the
present danger, defiring them to afford him some sudden Supplies, as he did the
same to the King of Poland and the States of Venice (now respited and breathing
after a tedious continuance of War, which was devolved upon other Territories)
but nothing of sudden resolution was to be expected from either of these
States, and the rest were too remote and at present unconcerned.

It was rumoured indeed that the Muscovite had proffered his Assistance, in
case of an accord to be made betwixt him and the Polander, but there were never
any effects thereof, and the like report there was that the Duke of
Brandenburgh would accept of the supreme Command of the United Armies of the
Empire, and that France offered their aid likewise upon certain conditions and
Articles, but none of all these overtures produced any such thing, by reason of
the Jealousies yet reigning between them; though Christendom was never in such
jeopardy; and in the mean while for satisfaction of the Hungarians, and to keep
them in their fidelity, which this storm had shaken, Count Serini was declared
the Emperors Generalissimo of them.

This ruinous devastation can hardly be represented by any pen, or pencil, but
from it nearest resemblance of Doomsday; the fire flaming for twenty miles in
view, and laying the Country in a heap of ashes, and the Tartars like so many
Devils haling and dragging their Captives, and chaining them together, with
such cries and ejulations, as if humanity were dammed, and Nature had expired,
amidst a numberless invention of tortures.

This same merciless Crew having destroyed all things, returned with celerity
to Weissemberg, there to dispose of their prey, and to be ready to assist the
siege of Newhausel, while in their absence the Counts Susa and Sporck were
throwing down trees, and cutting up Ditches, and making deep Trenches to impede
their further advance, for they had not men or arms to oppose against this
Torrent.

Newhausel siege continued.
And so we are returned also to the siege of Newhausel, where the Turk having
endeavored to fill the Trenches, and knowing that the season would not suffer
him to continue his Leagure, attempted another storm, which continued off and
on August 28. and 29 with very considerable loss, though he now made a Breach,
but the Trenches proved too wide and too deep many men perishing in them, with
little danger to the Defendants.

Another, storm.
On September. 9. having cast great Moles of earth, and other implements into the
Graft, he stormed again, beginning in the dusk of the evening, and continuing
it again till midnight, when he made such a fierce Scalado (the Bassa's
themselves in person leading on their own men on peril of their own heads if
their men did not valiantly) and was in hopes of carrying the Town, for the
business was come to handy-blows upon the top of the Rampire, and some of the
Turkish Ensigns were advanced thereupon, which nevertheless by the speedy and
gallant succor of the Reserves and redoubled courage of the Defendants, were
wrested from the Infidels after their utmost endeavors and efforts to have
maintained their achievement, and after the slaughter of 500 of the besieged,
and the unrevenged fall of 9 some say 10000 of their fellows, which they left
behind them; upon which carnage was grounded that rumor of the pest raging in
that Army by reason of that noisome stench the dead bodies raised in the Camp.

This trial of one another resolution, and utmost Essay of Force proved the
Grisis of eithers Fortune; the Turks appay'd, and taken off their metal, had
no mind to make another venture, nor the Bassa to command it, for fear lest
that obstinacy of his honor should hazard that and his life together to the
Grand Seignior, nevertheless he thought good to continue the siege, and his
preparations for another assault, and threaten it hourly, hoping he had given
the Defendants the like qualm upon their spirits, which with a little hard
duty, and new offers and advantages upon a surrender, would work them to a
compliance; and this took its desired effect, for the Hungarians being no way
assured of relief, and certain of good conditions, and having their estates,
dwellings and families concerned, resolvd not to hazard another storm, but to
admit of a Treaty contrary to the opinion and resolution of the Germans; which
treaty produced an accord and surrender upon very honorable Articles, the
Garrison and Inhabitants, if willing, to march out with Colors flying, Drums
beating, match lighted, and Bullet in their mouth, with Bag and Baggage, and to
be convoyed to Comorra nine miles off. Those that staid to have indemnity,
protection, and liberty of conscience.

Newhausel yielded.
Hereupon there marched out 3500. sound men, and 500. wounded, with four pieces
of Canon, most of them Germans, having a Convoy of 10000. Turks, who civilly
and fairly conducted them to the aforesaid Garrison, and returned to Newhausel,
where the Prime Vizier had out of a pretended generous sense of the Hungarians
valor given every man of them thirty Ducats, as a reward thereof: in lieu and
value of which sum, he found there a 100. brass pieces of Ordinance, and
ammunition proportionable, with 3000. Fats of Hungarian Wine, the use whereof
being prohibited the Turks, was converted into money, and supplied and
countervailed his liberal magnificence.

The Army thus freed from this difficult piece of service, the same flying
parties were commanded to make new inroads into Austria, Moravia, and Silesia,
while the Prime Vizier designed upon Presburg, the Capital and regal City of
that Kingdom, as aforesaid, and the imperial Army not able to make any Head yet
against them, continued, passing and repassing the Danow thereabouts, and a
General Council of war being called, Count Serino newly made Generallissimo,
Prince Gonzaga, Montecuculi, Counts Rothal, and Palfi being present, it was
concluded to retreat before the Enemy, and to put in Count Strozzi a famous
Soldier, with a supply, as Governor of the place, whether the Turk directed
his March, but being at liberty, and facing all the circumjacent Garrisons of
his attaque, he more imperiously summoned them all together, the dreadful event
whereof, must be remitted to a further discourse.

The other two divisions of the Army entered Moravia, and Silesia, and gained
the strong Pass and Key of Jaluncka, putting the Imperialists to flight, with
some Execution, but made not that havoc as before, having Commandment from the
Prime Vizier, to offer all friendly and fair terms, in the Grand Seigniors
name, if they would submit to his protection, the chief of those Terms were,
Liberty of Conscience, and free Exercise of all Religions, no Taxes or Tribute
to be paid for six years, and then but five Shillings upon every House, per
annum; with security of their Laws, rights, Claym, Titles, and Propriety, by
which he is in all probability like to gain submission and obedience from, and
to establish and fix his footing he has got already in, those Provinces, which
he has once again invaded.

And thus far of their History, now I shall speak of their Customs and Manners.

DABIT DEUS HIS QUOQUE FINEM
ALLACH HECHBAR



The Copy of this Letter or Summons coming newly to Hand by a person of
quality, and having seen the like insolence, and blasphemous arrogance formerly
Printed in the Turkish History, I thought it would be something satisfactory to
publish this which expresses some extraordinary design and resolution of this
Victorious and successful Infidel.

WE by the Grace of God, Lord of many Countries, Victor and Triumpher over our
Enemies, Potent Emperor of the Turks, Co-adjutor of the God Mahomet, and the
Moon, Protector of the Sepulcher of the Crucified Christ, Implacable enemy to
all professing Christianity:
To thee Roman Caesar, King of few Regions, give to know;
That we come to thee with a people of thirty three Kingdoms, so great a
multitude as thou never saw or heardst of before, to bereave thee by force
of Arms, of thy Crown and Tribute of thy Subjects. The City by thy self
Inhabited we will besiege, we will overcome thy strong men, thy women with
child we will give to Universal slaughter, Their Embrios as Toads we will
thrust through with Spears and sharpened Stakes, Thy most valiant young men we
will rend in pieces, and cast forth for meat for the Dogs. Thee, thy Popes,
Cardinals, Arch bishops, Monks and Nuns, together with all their own
dependings, we will send as Slaves into perpetual bondage, and finally, we will
ruin and destroy you all, and then shall you see, whether your Crucified
Christ will save you from us, who could not save himself; as if we or ours
could give credit, or yield any belief to such incredible things. The very City
where he was born, wherein he lies dead, We even enjoy, detain under our
Dominions, and assuredly you may believe that he will not help you, as being
long since slain.

This we were willing to signify, that thou and thine might know the real
Event and Truth thereof, as soon as thou could expect. This is given forth by
us at our Great Metropolis called Constantinople, which the valor of our
Ancestors has taken from yours, and that which we keep, and will always keep
from yours; and that which we keep and will always keep, to the Ignominy and
disgrace of you all.

Dated at Constantinople in the 15. year of our Reign, and the 23. of our Age.

A New Survey Of the Turkish EMPIRE.
Of their Oratories.
THe Fabrics of their Churches are sufficiently large and sumptuous, and called
by the name of Meschites: in which I never could perceive any sort of fancies
or imageries, (for Idolatry is held by them the worst of abominations) but
only these, or one of these inscriptions following, in the Arabic Language,
There is no God but one, and Mahomet his Prophet; or, One Creator and Prophets
equal: or, None is strong as God. Then there is seen a great abundance of
burning Lamps, the whole Church whited, the Pavement covered with Mattresses,
and on them the Ornaments of Tapestries. Near the Church, is erected a Tower of
great height, to the top whereof the Priest ascends before the time of Prayers,
and with a loud voice, his ears stopped with his fingers, he thrice proclaims
these words; God, True, One: which Clamor or Outcry (for they have no Bells)
being heard, the Nobility, and all unbusied persons, repair to Church, as bound
to that devotion. Afterward the said Priest descending, prays with them; (and
then they turn their faces toward Mecha:) And this he is tied to do by his
Office, five times day and night. But whosoever comes to these Prayers, must
wash his hands, his feet and privities, and his head thrice sprinkled with
water: and these words pronounced, Glory to my God; Then, their shoes put off,
and left at the Church-door, they enter in, some barefooted, others having new
shoes or socks, and so tenderly touch the ground. Women come not into
Churches, as being not excis'd, and for fear of disturbing men's devotions, but
meet apart in severed places, altogether shut off from eyes and ears of men;
and more seldom frequent their Churches, except in time of Passover, or
Easter, and on Fridays; which days from Mahomet's Traditions, for distinction
and imitation, they almost respect as much as Jews their Sabbaths, or
Christians the Lords day. They pray from nine a clock at night till twelve; and
in their praying, their bodies are ever in great motion and agitation;
wherewith they marvelously afflict themselves with loud cryings and fierce
ejaculations; so as oftentimes, their strengths and spirits failing, they sink
unto the ground; and if it happen, any of them conceive her self with child,
she then assures her self that pregnancy proceeds from favor of the Holy
Spirit; and when delivered, the Infants born are called, Sons, or Souls of the
Holy Ghost. This has been related to me from their Handmaids; for I, nor ever
any man else were present at that spectacle. At men's devotions I have been
often present with my Master; whose customs are in manner following: in their
prayers they never take off (their Turbants) coverings of their heads, but with
the tops of their fingers gently touch them, in token of taking them off; they
fall upon their knees and often kiss the ground: they hold it for great
wickedness, to have a Christian present at their mysteries; for they believe
their Churches (as they say) to be polluted by men unwashed; and that
Christians use not such Lavatories. Every Church in Turkey has a peculiar place
for Baths and washings, with lodgings for a Priest. Now here the Priest ascends
his Pulpit (reads a piece of the Alcoran, and sometimes expounds it) and there
preaches about two hours; his Sermon ended, two boys come up to him, who
pronounce their prayers singing with responsals; which Songs being ended, the
Priest with the whole People in a low voice, beating upon their sides, repeat
these words, There is but one God; which for the space of half an hour they do,
and so depart. But this manner of prayers and ceremonies of preaching and
singing, are not done every day, unless in time of Lent, Festivals, some
Sundays; and most observe the Fridays for religious worship.

Of their Lent.
They keep their Lent by fasting one Month and one Week every Year; but not
always the same: for if this Year they fast out January, the next they fast out
February, and keep on that course; so as in twelve Years space, they dedicate
to God (in lieu of tenths) one Year and twelve Weeks. Travelers and sick
Persons are excused from present fastings; but are enjoined to supply it, by
fasting so many days at other times. When they fast, all that Day they taste
nothing, not so much as Bread or Water; then the Stars appearing, it is lawful
for them to eat of all things which are not strangled, or Hoggs-flesh, which
they esteem as Carrion, most unclean. Their Lent being past, they observe
Easter for three days, with great solemnity, anointing the Nails of their Feet
and Fingers with an Oil which they call Chna, which makes those Nails to shine
like Gold; and with the same, they sometimes stain or color the Hoofs and
Tails of Horses. This Tincture holds very long, and can hardly be wiped away;
so as until new Nails thrust out the old, they still retain that dye; but Nails
of the Hand, by frequent washing, abate in time. Women do not only anoint the
Nails, but their whole Hands and Feet also with that Oil.

Of their Circumcision.
They Circumcise not on the eighth day as the Jews do, but when the newborn
arrive at the age of seven or eight years, and be of perfect speech: the
mystery whereof, is from the words of confession required before Circumcision,
which are some of those sentences aforementioned in their Churches, which they
repeat, and give assent thereto, by holding up the Thumb of the Right Hand. The
Youth is not for this mystery brought unto their Church, but is Circumcised in
his Parent House. I have been often present at this solemnity, which is
performed in manner following: first, the friends are all invited to a feast,
sufficiently furnished with all sorts of delicate flesh, lawful for them to
eat; and almost every where, especially amongst the wealthier sort, an Ox is
killed, bowelled and flayed; in the body whereof, they include a Sheep; and in
that Sheep, a Hen; and in her, an Egg; all which are entirely roasted
together, for the solemnity and splendour of that day. Then in their Feast and
time of Supper, the Boy that is to be circumcised, is brought to a Physician
skilful in that Art, who fixing between a pair pinchers the foreskin of his
privy Member, to prevent all fear in the Boy, he tells him that the next day
he will Circumcise him, and so departs; but presently feigning to have omitted
something appertaining to this preparation, on a sudden he cutteth off the
foreskin, applying thereunto a little salt and bombace; and then he is called
a Musselman, that is, one circumcised. Yet their Names are given the day of
their Nativity, not Circumcision. After continuance of this Feast for three
days, the Boy with great pomp and solemnity is accompanied to the Bathes; and
being returned to his House, he is brought before the Guest, and by them
presented with gifts prepared for him; some give Silver, Silken Vestments;
some, Silver Cups; others, Money, and sometimes Horse. Women present him
likewise, some with Shirts, Handkerchers, and such like, according to the
several pleasures and abilities of the Guests. Women are not circumcised, only
they confess the aforesaid words, and so made Musselmen. And if any Christian
voluntarily confess a Faith in Mahomet, and suffers Circumcision, (which often
happens by the heavy yoke and burden of their Tribute) this Man is led through
all the Streets and open places of the City, to the great joy and honor of the
people, with acclamations and ringing of Bells: him also they present with
gifts, and after free him from all Tribute. For covetousness of this profit,
many Greeks and Albanes become circumcised. But if any be forced thereto, as he
that shall strike or otherwise disgrace a Musselman, or blaspheme Mahomet, (as
it befell a certain Grecian Bishop which I did see) that man is circumcised, and
has nothing presented to him, yet shall be freed from Tribute, as others
circumcised.

Of their Priests.
Their great Mufty (as the Pope among Catholics) cannot err, and is the
highest Minister of all Religious and Lay Persons: an Officer of great power
and trust: his conclusions and sentences in State and Church Affairs, are
irrevocable; and his person held in most esteem and reverence next the
Emperor: his habit most in green, being Mahomet's color. There is small
difference between their other Priests and Laymen, nor much from the
Governors of Ceremonies (such as our Bishops are) neither is much learning
required from them: it is sufficient, if they can read the A LCORAN and
MVSSAPH; yet they that can interpret on the Text, are esteemed most learned,
because the Traditions of Mahomet are written in the Arabic, not vulgar
Turkish Character; and they hold it for most detestable, to have them
interpreted in the vulgar Language. These Priests and Governors are elected by
the People; but their rewards and stipends for their labors, are paid by the
King. They have Wives, and Habits like Seculars: and if their stipends be not
sufficient to maintain the number of their Children, they otherwise supply
themselves by Handicrafts and Trades, or what else befits a Freeman; as
teaching Schools, transcribing Books, etc. I never could see amongst them any
Printers; but Paper is there very well made. Some make profit one way, some
another, as Tailors, Shooe-makers, etc.

Of their Monks.
They have likewise Monks of several Orders; but chiefly of these three: the
first have no propriety in any thing; they go almost wholly naked, saving their
privities covered with a Sheep's skin, and in cold weather they use the like to
cover their backs; their sides, their feet and hands are never covered. They
beg alms as well of Christians as Turks; and, For God's sake. These Monks
having eaten an Herb called Maslach, are possessed with a kind of fury and
madness; they cut and wound their breasts cross and overthwart, and so their
arms, dissembling all trouble or pain; then clap on their heads, hands and
breasts, the sponge or mushrooms of old Trees light burning, and not remove them
till they are reduced to ashes. Another Order I have seen, who go with their
privy part bored through, and a Ring included therein of the weight of three
pround; and this to preserve chastity. The third Order is rarely seen abroad;
but remain both day and night in Churches, where within some little Angles they
have small Cabins, no shoes, vestments, or coverings of the head, wearing
nothing but one shirt; their exercise is fasting and prayers, that God would
reveal things future to them. With this sort of Monks, the King of Turks
usually consults, when he intends a motion or expedion to War.

Their reverence to Mahomet's Traditions.
They give so much respect to Mahomets Traditions and Statutes, that, not only
they never blaspheme GOD or his Prophet; (which amongst us sometime happens)
but if they find the least leaf or scrowl thereof, lying on the ground, they
take it up and often kiss it, and place it on some shelves or chinks of walls;
affirming it a sin, to suffer that wherein the Name of God, and Laws of Mahomet
are written, to be trodden under foot. And no man dares to sell the Alcoran,
and other writings of their Law, to any Christian, or any other differing in
Religion or Faith with them, lest they should be trodden on, or touched with
unclean hands: and whosoever should so do, is severely punished. And in this
regard they may be styled far more reverent then Christians.

Of their Schools.
They have places for Instruction, and Teachers both of Men and Women: in
several Towns, Men, the Boys; and Women, the Girls: some teach Astronomy,
Physic; and some, the Art of Poetry; which when they do, they speak out with
loud voice; and moving their hands unto their sides, they pronounce their
meanings. They understand no artificial Music; but frame Verses to certain
rules, which consist of eleven sillables. The horness of the Clymate, and often
sicknesses, makes most inclined to Physic, wherein they have some small
knowledge. They learn Astronomy, to be thought able to tell fortunes. Printing
is supplied by a number of writing Priests; and perhaps neglected (as all
learning is) to maintain the peoples ignorance, and keep them off from search
into the gross absurdities of their constrained Religion.

Of Marriages.
They marry without Vows or Oaths, take Wives without portions, and for the
most part buy them; contrary to the Roman custom, where the Son-in-law was
bought with Money to take a Daughter. This married Woman carries nothing with
her for use or ornament, which she is not forced to redeem or purchase from her
Parents. Evil manners or sterility, are causes of Divorces; for which there is
a peculiar Judge. They permit their bondmen or purchased servants to marry;
but the issue of them are all born slaves. The Alcoran persuades marriage, as
pleasing God and Man; and it allows plurality of Wives and Concubines, as many
as a Man pleases. The Turk amongst his (whereof he has above five hundred in
his Seraglio's) names her for his Wife or Sultana, by whom he has his
first-begotten Son. All their Wives are used with equality of respect, in diet,
clothes, returns, and what concerns them; and are most obedient to their
Husbands. They nurse their own Children, and bear them on their Shoulders, not
in their Arms: no men but Eunuchs, are suffered to be with them, not their own
Sons, if above twelve years of age: they never go abroad, but accompanied with
only Women.

Of Strangers.
Pilgrims of several Nations travel to visit holy places, which the Turk
possesses; as Mecha and Medinum, (as Christians, Jerusalem) where they say
Mahomet was buried: but this is done as well for gain and profit, as for
devotion or Religions sake. And there having seen a gilded Shoo hanging from
the roof of the Church, and bought such fine linen and cloth as they please,
they return home with great advantage; some carrying about the streets, water,
from thence, in glasses, for devotions sake, and freely give it to any that are
thirsty; others, do the like for profit. And if any one of them happen to die
in this Pilgrimage, by what occasion soever, although he never arrive near
Mecha, yet he has the estimation, and shall be placed in the rank of Pilgrims.

Miracles done by Mahomet at Mecha, which, they say, he still does in these
times.
I know not whether I should call them Miracles, or rather Monstrous toys,
written in their Book called Mehemidine, wherein they are persuaded, that when
Mecha was a building, GOD, by the prayers of Mahomet, commanded diverse
mountains to bring their stone to the Fabric of that Church, every Hill his
tenth: and when diverse Mountains had brought their portions, and Mecha built
and perfectly completed, a certain Hill called Araphat, and some other more
remote, coming thither with their tenths somewhat too late, and finding Mecha
built, and no use of their stones, they begun most bitterly to weep; which when
Mahomet perceived Hills so distressed, and understood the cause, he said unto
them, Be of good cheer, weep not, but store your tenths up in a place which
Ishall show you; and whosoever shall not pray upon your stones, his pilgrimage
shall be unprofitable and unaccepted. And after so doing, Mahomet struck the
stones with his foot, and there issued out Water, not useful to drink; and
imposed a name, and called it, A water of purification, whereof every Pilgrim
carries at his return, some portions thereof in vessels; and whenever any die,
the vestures wherewith the body is to be covered, are sprinkled with this
water, for remission of their sins. And they further affirm, That no man can
come to Mecha, whose visit is not known to Mahomet, who reveals the persons to
the Keepers there (all Eunuchs:) and if a Pilgrim come, a Ravisher, or wicked
Man, a Christian, or any of Religion different from theirs; these said Keepers
forbid him entrance into Mecha. But the body of Mahomet is not there, as some
affirm, but only an imaginary form in the Wall of the Church, expressing the
lineament of a body, which is often kissed; and so they return home again. Such
lying follies, for miracles, these Insidels are possessed with, concerning
Mahomet; and diverse others, so ridiculous, as I omit for modesties sake: yet
must advise the Reader, if he please, to interrogate any Turk therein, and he
will find I have spoke nothing but mere Truth.

Of their Alms.
The Alcoran obliges men to Alms, as meritorious, and much pleasing God; and
says, The contrary comes from the Devil. They have Hospitals for poor
travelers, built by the Wills and Legacies of their Kings; where they have
meat in different manners: some allow Rice with flesh, others prepare
Wheatbread, and water to drink; but for rest or Lodgings, there is no place
allowed: yet there are some few public receptacles, where they are received
without charge, or other bedding then Straw or Hay; but they repose under a
good Roof.

Of their Sacrifice.
Their Offerings or Oblations are for the most part upon promise or vows, in
sicknesses or other dangers; and then they kill an Ox or a Sheep, according to
their abilities, and promise to sacrifice it in some certain place. This
Offering is not burnt, or placed on an Altar, after the custom of the Jews;
but the beast being killed, the skin, head and feet, and a fourth part of the
flesh, is given to the Priest; another part, to the poor; a third, to
neighbors; and the remainder they keep for themselves and friends to rejoice
withal. Neither are they tied to perform these vows, unless they escape the
disease or danger for which they intended them: all things with them being
conditional; I give you, if you give me. And the like is observed by the
Greeks, Armenians, and other Asiatick people, even of the Christian Faith.

Of their Wills and Legacies.
If any of their Musselmen make a Will, their Legacies are given before Friends
or Neighbors; and they are commonly for cutting Watercourses, for conveying
Springs from some remote places, to Hospitals, Churches, or dry habitations;
and that for Piety sake, and their souls benefit. Others give money to free
bondmen out of thraldom. But Women for the most (as most superstitious)
bequeath their gifts to Soldiers, for a certain slaughter of Christians, which
they conceive to be greatly beneficial for their Souls. The Legacies of their
Kings are for the building of Hospitals, Churches; and so likewise are those of
eminent and great personages.

Ceremonies of the Dead.
When any of their Musselmen die, men take the Funeral-care of men, and women of
women. They wash the departed body very clean, and wrap it in fine linen; then
they carry it out of Town, into some remote place, (for they hold it sinful to
bury in their Churches.) First, Friends of the deceased and Priests meet and go
in progress, certain Monks bearing wax Candles; then follow some of their
Priests singing till they come to the Grave, shaking their heads, and often
turning round, fall down with giddiness, as in a trance. The better sort have
their Graves lined with Boards at bottom and at sides, and covered with Boards,
on which they throw the Earth, and strew sometimes the seeds of Flowers
thereon. Great men and Bassa's have peculiar Chapels for themselves and
Kindred. The poor are buried by highways, or in open fields. If the deceased be
of poor ability, there is then money gathered for satisfaction of labor for
those religious Men, which is offered in the Streets.

Of the edifice of a Sepulcher, called Tulbe.
Over this stately Tomb, (being Prince-like) there is erected a goodly Temple,
wherein their Kings are buried in the City with great magnificence. Both rich
and meaner have an Altar built of such an height, as Beasts cannot annoy or
pollute it with any foulness: thither with lamentations and weepings they often
return; and spread upon the monument sacrifices of meats, bread, flesh, cheese,
eggs, milk. This Solemnity or Funeral-supper continues for nine days after the
parties burial, (according to the Heathen manner) for the soul of the departed:
and it is left to be eaten by the Poor, by Ants, or Fowls of the Air. They say,
It equally pleases God, to give Alms to Beasts that want, as men, when they
are given for God's sake. I have seen many buy Birds in cages at good values,
only to set them at liberty, and see them fly away; others, throw Bread into
Rivers for Fishes, and that for the love of God, saying, That such charity
toward the needy, does obtain a great reward from Heaven.

Concerning War.
The Turks have all one Emperor or King, of the Race of Ottoman; who has next
to himself in Authority two Sangiachs or Viceroys, chief Governors, the one of
Europe, the other of Asia; and these have under them Lieutenants of lesser
quality, who command the ordinary Soldiery; and if they fail, being called to
any expedition, are presently punished with death. He has others always
following him; as Counselors, Guardians of his body, ever near him;
Chamberlains, Chancellors, and Exactors of Tribute, for moneys and young
people; with certain numbers of light horse, Messengers, and diverse others that
continually follow the Court. His greatest strength is in his Slaves; Children
(for the most part) torn from Christian Parents, with Tribute-Children bred and
educated in several Seraglio's, Captives taken in War, and Renegado's. Of
these, some are trained up, and serve on horse; who have a double stipend to
the Foot, and always ready at command, in stables keeping four hundred horse
together. The great body of Foot-Souldiery are the Janissaries, all commanded by
a Chief, called their Aga, a person of mighty trust, and like importance; who
has under him diverse inferior Commanders, and have Seraglio's apart. Of
these, and Auxiliary Forces, the Turk can draw three hundred thousand to the
Field. A great part of these Janissaries attend the Court, Ambassadors houses,
and protect all Christian Inhabitants and Travelers, for rewards; and are
faithful in those employments. Their Standard in the Field, is an Horse-taile
tied upon a pole; an Emblem of their first barbarity and rudeness. His strength
at Sea is not considerable, consisting most in Galleys, and those not equal to
some Italian Princes; nor has he many, for want of Slaves, whom he imploys
more for Land-services. The best of Shipping, is under the Bassa's of Algier
and Tunis, whom he manageth with much policy; sometime as Rebels, and sometime
as good Subjects, to his best advantage against Christians: for if they
complain of loss, the Turk then says, He cannot rule them. If the other do the
like, he will take treble damages.

The Condition of Noblemen.
There is not any of those great Personages that possess by right of inheritance
any Province, City or real Estate, to derive unto his Children or Successors,
without consent of the King. If any of their Dukes or Princes desire
possessions, it must be with this condition; the value of the Place or
Territory is first considered, and the Revenues thereof, whereby the Turk
apportioneth what number of Soldiers that can annually maintain: then the Lord
is enjoined always to keep in readiness that number, for any his commands; and
in default, his head is lost: nothing can excuse his presence in any commanded
place, but known want of health and sickness. And whenever it please the Turk
to ease him of this benefit, it is at his liberty; but if not deprived, he
enjoys it during life: after death, if his Successors will observe the same
conditions, they are often admitted; if not, it is then disposed to others. And
if it happen, any one of these great ones have occasion to speak unto their
King, with eyes fixed on the ground, they dare not look him in the face.

Of Bassa's, who may be called Counselors, Chancellors, or Secretaries.
These for the most part are all Eunuchs, castrated when Youths, and bred in
Seraglio's, for attendants on the Turkish Concubines: and of later years, some
of them (as I was informed, being a Slave to a great Man in Constantinople) are
cut so close the body, that they often die by the incision; and if live, they
ever after use small pipes for discharging their water: such is their cruel
jealousy, introduced (as 'twas said) by an Emperor that perceived a Gelding
leap a Mare. These Bassa's are of greatest esteem with the Turk, next to the
Sangiachs; and they are almost all that are preferred to that dignity, Children
of Christian Parents, violently taken from them: and none of them, although he
has to Wife a Daughter of a Turk, (as Hurstan Bassa had) can enjoy a Parish,
Castle, or Village by inheritance; but if he be promoted to any dignity or
possessions, he enjoys it till his death, or so long as the Turk pleases. Each
Bassa has a Court of Justice in the Province he commands, from whence
appeals are to the King, or great Mufty; whose sentence is concluding and
immovable.

The obedience of Turks to the King.
None of their Janissaries or great Captains have license to wear Swords or other
Arms within the Cities, unless the King go forth his Palace, for Devotion sake
or Hunting. And where there are Magistrates or Governors of Towns, Porters
carry with them staves or clubs and finding any quarrellings or offerings at
injuries, they presently punish them with those instruments; and no man
speaking to them, dares look them in the face; but falling on the earth, kiss
their feet, with eyes to the ground, and speak as to themselves. And whenever
they send forth Messengers with Letters to Governors, Cities, or Provinces,
whose horse grows saint by journeying, this Messenger has full authority to
dis-horse whom ere he meets; and meeting none, he turns into the next Town or
Village, and repairs to the chief Officer; and if he presently provides him not
an horse, he is hanged before his door: and for this cause, many make use of
Asses, rather then keep Horse. And when this Messenger shall come to whom he
was sent, he is most honorably received, his Letters kissed with great
humility, and their Contents answered with incredible celerity and quick
dispatch. No Princes dare contradict one syllable therein. None dare (as here)
rebel; all men live in such awful fear and trembling: Tortures and present
death depending on his will.

The Turkish strength, how diminishod.
The Emperor distributes in some equality all Provinces to his Noblemen; but
with condition, that such a Soldiery should be continually maintained by him
with the Revenues of that Province, both in time of Peace and War. A Soldier
killed, is not loss to him, unless the Province likewise be lost: as for
example, The Turk has now four hundred Soldiers, whereof one hundred is
maintained by Hungary; now if he lose Hungary, those Soldiers are lost: if he
lose no Province, he loses nothing; for he can raise more in their rooms; as
Church Officers, or benefits, easily find in vacancies Successors.

The condition of Chazilars.
These are stout Soldiers, and excellently versed in military affairs, who in
their first encounters break their Lances, without other Armor then a Sword,
Lance and Target, using it as we do with Coat of Fence and Helmet; the Lance
being broke, they use the Sword, and fight valiantly, always aiming at the head
or hands, and think it ignominious to thrust at their adversary, or an horse,
with point of Sword. These Men spend all their lives and hopes under the
protection of a Goddess, Fortune; having a Proverb with them, What is written,
will befall them; that is, What that Goddess has printed on the head at each
Man's Nativity, cannot be possibly avoided; though he were preserved in a
Castle unexpugnable. The actions of these men are writ in verses, and sung by
all Men; that others stirred up by like praise and honor, might with like
audacity, advance against an Enemy, couragionsly and valiantly: and for each
victory of these Men, their stipends are doubled; and are obliged attendance on
their King, on horseback, with Lances, Swords, and Iron Clubs: some, have
Targets; some, none; and are paid as well in Peace as War.

The order of their Foot.
Their first are Bow-men, with Arrows, Bows and Javelins; they are distinguished
from Janissaries by coverings of the head. The second is of Janissaries, who
instead of Bows, have Guns, with short Hatchets: all these are gathered from
amongst Christians living under Tribute, by force snatched from their Friends
being young, circumcised, and educated as aforesaid. These fight most valiantly
against Christians, yet have but slender stipends for their maintenance; some
four, five, or six Aspers a day; of which, sixty make a Crown English. And
these are prohibited on pain of death, to come on horseback, unless sick.
There are some few likewise, sons of Turks, made Janissaries. There is a third
order, whom they call Azaplars, whose stipends determine with the War, and are
all sons of Turks. These use a longer Lance, with Swords, and red hats or
bonnets, or other colored cloth, with crooked angles like half Moons; and so
distinguished by Arms and Habit from the other orders. There is a fourth of the
Grecian sect, who have no other stipend, then freedom from paying Tributes and
Tenths. They commonly attend the Turks horse of pleasure, keeping them at their
own charge, and well managing them for war.

Of the Turks Pavilions.
When the King removes from Constantinople, to any Expedition of War, he
carries with him double Tents, that when one is planted this day, the other is
carried to the next station, ready to receive him the day following: the number
and magnitude of these Pavilions is such, that afar off they seem no less then
Cities: round about the King's Pavilion, are the Tents of Princes and great
Men, encompassing his in circle. Then the horsemen of Arms, two or three
together, have their Tent: the footmen have the like for discipline sake, and
to keep them from cold Air. When the body of the Army moves, Yeomen footmen
clear the ways, and here and there make heaps of stone, or piles of wood, for
ease and direction of the passage; so as even in darkness of the night they can
hardly err. The Army moves at midnight, and till midday following marches.
The King rides between two Bassa's talking with him, before whom marches some
of the order of Janissaries on horseback, bearing lighted Candles in time of
night. Certain Captains follow them with iron Clubs round pointed, who keep off
men from sight of the King a good large distance: amongst these, are numbers of
the King's Guard; and amongst them, a Chariot of Women and Boys, fitted for use
of the Turk and his Nobility. These great Men, go some before, some follow
these Captains with great multitudes of Soldiers, horse and foot, and all
conditions; some for stipend, some for plunder; but all men.

Their Carriages of Beasts.
Then follow a multiude of Camels, Horse, and sometime Elephants, laden with
Victuals, Pavilions, and all necessaries for military uses; and where the Turk
pitcheth his Tent, there every one, according to his condition, (as in a City)
sets up his habitation; Boothes for Tailors, Bakers, Butchers, Sutlers, and all
sorts of Victuallers: some sell dainty flesh, and fowls; and when fresh meat
cannot be had, then what is brought upon their Beasts, they expose to sale;
biscuit, dry meats, cheese, curds and milk. All Turks are generally most patient
in suffering hunger, thirst and cold. They seldom lodge in Towns, but field it
in their Tents, near watersprings, Rivers or Meadows, taking more care of their
cattle then themselves; content with little and course diet, curds mingled with
water, bread with milk, sometimes biscuit: master and servant eat together. They
keep deep silence in the night; they neglect stirring after fugitives, for fear
of raising clamours; which are forbid upon great mulcts and punishments: but
when they go to rest, or rise to march, all with an unanimous noise, cry out,
Allah, Allah, Allchu, that is, O God, thrice repeated.

Of justice exercised in War.
There is so much severity in military discipline, that no Soldier dares
unjustly seize on any thing of another; for if he do, he dies without mercy.
They have amongst them certain Guardians, Defenders of all Passengers from
Soldiers violence, with Boys of eight or ten years old, carrying bread, eggs,
fruit, oats, and suchlike things to sell. These Guardians are bound to free
and preserve all Orchards, Gardens, Closes, they pass by; so far, that they
themselves dare not touch an Apple, Pear or Grape, or any suchlike thing,
without the owners license; otherwise they lose their heads. When I was present
in the Turkish Army in an Expedition against the Persian, I saw a great
Commanders head, with horse and servants, all three cut off, because that horse
had been found grazing in another man's pasture unsatisfied for.

Celobyations of a T^ victory.
When a Conquest is declared, the Cities straight throw themselves into all
delights and joyings. At entrance of night, for good auspice of the solemnity,
Torches, Wax-candles, Lamps, Firebrarnds, Fireworks, and all things that give
light, are every where disposed of throughout the City; with Carpets, costly
Hangings, Tapestry, and Silken, Silver, and Gold Vestments, their houses all
are covered, but especially that way, by which the Emperor enters. The
chiefest triumph is made in Constantinople, his constant residence, unless
occasioned by war. into some other Region. And he is bound by Law at every
three years end, to undertake some expedition into Christian Territories, for
advancing or defending his own Kingdom. I verily believe, and do confess, for
those days he celebrates for Victory, no Mortal eye, (nay, not the Moon or
Sun) did ere behold a spectacle more glorious and resplendent, for order,
number, silence, richness, state, and magnificence in all kinds. It is
impossible for only man to be exalted to a loftier degree of sublimation, then
this Pagan when triumphful.

Of their bunting and hawking.
No Nation under the Sun delights so much in hunting, as does the Turkish;
they will follow game through rocky, steepy, craggy mountains, and that, on
horseback, taking diversities of Beasts; but if any chance to be killed, or
suffocated by dogs or chase, they never eat thereof, nor any Christian that
lives in those Regions: and if they kill wild Boars, they give them to the
next inhabiting Christians, Musselmen being forbidden to feed on Hogs flesh.
The Turk has multitudes of Faulkoners (above thousands) in constant wages
through his Empire. Their Hawks both long and short winged very hardy. The like
charge he is at, for all sorts of dogs: nothing can move in the Air, or stir on
Land, that shall not be encountered, and seized on. These charges, with the
Soldiery, Officers, Seraglio's, and Court-attendances, are in a manner
infinite; and yet supplied more by casualities then Revenues constant: for he
commands all men's fortunes at his pleasure, and is the general Heir of all that
by nature die, or violence.

Of Artificers and Husbandmen.
The Country People with their Servants plow their Lands, and pay the Tenths of
all increase unto the King. Artificers maintain themselves by Trades: who live
in idleness, consume in hunger. They eagerly pursue all sorts of
Merchandizings; traveling the lesser Asia, Arabia, Egypt, and States of the
Venetians. They have their baths in every City, where in solemn manner they
wash themselves. When they make water, they wash that part; and the like, when
they ease their bodies. The like is done by Women, who have handmaids
following them, with Vessels filled with water; and when they bathe, they
anoint themselves with such an unguent, that within the space of half an hour,
rots off all hair from parts anointed. Men and Women do the same; not suffering
hair to increase: and this is done twice or trice each month, especially when
they frequent the Church; otherwise, (as violaters of sacred places) they are
burnt with fire. They have diverse sorts of Artificers; Tailors, Shooemakers,
Gold and Silver-Smiths, and for all sorts of Metals; Painters, Carpenters,
Stone-cutters; but not of such wits and exquisite inventions, as in our parts.

Of Justice amoag Citizens.
They have one Judge as well of Christians as Turks, (but always chosen from
amongst the Musselmen) to administer equal right to all men. If any kill
another, he suffers death: if steal, or violently takes from another, he is
hanged; as it happened to a Janizary, who drunk milk of a poor Woman's, brought
to sell, and paid not for it; and accused before the Judge, denied the fact;
whereupon, being stretched up by cords at his feet, and about his middle, he
forthwith vomited the milk, and was immediately by the Judge commanded to be
strangled: this happened in my presence at Damasco, when I traveled from
Armenia to Jerusalem. If any commit adultery, the Man is cast into strict
Prison; yet after diverse months may be redeemed: the Woman is carried about the
streets riding on an Ass, beaten naked with whips, stones thrown at her, and a
Bull's pizzle tied about her Neck. He that gives a blow, is cut cross the face,
and led about the streets for terror. All suits have this good piece of
justice, that right or wrong they last not above three days. Their differences
are few, because they buy and sell for ready Money; their chiefest wealth
consisting in it: for few have Lands or Revenues, but who command the
Soldiery: but generally the Turk's Law and Equity is in his Sword, and both
oppressed and stifled with Fear and Bribery, two potent and prevailing Agents.
To spoil, to rob, to kill, to murder, upon design of interest, he says, It Is
Justice; devastation and destruction of whole Provinces and Kingdoms, he
calls Peace. And if in ought he advise with Counsel or the great Mufty, it is
not for substance, but formality of justice, as well assured from gainsaying
an opposition.

Of Husbandry.
Both Christians and Musselmen manure and till their Grounds, Vineyards and
Pastures, and have like Fruits and Corn to ours; Wheat, Millet, Barley, Oats,
winter-Wheat, Pease, Beans, and all kinds of Pulse, and Rice in abundance;
Linen, and Cotton wools, more then these Nations; Vineyards like ours; but use
their Grapes in different manner: where we make Wine, the Turk has a kind of
Honey with them; so medicining their Grapes, that both in taste and color they
appear always fresh: other Fruits they have in great plenty; Melons,
Cucumbers, Pumpions: replenish well their Fields and Gardens in their seasons:
Nuts, Pears, Apples, Peaches of all sorts, Apricocks, Chestnuts, Figs, Lemons,
Oringes, Cherries; and suchlike, at small rates; but not in equal plenty in
all Kingdoms: and there are some within the Turks Dominion, as Cappadocia, and
less Armenia, where, in regard of cold, they have no suchlike Frutages.

Of diversity of Cattle.
They have Shepherds, (whom they call Sobanlars) always living in solitary
places, and every Month remove their stations: they neither have possessions or
houses, other then their Tents, and Cattle; as Camels, Mules, Horse, Cows,
Oxen, Sheep, and Goats; whom they feed, make Cheese and Butter; shear the
Wool, and so make Cloaks, Mantles, and Tapestry, which they sell, and supply
thereby their Families with Corn and necessaries. All these Shepherds pay the
King tenths of all annual increase; and all Christians further pay Tribute,
that live under the Turkish Government, for every Male, one Crown yearly; and
that which is most cruel, their sons unmarried, are taken forcibly from them
every fifth year, when their Tents are visited.

Of Houses.
They have no great magnificence of buildings; most of them are of bricks, but
differing; some are burned in Furnances, some dried by Sun. Their houses are
contiguous, like ours in Europe; but in Natolia, they are flat tabled without
elevation; from whence by Gutters, Pipes, and Channels, Rainwater flows down
to them. The houses low; none above two stories, and meanly furnished, if not
poorly.

Of their Garments.
Their Vestments are made of Wool, Flax, and spun Silk, sufficiently
magnificent. The use a Garment (which is called Chaucan) straight, full of
plates, and of length even to their ankles; abhorring breeches, as too much
directing to, and expressing privities. Their shirts or smocks are dyed in
color Violet. Their heads are covered with great rolls of Callico or suchlike
stuff, wound about in fashion of Pyramids; which they call Turbants. Women of
quality go always with their faces veiled; which are never seen of strangers,
or in public places. Their shoes are high, with strong soles, for longer
service both of men and women. Some say that Mahomet had a bald or scalded
head, which he covered with white linen rolled up, as their Turbants, from
thence derived, and still continue, for they never alter fashions. They wear
long beards, as tokens of their freedom, all Slaves being shaved. No great
difference in habit between rich and poor; but in the stuffs. They are
religiously cleanly, and never seen to unburden nature, but always after wash.

Of Viands.
They use, as we, bread white and course, which they sprinkle with certain seeds
before it is baked, and yields a great sweetness to the eater; which with us
is only used in Granada, and about Sivilia in Spain. They use much art and
sauces in their Cookeries: but ordinary food is pulse or Rice, so thickened,
that it must be parted with the hands: they feed on all flesh but Hoggs. There
are no Taverns or Innes allowed; yet in the streets, diverse sorts of victuals
are sold, and all things necessary for man's sustenance.

Of their Beverage.
They have three sorts of drinks: the first made with Sugar and Honey mingled
with Water: The second of Raisins, the stones taken out, and boiled in Water,
whereto they add some Rose Water, and a little perfect Honey; and this is to be
sold in most parts through Turkey; for it is sweet, and puffs up the belly:
The third is made of a Fruit (called Pechmez) into Must, and has a kind of
Honey-taste and color with it; this, mingled with Water, is given to their
Servants. The Houses where they sell, are frequented as Osteries in Italy, or
Taverns with us. Turks for the most part drink only Water; they are not
suffered to buy or swallow Wines; and who happens to be accused, and proved to
have drunken thereof, his testimony, in all occasions and actions is invalid:
and yet in private Christian houses, they do not abstain.

Of their manner of eating.
When they go to Dinner, they first strew Mattresses on the floor, and spread
upon them carpets or pillows; some fit on the bare ground. Their Tables are
made of skins, and plaited, to be drawn open more or less, like to a budget.
They neither sit, as we do, nonlie along on elbowes, as the ancients; but like
a cross of Burgondy, with legs infolded, they sit Taylor-wise. They always
Pray before they eat, then eat greedily and hastily, but with deep silence; and
in that time their Wives secluded from them. Menservants after twelve years
age, are never suffered to co-habitate in houses where Women are; but under
such age, they go about the houses, serving their Master's occasions. Captive
women have never liberty to go abroad, unless their Mistresses or Lady; go to
Vineyards, Graves of Friends departed Baths, or Gardens out of Town (which they
often do) for recreation sake; and otherwise are kept strict at work in houses,
not suffered to converse with other captive Servants; as shall be more at large
declared in the following Chapter. Their dishes are commonly placed at such
distance one over another, as 'twere on Pillars, that each man may make choice
of three, which pleases best. They eat three times a day; but quick therein,
unless at a Feast, where they sit all day.

Of the afflictions of Captives, and Christians under the Turkish Tribute.
WHen the King of Turks makes Expeditions against Christians, amongst diverse
sorts of Merchants, there always follow him on Camels, a mighty number of Buyers
or Scorcers of Children or Men, who in hope of getting Slaves carry with them
bundles of long Ropes, wherewith they easily tie together fifty or sixty men.
These traders purchase of the Soldiery or Freebooters, whomsoever the Sword
has not devoured; which is granted them, upon condition that the King may have
the tenth of what is traffick'd for, the rest unto themselves to sell. Nor is
there any Merchandise so profitable amongst them, nor so frequent; as anciently
among the Romans, who called things fairly bought, their proper Goods and
Rights, as just as that of Slaves.

How the Turks employ their slaves.
The youth and aged of both Sexes, whom Chance by tenths appropriates to the
Turk, he thus disposes; the elder in years he sells for Husbandmen, who yet
are rarely or cheap bought; for they seldom escape the Sword, their age making
them less vendible. Young men and Maidens, they confine them in Seraglio's,
there to be instructed in useful Arts for future times. But first, they must
deny their Faith in Christ, and then be circumcised. And thus initiated in
their Ceremonies, they diligently examine their physiognomies, and the several
lineaments of their bodies, and then the whole composure; and according to
conceived strength, forwardness of wit, and dispositions, they are destinated
to learn Laws of the Country, or discipline of Wars; and in the mean time are
allowed a daily stipend of two or three Aspers, sixty whereof make five
shillings, which they conceive a liberal sufficiency for diet and clothing,
until they are fitted for employments. In the elements of War, they thus are
trained, according to each strength: they first have given them a light bow;
skill and strength increasing, they have a greater and a heavier; so by degrees
they are fitted for expedition. They have Instructors, severe Exactors of their
daily Exercises; and whenever they err much from the mark, so often are they
cruelly whipped with scourges. These are enrolled in the order of Bow-men.
Others are instructed and made fit for Janissaries, who have appointed Masters
and Teachers every day to fight, two together with Cudgels. Others (an horrid
thing) who have more lovely faces, are so close cut, that nothing like Man is
lest them; and this not done without great and imminent danger to life: and if
the party escape death, his health is for no other use, but their most wicked
lusts; and after youth's grown aged, they are put to the offices of Eunuchs, to
attend on Ladies, Concubines, Horses, Mules, and some Kitchin-imployments.

The condition of Virgins and other women.
Such as are of extraordinary beauty, comeliness, or composition of body, are
chosen out for Concubines; mean and indifferent Faces, are appointed Matrons
handmaids; amongst whose offices some are so filthy, and so loathsome, as were
before (though somewhat uncivilly) relted. Others are set to women's work, as
spinning, carding, weaving. It is free for none of them to profess the
Christian Faith, or hope of liberty during life. There is some content in hope,
but these have none.

How private Turks use Prisoners.
Hitherto has been spoken how the Kings use Captives; now how private men their
Prisoners newly taken: first, they threaten them with all sorts of menacing
sharp words, promises, and allurements, to entice them to Circumcision; which
if yielded to, they are treated somewhat more courteously; but then all hope of
ever returning to their Country is clean cut off; and whosoever endeavors it,
burning is his appointed punishment. Such as are thought more firm and less
fugitive, are admitted to their Masters Military employments, and can only be
made free, when age has made them useless; and then he is rather turned off,
then remitted orderly; or when the Master by hurt in War, or danger of death,
bequeaths him liberty. They are permitted marriage; but their Children are
disposed at the Master's pleasure; which makes the more understanding sort
utterly abhor marriage. They who refuse Circumcision, are miserably and
unhumanely treated; of which I have had the experience of thirteen years
sufferings: nor can Lexpress in words the great calamities of such people.

How Christians ignorant in mechanic Arts are used.
The condition of such unskilful men is wretched. Those whose toil brings
profit, are only in reputation with them: and therefore learned Men, Priests,
and Noble men, who have lived in retiredness and pleasures, when they fall into
the hands of Turks, are of all most miserable; the Merchant or Manscourser
bestows no cost on them, as scant vendible: they walk with naked head and feet,
and often their whole bodies: no new clothes succeed, the old worn out: they
are hurried through Mountains, Rocks, from place to place, Winter and Summer,
and have no end thereof till death, or that they find a foolish Purchaser,
that (they think) buys ill Merchandise; but no man is so happy, or esteemed
amongst them, for Age, Art or Beauty, that they being sick will leave behind
them. First, they are whipped to go on; if they cannot do that, then they are
put on horseback; and there not able to sit upright, their bellies are tied on
horseback, no otherwise then a sack of Corn or Cloak-bag: if he die, he is
stripped of all clothes, and thrown into the next ditch, to be devoured by dogs
and vultures.

How Prisoners newly taken are used.
They do not only bind them in endless chains, but, in their journey, also
manacle their hands; they march the distance of a large pace one from another,
that mutually they do not hurt; and tie their hands, lest with stones they
mischief do their Masters: that when sometimes they lead great multitudes, as
ten times five hundred chained together, the strength of whom, if hands at
liberty to throw stones, might much annoy them. At night when they rest, their
feet are likewise chained, and exposed to all injuries of weather. The
condition of Women is a little more humane; they who have strength of limbs,
are driven on foot; those more tender, are set on horses; such as are infirm
and cannot ride, are put in baskets or ripiers, as we use geese. Afterward
their condition is sadder; either they are included in strong Turrets, or
forced to endure the wicked lusts of their Merchants. Where still they are, is
ever heard vast and hideous howlings of both sexes, suffering violations from
them; neither does the age of seven or six years, defend them from those
vitions actions: a people incomparably wicked, both against nature, and before
libidinous.

How used that are exposed to sale.
At the break of day they are brought to Market, like droves of sheep, or herds
of goats: Merchants appear, prizes are set; if the prisoner be liked, his
clothes are stripped off, he is viewed by the buyer, all members surveyed,
tried and thoroughly searched for faults in joints or arteries; if he please
not, then returned to the owner: and this is done until he find a purchaser.
When bought, he is carried to some heavy servitude, to plow, keep sheep;
omitting baser Offices. They endure there many unheard examples of calamities:
I have seen men tied together with yokes, to draw the plow. Maidens are
severely forced to perpetual labors; separated from the sight of men, nor are
they suffered speech or conference with other Servants. If any man be taken
Prisoner with wife and children, him some great person willingly purchases, to
be employed in his Country House, in Tillage, Vineyards, Meadows, Pastures; and
Children born of them, are all his Slaves: and if they persevere in Christian
Faith, a certain time is allotted them to servitude, and then made free; their
Children notwithstanding continue Slaves at the Master's will, and employed
where he pleases; for they have no certain nor enrolled Estates in Lands, and
so not assured seats of residence. If after making free, they desire to return
to their Country, they have Letters Patents given for their Journey. But to
such as abjure the Christian Religion, no certain time of bondage is prescribed
them, nor right of return; all hopes of their liberty, totally dedepends upon
the Master's pleasure: and when they have got freedom, they pay the Tenths, as
other Turks, but freed from other Taxes with which Christians are burdened.

Of Captives made Shepherds.
The Husbandman has an hard and sad condition, but the Shepherd far more
grievous; they always live in solitariness, night and day, covered only with
the roof of heaven. The Master and the Wife have some small Tents; no shelter
for the Shepherd, unless at spare times compelled to work on Tapestry or
Carpets. Every month they change their Pastures, and drive their flocks from
one Mountain to another. Some Masters that have more humanity, now and then
give small rewards, which the Servant keeps as his proper Goods, and preserves,
to bear the charge of a return to his Country, if ever he get liberty: but
these largesses are seldom done, and then, but as a miserable enticement to
servitude, thinking thereby to withdraw their hopes of shifting from them. To
such as deny Christ, and are circumcised, knowing they dare not run away, no
like indulgence offered.

Escapes of prisoners out of Europe.
European Slaves may more easily escape, then those sold into transmarine
Regions; they pass Rivers only, that may be swimmed over; others, with great
difficulty must pass the Hellespont. Such as intend escapes, usually attempt it
in Harvest season, to hide themselves in Fields of Corn, and by it live. The
Nights they travel, the Day lie close in Corn, Woods or Marshes; and rather
choose to be devoured by Wolves, then brought back to their Tyger-Masters.

Out of lesser Asia.
Who flee from thence, repair to the Hellespontick Sea, between Callipolis, and
those Towers of Sestes and Abidos, now called by the Turks Bogaz Aser, that is,
Castles on the mouth of the Sea, where the Waters are straight and narrow;
hither they come with Saws and Ropes, cut Timber Trees, and tie them fast
together, to serve and save themselves for shipping; carrying nothing with them
but salt. If Wind and Fortune favor, in three or four hours they are wasted
over; if otherwise, they perish in the Sea, or reforc'd again upon the Coast of
Asia: if safely pass, they then betake themselves to the Mountains, and by
inspection of the Pole and the Star Boots, they tend their way Northward; and
sustain themselves with Acorns and Herbs sod in salt. If many fly together in
society, sometimes in Night, they set upon the Shepherds, and what they find
of Victuals take from them; sometime they kill, and are sometime killed, or
taken and returned to their old Masters and Drudgeries: but the several dangers
of traveling, consumes more then escape, by shipwreck, the enemies sword,
wild beasts, and starving hunger.

The punishment of Fugitives.
Some are hanged up by the heels, and most cruelly scourged; and if commit
murder, the soles of his feet are all slashed into furrows, and salt stuffed
in. Some have great iron Chains, fastened on their necks, and forced to wear
them day and night, and as long as the Master pleases.

The charity of Greeks and Armenians to Captives.
Death, and confiscation of all sorts of Goods, is inflicted on those who
undertake, procure, or assist Captives in their flight, or running away, yet
notwithstanding both Greeks and Armenians cease not to entertain them, being
Christians, to hide them, and in disguises to conduct them unto shippings of
the Venetians or other Christians, and freely give them good provisions and all
things necessary for their journeys; nor do they spare or omit any kind of
piety toward them; for they confess to have had heard the like experience from
Christians charity, when as they travel for conscience sake to Rome or
Compostella.

The Incantation of Turks against Fugitives.
They have certain kind of charms, which they think can draw them off from
flying. The name of the Slave is written in a Schedule of Paper, which is hung
up in his Tent or honse: then with vengeable and horrible curses, his head is
charged and threatened, conceiving this by the Devils help, the Fugitive will be
affrighted with meeting of Lions and Dragons in his Journey, or that the Seas
or Rivers will swallow him, the heavens will grow dark, and these astonishments
will bring him back again.

The memory of Christ by degrees lost informer Christian Provinces.
There is some memory yet left of the expugnation of Constantinople, the
Kingdoms of Greece, Alania, Valachia, and Servia, now reduced to Provinces.
These, for a long time, constantly retained the Christian Faith, but their
Children have forgot it; and there will come to pass a full oblivion of Christ.
And likely it is to fall out so in Croatia, Hungary and Sclavonia, which are
now Additaments and Adjuncts to the Turkish Empire.

The condition of the conquered.
When a Province is subdued and taken, all sorts of Goods moveable and
immovable are given away for spoil. They totally extirpate the whole Nobility;
but especially the Princely Issue. And when they took John the King's Son of
Hungary, and favored him with life, it was on good advice, that if Hungary
where lost again, they might employ and involve him into any new encumbrances;
and when the Province should be in a quiet and calm condition, then to
dispatch him: for in such respects, the Turk regards neither Kindred, Father,
or Brother; he spares none. And if they do kill and murder not all Church and
Clergymen they take; yet they expose them to all scorn, nakedness and beggary,
despoyling them of all their Fortunes, Goods, and Dignities. Their Bells, their
Organs, and other Instruments and Ornaments of Churches, Chapels, and
Devotions, they raven and tear from the Temples, profaning them with
consecration to their Mahoment; leaving only the most miserable and wretched
Chapels to the Christians, wherein they are forbid public Prayers, and may
pray seemingly in silence: which Chapels, when either Earthquake, Fire,
Tempest, or Age destroy, they must in no sort re-edifie. Preaching or reading
parts of the Scripture is utterly forbidden. It is a sin to admit a Christian
to any public Office, to wear, have Arms or habit like a Turk: or else to use
the recreations of cheerfulness, as Pageants, Plays, or Dancings. If they
injure Christ or you with bitter or contumacious words, you must be silent, and
endure it. If you speak ought against their professed Religion, you are forced
to Circumcision; and but to whisper against Mahomet, Fire and Brimstone
follows. If a Christian on horseback pass by a Musselman, (that is, one
initiated in the Turkish Faith) he must, on necessity, light from his horse,
and bowing down his head worship him; which if omitted, he straight is knocked
down with clubs.

Condition of Priests and Friars under Tribute.
Priests and Friars are held the worst of Men, and are esteemed by Turks the
very Sacrilege and Scandal of God and mankind. They have no benefit from
Churches. Upon some festival days, a little bread is given them by poor Women,
and not on other days. They get their livelihood by carrying Wood; their
custom being to cut down sticks in Woods, lade them on Asses; and with this
Merchandise, they cry about the Streets, Wood to be sold.

The Tribute of Christians.
They pay a part of all increase, not only of Corn and Cattle, but even
Mechanics pay it out of all their profits. And then they pay another subsidy,
for every single man through a Family, each head a Crown. If Parents refuse
this Tribute, their Children are taken from them, and made Slaves. Others are
bound in Chains, and beg from door to door to pay this Crown; which if they
cannot this way procure, they are cast into perpetual Prison; and when all
Duties are performed, it is yet lawful for the Turk to choose the best amongst
his Children, whom he circumciseth, and removes from all approach or sight of
Parents, and breeds him for his Wars, never to return to his Friends; and so a
child easily forgets both Christ, his Parents and his kindred; that after, if
he chance in company with them, he shall not know them. No Man can express by
Words, the Lamentations, Cries, Tears and grievous sighs, at this distraction
of Children. The Father to see his Son (educated in the fear of Christ) torn
from him, and made an Instrument of Satan, to oppose Christ; hurried from his
Mother, to live perpetually with strangers, leaving whatsoever is dear in
blood, pleasing in society, or loving in familiarity, with an everlasting
dereliction: after listed in the ranks of those the Greeks call Fatherless and
Motherless: yet many of these, although they have denied Christ, carry about
them the Gospel of St. John, ( In the beginning was the word, etc. in Greek or
the Arabic tongue) as an Amulet or preservative in their Armpits; and with
great desire they expect the Christian Sword (according to some Turkish
prophecies) should revenge and free them from those great afflictions and
persecutions; and that if Christians do it not, whatever is the cause, or with
what mind soever hindered; all very ill deserve of Christian Religion.

A Narration of a dispute with a Turk.
AFter I had traveled with much labor and many dangers the better parts of
the world, and seen many pleasant Towns and Countries, as Socrates, Plato, and
other Philosophers had diligently done; at length I arrived at the famous City
of Hungary, Varadinum, where by chance I met one Dervis Gsielebi, a skilful man
in the Laws of Mahomet; who having dispatched his business with the Governor,
he very much desired conference with some Christian about Religion on either
side. This motion of his being published by an Interpreter, and none for diverse
days appearing to encounter him, in defense of the Christian cause, though many
Religious persons were in that Town, (struck mute and speechless at the courage
of one Ethnic Infidel) who seemed to me like Israelites, that durst not
adventure on one uncircumcised Goliath, provoking them. This I perceiving, and
grieving in my spirit, that in such plenty of Clerks and learned men, none was
so well armed with Truth as durst (though by Interpreters) reprove the
insolence of such an Heathen; then; and fearing that so wicked and detestable a
silence, in so good a Cause, with so bad a Man, would betray the Truth, and
render our Savior Jesus Christ's Opinion with him more ignominious; I my self,
though never called to Ecclesiastical Function, undertook the charge of arguing
this point of Piety with him; and so a prefixed day was agreed on between us;
when multitudes of of people of each Religion, came Spectators of the event.
The place was in a Monastery of Franciscans; the day, Whitson-Sunday, day of
Pentecost; where he moved to me first this Question: Where God had his being,
before the Heavens and Earth, and therein all things else were created? Which
Question, though it seemed to me not much pertinent to our purpose, yet lest he
should imagine us ignorant of our great God's universal presence, I said, He
then was in his own being. But when that seemed to him somewhat obscure, and
that he did not sufficiently understand it, I then told him, He was where he
now is. Which he understanding, denied in the general, and said, Not so; but
that he then was in a bright cloud. Which, when he earnestly affirmed, I quoted
Genesis; (for they also read the books of Moses, and the Prophets) and said, If
God were in a Cloud, before the Foundation of Heaven and Earth, then that Cloud
must be created before them both: and upon further argument on this point,
being at last convicted, he would dispute no further in it; but gave me leave
to propound some Question to him; and for solemnity of that days sake, I
thought fit to say something thereof; and finding these words (In the name of
God, his mercies, and the Spirit of them) in their Alcoran, in the Arabian
Tongue and Character, I desired him to read them: The mystery of the holy
Trinity. Which when he had considered, and wondered at, he said, Christian, from
whence had you this? for in the beginning of all our actions, we Musselmen use
these three words, and prefix them to every Chapter of our Alcoran; when we sit
down to eat, when we go to prayers, when we wash our hands, or other parts of
our bodies, these words we first pronounce; and these actions finished, we
sprinkle our heads with water, and repeat these words, In the Name of God, his
Mercies, and the Spirit of them. When thus he had confessed the Truth, I
desired to understand from him what he meant by the word Mercies: who replied,
He understood it literally, without other signification. Then I applied my self
to the mystical Interpretation, and divided it according to Truth into three
Persons, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and showed them written in
the Arabic tongue. And when he saw I had mentioned the Son of God, he
questioned, How God could have a Son? since according to their Law, and
Doctrine of Mahomet, God had neither Wife nor Child. To whom I answered,
according to my weak understanding and capacity; We Christians call God the
Father, for his Creatures sake, being the first creating Cause, and sole
Preserver of all created, who was for ever in the same Essence he now is in,
and will be for Eternity; and is the first Person in the Trinity. We believe
the Son, (who by Mahomet in the Arabic phrase is called Rahman, and signifies
Mercies, so changed by him) to be likewise God, not according to flesh (for God
is a Spirit) born of a Woman; but of the Essence and substance of God
Omnipotent, begotten by God the Father, to put away the sins of the World, and
so took humane flesh, by the Holy Virgin Mary, suffered for us, died, and was
buried, and according to the sayings of the Prophets arose again the third day,
and ascended into Heaven, and sits at the right hand of God the Father,
there to judge the quick and the dead, to render immortal happiness to those
that have faith in him, and to the unfaithful everlasting punishment.

I then Presented him a Crucifix, and said, Behold this now, and see if Mahomet
did unworthily call the Son of the eternal God by Name of Mercies, when with
Arms thus stretched forth, he calls poor sinners to his embraces, saying, Come
unto me all ye that labor, and are burdened with sins, and I will refresh
you. And to render him more capable of the Trinity, I pointed to the Sun,
saying, You have a fair similitude here: as there is but one Sun, that has
form, heat and light; so there is but one God and Father, who has Son, and the
Holy Spirit, which you call Rucahim, consisting of three Persons equally of one
substance, and from Eternity coexisting.

This comparison wrought in him a belief in God the Father, his only begotten
Son, and the Holy Ghost; a Trinity in Unity. And when he had heard my weak
discourses of God the Father, God the Son, and God the holy Ghost, he much
admired, saying, O God, O God; I nor any of our Sect, could ever imagine, you
had such good thoughts of God; for we conceive you live in darkness of
understanding: but by your relation, it seems you have great apprehensions of
him; and believe well, if you did not neglect our great Prophet of God,
Mahomet. I said, What shall we do with the toys and dreams of Mahomet? for
besides Baptism and the mystery of the Trinity, which were had from Christians,
we know the Alcoran contains naught that tends to Truth. Then I alleged to him
the fancies and filly trifles of Mahomet's two Angels called Arot and Marot,
whom Mahomet says, That God did send from Heaven, to minister justice unto
mortal men, commanding them to forbid drinking of wine, and unlawful mixtures
with women, and to show the way to heaven to no man: These Angels transgressing
Divine Commandment, were defiled, deceived, and made drunk by a Woman, and
showed to Mahomet the way to heaven; whom, when God saw there, he asked the
Angels standing by, who it was that came in that shape thither? And the Angels
telling him it was by the error of Arot and Marot; he turned the Woman into a
Star, and sent those Angels chained into a well, to be punished everlastingly.
Diverse like ridiculous stories I related; as that of the Beast Baraile, who
could speak as man, who carried Mahomet to heaven, where himself confesses to
have seen great Angels with many heads, and those speaking many Languages in
diverse Tongues; which is sufficiently foolish, and unworthy the name of a
Prophet; but said, I know not whether oppressed with Wine, in sleep he dreamed
to have seen such miracles, or monstrosities in his imaginations. And therefore
when he inserts such follies in his Alcoran, he deserves not the Title of a
Prophet from any reasonable man.

Having heard this, somewhat abashed, he arose, and would argue no further: but
led me into the Temple, and showed me certain Images carved in wood; and asked
me, If we did worship those silmilitudes of men or adore them? I answered, No;
think not we worship the stone or timber wherein these sigures are engraved;
they are used and respected only as records and remembrances to men's minds of
the passions and sufferings of our Savior Jesus Christ, for the redemption of
our transgressions: and we worship our true God in mind and Spirit, remembered
by that Crueifix; neither are you denied the like remembrances of your great
Princes, and famous men, nor we of holy Saints; but it is to give God thanks for
their examples of holiness, and our prayers to imitate their charity and
pieties.

In these discoursings, he spies some dogs walking in the Church, and doing
something against an Altar, (an evil custom, and to be condemned by all) and
asked whether it was lawful for Beasts to enter our Churches? and blushing with
shame, not knowing how to defend this negligence of Christian Pastors, I told
him, It was neither lawful nor seemly; and desired him to conceive it a mere
negligence of Officers.

When he heard this, he commended it very much, and desired me to instruct him
in our Savior's Prayer, which I gave him after, in the Arabian Dialect.

A Lamentation for loss of Christians destroyed.
AFflicted with an infinite and incredible sorrow (most high and mighty
Monarchs and Governors of Christian Commonwealths) to see the sad condition,
and most miserable being of our Brethren under the Turkish slavery; whereof
some seduced from the bosom of our Church to heretical unhappiness; others
with civil and hostile sword, slain, murdered, and cast to devouring Beasts;
others made captive to perpetual servitude, and most cruelly afflicted: They
all by me in lamentable sobs and groanings complain, O monstrous, mischievous
ambition of ill men, and wicked covetousness of ruling! How many equal souls
consecrated to Gods Divine Worship, have you betrayed to Death and to the
Devil? How many Principalities and Kingdoms of great Kings, and all sorts of
Nobility, have you destroyed? How many walls of stately Towns have you
demolished? How many sumptuous Palaces and strong stately Castles have you
levelled with the ground? How many lawful Owners have you dejected from eminent
Estates and quiet Conditions, and banished to perpetual disconsolations?

And although I intend not to write the Acts of Princes, but to delineate the
calamities and tragedies of Captives, I cannot forbear remembrance of that
abominable discord of the Earl of Servia, a potent and proud Prince, who
agreeing (a shameful foul example of a vicious ambition) with the Bassa of
Bosnia, (his neighbor Enemy) and having many Castles and strong holds upon the
Turkish Confines, even to the River Savus, (which divides Illyria from Croatia)
and defended all those Provinces which lie between that River and the River
Dravus, from Turkish violences and incursions: This Earl or Lord of Servia,
falling into variance and some petty controversies with the Nobility of
Sclavonia, made friendship with the said Bassa, and joining their Armies both
together, invaded the Sclavonians, partly at difference between themselves, and
partly impotent; wholly destroys them and their Province with fire and sword,
ruining their Towns and Castles, some by violence and force, some by craft and
treachery, (customary with wicked men and Turks) and so totally vanquished and
conquered them. And after a few Months had passed, this Bassa beholding the
Earls rich Provinces, and neighboring with his, he took or made occasions to
invade him, whom at length he killed; and so reduced all his Territories under
the Turkish Government. Thus this seditious Atheist, Traitor to his Country and
his Brethren, most ignominiously lost his life: for such are the Turks rewards
to whomsoever by craft, policy, or villainous fraud, he can lay hold on or
ensnare. The like was done with some Noblemen of Hungary, whom they reduced to
miserable captivity.

Wherefore (most Christian Monarchs) the cruelties of this Tyrant ought with
all industry and vigilance be both feared and prevented; lest considering your
fair Provinces, and viewing them with a fascinating eye, he find you
disagreeing, and thereby infeebled, he assault you on all fides, not only
Candia, Calabria, Malta, and Sicily, but even Italy, France, Spain, and
Germany; and prove an universal scourge and terror to all Christendom. They
are wise, who by others harms prevent their own: you are concerned when your
neighbors house is fired. But not to trouble you in this kind, I recommend to
you, most prudent Governors, the correction and amendment of this great
error, and return to the deplorable calamities and afflictions our Brethren
suffer under the yoke of Tribute in the Turks Dominions, where some with chains
about their necks are dragged through sharp and spiny parts of Thracia and
lesser Asia, with naked feet, in thirst and hunger: and if by labor of long
journeys, diseases, or other griefs they die, (as often happens to men of
Quality and bred in ease) are hurled stripped in the next ditch, (though not half
dead) to the care of ravenous fowls; others, that is, young people of either
sex, endure perforce the filthy lusts of their buyers and their defencers, with
hideous cries and howlings of violated and vitiated people; the age of six
years not defending them: others ignorant in husbandry or Mechanic Arts, and
literated men (who are least saleable) are for long time driven from Town to
Town, from Street to Street; and being once sold, compelled with clubs and
scourges to learn Trades and daily employments in base businesses and grievous
pains: others of more robustious strength, are made slaves to Galleys, tied by
the legs with chains, and most miserably tortured; whose sad calamities the
power of humane wit cannot express in words. And if these poor unfortunate
souls could have foreknown that miserable being, they would rather have chosen a
thousand deaths. If pains of life and death were ever commix'd together; yea,
if to live long and many days, and die every hour, were ever extant, it is in
Turkey: Egyptian servitude, Babylonian banishment, Assyriack captivity, Roman
destruction, are toys and trifles to these calamities. People, who live as it
were in the fiery Furnace of the Chaldean Hut, and crying up to heaven, with
sighs and groans, O Lord, how long! arise, and forsake us not in the end: and
when oppressed and grieved beyond all hope, they turn their eyes again on their
own Countries, likewise in captivity; yet wish themselves rather slaves there,
then where they are: their prayers are not for liberty, but change of place;
and for that cause, indifferent for death or or life, they turn Fugitives; and
some leaving their flocks in deserts, their Oxen at plow, expose themselves to
devouration; some murdering their Masters and their Children; some burning
their houses in revenge; some run away, hiding themselves in Caves and hollow
Trees, with fearful wants and dangers; which I here forbear, having given the
Reader some taste thereof before. And now they turn their cries to you, all
Christian Monarchs and Governors of Commonwealths.

Imploring and beseeching the Pope of Rome, who should be Father of our
Country, and all sorts of men belonging to Christ his holy Church, That they
uniting all sects of men in peace and concord, would labor to suppress this
common enemy, and restore their Brethren unto liberty.

Imploring and beseeching the Emperor and all Imperial Princes, Dukes, Cities,
and Nobility, to cool their hot Calentures of ambition, and avarice of
neighbors rights, and set apart domestic quarrels, and call together and
unite their strengths against so cruel an Usurper, and hostile Enemy, and
labor to defend their present, or else recover their lost Territories; and
then be assured, the circumspection of the Spanish Soldiery, the warlike
fierceness of the Belgic Provinces, the quick prudence of the Italian w^, the
robustiousness and stoutness of the Germans, will be easily persuaded by the
King of Romans, against this universal Enemy; remembering you withal, No Crown
sits so gloriously on an Emperor or Princes head, as that which bears a true
Title of the Peoples safety and lawful Liberties.

Imploring and beseeching the most Christian King of France, to employ his
helping and heroic Arms, in safeguard (according to his Title) of his
Christian Brethrens liberties, and his own from Turkish Tyranny.

Imploring and beseeching the most mighty and potent Kings of England, Poland,
Denmark, Swedeland, with all Republics, Cities and Corporations Christian, to
unite, and join in one, their strengths and powers in war against this cankered
common Enemy of their Religion, Crowns and Dignities.

Imploring and beseeching all sorts of Powers and Authorities spiritual and
temporal, to employ their diligence, and show the worthiness of their callings,
by correction and amendment of wicked and dissolute loose livers, by whom God's
wrath is kindled against us; and to reduce them to holy Rules of Christian
Exercises, in living justly, soberly and religiously, and so render God a true
account of Stewardship, and prevent the miseries have befallen others drowsy
and sleeping inadvertencies.

Imploring and beseeching both young and old, of all sects and conditions,
godly Christians religious and secular, beloved Fathers, dear Brethren,
respected Friends, Neighbors, and Companions, that you all, with humble face
and countenance, pure and sincere hearts and hands, devout minds, mournful
voices, and weeping eyes, condole, grieve, and lament the miseries, the
calamities of Turkish captives; and call unto the Lord of Hosts with violence,
in pity to his people, to avert his anger, and not to give them up to the
perpetual rebuke of this wicked Infidel, most cruel Enemy of Christian Religion
and Liberty; but to inspire the minds of Christian Kings and Governors, with
light of his holy Spirit, to reduce them all to unity and concord, against this
ravenous and insatiable Dragon; and grant others such success, that these
wretched captives, their Christian Brethren, may be restored to liberty in the
worship and adoration of their God, our Christ, and only serve him, who is for
ever blessed; that at length the Christian World may be refreshed and eased
from such perpetual slavery.

An Exhortation against the Turk.
I Have often marvelled with my self, most mighty Monarchs, when I considered
theadvantages which promise Christians victories against the Turk; and yet in
so many years they attempted none, or failed. We have Jesus Christ our God, who
in one only night destroyed the host of Sennacherib; who drowned Pharaoh; who
with a maiden hand of Judith, struck off the head of Holopherues; and, to be
brief, a God, whose will is victory. Contrary to which, they have Mahomet, a
wicked man of life and conversation; in death yet, hanging in his Sepulcher
without Resurrection: so as there is as much difference between them, as is
between an ever living Son of an ever living God, and a putrid carcass of a son
of a mortal man; that if we diligently examine the nature of each Power and
Authority, it would apear like dead men, superiors in strength to living. Now
in abilities of bodies, capacities, and gifts of understanding, we exceed them;
which are good strengths and fortifications against an enemy: and yet we are
still defeated. Who is more hardy then the Hungarian? more stout and robustious
then the German? more quick and nimble then the Frenchmen? more grave and solid
than the Spaniard? more cautelous and prudent then the Italian? more valiant
and daring then the English? forbearing other Nations, the endowments of whose
minds, are better, or at least equal. All these abilities seem able singly to
get a victory, or at least well to forward it. Courage often without much
force, generosity of mind, wisdom, forecast, ambition of honor, and policy,
often subdues an Enemy; yet notwithstanding, wretches as we are, amongst so many
victorious attributes, we get no victories. Then if we consider the easy
preparation and great furnitures of all sorts of arms, we shall appear far to
exceed the Turk. Guns of all sorts have been our own inventions, and the diverse
kinds of complete harnesses for horse and foot. The Turks, Persians Subjects,
naked, or half so, march forth to war: they have bows, we guns, that is, fire
and thunder: they have arrows, which hardly pierce and Armor; we Cannons,
which Rocks cannot withstand: and yet now some Musselmen have Guns and Gunners,
but few, and unskilful.

Now I pray, what other kind of people use they most in Expeditions? Scythians
and Thracians, who have no Italian or Spanish Spirits, only a kind of
inhumane fierceness, ignorance and stolidity: to these are added Grecians, lost
men with ease and laziness; Asians, corrupt with luxury; Egyptians, no less in
mind then bodies, feebled; Arabians, bloodless, thin, and parboyl'd with the
Sun. Who could imagine such kind of Soldiery should subdue the great
advantages and abilities of those forenamed Nations? yet (be it spoken with
grief) our Christians by these are overcome, and mastered into servitude, and
our great Captains are forced to bear arms against us, who were born and bred
by Ancestors to liberty: and in the mean season, the Turk laughs at us, and the
Jew rejoices.

Now if I should consider the Laws and Institutions of Nations, we shall be
found abundantly superior in that respect: for, what is more righteous and
divine then the Decalogue and holy Gospel, written by Gods own Finger and his
Spirit? what more regular then the Canon Law? more just and equal then the
Civil Law? Whereas the Turks live by Direction and Dictates of the Alcoran; a
book of stuff as foolish, as full of vanity; a book of sport and mirth, if pity
for the seduced did not allay it; though now spread abroad too much, and
handled amongst Christians; so as it may be truly feared, we shall learn other
Laws, or shortly loose our own, and turn Turks in our minds and approbations,
sooner then in our bodies to their Dominion. What is then the cause, having so
many Prerogatives of hopeful War, we are always beaten? why are our Ensigns
adorned with Crucifixes, fearful formerly to Infidels and Devils, now trampled
on and slighted? I shall tell you in few words, and truth. We have a God most
great, most good; but alienated from us so far, that according to the Prophets
saying, We scarce are to be named his people: for why should Christ remain with
us, whom we have rent and corn in far more pieces then the Soldiers did his
Garment, by our hideous Sects, Schisms and Heresies? Besides his Name, what of
him is deap unto us? The very Plowman these times is impudent and factious,
the Citizen fraudulent and avaritious, the Magistrate seeks retributions and
rewards, the Nobility is riotous and lazy, the Gentry contentious and proud;
the Soldier, beyond his pay and spoil, craves nothing from the War; let
Scepters fall as they will, he is no less grievous to friends and companions,
then Enemies. Churchmen, besides pomp Ecclesiastical, have little of the
Church; not sanctity, not piety, and some not fitting erudition; seeking their
own, not Christ's advancement; that we may say with the Prophet, All have
declined the ways of God, and are unprofitable; there is none that does good,
not even one. Why should we marvel then that Christ is not our Friend? We
therefore go to war without a God, and what is more calamitous, with God our
adversery: We carry Bibles and Crucifixes with us, but the crucified by his
favor converseth with our enemies; our Actions therefore perish, and are
involved in losses. And when one Nation fights against the Turk, another is
employed in civil wars, calling to his aid Pagans, Schismatics or Heretics,
more eagerly to oppose Christ; others tend their home-affairs, to indulge
themselves in ease and voluptuousness. The soldier sets not forth for Christ,
but money; which failing, soon deserts the field, and turns home back again.
What have we then from those rich Attributes and Eulogies of Germany, France,
England, Spain, and Italy, when the soldier neglects both God and Honor, and
goes to war as to market, a brothel-house, or stews, to exercise all rapine,
spoil, and lewdness? We have good Laws, but evil manners; good furniture of
Arms, but wicked dispositions: it is our glory to fight among our selves; and
if we prove coward to enemies, there follows little shame or punishment. When
do we see a Soldier quitting colors or disbanding, severely handled? which
crimes were anciently capital; and whole Legions have been decimated and tyth'd
for less offenses. We therefore march with men few in numbers, and those
corrupt in manners, against millions of men well disciplined; for Turks leave
their vices in their houses, from whence we carry ours. In their Pavilions and
Tents, no deliciousness; Arms only, and necessary provisions: in Christians,
all forts of Table-delicates, luxury and riotousness; and commonly, as many
light lascivious Women, as Men. What wonder then if they conquer who are
preserved by sobriety, parsimony, diligence, fidelity and obedience? Let them
perish then, who lose a field to get a prey; who are oftener found amongst
Whores, and drunk, then in good actions: but it is the fault and error of
Superiors, when Subjects are not kept in due observance; which if Christians
were, we could not be inferior to Turks. And yet a greater fault, behold,
Princes themselves, while they contend in mutual quarrels, are causes why they
cannot muster equal forces against the Turk: for whilst they fight and combat
for some little Town or other, after grievous strife, conflictation and
exhaustion of men and treasure, they grow weak, impoverished and heartless.
What brave Actions might those streams of Christian blood have done, which
civil wars most impiously have drawn out, emptied, and dried up? But it is too
late to mourn in complaints: Asia and Africa are lost; Greece, extinguished;
Hungary, desperately sick; Illyria and Sclavonia, joined to the Turk; Austria,
much enfeebled; and this Plague much threatens Germany, and Christianity
universal; and that so far, that no great Prince or Monarch ought to be secure,
or think himself so free, but that he may be forced to desend his own, without
invasion of his neighbors Territories, whether it please or not; unless they
will become, of Princes, Servants; of Freemen, Slaves, detained in perpetual
chains, or flain and murdered, that their Subjects may want Captains and good
Leaders.

Now, most mighty Monarchs and high Governors, for Gods cause, banish from
amongst you all discord and ambitious tyrannies, (which are the Devils
instruments to maintain oppressions and impieties, thereby to prolong Gods
wrath upon you) and restore to each Proprietor his due rights and privileges;
and then, as Rivers having free course, haste all smoothly to the Sea, and make
one mighty body; so your strengths united in the bond of peace, would startle,
astonish and drown this great Tyrant Turk. Which blessing on bended knees I
humbly pray for, and recommend unto the God of Peace. And being reconciled
among your selves, if you would say as Moses said to Joshua, Choose you a man,
and go and fight with Amelek; if you would reduce your selves to this peace and
concord, (which is only hopeful) and put your helping hands and powers toward
so greatly honorable, so blessed, so necessary and profitable a War against
the Turk; who can imagine, but that ye should at least equal the number of his
Soldiery, if not far exceed them? He is now swelled up to the very height of
Tyranny, and has there remained so for diverse years, as if expecting, as if
waiting an Attempt. All full Seas have their ebbings, all ripe fruits are
quickly shaken down; there wants nothing to this general and glorious work of
Christian Princes, but Gods blessing, unanimity, and an heroic courage, brave
and masculine. For the Emperor can with easiness raise, arm and muster 50000
horse, and 100000 foot; the like may hopefully be expected from France, from
Spain and Italy: the yet remaining parts of Hungary and Illyria, with the
Provinces under the King of Romans, will raise and maintain 60000. These
Christian forces may make 400000 horse and foot, besides the Maritime great
assistances of England, Denmark, united Provinces, Venetians, Portugals and
Swedes, and all other Christian Commonwealths, who, if once unanimous, and
freed from jealousies and petty, wretched, wilful, homecontentions, the Turkish
power could no more resist ye, then Darius, Alexander; Xerxes, Themistocles; or
Antiochus, Judas Macchabeus: and having gotten but one Victory, and once passed
the Danube toward Constantinople, God being pleased, and our lives amended,
these enemies of our faith would easily be trodden down. All Greece and Thrace
(where yet great part retain the Law of Christ) expect with greediness the
Christian Sword, and readily would revolt upon such occasion, and manfully
assault and fight against those Lords and Masters, that have so cruelly
afflicted them: which circumstance alone, would much hasten, if not perfect a
speedy victory.

I would to God, and wish heartily, most Christian Monarchs, That your civil,
fruitless, home-contentions, would permit and suffer you seriously to consider,
and calmly to examine these offered motions; you then would find all men's
wills and arms concur with yours; no age, no sex, no conditions of men would
leave your Ensigns: Each Turk would have his Executioner at home, his Traitor
in his Tent, and fugitive in the Field. All Christians amongst them have
contemptuous opinions of their arms, and know them only sitted for light
Skirmishes and Pickerings; who, if their noise, like shoals of clamouring
Rocks, affright you not, they flee. And whenever it shall please God to root
out from amongst us these perpetual Enemies of his faith, and send them to
their old lurking holes, and caves and corners in Bythinia, by the Christian
Sword (according to some of their own Prophecies) or else to reduce them to the
bosom of our Catholic Church, no man can donbt, but in short time the Emperor
will be seated in his chair at Constantinople, and invested in his Imperial
Roman Territories; The King of Romans reestablished, and recover Hungary, and
Thrace; France, lesser Asia; England, part of Egypt; Spain, part of Africa;
Italy, all Shores and Banks of the Mediterranean Seas; and last, the Pope, as a
great Pastor of the Christian Church, will be extolled and magnified for such an
union.

These are the apprehensions of all Christian captives under the Turkish
Tribute, and even Turks themselves, who have-knowledge and long acquaintance in
military affairs. And this my self have learned by thirteen years experience,
The Turk is valiant against a flying, and flying against a valiant Enemy; when
therefore he by nature is fugitive, impiety flies without pursuit. Let God
arise and scatter all his Enemies: let those that hate his Doctrine, avoid his
presence: let them like smoke vanish, and melt like wax against the fire: so
may all Infidels perish, before the face of God and his holy Church, that there
may be but one Flock, and one Pastor, Jesus Christ the righteous. Which grant,
Oh ever blessed Trinity and Unity, God the Father, God the Son, and God the
Holy Ghost. Amen.

The Seraglio of the women and Sultanas of the Great SIGNOR.
BEfore I dismiss this Subject, to satissie some Curiosities concerning this
Emperors pleasures, in which he satiates himself with variety, conversing with
his Mutes and Buffones (for that it is not lawful for any body but the Vizier
Bassa^s, and some few others to speak to him) in the same fignes and gestures,
and now and then riding, and shooting and casting a heavy Iron Mace, all which
he is taught to do with great exactness; I will transiently speak of that, then
which nothing is more secret and reserved viz. His Companying with women, the
beautifullest those parts of the world afford, the greatest excellency and
perfection whereof is reputed to consist in great and broad eyes; the enjoyment
of women so featured, being made a part of their Paradise in the world to come.

They which are within the third gate, called the Kings gate, are about two
thousand persons, men and women; whereof the women (old and young one with
another; what with the Kings Concubines, Old women, and women Servants) may be
about eleven or twelve hundred. Now those which are kept up for their beauties,
are all young Virgins, taken and stolen from foreign Nations; who after they
have been instructed in good behavior, and can play upon Instruments, sing,
dance, and sew curiously; they are given to the Grand Signor as presents of
great value: and the number of these increases daily, as they are sent and
presented by the Tartars, by the Bashaws, and other great men, to the King and
Queen. They do likewise sometimes decrease, according as the Grand Signor shall
think fit. For upon diverse occasions and accidents, he causes many of them to
be turned out of this Seraglio, and to be sent into the old Seraglio: which is
also a very goodly and spacious place, of which hereafter I shall take occasion
to make mention. Virgins made Turks and how.
These Virgins immediately after their coming into the Seraglio, are made Turks;
which is done by using this Ceremony only; to hold up their forefinger and say
these words; law illawheh illaw Allawh, Muhammed resoul Allawh. That is, there
is no God but God alone, and Mahomet is the messenger of God. Kahiyah Cadun,
the mother of the maids.
As they are in age and disposition (being proved and examined by an old woman
called Kahiyah Cadun, that is, as we say, the Mother of the Maids) so they are
placed in a room with the others of the same age, spirit, and inclination, to
dwell and live together.

Their manner of life.
Now in the women's lodgings, they live just as Nuns do in great Nunneries, for
these Virgins have very large rooms to live in: and their Bed-Chambers will
hold almost a hundred of them a piece. They sleep upon Sofaes, which are built
longwise on both sides of the room, and a large space left in the midst to go
to and fro about their business.

Their Beds are very course and hard (for the Turks neither use Feather-beds,
nor Corded Bedsteads) and by every ten Virgins there lies an old woman and all
the night long there are many lamps burning, so that one may see plainly
throughout the whole room: which does both keep the wenches from wantonness,
and serve upon any occasion which may happen in the night. Near unto the said
Bed-chambers they have their Bagnos for their all times: with many use at
Fountains, out of which they are served with water, and above their Chambers
there are diverse rooms, where they sit and sew: and there they keep their
Books, and Chests, in which they lay up their apparel.

They feed by whole Camaradaes, and are served and waited upon by other women:
nor do they want any thing whatsoever, that is necessary for them.

There are other places likewise for them, where they go to School, to learn to
speak and read (if they will) the Turkish tongue, to sew also, and to play on
diverse Instruments, so they spend the day with their Mistresses, who are all
ancient women: some hours notwithstanding being allowed them for their
recreation, to walk in their gardens, and use such sports as they familiarly
exercise themselves withal.

The King does not at all frequent or see these Virgins, unless it be at that
instant when they are first presented unto him; or else in case that he desire
one of them for his Bedfellow, or to make him some pastime with music or
other sports: wherefore when he is prepared for a fresh Mate, he gives notice to
the Kahiya Cadun of his purpose; who immediately bestirs her self like a crafty
Baud, and chooses out such as she judges to be most amiable, and fairest of
all; and having placed them in good order in a room, in two ranks, like so many
pictures, half on the one sidr, and half on the other, The Kings eoming to them.
she forthwith brings in the King, who walking four or five times in the midst
of them, and having viewed them well, takes good notice within himself of her
that he best likes, but says nothing; only as he goes out again, he throws
a handkercheif into that Virgins hand; by which token she knows that she is
to lie with him that night: so she being (questionless) exceeding joyful to
become the object of so great a fortune, in being chosen outfrom among so many,
to enjoy the society of an Emperor, has all the art that possible may be,
shown upon her by the Cadun, in attiring, painting, and perfuming her; and at
night she is brought to sleep with the Grand Signor in the woman's lodgings,
where there are Chambers set apart for that business only. And being in bed
together, they have two great wax lights burning by them all night; one at the
beds feet, and the other by the door: besides there are appointed (by the
Cadun) diverse old Black-more women, to watch by turns that night in the
Chamber, by two at a time; one of them to sit by the light at the beds feet,
and the other by the door, and when they will they change, and other two supply
their rooms, without making the least noise imaginable, so that the King is not
any whit disturbed. Now in the morning when his Highness rises (for he rises
first) he changes all his apparel from top to toe, leaving those which he wore,
to her that he lay withal, and all the money that was in his pockets, were it
never so much; and so departs to his own lodgings; from whence also he
sends her immediately a present of jewels, money, and vests, of great value,
agreeable to the satisfaction and content which he received from her that
night. In the same manner he deals with all such as he makes use of in that
kind; but with some he continues longer then with other some, and enlarges
his bounty, far more toward some then others; according as his humor, and
affection to them, increases, by their fulfilling his lustful desires.

And if so fall out, that any one of them does conceive by him, and bring forth
his first begotten child; then she is called by Sultna Queen.
the name of Sultana, Queen: and if it be a Son, she is confirmed and
established by great feasts, and solemnities; and forth with has a dwelling
assigned unto her apart, of many stately rooms well furnished; and many
servants to attend upon her.

Her allowance.
The King likewise allows her a large revenue, that she may give away, and
spend at her pleasure, in whatsoever she may have occasion; and all they of the
Seraglio must, and do acknowledge her for Queen, showing all the duty and
respect that may be, both to her self, and to them that belong unto her.

Other Sultana's
The other women (howsoever they bring forth issue) are not called Queens; yet
they are called Sultana's, because they have had carnal commerce with the King:
and she only is called Queen, which is the Mother of the first begotten son,
heir to the Empire; the which Sultanas, being frequented by the King at his
pleasure, have also this prerogative; to be immediately removed from the common
sort, and to live in rooms apart, exceeding well served and attended; and have
no want either of money, or apparel, in conformity to their degree.

All these Sultanaes do resort together very familiarly, when they please; but
not without great dissimulation, and inward malice; fearing lest the one should
be better beloved of the Grand Signor then the other; yet notwithstanding this
their jealousy, they (in outward show) use all kind of courtesy one toward
another.

They never stir out of the Seraglio but in company of the King himself, who
often times carry; either all, or most of them abroad by water, to his other
Seraglios of pleasure: and in those ways through which they pass, to go to and
fro from their Kaiks, there is Canvas pitched up on both sides, and none may
come near them but black Eunuchs, till they be settled, and covered close in
the room, at the stern of the Kaik; and then go in the Bargemen; so that in
fine they are never seen by any men, but by the Grand Signor only, and the
Eunuchs.

The Kings Daughters, Sisters, and Aunts, have their lodgings also in the same
Seraglio; being royally served, and very sumptuously apparelled, and live
together by themselves in continual pleasures; until such time as at their
request the King shall be pleased to give them in marriage: and then they come
forth of that Seraglio, and carry each of them along with them a chest which
the Grand Signor gives them, full of rich apparel, jewels, and money; to the
value of (at the least) thirty thousand pounds sterling a chest; and that is
(as we call it) their portion.

There are many other things which are worthy a Discourse, and Relation in this
Magnificent Court and family of the Grand Signor, but being confined by time to
this Volume, they must awayt a fairer opportunity of Publication.

FINIS.

