the Emperor of Ger:

the king of France

a^enge thy Country and my Blood

Tamerlane

Scanderbeg

The true Effigies of Count Nicolaj Serini Generalissimo of the Christian Army
in Hungary:
John Chantry sculp


A NEW SURVEY OF THE Turkish Empire HISTORY AND GOVERNMENT COMPLETED.

Being an exact and absolute Discovery of what is worthy of Knowledge, or any
way satisfactory to Curiosity in that mighty Nation.

With several Brass Pieces, lively expressing the most eminent Personages
concerned in this Subject.

Nec sinas Turcos equitare inultos
Te Duce Caesar.
Horat. Od. 2. London, Printed by J. Best. for John Williams, at the sign of
the Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard, MDCLXIV.

TO THE READER.
THIS Rationale or Account of the Turkish Empire, like the Subject it treats
of, from dispersed and scattered pieces of Travel and Observation, is now
arrived to a complete Consistency in this entire Frame and Composure, and looks
like the Portraicture and becoming proportionate Resemblance of that most noble
and potent STATE.

And perhaps this Work and Endeavor was due and reserved to this juncture of
its Greatness, as wherein the power and force of this Monarch does so
pressingly and importunately urge our consideration and serious reflections
upon the Effects thereof; And as he draws nearer to us, so in reason he should
appear in larger and fuller Dimensions, then the dangerless apprehensions of
former times have measured him out to our Curiosity.

It is confessed, that the joint stock of those famed Writers, who have engaged
in this design, will never tantamount to the sum of this Treatise, (wherein are
some things notwithstanding altogether rare and novel) but such is the
disjoined, unreduced variety thereof, besides the brevity and incompetence, as
to particulars, unless all of them be consulted, that never any plenary
satisfaction was yet given the world: As therefore in the Politics, Dominions
that lie compact and united to one another, though smaller, are preferred to
richer and vaster Territories, which are eloigned and far distanced, for that
the former can presently succor and relieve its fellows (as in the case of
France and Spain;) by so much may this Essay presume of a Favorable Reception;
and for that the one part does now illustrate and set forth the other, and each
supplies the whole, with every thing requisite in this Government, by an easy
and direct methodical conveyance, quite different from the projection of the
former Draught, for the better cluing and manuduction of the Reader.

And this being the first adventure this way, we have further Reason to hope,
that the ingenious will readily approve it, considering in this busy world
what use there is to be made of Time, and how much labor and purveyance is
saved in revolving so many Authors, as inquisitive men, resolved upon the
pursuit of this story, must otherwise have recourse to.

It was said ingeniously by Martial upon the Discomfitures of Pompey in so many
places and different Countries:

-- Jacere
Uno non potuit tanta ruina loco.
And I may more fitly say of the Glories of this Monarchy,

-- Jacere
Debuit haud multis Gloria tanta locis.
As it is thus reassembled from its divided pieces, in the manner of a
resurrection, we trust it has put on perfection, and with that immortality;
that is to say, as long as the Turkish Name and Nation shall endure.

VALE. H. M.

The CONTENTS.
Chap. I. THe Life of Mahomet the Impostor and Founder of this Empire. Chap.
II. An epitomy of the lives of His Successors the Caliphs, Sultans and Emperors
of the Ottoman Family. Chap. III. The Extent of their Dominion. Chap. IV.
Their Militia. Chap. V. Their Government Civil and Ecclesiastical Chap. VI.
Their Religion. Chap. VII. The Seraglio or Court of the Grand Seignior. Chap.
VIII. The common Customs and Manner of the Turks: Chap. IX. Of the afflictions
of Captives and Christians under the Turks. Chap. X. A Dispute between a Roman
Catholic and a Turk, with several Prophesies concerning the Turks. Chap. XI. A
brief view of the Tartars. Chap. XII. The Character of Tamerlane and Scanderbeg
those two great terrors to the Turk Chap. XIII. The modern History of the
Turks, with the siege of Newhausel. Chap. XIV. The late expedition of the noble
General Count Serini. Chap. XV. The interest of all the Princes in Christendom
upon the account of Policy and Religion in a War with the Turks. Chap. XVI. An
exact Chronology of the successes of the Christians formerly obtained against
them.
A NEW SVRVEY OF THE Turkish Empire COMPLETED.
CHAP. I. Of the Life of Mahomet the Impostor and Founder of this Empire, with
the succeeding Calyphs.
LIttle reason has the world to admire at the impiety of men, how execrable
soever, when it shall be fully informed of the most blasphemous designs of this
vile and lewd Deceiver, who by his prosperous and thriving delusions and
abominations, has given encouragement to succeeding and very modern times to
practice and imitate his wicked example. Such a Miscellany of absurdities in
moral and religious concernments could indeed hardly have been imagined to have
found any reception among rational creatures; but such was the force of his
bold Atheism, and his boasted familiarity with the Deity, and the pleasing
insinuations of his sensual and material Paradise, how incongruously soever
confounded in his Institutions, besides the fine novelty thereof to a Pagan
people, that without very much ado this Impostor quickly planted his opinions
so strong, that they have taken such root and spread so universally, that one
whole half of the habitable world to this day adheres to his doctrine.

Mahomets extraction
Most Writers accord that Mahomet, which name in the Arabic signify,
Indignation or Fury, was the son of Adalla a Merchant in Mecca, a City in
Arabia Faelix; but Jathrib an obscure Village there, is named for his
extraction. His mother Hemina a Jew, and himself in Anno Dom. 571. born
Posthumus, though others say he was deprived of both his Parents at two years
old, when a poor woman that labored for her living bred him up; others say it
was his Uncle; at sixteen years of age he became a Merchants Bondman, his name
Abdalmutalif; his Master pleased with his wit and dexterity, made him his
Factor: He dead, Mahomet being then twenty five years old, married his Mistress,
and until the thirty eighth year of his age he industriously followed his trade
of merchandise, avoiding no personal travel (as well in the Kingdoms of Egypt,
Syria and Persia, as elsewhere) where profit might arise. Being then satisfied
with wealth, and given to ease, he began to think on higher things, whereof in
his travels he had not been negligent, having been curious to understand the
Religion of the Jews and Christians; which compared with the Idolatry wherein
he was originally trained thirty years, did work in him assurance that Paganism
was the way of ignorance, but to whether of those to incline, he stood
doubtful. At last falling in company with two Christian Artificers inhabitants
in Mecca, by conversation with them (who read the Old and New Testament unto
him, for himself was unlettered) he preferred Christianism, and seemed of
opinion, that thereby only a man might attain unto salvation, and accordingly
he framed his life, which bred admiration in them that knew him, and gave him a
greater reputation then he did expect.

But this hasty spring was quickly blasted; for the Devil taking advantage by
this his esteem, enflamed his heart with pride, which wrought in him a desire
to be taken for a Prophet, thinking all other attributes of Religion and
sanctity to be but vile and base: Mahomet aspires to the name of a P^^phet.
To aspire unto that opinion he embraced a solitary life, retiring to a Cave in
the Mountains, where he lived free from the ordinary conversation of men;
repaired seldom to his own home, and his speeches (mixed with gravity and
holiness, teaching good life, and beating down Idolatry) moved, not only such
as saw him to admire, but the rest also (that heard by other men's ears) held
him to be a Saint. To increase this opinion of sanctimony, of the falling
sickness (wherewith he was afflicted) he made good use; Mahomet troubled with
the Falling sickness.
for he gave it out (when he fell into his fits incident to that disease) that
he conferred with the Angel Gabriel, by whom the pleasure of God was revealed
unto him, and that his trance proceeded through the weakness of his earthly
Carcass, that was astonished at the Divine presence of the Heavenly
Ambassador. To pass by the vulgar story of his pedigree.

Grown now famous, he thought it necessary to divulge into the world some works
in writing, whereby his name might increase; His best help was a Jew Scribe,
whom for want of a better Scholar he entertained; but shortly after, his Master
the Devil (the Church of Christ then laboring with the sickness of many
Heresies) procured the acquaintance of a Christian called Sergius born in
Alexandria, by profession a Monk, and by infection a Nestorian, witty, eloquent
and learned, who (having mist of some Ecclesiastical preferment which in his
opinion he had deserved) full of despite and revenge, The Monk Sergius his
Coadjutor
in a devilish discontent, (having fled out of Syria into the house of
Mahomets Master) sought as well to raise a scandal upon the Christian Religion,
as upon the professors thereof; the readiest way to kindle this fire, he found
to be Mahomet; who (as is already said) had won some extraordinary opinion of
sanctity. After some conference between them, the Jew for insufficiency was
discharged. Sergius being fully informed how Mahomet had hitherto proceeded,
made him to understand how weakly and grossly he had erred in fundamental points
necessary for the advancement of a new Religion; His damnable advice.
and cunningly showed him, not only the means how to smooth his past errors
without scandal, but to compose a new Treatise, collected out of the Old and
New Testament, united into some common principles with devised additions of his
own, to bring Christians, Jews, and Gentiles under one profession, that should
give credit to his Doctrine, and humor the hearers; which being divulged
amongst the Idolatrous people (who were easily caught) spread the poison it
contained over all the Arabies; but the wiser sort fearing (as they had cause)
that the settling of a new Religion, might also draw with it a new form of
Government, opposed themselves against it, calling Mahomet an Impostor,
reproving his hypocrisy, and taxing his sensuality and drunkenness (of both
which he was guilty) and sent to apprehend him; whereof Mahomet from some of
his friends in Mecca having notice, left his Cave and fled to the Deserts;
Sergius in the mean time sounding in the ears of the people his parts and piety
(the sixteenth of July 622. from which flight the Turks begin their computation
of Hegyrathi) unto whom diverse Novelists resorted; The Hegyra.
as also such as the Estates had banished for approving his late coined trash:
This swarm of Wasps being stirred, nothing but revenge could ease their hearts;
Mahomet willingly taking the advantage there offered, enlarged his thoughts,
holding it now, less difficil for him to gain a Kingdom, then the title of a
Prophet, which he had obtained.

To make a smooth way to his enterprise, by underhand means, he exasperated
the heady Novelists (whereof there were many of wealth and estimation) to be
sensible of their banishment, and to repair their wrongs by force; himself
accounted unto them Revelations, which assured him that God was displeased with
the Meccans, for the rigorous prosecuting him and his Sectaries; that God
willed to chastise their Tyranny: of victory he was assured: and whosoever of
them dyed in that holy War, his soul should presently ascend to Heaven: with
these and such like motives, the giddy people encouraged and seduced, elected
Mahomet to be their chief, who (ordaining Officers and Captains, and receiving
an Oath of fidelity as well from them as from their troops) marched to the City
of Medina, Mahomet takes Medina.
and though repulsed at first, (yet after a field fight with the said enemy, at
a place called Bedez, often mentioned in the Alcoran, where he had the Victory)
took it by force, the cause of his quarrel being pretended against the Jews
Synagogue, which he converted into a Temple for his own abominations: This
first good fortune wrought the effect he desired; for instantly by his Army he
was saluted Calipha, which interpreted, is King; and because his creation
happened upon a Friday, that day was ordained by him to be their Sabbath.

Takes Mecca.
His next conquest was the City of Mecca, where he triumphed in the blood of his
Neighbor Citizens, which was not spared; and proclaimed death to all those
that did not embrace his Doctrine.

The Princes and great men in Arabia (opposite unto him) assembled all their
forces; Opposed by the Nobles o^ Arabia.
Mahomet being too weak, was overthrown, wounded, and fled to Mecca; yet in the
end (the war continuing) he prevailed, and reduced the three Arabies under his
subjection. Grown great and glorious with his Victories, (at that time the
Emperor of Constantinople, and King of Persia being men of weak and tame
Spirits,) and assisted with the Saracens, who had been deceived and abused of
their pay by Heraclius the Emperor, as also by Julian the Apostate, (for
Mahomets appearance was signalized with the contemporary reign of that
miscreant) he invaded their Dominions, and with a conquering sword triumphed
over Syria, the City of Jerusalem, His conquests.
the Kingdom of Mesopotamia and Persia, the great City of Babylon, with other
Eastern Provinces; of all which, as of the Arabies, he styled himself King.
Being now grown elder by his inordinate life, in the state of his body then in
years, which exceeded not sixty seven, full of glory, as well in regard of his
large Empire, as in opinion of sanctity in being esteemed a Prophet, And
retirement.
and weary with war, with a fained holiness, he retired to Mecca, the
Metropolis of his new Empire (under which mask he intended to take his ease)
sequestered himself from public affairs, committing the Government of his
estate to the Lieutenants, and within three years following, which was in Anno
Dom. 631. the sixtieth year of his Age, and the tenth of his reign he died; but
others say in the seventieth of his age, and the twenty third of his
impostures, and that he died frantic: Mahomet dies.
Upon his deathbed he commended unto his principal Commanders, the care and
use of his fantastical Law, assuring them that it was agreeable to the Will of
God, and that so long as they and their posterity should hold and maintain it,
they should flourish. His dead body being kept four days in expectation of a
resurrection, which he promised to perform in three, grown full of stench and
putrefaction, was carried by his successors, who pretended to be his Caliphs or
Vicar Generals, to Medina, where it yet continues, but not drawn up to the roof
of the Chapel by a Lodestone, as is vulgarly fabled.

This false Prophet and usurping Prince, pretended paternally to descend from
the Patriarch Abraham by his eldest Son Ismael, Mahomet pretends descent from
Abraham.
and to avoid the infamy of an unlawful bed, he affirmed that Ismael was the
Son of Sara, not of the Bondwoman Agar, whereupon the Arabians (which is the
undoubted name of that people) are by some writers (of Ismael) called
Ismaelites, and by others (of Agar) Agarens; And (of Sara) Sarazens, but in
this latter time they are distinguished by the name of Arabians, Moors, and
Mahometans; the first is proper only to those which inhabit in Arabia: the
Moors are the Progeny of such Arabians as after their Conquests seated
themselves in that part of Africa: the Mahometans is the general name of all
Nations that profess Mahomet, as Turks, Tartars, Persians, etc.

Of the successors of Mahomet until the year of our Lord 673. the writers vary
in opinion, both in name and number of the Caliphs, and in the years of their
reigns: the reason that begat their errors proceeded from the dissension that
happened (about the succession) amongst Mahomets Kins-men, evermore
Anti-Caliphs starting up with pretending Titles in opposition to him that had
the Diadem; whereof some were murdered and others deposed, so as the writers
either out of ignorance (not able to discern the truth, or wilfully partial)
have erred. Notwithstanding their civil tumults they kept Mahomets Dominions,
and inherited his fortunes, for every of them added somewhat to his Monarchy,
whereby they became fearful to the world, and potent in Asia, Africa, and
Europe.

The fourth Caliph (agreed upon by Historiographers) was called Aozman or
Azman, Husband to Mahomets Daughter, who perceiving (that in this upstart
Religion) Schisms and diversities of opinions began to rise, by the help of his
Wifes Mother recovered Mahomets papers wherein his Law was written, which with
some additions of his own he caused to be digested into one volume, containing
four books, divided into 124. Chapters, and called it the Al^oran; that is to
say, the Collection of Precepts: the Original whereof they feign to be written
in a Table which is kept in heaven, and the Copy of it brought to Mahomet by
the Angel Gabriel, by his mistake, say the Persians, but for Mahomets virtue,
approved by God.

A Book so highly reverenced by the Mahometans, that they write upon the Cover
of it, The esteem of the Alcoran.
Let none touch this but he that is clean; Commanding expressly upon pain of
death, that that book, and that only, should be received as Canonical, through
his Dominions. The whole body of it is but an Exposition and gloss on these
eight Commandments.

1. Every one ought to believe that God is a great God, and one only God, and
Mahomet is his Prophet. They hold Abraham to be the Friend of God; Their
opinion concerning Christ.
Moses the Messenger of God; and Christ the Breath of God, whom they deny to be
conceived by the Holy Ghost, affirming that the Virgin Mary grew with child of
him by smelling to a Rose, and was delivered of him at her breasts. They deny
the mystery of the Trinity, but punish such as speak against Christ; whose
Religion was not (say they) taken away, but mended by Mahomet. And he who in
his pilgrimage to Mecca, does not coming or going, visit the Sepulcher of
Christ, is reputed not to have merited, or bettered himself any thing by his
journey.

2. Every man must marry to increase the Sectaries of Mahomet. Four Wives he
allowed to every man, and as many Concubines as he will, between whom the
Husband sets no difference, either in affection or apparel, but that his
Wives only can enjoy his Sabbaths benevolence. The women are not admitted in
the time of their lives to come into their Churches; nor after death to
Paradise.

3. Every one must give of his wealth' to the poor. Hence you shall have some
buy slaves, and then manumit them; buy birds and then let them fly. They use
commonly to free Prisoners, release Bondslaves, build caves or lodgings in the
ways for the relief of Passengers, repair bridges, and men Highways.

4. Every one must make his prayers five times a day. When they pray they turn
their bodies toward Mecca, but their faces sometimes one way, sometimes another
way, believing that Mahomet shall come behind them, being at their devotions.
And those which cannot come, must when they hear the voice of the Cryars, fall
down in the place where they are, do their devotions, and kiss the ground
thrice.

5. Every man must keep a Lent one month in a year. This Lent is called
Ramazan, in which they suppose the Alcoran was given unto Mahomet by the Angel
Gabriel. This fast is only intended in the day time, the law giving leave to
frolic it in the night, as they best please, so they abstain from Wine and
Swines flesh.

Turks unnatural to their parents.
6. Be obedient to thy Parents. Which Law is the most neglected of any in all
the Alcoran: never any children being so unnatural as the Turkish.

7. Thou shall not kill. And this they keep inviolated among themselves, but
the poor Christians are sure to feel the smart of their fury. And as if by this
law the actual shedding of blood only were prohibited, they have invented
punishment for their offenders, worse then death it self.

8. Do unto others, as thou would be done unto thy self. To those that keep
these Laws he promises Paradise, The Turks Paradise.
a place of all delights, adorned with flowery fields, watered with
Chrystalline Rivers, beautified with trees of Gold; under whose cool shade they
shall spend their time with amorous Virgins, whose mansion shall not be far
distant. The men shall never exceed the age of thirty, nor the women of
fifteen; and those to have their virginities renewed as fast as lost. he taught
too, that at the end of the world, all men that professed any such Religion,
should go into Paradise; the Jews under the Banner of Moses; the Christians
under the Banner of Christ; and the Saracens under the Banner of Mahomet. They
compel no man therefore to abjure the faith in which he was born, but commend
and approve secretly such as they find zealous and constant in their own
Religion; yet hold it an especial honor to have daily new Proselytes, they
incite them by hope of freedom and preferment, which with many are motive^ too
much prevailing.

The opinions which they hold concerning the end of the world, are very
ridiculous; a^ that at the winding of a horn, Their absurd conceit of doomsday.
not all flesh only, but the Angels themselves shall die, that the earth with
an Earthquake shall be kneeded together like a lump of Dough; that a second
blast of the same horn shall after forty days restore all again; that Cain
shall be Captain or Ringleader of the damned, who shall have the countenance
of Dogs and swine; that they shall pass over the bridge of Justice, laden with
their sins in satchels; that the great sinners shall fall into Hell, the lesser
into Purgatory only; with a thousand of the like fopperies, which it is
needless to add here, considering that the Alcoran it self is now extent in
English, and every one that lists may read it.

I need not engage further in an account of his Doctrine, and pretended
successors. But having shown you the Original and Author of this Dominion, and
how gained, and by what art enlarged into that bulk, and by force wrested from
other Princes, ( Mahomet pretending for his inj^rious invasions, the directions
of God, who seeing his Law delivered by Moses and Christ to have been despised,
because of the weak assertion thereof, would have them planted now by the
Sword) we will next see by what means they are yet kept and maintained, and are
like to be increased, namely by power, and the same military Maxims. Imperium
iisdem Artibus facile retinetur quibus acquiritur.

CHAP. II. The Successors of Mahomet, from the Nation of the Turks, continued
to this present in the Ottoman Family.
HAving partly touched before some of the preceding Caliphs, whose Catalogue
has been most imperfectly delivered, we come now to those his successors in
this Nation of the Turks, whose better and invincible fortune has preserved
their memory, and given the world a dreadful series of those Mahumetan
Potentates, who although they be not Caliphs, nomine, the Mufti executing the
sacerdotal part of that dignity; yet are they so great by their Imperial power,
and the subordination of the Preistly to his arbitrary commands, and alone
pleasure.

The world heard not of this Slip, and branch of that Miscreant Religion, till
the fury of the Eastern Tartars had dispossessed them of their worthless
habitations in Turcomania, and at such time also as the Persians had recovered
themselves from the oppressing Arms of Tangrolipix, and their Cousin Turks, a
remainder of whom, under Sultan Aladin, yet maintained a kind of vagrant
Regality about Iconium, and those parts of Asia the less; whilst those
accessional vagabonds under their Captain Solomon, the Chief of their Tribe
arrived and obtained quarters, from their Countrymen, to repose their wearied
and wretched Familes, who finding themselves pent up in the narrowness of that
precarious Territory: for the Christians of the Greek Empire in Asia, had stood
with their arms in their hands to defend invasions some good while before,
their Captain Solomon disigned an enlargement over the River Euphrates, in
which attempting to pass to the other shore, and disdaining to return to his
former seat, he was carried away by the violence of the stream and drowned
therein; to the great loss and grief of his followers.

He left behind him three Sons, but the Turks not then so nicely observant of
Primogeniture, passing by the eldest, preferred Ertogrul, of whose courage and
martial disposition they had early experience. He by his own enterprises and
assistance given to the said Sultan Aladin, so confirmed himself in that parcel
of Land given and augmented to him, that he was dignified and known by the name
of Ertogrul Beg, or Lord Ertogrul, which Title very aged, he left to his Son
Osman or Ottoman, his youngest of three, whom the Tribe substituted in his
Fathers place, from the same considerations with the former, about the year,
1300.

This OTTOMAN, who is taken for the Founder of this Empire, was the first of
the Turks, that quarrelled with the Christians, (for which reason it may be
supposed that Original glory is attributed to him) by seizing several of the
Neighbor Castles, as namely that of Cara Ciasar, and afterward others, as
well by force as fraud, until those frequent exploits had rendered him rightly
suspect to the Greek Emperors, whose Innovations in Religion, and persecutions
thereupon, divisions and unnatural feuds, the Grandfather, Father and Sons,
supplanted one another, to the renversment of that once Mighty State, opened a
way to the mean and despicable Arms of this rude Shepherd, even into the heart
of the Empire.

For besides other lesser Skirmishes with the Christians and the Turks of Nice,
(near to which, at Neapoly, he erected the seat of his new Kingdom, having
gained the most part of Phrygia, the greater Misia, and Bythinia, and caused
himself to be called Sultan, after the death of Aladin of Iconium, in whom
failed the Zelzuccian line, and whom he acknowledged as supreme,) he besieged
Prusa, and there fought a great battle with the Confederate Christian Princes,
in the confines of Phrygia and Bythinia, and after a long fight, obtained of
them a bloody Victory; and so curbed that City by building Castles to keep them
in, and block up the passages, that a while before he died, in the year 1327.
It was rendered to his Son Orchanes, and made the Royal Seat of the Ottoman
Kings, where in 1328. he dyed of the Gout, aged sixty nine years, and was
buried, a Monument of him remaining to this day.

ORCHANES his Son succeeded him, who had one only Brother named Aladin, the
peaceable enjoyer of a private life (for until the time of Bajazet the first,
it was not the custom to murder their brethren) this Orchanes had managed the
Kingdom two years before his Fathers death, and therefore was the more expert
in those Arts by which his Father had enlarged his Dominions. He encountered
with the Greek Emperor Andronicus at Philochrene, where it was a drawn Battle,
thereafter he surprised Nice, regayned from him by the Greeks; by strong hand
he carried Nicomedia, as his Captains took in the Castle of Abydos, in the
Sreights of the Hellespent, whence they had a fair and easy prospect into
Europe, as he did Callipolis upon the other same shore, now one of the Arsenals
and chiefest Ports in those Seas: and which gave him firm footing in Europe,
which Orchanes at the advice of Solomon his Son, who conquered it, peopled with
Sarazens out of the County of Carasina. In the year 1359. died Orchanes, aged
almost eighty years, with grief at the death of his said Son Solomon, who was
killed with a fall from his Horse as he was a Hawking, leaving his Son Amurath
to extend his new acquests, further into Thracia and Servia.

AMVRATH a very politic and Martial Prince, at the very entrance of his
Reign, Surprised Adrianople, and made the Greeks, who regarded not the loss of
Calipolis, to bethink themselves of the danger of these encroachments. He was
the first that began the order of the Janissaries, by taking Christian Children
from their Parents, and trayning them up in the Mahumetan Laws and Manners,
makes Leagues and Allyances with the Asian Potentates to secure his designs
upon Europe, as to cherish the divisions among the Greeks, he did aid and
assist the Emperor Cantacuzenus against John Palaeologus the third, in the
year (...) he invaded Servia, and took Nyssa the Metropolis thereof, and
imposed a great Tribute upon the Country. Returning thence he carried his
victorious arms against Aladin, King of Caramania, his Son in Law, by whom he
had been provoked in his absence, and in a great Battle overthrew him,
notwithstanding afterward he restored him to his Kingdom upon conditions of
homage. From hence he came back again to Bulgaria, which he overran, and in a
Mortal Battle slew and overcame Lazarus the Despot of Servia, in the fatal
plains of Cossova, where he himself proudly surveying the carriage of the
field, was stabed in the belly by a wounded Christian Soldier named Miles
Cobbelitz, who staggering to approach him, was by his own command admitted to
his person; since which time no Ambassador is suffered to come before the Grand
Seignior, unless his arms be guarded by one on each side. This happened in the
year 1390. in the 31. year of his reign. He was interred at Prusa with his
Predecessors.

BAJAZET, surnamed Gilderun or Lightning, for his fierce and sudden violence of
nature, having strangled his only brother Jacup Zelebi (so that he was the
introducer of this most inhumane practice) succeeded his Father Amurath, and
vanquished and subdued Mark the Prince of Bulgaria, as he did also Lazarus the
new Despot of Servia and spoiled Valachia, making the Vayvod thereof his
Tributary. In Asia he tyrannized over the Mohammedan Princes, the successors of
Aladin, and in arrogance besieged Constantinople twice, but in vain. He subdued
Thessaly and Phoci, defeated Sigismond King of Hungary at Nicopolis, assisted
by an Army of French and Burgundians with a terrible slaughter; so that the
Turkish Power was first dreadful by his Puiffance. He again vanquished the
stubborn Aladin of Caramania with his Kingdom, and the great Cities of Amasia
and Sebastia: in fine, uncivilly treating the Ambassadors of Tamerlane, sent in
behalf of the poor Princes of Asia, he was by him near Sebastia, after a most
bloody dispute overcome and taken prisoner, and put into an iron Cage, carried
about for Tamerlane's Horse-block, until with impatience at his two years
slavery, he broke out his brains against the grates, in the year 1399.

This overthrow so blasted the greatness of the Ottoman Family, that it was
hudled up in a general confusion betwixt the interests and claims of Bajazet's
Sons. Solomon his eldest Son possessed himself of his Conquests in Europe, and
seated at Adrianople, Mahomet his younger at Amasia, and defended his Asiatick
Provinces against the invasion of the Tartars; some petty Princes whereof had
those assigned to them by Tamerlane. In conclusion, Musa the second brother
released out of his Captivity, with his Fathers dead body, by the assistance of
Mahomet, destroyed Solomon, and seized himself of his Kingdom; of which not
long after, Mahomet dispossessed Musa and strangled him, and united the whole
entire Dominion under himself. He was but 15 years old when he began to reign,
yet such was his prudence and prowess, that he restored this collapsed Empire
in a few years. He died in 1422. and was buried at Prasa near his Father
Bajazet, who has a sumptuous Monument in that City.

AMVRATH, now the second, being sent for to Adrianople, was there by the
Bashaws, according to the appointment of Mahomet, advanced to the Throne. His
first work was the suppression of a counterfeit Mustapha the son of Bajazet,
whom he caused to be strangled. He next won Thessalonica, with the greatest
part of Atolia and Achaia, and at the same time practiced foully upon the King
of Epirus, the Father of Scanderbeg by poison, as tyrannically upon the petty
Princes of Asia; whence he converted his Army against the Despot of Servia,
whom he vallalized, but invaded Transylvania with loss; whereupon by much
entreaty he obtained peace of Vliadslaus King of Hungary, who breaking his
faith so solemnly given, and invading Amurath, engaged in a prosperous War with
the Caraman King in Asia, was by Amurath recalled thus into Europe, most
miserably defeated at Varna, and there slain. The remainder of his long reign
was spent in vexation at the successes of Scanderbeg, whom with all his power
he was not able to reduce, whereupon he retired to a Monastery, and with grief
he died, leaving the Government to his Son Mahomet.

MAHOMET was a perfect Athiest, of no Faith or Religion, murdered his Brethren,
subdued Mentesia, and took Constantinople on the 29. of May 1453. and thereby
put an end to the Greek Empire, and caused himself to be styled Emperor. To
omit the known story of his Concubine Irene, we must pass with him to the siege
of Belgrade in Hungary, whence he was forced to rise with great loss and
dishonor, having been himself dangerously wounded, afterward he practiced
upon the Princes of Valachia, and brought a horrible devastation on the
Country, and designed the like Treachery upon Scanderbeg, but by him worsted
before Croja; nevertheless he gained Sordea from the Venetians after a vain and
bloody siege by Treaty and Composition. He attempted and staggered the Persian
King also: In vain likewise he besieged Rhodes, and invaded Italy; as his
purposes against the Caramanian King were disappointed by his death, not
without suspicion of poison, 1481. He was buried at Constantinople.

BAJAZET, his Son succeeded him, and first managed a War against his brother
Zemes, who flying to Rhodes, and thence sent to Rome was poisoned by Pope
Alexander the sixth, bribed thereunto by Bajazet. He prepared for an expedition
to Hungary, but durst not prosecute it, the effect speeding it self to his
great loss upon Valachia and Transylvania, with more indifferent fortune he
combated Caitheius the Sultan of Egypt, but finally vanquished the Caramanian
King, and united that Kingdom to his own. He quarrelled the Venetians, and took
and lost several places: The end as the beginning of his reign, was disquieted
with the unnatural disloyalty of his Sons, Cocutus, Achomates and Selymus, at
whose instance he was at last poisoned by a Jew his Physician, in the year,
1512.

SELTMVS began his reign, not only with the death of his Father, but the murder
of his brother Corcutus, and five of his brother Achomet's Sons, makes war
against Hysmael the Persian Sophy, with whom he had a signal encounter beyond
Euphrates; but such was the equal fortune of the day, that Selymus content to
have coped personally with that renowned and dreadful Potentate, retreated back
to Constantinople, whence he threatened Hungary, but the force and fury of his
Army fell upon Campson Gaurus and Tomombeus, Sultans of the Mamaluke Empire,
whom he overthrew in two fatal battles at Singa, and in the City of Grand
Cairo, which with Egypt and Syria were annexed to his Dominions. In his return
hence, as he was meditating an useful expedition into Hungary, being seized by
a canker in his back, he breathed out his revengeful soul in the year 1520.

SOLOMON his only Son (not so strange, considering his Father was a most
Martial Prince) succeeded to the Throne; in whose reign this great Empire rose
to its highest pinnacle and culmination of Glory. He was surnamed the
Magnificent for the nobleness of his Acts: He first conquered the Isle of
Rhodes, defeated King Lewis of Hungary, and slew him at Mohaez, and besieged
Vienna, but in vain. In fine, this was the potent Monarch that conquered
Hungary, took Buda Strigonum, Alba Regalis, in pretense of the right of King
John and his Orphant elected by the Hungarian Nobility against the due title of
Ferdinand. He likewise threatened Italy with his Fleets, and aided the French
King by them against Charles the Fifth, as he likewise combated the Persian
Kings, Hysmael and Tamas: He besieged Malta by his General Mustapha, but was
there worsted. Toward the latter end of his reign he was enjealoused by his
Paramour Recotane against the Noble Prince Mustapha, his eldest Son by another
woman, to make way for her children, and Mustapha strangled, as Solomon was
upon a pretended Expedition against the Persians. In his seventh and last
expedition into Hungary he died, at the siege of Zigerh, 1566. having made
Hungary a Province of Turkey. Selymus having met his Fathers Corpse about
Belgrade (having been privily advertised of his death by Mahomet Bassa, who had
concealed it from the Janissaries, as is usual in that Government, to avoid the
mutiny of the Janissaries) was there saluted Emperor, but not admitted to the
Seraglio at his return to Constantinople, till he had given them a large
Donative. He was a Prince no way like his Father, but given to excess and
debauchery, which made him willing to make peace with the Emperor of Germany
and the Persians; notwithstanding by his Captains he gained Cyprus from the
Venetians, as he lost the famous battle of Lepanto to Don John of Austria.
Toward the end of his reign he subdued Moldavia and Valachia more absolutely to
the Turkish subjection, as he also reduced the Kingdom of Tunis, and the strong
Castle of Guletta, taken from Barbarossa by Charles the fifth 42 years before.
He died at the 51 year of his age, spent with wine and women, and in the year
of the Incarnation 1574.

AMVRATH the third succeeded him, having caused his five Brethren to be
strangled in his sight: He was a Prince not vicious as his Father, but given to
peace, and addicted to a quiet life, and managed his Arms as his Father had
done before him, by Lieutenants, who were famous men in their times, as Sinan,
Ferhates Mustapha, and Osnan Bassa the first and last of whom, sorely plagued
the Persians, against whom Amurath was provoked by a dream and vision, and took
from them the Province of Media, now called Sirvan, a great part of the greater
Armenia, and the Regal City of Tauris after two or three dismal encounters;
they confirmed likewise the Crim-Tartar in a surer obedience to the Ottoman
Family. The same Sinan waged a fierce War in Hungary, took Raab and other
Towns, but they were all recovered again, and he after many grand achievements
shamefully driven to fly out of Hungary, by Sigismund Prince of Transylvania,
since which time until this day, the Turks power was never formidable in
Europe. Amurath died in the year 1595. having reigned 21. years.

MAHOMET the third, his eldest Son succeeded him, commencing his reign with the
bloody Massacre of 18. of his Brethren, and ten of his Fathers Wives and
Concubines thought to be impregnate with Posthume issue, that so he might make
sure work. He was dreaded before his assumption to the Crown, to have been of a
fierce and untractable nature, but he proved a mere swine; for he was memorable
for nothing of military concernment, but his personal appearance in Hungary
with 200000 men, where he took Agria, and was present at the battle of
Keresture in 1596. the second of his reign, out of which field he run in the
beginning of the Fight, and would never endure to hear of an engagement again;
something was done by his Captains in Hungary, but as much was done against
them, and things continued there in statu quo to his death, which happened by his
unweildy Fat, under which he could not stand; in the year 1603.

ACHMAT his Son, a stripling succeeded him, a Prince proud and imperious, yet
no way Martial: he had some Piques with the Persian who threatened him hard, and
made him glad to urge a peace with Rodolphus the Emperor, being also perplexed
with his Rebels in Asia. Like his Predecessors he was engaged in a Valachian
and Moldavian War, which he finished with victory, taking the Princes
Alexander, Bougdan and Coresky Prisoners, the latter of whom made a great
bustle in the Ottoman Court, by his escape out of prison. This Sultan Achmat
was much given to women, and with too frequent use of them died young, at the
age of 30. years in 1617.

As to his Sons and Successors, having spoken of them in the modern History of
the Turks hereto adjoined, this is their brief Character: Mustapha the Brother
German of Achmat appointed by him, because of the minority of his Sons, to the
Government, was a bookish Philosophical man, and bred in the fear of death all
his days. Osman, Achmat's Son, who dethroned him, a Prince of 16. years of
age, was a very forward active Prince: he quarrelled with the Poles, and
perceiving in that War the sloth and cowardliness of the Janissaries, by which
he came off with dishonor, by the advice of Derlavir the grand Vizier, an
experienced honest man, and a great Captain on the Asian side, intended the
extirpation of them, and the erection of a new Militia; which design being
sented, was the cause of both their deaths, Osman being strangled in prison,
and the Vizier cut in pieces, by the tumultuous mutinies of those Bands.

MVSTAPHA was re-inthroned, but was the same man, and again deposed by the same
Janissaries; and Sultan Morat, the brother of Achmat established. He was as
warlike a Prince as his brother or any of his Progenitors, for he recovered
Bagdat, taken by the Persians during these changes at Constantinople, and there
in prosecution of his Brothers intentions, designed the perdition of those
Janissaries, but dying there, they escaped the punishment due to such Rebels as
embrue their hands in their Princes blood. Osman was wont to say, That he was
no Emperor, but a Play Master to a company of Droans, meaning those Soldiers.
Ibrahim his Brother and Successor, was nothing like him in courage, however he
bravadoed the Venetians, and began a War there for one of his Women, a more
honorable cause being not like to engage him. And what his Son Mahomet will
prove must be lest to his appearance in person this Campania: but if he be like
his Vizier, as they say he is in most things, he is most justly to be dreaded.

CHAP. III. The Extent and Dominion of his Empire.
The Preface.
TVrky owes so much to its barbarous power and greatness, that it is almost
bankrupt in its renown and glory, while the Christian world debarred of any free
and unjealousied converse, or wanting the advantage thereof by the rudeness,
ignorance, and vast depopulations of the respective Provinces of this spacious
Monarchy do conclude and gaze upon it as a Monster, spreading and winding his
pernicious bulk upon the face of Europe, more by a brute impulse and sudden
violent effort, then by the conduct and directions of true reason and policy,
which by a just and exact disquisition of their atcheivements and conquests,
Our mistakes concerning Turkish Government.
will be found of the best extraction from the truest refined wisdom, and to
relish of that pure and genuine intellect, which in the freeborn world is
reported and credited to have descended upon, and blessed this Tract and Regions,
however our vicious and depraved sense, perplexed with the Matchivilian
Intrigues of Government, does falsely conceive of it is exotic simplicity, and
of their Prowess as the forced result of their Savage and ferally Rapinous
disposition.

Our purpose therefore is in describing of the dimensions of this large and
ample Territory, to observe the manner and means of their augmentation, and
Coalition into this entire and grand consistency, with a Chronology of each
Provinces reduction to the Ottoman Scepter, from under the Government of their
former and natural Princes. The present Politiques, and Civil and
Ecclesiastical, Martial and Judiciary Administration of this Potent and most
extensive Soverainty, its Magnificence, Pomp and Splendour, not interfering with
what has been said before, but in a distinct and orderly method, for perfect
and plenary information of the Reader.

Nor will it therefore be necessary to pry into those lurking holes and abdite
retreats of their despicable and unobserved Ancestry, since the disagreement of
their Originals is rather the glory of their adult and mature estate and
grandeur, and concerns not their story or present condition, for you will find
it briefly, but satisfactorily mentioned in this following Treatise.

The convenient Scire of the Empire.
Considering this Dominion in general, there is nothing can be faulted in it
which is requisite to the support of its grandeur. For its Situation it is
placed most conveniently for an universal or fifth Monarchy, being divided
equally into Europe and Asia, the very center of the Earth, whereby he may be
ready on all occasions to stretch his Conquest either way, and be quick and
ready at hand with recruits and supplies to carry on a war in either quarter.
His Imperial City of Constantinople being the extremest limit of both Regions,
officiously attended and served by two Seas, the Euxine and the Mediterranean,
which combine their waters by the walls of the Magnificent Seraglia, and do
join in Homage to this mighty Lord and Ruler.

He has also large Territories in Affeick, and the red Sea under his command
in part, so that of the habitable world he has the biggest and fairest
proportion, and by that means may when his Ambition shall incite him to extend
his Arms and Dominions further, in any of these quarters, provided the Conquest
be worth the purchase, and his affairs at Home or the opposite Regions will
afford him opportunity, His constant policy in making war.
for it is to be noted the Grand Signior never makes war in two places
together, nor long in one place, either fearing the contagions of his enemies
manners should spread among his own people, which he carefully avoids, as the
bane of his Tyranny, or else suspecting that his own deficiencies in the Art
Military, or some other inconveniences of his Soldiery may be notified to the
adversary by any continuance in their Country, just like a Lion and a Dragon
fighting, or insults and results, taking and leaving as he pleases, so that
most of his design and force seems to lie in the invasion and intrusive manage
thereof; The French fury, and Turkish incursion being equally terrible and as
soon abated, unless extraordinary Fortune and other concurrent advantages hold
them longer in breath and prosecution, which is much to be feared in this
present juncture, and the condition of Hungary, from whence, and the European
parts adjacent, we will begin this Survey of this mighty Empire.

We will enter into that part which is nearest to us, Sclavonia described.
and leads into the body of his Dominoons, Sclavonia, divided now into six
Provinces, bounded on the East with Servia, Macedonia and Epirus, from which
they are parted by the River Drinus, and a line drawn from thence unto the
Adriatic; on the West with Carniola in Germany and Histria in the Seigniory of
Venice, from which last they are divided by the River Arsia; on the North with
Hungary; and on the South the Adriatic Sea, containing in length eight hundred
Italian miles, (the breadth being 325) those Provinces are, Windischand,
Croatia, Bosnia, Dalmatia, Liburnia or the Country of Zara, and Sclavonian
Isles.

Of this Territory Bosnia is wholly the Turks, it was united as a Kingdom unto
Hungary, Bosnia described.
and under the Homage thereof a Kingdom by it self in 1420. as is reported; but
as it was a Kingdom of a latter date, so was it of as short continuance; for in
the year 1464. Mahomet the Great having taken Constantinople, and almost all
the rest of Greece, suddenly surprised and seized it, together with Stephen the
last King thereof, he most barbarously commanded him to be flead alive (whereby
he terrified all other Pretenders) and then converted it to a Province of his
Empire; thereafter, and yet governed by one of the principallest of his Bashaws.

DALMATIA; In this Province, though the Venetians have a share, yet it is a
very inconsiderable one, yet it stretches all North along the Adriatic Sea or
Gulf of Venice, (whereto they pretend a sole Dominion and Jurisdiction) for
they pay for the customs of all Trade and Merchandise, a certain stipend yearly
to the Turk, with which engine it is thought they have for so many ages held
play with him, being ever in danger of a rupture and war, but much against
their wills and inclinations; upon the same account the Great Turk is Protector
of the little Commonwealth of Ragusa, The Grand Seignior protector of the
State of Ragusa.
very rich formerly by their Traffic upon the adjoining Sea; without this
protection they had long ere now ^allen into the hands of the Venetians, as on
the other side they are preserved by the State of ^^enice from being a prey to
their Protector. So that it is the very parallel of the State of ^^bene^a lying
betwixt the Duke of Savoy, the French and Spaniard. This Ragusa, is the
Maritime de^cent into Turkey.

The Isles of Sclavonia.
The ISLES (some of which belong to Ragu^a) as Curzola or Corcyra, Zara and the
rest have been often ransacked and pillaged by the Turks, but never possessed
by them, as not caring for ^uch remote and dangerous Tenures, being pl^^ed in a
boisterous and destructive Sea.

In the County of ZARA the Turk hat^ (...) good part, (...)
as he has firm footing in Windisch^and, the parts whereof lying much to
Hungary ^n the North and East, do groan under the Bon^age of the Turkish
Garrisons, some whereof are ^lso placed in Croatia, where the Turk in 1592.
^ook Whitiz the Metropolis, though fortified strongly both by Art and Nature in
the form of (...) Island by the River Vna, when contrary to the Articles of
surrender, he put all the Soldiers immediately to the Sword. Now for better
elucidation of the Turks part in the whole, w^ will sum it up in this partition:

The Venetians possess the greatest part of the Islands, The whole apportioned
and all the Sea coasts from the Rive^ Arisia to the Bay of Cattharo (the City
and Commonwealth of Ragusa only excepted;) the House of Austria, as Kings of
Hungary, the inland parts of Windischland and Croatia; a^^ the Turks who set
footing here in the reign (...) Mahomet the Great, the whole Kingdom (...)
Bosnia, the patronage of Ragusa, some Town in Windischland and Croatia, and all
the residue of Dalmatia, from the Bay of Cattaro to Albani^ so that he has the
better half of this Region (...) Sclavonia.

In HUNGARY it self, by the Victories (...) Solomon the Magnificent, Hungary.
who (upon the dea^^ of Lewis the Second, King of Hungary, that lo^^
unfortunately the Battle of Mohatz, and w^^ drowned in his flight) was called
in by John S^^pusio, Vay vod of Transylvania, chosen King b^ election of the
States of Hungary, against the hereditary claim of Ferdinand Arch Duke (...)
Austria, etc. such advantage was made in the di^sention betwixt the two rival
Kings, that upon the death of John Sepusio in 1540. that und^^ color of
Patronage to Stephen, John's Orpha^ whom he took into his own tuition, and
afterward deprived (having deliberated to p^^^ him to death) he seized Buda
the Capitol City with other Towns, and from that time his su^cessors, but
especially himself, have never omitted any occasions or advantages of the
Christian quarrels to enlarge their dominion in this Kingdom, which same design
this successful present Emperor has so far prosecuted, that there remains not
to the Emperor above four places of Note and strength in that Kingdom, which
are Raab, Comorra, Tockay and Presburg, the last confining upon Austria it
self, while the whole Country, Towns and Villages, even beyond the limits of
that Realm are subjected to, and ly open to this barbarous enemy.

The present condition thereof.
So that most men conclude, Actum est de Hungaria, and give it over as a
Province of the Turkish Empire, to which it was in as forward a condition after
the battle of Keresture in 1578. when Mahomet the third took in Agria^^ ^^d
making advantage of the Lutheran innovation in Germany, which then divided the
Princes thereof, had swallowed the Conquest, but was so near anutter overthrow
himself, being forced to forsake the field in a most disorderly frightful
fight, in which with have he lost his Turbant, B^ttel of Keresture.
that had not the Christians out of greediness of Plunder and Spoil, left the
pursuit scarce begun, to rifle the Camp, which gave the Turks time and courage
to rally, Mahomet had hardly recovered Constantinople: But by reason of this
disastrous covetousness the fortune of the battle was quite changed, with such
a diversity, that as Dr. Heylin elegantly observes, the Conquerours were
beaten out of the field, and the vanquished ran away with the victory.

Among other possessions of the Turks in Hungary, Belgrade.
before we depart thence, Belgrade anciently called Taurunum, or Alba Greca,
once the possession of the Despots of Servia, by whom it was consigned to
Sigismond King of Hungary, as the best able to maintain it, deserves our
observation: it is seated upon the confi^ence of the Savus and Danow, by the
former of which it is hemmed in on the North, and on the East by the latter; it
was heretofore the great Bulwark of Christendom against the Turks, who were
often times worsted and defeated before it (especially Amurath the Second, and
Mahomet the Great) but at last taken to the shame of Christendom for not
succouring the besieged in time, by Solomon the Magnificent, in the year 1552.
not to mention some other principal places besides these named, as Gran or
Strigonium, at the taking whereof by the Emperor Rodolph, in the year 1595. Sir
Thomas Arundel of Wardour for forcing the water Tower, L. Arundel of Wardour
and bringing thence a Turkish Banner, was made a Count of the Empire, and
after Lord Wardour of Arundel by King James, Alba Regalis, Quinque Ecclesio,
Zigeth, Temeswar, Pest Colocza an Archbishops See, etc. and now Newhausel and
Novigrand.

In DACIA, the Eastern bound of Hungaria, he is absolute Lord and Master. Dacia.
In this Region are contained the Provinces of Transylvania, Moldavia,
Valachia, Rascia, Servia and Bulgaria, the four first in old Dacia North of the
Danow, the two last in the new on the South side thereof.

Transylvania bounded on the East with Moldavia, on the West with Upper
Hungary, on the North with Russia Nigra, on the South with Rascia and Valachia,
has its name from the great Woods lying between it and Hungary, This people is
divided into seven Cantons, keeping their own laws, fatally and insensibly
betrayed to the Turkish yoke, by John Sepusio the Son of Stephen, Vayvod of
Transylvania (which was the title in use before Sigismund Battori, who styled
himself Prince) who as aforesaid called in Solomon: his Infant Son Stephen was
afterward by him made Vayvod of Transylvania, a fine recompense for his
Fathers kindness to the Turk: since which time the Grand Signior claims the
Investiture of the Provinces hereof, and a yearly Tribute, besides their
initiating Bribes and Presents: many revolts have been attempted, but none so
signal, The revolt of Transylvania.
as first that of Sigismond Battori, who defeated several Turkish Armies, and
shook off the Turkish yoke with scorn and indignation, but his successors have
been forced to accept of it again, and their Subjects contented to pay the
Tribute, for which they enjoy their National Laws and Liberties of Religion.
Secondly that of Ragotzi in 1659. and 1660. who was likewise very successful
against the forces of this present Sultan, but he being wounded in his last
conflict with them, Ragotzi dies.
was carried to Varadin, where he ended his life, much honored and lamented by
his Subjects. Varadin which is one of the strongest pieces of this Country, but
Garrisoned by Hungarians, was soon after taken by the Vizier Bassa, and the
prosecution of the war in Hungaria from this Pique hence undertaken, as from a
near view of those troubles and dangers which threatened the Empire of Germany
on the other side. The present Prince of this Country Michael Apaffi, is wholly
at the Devotion of the Turk, and is reciprocally caressed by them, but how long
the kindness will last, the Germain War will soon determine; the Transilvanians
are most part of the Calvinists.

Moldavia described.
MOLDAVIA is bounded on the East with the Sea, on the West with Transylvania,
on the North with the River Niester and Podolia, a part of Poland, and on the
South with Walachia; it is a fruitful Country, but very thin of people, by
reason of those depopulations made by Turks, Tartars, and Cossacks,
nevertheless it supplies Constantinople with five hundred Ships laden yearly
with provision for Constantinople, it is in diameter every way three hundred
miles, they believe with the Greek Church, and are tolerated therein like other
Christians in the same condition. Their Vayvod is a Tributary and Beneficiary
of the Grand Seignior, and is placed and displaced as he pleases, but he that
gives most commonly now adays is honored with the Dignity. The eminentest of
their Princes substituted in this manner have been John the Vayvod about 1570.
who gave a terrible overthrow to the Turks, assisted by Peter the Vayvod of
Valachia, who had bought, and now fought for the possession of the Vayvod-ship,
but was at last perfidiously murdered by the Turks 1574. when Moldavia
submitted to them, but was again wrested from them forcibly by Aaron the
Vayvod, confederate with Sigismond Prince of Transylvania, whom themselves had
placed, The various attempts of the Moldavians to recover their Liberty.
who being also again divested, and betrayed by Roswan, one of his disloyal and
ambitious Subjects, Moldavia sheltered it self under the tuition of the
Polanders, who have since placed some Vayvods, but to their perpetual loss and
trouble, and then of Rodolphus the Emperor, but at last again it reverted to
the Turk, who raged there in the year 1622. when young Osman was Emperor,
since which time the Vayvods have lived with good correspondence with the Port,
and now attend this expedition of the Grand Seignior into Germany; but though
they are absolute Vassals, yet is not their Country quite conquered, or so much
as marched over or thoroughly traversed by those Infidels.

Valachia described.
VALACHIA is the next Province, once one and the same with Moldavia, but by a
modern distinction defined and divided from it by the name of Transalpina, a
ridge of Mountains crossing both Countries; they follow the Greek Church, and
obey the Patriarch of Constantinople, whom those Christian parts of the world
acknowledge as supreme: but as their Neighbors are ignorant of all letters, and
so the fitter for the Mahumetan Impositions.

It is in length five hundred, in breadth a hundred and twenty miles, and very
plentiful of all things, the Storehouse with the other adjacent Provinces of
penurious Asia, and gives credit and reputation as it borrows its fertility, to
the River Ister, which in its confines, and by the confluence of other Rivers
into the Danow, is here so called. The people hereof were governed by Vayvods
of their own, till the Turks invasion made them seek for the King of Hungaries
protection, to whose often and very great discomfitures they have been highly
instrumental, but with various fortune, from the time of Bajazet the first, who
vanquished their Prince, and was himself caged by Tamberlane, until this last
age.

It afterward was resigned into the several vicine Provinces as the necessity
and occasion of war advised, still stubborn against the Turkish yoke, while the
prevailing fortune thereof made all the Territory about them to undergo it; yet
with a great deal less of slavery then the rest; For Mahomet the Great in the
year 1642. very unsuccessfully undertaking the entire conquest of this Country,
Mahomets Policy.
wherein he found more Rocks, Mountains, and Precipices then humane defense,
prudently declining any further attempt, by the more destructive mines of
Empire, hurled the state thereof into a Convulsive and distracted Ruin, by the
intestine Divisions of the two Brothers, Waldus the Prince, and Dracula his
younger Brother, whose interest he set up and assisted to their common
destruction.

By which means and his Auxiliaries residence there. He was not to be disputed
with longer, and thereupon was acknowledged the Lord of the Principality under
certain limitations and restrictions to his supreme power, which the neerness
of a continual aid from the Christian world adjoining thereunto induced him to
allow. We have spoken of Michael the Noble Vayvod thereof in 1659. who had in
all probability by his singular valor and generosity freed this warlike Nation
from their dependence on this Tyrant, and should mention the like bravery of
their late Vayvod in conjunction with Ragotzi, but the urgent Fate of the
Empire would not have those petit struglings to bear any part in her general
calamity; yea, has suffered those puny and indifferent limbs of Christianity
to be monstrously turned into arms against her, and to assist the barbarous
violences that now oppress and ravage the Austrian Dominions, yet have the
Turks got nothing in this conquest but a safe Retreat, Moldavia a very
expensive conquest.
which has cost them five times the money they will ever make of it, were it
not that their assurances of our divisions will one day quit their expense, as
otherwise, which God for his mercy vouchsafe, it is now and may prove to be
able to pay his score, if once he turns his back to the face of a competent and
courageous Christian Army.

RASCIA is bounded on the East with Valachia, Rascia.
on the West with Hungaria, on the North with Transylvania, on the South with
the River Danow, and on the East divided from Valachia, by the River Aluta. The
people hereof are so wretched, that they have lost their very name, not a
Gentleman surviving this depression, they have been linked into the Government
of their neighbors, but now scarce know any body but their tyrannical Masters,
to whom they do excellent service, when this natural courage, which like Brutes
they retain, is emulously provoked by other more barbarous Nations. By their
union with Servia they tasted of the same fortune, Unjust and indiscreet
ambition de ervedly punished.
and were subjugated by the glorious Amurath the second, at the time that those
Despots (who had unjustly vanquished this people) were captivated themselves.
Fate showing herein, how desperate a folly it is for Princes or (to descend to)
private men, to undertake any unjust, though advantageous design upon another,
while there is a Superior Enemy thereby invited to the umperage of the
quarrel. These Rascians do yet so retain their primitive hatred against the
Turks, that upon all occasions they have been ready to wreak themselves, but to
very little purpose, more then to show their more noble extract and ancestry.

The three Provinces mentioned before Rascia, do and have enjoyed more liberty
then any people under the Turkish Dominions, because first the Turk has not
Colonies to plant them, being not so numerous as his Army speaks him, for all
his Polygamy; and secondly because their often overthrows (as they have
infeebled their Natives, and in their long resistance desolated the Country, so
that a man cannot find an Inn or Harbor in a days riding) have disheartened an
expedition on purpose; Mahomet the Great, who first attempted them, saying in
great anger, that he came not to fight with Beasts, or which was more unequal,
against Nature it self, who had by so many abrupt or uncouth ways hindered the
progress of his most industrious and eager Ambition, which his successors
notwithstanding from that kind of precarious Sovereignty have improved into an
awful submission, and address to the Port with two hundred thousand Chequins
yearly, which makes some 45 thoupounds sterling, besides the Fees and Presents
of the respective Princes. But, what their condition is now like to be, the
event of this present enterprise will best declare, but as now they are not fit
for, or else not worth his fury, only miserable Rascia, not honored with a
Governor, suffers all extremity. And so we must pass the Danow to its Southern
shore, the two Kingdoms, or despotical Provinces of Servia and Bulgaria.

Servia surveyed.
SERVIA is bounded on the East with Bulgaria, on the West with Bosnia, on the
North with the Danubius, on the South with Albania and part of Macedon, a rich
and fruitful country for grain and gain, concealed in the repositories of
several mines of Gold and Silver, and therefore much peopled by the Turks after
their general Excision and Massacre (in a manner) of the Christian Inhabitants
by Amurath, in the year 1367. when he took Nissa their Capital City, and Key of
the Country, in revenge of their Despots assisting the Hungarians in the siege
of Adrianople, but after the death of Lazarus the last Despot, Mahomet the
great seizes it.
Mahomet the Great not satisfied with a Tribute which Amurath had imposed,
dispossessed his three Orphans Peter, John, and Martyn (who fled to the
Hungarian protection) in title of Lazarus's two other brothers, who craved his
assistance, and thereby with dread and Terror destroyed most of the Natives, by
empaling, gaunching, fleaing, and all other devices of Torture, so that he
quickly tamed their courage, and made them the second province of the Eastern,
or Greek Empire, that acknowledged and humbled it self to his Conquest and
Dominion, in the year 1460.

Bulgaria described.
BVLGARIA is bounded on the East with the Euxine Sea, West with Servia, on the
North with the River Danow, which is here called Ister, and on the South with
Thrace. It was governed by Kings till Amurath the first reduced it by his Arms,
(and the abject submission of Sasmenos the last Prince, who humbled himself in
a winding sheet before that Tyrant in 1369.) after by Bajazet his Son, not
content therewith, made a Province under the absolute Government of the Turks;
who in Nicopolis, Sophia, and Silistria, have three Sanjacks or Major Generals
under the command of the Beglerbeg or Viceroy of Greece.

It is a mountainous and woody Country, the Plains thereof being thick planted
with tall Trees, so that it furnishes Constantinople with fuel, and is a good
defense against any sudden irruptions into the more inward part of Romania;
famous for the many Battles fought herein by Trajan the Emperor, who built
Nicopolis, interpreted The City of victory, in memory of his Conquest of Dacia,
and by modern Potentates, Sigismond Emperor and Bajazet the first which was
fatal to the Christians, and Michael the brave Vayvod of Valachia against
Mahomet the third as calamitous and destructive to the Turks. Not to mention
the plains of Cossova, where Miles Cobelitz, a private Soldier rising from
among the dead, slew Amurath the first: and for that three days encounter
betwixt Huniades and Amurath the second, both of them with the adversest
fortune that Christians ever fought with; which is to this day alleged as an
argument against any Invasion upon the Mohammedan Territory, how fondly, the
encroachments of that enemy so many miles upon Christian ground does sadly
evince.

And so we have finished the survey of Dacia, sometimes possessed by the
Romans, afterward by the Scythians, then by the Greek Emperors, and lastly
swallowed by the Turks, who keep it so fettered, that it will hardly know
another Master.

Our next aspect tends toward Graecia; but in our way thither we must pass
over Mount Haemus, Mount Haemus;
so high and open to the weather, that it is said of it, that for eight months
in the year it is always cold, for the other four winter. There are but two
passes, and those thought so impregnable by their abruptness, that with little
defense they are the invincible security of the Turkish dominion on the other
side, as Huniades in his expedition to the siege of Hadrianople sadly
experimented; but our Survey shall have leave and license to descend.

Graecia.
GRAECIA thus entertains our sight, which from the glorious and most noble
structure of Empire, in the third universal Monarchy, abridged afterward by
civil Fate, and the unwilling disrespect of time, into the Empire of the East,
is crept into most petty and despised Cantons of this barbarous Signiory, cut
out and partitioned under the commands of several inferiors, but most cruel
Governors, all subjected to the Beglerbeg of Romania, so called by us, but by
them Rum Ili.

In the present Latitude and extent thereof it is bounded on the East with the
Propaentick, Hellespont, and Aegean Seas, on the West with the Adriatic, on
the North with Mount Haemus, which parts it from Bulgaria, Servia, and part
of Illyrium, on the South with the Sea Jonian, so that it is in a manner a
Peninsula or Demi Island, environed on three sides by the Sea, and on the
fourth with the rest of Europe.

To give precedence to Christianity in the brief description of this Region, it
will be satisfactory to give a little account of the Greek Church (beforehand)
in this part. The Patriarch of Constantinople, who was reckoned the last in
order and dignity, is now notwithstanding the principal and chief of all, in
point of latitude and power, which has engrossed the most concerning affairs
of the Church to it self, for he presides over all Greece, Russia, Dacia,
Sclavonia, part of Poland, and all the Islands in the Adriatic adjacent Seas,
which extent of jurisdiction confined at first within Thrace, was acquired by
the reputation of the Imperial City for his See, and the diligence and piety of
their Bishops in conversing and supplying the Russes and other Nations with
Pastors and Ministers in such parts, which being conquered by the Turk, were
forsaken by their Clergy, but such is the poor and despised condition thereof,
that there is little power of Christian Religion. And though it be enlarged on
the outward Members it is much impaired at home, by the Tyranny of the Turks
(who educated their Children in Mahumetanism) on the one hand, and the
Temptations of preferment unto Apostasy on the other, yet there are twenty
Churches of them in Constantinople, and at Salonica, formerly Thessalonica,
thirty, which freely enjoy the profession of their Faith.

To return to Greece thus Turkified, it will be an unnecessary insignificant
labor to trouble the Reader with those several names, and particular numerous
Governments thereof in former ages, when it produced the most martial and
learned men, whose Ghosts would wish for annihilation at sight of the disgrace
and ignominy of this their wretched posterity, we pass over the particular
Dominions of old Sicyon, of Eli, Messenia, Sparta, Athens, now called Selina
(and is but an ordinary Borough taken by Mahomet the great in 1440. when some
beauty of it remained,) and in a general manner, since all limits of them are
confounded in this barbarous subjection under the Grand Signior, and speak of
those more noted places thereof, as they now pass under the name of Romania and
are Governed by one Viceroy as their supreme commander, termed Beglerbeg, of
whom before a little; The next temporal Dignity in this Empire to the Prime or
Grand Vizier, as commanding the strength and flower thereof, as to its Martial
and military Puissance.

The description of Romania.
TVRKEY ROMANIA. And now that we have for brevity sake run over the Western
Provinces of this might, rich, and dreadful Potentate, we will in some sort
relate to the pleasure of the Reader, many the particulars of those good and
ancient regions which at this day this Saracenical Nation terms by the name
of Romania, so called, either for the many Roman Colonies planted there, or for
the former name of Constantinople called Nova Roma.

This Romania at this day is the most populous and delectablest part of the
Turkish Empire, and contains the Provinces of Thrace, with its Chersonese,
vulgarly the straight of Callipolis, Macedon, Epire now Albania, Achaia now
Livadia, Peloponesus now Morea, and the Islands of the Archipelago.

Until the coming of Cyrus King of Persia these Provinces remained in freedom,
but of all oothers he first gave them the yoke of subjection. The Vicistitudes
of the Gre^ an Government
After him Xerxes the Son of Darius, with the succeeding Princes of Persia did
no less afflict them. When their turn was past, Philip King of Macedon acted
his part, and united them under his own Dominion, until the days of Perseus,
whom the Romans sub dued and subjected. But the Roman Empire being divided into
the East and West, the Graecians began their Empire under Constantine the
Great, and Ruled honorably many ages, until the descent, first of the Goths,
secondly of the Bulgares, thirdly of the Saracens, and lastly of the Turks, who
slew their Emperor; and seized on the Empire. Who at this day (except some
relics remaining under the Venetian Domions) possess the greatest part
thereof, as well upon the continent as in the Islands. Those that are under the
Venetian jurisdiction (says Bellonius) little differ, especially in Religion,
from those that are tribuary to the Turk: for both sorts being mingled, those
that are subject to the Turks, live like Turks; and those that live under the
Venetians, do as do the Venetians. So unspeakable is the rudeness of either,
The Condition of the Greeks
that through all their Cities you shall not find a School to instruct their
youth. Promiscuously all speak the Greek tongue corrupted from the ancient, but
some better then others. The Burghers, subject to the Italians, speak Italian
as well as Greek, but the Villageois altogether Greek. And so the Graecians,
which are subject to the Turk, in Cities speak Turkish and Greek, the
Villageois only Greek, and in places of traffic they borrow one from another,
according as their business is with those whom they Negotiate. And as they seem
to differ in language, so do they in attire. Those that serve the Venetians go
apparelled like Venetians, those that live under the Turk, like Turks. Both the
Islanders and those that live on the Continent as well in Europe as Asia,
although subject to Turkey, keep their ancient Christian Faith. Long also they
rejected the primacy of the Latin Church, and elected to themselves Patriarchs,
whom they acknowledge for their chief Pastors, and appointed them several Sees.
Whom not only the Graecians thus obey, but likewise all those Provinces which
follow the Greek Church, as Circassia, Walachia, Bulgaria, Moscovia, Russia,
the better part of Polonia, Mangrelia, Bosnia, Albania; Sclavonia, some part of
Tartary, Sirtia, Croatia, and generally all the Provinces of the Euxine Sea. In
number they are four, viz. the Patriarchs of Constantinople, Alexandria,
Jerusalem, and Antioch.

The Greek Patriarks.
Of these, the Patriarch of Constantinople is the Primate, siteth in
Constantinople, and chiefly moderateth over the Caloieri (so are the Greeks
Priests termed) which refide in Mount Athos, and generally over all Christians,
professing the rites of the Greek Church throughout Europe; and for the
Monasteries of Mount Athos, and all other, dispersed over Europe, he pays the
Turk yearly 12000. Ducats. The Patriarch of Alexandria moderateth in Egypt and
Arabia, and his dwelling places in Memphis and Cair, are not much inferior to
his of Constantinople.

The Patriarch of Jerusalem absolutely moderateth in Judea, and over all
professors of the Greek Religion throughout Syria. And must of necessity every
year on the 15. of August, say Mass in the Monastery situated upon Mount
Libanus.

The Patriarch of Antioch presideth in the Monasteries and the Greek Churches,
which are in Beritus, Tripolis, Haleb, and other places of Asia. And in these
places, as in all other, the Turk permits the Christians to use their
consciences freely, so they perform their due and accustomed tributes. To
proceed.

Thrace described.
THRACE has on the East the Euxine Sea, the Thracian, Bosphorus, Propontis,
and Hellespont: on the North the Mount Haemus, upon the West the higher Misia,
and part of Macedon, on the South the Archipelago. It is a most Noble Province,
cold, plain and admirably populous, stored with grain, pulse and excellent
wine, toward the Seaside: but toward the up-land (lying more subject to
cold) it is not so fertile nor woody.

In it stands many goodly Cities, Philippolis, Nicopolis, Sophia,
Hadrianopolis, the former Regal Seat of the Turkish Kings, taken by Amurath the
first, and beautified with a famous Seraglia. The Town is seated very
pleasantly, and was built by Hadrian the Emperor, whose name it retains, it is
now the usual retreat of this Grand Signior, and where at present he abides for
its vicinity to his affairs in Hungary. Pera by others called Galata, once
peopled by the Genoese, as the Mart and Factory of that State, taken by Mahomet
in 1653. but still replenished with Christian Merchants and Artificers. But
above all other Constantinopolis, Description of the famous City of
Constantinople.
by Heaven erected to be the head of an Empire; as the only seat which Romans,
Greeks, and now the Turks, have chosen and reputed to be most commodiously
seated, not for the Government only of the Empire, but (as was before
generally mentioned) of the whole World.

By its first Founders Name it was called Byzantium, and after many various
turns of Fortune betwixt the Persians and Spartans, it settled at last under the
Roman Empire, by the Conquest of Severus, who sacked it after three years
siege, for their partaking with Niger his Competitor, but yet such Majesty
remained in the very ruins, that Herodian reports, not without favor and pity
thereof, Mirabantur homines utrum eorum qui primi Extruxerunt vel eorum qui
deinceps sunt demoliti vires essent potiores; it was wondered at, whether the
strength of the Founders, or the destroyers was greatest. From this Rubbish it
was reared and re-edified by Constantine the Great, and finished May 11.331.
and endowed with the Privileges of Rome, and called for that reason Nova Roma
for some short times, but in memory of its raiser, afterward Constantinople.

It continued in this state under the Eastern Empire 1100. years and upwards,
till an unfortunate Constantine surnamed Palaeologus, lost it to Mahomet the
Great, A.D. 1453. by the base covetousness of the Citizens, who would not for
their own defense supply the Emperor with money. It is eighteen miles in
compass, by which computation it is one third part bigger then London and the
Suburbs, it is said to contain seven hundred thousand souls, and would be much
more populous were it not for the plague, whose Triennial mischief destroys
multitudes; it is fortified toward the Land with three strong and high walls,
the one higher then the other, but toward the Sea with one only built with
many Turrets, which strongly flanker it. It yields a pleasant prospect afar
off, by reason of the many Groves and Gardens within it, but is meanly built,
the Houses but two stories high, some of course Stone, the rest of Timber,
rough and ungarnished; there are the in it 8000. Mosques or Churches, which are
beauty of the City; the chief of them, and worthy of remarque is that of St.
Sophia, which in elegancy, though not in bulk exceeds all the Fabrics of the
World, the sides and floor flagged with Marble, with a stately Porch at the
entrance: add hereunto the Sepulchral Mosques of the Turkish Sultans, which are
very sumptuous, together with the Seraglio, built all of white Marble, round in
form, and crowned at the top with shining golden Spires: not to omit the Mosque
of Solomon the magnificent, one of the present wonders of the world. But
Canstantinople which is seated upon seven Hills and Mountains, as well as Rome,
is better furnished with a Port and Haven, so convenient and advantageous to
shipping, and so commodiously seated upon the Thracian Bosphorus, that Ships of
all burdens, and with all winds may come close to the walls, the water is so
deep. As to the Seraglio it stands on one of the seven Hills in the
North-east quarter of the City, like a Delta, two Angles of it aspect the Sea,
which affords it a most pleasant speculation; the other is joined by a wall to
the City, toward which it has one gate only; the other gates are never opened
but for the private pleasure of the Grand Seignior, or his displeasure to be
executed by the death of some of his Officers and Bashaws; it contains three
Courts, one within another, the first is open to all persons, in the second
sits the Divan or Courts of Justice, into which no man comes on Horseback, the
third is the Mansion and privacy of the Grand Seignior and his women, it is
three miles in circuit, in which are contained many delightful Groves of
Cypresses, intermixed with Plains, delicate Gardens, Artificial Fountains,
Banqueting Turrets, and Prospect Rooms, with a most magnificent
Audience-Chamber for Ambassadors, floored with embroidered Velvet, seamed with
Pearl and other Jewels. I have the longer insisted on this place, because as
the Mistress of the World she draws all eyes upon her, and therefore it is fit
to dress her in those Ornaments which she usually wears, and do become her
greatness.

Callipolis, is another famous portion thereof, seated on the Northen
promontory of Chersonese, the first City of note possessed by the Turks in
Europe, taken in the reign of Orchanes in 1358. from whence they easily spread
their conquest over the adjacent Provinces, it is the most convenient passage
between Europe and Asia, by reason of the safe harbor and good anchorage.

Next follows MACEDON, bounded on the East with the Aegaean Sea, Macedon
described
on the West with Albania, on the North with Mysia superior, and on the South
with Epyrus, and Achaia; it is now principally divided into Thessaly (a sweet
and delectable Country) Macedon specially so called, and Migdonia by the Turks
called Jamboli. It is a fertile Region enclosed with Hills, and near the Jonian
Sea, plain and woody. That it was once the Empress of the East, it is well
known, but at this day it is Turkish, and without any famous Cities, save in a
piece of Albania. In it is nothing so memorable as the Mount Athos, Mount Athos.
or holy Mount. It is seventy five miles in compass, three days journey long,
and a half a days journey broad, resembling the shape of a man lying with his
face upward, whose highest cone, always covered with Snow, is seen thirty
miles off at Sea. It is exceeding fertile in Grass, Fruit, Oil, and Wine. Long
ago it was dedicated in honor of St. Basil to the Greek Caloieri, and endowed
with privileges, which at this day it enjoys by the Turks good favour^ that
is to say, Privilege of Greek Priest^.
that no man neither Grecian nor Turk may inhabit in this place except he be a
Priest. So that their number in these days are about six thousand, dispersed
into twenty four Monasteries, ancient and warlike, built for fear of Thieves
and Pirates, although there be no such great cause. In these Monasteries are
many relics, which cause great concourse of people, and they are stately
built, and richly adorned. This was made a Roman province in the year of the
World 3798. after the Captivity of their last King Perseus, and was upon the
division of that Empire to East and West, consigned to the Eastern, to which it
continued subjected till Amurath rent in from that Dominion by taking
Thessalonica; it is now governed by a Sanjack, who is bound to maintain a 100.
horse, and to find 400. more upon an Expedition.

Epire, Epirus.
now Albania, was once a very famous Province bounded on the East with that
part of Greece called Aetolia, on the West with the Adriatic, on the North
with Thessaly, Macedon, and part of Albania, and on the South with the Jonian
Sea; as witnesses P. Aemilius, it had in it seventy Cities now destroyed, and
turned into ruins, and Villages meanly inhabited. For the most part it is
woody and barren, but near the Sea fertile, and adorned with very beautiful
havens.

This Country was formerly Famous for Olimpias the Mother of Alexander the
Great; and Pyrrhus that great Captain among the Romans, but modernly as much
renowned for the unexemplary valor and conduct of Scanderbeg or Lord
Alexander, who proved a scourge to the Turks in the reigns of Amurath the
second, and Mahomet the first, Scanderbegs renown.
his bones after his death taken up, were worn by this rude enemy about them,
as an Omen or pledge of success and victory, whomsoever they engaged with.

Achaia, mentioned for its name in Scripture, is a very goodly region, as may
be gathered by the goodly Cities, which therein once flourished (viz.) Delphos,
Thebs, Athens, Megara and many more now destroyed.

So is Peloponesus; termed by Pliny the Bulwark of Greece. It yeildeth all
things that man can desire either for life or pleasure, and although the
ancient Cities be now defaced, yet is for quantity the best peopled part of
Greece. It is now under the Turk, and counted the best Sanjackship in Turkey, as
bound to bring at the command of the Beglerbeg of Greece 1000. horsemen under
his own pay. It is worth yearly fourteen thousand ducats.

And so we pass to the Isles of the adjoining Aegean Sea, which are many in
number, Dardanels.
saluting first the Dardanels or the two Block-Houses, where all vessels
passing out of the Hellespont into this Sea (which extends forty miles in
length) are staid three days for slaves and other prohibited mercandizes, or
until information of any such may come from Constantinople, they are
exceedingly well walled, fortified and provided, they receive the customs, and
are the principal strength of that City, as to the Mediterranean (as it is
defended with the two black Towers, the Prison for the Bashaws and great
persons) at the mouth of the Euxine, where it joins with the Thracian
Bosphorus, the one of which is scited above Constantinople, on Europe side, and
the other on the Asian shore.

The Aegean Islands.
These Aegaean Islands are thus named Samothrace, Thassus, Imbrus, Lemnos,
famous for the late contest in 1660. between the Turks and Venetians about it,
Euboea circuting a hundred and fifty miles in which stands the famous City
known by the Gulf of Negropont, taken from the Venetians (to whom with other
things it fell in the division of the Eastern Empire unto the Latins) by
Mahomet the Great in 1471. with the loss of forty thousand men. Salamis,
Aegina, the Cyclades, in number fifty three, called now the Isles of the
Arches, encompassing Delos, and the Sporades.

Candia Described
Next we should view the Isles of the Cretan Sea, but they being inconsiderable
we will mention only Candia, in form extending East and West, in length two
hundred and seventy, and in breadth fifty miles, placed in the midst of this
Sea, the Natives speak the Greek Language, and before the Turks put foot there,
were governed by Latin Bishops of the Chuch of Rome, to which the Venetians,
then the Lords of it, do adhere.

It has been attempted by Selymus the second in 1571. when he conquered
Cyprus, but in vain, yet Ibrahim the Father of this Sultan, gained footing
there some few years ago, and this is like when he shall be at leisure, unless
the Venetians improve his absence in Hungaria, to carry it all; for of late he
has been very successful there against all the power they can make, and is at
present possessed of the better half, so that he must be reckoned as more
interested then the Venetian. The Jonian Isles as pertaining to their
Seigniory, we are not obliged to mention here, though they stood in great
danger of changing their Master.

From hence as we descend to the bottom of the Straights appears the Island of
Rhodes, Rhodes.
(which we must observe in our way to the Isle of Cyprus, and so to Egypt)
famous in former times for the potent residence of the Knights of the order of
St. John of Jerusalem, who deserted by the Christian Princes were forced to
yield it in the Grand mastership of Villerius, to Solomon the Magnificent, not
more to the scandal then detriment of Christianity, but this is so notorious
that I must not enlarge my self.

Cyprus is situated in the Syrian and Cilician Seas, Cyprus.
extended in length from East to West two hundred miles, in breadth sixty, the
whole Compass reckoned five hundred and fifty, and distant from Cilicia, in
Asia minor some sixty miles, it is a rich and fertile Kingdom, and has in it
twelve eminent Cities, but the most famous are those two of Nicosia, and
Famagusta, the last whereof was gallantly maintained by Signior Bragadino
Governor of the Island, for the Venetians, who being in in despair of relief,
yielded the Town, and consequently the Kingdom upon Honorable Articles to
Mustapha, The barbarous conquest of Cyprus.
Selymus's General, but was barbarously flead alive, and all persons of quality
murdered besides, only a beautiful Lady reserved for the lust of the Grand
Signior, (with some other. Prisoners) in their voyage to Constantinople blew
her self, Ship and company into the Air, and worthily preserved and transmitted
her honor to after ages inviolate.

And so we pass to Syria. SYRIA is bounded on the South with Palestina, and
some parts of Arabia, on the West with the Mediterranean Sea, on the East with
the River Euphrates, by which parted from Mesopotamia, on the North with
Cilicia and Armenia minor, from which it is separated by the Mountain Taurus.

In the Survey of this spacious Country, the Reader is desired to limit his
sight to the grand division thereof into its several Provinces, wherein we must
transitorily observe those eminent Cities which are in the knowledge and
discourse of Europe.

The first Province is PHAENICIA, bounded on the East and South with Palestine,
Phaenicia described.
on the North with Syria, on the West with the Mediterranean Sea. It is famous
for the noble Cities (for their achievements and Merchandises) of Tire and
Sydon, Berytus and Ptolemays, the last place of the Holy War conquest: they
were reduced to the Turkish Dominion, in 1489. but that place which now most
concerns us, is Tripoli, bravely and fertilely seated, once a Christian
Marquisate (but in name so allied to that barbarous den of Theives in Africa,
mischeivous to trade, that I cannot but forestal its site) and is upon that
account the Metropolis of Phenicia: secondly, Syria Propria, bounded and
adjoining Northward to Phenicia, famous to our acquaintance, for Laodicea, as
is mentioned in the Revelations of St. John; and Antioch, the place where
Christians were first so called, Antioch.
but now has no name it self either Turkish or Christian to be called by,
being sunk into most obscure and ignote Rubbish. It was finally lost from the
Christians in 1381. when it came to Saladine, the Victorious Sultan of Egypt
and Damascus. Thirdly, Comagena bordering upon Euphrates toward the East, with
which it is wetered, Aleppo.
in it Aleppo situated in the midst betwixt Tripolis, Beritus, and
Alexandretta, the three prime ports of Turkey, and on the further side it
adjoyns to the Persian Territories; it has been of long time a factory of the
English Nation, governed by a Consul who maintain thence correspondence with
the East Indies, several goods coming over land upon Camels. The English are
here well beloved, and our Tutelar or National Saint George, whose Sepulcher is
feigned here, is had in great veneration; It over-looks by its situation upon
a Hill six Villages, to be seen no where else in these depopulated uncultivated
places of this Empire, and is governed by a Bashaw, which Dignity has of late
years been troublesome to the Turkish State, as was mentioned in the following
Treatise; It was taken in by Selymus the first, of which more presently.
Fourthly, Palmyrene a Country never conquered in the Holy Land expedition, as
the other parts were. Fifthly, Coelosyria bounded on the West with Palestine,
whither we are next to pass, and on the South-East, with Arabia Deserta, and on
the North with Palmyrene, remarquable for the famous City of Damascus, Damascus.
and the Imperial and regal Seat of many Kings, who have been celebrated as
well in Divine as humane writ. A most fruitful delightful place, even to
surfeit, being stored with wine to superfluity, for which reason, as is
excellently observed, the vile Impostor Mahomet would not be persuaded to come
to it, lest being inescated with its pleasure he should forget the business he
came about; but his Successors were not so abstemious, it being the seat of one
of his Caliphs, while Babylon or Badgat was re-edified. Here are many ingenuous
workmen in most Arts, and hence come our Damask Satins and Linnens, wrought
with curious Branches. It is now the Seat of one of the principal Turkish
Bashaws, and who is had in great estimation and beloved by the Grand Signior;
It was held in modern times by the Mamalukes, who piecemeal recovered Syria
from the Tartars, who under Tamberlane terribly sacked this City; but in the
year 1516. when the victorious Selymus the first discomfited Campson Gaurus the
Egyptian Sultan in the fields of Aleppo, this City fearing the Spoil and ruin
thereof then very opulent by trade, set open their Gates, as did all the other
Cities by their example. By means whereof the Turks became Lords of all this
Country without any more blows, as they were next year of Egypt also, by their
victory over Tomombeius, in whom perished the Name and Empire of the Mamalukes.

In our way to Palestine on the Holy Land, we must pass over Mount Hermon, a
ledge of Hills, Mount Hermon.
which beginning Eastward run directly South, by which Palestine is bounded on
the East, and parted from Coelosyria and Arabia Deserta, on the West with the
Mediterranean Sea, and some part of Phaenicia; On the North it is divided with
the Hill Anti-Libanus from Syria, and on the South with part of Arabia Patraea;
a most fertile Land even to admiration, flowing with milk and Honey, as it is
elegantly expressed in the eight of Deuteronomy; by its former division it was
cantoned into six Provinces, 1. Berea, 2. Iturea, 3. Galilee, 4. Samaria, 5.
Judea, and 6. Idumea, but made one Province of the Roman Empire, as it is now
of the Turkish, the chief Cities were Coesaria, Samaria, and Jerusalem, of
which a little must needs bespoken.

For to speak nothing of ancient times, in the 73. year after Christ, Jerusalem
was taken and destroyed by Titus, with the slaughter and captivity of infinite
thousands. In the year 136. it was restored by Aelius Adrianus, new-named
Aelia, and given in possession to the Jews. In the time of Constantine and
Helena his Mother, it fell into the hands of the Christians, and so continued
until the days of our Henry the fourth, at which time it was again taken by
the Sultan of the Sarazens, and the Christians clean banishment.

In the year 1097. in a general Council for the delivery of the Holy Land,
Holyland.
the Crossed Knights were instituted throughout Christendom, and Godfrey of
Bulloygne chosen General of three hundred thousand footmen, and one hundred
thousand horse. These Knights did many famous acts; recovered the Land,
instituted a Monarchy, and though sometime with loss, continued some defense
thereof, until the year of our Lord 1517. and then was it overcome by the
Turkish Armies, of the aforesaid victorious Selymus, who at this day retain it
in miserable servitude under a certain Tribute or imposition upon such
Christians as are permitted to live here.

There are now therefore two or more Monasteries, or Religious Houses, where
Friars do abide, and make a good commodity of showing the Sepulcher of Christ,
and other Monuments unto such Christian Pilgrims as do use superstitiously to
go in Pilgrimage to the Holy Land.

And so it rests peopled with men of diverse Nations and Sects; as Saracens,
Arabians, Turks, Hebrews, and Christians: whereof some follow the Latin
Church, some the Greek: as the Graecians, Syrians, Armenians, Georgians,
Nestorians, Jas^bites, Nubians, Marodits, Abessines, Indians and Egyptians,
every one having their peculiar Bishops, whom they obey. But to particularize a
little further.

GALILIE upon the North is environed with the steep hills of Libanus and
Antilibanus, upon the West with Phenicia, upon the East with Coelosyria, and
upon the South with Samaria, and Arabia the desert. The soil is most fruitful,
yielding all sorts of Trees, and divided by Jordan: upon whose banks stand very
many Towns and Villages, and so well watered, either with mountain Torrents, or
Springs, that no part thereof lies unmanured.

The Country is the more famous, for that in it stands (amongst the rude
mountains) the small Villages of Nazareth, Nazareth.
the place of our Lords conception: And at this day, there is a small Chapel
archt and built under ground, whereinto a man must descend by stairs: Here
(some say) the Angel appeared unto Mary, and foretold her that she should
conceive and bring forth our Lord.

The Inhabitants are Arabians, short and thick men, rudely apparelled, and
weaponed with Bows, Swords and Daggers. In this Region likewise stands the
Mount Thabor, whose North part is inaccessible, and whereon our Lord was
transfigured, according to the blessed Evangelist.

SAMARIA lies in a most delicate plot of Palestine, Samaria.
but in bigness not comparable to Judea or Galilie. The soil is partly
mountainous, partly champian, pleasant, fruitful, and very well watered with
fresh and sweet water. The City is now ruinated: but as for pleasure and
delight it was inferior to no other. It is situated upon the side of a Hill,
the eighth part of a mile, from whence a man may behold the ruins of a great
Temple: whereupon (as men say) Christ sat, when he asked water of the
Samaritan woman. But these are uncertainties, not to say fallacies.

JVDEA, Judaea.
far excels any part of the residue of Palestine, and at this day enjoys
its ancient fertility.

The tribe of Juda so named it, and in it, as in the rest of Palestina were
very many worthy Cities, whereof Jerusalem was the chief seat of their Princes,
Jerusalem.
the possession of the Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles: the original place of
our faith, and the glory of the Christian world. By the Barbarians, at this day
it is called Godz, or Chutz: It stands on an eminent place, as whereunto a
man must always ascend.

Saint Jeroms opinion was, that it stood not only in the heart of Judeaa, but
in the very center of the world, as having Asia on the East, Europe on the
West, upon the South Lybia and Africa, and upon the North, Scythia, Armenia,
Persia, with theresidue of the Pontique Nations.

What the glory hereof has been, may be conjectured out of Tacitus, who
reports, that in the beginning of the Siege, it contained two hundred
thousand souls. At this day it numbereth not above five thousand inhabitants,
although many Pilgrims daily resort thither in a good conscience, and for
devotion sake.

It was once strongly and fairly walled, but now weakly, and therein it shows
nothing so famous as the Sepulcher of our Savior Christ, whose Temple
incircleth the whole Mount of Calvary, situated upon a plain plot of ground,
high, round, and open at the top, The Sepulcher of Christ.
from whence it receives light: but the Sepulcher it self is covered with an
archt Chapel cut out of the main Marble, and left unto the custody of the
Latin Christians.

Whosoever is desirous to see this Sepulcher, must pay nine Crowns to the Turk:
so that this tribute is yearly worth unto him a very considerable revenue.

One hundred and eight foot distant from this Tomb, is the Mount (called the
Mount Calvary) whereon our Savior Christ was crucified by the treacherous
Jews. In this place are many other religious Relics. And the pilgrims which
come thither, are always lodged according to his own profession; the Latins
with the Franciscans, without the City, by Mount Sion: the Graecians are lodged
with the Caloirean Greeks, dwelling within the City by the Sepulcher: And so
every other Nation, Abessines, Georgians, Armenians, Nestorians, and Maronites,
who all have their proper and peculiar Chapels. Those Franciscans, which
follow the Latin Church, and are for the most part Italians, were wont to
create the Knights of the Sepulcher, and to give testimonial unto Pilgrims of
their being there.

Without this City is the valley of Jebosophat, and therein the Tombs of the
blessed Lady and Saint Anne. The territory adjoining is exceeding fruitful in
Vines, Apples, Almonds, Figs and Oil: the mountains are no less stored with
trees, wild beasts and spiceries.

Besides Jerusalem, here stands Bethlem, now destroyed, and showing nothing
worth looking on, save a great and stately Monastery of the Franciscans, within
which is the place where Christ was born. Rama is now likewise ruinated; the
Arches and Cisterns which are now remaining, by the witness of Bellonius his
own eye, are greater then those of Alexandria, but not so thick.

Gaza is now a Turkish Sanjackship: the soil about fertile, and the inhabitants
Graecians, Turks, and Arabians.

IDVMEA. In holy writ, this Region is called Edom, Idumea.
and by other Authors Nabathea. Toward the Sea and Judea the soil is fertile,
but toward Arabia, desert and barren. Some say its inexpugnable for its deserts
and want of water: yet is it stored therewith but hidden, and known to none but
the Natives. Of old they were a turbulent, unquiet, and seditious people, and
so at this day they are like to their villainous and roguish Neighbors the
Arabians.

For further satisfaction of the Reader, be he pleased to refer himself to
Doctor Fullers Holy Land, or Sir Walter Raleigh, who have amply discoursed on
this Subject, by whose copious and pleasant style and luxurious description,
the Ruins and present indigence and penury of this once flourishing and
abundant Region are only to be alleviated. And so we pass forward.

EGYPT is best to be known as to its bounds, by its threefold definition and
division. Egypt.
First, Egypt properly so called, extends it self North upon the Mediterranean
Sea, and part of Idumea to Lybia or Marmarica. Secondly, Lybia or Marmarica
lying betwixt Egypt properly so called, and Cyrene or Pentapolis, so called for
the five chief Cities thereof, thirteen hundred miles long, and two hundred
broad, reaches from Lybia to the greater Syrty, where it is bounded with the
Kingdom of Tunis in Africa, The kingdoms of Tunis and Algier.
which Kingdom with the other of Algier, by the Ottoman Family's intermedling
with the quarrelling Princes thereof, though Mahumetans also, came at length to
acknowledge no other Master but themselves; the last King of Tunis named
Mahomet, put in by Don John of Austria, whose succor he craved, being subdued
by the Turks, and carried Prisoner to Constantinople in the reign of Selymus
the second, about which time the Kingdom of Algier, in length 300 miles, but in
breadth not considerable, was likewise reduced upon the same score by the
famous Barbarossa. Not to mention here some of the Isles of Barbary which are
subject to the Grand Seignior, as Zerby, infamous for the loss of fifteen
thousand Christians by slaughter at the taking, and afterward by famine at the
surprise and retaking of it by Pial Bassa in 1559. I am constrained to mention
these parts of Africa here, for want of convenient reduction (in this brief
Compendium) to their proper place.

Egypt was vassalled to the Mamalukes, who seized it from the Eastern Emperors
some three hundred years before Selimus the second, that ambitious and martial
Sultan, wrested it from them in the fields of Aleppo, and extinguished the name
and Empire as aforesaid: when Cyrene followed the same fortune, and submitted
to the Turkish yoke. In this Province we must remarque Tripolis, assigned by
Charles the fifth to the Knights of John of Jerusalem in lieu of Rhodes, but
wrested from them by Sinan Bassa in 1577. since which it is become a Den of
Pirates, as was mentioned before in the Syrian Tripolis.

In Egypt, passing over Pelusium and the famous Damiata, we will confine our
view to Grand Cairo, once called Memphis, the Metropolis of Egypt, which of
all ancient Cities has lost little or nothing by the injury of time.

Grand Cairo described at large.
Grand Cairo was wrested from the Mamalukes, and their Sultan Tomembeus, by
Selimus the first in the year of the Incarnation, 1517. after four bloody days
spent before he could entirely possess himself of the City; It is nobly scited,
and is between thirty and forty English Miles in compass, divided into seven
burgs, built after the Egyptian manner, high, and of large rough stone, part
also of Brick, the streets are narrow, of late there are new buildings made of
the Turkish fashion, as the former decay, poor, low, much of Wood and Timber,
except some modern stately Palace^ of both Nations.

There are in it as are reckoned five and thirty thousand Moschets, four and
twenty thousand noted streets, besides lanes and turnings, some of those
streets are two miles in length, some not half a mile, all of them every night
are locked up with a Door or Gate at each end, and Guarded by a Musketier, to
prevent Tumults, Fire, or outrages.

Its Government.
Without the City on horseback there warch every night, to prevent any attempts
of the Arabs, four Sanjacks, with each a thousand Horsemen under his command,
so that in all, as it is easily computable by the individual, Guardians of the
streets there watch every night no less then twenty eight thousand persons.

The Castle is the place where the Bashaw resides, who is always one of the
most avaricious and ravenous Viziers, sent thither on purpose to squeeze and
oppress the Egyptians, and is frequently made a Sponge, to refund his wealth
(with his life) into the grand Seigniors Exchequer, in which act the slavish
Egyptians can discern nothing but his justice, and are saisfied with it as
their revenge: This Castle is founded upon a Rocky ascent on the East side of
the City, nor well repaired nor quite decayed; at the foot of this ascent is a
place half a Mile long, wherein they ride the great horse, and by that a little
House and Garden, wherein the old Bashaws of this place, when disauthorised
till the coming of a new one, are keptuntil they are strangled or restored to
the Grand Signiors favor. Things of remarque and note herein, The famous River
Nile.
are first the River Nile running along the South of the Town to the West,
making as it leaves it, a little dainty Island, whose fertile and wonderful
inundation begins constantly about the middle of June, and increases to
between eighty and a hundred days, then it abates, and by the end of November
comes within its narrowest banks, about a quarter of a mile broad: by reason of
this flood they have four Harvests in a year, the ground adjacent to this River
being before a white Sand, without a sprig of any green thing but two weeds
(which carried to Venice makes the finest Crystal Glass) becomes a fat black
mould, and bears Flax and Rice, with Sugarcanes in abundance. Not to omit the
number of Crocodiles that infest this River, nor the Nilscope in the Isle,
where stands a Pillar with several marks, declaring the height of the flood all
over Egypt. The next are the Pyramids so much famed in History, The Pyramids.
and the granaries or storehouses which Joseph built, three of which Pyramids
stand twelve miles South-west of the City on the other side of the River, and
are yet almost entire, their form is quadrangular, lessening by equal degrees
from a quarter of a mile, flat at bottom to a square at top, a little more then
four yards angular; there are sixteen or eighteen other Pyramids, some twelve
miles to the Southward, but ruined extremely. It rains not here but once in
three or four years, so that bodies buried in that sand, will keep without
putrefaction, by reason no moisture is near them but what is in themselves.

Cairo subject to plagues, yet populous.
Plagues are here very rife in Winter, by one whereof eighteen hundred thousand
persons died in six month, yet was the City presently as populous as before,
and continues so thronged that persons of quality have one going before their
Mules to make way for them, by bidding people make room, this is caused by the
confluent multitude of the Arabs, and Indians too, that flock to the pleasures
and plenty of this place. There are a great many Christians also, Venetians,
Dutch, Genoese, and some English; the Air sometimes in Summer, is like any
sweet perfume, and almost suffocates the Spirits, caused by the Wind that
brings the Odours of the Arabian Spices in a full Flavor.

There is also a sort of rare Horses, but of tender hoofs, yet fit for that
sandy and soft ground, which will run four days and nights together without
eating or drinking, and some Egyptians with a little provant, and less sleep,
their body being wound about with a Linen, will ride them so upon business, to
which this is the only convenience, over those sandy deserts, where there is
neither house or inhabitants, The sandy playns about it.
but the Theiving Murderous Arabs. For the direction of the way over those
Vastitudes, (the wind blowing the Sand, and losing the track of any beaten way,
and sometimes burying the Travelers in Sheats of it, unless they be wary,) are
Pillars of brick, set up a mile distant from one another.

The Revenue that the Grand Signior receives from Egypt amounts to eight
hundred thousand pound sterling, a third part whereof comes only clear to the
Exchequer at Constantinople, all arises out of certain farms of the Land,
belonging to the Crown, The revenue of Egypt.
let out to the Egyptians, the least farms pays two hundred pound a year. But
the Bashaw has other ways to make profit to himself, nor is any invention of
oppression thought envious or dangerous; for the Egyptians naturally
effemenate, and having suffered under a lasting Tyranny, from slavery to
slavery, are in no likelihood of endeavoring a revolt? the Grand Signior has
of them, no more then fourteen thousand enrolled in his pay, and that for show
only. The other two parts of the Revenue are disposed thus, the one to furnish
the Expense of the Caravan and Pilgrimage to Mecha, whither the Grand Seignior
sends presents yearly, especially a green Velvet Pall for Mahomets Coffin, and
the other third part of the revenue toward the defraying the charges of the
Government, viz. all Officers and public services, besides that of the
Timariots, who do theirs for their Tenure, and enjoy almost a half of that
Kingdom. It is a rare felicity for any Bashaw of this place to escape with
life, fortunes, and liberty, yet there are few of the Visiers, who do not
ambitiously affect this ominous Government.

The Nile descends from Cairo in a length of 360. miles to Canopus, now called
Rosetta, where it imbogues it self into the Sea: from whence by Land to
Alexandria, Alexandria.
the Port where goods are landed for Cairo, famous for its founder Alexander
the Great, and for the Monument and Tomb of red Marble of its beautifier,
Pompey the Great, likewise, and for its new Castle built since by the Turks,
being their only Emporium or scale of Trade in Egypt.

The description of Arabia.
ARABIA TRIPLEX. The three Arabia's, are likewise parcel of this Empire, which
is a mavelous great country, included between two huge bosoms of the Sea, in
manner of a Peninsula, viz. upon the West and East with the Arabian and Persian
gulfs, upon the South with the Ocean, and upon the North with Syria and
Euphrates.

The Inhabitants are indifferently called Arabians, Saracens, or Moors: Those
are the true Arabians which live out of Cities in Tents, dispersed over Syria,
Egypt, and Africa, these give themselves to feed Cattle, and droves of Camels.
Those which inhabit Cities, are called Moors, and were once of such puissance,
that they not only subdued Syria, Persia, and Trogladitica, but likewise
Egypt, a great part of Africa, and almost all Spain, with the Island of
Sicily, and the Kindom of Naples.

Two hundred years they kept possession of these pieces, but of some part of
Spain seven hundred, even until the days of our Fathers. And further, this
accursed generation at this day is not only spread over all the Southern coast
of Asia: viz. Persia, East India, and the Islands of the Indian Sea,
butlikewise advanced with great prosperity unto diverse wealthy Kingdoms, famous
Cities, and worthy Marttowns, over all the South Coast of Africa: under this
people the Turks were first called into Asia to bear Arms, and from whence
issued out the swarm of this Locust Mahomet. The Division is as follows, first

The division of it.
ARABIA DESERTA. This is a vast Country, full of Deserts, yet well inhabited
with populous and warlike multitudes, especially toward Euphrates, and the
mountains of Arabia Faelix, whether Merchants resort. The residue toward the
West is sandy, by which if a man be to travel, he must have the stars for his
guide, company for his safeguard, and provision for his diet, for otherwise he
shall lose his way, or surrender his goods to the Theevish Arabs, or starve in
the Dese^t for want of food.

ARABIA PETREA. Toward Syria this is somewhat fertile, but smally commended
for that property by the Ancients: For indeed it is exceeding barren, and
wants necessary sustenance, Wood and fresh Water. The memorable things herein
are the Mountains at Synay and Oreb, upon the former whereof is at this day
builded a Monastery of Christians, following the Greek Church, and the only
receptacle or Inn for wayfaring Christians: other place of relif is there none.

ARABIA FELIX is a very large province, better manured and watered then the
other. It is adorned with noble Cities, and full of Villages, especially toward
the Sea side, where are many excellent places of Trade. The residue except the
Sand, is made manurable either for feeding of Cattle or Camels, in which places
live infinite swarms of diverse Nations, by Grazing and Husbandry.

Its History.
Arabia Petrea and Deserta, were subdued by the Turks upon their first Conquest
of Persia, in the rise of their greatness, but recovered by the Mamalukes,
whose fortune they followed to the fatal period made by Selymus the first, when
in his expedition to Egypt, they more annoyed him by falling in his rear, and
terrified him in their night alarums, then all the Forces of their Mamaluke
Masters in the field; which deciding the title to Egypt included soon after the
Dominion of those Countries, the chiefs thereof being gained by money and
promise of preferment, who yet nevertheless continue their petty Soveraignties,
and rob and steal upon their own account, making no distinction betwixt Turk
and Christian.

As for Arabia Felix it continued unconquered, till the Turks and Portugals
quarrelled about it in 1538. when Solomon Bassa sent with a Fleet into to the
read Sea to maintain the Trade thereof, and to repress the Persians, assisted
by the said Portugals, instead of taking in Diu, most basely surprised Aden,
one of the chiefest Ports, when under color of a friendly invitation, he had
got the King thereof on board, where he hanged him, as he did the like to Zibel
(and the King thereof) the Port of Mecca; nevertheless the Turks have but
little command here, especially in the more inland parts, and toward the
Persian Gulf, where a Turk is generally hated and abhorred.

Assyria described.
ASSYRIA is bounded on the East with Media, West with Mesopotamia, South with
Susiana, and North with part of Turcomania, by the last name of it as alluding
to its great Original, called by the Turks Arzyrum, and though formerly the
terrible name of a mighty Empire, and the first of the four, is now a mean
Province of the Grand Seigniors Dominion: in it was once seated the famous City
of Nineve mentioned in Scripture, Nineve.
but the name and memory of it is now lost, only it is supposed that Mosul
seated on the Tygris, and inhabited with a number of Nestorian Christians is
risen out of its ruins. The Bassa of Arzyrum, the chief and strongest place in
this Province, has ten thousand Timariots under his Command to defend this
Country, and to be ready for any other service.

MESOPOTAMIA is bounded on the South with Arabia Deserta, from which it is
parted with the bending of Euphrates, on the East with the River Tygris and
Assyria, on the West with Syria, and on the North with Mount Taurus, and
Armenia Major, it is memorable for very little of modern note, the people prone
to slavery, and accept of any Master that can win and wear them.

CHALDEA bounded on the East with Susiana a Province of Persia, on the West
with Atabia Deserta, on the North with Mesopotamia, and on the South with the
Persian Bay, and the rest of the Deserta. As to the account hereof we shall
confine our view to Babylon, Babylon described.
enlarged by Nebuchadnezzar, once accounted one of the worlds nine wonders, but
since dwindled into oblivion, but recovered by the name first of Selencia, and
now of Bagdat: it was taken from the Persians by Solomon the Magnificent, and
recovered from them under Sophy Abbas in 1625. and retaken from them by the
noble and glorious Sultan Morat in 1640. when he intended to bury the name of
the Janissaries in the rubbish of it, but left his own bones there like another
Alexander: but the same vicissitude has again restored it to this present
Sophy; the people of those Regions as was hinted before, being patient and
regardless of any power or Government whatsoever, as sure to suffer no worse,
nor having ever experienced better.

TURCOMANIA (of which something more largely for the quality of the place) is
bounded on the North with part of Tartary, Turcomania.
upon the West with the Euxine Sea, Cappadocia and Armenia Minor, on the East
with Media and the Caspian Sea, and on the South with Mesopotamia and Assyria,
it is called Turcomania from the Turks, who from hence made their first
fortunate expedition and irruption to the conquest of Persia, and spread
themselves afterward into other Regions. The inhabitants are now generally
Christians, privileged by Mahomet the Great, and speak a language of their
own, yet are their manners very barbarous, given much to Tillage, and very
industrious; they are of late well seen in Manufactures, especially in rich
Tapestries, Grograins, and watered and unwatered Chamlets, with which they
Traffic in all places of Turkey.

Armenia Major.
The chief Provinces of this Territory, are Armenia Major, conquered by Selymus
the first in 1515. after the fatal Calderan field, the day whereof was called
by the Turks Doomsday, against Hismael the Persian Sophy, The Chaldean fields
whose Predecessor Vssan Cassan took it from a Christian Prince thereof; and
fully settled by Amurath the third, by the strong Garrison of Van. 2. Colchis,
reduced by Vluzales the famous Turkish Sea Captain, sent into the Euxine Sea by
Amurath in 1579. and made subject to a Beglerbeg. 3. Iberia with the rest,
formerly feudatory to the Grecian, as before to the Roman Empire, by the same
Amurath (who pursued his Father Solymans design) was partly united to his
Scepter, but the Georgian Princes by the near aid of the Persians have yet a
part. 4. Albania conquered by the Great Cham of Tartary, but since blended with
the other Georgians into Turkish slavery. This Turcomania, though it were the
first place of the Turks extraction, yet it was the last of their conquest,
besides that it is strangely Christian, and is the last Province that is
assured and settled under their Dominion.

Georgia describech
GEORGIA, by the Barbarians termed Gurgistan, comprehends part of the ancient
Iberia, with part of the great, Armeny, and peradventure Atrapatia. Upon the
West lies Mengrelia, upon the North Zuiria (once Albania) upon the East the
middle Atropatia (now Sirvan) upon the South that part of the greater Armenia,
which now is called Turcomania.

For the greater part it it covered with Mountains, Woods, and Thickets, and in
that regard inconquerable for the difficulties of the mountainous passages. It
is notwithstanding fertile, and adorned with many large places and villages,
from whence arise many famous Rivers, as Cirus and Araxis, springing from the
Mountain Taurus, and running thorough the whole Province, until at last, it
disgorge it self into the Caspian Sea.

The Inhabitants are termed Georgians, of St. George, whom they advow their
patron and advocate. For they are Christians according to the Greek Church,
with some small difference. They are very populous and warlike, strong of body,
and valorous in fight, even until our times maintaining their liberty in the
midst of the Mahumetans, sometimes following the fortunes of the Turks,
sometimes of the Persians. But at this day, they have not only lost their
wonted liberty, but also many Fortresses and Cities, as Teflis, Lori, Clisca,
Gori, and Tomanis, and withal some of them have embraced the Turkish infidelity.

The City of Tauris.
I must here insert the Noble City of Tauris in Media, within that Province
belonging to the Persian, being the utmost extent of the Turkish Dominion
Eastward, and the bound thereof, whither being arrived we will return back to
Constantinople by the way of Asia minor, called Natolia, and after this
spacious perambulation, sit down and compute in an entire sum, the whole extent
of this dominion, for the reader happily may be tired with so tedious a journey.

Asia Minor.
NATOLIA. That which the Turks at this day term Natolia or Turcia major, once
Asia minor, comprehends the Provinces of Pontus, Bithinia, Asia it self,
Licia, Galacia, Pampbilia, Cappadocia, Cilicia, and Armenia the less; and in
these Provinces of ancient times flourished the States and Kingdoms of the
Troyans, of Methridates, of Cressus, of Antigonus, of the Paphlagonians, of the
Galathians, of the Cappadocians and Phrigians; All which at this day are not
sufficient to satisfy the single ambition of the Turkish Tyranny. The
Inhabitants for the most part are Mahometans, and naturally Turks, of simpler
nature then the Turks of Europe, and nothing so cruel as the Renegado
Christians. Yet are there many Christians among them in many of these Regions,
The condition of the people.
following the Rites of the Greek Church. Among these Turks there is no
acknowledgement of Superiority, Blood, or Nobility, but all are equal slaves to
the Grand Signior, over whom he appoints Beglerbegs and Sanjacks. They are
either a kind of idle or lofty people, for they are smally industrious, and
were it not for their slaves, their grounds would generally lie unmanured.

Pontus and Bithinia are now united under one name, and called Bursia. Its
Canons.
Here once reigned the Great King Methridates; and here stood the famous City
of Chalcedon, Nicomedia, Apamia, Prusia Nice, and Heraclea Ponti.

Asia propria, now Sabrum, is a particular Province of Asia minor, and
contains in it many famous Provinces, as Phrygia major, and minor, Caria,
Mysia, etc. in Phrygia minor, stood that Noble City of Troy, famous at this day
(says Bellonius) an eye witness, for its very ruins of Walls, Gates, Circuit,
and Marble Sepulchers, found upon the way without the Walls.

Pamphylia now Caramania, is one of the seven Sangjack-ships, with 8000 ducats
of yearly revenue. In this Country, as also in Cilicia, are woven those fine
clothes which we call Chamblets, watered and unwatered. They are made of the
hair of Goats, so fine and white as no silk can surpass them in those two
properties.

Cappadocia now Amasia, is a goodly Country, and the seat of the Turks eldest
Son. In it are many goodly Cities, as Trapezond, once the seat of the Commeni,
Emperors of Trepesond, The Empire of Trapezond*
whose name and progeny, Mahomet the second utterly extinguished.

Cilicia, now part of Caramania, is a good Country; the Inhabitants are given
to pasturing of Goats for lucre of their fleece, of which they make their
Chamblets; but otherwise neither given to fishing, Navigation nor Husbandry. At
the foot of mount Taurus (says Bellonius) are diverse small Villages, and
excellent pastures about them, which for the fertility thereof should seem to
be one of the Turks Races; for from thence he culleth out every year 600 horse
of service, which they highly esteem, and name Caramani.

Armenia Minor, is a better soil, and more populous then Cappadocia, round
about incircled with tall, huge, broken and woody mountains. These Provinces
are of Natolia, governed by a Beglerbeg, the chief next to him of Romania, but
his forces are not esteemed so much for their service as the Europeans.

The whole is bounded on the East with the River Euphrates, by which it is
parted from Asia the Greater, on the West with the Thracian Bosphorus and
Hellespont, by which divided from Europe, on the North with the Euxine Sea, and
on the South by the Rhodian, Lydian, and Pamphilion Seas, so that it is almost
a demy-Island or Peninsula. To omit for brevity sake the Provinces of the
Isles, among which are reckoned as chief, Samos, Lesbos, Tenedos, and
principally Rhodes, The Island Rhod^s.
an Island an hundred and forty miles in compass, the City whereof, taken by
Solomon the magnificent on Christmas day 1522, is reputed one of the most
impregnable Fortresses the Turk possess, as is Famagusta in Cyprus. It is now
inhabited by Turks and Jews which were banished out of Spain.

As to the story of Anatolia, it chiefly depends upon the two Empires of
Constantinople and Trabezond, and the Kingdom of Caramania, subdued by Bajazet
the second, since which time every parcel thereof became united to the Ottoman
Dominions. It was once the most flourishing part of the world, but has lost
since some few Centuries, no less then 4000 Cities, partly by earthquakes,
which are frequent here, and partly by the sloth and natural laziness of the
Turks, who busy themselves in nothing but their lust and luxury, so that
little Trade is stirring here. But their Horse bread here retain their native
excellency, and are reputed the best, the European Horsemen are like so
esteemed. And in these two consist the chief power and strength of the Turk.

So that we have seen under the Empire of the Turk is comprehended the better
part of the ancient threefold division of the earth, which we will
recapitulate and repeat for the Readers memory. The sum of the Turkish dominions
He holds in Europe the whole Sea coast, which from the borders of Epidaurus,
stretches it self to the mouth of Tanais; whatsoever lies between Buda and
Constantinople, and from the Euxine Sea to the banks of Savus, is his. In that
perambulation is contained the greater part of Hungary, all Bosnia, Servia,
Bulgaria, Macedon, Epire, Greece, Pelloponese, Thrace, and the Archipelago with
the Islands. He holds in Asia and Africa, all that is between Velez de la
Gomera and Alexandria in Egypt, between Bugia and Guargula, between Alexandria
and the City Siene; and from the City Suez as far as Swachen. The hugeness of
this territory may be imagined by the circuit of some of the parcels: Palus
Meotis (wholly his) spreads it self a thousand miles into the land; two
thousand and seven hundred miles do hardly incompass the Euxine Sea. The coast
of the Miditerranean Sea (as much as is subject to him) contains in circuit
eight thousand miles. Egypt wholly his, is esteemed three thousand and two
hundred miles; so far from Derbent upon the Caspian Sea to Aden upon the Red
Sea; and from Balsara upon the Persian Gulf to Tremessen in Barbary, is
accounted little less then four thousand miles. In the Sea, he is Lord of the
most noble Islands of Ciprus, Eubea, Rhodes, Samos, Chio, Lesbos, and many
other in the Archipelago, of which before.

CHAP. IV. Of their Militia.
THeir Infantry consists of two sorts. First, such as are levied upon
particular Cities, more or less according to the nature of the Expedition, The
Infantry.
and proportionable to their abilities, from whence many Christians are
frequently sent, both Turks and Christians well clothed and armed, and
exercised a month before they march without the Cities where they are raised:
The second the Janissaries, who make 50000. which are Christian Children taken
from the Northern parts of Europe, and entered into the Grand Seigniors books,
and bred in the Seraglio and other places as common servants till twenty two
years old, and then are mustered and disciplined for service (but now Turks are
listed among them very frequently) these are the flower of the Army, and are
never disbanded, but when old, are put into Garrison. The horse consist of the
Spahioglans, Their Cavalry.
whose just number is 32000. and are the constant guard of the Emperors person
at home and abroad; and the Timariots, who hold lands by serving the Sultan in
his Wars, and according to the value of their Timar or Farm sending three, four
or six horses, but not all for service, their total number with the Tartar,
whose aid of 60000. horse is always to be in a readiness may be 300000. of
which number the Kingdom of Algier affords 40000. that of Tunis 30000. Tripoli
10000. we may not reckon proportinably, so with the other Provinces, because
horse are here in abundance.

When a War is proclaimed, and a general Rendezvous appointed, the several
Bassa's and Governors of Provinces draw their forces together, summoning the
Timariots to do their service aforesaid, but many of them with some Janissaries
and Volunteers have leave to march before to the said Rendezvous. When these
Bashaws begin their march, public proclamation is made to hang all such
Janissaries as shall be found behind those Forces upon their march; when they
are rendezvoused, and upon the Expedition, the Bashaws do not go all in
company, but setting forth about an hour one after another, The Turks
disdipline* in marching.
draw out their Troops without confusion, not in any strict order of Rank and
File, as near no enemy.

Yet though there is not the discipline of posture, their Officers commands are
in all other things carefully obeyed; it is a wonder to see such a multitude, as
commonly they march with, so clear of confusion, violence, want, sickness, or
any other disorder, there being always plenty of good Biscuit, Rice and Mutton
carried with the Army.

The Bashaws and great Commanders have with them three or fourscore Camels,
besides six or seven score Carts to carry the Baggage, and when the General
takes horse, he has five or six Coaches covered with cloth of Gold or rich
Tapestry to carry his wives, some have with them twelve or sixteen, the least
ten, who when they enter the Coach, there are men placed on both sides, holding
up a row of Tapestry to cover them from being seen by the people, although they
were musted after the Turkish manner that nothing but their eyes appeared. The
Turks Sodomy.
Besides these women, each Bashaw has as many or rather more pathick Boys
which they use for Sodomy, whom they prefer as the greater satisfaction before
their Wives, which are used mostly to dress their meat, to wash, and for to
honest their unnatural lust.

The Boys are generally of fourteen, ten or nine years old, and are usually
clad in velvet or scarlet with gilt Scymetars, and bravely mounted with
sumptuons furniture, and each of them a Soldier is appointed, who walks by his
bridle for his safety.

When the Prime Vizier departs upon any expedition out of Constantinople, he
wears in his Turbant a long broach Feather, which none but the Grand Signior
usually wears besides himself, upon this only occasion; He is accompanied on
his way with all the Grandees of the Court, who present him with Gifts, as does
the Sultan himself in vests and such like commodities, to bestow upon merit or
other occasions for his Magnificence. Their Military music.
The martial music they have is none of the best, but will serve sufficiently
to confound the senses, and deafen the ears to any other clamor, being a kind
of horse Kettle Drum, which with some brass dishes and wind Instruments,
carried by fellows on Horseback, ride a little before every great Commander,
and noise along the journey. The great rendezvous when he marches against
Christendom is always appointed in that fatal plain, of Thessaly famous for the
battles of Pharsalia, between Pompey and Caesar, and Philippi between Augustus,
and Cassius, and Brutus. As for their arms which has been touched before
something more particularly is to be said of them. They differ from those of
the Europeans very much, Their Arms.
yet their Harquebuze is something like our Caliver, their Scymetar a crooked
flat Back-sword, good at Sea upon Boarding, or among Ropes, but in the field
fight is much inferior to the Rapier; but constant use (for it has been always
the eastern weapon) gives them advantages, more then we can ward.

They use likewise an Iron Mace, either for stroke or hurl, and in this they
have a peculiar excellency, being brought up in it from their youth. Bows and
Arrows are no less skilfully then frequently used, Bows and Arrows.
with which they do most mischief, though the Arrows be no bigger then
childrens, but the strength of their bows does the Execution. Besides these
they carry other, almost all sorts of weapons with them, as they do the like
when they travail, first their Girdle is charged with three or four Pistols,
then on either side a knife as long as a man's arm, like a skean, but not so
broad, with another for ordinary uses, tuckt to his Coat, a harquebuze on his
shoulder, on his thigh a Scymitar, on the one side of the saddle pummel a
petronel, on the other a strange Sword, the blade being hollow and foursqare,
by that either an Ax or an Hungarian Mace, or both, and at his back Bows and
Arrows, so that he looks live a Porcupine, with weapons in every part of his
body. The great Ordinance each Soldier carries in his pocket in pieces to the
field or Leagure, where it is cast.

As to their Quarters, which are always in the fields and the open Air, Their
Quarters.
but what their Tents sometimes defend, all these arms are fastened to their
Bridles, which are imbellished with brass gilt bosses, and that is tied about
the Tree, or otherwise made sure to the ground, where he rests, that being
cared for, he spreads a blanket, whereon he first eats, and then sleeps in his
clothes, with his Saddle for his Pillow; Armor they have not had long, but now
they begin to use it frequently, the agility and celerity of men and horses in
offending, equalling the defensive part. To three Horsemen a Wagon is allowed
to carry their other necessaries.

When they approach an enemies Country, they march in rank and file with
wonderful exact order and silence, whereby commands are readily heard and
obeyed, there being severe punishment for them that by disorderly and
licentious behavior, disturb their companies. And for the better security of
this discipline, and to prevent straggling, Their provision on their march.
they are always provided of Biscuit, dry Flesh, and store of Rice, with a sort
of course butter, so as in the greatest desolate places and Countries, they
have plenty of necessaries, which bringes them in heart to the encounter.

Their Battle.
When they are near an engagement, the horse (which is one of their chief
Military politiques) encompass all their Infantry, except the Janissaries (whose
courage and bravery they confide in) it the rear in form of a half Moon or
Crescent, which figure they esteem propitious. Those Horse have order not to
meddle with the enemy, but only to drive and necessitate the foot upon the
enemy, till they have pierced through their Battaliaes if possible, and if they
chance to recoyl, Their manner of fighting.
to hold them to the slaughter, till they have wearied and dulled the enemies
Swords, and then the Janissaries and they together fall with fresh fury and
vigor upon them, and this serves for all the advantages of Military Policy,
and quickens his multitudes, through despuration, to high and gallant services.

Their Seiges and Leagures.
In matter of siege and Leagures, they are not altogether so expedite and
understanding as the Europeans, and what ever they have attained to in matter
of raising or ruining Fortification, has been taught them by Fugitives and
Renegadoes; the use of the Cannon they have learned very well, but yet it is
not so familiar to them, for not many Matrosses are to be found in their
Country, the Persian their next Neighbor to this day standing six or eight
yards off when he gives fire to those pieces.

Their number serves them for shelter and defense, for as soon as they have
raised a battery, and made a kind of breast-work, with some Mountains in it to
overlook the place besieged, Their bold approaches.
they make their approaches in spite of the Bullet, and strive to fill up the
Trenches with their bodies, if they cannot do it with other matter, and when
once a Breach is made, it is either a Soldiers death there in honor, or a
Dogs in the Camp for an Officer to retreat, or give over the assault while
commanded.

Yet they can use Galleries, as they do mines and other devices of conquest,
but neither with that art or success as the Christians, but that is equalled
with their diligence and undefatigable working, and obstinate resolution of
carrying the Town at last. And their patient suffering of all extremities upon
such a bent is almost incredible, and the like they do in the defense of their
own.

But the Turk puts not himself to much charge of Garrisons, unless Frontiers
and maritime Towns, The Turk always Master of the field.
(which are not yet so strictly guarged and maintained as with us) for he
supposes himself Master of the field, and that upon any sudden rupture he is
able to march with a sufficient Army to their relief (the places being provided
for such a competent time) besides, after the conquest of a Country, he divides
it, as was partly said before, into so many Timars or Farms, for which the
several possessors are bound always to be in a readiness, with two, three, or
six Horses, according to the value of the said Lands, who do so awe the
Country, (the Nobility and better sort being either transplanted and destroyed,
and some Rusticks only left to till and manure the ground,) that seldom
happens any revolt merely by them, the Morlacks excepted, whose poverty suited
not with their Lordly Greatness, nor was able to maintain it among so many
natural wants and indigencies.

Their Naval force.
As to their Naval force it consists of three Fleets, the one (like our
Newcastle Traders) sails the Euxine and Mediterranean Seas, either toward the
Moscovite, Cireasse or Cossack, and thence bringing slaves, with honey, wood
and wax, etc. returns to Constantinople about August, and thence sails to
Alexandria to barter those commodities for Flax, Sugar, Tapestry, Sherbets
(made of several dry preserved fruits, as Apricocks, Peaches, Citrons, etc.)
Corn, Rice, and other Egyptian traffic, and returns with Tribute (guarded with
a Fleet for fear of the Malta and Florentine Galleys which lie in weight for
the straglers) in January back to Constantinople, Of late for fear of the said
Galleys it comes by Land in Caravans.
which is as the Nursery of his Seamen. The second is his Fleet of War, built
and equipped in the Streights, and made only for fight. The third, the Barbary
men of War, which exercise Piracy over all Christendom.

This last is his chiefest strength, though not so much and so soon at command
as the other; for they have long pretended an independance on the Grand
Seignior, when appealed to from those they have robbed, which he likewise
dissembles, The Pirates of Alger, etc.
so that sometimes they prefer their own designs before his quarrel; but
generally they comply with his Orders.

Notwithstanding to give the world to believe that they are exempt from the
Turkish jurisdiction, and to be reputed free Pirates, for fear of restoring
their prizes, they will not come to Anchor under the reach of any of the Forts
or Castles belonging to the Grand Signior, but if they have occasion to stay
for a wind or other convenience, ride at anchor for a while out of danger of
any shot; which personates the exemption very finely.

They are notwithstanding ill supplied with Seamen, for besides Renegadoes they
have very few skilful Sailors; The Turkish store of Seamen.
these Renegadoes in the Barbary Fleet have taught them to sail into the
North-wester-most parts of Europe, they having sometimes landed in Cornwall by
night, and carried away some captives out of their Beds; they have frequently
infested Spain in the same manner, and now they have proceeded so far that they
roave as far as New Foundland, and have taken prizes there, and in one of the
Ships a very handsome English woman going for Virginia, who was presented by the
Captain to the Grand Signior, and is by report at present in his Seraglia, and
one of the Sultanaes.

The Seamen are generally very civil and courteous, as they are obedient and
diligent, and not irreligious and profane, as too many of our Mariners are,
and rough and quarrelsom besides; their terms of Navigation are altogether
Italian, from whose commerce they borrowed it, themselves having formerly few
or no Ports to the Sea.

Their vessels.
Their own Ships called Caramuzaels are most part great Ships, with Poop and
Fore-castle very high, and will carry seven or eight hundred passengers, but
like Portugal Galleons are slow of sail, not fit for service in fight, and are
soon overset by any sudden tempest, or stormy weather. The best Ships therefore
they have are such as they have taken from the Hollander, who to save their
lives and liberty, which the Turks promise upon a present surrender, will part
with their Ships and Goods, which turns to the uspeakable prejudice of other
Christians trading in the Levant, Holland prize..
especially the Venetians, who have often times encountered the Turks at Sea
within these few years.

This makes the Pirates of Algiers, Salley, and Tripoli to have such a
contemptuous opinion of that Nation, and always apt to flinch from such terms
of peace as are every-foot agreed on between with them; but with us they care
not how little they quarrel, for that they seldom get any thing by the bargain,
but frequently come by the worst, a single Merchant man having spoiled two of
their best men of War, An Enlish explat.
and slain almost all their men, with their Captain Bashaw of Rhodes, about
which a great difference was like to have arisen in the year 1634. by a
complaint made against the English at the Port.

It were to be wished therefore that the Turk were no more formidable at Land
then he is like to be at Sea, of which the Venetians have continued Masters,
and by their annual espousal have wedded it to their Fortune and Glory, which
has in several triumphs adorned that maiden and little requblique, against the
huge and bulky mightiness of this Empire.

The Turkish Arsenals for shipping.
The Turkish Arsenals for shipping are four; the first is at Pera, and
conteained thirty three docks or mansions for so many Galleys: The second is at
Callippolis, and contained twenty, both under the charge of the high Admiral
and his Servitors: The third, is at Suez at the Red Sea, containing twenty five
mansions, and the fourth and last, at Balsaro in the Persian Gulf, consisting
of fifteen Galleys, and these two last under the charges of the Beglerbegs of
Balsaro and Cairo; but of late years there are double the number built at Pera
and in Callipolis.

CHAP. V. Of their Government Civil and Ecclesiastic.
THE Court is commonly styled by them Capy, viz. the port, wherein are many
great Officers, partly spoken of before, and whose services are only
destinated to uses within the Seraglio (too large to be here described further
then what was mentioned in the Description of Constantinople;) and they are for
the most part Eunuchs, with their Table of under Eunuchs. But without the
Seraglio are also diverse honorable Offices for the Government of the Empire,
the chief whereof is their Mufti or Pope, who only has plenary power to
interpret their Law and Alcoran. In the second Rank, are their Coldeleschers,
viz. Chief Justices, and they have the hearing and deciding of all temporal
suits between party and party. In ancient times they were but two, one in Rum
Ili or Europe, the other in Natolia: The great Officers of the Empire.
but Selymus the third, added a third equal in authority to the other two, over
the Provinces of Egypt, Syria, Arabia, and part of Armenia. These chief Judges
have jurisdiction over all inferior Justices, or Caddies in particular
Provinces, and by them are nominated, but confirmed by the Grand Signior
himself. After the Cadeleschers, follows the Viceroy Bassaes (Counselors
of estate) whose number is uncertain; in old time three or four, but of late
twelve. The President of these the Turks term Viceroy Azem, and in truth, is a
personage of great dignity and authority in managing the affairs of the State,
as the man with whom the Grand Signior does only communicate his weightiest
intentions, and secretest deliberations.

In the next place appear the Beglerbegs (masters del Campo) the chief whereof
is he that is termed of Romania or Graecia: Major Generals.
The second is the Beglerbeg of Anatalia or Asia. The third is the Denizi
Beglerbeg, that is to say, the Lord high Admiral. And these three Beglerbegs
have equal place and authority with the former Bassaes in the Divano, or place
of public audience.

Before the last war of Persia, this Empire was under-governed by forty
Beglerbegs, who likewise had under them two hundred and seventy Sanjacks (but
since those times this number has been much augmented) viz. in Europe resided
seven, in Africa 4. in Asia 29.

His yearly revenue, without counting his Timars, by them he has 30000 horse
always in pay (which are farms held as by Knights service, and remove the
wonder his Revenue is so little) is estimated at fifteen Millions of Ducats.

As to the Capy or Port, by which is insinuated the safety and Harbor of such
as address themselves to the Grand Signior, the remarkable thing besides the
Emperors places of pleasure which are hinted in the other part is the Divan or
places of Judicature, The Divan.
where the Visiers, and the two Cadeleschers sit four days in every week.
Their decisions are speedy and most just, for that the Grand Signior has a
place private to himself to inspect their Deportment; A notable story of Sultan
Morat.
and it is very certain that the late Sultan Morat being there one day, and
hearing judgment given against a Coyner, to lose his right hand, which is the
only punishment for that fact, by a waft of his hand out of the window, unseen
to any but the Executioner, gave a sign for cutting off the Fellows head, as
judging him to deserve death, which the Executioner performing, to the
amazement of the Divan, they sentenced him to the same infliction (for sentence
and Execution are done at one and the same time) which the fellow preparing
for, and refusing to give any account or reason of his Action, as relying upon
the Emperors intervention, was by his own mouth, out of the same Privacy
absolved and acquitted of the fact, as done by his Command.

Besides, by the Emperors public appearance every Friday, when he goes in
great State on Horseback to the Temple of St. Sophia, attended by no less then
20000. men, such is the Majesty, and consequently the awful dread of this
Prince (though to their joyful acclamations he will answer by bestowing his
blessings cheerfully upon the people, The Emperors public apearance every
Friday for prevention of Injustice.
and shows himself ready to receive all manner of complaints from all manner of
persons, insomuch that none of his attendants dare deny the receipt of any
paper from the meanest wretch, nor the greatest of his Officers hope for any
favor upon any true information of their oppression and injustice) I say by
this means justice is kept most part uncorrupted; and the Grand Seignior upon
the account of his impartial severity toward his Ministers, though he
squeezes to himself by their death or exile the juice of their oppression, is
most infinitely beloved and admired by his subjects, being by his state,
magnificence and justice, conceived by them to have something more then humane
in his nature.

The Turks Trials.
As to their common Trials, (which is by way of viva voce, and the Oaths of
Witnesses) though of late the attestation of a Musselman or Turkish believer is
often taken for an authentic proof against a Stranger, yet in their ordinary
trials between one another, they do proceed with more caution, and upon surer
grounds, (for even the Religious orders of which there are four, and are
presumed for the honor of their Religion not to be taintible with any crime
are given most excessively to subornation and perjury) extracting ground and
just presumptions for sentence from private examinations and questions, so
artificially put, as no premeditated combination can evade, Turks reverence
Oaths more then Christians.
yet generally the Turks bears a more awful reverence to Oaths then Christians,
nor are they found to alloy it with the poisonous mixtures of equivocation,
though the Jews that live among them are very prone to forswear and abuse that
sacred name they pretend to have in so much veneration, and for this reason and
other wicked subtilties of that people, they will not suffer them to turn
Turks, (which they would readily do, because of the same common principle of
Circumcision) unless they will first turn Christians, which goes against the
grain, and keeps numbers of them from being converts to Mahomet.

But to proceed, from all Judges both extraordinary and ordinary at the Port,
The Mufti.
and in the several Villages of the Provinces (for a Justice or Caddie is
appointed for every Town) there lies an appeal to the Mufti or Mohammedan chief
Bishop (who is next to be considered in the Government) to whom all
controversies, difficulties or perverted judgment are submitted for his final
sentence, and even the grand Signior himself does and must refer himself, but
his Oracle is sounded before, and must not utter one word more or less then is
directed to him, and shall fit the convenience of State, for as it has bin
excellently observed, the Turk has the Mufti and Mecca both in his own
Dominions, and is not forced in some untoward occurrences to apply himself to
foreign dispensations. And sometimes the Grand Signior makes not nice to
remove his Arch-Clergy-man, as well as other of his Tribe, if they once
interfere with the State, yet without any tumult or Faction, or scarce any
blemish to the persons of the men, who shall be reputed Saints, and so
Calendaried; even if put to death, such is the radical opinion of their
unstained sanctity and integrity.

As to the Bashaws and Beglerbegs, and their honors for life, their posterity
being reckoned for no more then common Turks, unless their own worth shall
raise them, by which all potent combination of families is prevented; as we
shall speak of more liberally in the following Treatise.

In the time of Selymus, were reckoned one million and thirty three thousand
Christian souls to live within his Dominions, The number of his Christian
Vassals.
not accounting those that enjoyed freedom of conscience by privilege, nor
those that then were subject to the Egyptian Sultan, whom the said Selymus
vanquished, but now they are in far greater numbers.

The Jews likewise live dispersed over his whole Dominions, Of Jews likewise
in such infinite numbers, that scarce no Town nor Village, but is very
populously replenished with their Families, speaking diverse Languages, and
using the trade of Merchandise in ample and rich fashion. Thus to my power have
I laid out the portraiture of this mighty, tyrannical, irreligious and bloody
Empire, which as it began by the sword, and is propagated by the sword, so let
all Christians henceforth pray, that by the sword it may fall, and at last
vanquish into nothing, as of nothing (to speak of) it took Original.

CHAP. VI. Their Religion and Foperies.
THe Turkish Religion, (if we may give so high a Title to such a mess of
nonsense) is a hodge-podge of all sects and opinions, but so ridiculous that
any one well in his wits cannot choose but laugh heartily at its absurdities;
and no wonder, their Lawgiver Mahomet being troubled with the Megrims, that he
should vend such trash, and those people addicted to all manner of luxury
should receive a Religion suitable to their sordid appetites. To rehearse all
his mad whimzical conceits, would make a sufficient volume of it self; we shall
only in a brief Epitomy give you a taste of some of the most notorious, by
which you may give a guess of the rest.

And first concerning his opinion of Heaven, whither he says he was carried by
an Angel, and let in Gabriel the Porter there; where he saw a Cock so great,
that standing upon the Moon, his Coxcomb reached into the imperial Heaven, many
millions of miles altitude, and when this mighty Chanticlear crowed, all the
Cocks upon earth re-ecchoed him; this he saw in the first Heaven; In the fourth
he beheld an infinite company of Angels, whereof every one was a thousand times
bigger then the Globe of the earth; each of them had ten thousand heads, every
head threescore and ten thousand tongues, and every tongue praised God in seven
hundred thousand several languages: amongst other of these Angels, (says he)
was one named Phatyr, or the Angel of mercy, who was of that immense greatness,
that every step he trod was twelve times more then the distance betwixt the
Poles. This Angel (said he) had a quill or pen of Orient Pearl, of such a
length, that an excellent Arabian Courser could hardly reach to the end of it
in five hundred years continual galloping; with this pen (says he) does God
record all things past, present and to come, in such a mysterious Character,
that none but he and Seraphael can understand it; with this quill were written
all the hundred and four Holy Books, viz. the ten which Adam received, Seth
fifty, Enoch thirty, and Abraham the remainder; this pen forsooth also, writ
Moses Law, David's Psalms, Christ's Gospel, and Mahomet's Alcoran. In the
seventh Heaven he saw the. Throne of God, supported by seven Angels, each of
them so great, that a Faulcon with incessant flying could scarce in a thousand
years reach the distance of one eye from another; fourteen everlasting burning
candles hung about the Throne, whose length (according to Mahomets measure) was
as much as a horse could run in five hundren years. There (says this
blasphemer) did he see the Almighty, who bid him welcome, and stroaked him on
the face with his hand, which was a thousand times colder then ice. Here
Mahomet for shame of his own baseness blushed, and sweat six drops, which he
wiped from his brow and threw into Paradise, where one became a Rose, another a
grain of Rice, and the other four became four learned Men, viz. Armet,
Sembelin, Almamed, Molec-zed, and Seh-naffin.

Who would think people should be so credulous to believe such antic stories;
but his other opinions were full as ridiculous, as concerning the day of
Judgment, that he should paint it out by a great and fearful Duel betwixt him
and death, who being overcome shall be so enraged, that he shall destroy all
the world presently, and being armed in flaming brass, shall sound his Trumpet
to each quarter of the world, whose affrighting noise shall make all creatures
to give up the ghost: yea, the very Angels also shall die, as also Adriel, who
wrapping his iron wings about him, shall strangle himself with such a hideous
noise as is not to be imagined.

Then shall ensue a terrible earthquake, and a violent shower of parching
brimstone, which shall turn the world into a disordered Chaos, in which
condition it shall remain the space of forty days, at which time God shall take
it in his fist and say, Where are now the haughty Princes, the cruel Tyrants,
lascivious 'Wantons, and covetous Muck-worms of the earth? Then will he rain
down mercy for forty days and nights together incessantly, which shall reduce
the world again into a flourishing estate. Then shall the Angel Seraphiel take
a golden Trumpet in his hand, of length 500 years travel from one end to
another, with which he shall give such a sound, as shall revive again both
Angels and men, who shall reassume their former estate after this; Michael the
Archangel comes with a mighty Balance, and poyses every man's actions in
either scale, those whose good deeds outweigh their evil, are put on the right
hand, the other on the left. Then is every man laden with his sins in a
satchel and hung about his neck, with which they pass on a narrow weak bridge
over the mouth of Hell; now those that be heavy laden break the bridge and fall
therein, but such as have but few sins pass over securely; on the other side of
the bridge stands Mahomet, who shall be transformed into the shape of a mighty
Ram, full of locks and long fleeces of wool, in which all his Sectaries like
Fleas shall shroud themselves, then will he jump into Paradise, and so convey
them all thither.

Paradise he described to be as many miles about as there be Atoms in the Sun,
and that it is enclosed with a wall of ninety times refined gold, ten thousand
miles high, and three thousand thick; it has seven Gates to enter in at, and
is divided into seven spacious Gardens, and those subdivided into seventy times
seven several places of delight. In this place he promises to his Mussel-men,
or true Believers, all sensual pleasures and delights imaginable; namely, that
they should have garments of silk, with all sorts of colors, bracelets of gold
and Amber, Parlors and Banquetting-houses upon floods and Rivers, vessels of
Gold and Silver, Angels serving them, bringing in Gold and Silver Flaggons Milk
and Wine, curious Lodgings rarely furnished, Cushions, Pillows and Down-beds,
most beautiful Women to accompany them, Maidens and Virgins with twinkling
eyes, Gardens and Orchards with Arbors, Fountains, Springs, and all manner of
pleasant fruit, Rivers of Milk, Honey and spiced Wine; all manner of sweet
Odours, Perfumes, and fragrant Scents, yea whatsoever the flesh shall desire to
have. In this Paradise (says Mahemet) there is a Table of Diamond, seven
hundred thousand days journey long; this is for men to feast upon, sitting on
chairs of Gold and Pearl. Gabriel the Porter of Paradise has seventy thousand
keys which belong to his Office, and every key is seven thousand miles long;
questionless he must be very strong, or else those keys must needs tire him.
Here (says the Alcoran) shall men tumble in all manner of pleasure, reposing
upon fair beds lined with Crimson; there shall they gather the fruits of the
Garden to their contentment; there shall they enjoy the company of fair and
beautiful Damsels, whose hairs be threads of Gold, their eyes of Diamonds as
big as the Moon, their lips of Cherries, their teeth of Pearl, their tongues of
Rubies, their cheeks of Coral, their noses of Jasper, their foreheads of
Saphyr, their eyes exceeding black, and bodies exceeding white, round faced,
sweet, amorous and beautiful; there shall they spend the time with these
Virgins in pleasant Arbors, who being enjoyed, shall have their Virginities
again renewed as often as lost. In the midst of this delightful place (says
he) is a very high spreading Tree, higher then all the Mountains in the world,
were they heaped one upon another, and so broad that it shadeth all Paradise.
The trunk of this extraordinary rate tree is all of Diamond, the leaves of
Ophirian gold, and the boughs of jet; each leaf has an antic shape, having on
one side growing the name of God, and on the other that of Mahomet.

Such gross absurdities did he publish to catch the credulous inconsiderate
multitude; but his devices are so ridiculous, that a wise man cannot choose but
smile at his conceits in pleasure: this indeed has made many of the most
serious of them, to mislike his inventions and sensual delights; amongst the
rest hear Avicena, one of his own Sect; Mahomet (says he) has given as a Law
which shows the perfection of felicity to consist in those things which
concern the body, whereas the wise and sages of old had a greater desire to
express the felicity of the soul then of the body; as for the bodily felicity,
though it were granted them, yet they regarded it not nor esteemed it, in
comparison of the felicity which the soul requires.

Nor were his ridiculous fopperies of Hell less then the other; namely, that it
was in the navel of the world, compassed with a large high wall of attractive
Adamant, having seven gates of flaming brass to enter in at; that it was
divided into several Cells or Dungeons, whereof some were more loathsome and
fuller of torments then others, which are prepared for those souls who have
highest transgressed. Some of these Caves (says he) are so deep, that a
millstone in a thousand years cannot attain to the bottom, and other places are
without bottom: In the descent of these deep Caves or Dungeons, are placed
sharp pikes and swords to wound and torment the souls that move there. These
Dungeons are full of flaming oil and brimstone, which strikes such a terror,
that the very Devils themselves do howl, scrich and rage there beyond measure:
other Dungeons be full of serpents, toads, and all manner of venomous and
noison creatures that can be imagined. Here shall the wicked eat of the fruit
of the Tree Zacon, which being in their guts shall flame like sulphur, they
shall drink boiling water, and every day have alteration of new torments. Some
Rivers (says he) be full of Crocodiles, others so cold as makes them gnash and
chatter, others boil with violence of heat; yet (says the Alcoran) shall not
these pains endure for ever; for after so many thousand years, when each soul
has suffered according to the demerits of the sins which he has committed,
then shall they be delivered by Mahomet, (yea his charity is so great, that he
will deliver the Devils also) first changing their affrighting shapes into
others more tolerable, and then by washing them in a River flowing out of
Paradise called Alcanzar, they shall become whiter then the driven snow, and
from thence forward sing Lala hillulaes unto Mahomet.

His doctrine of Angels was, that they were either good or bad, yet both
subject to death; the good as consisting of flame, because Lucifer an Angel, by
ambition was cast out of Paradise; the bad Angels are imprisoned in Dogs,
Swine, Toads, Wolves, Bears, Tigers, etc. After the Judgment day they must be
tormented in Hell some millions of years, and afterward be delivered by
Mahomet.

As absurd and ridiculous were his opinions concerning our Savior Christ, as
that the Virgin Mary conceived him by smelling to a Rose presented to her by
the Angel Gabriel, and that he was born out of her breasts: also, that he was
not crucified, but Judas or some other wicked thief in his stead, Christ being
separated from them by a cloud that covered him, which came from Heaven: that
at the last day the Righteous should enter into Heaven, the Jews under the
banner of Moses, the Christians under the banner of Christ, and the Saracens
under his banner.

Having with these and the like odd whimzies, patched up his Alcoran, to give
it the better credit, that the people might imagine it to come from Heaven, he
devised this cuning way; He secretly caused a wild Ass to be taken and bound,
his Alcoran being fairly written about his neck; then as he preached unto the
people, he pretended a sudden rapture of some extraordinary thing that was
revealed to him from above, and with a loud voice spoke to the people, Ye have
desired a Law, behold God has sent you a Law from Heaven; go to such a Desert,
there shall ye find an Ass, and a Book tied about his neck, which will direct
you in the ways which God has commanded.

Thereupon the people ran in great have, and (as they could do no other) found
it according as he had said; so with great pomp they bring back the Ass with
the book about his neck, suitable to the bearer; and now (as thoroughly
convinced) they give great honor to this their new Prophet. Thus were these
silly souls deluded by this cunning Impostor, who worse then Herostratus,
purchased to himself a lasting name by by the grandest wickedness that could be
committed. We shall conclude this Chapter with a brief Epitomy or Summary of
their Religion (such as it is) wherein all those that are not wholly given over
to sensuality and brutishness, may see the ridiculous machine whereon the great
fabric of their faith is grounded.

A Summary of the Religion of the TURKS.
THe Turks believe one sole God, in one sole Person, Creator of heaven and
earth, the rewarder of the good, and punisher of the wicked; who has created
Paradise for the recompense of the righteous, and Hell for the last punishment
of crimes. They believe that Mahomet was a very great Prophet, whom God sent in
the world to teach men the way of salvation; and call themselves Musulmans,
that is to say, recommended to God, or saved.

They believe the Decalogue of Moses, and are obliged to observe it; they
celebrate Friday as the Christians Sunday, that day they assemble in Temples at
noon to pray.

They are obliged to pray five times a day, viz. in the morning, at noon, at
the evening, when the Sun sets, and an hour within night.

They fast the month, or moon, which they call Ramazan; during this month, they
neither drink nor ear all the day, until the Sun be set, but in the night drink
and eat according to their appetites, flesh and fish, except the flesh of
swine, and wine that is all times forbidden them; after this fast they have the
feast of great Bairan, as the Christians Easter after Lent. In this Bayran or
Byram, lasting 3 days, they are very jolly, and give Presents like our New
years gifts especially the Grand Seignior gives and receives much.
They are great founders of Temples and Hospitals, and are obliged to give to
the poor the first day of the year, the Tyth of what they have gained during
the preceding year.

They believe, that after being well washed, saying some prayer appropriate to
that Ceremony, they have also the soul purified from all filthiness of sin,
which is the cause that they wash and bath often, especially before they pray.

They have no Sacrament but Circumcision; they cause their children to be
circumcised at the age of seven or eight years; and when they can pronounce
these words, La ilha ilha allha Mehemet rasoul allha, that is, There is but one
God, Mahomet is his Prophet and Apostle; this is their profession of Faith;
nevertheless there is no mention of Circumcision in all the Alcoran; they say
they observe it in imitation of Abraham, whose Law is recommended to them by
Mahomet; they believe that the Alcoran was brought to him at several times by
the Angel Gabriel in the City of Mecca, and that of Medina, because the Jews
and Christians had altered the holy Scriptures, and the Law of God.

They are permitted to have four wives, married at the same time, and as many
Concubines as they are able to maintain.

They can put away their wives when they think fit, paying them what they
promised them in contract of marriage, and marry again at their pleasure; but
the women are bound to tarry until they are assured that they are not with
child before they marry again; and their husbands are obliged to keep, and take
the care of the child. The children which they have by their slaves are
indifferently esteemed with those of their wives, and are all held as
legitimate.

They have Temples, Colleges, and Hospitals well revenued; they have covents
of Religious, that live exemplary; obey their Superiors without contradiction,
and dance after the sound of Flutes and other instruments when they make their
prayers.

They have moreover another sort of Religious Vagabonds through the world,
clothed like fools of that Country; they often go naked, and cut their skin in
many places, they are held to be holy persons, and live by alms, which are
never refused them; both the one and the other sort of Religious are called
Dervis, they are known by their habit, and can retire and marry when they
please.

They deny Jesus Christ to be God, or the Son of God; neither believe they in
the holy Trinity: they say that Jesus Christ was a great Prophet, born of the
Virgin Mary, a Virgin both before and after her delivery; that he was conceived
by divine inspiration, or by a divine breath, without a father, as Adam was
created without a mother; that he was not crucified, that God took him into
heaven, and that he shall come again on earth at the end of the world to
confirm the Law of Mahomet; they likewise affirm, that the Jews thinking to
crucify Jesus Christ, crucified a man among them that resembled him.

They pray to God for the Dead, A great question among Mahometans.
they invoke their Saints, of whom they have a large Legend, nevertheless they
believe not Purgatory; and many among them imagine that the soul and body
remain together in the grave until the day of Judgment.

They have Mecca and Medina, that are two Cities of Arabia, in great veneration
because Mahomet was born at Mecca, and buried at Medina: they make thither
great pilgrimages, and believe that Land to be Holy: They bear likewise
singular respect to the City of Jerusalem, for that it has been the
Birthplace, and habitation of many Prophets.

They use no Clocks; at the hour of their prayers their Priests ascend the
highest part of the Tower, that is in a corner of the Temple, and with a loud
voice call the people to prayer, singing prayer, composed for that purpose.

CHAP. VII. The Seraglio or Court of the Great SIGNOR.
HAving before mentioned the place, to satisfy some Curiosities concerning
this Emperors pleasures, in which he satisfies himself with variety, conversing
with his Mutes and Buffones (for that it is not lawful for any body but the
Vizier Bassa's, and some few others to speak to him) in the same signs and
gestures, and now and then riding, and shooting, and casting a heavy Iron Mace,
all which he is taught to do with great exactness; I will transiently speak of
that, then which nothing is more secret and reserved, viz. His Companying with
women, the beautifullest those parts of the world afford, the greatest
excellency and perfection whereof is reputed to consist in great and broad
eyes; the enjoyment of women so featured, being made a part of their Paradise
in the World to come.

They which are within the third gate, called the Kings gate, are about two
thousand persons, men and women; whereof the women (old and young one with
another; what with the Kings Concubines, old women, and women servants) may be
about eleven or twelve hundred. Now those which are kept up for their beauties,
are all young Virgins, taken and stolen from foreign Nations; who after they
have been instructed in good behavior, and can play upon Instruments, Sing,
Dance, and sew curiously; they are given to the Grand Signor as presents of
great value, and the number of these increases daily, as they are sent and
presented by the Tartars, by the Bashaws, and other great men, to the King and
Queen. They do likewise sometimes decrease, according as the Grand Signor shall
think fit. For upon diverse occasions and accidents, he causes many of them to
be turned out of this Seraglio; and to be sent into the Old Seraglio: which is
also a very goodly and spacious place, of which hereafter I shall take occasion
to make mention. Virgins made Turks and how.
These Virgins immediately after their coming into the Seraglio, are made
Turks; which is done by using this Ceremony only; to hold up their forefinger
and say these words; law illawheh illaw Allawh, Mahummed resoul Allawh. That
is, there is no God but God alone, and Mahomet is the Messenger of God. As they
are in age and disposition (being proved and examined by an old woman called
Kahiyah Cadun, that is, Kahiyah Cadun, the mother of the Maids
as we say, the Mother of the Maids) so they are placed in a room with the
other of the same age, spirit, and inclination, to dwell and live together.

Their manner of life.
Now in the women's lodging, they live just as Nuns do in great Nunneries, for
these Virgins have very large rooms to live in, and their Bed-Chambers will
hold almost a hundred of them apiece. They sleep upon Sofaes, which are built
long-wise on both sides of the room, and a large space left in the midst to go
to and fro about their business.

Their Beds are very course and hard (for the Turks neither use Feather-beds
nor Corded Bed-steads,) and by every ten Virgins their lies an old woman, and
all the night long there are many lamps burning, so that one may see plainly
throughout the whole room: which does both keep the wenches from wantonness,
and serve upon any occasion which may happen in the night. Near unto the said
Bed-Chambers they have their Bagnos for their use at all times: with many
Fountains, out of which they are served with water, and above their Chambers
there are diverse rooms, where they sit and sew: and there they keep their
Books, and Chests, in which they lay up their apparel.

They feed by whole Camaradaes, and are served and waited upon by other women:
nor do they want any thing whatsoever that is necessary for them.

There are other places likewise for them, where they go to School, to learn to
speak and read (if they will) the Turkish tongue, to sew also, and to play on
diverse instruments, so they spend the day with their Mistresses, who are all
ancient women: some hours notwithstanding being allowed them for their
recreation, to walk in their Gardens, and use such sports as they familiarly
exercise themselves withal.

The King does not at all frequent or see these Virgins, unless it be at that
instant when they are first presented unto him; or else in case that he desire
one of them for his Bedfellow, or to make him some pastime with music or
other sports: wherefore when he is prepared for a fresh Mate, he gives notice
to the Kahiya Cadun of his purpose; who immediately bestirs her self like a
crafty Baud, and chooses out such as she judges to be most amiable, and
fairest of all; and having placed them in good order in a room, in two ranks,
like so many pictures, half on the one side, and half on the other, she
forthwith brings in the King, The Kings coming to them.
who walking four or five times in the midst of them, and having viewed them
well, takes good notice within himself of her that he best likes, but says
nothing; only as he goes out again, he throws a Handkercheif into that
Virgins hand; by which token she knows that she is to lik with him that
night: so she being (questionless) exceeding joyful to become the object of so
great a fortune, in being chosen out from among so many, to enjoy the society
of an Emperor, has all the art that possible may be, shown upon her by the
Cadun, in attiring, painting, and persuming her; and at night she is brought to
sleep with the Grand Signior in the woman's lodgings, where there are Chambers
set apart for that business only. And being in bed together, they have two
great wax-lights burning by them all night; one at the beds feet, and the other
by the door: besides there are appointed (by the Cadun) diverse old Blackmore
women, to watch by turns that night in the Chamber, by two at a time; one of
them to sit by the light at the beds feet, and the other by the door, and when
they will they change, and other two supply their rooms, without making the
least noise imaginable, so that the King is not any whit disturbed. Now in the
morning when his Highness rises (for he rises first) he changes all his
apparel from top to toe, leaving those which he wore, to her that he lay
withal, and all the money that was in his pockets, were it never so much; and
so departs to his own lodings; from whence also he sends her immediately a
present of jewels, money, and vests of great value, agreeable to the
satisfaction and content which he received from her that night. In the same
manner he deals with all such as he makes use of in that kind; but with some
he continues longer then with other some, and enlarges his bounty far more
toward some then others; according as his humor, and affection to them
increases, by their fulfilling his lustful desires.

And if it so fall out, that any one of them does conceive by him, and bring
forth his first begotten child: then she is called by the name of Sultana
Queen: Sultana Queen.
and if it be a Son, she is confirmed and established by great feasts, and
solemnity; and forthwith has a dwelling assigned unto her a part, of many
stately rooms well furnished; and many servants to attend upon her.

The King likewise allows her a large Revenue, Her allowance.
that she may give away and spend at her pleasure, in whatsoever she may have
occasion; and all they of the Seraglio must, and do acknowledge her for Queen,
showing all the duty and respect that may be, both to her self, and to them
that belong unto her.

The other women (however they bring forth issue) are not called Queens; yet
they are called Sultana's, because they have had carnal commerce with the King:
and she only is called Queen, which is the Mother of the first begotten Son,
heir to the Empire; the which Sultanas, being frequented by the King at his
pleasure, have also this prerogative; to be immediately removed from the common
sort, and to live in rooms apart, exceeding well served and attended; and have
no want either of money or apparel, in conformity to their degree.

Other Sultanas.
All these Sultanaes do resort together very familiarly, when they please; but
not without great dissimulation, and inward malice; fearing lest the one should
be better beloved of the Grand Signor then the other; yet notwithstanding this
their jealousy, they (in outward show) use all kind of courtesy one toward
another.

They never stir out of the Seraglio but in company of the King himself, who
often times carrys either all, or most of them abroad by water, to his other
Seraglio's of pleasure: and in those ways through which they pass, to go to and
fro from their Kaiks, there is Canvas pitched up on both sides, Their Barges.
and none may come near them but black Eunuchs, till they be settled, and
covered close in the room, at the stern of the Kaik; and then go in the
Bargemen; so that in fine they are never seen by any men, but by the Grand
Signior only, and the Eunuchs.

The Kings Daughters, Sisters, and Aunts, have their lodging^ also in the same
Seraglio; being royally served, and very sumptuously apparelled, and live
together by themselves in continual pleasures; until such time as at their
request the King shall be pleased to give them in Marriage: and then they come
forth of that Seraglio, and carry each of them along with them a Chest which
the Grand Signior gives them, full of rich apparel, jewels, and money; to the
value of (at the least) thirty thousand pounds sterling a chest; and that is
(as we call it) their portion.

The Kings Sons by the Queen
The Kings Sons, which are born unto him by his Queen, are Nursed, and brought
up together by themselves, by choice Nurses, which are found abroad without the
Seraglio. But if his Majesty have Sons also by other Sultanaes, (as commonly
every Grand Signior has) then those are brought up apart, and not with the
Queens; so that every Mother cares for her own Children, and that with great
Envy and Jealousy; yet they may play together, till they come to be of six or
seven years of Age; being much made of, sumptuously maintained, and apparelled
all alike at the Kings charge.

They live among the women till they come to be of nine or ten years of Age,
and about fourteen, Circumcision solemnity.
they are Circumcised with Great Pomp and Solemnities throughout the whole
City, especially the Eldest Son. For the Circumcision of the Turks Children are
like to the Christian Weddings; there being used at them, great Feasting,
Banqueting, Music, and bringing of Presents.

From five years of age until ten, (during which time they live amongst the
Women) they have their Hojah (that is, their Schoolmaster, appointed them by
the King to teach them to Write, and Read; and to instruct them in good
manners, that they may behave themselves decently before the King their Father;
which Hojah comes once a day into the women's Seraglio, and is brought into a
Chamber by the black Eunuchs (without ever seeing the Kings women at all)
whither the Children come, accompanied with two or three old Black-moor-women
slaves; and there they are taught for so many hours together, as their Tutor is
permitted to stay, and then he departs.

The Kings daughters
As for the Daughters, they are but slightly looked after; nor is the King so
tender and careful over them. For as they are not suspected at all, for any
thing that may concern the State in future times; so likewise are they not much
respected: yet they are well provided for by the Grand Seignior their Father,
in case they live to be fit for Husbands,

After the Shawh-zawdeh (the next heir to the Crown) is Circumcised; if his
Father think it unfit to keep him any longer with him at home in the Seraglio,
he provides all things fitting for to send him abroad: The Prince sent abroad.
that he may see the world, and learn experience, the better to enable him to
govern the Empire after his Fathers decease: sending along with him one of his
principal, and trusty Eunuchs for to be his guide, An Eunuch his Overseer.
and overseer in all his actions; besides many servants to attend upon him: all
which he chooses out of his own Seraglio. He allows him likewise sufficient
means to maintain him like a Prince (as he does also the rest of his Sons, if
he have a purpose to send any of them abroad.) And so all things being well
ordered, and prepared for him; having taken his leave of his Father and Mother
(who present him with many gifts, as also the Sultanaes, and all the Bashaws,
and great men of the Port do) he departs for Magnesia a City in Asia, Magnesia
his residence.
there to reside in the Government of that Province; in which he has not the
supreme Authority, but governs only as his Fathers Deputy. And should he pass
the limits of his commission, His Commission.
he would quickly fall into disgrace, and suspicion of Rebellion; as heretofore
it has happened unto diverse of his predecessors, sent out in the same manner.
Wherefore the Eunuch which is appointed to be his helper and over-seer, is
bound to give continual advice to the Grand Signior of his deportment, and to
the Viziers, of all occurrences whatsoever, according to the carge given him:
and likewise to receive from Constantinople such orders and commandments, as
are to be obeyed in those parts, where the Prince resideth. So that all things
(in a manner) are swayed by the discretion of the Eunuch.

His beding. A Shash is the whole pe^ce (be it long or short) of fine linen.
Pages watch.
And as for his lodging, he sleeps upon mattresses of velvet, and cloth of gold:
in the summer in sheets of Shash embroidered with silk, sown to the quilts, and
in the winter betwixt coverlets of Lusernes or of Sabells, wearing all night a
Gheje-lick or little shash on his head.

And when he lies alone in his own lodgings, he is always watched by the Pages
of his chamber, by two and two at a time, changing their watch every three
hours; one of them standing at the chamber door; and the other by the bed side
to cover him, in case the clothes should slide off, and to be near hand if his
Majesty should want any thing, or be ill at ease. In the same chamber also
where he lies, there are also two old women that wait with burning torches in
their hands, Two torch women.
which they may not put out, till such time as the King is risen out of his
bed: now the use of these lights is, for his Majesty to say over his Beads, and
for to pray by, in case his devotion be stirred up thereto at midnight, or at
Temcheet namaz, which is about two hours before day.

Women's habit.
The habit of his women is much like to that of the men. Breeches from the waste
down to the heel.
For they wear Chacksirs, and Buskins too, and the meaner sort of them have
their shoes shod with iron at the heels.

They likewise sleep as the men do, in their linen breeches, No closestools
among the men; but the women ever when they go to the Haman or Bagno, carry
the^ along with the^. No paper used at the privy. They also call it Kecheh,
that is, a Janissaries cap, but Vskuf properly signifies a hood.
and quilted waste-coats; having thin and light ones for the summer, and more
thick and warm ones for the winter.

The Turks never have any close-stools or such like utensils in their chambers;
but having necessity they rise, and go to the privies, made in places apart,
where there do always stand pots full of water ready, that they may wash when
they have done, for they use no paper in that service, as others do; holding it
not only undecent, but an extraordinary absurdity, for a Musselman to put paper
to so base a use: seeing that both the name of God, and the Mohammedan Law, are
written upon the like. They all put off their Turbants when they go about that
business; and a Janizary may by no means piss with his Vskuf upon his head, but
having done, he must kiss it, and so put it on again. For they hold the
covering of their heads to be as honorable in a manner as the head it self.

His Majesty's Bedchamber is near unto the great Hall of Audience, in the
third Court of the Seraglio, Grand Seig^ors bed-cha^ber described. H^ng ngs be
ore the doors.
the walls whereof are covered with stones of the finest China metal, spotted
with flowers of diverse colors, which make an excellent show: The Anteporta's
are of cloth of gold of Bursia, and their Borders of Crimson velvet embroidered
with gold and pearls: The posts of the bed-stead are of silver, hollow, and
instead of knobs on the tops of them, there are set Lions made of Crystal: The
Canopy over it is of cloth of gold, and so are the bolsters, Lions of Crystal.
and the matresses. The floor of this Chamber (as of the other rooms) and the
Sofaes, are spread with very costly Persian Carpets of silk and gold: and the
Pallets to sit on, with the Cushions to lean upon, are of very rich cloth of
gold.

Victuals and Cooks.
The victuals in the Seraglio (for the most part are dressed by Agiamoglans
brought up to Cookery, (which are called Aschees, and are known from other
Agiamoglans by their white caps; Cooks.
yet in the form of a suger-loaf as well as the others are) howbeit there are
belonging to the Kitchins that are therein, more then two hundred under-cooks,
and skullions; besides their principal officers, as sewers, caterers, and such
like: all which are carefully to look to their several Kitchins, and not any
one to trust another with his business.

The Sultans Kitchen and Meals.
The Kings Kitchen begins to work ordinarily before break of day. For his
Highness rising betimes, there must be always somewhat ready for him; because
commonly he eats three or four times a day. He dines usually at ten of the
clock in the forenoon, and sups about six at night, as well in the Summer as in
the Winter.

When he has a will to eat, he tells the Capee Aga of it, who forthwith sends
an Eunuch to give notice of the same to the chief Sewer, and he having caused
the meat to be dished up, brings it in dish by dish to the Kings Table: and so
his Majesty sits down after the common Turkish fashion with his legs across,
His sitting at meat.
having a very rich wrought towel cast before him upon his knees to save his
clothes: and another hanging upon his left arm, which he uses for his Napkin
to wipe his mouth and fingers. He is not carved unto, as other Princes are, but
helps himself; having before him upon a piece of Bulgar Leather (which is
instead of a table cloth) fine white bread, of three or four sorts, well
relished, and always very new, as indeed all Turks love their bread best when
it is warm, newly come forth of the Oven. He neither uses Knife nor Fork, but
only a wooden Spoon, of which there are two always laid before him the one
serving him to eat his pottage, and the other to sup up certain delicate
Sirrups, made of diverse fruits, compounded with the juice of Lemmons, and
Sugar, to quench his thirst. He tastes of his dishes one by one, and as he
has done with them they are taken off. His meat is so tender, and so
delicately dressed, that (as I said before) he needs no knife, but pulls the
flesh from the bones very easily with his fingers. He uses no salt at his
Table, neither has he any Antepaste; but immediately falls aboard the flesh,
and having well fed, closes up his stomach with a Bocklava, A Tart.
or some such like thing. And so his Dinner, or Supper, being ended, he washes
his hands in a Basen of gold, with the Ewer all set with precious stones.

His Majesty's ordinary diet (as I have been told by some of the Aschees,) is,
half a score roasted Pigeons in a dish; two or three Geese in a dish, Lamb,
Hens, Chickens, Mutton, and sometimes wild fowl, but very seldom: and look what
he has roasted for him, so he has the same quantity boiled, almost of every
thing, there being very good sauce for every dish, and other ingredients very
pleasing to the pallat. He has likewise broaths of all sorts; and diverse
Purcelain dishes full of Preserves and sirrups; and some Tarts, Little pies
and Burecks after their fashion, made of flesh covered with paste: And having
made an end of eating: he drinks one draught of Sherbet (seldom or never
drinking above once at a meal) which is brought unto him by one of his Agas in
a deep Purcelane dish covered, It is an Arabian word and signifies drinks.
standing upon a flat under dish of the same metal.

All the while that he is at Table, he very seldom or never, speaks to any man;
albeit there stands before him many Mutes and Buffones to make him merry,
playing tricks, and sporting one with another alla mutescha, which the King
understands very well. For by signs their meaning is easily conceived, and if
peradventure he should vouchsafe to speak a word or two, it is to grace some
one of his Agas standing by him, whom he highly favors (...) throwing unto
him a loaf of bread from his own table: and this is held for a singular grace,
and especial favor; and he distributing part of it amongst his companions,
they likewise accept of it at the second hand, and account it as a great Honor
done unto them, in regard it came from their Lord and King.

The dishes for his Highness Table, are all of gold, Dishes, and Covers of gold.
and so likewise are their Covers; they are in the custody of the Keelergee
Bashaw, who attends at the Kitchen at Dinner, and Supper time: Yellow purcelane
for the Ramazan, or Lent.
and so are all the Purcelane Dishes (which are very costly and scarcely to be
had for money) in which the Grand Siguior eats in the Ramazan time, which is
their Lent, and lasts a whole moon, and the month it self is so called. Now
at that time, the Turks never eat in the day, but only in the night; not
making any difference at all in meats; (except Swines flesh and things
strangled, of which they are forbidden by their Law to eat at any time.)

The King seldom eats fish, unless it be when he is abroad, at some Garden
House by the Sea side, with his women; where he may sit and see it taken
himself.

CHAP. VIII. The common Customs and Manners of the Turks.
THe Fabrics of their Churches are sufficiently large and sumptuous, and
called by the name of Meschites: in which I never could perceive any sort of
fancies or imageries (for Idolatry is held by them the worst of abominations)
but only these, or one of these inscriptions following, in the Arabic
Language, There is no God but one, and Mahomet his Prophet; or, One Creator and
Prophets equal: or, None is strong as God. Then there is seen a great abundance
of burning Lamps, the whole Church whited, the Pavement covered with
Mattresses, and on them the Ornaments of Tapestries. Near the Church, is
erected a Tower of great height, to the top whereof the Priest ascends before
the time of Prayers, and with a loud voice, his earr stopped with his fingers,
he thrice pro-proclaims these words; God, True, One: which Clamor or Outcry
(for they have no Bells) being heard, the Nobility, and all unbusied persons,
repair to Church, as bound to that devotion. Afterward the said Priest
descending, prays with them; (and then they turn their faces toward Mecca:)
And this he is tied to do by his Office, five times day and night. But
whosoever comes to these Prayers, must wash his hands, his feet and privities,
and his head thrice sprinkled with water: and these words pronounced, Glory to
my God; Then, their shoes put off, and left at the Church-door, they enter in,
some barefooted, others having new shoes or socks, and so tenderly touch the
ground. Women come not into Churches, as being not excis'd, and for fear of
disturbing men's devotions, but meet apart in severed places, altogether shut
off from eyes and ears of men; and more seldom frequent their Churches, except
in time of Passover or Easter, and on Fridays; which days from Mahomets
Traditions, for distinction and imitation, they almost respect as much as Jews
their Sabbaths, or Christians the Lords day. They pray from nine a clock at
night till twelve; and in their praying, their bodies are ever in great motion
and agitation; wherewith they marvellously afflict themselves with loud cryings
and fierce ejaculations; so as oftentimes their strengths and spirits failing,
they sink unto the ground; and if it happen any of them conceive her self with
child, she then assures her self that pregnancy proceeds from the favor of the
Holy Spirit; and when delivered, the Infants born are called, Sons, or Souls of
the Holy Ghost. This has been related to me from their Handmaids; for I, nor
ever any man else were ever present at that spectacle. At men's devotions I have
been often present with my Master; whose customs are in manner following: in
their prayers they never take off (their Turbants) coverings of their heads,
but with the tops of their fingers gently touch them, in token of taking them
off; they fall upon their knees and often kiss the ground: they hold it for
great wickedness, to have a Christian present at their mysteries; for they
believe their Churches (as they say) to be polluted by men unwashed; and that
Christians use no such Lavatories. Every Church in Turkey has a peculiar place
for Baths and washings, with lodings for a Priest. Now here the Priest ascends
his Pulpit (reads a piece of the Alcoran, and sometimes expounds it) and there
preaches about two hours; his Sermon ended, two boys come up to him, who
pronounce their prayers singing with responsals; which Songs being ended, the
Priest with the whole People in a low voice, beating upon their sides, repeat
these words, There is but one God; which for the space of half an hour they do,
and so depart. But this manner of prayers and ceremonies of preaching and
singing, are not done every day, unless in time of Lent, Festivals, some
Sundays; and most observe the Fridays for religious worship.

Of their Lent.
They keep their Lent by fasting one month and one week every Year; but not
always the same: for if this Year they fast out January, the next they fast out
February, and keep on that course; so as in twelve Years space, they dedicate
to God (in lieu of tenths) one Year and twelve Weeks. Travelers and sick
persons are excused from present fastings; but are enjoined to supply it, by
fasting so many days at other times. When they fast, all that Day they taste
nothing, not so much as bread or water; then the Stars appearing, it is lawful
for them to eat of all things which are not strangled, or Hogs-flesh, which
they esteem as Carrion, most unclean. Their Lent being past, they observe
Easter for three days, with great solemnity anointing the nails of their Feet
and Fingers with an Oil which they call Chna, which makes those nails to shine
like Gold; and with the same, they sometimes stain or color the hoofs and
tails of Horses. This Tincture holds very long, and can hardly be wiped away:
so as until new nails thrust out the old, they still retain that dye; but nails
of the hand, by frequent washing, abate in time. Women do not only anoint the
nails, but their whole Hands and Feet also with that Oil.

Of their Circumcision.
They Circumcise not on the eighth day as the Jews do, but when the newborn
arrive at the age of seven or eight years, and be of perfect speech: the
mystery whereof, is from the words of confession required before Circumcision,
which are some of those sentences aforementioned in their Churches, which they
repeat, and give assent thereto, by holding up the Thumb of the right hand. The
Youth is not for this mystery brought unto their Church, but is circumcised in
his Parents house. I have been often present at this solemnity, which is
performed in manner following: first, the friends are all invited to a feast,
sufficiently furnished with all sorts of delicate flesh, lawful for them to
eat; and almost every where, especially amongst the wealthier sort, an Or is
killed, bowelled and flayed; in the body whereof, they include a Sheep; and in
that Sheep, a Hen; and in her, an Egg; all which are entirely roasted
together, for the solemnity and splendour of that day. Then in their Feast and
time of Supper, the Boy that is to be circumcised, is brought to a Physician
skilful in that Art, who fixing between a pair of pinchers the foreskin of his
privy Member, to prevent all fear in the Boy, he tells him that the next day
he will circumcise him, and so departs; but presently seigning to have omitted
something appertaining to this preparation, on a sudden he cutteth off the
foreskin, applying thereunto a little salt and bombace; and then he is called a
Musselman, that is, one circumcised. Yet their Names are given the day of their
Nativity, not Circumcision. After continuance of this Feast for three days,
the Boy with great pomp and solemnity is accompanied to the Baths; and being
returned to his House, he is brought before the Guests, and by them presented
with gifts prepared for him; some give Silver, Silken Vestments; some Silver
Cups; others Money, and sometimes Horse. Women present him likewise, some with
Shirts, Handkerchiefs, and such like, according to the several pleasures and
abilities of the Guests. Women are not circumcised, only they confess the
aforesaid words, and so made Musselmen. And if any Christian voluntarily
confess a Faith in Mahomet, and suffers circumcision, (which often happens by
the heavy yoke and burden of their Tribute) this Man is led through all the
Streets and open places of the City, to the great joy and honor of the people,
with acclamations: him also they present with gifts, and after free him from
all Tribute. For covetousness of this profit, many Greeks and Albanes become
circumcised. But if any be forced thereto, as he that shall strike or otherwise
disgrace a Musselman, or blaspheme Mahomet, (as it befell a certain Grecian
Bishop which I did see) that man is circumcised, and has nothing presented to
him, yet shall be freed from Tribute, as others circumcised.

Of their Priests.
Their great Mufty (as the Pope among Catholics) cannot err, and is the
highest Minister of all Religious and Lay Persons: an Officer of great power
and trust: his conclusions and sentences in State and Church Affairs, are
irrevocable; and his person held in most esteem and reverence next the
Emperor: his habit most in green, being Mahomets color. There is small
difference between their other Priests and Laymen, nor much from the Governors
of Ceremonies (such as our Bishops are) neither is much learning required from
them: it is sufficient if they can read the ALCORAN and Musaph; yet they that
can interpret on the Text, are esteemed most Learned, because the Traditions of
Mahomet are written in the Arabic, not vulgar Turkish Character; and they hold
it most detestable, to have them interpreted in the vulgar Language. These
Priests and Governous are elected by the People; but their rewards and stipends
for their labors, are paid by the King. They have Wives, and Habits like
Seculars: and if their stipends be not sufficient to mantain the number of
their Children, they otherwise supply themselves by Handicrafts and Trades, or
what else befits a freeman; as teaching Schools, transcribing Books, etc. I
never could see amongst them any Printers; but Paper is there very well made.
Some make profit one way, some an other, as Tailors, Shooe-makers, etc.

Of their Monks.
They have likewise Monks of several Orders; but chiefly of these three: the
first have no propriety in any thing; they go almost wholly naked, saving their
privities covered with a Sheeps skin, and in cold weather they use the like to
cover their backs, their sides, their feet and hands are never covered. They
beg alms as well of Christians as Turks; and, For God's sake. These Monks
having eaten an Herb called Maslach, are possessed with a kind of fury and
madness; they cut and wound their breasts cross and overthwart, and so their
arms, dissembling all trouble or pain; then clap on their heads, hands and
breasts, the sponge or mushrooms of old Trees light burning, and not remove
them till they are reduced to ashes. Another Order I have seen, who go with
their privy part bored through, and a Ring included therein of the weight of
three pound; and this to preserve chastity. The third Order is rarely seen
abroad; but remain both day and night in Churches, where within some little
Angles they have small Cabins, no shoes, vestments, or coverings of the had,
wearing nothing but one shirt: their exercise is fasting and prayers, that God
would reveal things future to them. With this sort of Monks, the King of Turks
usually consults, when he intends a motion on expedition to War.

They give so much respect to Mahomets Traditions and Statutes, Their reverence
to Mahomets traditions.
that not only they never blaspheme God or his Prophet; (which amongst us
sometimes happens) but if they find the least leaf or scrowl thereof, lying on
the ground, they take it up and often kiss it, and place it on some shelves or
chinks of walls; affirming it a sin, to suffer that wherein the Name of God,
and Laws of Mahomet are written, to be trodden under foot. And no man dares to
sell the Alcoran, and other writings of their Law, to any Christian, or any
other differing in Religion or Faith with them, lest they should be trodden on,
or touched with unclean hands: and whosoever should so do, is severely
punished. And in this regard they may be styled far more reverent then
Christians.

They have places for Instruction, and Teachers both of Men and Women: Of their
Schools.
in several Towns, Men the Boys, and Women the Girls, some teach Astronomy,
Physic; and some the Art of Poetry; which when they do, they speak out with
loud voice; and moving their hands unto their sides, they pronounce their
meanings. They understand no artificial Music, but frame Verses to certain
Rules, which consist of eleven syllables. The hotness of the Clymate, and often
sicknesses, makes most inclined to Physic, wherein they have some small
knowledge. They learn Astronomy, to be thought able to tell fortunes. Printing
is supplied by a number of writing Priests: and perhaps neglected (as all
learning is) to maintain the peoples ignorance, and keep them off from search
into the gross absurdities of their constrained Religion.

Their marriages
They marry without Vows or Oaths, take Wives without portions, and for the most
part buy them, contrary to the Roman custom, where the Son in-law was bought
with Money to take a Daughter. This married Woman carries nothing with her for
use or ornament, which she is not forced to redeem or purchase from her
Parents. Evil manners or sterility, are causes of Divorces: for which there is
a peculiar Judge. They permit their bondmen or purchased servants to marry;
but the issue of them are all born slaves. The Alcoran persuades marriage as
pleasing God and Man; and it allows plurality of Wives and Concubine, as many
as a Man pleases. The Turk amongst his (whereof he has above five hundred in
his Seraglio's) names her for his Wife or Sultana, by whom he has his
first-begotten Son. All their Wives are used with equality of respect, in diet,
clothes, returns, and what concerns them; and are most obedient to their
Husbands. They nurse their own Children, and bear them on their Shoulders, not
in their Arms: no men, but Eunuchs are suffered to be with them, not their own
Sons, if above twelve years of age: they never go abroad, but accompanied with
only Women.

Pilgrims of several Nations travel to visit holy places, Of strangers.
which the Turk possesses; as Mecca and Medinum, (as Christians, Jerusalem)
where they say Mahomet was buried: but this is done as well for gain and
profit, as for devotion or Religions sake. And there having seen a gilded Shoo
hanging from the roof of the Church, and bought such fine linen and cloth as
they please, they return home with great advantage; some carrying about the
streets water, from thence in glases for devotion sake, and freely give it to
any that are thirsty; others do the like for profit. And if any one of them
happen to die in this Pilgrimage; by what occasion soever, although he never
arrive near Mecca, yet he has the estimation, and shall be placed in the rank
of Pilgrims.

I know not whether I should call them Miracles, or rather Monstrous Toys,
Miracles done by Mahomet at Mecca, which they say he still does in these times.
written in their Book called Mehemidine, wherein they are persuaded, that when
Mecca was a building, God by the prayers of Mahomet, commanded diverse mountains
to bring their stone to the Fabric of that Church, every Hill his tenth: and
when diverse Mountains had brought their portions, and Mecea built and perfectly
completed, a certain Hill called Araphat, and some other more remote, coming
thither with their tenths somewhat too late, and finding Mecca built, and no
use of their stones, they begun most bitterly to weep; which when Mahomet
perceived Hills so distressed, and understood the cause, he said unto them, Be
of good cheer, weep not, but store your tenths up in a place which I shall show
you; and whosoever shall not pray upon your stones, his pilgrimage shall be
unprofitable and unaccepted. And after so doing, Mahomet struck the stones with
his foot, and there issued out Water, not useful to drink; and imposed a name,
and called it, A Water of Purification, whereof every Pilgrim carries at his
return, some portions thereof in vessels; and when ever any die, the vestures
wherewith the body is to be covered, are sprinkled with this water, for
remission of their sins. And they further affirm, That no man can come to
Mecca, whose visit is not known to Mahomet, who reveals the persons to the
Keepers there (all Eunuchs:) and if a Pilgrim come, a Ravisher, or wicked Man,
a Christian or any of Religion different from theirs; these said Keepers forbid
him entrance into Mecca. But the body of Mahomet is not there, as some affirm,
but only an imaginary form in the Wall of the Church, expressing the lineament
of a body, which is often kissed; and so they return home again. Such lying
follies, for miracles, these Infidels are possessed with, concerning Mahomet;
and diverse others, so ridiculous, as I omit for modesties sake: yet must advise
the Reader, if he please, to interrogate any Turk therein, and he will find I
have spoke nothing but mere Truth.

Of their Alms.
The Alcoran obliges men to Alms, as meritorious, and much pleasing God; and
says, The contrary comes from the Devil. They have Hospitals for poor
travelers, built by the Wills and Legacies of their Kings; where they have
meat in different manners: some allow Rice with flesh, others prepare
Wheat-bread, and water to drink; but for rest or lodgings, there is no place
allowed: yet there are some few public receptacles, where they are received
without charge, or other bedding then straw or hay; but they repose under a
good roof.

Of their Sacrifice.
Their offerings or oblations are for the most part upon promise or vows, in
sicknesses or other dangers; and then they kill an Ox or a Sheep, according to
their abilities, and promise to sacrifice it in some certain place. This
Offering is not burnt, or placed on an Altar, after the custom of the Jews; but
the Beast being killed, the skin, head and feet, and a fourth part of the
flesh, is given to the Priest; another part, to the poor; a third, to
neighbors; and the remainder they keep for themselves and friends to rejoice
withal. Neither are they tied to perform these vows, unless they escape the
disease or danger for which they intended them: all things with them being
conditional; I give you, if you give me. And the like is observed by the
Greeks, Armenians, and other Asiatick people, even of the Christian Faith.

If any of their Musselmen make a Will, their Legacies are given before Friends
or Neighbors; Of their Wills and Legacies.
and they are commonly for cutting Watercourse, for conveying Springs from
some remote places to Hospitals, Churches, or dry habitations; and that for
Piety sake, and their souls benefit. Others give money to free bondmen out of
thraldom. But women for the most part (as most superstitious) bequeath their
gifts to Soldiers, for a certain slaughter of Christians, which they conceive
to be greatly beneficial for their souls. The Legacies of their Kings are for
the building of Hospitals, Churches; and so likewise are those of eminent and
great personages.

Ceremonies of the dead.
When any of their Musselmen die, men take the Funeral-care of men, and women of
women. They wash the departed body very clean, and wrap it in fine linen; then
they carry it out of Town, into some remote place, (for they hold it sinful to
bury in their Churches.) First, Friends of the deceased and Priests meet and go
in progress, certain Monks bearing Wax-candles; then follow some of their
Priests singing till they come to the grave, shaking their heads, and often
turning round, fall down with giddiness, as in a trance. The better sort have
their graves lined with boards at bottom and at sides, and covered with boards,
on which they throw the Earth, and strew sometimes the seeds of flowers
thereon. Great men and Bassa's have peculiar Chapels for themselves and
Kindred. The poor are buried by highways, or in open fields. If the deceased
be of poor ability, there is then money gathered for satisfaction of labor for
those religious men, which is offered in the streets.

Of the edifice of a Sepulcher called Tulbe.
Over this stately Tomb, (being Prince-like) there is erected a goodly Temple,
wherein their Kings are buried in the City with great magnificence. Both rich
and meaner have an Altar built of such an height, as beasts cannot annoy or
pollute it with any foulness: thither with lamentations and weepings they often
return; and spread upon the monument sacrifices of meats, bread, flesh, cheese,
eggs, milk. This Solemnity or Funeral-supper continues for nine days after the
parties burial, (according to the Heathen manner) for the soul of the departed:
and it is left to be eaten by the Poor, by Ants, or Fowls of the Air. They say,
It equally pleases God, to give Alms to Beasts that wants, as men, when they
are given for Gods sake. I have seen many buy Birds in cages at good values,
only to set them at liberty, and see them fly away, others, throw Bread into
Rivers for Fishes, and that for the love of God, saying, That such charity
toward the needy, does obtain a great reward from Heaven.

The Turks have all one Emperor or King, of the Race of Ottoman; Concerning War.
who has next to himself in Authority two Sanjacks or Viceroys, chief
Governors, the one of Europe, the other of Asia; and these have under them
Lieutenants of lesser quality, who command the ordinary Soldiery; and if they
fail, being called to any expedition, are presently punished with death. He
has others always following him, as Counselors, Guardians of his body, ever
near him; Chamberlains, Chancellors, and Exactors of Tribute, for moneys and
young people, with certain numbers of light horse, Messengers, and diverse
others that continually follow the Court. His greatest strength is in his
flaves; Children (for the most part) torn from Christian Parents, with
Tribute-Children, bred and educated in several Seraglio's, Captives taken in
War, and Renegado's. Of these, some are trained up, and serve on Horse; who
have a double stipend to the foot, and always ready at command, in stables
keeping four hundred Horse together. The great body of Foot-Souldiery are the
Janissaries, all commanded by a Chief, called their Aga, a person of mighty
trust, and like importance; who has under him diverse inferior Commanders, and
have Seraglio's apart. Of these, and Auxiliary Forces, the Turk can draw three
hundred thousand into the field. A great part of these Janissaries attend the
Court, Ambassadors Houses, and protect all Christian Inhabitants and
Travelers, for rewards; and are faithful in those employments. Their Standard
in the field, is an Horse-tail tied upon a Pole; an Emblem of their first
barbarity and rudeness. His strength at Sea is not considerable, consisting
most in Galleys, and those not equal to some Italian Princes: nor has he many
for want of slaves whom he imploys more for Land-services. The best of
Shipping, is under the Bassa's of Algier and Tunis, whom he manageth with much
policy; sometimes as Rebels, and sometimes as good Subjects, to his best
advantage against Christians: for if they complain of loss, the Turk then says,
He cannot rule them. If the other do the like, he will take treble damages.

The condition of Noblemen.
There is not any of those great personages that possess by right of inheritance
any Province, City or real estate, to derive unto his children or successors,
without consent of the King. If any of their Dukes or Princes desire
possessions, it must be with this condition; the value of the place or
Territory is first considered, and the revenues thereof, whereby the Turk
apportioneth what number of Soldiers that can anually maintain: then the Lord
is enjoined always to keep in readiness that number, for any his commands; and
in default his head is lost: nothing can excuse his presence in any commanded
place, but known want of health and sickness. And whenever it please the Turk
to ease him of this benefit, it is at his liberty; but if not deprived, he
enjoys it during life: after death, if his Successors will observe the same
conditions, they are often admited; if not, it is then disposed to others. And
if it happen any one of these great ones have occasion to speak unto their
King, it is with eyes fixed on the ground, they dare not look him in the face.

Of Bassa's, who may be called Counselors, Chancellors, or Secretaries.
These for the most part are all Eunuchs, castrated when youths, and bred in
Seraglio's, for attendants on the Turkish Concubines: and of later years, some
of them (as I was informed, being a slave to a great man in Constantinople) are
cut so close the body, that they often dye by the incision; and if live, they
ever after use small Pipes for discharging their water: such is their cruel
jealousy, introduced (as 'twas said) by an Emperor that perceived a Gelding
leap a Mare; these Bassa's are of greatest esteem with the Turk, next to the
Sanjacks; and they are almost all that are preferred to that dignity, children
of Christian parents, violently taken from them: and none of them, although he
has to wife a daughter of a Turk, (as Hurstan Bassa had) can enjoy a Parish,
Castle, or Village by inheritance; but if he be promoted to any dignity or
possessions, he enjoys it till his death, or so long as the Turk pleases. Each
Bassa has a Court of Justice in the province he commands, from whence
appeals are to the King, or great Mufty; whose sentence is concluding and
immovable.

The obedience of Turks to the King.
None of their Janissaries or great Captains have license to wear Swords or other
Arms within the Cities, unless the King go forth his Palace, for Devotion sake
or Hunting. And where there are Magistrates or Governors of Towns, Porters
carry with them staves or Clubs: and finding any quarrellings or offerings at
injuries, they presently punish them with those instruments; No man speaks to
them, or dares look in their faces; but falling on the earth, kiss their feet,
with eyes to the ground, and speak as to themselves. And whenever they send
forth messengers with letters to Governors, cities, or provinces, whose horse
grows faint by journeying, this messenger has fall authority to dis-horse whom
ere he meets; and meeting none, he turns into the next town or village, and
repairs to the chief Officer; and if he presently provides him not an horse,
he is hanged before his door: and for this cause, many make use of Asses, rather
then horses. And when this messenger shall come to whom he was sent, he is most
honorably received, his Letters kissed with great humility, and their contents
answered with incredible celerity and quick dispatch. No Princes dare
contradict one syllable therein. None dare (as here) rebel; all men live in
such awful fear and trembling: Tortures and present death depending on his will.

The Turkish strength, how diminished.
The Emperor distributes in some equality all Provinces to his Noblemen; but
with condition, that such a Soldiery should be continually maintained by him
with the Revenues of that Province, both in time of Peace and War. A Soldier
killed is not loss to him, unless the Province likewise be lost, as for
example, the Turk has now four hundred Soldiers, whereof one hundred is
maintained by Hungary; now if he lose Hungary those Soldiers are lost: if he
lose no Province, he loses nothing; for he can raise more in their rooms; as
Church Officers, or Benefices, easily find in vacancies Successors.

The condition of Chazilars.
These are stout Soldiers, and excellently versed in military affairs, who in
their first encounters break their Lances, without other Armor then a Sword,
Lance and Target, using it as we do with Coat of Fence and Helmet; the Lance
being broke they use the Sword, and fight valiantly, always aiming at the head
or hands, and think it ignominious to thrust at their adversary, or an horse
with point of Sword. These men spend all their lives and hopes under the
protection of a Goddess, Fortune; having a Proverb with them, What is written
will befall them; that is, What that Goddess has printed on the head at each
man's nativity, cannot be possibly avoided, though he were preserved in a Castle
unexpugnable. The actions of these men are writ in verses, and sung by all men;
that others stirred up by like praise and honor, might with like audacity,
advance against an enemy, courageously and valiantly: and for each victory of
these men their stipends are doubled; and are obliged attendance on their King,
on horseback, with Lances, Swords, and Iron Clubs: some have Targets, some
none, and are paid as well in Peace as War.

The order of their foot
Their first are Bowmen, with Arrows, Bows and Javelins; they are distinguished
from Janissaries by coverings of the head. The second is of Janissaries, who
instead of Bows have Guns, with short Hatchets: all these are gathered from
amongst Christians living under Tribute, by force snatched from their Friends,
being young, Circumcised, and educated as aforesaid. These fight most valiantly
against Christians, yet have but slender stipends for their maintenance; some
four, five or six Aspers a day; of which sixty make a Crown English. And these
are prohibited on pain of death to come on horseback, unless sick. There are
some few likewise Sons of Turks, made Janissaries. There is a third Order, whom
they call Azaplars, whose stipends determine with the War, and are all Sons of
Turks. These use a longer Lance, with Swords, and red Hats or Bonnets, or other
colored cloth, with crooked Angles like half Moons; and so distinguished by
Arms and Habit, from the other orders, There is a fourth of the Grecian Sect,
who have no other stipend, then freedom from paying Tributes and Tenths. They
commonly attend the Turks horse of pleasure, keeping them at their own charge,
and well managing them for War.

Of the Turks Pavilions.
When the King removes from Constantinople, to any Expedition of War, he
carries with him double Tents, that when one is planted this day, the other is
carried to the next station, ready to receive him the day following: the number
and magnitude of these Pavilions is such, that afar off they seem no less then
Cities: round about the King's Pavilion, are the Tents of Princes and great
Men, encompassing his in circle. Then the horsemen of Arms, two or three
together, have their Tent: the footmen have the like for discipline sake, and
to keep them from cold Air. When the body of the Army moves, Yeomen footmen
clear the ways, and here and there make heaps of stone, or piles of wood, for
ease and direction of the passage; so as even in darkness of the night they can
hardly err. The Army moves at midnight, and till midday following marches.
The King rides between two Bassa's talking with him, before whom marches some
of the order of Janissaries on horseback, bearing lighted Candles in time of
night. Certain Captains follow them with iron Clubs round pointed, who keep off
men from sight of the King a good large distance: amongst these, are numbers of
the King's Guard; and amongst them, a Chariot of Women and Boys, fitted for the
use of the Turk and his Nobility. These great Men, go some before, some follow
these Captains with great multitudes of Soldiers, horse and foot, and all
conditions; some for stipend, some for plunder; but all, men.

Their carriages of Beasts.
Then follow a multitude of Camels, Mules, Horse, and sometime Elephants, laden
with Victuals, Pavilions, and all necessaries for military uses; and where the
Turk pitcheth his Tent, there every one, according to his condition, (as in a
City) sets up his habitation; Booths for Tailors, Bakers, Butchers, Sutlers,
and all sorts of Victuallers: some sell dainty flesh and fowls; and when fresh
meat cannot be had, then what is brought upon their Beasts, they expose to
sale; biscuit, dry meats, cheese, curds and milk. All Turks are generally most
patient in suffering hunger, thirst and cold. They seldom lodge in Towns, but
field it in their Tents, near water-springs, Rivers or Meadows, taking more
care of their cattle then themselves; content with little and course diet,
curds mingled with water, bread with milk, sometimes biscuit: master and servant
eat together. They keep deep silence in the night; they neglect stirring after
fugitives, for fear of raising clamours; which are forbid upon great mulcts and
punishments: but when they go to rest, or rise to march, all with an unanimous
noise, cry out, Allah, Allah, Allahu, that is, O God, thrice repeated.

Of justice exercised in War.
There is so much severity in military Discipline, that no Soldier dares
unjustly seize on any thing of another; for if he do, he dies without mercy.
They have amongst them certain Guardians, Defenders of all Passengers from
Soldiers violence, with boys of eight or ten years old, carrying bread, eggs,
fruit and Oats, and such like things to sell. These Guardians are bound to free
and preserve all Orchards, Gardens, Closes they pass by; so far, that they
themselves dare not touch an Apple, Pear, or Grape, or any such like thing,
without the owners license; otherwise they lose their heads. When I was present
in the Turkish Army in an Expedition against the Persian, I saw a great
Commanders head, with Horse and Servants, all three cut off, because that horse
had been found grazing in another man's pasture unsatisfied for.

Celebration of a Turkish Victory.
When a Conquest is declared, the Cities straight throw themselves into all
delights and joyings. At entrance of night, for good auspice of the solemnity,
Torches, Wax-candles, Lamps, Firebrarnds, Fireworks, and all things that give
light, are every where disposed of throughout the City; with Carpets, costly
Hangings, Tapestry, and Silken, Silver, and Gold Vestments, their houses all
are covered, but especially that way by which the Emperor enters. The chiefest
Triumph is made in Constantinople, his constant residence, unless occasioned by
War into some other Region. And he is bound by Law at every three years end, to
undertake some Expedition into Christian Territories, for advancing or
defending his own Kingdom. I verily believe, and do confess, for those days he
celebrates for Victory, no mortal eye, (nay, not the Moon or Sun) did ere
behold a spectacle more glorious and resplendent, for order, number, silence,
richness, state and magnificence in all kinds. It is impossible for only man
to be exalted to a loftier degree of sublimation, then this Pagan when
triumphful.

Of their Hunting and Hawking.
No Nation under the Sun delights so much in Hunting as does the Turkish; they will
follow game through rocky, steepy, craggy mountains, and that on horseback,
taking diversity of Beasts; but if any chance to be killed, or suffocated by
Dogs or chase, they never eat thereof, nor any Christian that lives in those
Regions: and if they kill wild Boars, they give them to the next inhabiting
Christians. Musselmen being forbidden to feed on Hogs flesh. The Turk has
multitudes of Faulkoners (above thousands) in constant wages through his
Empire. Their Hawks both long and short winged very hardy. The like charge he is
at for all sorts of Dogs: nothing can move in the Air, or stir on Land that
shall not be encountered, and seized on. These charges, with the Soldiery,
Officers, Seraglio's, and Court-attendances, are in a manner infinite; and yet
supplied more by casualities then Revenues constant: for he commands all men's
fortunes at his pleasure, and is the general heir of all that by nature die, or
violence.

Of Artificers and Husbandmen.
The Country people with their Servants plow their Lands, and pay the Tenths of
all increase unto the King. Artificers maintain themselves by Trades; who live
in idleness, consume in hunger. They eagerly pursue all sorts of
Merchandizings; traveling the lesser Asia, Arabia, Egypt, and States of the
Venetians. They have their baths in every City, where in solemn manner they
wash themselves. When they make water, they wash that part; and the like, when
they ease their bodies. The like is done by Women, who have handmaids following
them, with vessels filled with water and when they bath, they anoint themselves
with such an unguent, that within the space of half an hour, rots off all hair
from parts anointed. Men and Women do the same, not suffering hair to increase:
and this is done twice or thrice each month, especially when they frequent the
Church; otherwise, (as violaters of sacred places) they are burnt with fire.
They have diverse sorts of Artificers; Tailors, Shoo-makers, Gold and
Silver-Smiths, and for all sorts of Metals; Painters, Carpenters,
Stone-cutters; but not of such wits and exquisite inventions, as in our parts.

They have one Judge as well of Christians as Turks, Of Justice among Citizens.
(but always chosen from amongst the Musselmen) to administer equal right to
all men. If any kill another, he suffers death: If he steal, or violently
takes from another, he is hanged; as it happened to a Janizary, who drunk milk
of a poor Woman's, brought to sell, and paid not for it; and accused before the
Judge, denied the fact; whereupon, being stretched up by cords at his feet, and
about his middle, he forthwith vomited the milk, and was immediately by the
Judge commanded to be strangled: this happened in my presence at Damasco, when
I traveled from Armenia to Jerusalem. If any commit adultery, the Man is cast
into strict prison; yet after diverse months may be redeemed: The Woman is
carried about the streets riding on an Ass, beaten naked with whips, stones
thrown at her, and a Bull's pizzle tied about her Neck. He that gives a blow,
is cut cross the face, and led about the streets for terror. All suits have
this good piece of Justice, that right or wrong they last not above three
days. Their differences are few, because they buy and sell for ready money;
their chiefest wealth consisting in it: for few have Lands or Revenues, but who
command the Souldery: but generally the Turks Law and Equity is in his Sword,
and both oppressed and stifled with Fear and Bribery, two potent and prevailing
Agents. To spoil, to rob, to kill, to murder, upon design of interest, he
says, It Is Justice; devastation and destruction of whole Provinces and Kingdom,
he calls Peace. And if in ought he advise with Counsel or the great Mufty,
it is not for substance, but formality of Justice, as well assured from
gainsaying or opposition.

Of Husbandry.
Both Christians and Musselmen Manure and Till their Grounds, Vineyards and
Pastures, and have like Fruits and Corn to ours; Wheat, Millet, Barley, Oats,
winter Wheat, Pease, Beans, and also the like kinds of Pulse, and Rice in
abundance; Linen, and Cotton Wools, more then these Nations; Vineyards like
ours; but use their Grapes in indifferent manner: where we make Wine, the Turk
has a kind of Honey with them; so medicining their Grapes, that both in taste
and color they appear always fresh: other Fruits they have in great plenty;
Melons, Cucumbers Pumpeons, replenish well their fields and Gardens in their
Seasons: Nuts, Pears, Apples, Peaches of all sorts, Apricocks, Chestnuts, Figs,
Lemons, Oranges, Cherries, and suchlike, at small rates, but not in equal
plenty in all Kingdoms: And there are some within the Turks Dominion, as
Cappadocia, and lesser Armenia, where in regard of cold, they have no such like
Frutages.

Of diversity of Cattle.
They have Shepherds, (whom they call Sobanlars) always living in solitary
places, and every month remove their stations: they neither have possessions or
houses, other then their Tents, and Cattle; as Camels, Mules, Horses, Cows,
Oxen, Sheep, and Goats; whom they feed, make Cheese and Butter; sheer the Wool,
and so make Cloaks, Mantles, and Tapestry, which they sell, and supply thereby
their Families with Corn and necessaries. All these Shepherds pay the King
tenths of all anual increase; and all Christians further pay Tribute, that live
under the Turkish Government, for every Male, one Crown yearly; and that which
is most cruel, their Sons unmarried are taken forcibly from them every fifth
year, when their Tenths are visited.

They have no great magnificence of buildings; most of them are of bricks, but
differing; Of houses.
some are burned in Furnaces, some dried by Sun. Their Houses are contiguous,
like ours in Europe: but in Natolia, they are flat tabled without elevation;
from whence by Gutters, Pipes, and Channels, Rainwater flows down to them. The
houses low; none above two stories, and meanly furnished, if not poorly.

Of their Garments.
Their Vestments are made of Wool, Flax, and spun Silk, sufficiently
magnificent, They use a Garment (which is called Chaucan) straight, full of
plates, and of length even to their ancle; abhorring breeches, as too much
directing to, and expressing privities. Their shirts or smocks are dyed in
color violet. Their heads are covered with great rolls of Callico or such like
stuff, wound about in fashion of Pyramids; which they call Turbants. Women of
quality go always with their faces veiled; which are never seen of strangers,
or in public places. Their Shoes are high, with strong soles, for longer
service both of men and women. Some say that Mahomet had a bald or scalded
head, which he covered with white linen rolled up, as their Turbants, from
thence derived and still continued, for they never alter fashions. They wear
long Beards, as tokens of their freedom, all slaves being shaved. No great
difference in habit between rich and poor; but in the stuff. They are
religiously cleanly, and never seen to unburden nature, but always after wash.

They use, as we, bread white and course, which they sprinkle with certain
seeds before it is baked, Of Viands
and yeildeth a great sweetness to the eater; which with us is only used in
Granada, and about Sivilia in Spain. They use much art and sauces in their
Cookeries: but ordinary food is Pulse, or Rice, so thickened, that it must be
parted with the hands: they feed on all flesh but Hogs. There are no Taverns
nor Inns allowed; yet in the streets, diverse sorts of Victuals are sold, and
all things necessary for man's sustenance.

Of their Beverage.
They have three sorts of Drinks: the first made with Sugar and Honey, mingled
with Water: The second of Raisons, the stones taken out, and boiled in water,
whereto they add some Rose Water, and a little perfect honey; and this is to be
sold in most parts through Turkey; for it is sweet, and puffs up the belly:
The third is made of a fruit (called Peckmez) into Must, and has a kind of
Honey-taste and color with it; this, mingled with water, is given to their
Servants. The Houses where they sell, are frequented as Osteries in Italy, or
Taverns with us. Turks for the most part drink only water; they are not
suffered to buy or swallow Wines; and who happens to be accused, and proved to
have drunken thereof, his testimony, in all occasions and actions is invalid:
and yet in private Christian houses, they do not abstain.

Of their manner of eating.
When they go to dinner, they first strew Mattresses on the floor, and spread
upon them Carpets or pillows; some sit on the bare ground. Their Tables are
made of skins, and plaited, to be drawn open more or less, like to a Budget.
They neither sit as we do, nor lie along on elbows as the Ancients; but like a
Cross of Burgundy, with Legs infolded, they sit Taylor-wise. They always pray
before they eat, then eat greedily and hastily, but with deep silence; and in
that time their Wives secluded from them. Men servants after twelve years age,
are never suffered to co-habitate in houses where women are; but under such age
they go about the houses, serving their Masters occasions. Captive Women have
never liberty to go abroad, unless their Mistresses or Ladies go to Vineyards,
Graves of Friends departed, Baths, or Gardens out of Town (which they often do)
for recreation sake; and otherwise are kept strict at work in houses, not
suffered to converse with other Captive Servants; as shall be more at large
declared in the following Chapter. Their dishes are commonly placed at such
distance one over another, as 'twere on Pillars; that each man may make choice
of three, which pleases best. They eat three times a day; but quick therein,
unless at a Feast, where they sit all day.

CHAP. IX. Of the Afflictions of Captives, and Christians under the Turkish
Tribute.
WHen the King of Turks makes Expeditions against Christians, amongst diverse
sorts of Merchants, there always follow him on Camels, a mighty number of
Buyers, or Scorcerers of Children or Men, who in hope of getting slaves, carry
with them bundles of long Ropes, wherewith they easily tie together fifty or
sixty men. These traders purchase of the Soldiery or Free-booters, whomsoever
the Sword has not devoured; which is granted them, upon condition that the
King may have the tenth of what is trafficked for, the rest unto themselves to
sell. Nor is there any Mercandize so profitable amongst them, nor so frequent;
as anciently among the Romans (who called things fairly bought, their proper
Goods and Rights) as just as that of slaves.

How the Turks employ their slaves.
The Youth and Aged of both Sexes, whom Chance by tenths appropriates to the
Turk, he thus disposes; the elder in ^ears he sells for Husbandmen, who yet
are rarely or cheap bought; for they seldom escape the Sword, their age making
them less vendible. Young men and Maidens, they confine them in Seraglio's,
there to be instructed in useful Arts for future times. But first, they must
deny their Faith in Christ, and then be Circumcised. And thus ALLACE^ HECHBER.

DABIT DEUS HIS QUOQUE FINEM.

initiated in their Ceremonies, they diligently examine their Physiognomies,
and the several lineaments of their bodies, and then the whole composure; and
according to conceived strength, forwardness of wits and dispositions, they are
destinated to learn Laws of the Country, or discipline of Wars; and in the mean
time are allowed a daily stipend of two or three Aspers, sixty whereof make
five shillings, which they conceive a liberal sufficiency for diet and
clothing, until they are fitted for employments. In the elements of War, they
thus are trained, according to each strength: they first have given them a
light bow; skill and strength increasing, they have a greater and a heavier; so
by degrees they are fitted for expedition. They have Instructors, severe
Exactors of their daily Exercises; and whenever they err much from the mark,
so often are they cruelly whipped with scourges. These are enrolled in the
order of Bow-men. Others are instructed and made fit for Janissaries, who have
appointed Masters and Teachers every day to fight, two together with Cudgels*
Others (an horrid thing) who have more lovely faces, are so close cut, that
nothing like man is left them; and this not done without great and eminent
danger to life: and if the party escape death, his health is for no other use,
but their most wicked lusts; and after youth's grown aged, they are put to the
offices of Eunuchs, to attend on Ladies, Concubines, Horses, Mules, and some
Kitchin-employments.

Such as are of extraordinary beauty, comeliness, or composition of body, The
condition of Virgins and other women
are chosen out for Concubines; mean and indifferent Faces, are appointed
Matrons handmaids; amongst whose offices some are so filthy, and so loathsome,
as were before (though somewhat uncivilly) related. Others are set to women's
work, as spinning, carding, weaving. It is free for none of them to profess the
Christian Faith, or hope of liberty during life. There is some content in hope,
but these have none.

How private Turks use prisoners.
Hitherto has been spoken, how the Kings use Captives; now how private men
their Prisoners newly taken: first, they threaten them with all sorts of
menacing sharp words, promises, and allurements, to entice them to
circumcision; which if yielded to, they are treated somewhat more courteously;
but then all hope of ever returning to their Country is clean cut off; and
whosoever endeavors it, burning is his appointed punishment. Such as are
thought more firm and less fugitive, are admitted to their Masters military
employments, and can only be made free, when age has made them useless; and
then he is rather turned off, then remitted orderly; or when the Master by hurt
in War, or danger of death, bequeaths him liberty. They are permitted marriage;
but their children are disposed at their Master's pleasure; which makes the
more understanding sort utterly abhor marriage. They who refuse Circumcision,
are miserably and unhumanely treated; of which I have had the experience of
thirteen years sufferings: nor can I express in words the great calamities of
such people.

How Christians ignorant in mechanik Arts are used.
The condition of such unskilful men is wretched. Those whose toil brings
profit, are only in reputation with them: and therefore learned Men, Priests,
and Noblemen, who have lived in retiredness and pleasures, when they fall into
the hands of Turks, are of all most miserable; the Merchant or Man-scourser
bestows no cost on them, as scant vendible; they walk with naked head and feet,
and often their whole bodies: no new clothes succeed, the old worn out: they
are hurried through Mountains, Rocks, from place to place, Winter and Summer,
and have no end thereof till death, or that they find a foolish Purchaser, that
(they think) buys ill Merchandise; but no man is so happy, or esteemed amongst
them, for Age, Art or Beauty, that being sick will leave behind them. First,
they are whipped to go on; if they cannot do that, then they are put on
horseback; and there not able to sit upright, their bellies are tied on
horseback, no otherwise then a sack of Corn or Cloak-bag: if he die, he is
stripped of all his clothes, and thrown into the next ditch, to be devoured by
dogs and vultures.

How prisoners newly taken are used.
They do not only bind them in endless chains, but, in their journey, also
manacle their hands; they march the distance of a large pace one from another,
that mutually they do not hurt; and tie their hands, lest with stones they
mischief do their Masters: that when sometimes they lead great multitudes, as
ten times five hundred chained together, the strength of whom, if hands at
liberty to throw stones, might much annoy them. At night when they rest, their
feet are likewise chained, and exposed to all injuries of weather. The
condition of Women is a little more humane; they who have strength of limbs,
are driven on foot; those more tender, are set on horses; such as are infirm
and cannot ride, are put in baskets or ripiers, as we use geese. Afterward
their condition is sadder; either they are included in strong Turrets, or
forced to endure the wicked lusts of their Merchants. Where still they are, is
ever heard vast and hideous howlings of both sexes, suffering violations from
them; neither does the age of seven or six years, defend them from those
vicious actions: a people imcomparably wicked, both against nature, and before
libidinous.

How used that are exposed to sale.
At the break of day they are brought to Market, like droves of sheep, or herds
of goats: Merchants appear, prizes are set; if the prisoner be liked, his
clothes are stripped off, he is viewed by the buyer, all members surveyed,
tried and thoroughly searched for faults in joints or arteries; if he please not
then returned to the owner: and this is done until he find a purchaser. When
bought, he is carried to some heavy servitude, to plow, keep sheep; omitting
baser Offices. They endure there many unheard examples of calamities: I have
seen men tied together with yokes, to draw the plow. Maidens are severely
forced to perpetual labors; separated from the sight of men, nor are they
suffered speech or conference with other Servants. If any man be taken prisoner
with wise and children, him some great person willingly purchases, to be
employed in his Country House, in Tillage, Vineyards, Meadows, Pastures; and
children born of them, are all his Slaves: and if they persevere in Christian
Faith, a certain time is allotted them to servitude, and then made free; their
children notwithstanding continue Slaves at the Master's will, and employed
where he pleases; for they have no certain nor enrolled Estates in Lands, and
so not assured seats of residence. If after making free, they desire to return
to their Country, they have Letters Patents given for their journey. But to
such as abjure the Christian Religion, no certain time of bondage is prescribed
them, nor right of return; all hopes of their liberty, totally depends upon the
Master's pleasure: and when they have got freedom, they pay the Tenths, as
other Turks, but freed from other Taxes with which Christians are burdened.

Of Captives made shepherds
The Husbandman has an hard and sad condition, but the Shepherd far more
grievous; they always live in solitariness, night and day, covered only with
the roof of Heaven. The Master and the wise have some small Tents; no shelter
for the shepherd, unless at spare times compelled to work on Tapestry or
Carpets. Every month they change their Pastures, and drive their flocks from
one Mountain to another. Some Masters that have more humanity, now and then
give small rewards, which the Servant keeps as his proper Goods, and preserves,
to bear the charge of a return to his Country, if ever he get liberty: but
these largesses are seldom done, and then, but as a miserable enticement to
servitude, thinking thereby to withdraw their hopes of shifting from them. To
such as deny Christ, and are circumcised, knowing they dare not run away, no
like indulgence offered.

Escapes of prisoners out of Europe.
European Slaves may more easily escape, then those sold into transmarine
Regions; they pass Rivers only, that may be swimmed over; others, with great
difficulty must pass the Hellespont. Such as intend escapes, usually attempt it
in Harvest season, to hide themselves in Fields of Corn, and by it live. The
Night they travel, the Day lie close in Corn, Woods or Marshes; and rather
choose to be devoured by Wolves, then brought back to their Tyger-Masters.

Out of lesser Asia
Who flee from thence, repair to the Hellespontick Sea, between Callipollis and
those Towers of Sestos and Abidos, now called by the Turks Bogaz Aser, that is,
Castles on the mouth of the Sea, where the Waters are straight and narrow;
hither they come with Saws and Ropes, cut Timber Trees, and tie them fast
together, to serve and save themselves for shipping; carrying nothing with them
but salt. If wind and fortune favor, in three or four hours they are wafted
over; if otherwise, they perish in the Sea, or reforc'd again upon the Coast of
Asia: if safely pass, they then betake themselves to the Mountains, and by
inspection of the Pole and Star Boots, they tend their way Northward, and
sustain themselves with Acorns and Herbs sod in salt. If many fly together in
society, sometimes in Night, they set upon the Shepherds, and what they find of
Victuals take from them; sometime they kill, and are sometime killed, or taken
and returned to their old Masters and Drudgeries: but the several dangers of
traveling, consumes more then escape, by shipwreck, the enemies sword, wild
beasts, and starving hunger.

The punishment of Fugitives.
Some are hanged up by the heels and most cruelly scourged; and if commit
murder, the soles of his feet are all slashed into furrows, and salt stuffed
in. Some have great iron chains fastened on their necks, and forced to wear them
day and night, and as long as the Master pleases.

The charity of Greeks and Armenians to Captives.
Death and confiscation of all sorts of Goods, is inflicted on those who
undertake, procure or assist Captives in their flight, or running away; yet
notwithstanding both Greeks and Armenians cease not to entertain them, being
Christians, to hide them, and in disguises to conduct them unto shippings of
the Venetians or other Christians, and freely give them good provisions and all
things necessary for their journeys; nor do they spare or omit any kind of
piety toward them; for they confess to have had heard the like experience from
Christians charity, when as they traveled for conscience sake to Rome or
Compostella.

The Incantation of Turks against Fugitives.
They have certain kind of charms, which they think can draw them off from
flying. The name of the Slave is written in a Schedule of Paper, which is hung
up in his Tent or House: then with vengeable and horrible curses, his head is
charged and threatened, conceiving this by the devils help, the Fugitive will be
affrighted with meeting of Lions and Dragons in his Journey, or that the Seas
or Rivers will swallow him, the heavens will grow dark, and these astonishments
will bring him back again.

The memory of Christ by degrees lost in former Christian Provinces
There is some memory yet left of the expugnation of Constantinople, the
Kingdoms of Greece, Albania, Valachia, and Servia, now reduced to Provinces.
These, for a long time, constantly retained the Christian Faith, but the
children have forgot it; and there will come to pass a full oblivion of Christ.
And likely it is to fall out so in Croatia, Hungary, and Sclavonia, which are
now Additaments and Adjuncts to the Turkish Empire.

The condition of the conquered.
When a Province is subdued and taken, all sorts of Goods moveable and
immovable are given away for spoil. They totally extirpate the whole Nobility;
but especially the Princely issue. And when they took John the Kings Son of
Hungary, and favored him with life, it was on good advice, that if Hungary
were lost again, they might employ and involve him into any new encumbrances;
and when the Province should be in a quiet and calm condition, then to dispatch
him: for in such respects, the Turk regards neither Kindred, Father or Brother;
He spares none. And if they do not kill and murder all Church and Clergymen
they take, yet they expose them to all scorn, nakedness and beggary, despoyling
them of all their Fortunes, Goods and Dignities. Their Bells, their Organs, and
other Instruments and Ornaments of Churches, Chapels, and Devotions, they
raven and tear from the Temples, profaning them with consecration to their
Mahomet; leaving only the most miserable and wretched Chapels to the
Christians, wherein they are forbid public Prayers, and may pray seemingly in
silence: which Chapels, when either Earthquake, Fire, Tempest, or Age
destroy, they must in no sort re-edifie. Preaching or reading parts of the
Scripture is utterly forbidden. It is a sin to admit a Christian to any public
Office, to wear, have Arms or habit like a Turk: or else to use the recreations
of cheerfulness, as Pageants, Plays, or Dancings. If they injure Christ or you
with bitter or contumacious words, you must be silent, and endure it. If you
speak ought against their professed Religion, you are forced to Circumcision;
and but to whisper against Mahomet, Fire and Brimstone follows. If a
Christian on horseback pass by a Musselman, (that is, one initiated in the
Turkish Faith) he must on necessity light from his horse, and bowing down his
head worship him; which if omitted, he straight is knocked down with clubs.

Condition of Priests and Frya^^. under Tribute.
Priests and Friars are held the worst of Men, and are esteemed by Turks the
very Sacrilege and Scandal of God and mankind. They have no benefit from
Churches. Upon some festival days, a little bread is given them by poor women,
and not on other days. They get their livelihood by carrying Wood; their
custom being to cut down sticks in Woods, lade them on Asses; and with this
Merchandise, they cry about the streets, Wood to be sold.

They pay a part of all increase, not only of Corn and Cattle, The Tribute of
Christians
but even Mechanics pay it out of all their profits. And then they pay another
Subsidre, for every single man through a Family, each head a Crown. If Parents
refuse this Tribute, their children are taken from them, and made Slaves.
Others are bound in Chains; and beg from door to door to pay this Crown; which
if they cannot this way procure, they are cast into perpetual Prison; and when
all Duties are performed, it is yet lawful for the Turk to choose the best
amongst his Children, whom he circumciseth, and removes from all approach or
sight of Parents, and breeds him for his Wars, never to return to his Friends;
and so a child easily forgets both Christ, his Parents, and his Kindred; that
after, if he chance in company with them, he shall not know them. No man can
express by Words, the Lamentations, Cries, Tears and grievous sighs, at this
distraction of Children. The Father to see his Son (educated in the fear of
Christ) torn from him, and made an instrument of Satan, to oppose Christ;
hurried from his Mother, to live perpetually with strangers, leaving whatsoever
is dear in blood, pleasing in society, or loving infamiliarity, with an
everlasting dereliction; after listed in the ranks of those the Greeks call
Fatherless and Motherless: yet many of these, although they have denied Christ,
carry about them the Gospel of St. John, (In the beginning was the word, etc.
in Greek or the Arabic tongue) as an Amulet or preservative in their Armpits;
and with great desire they expect the Christian Sword (according to some
Turkish Prophecies) should revenge and free them from those great afflictions
and persecutions; and that if Christians do it not, whatever is the cause, or
with what mind soever hindered, all very ill deserve of Christian Religion.

CHAP. X. A Narration of a Papists dispute with a Turk.
AFter I had traveled with much labor and many dangers the better parts of
the world, and seen many pleasant Towns and Countries, as Socrates, Plato and
other Philosophers had diligently done; at length I arrived at the famous City
of Hungary, Varadinum, where by chance I met one Dervis Gsielebi, a skilful man
in the Laws of Mahomet; who having dispatched his business with the Governor,
he very much desired conference with some Christian about Religion on either
side. This motion of his being published by an Interpreter, and none for diverse
days appearing to encounter him, in defense of the Christian cause, though
many Religious persons were in that Town, (struck mute and speechless at the
courage of one Ethnic Infidel) who seemed to me like Israelites, that durst
not adventure on one uncircumcised Goliath, provoking them. This I perceiving,
and grieving in my spirit, that in such plenty of Clerks and learned men, none
was so well armed with Truth as durst (though by Interpreters) reprove the
insolence of such an Heathen; and fearing that so wicked and detestable a
silence, in so good a cause, with so bad a man, would betray the truth, and
render our Savior Jesus Christ's Opinion with him more ignominious; I my self,
though never called to Ecclesiastical Function, undertook the charge of arguing
this point of Piety with him; and so a prefixed day was agreed between us; when
multitudes of people of each Religion came as Spectators of the event. The
place was in a Monastery of Franciscans, the day, Whitson-Sunday, day of
Pentecost; where he moved to me first this Question: Where God had his being,
before the Heavens and Earth, and therein all things else were created? Which
question, though it seemed to me not much pertinent to our purpose, yet lest he
should imagine us ignorant of our great Gods universal presence, I said, He
then was in his own being. But when that seemed to him somewhat obscure, and
that he did not sufficiently understand it, I then told him, He was where he
now is. Which he understanding, denied in the general, and said, Not so; but
that be then was in a bright Cloud. Which, when he earnestly affirmed, I quoted
Genesis; (for they also read the book of Moses, and the Prophets) and said, If
God were in a cloud, before the Foundation of Heaven and earth, then that Cloud
must be created before them both: and upon further argument on this point,
being at last convicted, he would dispute no further in it; but gave me leave
to propound some Question to him; and for solemnity of that days sake, I
thought fit to say something thereof; and finding these words (In the name of
God, his mercies, and the Spirit of them) in their Alcoran, in the Arabian
Tongue and Character, I desired him to read them: The mystery of the Holy
Trinity. Which when he had considered, and wondered at, he said, Christian, from
whence had you this? for in the beginning of all our actions, we Musselmen use
these three words, and prefix them to every Chapter of our Alcoran; when we sit
down to eat, when we go to prayers, when we wash our hands, or other parts of
our bodies, these words we first pronounce; and these actions finished, we
sprinkle our heads with water, and repeat these words; In the Name of God, his
Mercies, and the Spirit of them. When thus he had confessed the Truth, I
desired to understand from him what he meant by the word Mercies: who Replied,
He understood it literally, without other signification. Then I applied my self
to the mystical interpretation, and divided it according to Truth into three
persons, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and showed them written in
the Arabic tongue. And when he saw I had mentioned the Son of God, he
questioned, How God could have a Son? since according to their Law, and
Doctrine of Mahomet, God had neither Wife nor Child. To whom I answered,
according to my weak understanding and capacity; We Christians call God the
Father, for his Creatures sake; being the first creating Cause, and sole
preserver of all created, who was for ever in the same Essence he now is in,
and will be for eternity; and is the first Person in the Trinity. We believe
the Son (who by Mahomet in the Arabic phrase is called Rahman, and signifies
Mercies, so changed by him) to be likewise God, not according to flesh (for God
is a spirit) born of a Woman; but of the Essence and substance of God
omnipotent, begotten by God the Father, and so took humane flesh, by the Holy
Virgin Mary; suffered for us, died, and was buried, and according to the saying
of the Prophets, arose again the third day, and ascended into Heaven, and
sits at the Right Hand of God the Father, there to judge the quick and the
dead, to render immortal happiness to those that have faith in him, and to the
unfaithful everlasting punishment.

I then presented him a Crucifix, and said, Behold this now, and see if Mahomet
did unworthily call the Son of the Eternal God by the Name of Mercies, when
with Arms thus stretched forth, he calls poor sinners to his embraces, saying,
Come unto me all ye that labor, and are burdened with sins, and I will
refresh you. And to render him more capable of the Trinity, I pointed to the
Sun, saying, You have a fair similitude here: As there is but one Sun, that
has Form, Heat, and Light; So there is but one God and Father, who has ^the
Son, and the Holy Spirt, which you call Rucahim, consisting of three Person,
equally of one substance, and from eternity coexisting.

This comparison wrought in him a belief in God the Father, his only begotten
Son, and the Holy Ghost; a Trinity in Unity. And when he had heard my weak
discourses of God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, he much
admired; saying, O God, O God; I nor any of our Sect, could ever imagine, you
had such good thoughts of God; for we conceive you live in darkness of
understanding: but by your relation, it seems you have great apprehensions of
him; and believe God, Mahomet. I said, what shall we do with the toys and
dreams of Mahomet? for besides Baptism and the mystery of the Trinity, which
were had from Christians, we know the Alcoran contains naught that tends to
truth. Then I alleged to him the fancies and silly trifles of Mahomet's two
Angels, called Arot and Marot, whom Mahomet says, that God did send from Heaven
to minister justice unto mortal men, commanding them to forbid drinking of
wine, and unlawful mixtures with women, and to show the way to Heaven to no
man. These Angles transgressing Divine Comandment, were defiled, deceived and
made drunk by a Woman, and showed to Mahomet the way to Heaven; whom, when God
saw there, he asked the Angles standing by, who it was that came in that shape
thither? And the Angels telling him it was by the error of Arot and Marot; he
turned the Woman into a Star, and sent those Angels chained into a Well, to be
punished everlastingly. Diverse like ridiculous stories I related; As that of
the Beast Baraile, who could speak as a man, who carried Mahomet to Heaven,
where himself confesses to have seen great Angels with many heads, and those
speaking many languages in diverse tongues; which is sufficiently foolish, and
unworthy the name of a Prophet: but said, I know not whether oppressed with
Wine, in sleep he dreamed to have seen such miracles, or monstrosities in his
imaginations. And therefore when he inserts such follies in his Alcoran, he
deserves not the Title of a Prophet from any reasonable man.

Having heard this, somewhat abashed, he arose, and would argue no further: but
led me into the Temple, and showed me certain Images carved in wood; and asked
me, If we did worship those similitudes of men, or adore them; I Answered, No,
think not we worship the stone or timber wherein these figures are engraved:
they are used and respected only as records and remembrances to men's minds of
the passions and sufferings of our Savior Jesus Chrest, for the redemption of
our transgressions; and we worship our true God in mind and spirit, remembered
by that Crucifix; neither are you denied the like remembrances of your great
Princes and famous men, nor we of holy Saints; but it is to give God thanks for
their examples of holiness, and our prayers to imitate their charities and
pieties.

In these discoursings, he spies some dogs walking in the Church, and doing
something against an Altar, (an evil custom, and to be condemned by all) and
asked, Whether it was lawful for Beasts to enter our Churches? and blushing
with shame, not knowing how to defend this negligence of Christian Pastors, I
told him, it was neither lawful nor seemly; and desired him to conceive it a
mere negligence of Officers.

When he heard this, he commended it very much, and desired me to instruct him
in our Saviors Prayer, which I gave him afterward in the Arabian Dialect.

The Prophesies among the Turks.
THe Turks are exceeding credulous, superstitious, relying upon Dreams,
Fortunes, Prophesies, Divinations and Destiny, and have especial regard to the
Enthusiasms and Freaks of whatsoever distracted or mad persons, as taking them
for Prophetical raptures, and as men taken up with admiration and ecstasy of
some divine and ravishing objects; and therefore no wonder if they do with
veneration receive those Oracles of their Priests, voiced to be dictated by
their great Prophet, or some other person eminent for his great Piety and
Holiness.

Among the first rank of those Predictions, is that of the return of their
great Prophet, for which the Moors and Persians, who have long looked for his
coming, keep always a horse ready sadled with rich furniture, as priding
themselves, that the Miracle of the Conversion of the World shall be propagated
upon that Horse from their Country. To omit many more fancies of this nature.

As to their temporal state and Government, they have a Prophecy in which they
are much disconsolate, viz. That as a Mahomet won Constantinople, so another
Emperor of that Name shall lose it to the Christians, and that they shall then
be brought to the utmost extremity; but their Prophet Mahomet shall appear to
their deliverance.

They have another Prophecy relating to Christendom, which is turned upon this
hinge; They measure the continuance of their Empire by the discord betwixt the
Princes of the belief of the Name of Jesus, and they confess truly, that this
division is the only cause of their greatness, the which has made them
believe, that among Christians, there was a bad Angel, enemy to peace, which
they call the strong or powerful Spirit, which kindling the fire of revenge and
ambition in the hearts of great men, draws from their affections the good of
their belief, to entertain them in perpetual discord; during the which, they
promise unto themselves a firm and an assured reign. So the Mufti, and the
Talismans praying on Friday in their Mosques, demand of their Prophet the
circumstance of this bad intelligence betwixt Christian Princes, to the end
they may enjoy the Empire which they have unjustly usurped. Yet their
Prophesies do not promise them a perpetual possession; and behold one
translated out of their language, which has always made them fear the union
of the Christians.

That is to say,

Our Emperor shall come, he shall possess the Realm of an infidel Prince, he
shall take the red Apple, and make it subject to his power: if at the seventh
year of his command the Christians sword does not advance, he shall rule unto
the twelfth year, he shall build houses, plant vines, compass in gardens with
hedges, and beget children: but after the twelfth year that he has held the
red apple, the Christians sword shall appear and put the Turk to flight. By the
Infidel Prince they understand a Christian Prince (for so they call them) and
by the Red Apple an Imperial town strong and important; in the which, and else
where the Turks shall build houses; that is to say, convert holy temples to the
use of the Mohammedan impiety: for by this word to build, they that have
commented upon this prophecy, understand usurpation of the house s of God:
Plant vines, by these words they signify the extent of the Turkish Empire, and
the settling of their colonies, as we see in Hungary and Transylvania:
Compassing in gardens, that is to say, they shall fortify the towns which they
have taken from their enemies: Beget Children, extend the Mohammedan Religion,
far in the Christians Countries. But after the twelfth year, etc. within a
certain time best known to God, his divine Majesty, opening the eyes of his
clemency upon the Christians, will unite the wills of their Princes, kindle
their affections with a holy zeal, and blessing their arms, will make them
victorious over the Turk, whom he will banish out of the East, and chase into
Scythia, from whence they came to be a scourge unto Christendom.

CHAP. XI. A brief View of the Tartars.
HAving thus surveyed the Turkish Domions, it will be an acceptable endeavor I
presume to give the Reader a little discovery of the Tartar and his Concerns,
which are linked and joined by Religion and other compacts to the Grand
Seigniors, because this Nation has been as yet much unknown to us.

TARTARIA is bounded on the East, with China, the Oriental Ocean, and the
streights of Anian (if such streights there be) by which parted from America,
on the West with Russia and Podolia, a Province of the Realm of Poland; on the
North with the main Scythick or Frozen Ocean; and on the South part with part
of China, from which separated by a mighty wall; the River Oxus parting it from
Bactria and Margiana, two Persian Provinces; the Caspian Sea, which separates
it from Media, and Hyrcania; the Caucasian mountains interposing betwixt it and
Turcomania; and the Euxine, which divides it from Anatolia and Thrace. So
called from the Tartars, a puissant and mighty people, now possessed hereof.

It contains all those great and spacious Provinces, which the Ancients
called Seres, Scythia extra Imaum, Scythia intra Imaum, Saca, Sogdiana, the
greatest part of Sarmatia Asiatica, and part of Sarmatia Europaea; extending it
self the whole length of Asia, from the River Tanais, to the Eastern Ocean;
taking in Taurica Chersonesus, and some other parts of Europe also. So that if
we measure it by miles, it is said to contain 5400 from East to West, and 3600
from North to South; a greater quantity of ground then the Turkish Empire, but
of less fertility and account.

This extent in easier terms stretched from the uttermost bounds of Asia to
Armenia, and from Bengala to Volga, yea their incursions pierced even to Nilus
and Danubius. The Macedonian and Roman Empires were never so large. But because
they were rather Runnagates then men of War, wanting politic Government, and
Military Discipline, sometime ruling one Province, sometime another; they
rather wrought spoil and terror to the conquered Nations, then fear of bondage
and subjection, and at last seated themselves beyond the mountain Caucasus.
After it became divided into many Principalities, yet so that the title and
majesty of the Empire remained always to the great Cham, who took the original
of this name from the great Chingis, the founder of this Empire.

But leaving the great Cham of these Tartars, the Successors of Tamerlane, to
remoter affairs, supposed by very learned men to be but an imaginary Titulado,
and the shadow of the shadow of spirits, as they call their Emperor; our
purpose obliges us only to an account of the Crim or Praecopense Tartar, so
called from Praecopia, a chief town thereof. This Tartary is bounded on the
East with the River Tanais, now Don, on the West with the River Nieper once
called Borysthenes, by which it is parted from Podolia, on the North part with
Russia, and on the South with some part of the Euxine Sea, by which lie the
Circassians, a sort of warlike Christians, who sell their children to
Mahometans for to make Soldiers of them, such as were the Mamalukes, such now
some of the Janissaries, and the Persian standing Army.

These Tartars are good Soldiers for the most part (as their frequent
irruptions into Europe do sadly manifest) especially at Bows and Arrows, which
they use as dexterously as the Parthians; of late years they have been trained
up to the Harquebuze, and the handling of a Scimetar. They are not to be
vanquished but by death, as resolute against captivity, the misery whereof they
know from their own cruelties, yet at home are they more civil to Christians
then abroad, for they have some honorable thoughts of our Savior, more then
other Mahometans, which has invited many Greeks and Armenians to co-habit with
them.

As to their modern History, and for what relates to our purpose, we must
retrospect to the reign of Mahomet the first, the Turkish Emperor when they
grew at last of so great Power, by conquering the Asiatick Tartars, which lay
nearest to them, that Mahomet the Great thought fit to keep them down before
grown too strong for him: and therefore under color of taking in the City of
Capha, then possessed by the Genoese, made himself Master of the greatest part
of the Taurican Chersonese, and the port of Tanais; thereby commanding both
Moe^tis and the Euxine Sea.

In the time of Selymus the first, who had married the daughter of this
Crim-Tartar (for so they called him) and was aided by him with an Army of
fifteen thousand men against his father; The Turks and these Tartarians grew
into a League. The chief conditions of it were, that the Tartar should aid the
Turk upon all occasions, with sixty thousand Horse, that they should not make
war with any of their Neighbors, (except the Muscovite) without leave of the
Turk; that they shall pay yearly to the Grand Seignior in the way of Tribute,
three hundred Christians; that the new Cham, upon the death or deposition of
his Predecessor, shall receive from the Great Turk a Royal Banner, in token of
his Confirmation in that estate, that in reward of these services, the Crim
Tartar shall have yearly from the Grand Seignior, five thousand five hundred
Ducats, in the way of pension; and succeed finally in the Turkish Empire, if
the male issue of the house of Ottoman should chance to fail. According unto
this agreement the Tartars have been aiding to the Turks from time to time,
against the Persians, Polanders, Hungarians, Moldavians, and indeed whom not;
and that with great and puissant Armies; the Great Cham sometimes arming
150000. of his own Subjects (leaving but one man in an house to attend their
Cattle;) and sometimes adding five thousand Circassians; and others of the
Asian Tartars.

Nothing so punctual is the Turk, on his part to perform the contract; who not
content to have the Tartar for his friend, or at the worst his Homager, has of
late times attempted to make him his slave or vassal. For Amurath the third,
quarrelling Mahomet the Crim-Tartar for a design to intercept Osman Bassa, in
his way from Persia to Constantinople, authorized the same Osman to war upon
him: by whom the poor Crim and his two Sons, betrayed by some of his own
Counselors (corrupted with Turkish gold) were strangled with a Bow-string;
Islan a brother of the Crims, first sworn a Vassal to the Turk, put into the
place, and over him a Turkish Beglerbeg or Bassa, to command in chief. What
hopes he has of succeeding in the Turkish Empire, if (possible) the house of
Ottoman should fail are doubtful, for that the Bashaws will either alter the
state or provide for themselves, like Alexanders Lieutenants, or set one of
their number, or a counterfeit Brother or Uncle of the last Emperor, whom they
will govern as they please.

What the Revenue of this Prince is, it is hard to say: his subjects have
little money, and live most upon the bartery of their Cattle. But besides what
he has in lands or Customs, and the 5500 Ducats yearly from the Turk, he has
the tenth of all the spoils which are got in the Wars, and a Checkine for every
Captive, for some, two or three, (whosoever takes them) according unto their
estates.

As them by the Turk, (who does sometime espouse his quarrels;) by whose
assistance they have brought the Moscovites to some extremities.

CHAP. XII. The Character of Tamerlane the Great.
THis renowned Prince, the glory of his age for warlike achievements, was born
at Samarcand, the chief City of the Zagalaian Tartars, his Father was called
Zain-Cham or Og, Prince of those people, who spending his time in peace,
contenting himself to live upon the profit of his flocks of Sheep and Herds of
Cattle, which then and also now are the principal Revenues of the Tartar Kings
and Princes; gave occasion to some, ignorant of the manner and custom of those
northern Nations and Countries, to reckon them all for Shepherds and Herdsmen,
and so have reported this great Prince to be a Shepherd or Herdsmans Son;
measuring his Nobility by the rudeness of his people, and not by the honor of
his Family and heroical virtues, such as hardly to be paralleled in that or
former ages.

Scarce had he attained to 15. years of age when his Father dyed, leaving unto
him the Government of his Kingdom, and for his counsel in the same, he
commended to him two of his most trusty and faithful Servants, viz. Odmard and
Aly, whom he dearly loved whilst they lived, being much ruled by their
directions, and greatly honored the remembrance of them being dead, as persons
from whom he had received his rudiments for his future Government. He was a man
of greater strength then stature, and of far greater courage then strength; to
which his policy being added, made him a most renowned and fortunate Warior. In
his eyes sat such a rare Majesty, as a man could hardly endure to behold them
without closing his own; from whence darted such radiant beams, that many in
talking with him were stricken dumb; which occasioned him many times with a
beseeming modesty to forbear looking too earnestly on those that talked or
discoursed with him. He was somewhat narrow in the shoulders, otherwise well
limbed; his visage was amiable, and of an excellent proportion, but little hair
on his chin; the hair of his head long and curled, quite contrary to the manner
of the Tartars, who shave and cover their heads, whereas he contrariwise did
wear it long, in obedience to his Mother (as he gave it out) who commanded him
so to wear it in token of his descent, she pretending to come of the race of
Sampson, which caused him to be the more respected of his men of War, they
believing that in those hairs there was some rare virtue, or rather fatal
destiny; an ancient practice of many eminent Commanders, to fill the heads of
their Soldiers with some strange opinion conceived of them, thereby to receive
the greater honor, as if in them were something more then ordinary men. Thus
Numa Pompilius feigned to have received his Laws from the Goddess Egeria, and
Mahomet the Impostor bewitched the people with a Pigeon which he had taught to
feed at his ear, whom he persuaded to be the holy Ghost, which brought him
Revelations out of Heaven.

That he was of a valiant courage from his youth, his actions do declare, not
dreading any danger when occasion did require it, having fortune always
attending on him as his handmaid. His first endeavors were crowned with
admirable success, viz. against the Muscovites, who having spoiled a City which
had put it self under his protection, and also entered into his Country; he
thereupon met them with an Army, gave them battle, and slew of them five and
twenty thousand footmen, and between fifteen and sixteen thousand horsemen,
with the loss of scarce eight thousand horsemen, and four thousand footmen of
his own: yet was he far from exulting in this victory, that beholding so many
thousand dead bodies on the ground, he fell on weeping at the condition of such
as commanded over great Armies, applauding a quiet course of life for the most
happy, and accounting the other most unhappy, which by the destruction of their
own kind, sought to purchase to themselves vain glory.

He was by nature a great chastiser of proud and insolent persons, yet withal
so just that he would not be moved to undertake any thing ^ashly or
unadvisedly, but would first understand the truth of the same; witness the time
when the Mohammedan Princes of Asia oppressed by Bajazet, sued unto him for aid,
to whom he gave this answer, I can hardly believe (said he) that so great and
religious a Prince as Bajazet, would without just and sufficient cause offer
such violence as you may complain of, especially unto you his neighbor
Princes, and of the same Religion with himself; nevertheless I will send an
Ambassador to him, to understand more of him and his proceedings, till then I
shall not resolve any thing, and therefore until such time you must rest your
selves content. Accordingly he sent an Ambassador unto him, with many rich
gifts and presents, courteously requesting him the rather for his sake, to deal
kindly with those Mohammedan Princes; but Bajazet being a Prince of a proud
spirit, rejected his message with great scorn, willing the Ambassador to bid
his Master to meddle with his own matters, and to prescribe Laws to his own
Subjects; adding thereunto many other words, full of great dispight and
disdain, calling him the Husband of a Whore if he met him not in the field: So
that Tamerlane could do no less in justice and honor then war against him, and
having overthrown him to punish his haughtiness, he shackled him in fetters of
gold, and so shut him up in an iron Cage, made like a grate, in such sort, as
that he might be seen on every side, carrying him up and down with him as he
passed thorough Asia; which, though some may construe as an action of cruelty,
yet he himself said, That he did not use that rigor against him as King, but
rather did punish him as a proud ambitious Tyrant, polluted with the blood of
his own Brother.

But as he was dreadful and terrible to his enemies, so none were more kind or
courteous to his friends: the service of his servant he never forgot, neither
left the same long unreawarded, being therefore so mindful that he needed not
by them or others on their behalf, to be put in remembrance thereof, having for
that purpose a Catalogue always by him, both of their names and good deserts,
which every day he did peruse like another Titus Vespatian, saying, he had lost
that day wherein he had not done some good, yet never bestowing his preferment
on such as were undeserving, or ambitiously sought after the same, deeming them
altogether unworthy; but upon such whose modesty and desert he took special
notice of, that they were worthy of such favors, so tempering the severity of
his commands, with the greatness of his bounty, that it is dubious whether he
were of his Nobility, or men of War, for the one more feared, or for the other
beloved, both the great stays of Princes States; fear keeping the obstinate in
obedience, and love the dutiful in devotion.

Although by Religion he was a Mohammedan, yet would he dislike no man for his
Religion whatsoever, so that he did worship but one only God; creator of
Heaven and Earth, and all that therein is: he himself beleiving that God was
one in essence, and in himself immutable, without change or diversity, and yet
for the manifesting of his omnipotency and power, he created in the world
sundry kinds of people, differing both in nature, manners, and conditions, yet
all framed to the Image of himself; so in like manner was he contented of his
Subjects to be diversely served, according to the diversity of their natures and
manners, so they worshipped no strange Gods; which was the cause that he
permitted the exercise of all Religions in those Countries subject to his
obedience, were they not mere Atheists or Idolaters.

His Army though very great, was like unto a well governed City, in passing
thorough any Country with his Soldiers, he took such order that none of the
people whereby he passed, were by them any thing injured, insomuch that if a
Soldier had but taken an Apple, or other thing of like value from any man, he
died therefore, so severe were his commands. It is reported that one of his
Soldiers having taken a little milk from a Country woman, and she complaining
thereof, he commanded the said Soldier to be presently killed, and his stomach
to be ripped, where the milk being found, he satisfied the woman and so sent her
away, who doubtless else had died for her false accusation, had it not so
appeared. This severity (with some other of the like nature) was very
conducible to the preservation of his Army, which was so great, that it was
thought almost impossible to have found sufficient victuals for the releif
thereof; but by his severe punishment of disorders, both Artificers and
Merchants from far Countries, resorted with their Commodities and Merchandise
to his Camp, without fear from every place, for which they received present
money, and so in safety again departed.

Those Cities that yielded to him he favorably received, but the other that
refused to submit themselves to his obedience, he used with all extremity. He
used often to say, that a small number well conducted, did many times carry
away the victory from the confused multitude. He rather sought to maintain his
Army upon the spoil of his enemy, though with some hazard, then upon his
Friends and Allies, and when he sent out any part of his vast Army, for the
taking of any place, he would command them on pain of his displeasure, so to
behave themselves, that at his coming he might either find the City taken, or
the Gates shut against him, which they seldom failed for to do, for he had his
men at so great command, that no danger unto them was more dreadful then his
displeasure, nor did he punish any thing so severely as cowardice, insomuch
that if in his disport of Hunting the wild Beast, any one did for fear give way
either to a Bear or Lion, and slew him not, was sure therefore to die himself,
and to turn his back upon the enemy was no less dangerous, then to run upon his
own death.

That he was free from covetousness, and that ambition with which many Princes
are infected, may appear by this, That after his many con^^ests in the lesser
Asia, and the overthrow of Bajazet, the Empire of Constantinople being proffered
to him by the Emperors Ambassadors, he returned this answer, That he was not
come from so far Country, for the enlargement of his Dominions, already large
enough, but rather to win Honor, and thereby make his name famous to all
posterity; That he come as his friend and Ally, and that his upright meaning
therein was in greatest cause; that God from above had beheld his power, and
thereby bruised the head of the fiercest enemy of mankind that was under
Heaven. That unto his courage he had always faith joined, such as should never
suffer him to make so great a breach in his reputation, as that it should be
reported of him, that in the color of a friend he came to invade the Realm of
his Ally. That he desires no more, but that the service he had done for the
Greek Emperor, might for ever be engraven in the memory of his posterity, to
the end they might for ever wish well unto him and his successors, by
remembering the good he had done them. That long might the noble Emperor live
happily to govern his Estate; and that before his return he would so well
consider for the establishing of the same, as that he should not lightly fall
again into the like jepordy, always assuring himself of his good will and
favor toward him.

Having thus purchased an everlasting renown by his many victories, and
restored several Princes that had fled unto him for refuge, to their ancient
inheritances; after he had long time wasted Phrygia, Caria, Lydia, with the
most part of the lesser Asia, and conquered all Syria, Judea, Egypt and Persia,
with diverse other great Kingdoms and Provinces, he returned home, beautifying
his Regal City of Samorcand, with the spoils of a great part of the world
before by him wasted; where he for a long space reigned in great peace and
glory. Afterward hearing of the rising again of the Turkish Kingdom under the
Ottoman Princes, he resolved for a second expedition, but in the midst of his
preparations he was prevented by death, dying of an Ague the 27 of January, in
the year of our Lord, 1402. whose death was ushered by a terrible blazing Star,
portending as it were to the world the death of so eminent a Prince, who while
he lived made such a bustle therein.

The Character of Scanderbeg Prince of Epirus.
THis famous and renowned Champion, was son to John Castriot, who reigned in
Epirus in the time of Amurath the fixth King of the Turks, about the year of
our Lord 1422. His father not being able to withstand the growing fortunes of
that ambitious Tyrant, delivered him with his three brothers as hostages to
obtain peace, whom the perfidious Amurath promised to entreat well and
honorably, but upon the death of their Father poisoned three of them, only
this George Castriot (for so was his name) whom the Tyrant entirely loved,
escaped death. For his excellent feature and pregnant wit, he was by the Turks
named Scanderbeg or Lord Alexander, and in his youth showed many tokens what a
rare Scholar he would prove in the School of Mars.

He was of a very noble generous mind, affecting liberty, and therefore a great
enemy to Tyrants; but having to deal with potent adversaries, he was forced to
add policy to his strength, and so piece out the Lions skin with the Foxes
tail; for it was almost a miracle, that in little more then a month, he should
recover the whole Kingdom of Epirus save one City, out of the hands of the
Turks, who had many and strong Garrisons therein.

He was of so even a temper, that prosperity could not make him proud, nor fear
daunt him, but always kept the same cheerfulness of countenance as he used to
do: his courage was invicible, of exceeding strength and agility of body,
modest and temperate in speech; so politic, that he was by his very enemies
called, The Master of Policy; a great cherisher of valor in others, dividing
the spoil of his enemies amongst his Soldiers, reserving no part thereof to
himself; nay, having taken Mustapha the Turkish General Prisoner, and receiving
five and twenty thousand Ducats for his ransom, he freely divided it amongst
them, which made his Soldiers not only obedient to his commands, but also so
resolute, that they feared not to set upon their enemies, though with never so
great disadvantage, reward being the Razor that whetteth a Soldiers courage,
and pricketh him forward to all adventurous enterprises.

His personal valor was seen in his combat with Feri-Bassa a great Commander
of the Turks, whom he slew hand to hand; though some blame this as a fault, the
loss of a General, being a general loss, who should not expose himself to
private dangers, and indeed the greatest oversight that he committed in all his
Wars was soon after, when the Turks besieged Croya, in whose Army he had so far
engaged himself, that he was by them on every side enclosed, and in great
danger to have been slain or taken, although through his valor he broke
thorough, and made an escape: for the office of a good General consists not
in the adventuring his person to manifest danger, but in the politic
Government of his charge.

Of his great bounty to his Soldiers we have in part spoken before; we shall
to that add an example of his Justice: Mahomet the Great sent 14000 horsemen
against him, under the command of one named Debreas, who promised to perform
wonders against him, but was by Scanderbeg overthrown, and by him slain,
encountering hand to hand; all the enemies spoil he divided amongst his
Soldiers, and gave Debreas Horse and Armor unto one of his chief Commanders
named Moses, to another called Musachius, who had behaved himself gallantly in
that Battle, he gave a Prisoner, who by his outward part and behavior seemed
to be a man of some account. This Turk agreed with Musachius upon a ransom of
200 Ducats, and thereupon drew forth the money out of a little bag which he had
kept secretly about him, offering it to Musachius for his ransom, who taking
it, told the Turk be must provide more money for his ransom, for that was his
own by Law of Arms being taken with his person. On the other side, the Turk
alleged the agreement, with the payment of the full sum agreed upon. This
controversy being brought before Scanderbeg, he with great pleasure heard them
both, Musachius pleading hard for his ransom, and the Turk for his liberty:
when they had both ended their Pleas, Scanderbeg told them, that they both
contended for that which in right was his, and neither of theirs; for the
Prisoner (said he) with the money, was both mine at first taking him; and
although Musachius, I gave you the Prisoner, yet not the money, which I knew
not of, neither (said he to the Turk) does the concealing of it make it yours,
who by the Law of Arms had lost your self and it to me. Afterward he decided
the business thus, allotting Musachius the money he agreed for, and to the Turk
his desired Liberty.

Such was his heroical disposition, that when the forenamed Moses had revolted
from him, and joined himself to his enemy Mahomet, diverse of his friends
(according to the custom of the world) aggravating his offense with many hard
speeches before Scanderbeg, he could not abide to hear the same, but commanded
them to hold their peace, and to use no more such speeches, only wishing that
all Treason and evil fortune were together with Moses gone out of Epirus. Such
was also his celmency, that notwithstand-the said Moses had with the power of
the Turks given him a sharp and terrible battle, in which he was overthrown and
afterward being in disgrace with the Sultan, fled from Constantinople, and
prrostrated himself before Scanderbeg, with his girdle about his neck, in token
that he had deserved death, desiring mercy upon his knees; he presently granted
him his request, restraining by Proclamation all people from speaking against
him, and restoring his goods and offices again, which by his Treasons he had
confiscated.

One great policy for the preservation of his Country was, that upon the
approach of his enemies, he took order, that all the provisions of the Country
should be conveyed to places of refuge, and nothing left abroad for the Turks
to prey upon; by which means, provisions many times grew so short amongst them,
that straying abroad for forage, he with the more ease overcame them.

Many were the battles which he fought against the Turks, in all which he
remained Victor, scarcely ever suffering the least check, so that fortune
seemed to wait upon him as his handmaid: It is reported of him, that having
slain of the Turks in one Battle twenty four thousand, and being informed the
next day, that the remainder of them might easily be surprised if presued, he
said, O no, let some of our enemies live to report their own slaughter, and our
victory.

He having at another time brought the Turks unto a great straight, they sent
unto him, offering to deliver up their Horses and Arms, so that they might
depart with their lives, to whom he returned this answer, That as they came
into his Country without his Command, so should they not by his leave depart
thence.

Having thus victoriously reigned the space of 24 years, January 17. in the
great Climactorical year of his age, he deceased at Lyssa a City of the
Venetians, to which State he commended the tuition of his Wife, Son and
Kingdom, till such time his Son should come of age. His death was worthily
lamented of all Christian Kings and Princes, he being the scourge and maule of
the Turks, and the most careful watchman and invincible Champion of the
Christians: his dead body was with the general lamentation of all men
magnificently buried in the Cathedral Church of St. Nicholas at Lyssa. About
nine years after his decease, the Turks having taken that City, they with great
devotion dug up his bones, where happy was he that could but see or touch
them; and such as gained them, or any part of them, esteemed of them as so high
and precious Relic, that they caused them to be set in silver and gold to
hang about their necks, or wear upon their bodies, persuading themselves, that
by wearing of them they should be partakers of such good fortune, as had
attended Scanderbeg whilst he lived.

MAHOMETS TOMB
A the Grand Signior B the Crim Tartar C the Emperor of Ger: D the Pope:

I Chantry. scu^


CHAP. XII. The Modern History of the Turkish Empire.
THis Puissant, and almost numberless people, in their Armies and Hosts which
like Xerxes his Forces, drink whole Rivers dry as they march, came from most
contemptible and petty Originals; and like the Roman Empire, which began from a
collected rabble of loose and outlawed persons, was founded in a company of
thieving shepherds, who wandering up and down like a running disease, infested
and disquieted all places they came to, and at last grew to such considerable
strength, like a Snow-ball, that they became suspect to the Monarchs of the
East, both Pagan and Christian.

The rise of the Turkish power.
The first appearance which rendered them Famous and Notable to the world, was
under the conduct and leading of their Captain Tangrolipix, who was called in
by the King of Persia, to aid him against the potent and prevailing Armies of
the Saracens, which having readily undertaken, and strenuously and successfully
achieved; this Auxiliary took occasion to crave for himself, and erect a new
principallity and Empire as well upon his friends, whom he pretended to rescue,
as upon their common enemies territory, making both of them the equal prey of
his ambition of sovereignty and Dominion.

This new Family continued in this Usurpation and Intrusion with various
success one hundred and seventy years, to the year of our Lord, 1300. But
standing solely upon its own legs, neither strengthened nor secuted by any
alliances, and wasted with a continual War with the former just Proprietors
of the Land they had treacherously and forcibly wrested, it expired its dying
gasping breath into a younger slip of the same house: for now the Zelzuccian
Name and Fortune was transmitted to the Oguzian Tribe (which were the two, and
only Descendants of this people) whom Fate had adopted to the reserve and
residue of her greatest and benignest Favors, which she decreed to double upon
it; for having made an essay of the formers aptness to glory, and laid the
dead colors in it, of a Majestical and August Form and Feature; drew it
perfect afterward in this beautiful and fair proportion, in which we now see
the Turkish Empire.

The rise of the Ottoman Family.
The Infant Darling of this rising greatness, was the famous Ottoman, to whom
the grand Seignors refer, and ambitiously entitled their Surname, who having
prevariously obtained a small quantity of ground from his Neighbors, upon
protestation of his quiet and peaceable demeanor, partly by courage, and
partly by treachery, overran the whole Country of Bythinia, in the Lesser
Asia; and dying left the design of enlarging and extending his Dominions to his
Son and Successor Orchanes, whose Sons immense Fortune, like the Collossus,
bestrid the Hellespont, and conveyed the Turkish Ensigns into Europe, whose
delicious and useful soil, so pleased and enticed those Conquerours, that the
Imperial Seat was first fixed here at Adrianople, to which most of the vicine
Princes were forced to come and pay tribute and homage: such was the slavish
condition of Servia and Bulgaria, and most part of Scalavonia, afterward
swallowed up in absolute Mahumetanism, and made Provinces of this monstrous
Seignory.

But that which constituted, and was as the formal being thereof, was the
Conquest and possession of Constantinople, now called Stamboll, the Magnificent
Throne of the Eastern Empire, which resigned its glories to victorious Mahomet,
May 29. Anno Dom. 1450. and transferred its imperial Title to that Regal claim,
his Ancestors had enjoyed. This irrecoverable loss, and lop of one of the
greatest and chiefest members of Christianity, so stund the Greeks, and other
petty Princes, who yet maintained their Dominions, that most of them were
either suddenly reduced or tamely yielded themselves, which was the fate of the
Epirots (though they held out for a while, by the unexampled conduct and
felicity of Scanderbeg,) the Rhodians, the Cypriots, and Isles of the
Mediteranian Sea; and lastly in a^e Reign of Solomon, of Moldavia, Valachia,
part of Transylvania and Hungaria, whither he pierced and passed as far as
Vienna, (and beyond it, in other parts of Austria) which by the fear of his
approach, saw her Suburbs, and Houses, and Gardens of pleasure fired and
ruined, that he might have no shelter for his men, when he should attempt the
siege, which he in vain offered: but such was his importunate ambition of
effecting a total conquest of that Country, in which he had been partly
succesfull to the gaining of the better half of that Kingdom of Hungaria, and
seizing Buda the Capital City thereof, that he made several expeditions in
person, even in his old age, and dyed at his return from taking Zigeth, though
gallantly defended to the last man by Count Serinus, great Ancestor to the
Emperors Generalissimo now in that Kingdom. Not to mention the augmentation of
his Empire, by the triumphal accessions of Egypt, and remoter parts of Asia the
Great, both Nations of the same Religion.

From the time of this Solymans Decease, the death of Solomon.
about 1566. till now, little or no attempts were made this way by his
Successors: for Amurah his son who threatened more then he dared, Mahomet and
Achmat, were Princes given to quiet, and Home-Delights, so that most men
conjectured, this Empire was at its Zenith and Solstice, and full stop, and
would decline as fast as it rose; and that glory wearied with such a train of
greatness, would flag at last, if not be pulled back again with the weight of
them, the death of Achmat the first.
and crush it to nothing.

And this was concluded after the Achmat, when immediately followed such
Convulsions in that State, and recedings from those observed rules of policy,
which were the security of its establishment, viz. the saving the lives of the
younger brethren of the Emperor, as Achmat did by Mustaphas, and he by Achmats
three Sons; Osman who at twelve years of age had the Government transfered to
him from his Uncle Mustapha (who from a bookish and contemplative stoic was
become an active and busy Tyrant and for that reason deposed again) and was
afterward strangled by the tumultuary Janissaries, Amurath or Morat, and Ibrahim
(the Father of the present Emperonr) who all reigned successively, of which
three, Morat proved a most Heroique Prince, and of as great if not greater
spirit then any of his Progenitors. He dyed in 1640. at the siege of Bagdate,
alias Babylon, whether he had designed the Janissaries for slaughter and
excerpation, as being the causes and Agents of all those troubles and
disloyalties which had happened to his Brother and Uncle, intended in their
room to erect a new kind of standing Militia, which should be more absolutely
at his command, Being asked upon his deathbed occasioned by a violent Fever
(in the said year 1640) whom he would appoint to succeed him, he disdainfully
and angrily replied. Will there be any more words when I am dead? He was
thought to have favored the Christians for his mothers sake, and therefore
chose this expedition against the Persian. His immature fate was much lamented
by his Subjects* for his justice and temperance, and care of them; but welcomed
by the Janissaries, who began to perceive his drift against them, and who
notwithstanding saluted his Brother Ibrahim with the Impetial dignity the year
abovesaid.

Ibrahim immediately upon his Assumption renewed the League with the Emperor of
Germany, which had been concluded by Achmat in 1612. and had been thitherto
punctually and inviolably observed: but the Galleys of Malta meeting with his
wealth, coming from Cairo and Alexandria, and carrying them, and one of his
dear Sultans (with a son of his named Uzman, both which thereafter turned
Christians) which was on board away for that Island, put him into such a rage,
that without present restitution he vowed to attaque Christendom: which
immediately he commenced against the Venetians, as abettors, if not accomplices
in the fact, upon whose trade and Territories he might wreak his fury, which
would be spent in vain against that impregnable Isle, which had blemished the
prowess and glory of his Ancestors: and having rigged a Fleet, and raised an
Army, he set upon the Isle of Candy by Sea and by Land upon Dalmatia, resolved
against any agreement or accommodation soever, and with various fortune
maintained the War, till the Janissaries tumulting again, deposed him, and set
up his son Mahomet the fourth, a stripling, and whom they might govern as they
pleased. He is supposed to have died in that fatal year 1648. the murderous
Resolution to Princes; but how, is not certain: For such is the knack of this
Tyranny, that the world cannot tell, whether the Prince or his Slaves do dye the
fairest.

Of the present Reign of Sultan Mahomet the Fourth.
ACcording to the usual custom and solemnity the Eldest son of the ceposed
Sultan Ibrahim was by the Janissaries and their Leaders and the principal
Basha's saluted Emperor, and with great applause received by the people, who
were weary of his Fathers Tyranny. His Name then was Aly Solomon; but at his
Coronation in ^656. he changed it into Mahomet, partly for the greater
reverence of his Name, and partly for the greater fortune thereof, and the
favor of Prophecy that a Prince of that Name should be more victorious
against the Christians then any of his Predecessors.

His Mother the Sultana a brave woman, and who has given very good Features
both of mind and body to the young Emperor took upon her the Regency and
tuition of her son, and the administration of the Government, where she had
busied her self in Abraims time, and was none of the least motions of that
change which lifted him out of the Throne, for the advancement of her son, the
Heir of the Empire.

There had been frequent changes by death, and disgrace of the Prime Visiers in
the next preceding Reigns: It is a Dignity far greater then our Lord
Chancellor, for he commands both in peace and War, at home and abroad, but
of such short and uncertain possession, especially of late, that the Turks have
a Proverb, The greatest Persons and Officers in that government, are but at
best fair statues of Glass. He that administered this place at the Emperors
Assumption, was an old Statesman and a person of good success and conduct, and
of as good age and experience, and who questionless laid those Noble
principles and elements of glory and ambition in this young Monarch, which the
Christian world now sadly feels. For from that disreputation, and
despicableness of the Turkish power, by reason of those confusions and
intestine troubles, which for some years before had besotted, and as was hoped,
had emasculated the Policy, Prudence, Valor, and Courage of that Empire: he
at the first instant of his Government gave manifest signs of a Mercurial and
Martial Disposition, and with his own active Genius, (the example of Princes
being the great Engine of worth) soon buoyed up the Spirits of his people to
their former pitch of fortitude, and bravery of mind, awakened and restored
their lost discipline: and to whet their new fourbished Scimitars, resolved to
employ them altogether against the Christians, upon the irreconcilable quarrel
of Religion, the great Incentive to Heroical enterprises, especially amongst
the Turks, where zeal always fights half the Battle.

To this purpose he resolved to prosecute the War against the Venetians, which
his Father had begun; and though at his first entrance upon it, Fortune seemed
to oppose his designs, and severely to exercise his glorious and aspiring mind,
with a very great defeat given his Naval Forces by Sea, the greatest ever given
them since Lepanto-fight, wherein he lost forty eight Galleys, 6 Galiasses, 12
Mahones and nine Ships, and his Admiral Bassa slain in the fight in the Haven
of Foggia, and this success disabling his command at Sea, he made no more of it
then his noble Ancestor Selynus the second, who beaten at Lepanto, after his
conquest of Cyprus, said merrily, Lepanto is but the shaving of my beard,
Cyprus is the loss of a limb.

Venetians victory over the Turks.
In the year 1654. the Venetians obtained another Victory over the Turks, having
fought them two days together in the Dardanelles, the straight of the
Hellespontick sea between Asia and Europe, famous for the story of Leander and
Hero, where now the Turks have two Castles built, in lieu of Sestos and Abydos,
made more impregnable very lately by some modern Fortification, for better
security against the Venetians, The Grand Seignior himself advised the method
of it, and was present at the beginning and finishing the work: wherein he takes
much satisfaction. At this Naval encounter no less then 6000 Turks were slain,
and Amurath Bassa, Captain Admiral of the Port was mortally wounded, Turks
fleet overthrown.
and twenty ships of War and Galleys taken, besides as many sunk and spoiled.

This defeat so incensed the Grand Seignior, that the Prime Vizier (being
obnoxious to his anger and displeasure, for other matters, some whereof were
noysed to be of treasonable Consequence against his life) was by a private
Council ordered to be strangled, and he accordingly was executed; about which
time the sparks of that Conflagration which at this present is mastering
Hungary began to appear, for a party of Turks attempted the surprisal of
Vesperin, a Garrison of the Emperors, which annoyed the freedom of their
correspondence; but their design being discovered, they were forced to retreat
with the loss of 900 men, and so the peace continued in a kind of doubtful and
suspicious entertainment by both parties, who made slight and mutual inroads
into one another limits, without any declaration or notice taking of a war,
which the Turkish Governors studied to dissemble.

The death of the Grand Vizier begat several Factions in the Soldiery and
chief Officers, whom he in his life time had tampered with, hoping to make a
party for himself, and transfer the Imperial Dignity from this ancient
Ottoman family to his own house, an attempt never heard of before in that
Government, which has showed the most awful reverence to the Majesty of their
Prince, beyond all others whatsoever.

The seeds of this treason broke out and appeared two years after in 1656. in
the tumults raised by the Janissaries, but abetted by some of the Bashaws of his
Council and Intrigue at Constantinople, where they massacred several of the
Divan (the Emperors Council and Court of Justice) strangled the Vizier Bassa
in revenge of his Predecessor, forced the Sultana or Empress, Mother of the
Grand Seignior, who managed her son, and the administration of Affairs, to fly
to the old Seraglio for safety, and made search for the Muph^ee, by whose
Consent and Advice (which the Great Turk always asks in matters of life and
death) the aforesaid Vizier had been put to death, resolving to depose the
Grand Seignior, and set up his Brother.

To this purpose they laid aside all the former Principal officers, to secure
themselves from the punishment of their Rebellion, and placed others in their
room, who had encouraged and prompted them thereunto: These men mistrustfull of
their violent beginnings, and dreading more violent ends, forbore those
desperate actions and Councils which this Revolt at first threatened, intending
first to secure themselves, and establish their interest: And thus they applied
themselves to the Sultan, with deep protestations of their Loyalty and dutiful
Intentions, and that the exorbitant abuses and oppressions of his Officers had
caused the late Troubles, which they hoped to remove, and restore his Majesty
to the affection of the Janisaries, which those Ministers had debauched from
him. And to make this appear they proceeded vigorously in carrying on the War
against the Venetians in Dalmatia, and Candia, as the most acceptable, and
which made them likewise more grateful to the people; so that the Venetians to
reinforce the places they held in Candia, dispatched away some new Regiments of
Volunteers and others, under the command of Prince Horatio Farnese, of the
House of Parma, who did that Republique good service, in several enterprises
against the Enemy; as did their General Zeno in Dalmatia, where the Morlacks,
who at the beginning of the war revolted from the Turk, merited also very
exceedingly, from the said Seignory:

The Grand Seignior in the mean while doubtful of these fair shows, and their
pretenses to him, by some of his trusty Eunuchs, and at the advice of his old
friends, had insinuated so far into some of the principal of the new
Statesmen with proffers of his greatest favors, setting likewise before them
the danger of continuing this force upon him, for that the Bassa of Damascus
was said to be upon his march to Constantinople, that they resolved to save
their own stakes, and by a timely submission and discovery, prevent others from
doing it before them: And this was almost done as quick as thought, and the
news of it not published sooner then by his solemn appearance in
Constantinople, who at his return from this his joyful cavalcade, gave order
for the strangling of the Ringleaders of the late defection, some of whom were
even those who had declared their return to their obedience: so unpardonable a
crime is Rebellion amongst those Barbarous Nations, who have no Scripture rule
and Command obliging their Allegiance, that there is no place left for
Repentance, in any hopes of mercy or forgiveness.

In this naked composure of the state which had been dismembered of her chiefest
Ministers, it was not an Act of grace or of choice to prefer, but of the
greatest necessity and care, to find some worthy and fit person for the
dignity of Vizier Azem, or Prime Vizier, who should be able to undertake this
Corruens Imperium, and to sustain, like another Atlas, the tottering ruinous
Fabric of this overpoyzed greatness.

Much consultation among the Grandees themselves there was, who should be the
man Nominated by them in this hazardous and variating condition of the state,
to the Grand Signior, whose mothers consideration of his, and the public
safety, had pitched upon the aforesaid Bassa of Damascus whom not long before he
had dismissed out of the Seraglio to that command (it being the Custom to breed
Christian noble Children, to the number of a hundred, for the immediate service
of the Emperor who according to his favor, or their abilities and parts
disposes them afterward to the best Provinces, and prefers them to the highest
dignities, and those are called at their initiation, Itchoglans, and are taught
the Rules and Policies of the Government) as having perceived in some aptitudes
to his service, in the resemblance of his own dispositions, advantaged by some
near equality of age.

This prudent person beyond the expectation of his years, not exceeding twenty
four, courageously but modestly accepted of the charge, and behaved himself so
discreetly, yet confidently therein, that he allayed and awed that discontented
and mutinous humor of the Janissaries, partly by extraordinary munificence, and
partly by just severity: as he gained upon the peoples respect by his free and
uncorrupted Justice, so that of all the Ministers that the Seraglio ever bred,
or the Government produced, there has been none exceede^ him therein, and his
Fortune is highly paramoun^ to them all. And this is he who at present commands
and manageth the victorious Army of these Infidels with that fairness for
which he is universally famed.

Yet had he no better luck then his Master at his entrance upon the Government
(in which he was installed in Constantinople with most extraordinary Pomp and
solemnity) the first care whereof, as to Foreign business was the equipping and
recruiting of the Fleet going to Sea against the Venetians, who braved the
Grand Seignio^ and the Port (as Constantinople is called) at the mouth of the
Dardanelles, and had continued there a month, on purpose for an Engagement.

June the 26. the Turkish Fleet, set sail, consisting of 28 great ships, nine
Galliasses, 60 Galleys and 30 Mahons, The Venetian Navy had 28 great Ships, 24
Galleys, besides 7 of Malta, and 7 Galiasses, who keeping in the Channel, the
Tur^^^ could not pass without fighting.

There were two Batteries raised on both side the straight, to facilitate the
going out of the Turkis^ Fleet, by causing the Venetian to desert their station
which nevertheless they would not abandon, b^ stood the shot of the Castles and
them, A great Fight in the Dardanelles.
and upon the advance of the Turkish Fleet part of theirs under the command of
Captain Moceingo, making more boldly to the shore, got a stern of the whol^
Navy, and so hemmed them in: after a sharp an^ tedious encounter, this Armado
was wholly overthrown by sword, fire, and water, forty Galleys were taken, with
nine Mahones, the twenty eight ships burnt, the Captain Bassa only saving
himself with fourteen Galleys. The number of Turks slain, was reputed no less
then five thousand, and four thousand taken, and as many Christian slaves set
at liberty. The Venetians lost their Captain General Marcello, five hundred
Mariners and Soldiers, of whom the Maltesse did brave service: In room of
Marcello the gallant Mocceingo was elected General by the Senare, and a chain
worth two thousand pound bestowed on him besides.

In September, the same year, the Noble General being recruited, following
his success, landed and took the important and strong Island of Tendos, (the
Grecian Harbor, when they besieged Troy) and soon after took the Island of
Lemnos, after a difficult siege for the Turks esteemed it as impregnable, and
having repaired and provided the Fortress with all necessaries for defense, it
lying within view of the enemy, and a great anoyance to their Trade and
provision by Sea, departed toward Scio, and now the hopes of an accommodation
by a Treaty, which was maintained at that time by their Secretary Bellarini,
were evaporated into the Turks fury, who caused the said Secretary to be
secured, and the Treaty to be laid aside. For these losses nothing discouraged
but rather heightened the Grand Seignior and Vizier, nor did they give over the
design of reducing Candia, which was only feasible by success at Sea, as
being an Island; but Mahomet breathing nothing but Revenge and Honor, with
fierce language, and stern looks upbraided the Bashaws for employing such base
cowardly fellows, and then cheerfully bad them equip another Fleet* and he
would design and appoint the Commanders, whom his own observation had
recommended to his choice.

In the same time the Land service in Dalmatia went hotly on, but so as it
showed the Turks had not totally recovered the use of their Arms; and while a
greater experience could be gained He thought it not advisable to hazard an
expedition in person, or venture the Reputation of his Prime Vizier, in so
minute an enterprise; reserving that design till he had trained and accustomed
his men to that service, to the same end keeping his Army in continual service
in Candia, though with little effect. For nothing of consequence was archieved
of either side, and those small successes that were, were equal and mutual: The
turks severity and policy.
now the one, and then the other prevailed, as if they bartered and exchanged
Victory. For which lazy progress, notwithstanding, on purpose to show his
severity against such remiss, and unactive Commands, though it were hardly
possible to effect more with the force he had; upon the Island. He some time
after caused the Bassa, Governor thereof, to be put to death, at his return
from that Government, the like fate befell the Bassa of Bosnia, for his slow
and fruitless menage of the war in Dalmatia aforesaid.

Another Fleet, as the grand Seignior threatened was again rigged, and in
August the same year defeated in the same place by the same General, the
Emperor himself coming to the Castles to view the encounter, which was
gallantly maintained on both sides, and the loss nothing so considerable to
the Turks; for that he set to Sea with a potent Fleet the next month, the
Venetians having lost their General by a casual lighting of the shot of a tire
of Canon from the Isle of Scio, into his magazine of powder, which here blew
him up, and other Nobles with him into the air. The turks get conquest.


With this Fleet the Turk regained the Isle of Tenedos, though with a great
ruin to themselves; for the Venetian Fleet, who had braved and affronted them
all this Summer, being gone to take in fresh water, the Turkish Fleet took the
opportunity, and landed there a great Body of men; who storming it, were at
first repulsed but prepared for a general onslaught, the Venetian Garrison
working a Mine under the Fort, disposed the Powder therein, with a Match sitted
to it? when quitting the place, and getting on ship board, the Turks taking
possession, were blown with the Fort into the air. The Venetian Fleet
returning, and perceiving what had happened, the Turks Fleet being at hand,
prepared for the encounter, which was again resolutely performed, the Grand
Seignior being in view again, and cocerned in the regaining of the aforesaid
Island, but in fine the Venetians got the Victory, sinking twenty of the
Galleys, and taking four more; the rest sheltred themselves within the
Dardanelles. So often was that little Republic in one year successefully
against this potent enemy. Besides that, it has sustained their whole Naval
Force (and their strongest efforts by land) for twenty years together, without
any considerable loss, and with very inconsiderable helps and supplies from
other Christian Neighbor Princes. But there is a great deal of difference and
odds betwixt an united and entire State, whose virgin generosity had almost
tired this lustful Leviathan; and divided Dominions, not only by distances,
Limits, Laws and customs, but Religion also, and prostituted likewise to his
ravishing Arms by others interests, designs and ambition.

After his return from that short expedition, the Grand Seignior continued at
Constantinople, busy in reforming his Court, and Officers, and other abuses in
the Seragiio, which by the depravity of the times, and those breaches and
corruptions in the State had prevailed to custom; sloth, and Epicurisme, and
Pride the mother of faction, and the specific direct bane and ruin of this
arbitrary government, were extremely predominant; and corruption by bribery, to
which the Turkish Ministers of State are most strongly inclined, was never so
boldly licentious, so that the virtues of another Hercules was requisite to
purge out these enormities; Yet such was the excellency of this Princes
judgment, The Grand Seignior excellent in Government
such his severe Government of himself and commands, and punishment, of others,
and the strict execution of them, that by thi^ he quickly reduced things to the
former state, denying himself the ordinary use of those pleasures for whose
excesses his predecessors are so infamous to Christendom.

This sharp and rigid proceeding with all sorts of persons, especially the
Soldiers of his Guard, putting the hard yoke of Discipline upon their necks
again, began to grate and gall and make them to wince against the Government;
and therefore a Persian war was concluded; which Kings Ambassador had his head
taken off for making a denunciation thereof at Constantinople. But a nearer
European quarrel presenting it self, a truce and peace was afterward patch up
betwixt them.

The Swede proving very successeful in Poland in 1656. and 1657. by taking most
of the Towns and Cities of that Kingdom, Prince Ragotzi enters Poland.
and wanting men at present to maintain them, fairly invited Ragotzi Prince of
Transylvania to come and take share of the spoil, promising him a part of the
conquest for his labor: To the same purpose Oliver Cromwell courted him; and
many transactions of that nature there passed between them. Ragotzi no way
disliking the bargain, and being next neighbor, Recalled by the Grand Seignior.
out of covetousness and ambition came in with a great Army, and assisted the
Swede at the siege of Cracovia, which at last was yielded, and put into his
hands. The news hereof hastily alarmed the Turkish Court; who resenting the
growing greatness of the Swede, and the ill neighborhood they were like to
have from him, if once he could fix and settle himself in Poland; the Grand
Seignior commanded Ragotzi, as his Tributary and Vassal, (for, for many years
those Princes, like the other of Vallachia and Moldavia, have received their
investit^^^ from the Turk) to abandon his League wi^^ the Swede, and to return
home, restoring the Polander the places he had taken. Ragotzi not daring to
refuse, marched back again; and upon his arrival was met with a Chiaux,
commanding him to resign his Principality to his Cousin Radus, for that he had
presumed without the Grand Seigniors command or license to invade the King of
Poland, and make war with a Prince in league and amity with him; and withal,
to resign his Forts, and places of strength. To the first he seemingly yielded;
but the other he would by no means hearken to, and thereupon making use of his
Forces, reassumes his former Title, and prosecuted the Turk with open war: And
at the beginning with very good success, though his confederate the Prince of
Vallachia was routed, and 8000 men slain, as he was marching to his assistance;
defeating the Turkish Army and Bassa of Budo at Lippa, 6000. men taken and
killed, and the victory followed thirty leagues: where hearing of the advance
of the prime Vizier with 8000. he retired in haste, and making opposition about
Alba Julia to the whole Force of the Turk, was there worsted: a little before
which, he had vanquished his competitor Radus (and after besieged and taken the
Castle wherein he had thought to have secured himself) and put him to death.

Before and after his overthrow, he had importuned the Emperor of Germany by
many ^^stances at Vienna, to undertake the Protection of his Country, offering
to give him caution of what Towns he should please: but the Emperor delaying a
timely interposition (yet giving the Turk occasion of a quarrel by under-land
assisting Ragotzi with some men) Ragotzi died of his wound (received at Alba
Julia) and with grief, at Waradin: Which being defended for a while after by
Colonel Gaude a Scotchman, was yielded* upon terms to this prime Vizier,
being the immediate earnest of those present conquests in Hungaria.

In the mean while, Rodus the compe it or of Ragotzi being put to death by him
as abovesaid, The Transilvantan Troubles.
the prime Vizier named another to the Principality of Transylvania at the end
of the year 1659. a Nobleman by, descent allied to the former Princes, by name
Michael Apaffi, (though vulgar error call him Abaffi) who at the appointment
of the Grand Seignior was accepted by the States thereof, when they perceived
it was in vain to struggle for Ragotzi's Interest against the whole power of
the Sultan, without any assistance from the Emperor, who in this declension of
that Princes fortune abandoned the quarrel, and left them to themselves, nor
would hearken to any overtures made to him for his protection, upon whatever
terms of resignation or Dominion, and his Envoys publicly declared to the
Turk as much, who measuring his designs by those seares and jealousies which
this Punctual satisfaction signified, was the more incited to a pursuance of
those resolutions, which had been taken up sometime before at the Port. The
Emperor complies with the Tu^k.
And by this means Transylvania was quite lost, and absolutely in the power of
the Turk, with some further advantages gained for his intended invasion of the
adjacent provinces of Hungaria and Austria.

Leave we this Kingdom for a while which is to be the Doleful and Tragical
Conclusion of this Narrative, and retrospect to the Grand Seigniors Home
affairs, which diverted him from an immediate prosecution of his success in
Europe; for the Bassa of Aleppo (where resides, the greatest English Factory)
in 1659. broke out into a Rebellion, and threatened a conjunctory with the
Persian, declaring for Reformation in Government, and Religion, the latter
especially, having for better pretense made some new fangled expositions of the
Alchoran, more to the humor of the preciser and rigid zealots of the Mahumetan
Religion.

By virtue whereof, and some former discontents which were not yet quite purged
out of the Soldiery, who were distributed, and had their possessions in those
parts, under his command (for the Grand Seigniour allows each Horseman such a
proportion of ground, for which he is to be in a readiness to do him service)
he had amassed a very considerable Army, several inferior Bashaws dependants,
and retainers to the former Prime Vizier, whose quarrel they espoused,
resorting to him from their respective Governments.

With this power he marched toward Constantinople, and came on his way thither
as far as Scutary, within four miles of that City, and thence sent in his
demands which swelling to that daring presumption, as to require a resignation
of the Imperial Title, to a pretended Son of the late Emperor Morat, an
impostor of his own setting up, such another as Perkin Warbeck (to whom he gave
all honor, and observances becoming the state of a Sultan,) and in his right
and Title encountered and overthrew two distinct Armies of the Grand Seignior,
that were in have dispatched to obstruct the increase of more adherents, and
favorers of his enterprise.

He continued in this posture, like a cloud hovering over Constantinople, big
with some ruinous storm, till this successful Prime Vizier having amassed his
European Forces, The expedition of Asia.
passed the Bosphorus into Asia, with fifty thousand men, (more prepared to
follow him) being the choice of the Turkish power and with good speed advanced
after the Rebel, who knowing the courage both of the Leader, as having been his
Neighbor at Damasco, and the Soldiers, after a long consultation with his
council of War, resolved immediately in all humble and frankest manner to
submit themselves to the Sultans mercy, dismissing the common Soldiers to
shift for themselves; which being done so unexpectedly, the Vizier gave notice
of it by an express, with as much favor to their persons as the case
deserved, to the Grand Seignior, who gave them all his, pardon with some
extraordinary respects for the Bassa of Aleppo; but presently after, when there
was no danger of the Rebellion, and all things were quieted thereabouts, at the
instance of some Enemies of his at Court, but more truly by reason of State,
and the policy of the Government, The Bassa of Aleppo strangled.
which never pardons that Crime, he and thirty more were suddenly strangled,
their heads chopped off and set upon poles against the Emperors Seraglia at
Constantinople.

This treacherous and cruel dealing after pardon given, and such a Loyal
Rendition of themselves, when as they might have hazarded the whole Empire,
raised in the friends of the deceased a thirst of revenge, having yet their
Arms in their hands, and the Soldiery as prone to new troubles as they could
wish them, and hereupon instantly ensued a another defection, as great
altogether as the former, but the authority of Leaders was wanting to manage it
to the effect. Nevertheless upon the first news of it, the Grand Seignior
resolved to march himself in person to make a final end, and root out the seeds
of those commotions, which were so apt upon every occasion to burst forth.

Prepartion was made accordingly for a solemn exped^tion, and the Rebels cursed
and dev^ted by the Priests to destruction, the Janissaries and Spabees mustered,
and upon their march, the Sultana, the Mother of the Emperor appointed Regent
in his absence, when news came that all was quietted again, and the chief
Authors of the late defection were fled and escaped into Persia.

The Emperor being but just in his way, having effected his business, thought
it advisable, while the Army was in a motion into those parts, to treat with
the Persian, who doubting he might bend his Forces upon him, was willing to
come to agreement, and so a peace was confirmed between them, At his return to
Constantinople, he was welcomed as if he came from a Triumph, but that which
pleased him more then the vain glorious pomp of his magnificent Reception, was
the news of a Victory obtained by his Forces in Candia against the Venetians,
who having employed the Prince Almeric de Este, of the House of Modena, as
General for that service, who carried with him some Regiments of French, the
said Regiments in an expedition into the Country, toward Candea, with a
design thereupon, were met by the Bassa, and after a Brave Encounter, and much
gallantry on both sides, were defeated, very few escaped back again to their
Garrisons. The loss and the unagreeablenesse of the Climate so aff^cted the
said Prince, that he shortly after died there (the grave of many a gallant
person that have sacrificed their lives against, and for this Infidel) and was
brought by Sea back again, to be entered with his Ancestors. The Earl of
Winchel. Ambassa^^^ Extra^^^^nary to the Grand Seignior.


At this end of Winter 1660. arrived at the Port, after very bad weather, the
right honorable Earl of Winchelsea His Majesty's Ambassador extraordinary, in
the place of Sir Thomas Bendish, who succeeded Sir Sackvile Crow in that
employment in 1648. to the Grand Seignior. He had Audience in very great State,
and as usual, the day thereof, was treated at Dinner in the Divan, by the chief
Vizier, and He and His Retinue vested with rich Turkey Habits, out of which it
is not lawful to see the Emperor, and though the two outermost Courts of the
Seralglio, Conducted into the innermost, and thence to a great Hall, leading
into his Chamber, the sloor whereof was covered with Velvet, embrodered with
Pearl, etc. the Capitzi Bassa and his Assistants, leading him by the Arm to
kiss his Majesty's sleeve, as they did several Gentlemen beside, that were of
his Retinue, but of this an account has been lately given; but I may not omit
that it is certainly reported, the grand Seignior being highly affected with
his Majesty's Restitution, should say, That if he were to choose his God, or his
Religion, he would choose the King of Englands.

All things now seemed to be in a screne condition, and calm from the late
troubles, which had tempested this Monarchy: And discourses there were that the
Grand Seignior would now at last hearken to an accommodation with the state of
Venice, and consequently restore a free Trade, and commerce to his Dominions,
which had been endamaged and spoiled by frequent Dep^aedations.

But as deep waters run smooth and stiller then shallow brooks, so was it in
this seeming tranquillity of affairs, not but perhaps there might be due to the
Sacred number of 1660. and the particular glories of his Majesty's Restitution,
and the fortune of England, the same general peace and quiet, which once blessed
the world in the reign of Augustus Caesar (with reverence to that sacred
Miracle) for that the universal Cessation which France boasts to have given
Christianity, by the late accord with Spain, was clearly influenced by his
Majesty's Native Star, and the necessities of Fate, which attended the
prosperous Culmination of his greatness, as could be instanced and
demonstrated, were it not beyond the purpose of this discourse.

Yet so much concerns it, that the Grand Seignior took his deliberate
Enterprise upon Christendom, from the very juncture of this peace; (being as
understanding and conversant in the affairs of Europe as our selves)
particularly his ancient league with France, gave him opportunity of such
Intelligence, which he never maintained with the Spaniard, as his necessary
enemy.

For he knew well, that the state of Christendom could never endure a vacation,
nor could be free from the vicissitudes of interest, when so many Monarchs at
leisure had opportunity to project their ambition.

Nor was he ignorant of these Animosities which perplexed the late Election of
the Emperor at Frankeford, not with what industry the French managed their
lust after the Imperial Dignity.

Certain it was that the Arms of that puissant Nation must be employed upon
another Enemy, whose ever ill luck it should be to receive them; and that he
knew would be the House of Austria or some other vicine power, if, which was
more favorable to his design, he did not amuse all Princes, and then take his
best advantage.

These undoubtedly were the encouragements of this his Expedition and violent
irruption into Hungary, he using the same method of Conquest which his
Progenitors had fortunately experienced by occasion of the divisions and
security of their Neighbors. And therefore unlookt for, or at leastwise not
provided against, while the German Emperor stood upon his wrong-guard, and
dreaded the loss of Al^atia (which jealousy likewise armed the adjacent
Princes) he like a deluge entered Hungary, and auspiciously began the race of
his Glories.

Now the better to conceal his designs upon Europe, and to color his aspect
upon those parts, he gave order for a removal of his Court to Adrianople,
pretending the salubrity of the place, and the freer prosecution of his
pleasures, and vocation from business, and the toil of the Government, leaving
the Sultana his Mother, and the Vizier to the care thereof, as he had done
before in his expedition in Asia; Hither accordingly he came attended as
usually, with a great train or Army* but now augmented to an Host, as a guard
of his Person; still entertaining the Emperors Ambassador, with shows and
flourishes of Peace and good correspondence, till the Vizier having amassed and
drawn down the Asian Forces over into Europe, while the Europeans were embodyed
about Belgrade: it was plainly manifest, what this preparation portended.

Yet the relics of the late Transilvanian defection, were still voiced to be
the object of this expedition, and to settle the other Provinces of Moldavia
and Valachia, in a perfect subjection to the grand Seignior, they for some late
years having fluctuated and wavered in their duty toward him, and still ready
upon all occasion, or change of their Princes, to break out into open hostisity
and disquiet, and disturb the Provinces nearest them, and to take part with any
revolt of others, and help and assist it to a formidable, and very considerable
puissance.

But in the mean while they approached and entered the Hungarian limits without
leave, The Turks Policy (...) his entrance (...) Hungary.
and enlarged their Quarters into the Towns and Villages belonging to the
Emperor, contrary to the Tenor of the former, and existing League, which
appointed the bounds of their Jurisdiction; nevertheless complying in all
things with the Hungarians, and paying their Quarters justly, nor taking the
least thing from them without satisfaction, which was made Capital by the Prime
Vizier, who carassed the Inhabitants, and treated them very humanely and
civilly upon any address or complaint made to him.

The gross of this Army, when made up by the Auxiliary Tartars, who are hired
to wait upon his expeditions, forces marching also from all parts (even out of
Dalmatia, where he resolved to stand only upon the defensive part, against the
attempts of the Venetians,) amounted in all to near two hundred and fifty
thousand men; disposed of afterward into several parts and commands, a
Resolution being taken to commence the War, which was ushered with this Letter
from the Grand Seigniour to the Emperor.

The Copy of this Letter or Summons coming newly to hand by a person of
quality, and having seen the like insolenee, and blasphemous arrogance formerly
Printed in the Turkish History, I thought it would be something satisfactory to
publish this which expresses some extraordinary design and resolution of this
Victorious and succesful Infidel, as a further instance and Motive to the
preceding Exhortation.

WE by the Grace of God, Lord of many Countries, Victor and Triumpher over our
Enemies, Potent Emperor of the Turks, Co-adjutor of the God Mahomet, and the
Moon, Protector of the Sepulcher of the crucified Christ, Implacable enemy to
all professing Christianity:
To the Roman Caesar, King of few Regions, give to know;
That we come to thee with a people of thirty three Kingdoms, so great a
multitude as thou never saw, or heardst of before, to bereave thee by force
of Arms, of thy Crown and Tribute of thy Subjects. The City by thy self
Inhabited we will besiege, we will overcome thy strong men, thy women with
child we will give to Universal slaughter, Their Embrio's as Toads we will
thrust through with Spears and sharpened Stakes; Thy most valiant young men we
will rend in pieces, and cast them forth for meat for the dogs. Thee, thy
Popes, Cardinals, Archbishops, Monks and Nuns, together with all their own
dependings, we will send as slaves into perpetual bondage, and finally, we will
ruin and destroy you all: and then shall you see whether your crucified Christ
will save you from us, who could not save himself; as if we or ours could give
credit, or yield any belief to such incredible things. The very City where he
was born, wherein he lies dead, we even in joy detain under our dominions, and
assuredly you may believe that he will not help you, as being long since slain.

This we were willing to signify, that thou and thine might know the real
Event and Truth thereof, as soon as thou could expect. This is given forth by
us at our Great Metropolis called Constantinople, which the valor of our
Ancestors has taken from yours, and that which we keep and will always keep,
to the Ignominy and disgrace of you all.

Dated at Constantinople in the 15. year of our Reign, and the 23. of our Age.

The Hungarians in the mean while had armed themselves under the commands of
the two Counts Serinus and Forgatz, whose Ancestors had been terrible to the
Turks, and were famous for their martial exploits and achievements, but
subjected by the Emperors order to his Generallissimo. Count Montecuculi,
which at first bred a discontent in the Hungarians, who have no affection for
the Germans, nor would ever cheafully engage with them, except out of envy or
emulation; and this is and was one of the chief causes of that little
opposition and inconsiderable resistance, that has been made against this
present invasion.

The cause of this misunderstanding has been very ancient, upon the account of
Religion, and much ado there has been to keep the Hungarians in obedience and
fealty to the Emperor of Germany, as their King and Sovereign, which from
being Elective, is now, and has for many years been made Hereditary: that
force upon their Privilege, Rights and Liberty, interwoven with more violent
constraints upon their conscience had caused a very great averseness to this
Fortain Government, and a general defection in 16^0. and those years: for
fuller satisfaction whereof, we must refer the Reader to the Turkish History.

Upon the same score it was that Bethlehem Gabor Prince of Transylvania entered
Hungary; some few years after, and possessed himself of the Fortress of Newhuse
alias Newhausel, the Governor whereof was delivered bound unto him by the
Inhabitants, with Presburg and other places, and designed (having the Regalia
in his hands which were deposited at Presburg) to Crown himself, with the
consent likewise of the States and the People, he being of the same reformed
persuasion: but the Emperors successes in Bohemia against the Prince Elector
Palatine (with whom Bethlehem was in Confederacy) and the King of Denmark soon
after made him relinquish his design, and secure himself at home, by which
means the Hungarians were forced to submit, but yet so that they always had a
hankering and ready proneness to any alteration, and a grudging at, and
indisposition to the house of Austria, whose Prerogative they have in all their
Assemblies highly disputed and debated.

And as a further incentive and reason to this reluctance, may be added, The
Aunrians cujel^d.
the general fair and civil usuage in point of Religion and Taxes, which the Tu
ks every where observes in those places of the same Kingdom (which are far the
better half thereof) that are in and under his subjection and dominion, not
intently and prudently considering, that that forbearance and lenity is merely
a temporary baid and lure to debauch them from their duty to a Christian
Prince. For he that will but reflect on the miserable and calamitous condition
of the Greeks and other Provinces which have been long subdued, and have no
dependence and vicinity to Christendom, but are swallowed up in a total
Conquest, is sufficiently warned against those insinuating treacherous
kindnesses, and popular captations, which will certainly end in most
unsufferable slavery and bondage, even to the snatching away their children,
and enhausing the Tax of money to the tribute of life, upon their Mahumetanized
posterity, carried every year for the Grand Seigniors service to
Constantinople, and there employed and educated in Seraglia.

But to return these misunderstandings betwixt them, and the rumor of the
French design, either upon Alsatia, in Germany or Italy, to the amusing all the
Princes thereof, and causing them to stand upon their own guards, which removed
the fear of their supply or aiding of the Emperor, put the Turk upon present
action, Count Forgatz unhappy engagement.
part of which Army advancing upon the Enterprise, were adventurously, and
inconsiderately engaged by Count Forgats, who with a party of six or seven
thousand Germans and Hungarians together, was appointed to attend their motion,
and observe which way they steered, and to be ready to put relief and succor
into what places soever the Infidels should attaque. The Count and his men
indeed behaved themselves very gallantly, but their number was far inferior to
the multitudes that pressed upon him, whereupon ensued a total rout of his
party, most of whom are cut in pieces, the rest hardly escaping to the body of
the Army, and Count Forgats himself into Newhausel, being the nearest the place
of his defeat.

The occasion of his so sudden Engagement, was to dispossess the Turk of a
Bridge they had laid upon Danubius, having put three thousand men over it to
secure it, but the pouring in of multitudes upon them occasioned their
discomfeiture, Forgats was highly questioned for this rashness, because of the
slain there were 400 Gentlemen, and of the Prisoners 800 had their heads cut
off, in the presence of the Emperors Ambassador, which were afterward sent to
Consantinople, as an evidence of their Victory.

Upon the news hereof, General Montecuculi suspecting the siege of the
aforesaid Newhausel, had clapped in a supply of a thousand Germans, with
provision and Ammunition proportionable. This Town is of a late standing, as
its name imports, being built for a Frontier, upon a convenient level in a
morass, the River Niutre gliding within a stone cast of the wall, and within
eight miles of the River Waegh: It is a modern and very regular fortification,
consisting of six great Bastions or Bulworks with Flankers, well stored with
Cannon: the Town having but two Gates, the upper and the lower: There is in it
a very large Market place, wherein is a place built at one corner to lodge the
Garrison Soldiers and their Arms, being most of them Germans, who confide not
in the Hungarians; but upon this necessity they were mixed together.

The Turk ^esieged Newhausel
The Turk coming before the Town, passed his Army over the Nitre, by a bridge
laid thereupon, a little below the lower gate, (where the River is nearest the
Town) out of reach of the Canon, and entrenched upon the beginning of August
this year, and begirt it round, and made his approaches, by thundering day and
night from two great Batteries on which were mounted a hundred Cannon, so that
the shots he made were numberless. By which fury he battered almost all the
Houses and Churches of the Town down into Rubbish, but made no considerable
breach, which he might attempt. Notwithstanding, the Prime Vizier, being
resolved to carry the Town, one way or other, concluded on an Assault, September.
14. before break of day, and brought Scaling-ladders, Faggots, and other
necessaries to fill up the Trenches, The Turk beaten off again.
but was so gallantly and stoutly received by the Defedants, that he was forced
to sound a Retreat, having lost 8000 men at a Breakfast, and the Trenches
filled with Carcasses of the shin. They began their fierce onsl^ught with the
cheerful noise of Alla, Alla, but ended it very silently and heavily;
Notwithstanding, the Vizier continued his Resolution of gaining the place, or
perishing before it; having promised the Grand Seignior to Conquer and take
four principal places on forfeiture of his Head; but before I proceed further,
it will be requisite to give you a Copy of the Summons to the Governor of this
Place.

I That through the Grace of God, and through the Miracles of our Prophet, who
is a Son of both Worlds, and by whom there is happiness and glory, I that am
the first of the Council, and General of the most mighty Emperor of the Turks,
that is the King of all Kings upon Earth: To you Adam Forgats, that are the
Chief among the Nobility of Hungary, do make known, that through the Command of
my Gracious Lord, I am come with his Forces before Newhausel, to reduce it to
his obedience; wherefore if you shall deliver up the Place to us, you shall
have liberty to march out with what belongs to you from the Highest to the
Lowest, and to what place you please, and he that will rather stay, shall keep
his Goods and Estate; but if you will not yield, we will take it by force, and
every man of ye from the Highest to the Lowest shall be put to the Sword. If
the Hungarians did but know the good Intentions of the Mighty Emperor, they
and their Children would bless God for them. Peace be to the Obedient.

In the Interim, to revenge himself of the affront, he received before the
Town, he divided his Army into three parts, one part whereof was ordered to
march into Moravia, and Austria, and front the Emperors Forces, and the other
into Silesia, while he continued the Seige, which said Armies passing over the
River Waegh, made most terrible Havoc, spoiling and burning thirty miles
together. They pasted the said River the 21. of August, but were forced back
again with loss, yet the day following they came on with 30000. The Tartars
make an eruption into Moravia.
and after some opposition gained the pass of the River, 200. Dragoons being
slain in defense of the passage, and put the Imperial forces to a retreat
toward Presburg After those came a body of 20000. Tartars, who took in several
walled Towns, which they burnt to ashes, with all the adjacent Villages,
possessing themselves of the narrow passages between the Hills, and massacring
many thousands of people, putting others in chains, and in fine overbearing all
his way without resistance; At the same time the pass of Jalunca was attempted,
the only entrance into Silesia, but they were forced to retreat, re infecta.

Lamentable was now the condition of those poor Christians, who were exposed to
those outrages, and could not prevent the suddenness of the danger, there being
no Armies nor places at hand, wherein, or to which they might have recourse for
safety, The Austrians only by the benefit of the Garrisons had opportunity to
secure, and to put themselves into a posture of defense by raising every fifth
man to bear Arms against this furious and desolating Enemy.

Count. Serini into the Turks Country.
But to require the incursion of these barbarous Tartars, the Counts of Serini
and Budiani carried the like ravagement and ruin into the Turkish Provinces,
where they spared nothing they could destroy, and left as little of what they
could carry away with them, and so revenged in part, having also defeated and
shin a party of 3000. Turks, and taken a convoy of 30000. Rix Dollers, and
other provisions designed for the Leagure of Newhausel, with good speed
returned to the German General; having notice that the other body of Tartars
was advancing to join with the Wallachians, and Moldavians, and that they were
already come as far as Clausenburg, and to the gates of Zachmar, where the
Hussars on the 29. of August had sallied out and killed diverse of them;)
preventing also thereby the danger of being intercepted by forces from
Newhausel.

The Emperor of Germany himself at the terror of this inroad, left his City of
Vienna (now filled with the Country people, who flockt thither for refuge, and
made sad Relations of their ruins) to Lintz another City in Austria, and thence
by his Agents and Expresses gave notice to the Princes of the Empire of the
present danger, desiring them to afford him some sudden supplies, as he did the
same to the King of Poland, and the States of Venice (now respited and
breathing after a redious continuance of War, which was devolved upon other
Territories) but nothing of sudden resolution was to be expected from either of
these States, and the rest were too remote and at present unconcerned

It was rumoured indeed that the Muscovite had proffered his assistance, in
case of an accord to be made beawixt him and the Polander, but there were never
any effects thereof, and 'twas the like report that the Duke of Brandenburgh
would accept of the supreme command of the United Armies of the Empire, and
that France offered their aid likewise upon certain conditions and Articles,
but none of all these overtures produced any such thing, by reason of the
Jealousies yet reigning between them; though Christendom was never in such
jeopardy; and in the mean while for satisfaction of the Hungarians, and to
keep them in their fidelity, which this storm had shaken, Count Serini was
declared the Emperors Generalissimo of them.

This ruinous devastation can hardly be represented by any pen, or pencil, but
from its nearest resemblance of Doomsday; the fire flaming for twenty miles in
view, and laying the Country in a heap of ashes, and the Tartars like so many
devils haling and dragging their Captives, and chaining them together, with
such cries and ejaculations, as if Humanity were damned and Nature had expired,
amidst a numberless invention of tortures.

This same merciless Crew having destroyed all things, returned with celerity
to We^ssemberg, there to dispose of their prey, and to be ready to assist the
siege of Newhausel, while in their absence the Counts Susa and Sporck, where
throwing down Trees, and cutting up Ditches, and making deep Trenches to impede
their further advance for they had not men or arms to oppose against this
Torrent.

Another storm.
And so we are returned also to the siege of Newhausel, where the Turk having
endeavored to fill the Trenches, and knowing that the season would not suffer
him to continue his Leagure, attempted another storm, which continued off and
on August 28.29. with very considerable loss, though he now made a breach, but
the trenches proved too wide and too deep, many men perishing in them, with
little danger to the Defendants.

On September. 9. having cast great Moles of earth, and other implements into the
Graft, he stormed again, beginning in the dusk of the evening, and continuing
it again till midnight, when he made such a fierce scalado (the Bassa's
themselves in person leading on their own men on peril of their own heads if
their men did not valiantly) and was in hopes of carrying the Town, for the
business was come to handy-blows upon the top of the Rampire, and some of the
Turkish Ensigns were advanced thereupon, which nevertheless by the speedy and
Gallant succor of the Reserves, and redoubled courage of the Defendants, were
wrested from the Infidels after their utmost endeavors and efforts to have
maintained their atchievment, and after the slaughter of 500 of the besieged,
and the unrevenged fall of 9 some say 10000. of their fellows, which they left
behind them; upon which carnage was grounded that rumor of the pest raging in
that Army by reason of that noysom stench the dead bodies raised in the Camp.

This trial of one another resolution, and utmost Essay of Force proved the
Crisis of eithers Fortune: the Turks appay'd and taken off their metal, had no
mind to make another venture, not the Bassa to command it, for fear lest that
obstinacy of his honor should hazard that and his life together to the Grand
Seignior, nevertheless he thought good to continue the Siege, and his
preparations for another assault, and threaten it hourly, hoping he had given
the Defendants the like qualm upon their spirits, which with a little hard
duty, and new offers and advantages upon a surrender, would work them to a
compliance; and this took its desired effect, for the Hungarians being no way
assured of relife, and certain of good conditions, and having their estates,
dwellings and families concerned, resolved not to hazard another storm, but to
admit of a Treaty contrary to the opinion and resolution of the Germans; which
Treaty produced an accord and surrender upon very honorable Articles, the
Garrison and inhabitants, if willing, to march out with Colors flying, Drums
beating, Match lighted, and Bullet in their mouth, with Bag and Baggage, and to
be convoyed to Comorra nine miles off. Those that siaid to have Indemnity,
Protection, and Liberty of Conscience.

Newhausel (...)
Hereupon there marched out 3500. sound men, and 500. wounded, with four pieces
of Cannon, most of them Germans, having a Convoy of 10000 Turks, who civilly
and fairly conducted them to the aforesaid Garrison, and returned to Newhausel,
where the Prime Vizier had out of a pretended generous sense of the Hungarians
valor given every man of them thirty Ducats, as a reward thereof: ^n lieu and
value of which sum, he found there a 100. brass pieces of Ordnance, and
ammunition proportionable, with 3000. Fats of Hungarian Wine, the use whereof
being prohibited the Turks, was converted into money, and supplied and
countervailed his liberal magnificence.

The Army thus freed from this difficult piece of service, the same flying
parties were commanded to make new inroads into Austria, Moravia and Silesia,
while the Prime Vizier designed upon Presburgh, the Capital and regal City of
that Kingdom, as aforesaid, and the Imperial Army not able to make an Head yet
against them, continued passing and repassing the Danow thereabouts, and a
General Council of war being called, Count Serini newly made Generallissimo,
Prince Gonzaga, Montecuculi, counts Rothal, and Palsi being present, it was
concluded to retreat before the Enemy, and to put in Count Strozzi a famous
Soldier, with a supply, as Governor of the place, when her the Turk directed
his March, but being at liberty, and facing all the circumjacent Garrisons of
his attaque, he more imperiously summoned them all together, the dreadful event
whereof, must be ritted to a further discourse.

The other two divisions of the Army entered Moravia and Silesia, and gained the
strong Pass and Key of Jaluncha, putting the Imperialists to flight, with some
execution, but made not that havoc as before, having Commandment from the
Prime Vizier, to offer al friendly and fair terms in the Grand Seigniors name,
if they would submit to his protection, the chief of those Terms were, Liberty
of Conscience, and free Exercise of all Religions, no Taxes or Tribute to be
paid for six years-and then but five shillings upon every House, per annum;
with security of their Laws, rights, Claim, Titles, and Propriety, by which he
is in all probility like to gain submission and obedience from, and to
establish and fix his footing he has got already in, those Provinces, which he
has once again invaded. And thus far of their History, now I shall speak of
their Customs and Manners.

Newhausel being reduced, which was supposed and vainly hoped, would have
disappointed the Turks Progress, and success for this year, being declined so
far as the depth of winter, the Grand Vizier undertook some farther conquest,
and with his Army, leaving a sufficient Garrison, and other numbers to repair
and better fortify the Fort, by bringing the River Niutre round about it, The
Visiers design on Presburgh.
marched toward Presburg, the Capital City or Metropolis of lower Hungary, and
with his approach gave out rumors of his resolution to attaque it, relying on
his first fortune, and those popular insinuations he had spread abroad of his
reality, justice and tenderness to such places as should come in to his Masters
protection, with which thriving artifice he had already gained upon the
credulity of most of the Pesants and indefensible places.

Besides the honor of the place, as the repository of the Crown of Hungary
(which the Hungarians most religiously reverence, as placing the safety and
glory of their Nation therein, and which being seized, would have entitled the
winner and wearer to the Kingdom) the convenience thereof as freeing his way to
Vienna, on one part; and to Commorra, Raab, or Newhausel on the other, and
contrarily incomodating any attempt upon the Island of Schut, by its
Neighbourly correspondence and assistance in case of danger, where at present
the General Count Serini was enquartered, was a great motive and incitement to
an attempt against it, but such had been the vigilance and care of Count
Strozzi a famous and experienced Soldier, in providing and furnishing the
City, wherein the hope of the Kingdom was concerned, and his courage, and all
other excellent qualities of a Govenour, so known and believed by this discreat
Vizier, that contenting himself with the submission of Modern, St. George,
Posing and other places that lay open and exposed to his power, Content^
himself with submission of places adjacent.
and the bravery and gallant designment of so high an enterprise, which the
unimpeded conduct of the affair, he retreated honorably: and as if he had
proceeded so far merely upon a plot and design to surprise some places by his
sudden retun he presently ^^nvested Niutra, a place near Newhausel, and as well
fortified, and more respected, because of its Ecclesiastical concernments as
being a Bishops See, and by terrifying menaces and preparations for a storm,
soon wrought upon the defendants to a surrender, who by the Articles thereof
were conveyed to Presburg.

Nuntia yielded.
The speedy and lucky event of this rendition, was effectual to his practices
upon other places, for upon the same score Tyrnaw and some other Towns
thereabouts opened their Gates and submitted to him, upon his common Terms of
Religion and Liberty, which success invited him to the Siege of Schinta,
Bafled at Schinta.
a very strong and considerable Fortress, and a Magazine of a great and the
best quantity of the Emperors Artillery, but by the fidelity and valor of the
Governor and his men, was repulsed thence, and glad to abandon the enterprise,
for that October was more then half spent, and the climate did much incommodate
his Asian and African soldiery.

Therefore to provide them of warmer Winter Quarters, to keep them well and in
health against the Spring, he repassed his great Guns with some of his Army
over his Ship bridge to Gran or Strigonium, rumouring that when he had disposed
of those unuseful pieces in the depth of winter, he would return himself with
his Europeans and prosecute the War, but in fine he passed over his whole Army,
Retires to Winter quarters.
being followed in his rear, in expectation of advantage by General Serini, who
having parted with General Montecuculi, conjoined in attendance of the
Newhausel design upon the Island of Schut) and did at last cut off some 600.
Janissaries, with 200. other Besonio's, or Baggage people, engaged in the
defense thereof, which they resolutely maintained, by barrica doing themselves
among the Wagons, so that Serini's Hussars were forced to alight and follow
them a foot into their advantages, and there courageously slew them; (This was
some expiation of that defeat given to Count Forgatz very near the same place)
as a fortnight before his brother and he had defeated two great parties, but
not with so great success. This happened about the last of October, and so
those parts of this side the Danow, conceived some joyful hopes of a respit
till the coming of the Spring.

But the Vizier by those other after accessions had so strongly fixed himself,
by leaving a Garrison of 4000. men in Newhausel, and 1500 in Niutre, besides a
body of 10000. men to be ready to assist them upon all occasions, that the
Christians are still kept to their Arms to attend their motion, and Guard
themselves. And to increase the danger, Apaffi the Prince of Transylvania, whom
they looked upon as under a constraint of compliance with the Turks, Apaffis
i^^igrut with the Turk discovered.
and a secret well-wisher to the Christian cause, discovered himself a declared
and professed enemy, being inveagled with an investiture of those places taken
this Campagnia, and upon the total Conquest, with the Crown of Hungary: for as
soon as they were rid of the Infidels, he with his half Christians, Valachians,
Moldavians, intermixed with Tartars, Apaffi manages the Winter war.
and his own plundering Transilvanians, undertook the Lieutenant-ship of the
Winter War, those Nations being better able, as inured to the climate, to
undergo the extremities of the weather.

Apaffi's first design was upon the Berg Towns, or Mine Hills, whence the
Hungarian gold is faught, which as soon as he had parted with the Grand Vizier,
then retreating to Belgrade, he attempted, and this the easier, for that there
was no resistance in readiness to oppose him, the forces that were raised by
the Counts of Cochary and Tekelly in the upper Hungary, for the most part (for
that the lower was already joined with Serini, or awed by the Turks) were a
little before, (maugre the enemies design of impeding them) already arrived to
the gross of the Army; which also for want of necessaries for Men and Horse,
and devoured by the Turks are now dispersed into Quarters.

The two first obstacles of his design upon the Mine Towns, His design upon the
Mine towns
and which barred his entrance, were the two Towns of Levents and Novigrad,
reputed one of the prime places of upper Hungary; Levents was also well
appointed, having in it a Castle manned with coragious Soldiers, and firmed
with thick walls, flankers and Turrets, that accordingly gave the enemy a rude
and unwelcom entertainment, Leventz. yielded.
but their numbers being not to be wearied and no relief to be expected by the
besieged, it was Yielded by agreement, and the Articles according to the modern
policy of the Turks punctually observed.

From thence Apaffi marched to Novigrad, lying further in upper Hungary, which
after a stout but short resistance, not without suspicion that the Governor
was of Apaffi's party (more obvious now by his retreat into the Enemies
Country, Novigrad lately yielded.
and the neutrality or rather assistance of the whole Province, as to the
generality, toward Apaffi) was rendered likewise and the Garrison dismissed, but
not into Christian quarters, being set to work and enjoined to be in readiness
to assist their late besiegers.

The enemy encroaching thus upon the Mine Towns, some Regiments which could be
best got together were sent to enforce them, and to hinder them from settling
their Winter quarters in those places, which were nevertheless much despaired
of, for that Apaffi with his aids threatened Cassovia the Metropolis of upper
Hungary with a present siege, as he did in effect beleagure Filick, some ten
miles distant, prejudgeing that the Christians if once able to take the field,
would carry the war into these Quarters, of which therefore they would betimes
possess themselves; and therefore notwithstanding the prevention aforesaid,
they soon after seized on Shomnitz, Cremnitz, and other Towns of the Mines;
Seizes some of the Mine towns.
and by threatening Letters and summons terrified the people thereabouts to an
acquiescence and submission under his own command: They faced likewise Tockay
(the strongest hold of all) with parties; but neither their courage,
multitudes, practices or hopes, served them to the adventure of a siege.

Nevertheless to countenance such resolutions, they spread rumors abroad as
if the Grand Vizier would presently return, and orders were indeed to that
purpose dispatched to the Magistrates of Frystad to make ready two Bridges over
the Waegh, so broad as that whole Squadrons might pass over there abreast, in
order to another irruption into Moravia.

This news caused Count Serini, who till then continued in the Isle of Schut,
observing the designs of them at Newhausell, to put himself into motion, which
presented him with some considerable booties, (but inconsiderable parties,)
designed for Constantinople; and that was all he was able to do; Count Hohenlo
General of the Auxiliaries.
the Auxiliaries of the Empire, amounting in all not to above 8000 men under
command of the Count of Hohenlo, (whose ancestors were famous in the low
Country war) by their surfeits upon the fruits of the Country, which are in
great abundance in the Hereditary dominions, being so diseased, that they were
in no condition or capacity for any field service; to increase these
Auxiliaries the Swedes were near upon their arrival from Bremen, with 700 horse
well mounted, but now like to have met with some danger at Erford, as the
Hessen Darmstad Ayds perished with a greater misfortune upon the Danubius in
their passage to Vienna.

Neither were the Frontire Garrisons better conditioned by want of many
necessaries, even Raab and Comorra, where the Officers that surendred Newhausel
had been newly acquitted, so that amidst so many ex^gencies and streights every
thing was feared to excess: The Emperor to Regensburgh, or Ratubone,
The Emperor himself was at this time departing from Vienna to the Diet he had
summoned at Regenspurg, to consider with the Princes of Germany of some quick
expedient to redress those evils, leaving the Archduke Charles Joseph to govern
in his absence, who to add affliction to misery is since deceased, and the
direct line of the Imperial Family, save in the Emperor, totally extinguished,
a matter of no small moment to some designs in the world, especially since the
Pope and the French were now so near a rupture, yet to alleviate the present
distress, providence was pleased to bestow on the vigilance and conduct of
Count Serini, a very remarkable success. The Forces of Apaffi intermingled
with Tartars and some Turks, pursuing their design of another invasion into
Moravia; having also an eye upon the Island of Schut, had privately laid a
bridge over the River Mur, Count Serini gives a great defeat to the Turks.
and had passed two thousand Horse already over it; of which Serini having good
and timely notice by a discharge of a Cannon, he rose from his post, and with
his troops so fiercely charged them, that betwixt surprised and dismayed, and
fairly worsted, they betook themselves back to the bridge, where rancountring
with numbers of their fellows passing over in great haste to them, they could
neither go forward nor backward, but were forced to take the River, which
spared none, there escaped very few of those 2000. this was done in the
morning, November. 27. when Serini brought two fieldpieces and 300. of his Foot
to face the Enemy, who stood on the other side of the water and managed a
revengefull Skirmish all the day long, and then retreated toward Canisiae,
from whence they are dreaded to reinforce this their first attempt, being
exceedingly enraged at this disgraceful disappointment.

Affairs of the Diet*
There is mention made in the Diet, of Mars. Turenne to succeed in the supreme
command in Hungary, by means of an Invitation, and request to the French King,
whose assistance they would thereby have engaged, together with a numerous
company of voluntier Gentlemen, who would have accompanied and attended the
said Marshall in the expedition: but so many contests arose afterward by the
rival competition of the German Princes to that command, that to satisfy
those interests which were of great conducement to the service, they at last
fixed upon Generals from among themselves, not devolving the absolute power to
one Generalissimo, but to the joint councels of the supreme Commanders, which
are first the Marquess Leopold of Baden General, Count Fugger Major General of
the Horse raised by the States of the Empire, Duke Vlrich of Wittenburg General
of Foot, Duke Gustave of Baden Durlach, Duke Adolph of Holstein and Baron de
Bunches, Major Generals of Foot, of the Emperors own forces, Count
Mounteouculi is Lieutenant General, and Count Spar Field Marshall: what the
number of men will be that are to be put under this command are not certainly
known, but it is supposed, the whole Force will amount to upwards of above a
100 thousand men completely armed and well disciplined.

But while these things were debating the Emperors affairs were in an ill
condition in Transylvania and upper Hungary, by the practices of Prince Apaffi,
upon the discontents of several Garrisons for want of pay, insomuch that
Zekelheyt and Clausenburg revolted and put the Towns into the hands of the said
Prince, who plays the Turks game more openly then hitherto he had done; with
these Towns the circumjacent County submitted likewise. Zackmar a strong place
began to warp the same way, but the Emperor and the Council of Vienna having
had so late experience of the mischief of mutinies for pay had provided a sum
of money which came in season to keep them in their duty. Withal Forces under
Grneral Souches were ordered that way to confirm the places that stood, but it
is perceived that money is the best expedient to retain them in so many
difficulties of the Empire, and the disaffection of the Country, who have an
itching ear after Apaffi's proposals, and were never much in love with the
Austrian Family, because of their Restraint upon the reformed Religion; and
with those pretenses Apaffi gains mightily upon them; so that without they be
suddenly awed by some advantage on the Emperors side they will undoubtedly
accept of him for their Prince and Governor; and this is the condition of
those parts, by many supposed like to be the seat of the war this Summer.

CHAP. XIV. The late Expedition of General SERINI into the Turks Country.
Htherto had the Christian Army been only defensive, to repel the force and
injury offered by the Barbarians in their causeless and ungrounded Invasion of
the Emperors Dominions, when Winter summoning their Asian and Southern people
to warmer quarters, gave the noble Serini (who had scarce breathed between
action and design, such was his extraordinary vigilence over this enemy) a
little respit and pause to confider in what way to requite this their violence
by returning it in the same measure upon their Dominions.

And it pleased providence so to favor and to ominate his enterprise, that the
mildness and clemency of the weather which had thawed the conjunction of the
Turks and Tartars (who waited for Frost and Ice to give them passage into the
next Province,) and dissipated them into remote quarters for provision and
subsistence, about which they fell to blows, soon after turned it into
seasonable cold weather, and gave advantage to the Hungarian Army, enforced
with the supplies under Count Hohenlo, to begin the Expedition which was about
the beginning of January, new style,

The whole Army consisted of thirty thousand men well resolved, under the
conduct of this noble Chieftain, who had given such eminent proofs of his
Military sufficiencies, and was solely capacitated to the present undertaking,
as a person acquainted with the places designed upon, by reason of his extract
thence, and the ancient original of his Family, endowed once there with great
possessions, but swallowed, and now eaten up by Turkish Timar^ or
Souldier-Farms, for which the several proprietors are bound to be ready with so
many Horse and Arms for the service of the grand Seignior.

The main bottom of the design was if possible to hinder and stop those ways
of advance by which the Turkish power was like to be powered next Spring upon
Hungary, threatened with a plenary Conquest and reduction of it unto the Ottoman
Scepter; and to that purpose to waste and destroy all those places by which
their Army must necessarily p^sse in pursuance of those projections; or at
least incommodate and retard their march, while that the Emperor with his ayds
might be in a readiness to receive them: In order hereunto Count Serini with
all secrecy departed from his rendezvous near Raab, where he stayed a while to
amuse the Turks (who had had a design upon the Island of Schul assisted by some
Tartars (to whom Serini will allow no quarter by reason of their unmerciful
usage of the Country) but were disappointed by the weather, and thence set
forward with as much speed as the drawing of his great guns would allow him.

In this equipage and resolution he proceeded in a week and some few d^ies
march as far as the confluence of the Danubius and the Drarus, a little below
which lies the bridge of Esseck, the only usual and strongest bridge on which
the Turks pass their Forces, Wagons and Carriages, into the lower Hungary from
Belgrade, and other places of their Rendevouz; and immediately fell to work to
break down the said bridge, or at least demolish it so far that it should be
rendered altogether unpassable and unserviceable to the enemy for this Summer.
But the Turks of the other side being a considerable Garrison, as the
importance of the place required, seeing his intentions endeavored all they
could by continual shooting to enterrupt his work; but his great guns so
annoyed and terrified them, and helped forward the destruction of the siege
attempted by fire and all other ways of Mine, that in a nights time a great
part thereof was quite broken and fallen into the River, the Turks being forced
to desert the slation and the defense thereof, for which it is reported that
many of the Officers are now under question, and will be severely punished by
the grand Seignior, who is highly enraged and vexed at the business.

There being no more to be done to the bridge, the Count spent the next of his
fury upon the Country, which he laid in ashes round about, there being no less
then 1000 Villages which are reported to have been burnt by him, and herein he
did not only satisfy his particular revenge, many of the places formerly
belonging to his Ancestors, and detained by the Turks, but left the enemy
nothing to subsist on either for man or horse, if he should come that way. They
that have seen this desolation, say that it is a most ruful spectacle, not a
stick or straw remaining, or to be seen for many miles together. Few prisoners
came to his hands, for the Landlords suspecting what would happen, had timely
removed themselves upon news of of his approach: and as for their Boors, they
are not deemed, or to be taken as prisoners of war, on either side.

With the terror of these exploits being now upon his return, for that a
report was very rife, that the enemy had joined, and made haste after him, he
came before Quinque Ecclesiae, or 5. Kercken, and summoned the Town, menacing
all extemity if they delayed a surrender or engaged this Army in a siege or
assault, and the cunning Garrison so dissembled a fearful compliance, that part
of his Forces thinking the town their own, drew within reach of their Canon,
which was very plentifully discharged among them, and a number of Officers of
note, and the forwardest soldiers slain therewith: which so provoked the
General, that he commanded a present assault to be given, and the Town to be
stormed on every side, which after a short but stout resistance was entered, and
immediately plundered, and then fired, and sacked: no quarter being given. The
mean while, those that had time to fly made to the Castle, where they were
received, and which stood still out, knowing that Serini could not dwell upon a
siege, as in truth his men being so harrassed and tired out, it been very
imprudentiall for him to have done.

But leaving them* thus bent upon an obstinate defense, and having gained glory
enough by the sacking of the Town, he passed by Zigeth (famous for his Noble
grandfather) and with the same fury set upon a town called Segess not far
distant from thence, which he carried likewise by assault, and put the Garrison
to the sword, leaving therein a Garrison of his own, which will be in danger to
be lost; as lying betwixt Canysa (a strong Fortress of the Enemies) Alla
Regalis and Zigeth, if the Count come not to its relief, as he is engaged to do
upon another account, for that he left his great Artillery likewise thereabout
which his occasions must oblige him to fetch home, or he intended another
expedition back again upon a further prosecution.

Having thus accomplished his design he returned about the end of February,
when most men that boded his design, and feared he had been engaged too far
beyond any possibility of retreat, could not but admire the excellence and
Felicity of his Conduct, attended with so many great successes; but what ever
his glory is, which is his own, it is no way proportionable to that terror
which he has cast upon the Turk, who dread his name as they did that of
Huniades and Scanderbeg; and it is not to be doubted, but by the blessing of
God upon his life, he may prove such another scourge to that insolent, People.

CHAP. XV. The Interest of all the Princes in Christendom upon the account of
Policy and Religion in a War with the Turk.
I. INterest, says the Duke of Rohan, governes Princes more then the Princes
govern the People, which according as it is well or ill understood, closely or
negligently followed, is either the strength or ruin of States and Kingdoms,
being nothing else but the advantage that a Kingdom may make, or disadvantages
it may suffer from the present state of affairs in the world: to discern
therefore the public interests at this time, Lay we this for our foundation,
that there are two Powers in the whole world, which are as the two Poles from
whence descend the Influences of Peace or War, of happiness or misery upon the
several parts of it, viz. that of the Christian, and that of the Turk; that of
the infidel finding it self improved to a miracle, has not been able to
conceal the design it has of an universal Monarchy: that of the Christian
being naturally obliged to make a counterpoise of all the subordinate powers,
whether Pagan, Jewish or Christian, being annexed to the one or the other,
according to their particular Interests.

II. It follows unavoidably that the Christian Princes are very much concerned
to lay aside that meannesse of designs, and enterprises, wherewith this last
century they have undervalued themselves; the petty acqu^st of a little spot to
former purchase rather then. Princes conquest: The inglorious wars with their
own subjects, where they lose whoever conquereth, the endless wranglings about
a Portugal* a Flanders, a Parma* like those of the Heathens for a poor
ambition, and a very narrow Interest, and resolve once more nobly for the
Christian faith, not for a little Province, but for 18 parts of 24. of the
world swallowed up of Infidelity.

III. For our sins multiplying, and our heresies making up their full measure,
when we would not live under the easy yoke of Christ: we were brought under
the intolerable tyranny of the Infidel Choswey and Hunmer, who overthrew our
Religion, and propagated Mahumetanisme by the justice of God, and through the
spreading nature of evil by permitting carnal liberty (a bait that will catch
all flesh) by promising a sensual Paradise which is more taking with men's
experiences than a spiritual one is with their hopes, and by the power of the
Sword which effectually teaches the conquered the Religion of the Conquerours
has improved it self to that fearful latitude and extent as threateneth to out
Christianity from the earth, the Turks succeeding the Saracens, and adding to
their Dominions Turcomania, Persia, Egypt, Syria, Greece, and several parts of
Europe, as it is at this day. In relation unto this dreadful power the Interest
of Princes is either common to them all, or else peculiar to some: that which
is common to all besides the present invasion and terror, Is

IV. Religion the common happiness, and common care of Christians.

1. This is that which ties us to the most high God in duties, and the most
high God to us in mercies, that blesses all we set our hands unto, that is our
honor in the fight of the Nations; that is the great improvement of our
Natures; the great restoration of mankind; the inward Counsels of God, the
Charter of eternity written in the blood of Christ, copied down to us in the
blood of Martyrs, our forefathers, who expect that we should transmit them
down to posterity: this religion, for whose defense you are set, by whose God
you reign, by whose precepts and sanctions your Thrones are secured, entreats
your succors, prays your assistance in her distress, and hopes you will not
deny her prayers, as you would not have the prayers she taught you denied in a
time of need. It is your honor to help God against the mighty, that invade his
Kingdom, as it will be your happiness to be helped by him against the mighty
that invades yours: he can prevail without you, your greatness extends not
unto him; you cannot subsist without him; would you have your thrones
established in righteousness; your people tied unto you in conscience: your
Kingdoms civilized and pacified: your borders* in peace and plenty; your
subjects ingenuous and free: your times knowing and happy, and your names as
lasting as letters, in time stir up your strength: quit your selves like men,
maintain Religion and it will maintain you: or would you see cruel tyrannies,
bathed in the blood of Kings at every succession: Thrones environed with heaps
of vassals and slaves; no Nobles in the Court, nor Gentlemen in the Country:
no free men in the Land: no natural affections to wives or children: no
inheritance to posterity: no memory of Ancestors: no Morality, or Learning: no
Arts or Sciences: would you be the reproach of mankind and humane society? and
see neither peace to him that goes out, nor to him that comes in? but the
whole earth covered with violence, oppression, rapine, uncleanness and blood:
with such enormities as the ears that hears them would tingle at: or would
you live under the promises of this life and that which is to come, where grace
and glory is dispensed, and no good thing withheld from them that fear God:
where you shall be blessed in the City, and in the field, in the fruit of your
body, and in the fruit of the ground; in your bushel and your store, when you
come in, and when you go out: where the Lord shall command the blessings upon
you, and whatsoever you set your hands unto.

V. But more particularly is Religion become the Interest of every Kingdom: 1.
Of Spain, whose zeal for the Catholic Religion is the best prop of that
Monarchy: its that which obliges the Pope and Papists in all Kingdoms to
promote his greatness against the Protestants and the Princes of Italy, to
serve his design against France. 2. Of the Popa and the Princes that hold of
him in Italy in the right of the Church whose patrimony lies in the same
bottom with their Religion, and whose estates are entailed upon them by the
holding of their Christianity. 3. Of France whose power is empowered by
indulging Protestants, and assisting them against the encroachments of Spain.
4. Of the Low Countries, the Hans-towns of Germany, and the Princes, with
Denmark and Swethland, whose religion has propagated the liberty of the four
first of these, and upheld the Kingdoms of the two last: all which had been
swallowed up of the Austrian power, had not their Religion knit their interest
together, and they who were otherwise at a great distance in situation and
civil concerns become so united in their faith: in a word, the Laws, the
privileges, the constitutions and policies of Europe are so interwoven with
Christian religion, that if it be pulled down the government of Europe falls
down with it.

VI: But Religion is not all, though it be enough to engage the states and
lives of all that profess it, for the Christians have many more engagements
upon them.

1. Namely, the Emperor has his borders to secure, and his rebellious people,
who have taken sanctuary under the Turk to subdue every year, until this ill
neighbor be removed: as has Poland, Sweden, and Museovy.

2. The English and the Dutch have the Levant and other places to be settled,
which cannot be expected as long as this absolute Tyrant gives Laws to sea and
land.

3. The French, the Spaniards, and other Popish Princes have the yoke the Pope
has set upon their necks (to enslave them to him more unworthily then they do
the people to themselves) to remove, which they could never yet attempt, but
their Ghostly father chastized them with an Invasion of Turks or Moors, or
deluded them into an holy war, where he had his privy projects beyond the
public design, that (a^ the Sea loses in one place it gains in another)
the Emperor and the other Princes lost more to his Holiness in the West, then
they were like to gain of the Turk in the East. Lord Ba^ons advertisment
touching an holy War.


4. Besides, there is no such undertaking at this day, for earthly honor, with
secular advantage and greatness, as a war upon Infidels: No fancy this! the
Spaniards invaded Mexico, Peru and other parts of the West Indies: and what
floods of treasure have flowed into Europe upon that action: so that the Rates
of Christendom are improved fifteen times more then formerly by a growing
treasure of Gold and Silver; besides the access of Empire and new Territories:
not to mention the rich Trade of Spices, Stones, Musk, and Drugges opened by
our honorable achievements in Africa, Asia, and other parts of the world,
would it be nothing to make all the kingdoms of the earth become kingdoms of
Christ, and yours under him? And the Sun would never set in the Christian
Kingdom, but ever shine upon one part or other of them, as the Sun of
Righteousness ever shines upon the whole.

5. How many thousand persons might b^ employed in a War against the Infidels
who do worse at home? foreign wars are the breathing of a Kingdoms vein, to
let out (...) blood: the idleness of Christendom might (...) its very sin, and
shame might cure it.

6. The idle being di^patched to engage the Infidel abroad, the divided would
in exp^^^tion of the event of that engagement be u^^^ed at home. A war with
the Turk is the gr^nd means of the peace of Christendom. The war with Carthage
was the peace of Rome:

7. Besides Palestine was a parcel of the Roman Empire. Cyprus a piece of
England, some parts of Egypt belong to France: not to speak of the Churches
right, it is not fit for Christian Princes to let go what is their own to an
Infidel, and fight among themselves for what is not their own; and does not
piety and compassion move you to consider the distressed Christians in Syria:
were it not worth the time, if you neglect your own to maintain Gods title to
the holy Land, to make Jerusalem once again the joy of the whole earth: to
restore the chapel of Christ's conception at Nazareth, his birth at Bethlem,
his burial on Mount Calvary, ascension on Mount Olivet to their primitive piety
and devotion: what pleasure were it but to see those Theaters of Mysteries, of
Wonders and Miracles. It were pity but the blasphemies of the Turks against
Christ, and their cruelty against Christians were punished, and a way opened by
the Sword for Instruction and Catechizing, and such other succesful^ motives to
Christianity, in order to that universal profession of Religion which is to
bless the world with happy times the last thousand years of duration.

8 Though umbrages and fond jelousies, the fume of love, and weak fancies are
not competent foundations to build a war upon: yet to prevent a mischief
whereof we have but too just a fear is the result of right reason, and the
constant practice of all wise men and Nations, (its folly like a clown to ward
a blow only when it is past, to play an aftergame is rather a shift then a
policy, especially considering that war is a Tragedy that ever destroys the
Stage whereon it is acted) now that the Turks are now justly to be feared,
cannot be denied, Asia is overrun, Greece is subdued, Transylvania is made
tributary, the Hereditary countries of Austria are made desolate,: Hungary is
revolted, some Islands in the Mediteranian sea are lost, there is but the Alps
between them and France, and Italy, but a River between them and Poland, but
the Pyrenean mountains between them and Spain: they give Law to the Midland
sea. Let us make therefore the war with the Turk, the sewer of Christendom,
and drive all discords out of it: Europe now is surfeited with people, and many
of them active spirits, and stirring natures, employing themselves in mutual
jars and dissentions: which this war will close up, uniting all the malice
and power of Europe against the common foe of Christianity.

Object. But is it Lawful to make a War for Religion, to enforce that which
should be persuaded, to make our Christian Savior an Heathen Idol, in
sacrificing the blood of men to him, and whilst we would let the world see we
are Christians, to forget the rest of the world are men?

Answ. We allow not War to plant Religion, though we allow Religion to make
advantages, of war for its Plantation, beasts may till the ground, though men
sow the seed. But we say (there being some as the Philosopher said, Natura
Domini, and some Natura Servi; some born to Command, and some born to Obey)
That where there is an heap of Inhabitants (calling themselves a Kingdom or
State) that is altogether unable or unworthy to Govern, there it is a just
cause for another Nation, that is Civil, to subdue them, in order to a better
Government amongst them. And where the constitution of a State, and the
Fundamental Customs of it are against the Laws of Nature and Nations, there a
War may be lawful to remove those Customs and Constitutions (the light of
Reason being that part of the Image of God upon which Government is founded.
Lo. Bacon.
) They that live in a way contrary to that Reason, are immediately incapable of
Government: And any Nation, ambitious of an enterprise of true glory and merit
(as the Romans who Marched for the freedom of Greece) might divest them of
their Government. Now the Turks are confessedly a rout and shole of people, so
ignorant, and so barbarous that they are incapable of government, their
constitutions are so unnatural as that of slaves governing freemen: that of
murder in case of expeding that of commonnesse of women: that of prohibiting
Learning, etc. that mankind by a league of nature, and the tacit consideration
of humanity, should rise against them as the reproaches of humane monsters of
mankind, and the very shame of nature: A war being thus commenced by an
instinct of nature, to reduce beasts to men, may be improved by the principles
of reason to persuade those men to be Christian^.

Chapter 2. The interest of the Christian Princes among themselves, all
reconcilable with a common interest against the Turk. But because one said,
that except you bray Christendom in a Mortar, L. Bacon.
and mold it into a new past, there is no possibillty of an holy war; and was
of opinion that the Philosophers stone and an Holy war were but the
Rendezvous of crack* brains that wore their Feathers in their heads instead of
their hats: and all this in reference we suppose to the divided interests of
Christendom. Before therefore we unite the European Princes in a common
interest against the Infidels, we will consider their peculiar interests among
themselves: and begin we where we are with that of England.

1. England, being a little world within it self, was not much concerned with
foreign States any further then by way of commerce and trade, Englands
in^e^^^^.
until the practices of Spain and France meeting with its own distempers made
it more obnoxious then formerly, and so branched its interest to these maxims
following:

1. To maintain a constant war, not only to discharge ill humore, which
would otherwise feed upon themselves: But first, to balance Europe. 2. To
train soldiers in the field, especially to exercise seamen, who are the best
wall of this Kingdom, 3. To enrich the noble undertakers with Reprisals: or,
4. to relieve and aid a decaying Prince or State. 5. To maintain the
soveraign^y of the Narrow seas. 6. To take the thoughts and discourses of the
people off from more distastefull affairs at home, where all men are never
pleased. 7. To keep up that reputation abroad which we have gained; a main
interest in any Estate.

2. An inviolated unity secured by Indulgence, resolution, the one a
satisfaction to them who are under the evil of former miscarriage, and to
secure themselves may fall into more: the other a terror to them who presuming
upon that Indulgence attempt further Innovasions, a hard and a soft breaks a
flint, an hard and a soft breaks a people.

3. No toleration contrary to the established Laws, to keep up a perpetual
faction. The Duke of Rhoan recites this as a fundamental maxim of Qu. Eliz
viz. to banish from England the exercise of the Roman Religion, as the only
means to break all the plots of the Spaniards, who under this pretex^ did there
foment rebellion: deeming, says that Noble person, as it is most true, that
England is a mighty animal, that can never die, except it kill it self.

4. To be the head of the Protestant Religion: to which purpose there should be
strict alliances* constant and exact intlligence with, and a partnership in all
the treaties of Protestant Princes, especially with the Low countries, who open
to us the way to France and Spain: always provided that they encroach not
either upon our trade or fishing; in the last whereof we loose 452000 l. yearly
to that people, which may be prevented by Laws and Constitutions in that
behalf provided, and engrossed in the treaty. However the Netherlands may be
divided, its the peculiar interest of England to promote the Protestant
Religion, with the same measure of zeal the King of Spain promotes the
Catholic.

5. National provisions against sloth and luxury, two insensible crudities that
melt away the English glory. It was neither Roman, Saxon, Dane nor Norman that
overcome this Nation, but the intemperance of them all: all Empires have risen
to their greatness by sobriety and frugality, the mothers of prudence and
resolution: so by luxury and intemperance (whose daughters are softness, and
unmanlinesse) they have all declined, and come to nothing.

6. A well disciplined Militia: the Kings of England were always drawn with
their swords by their sides. All Islands must be well armed for security at
home and commerce abroad.

7. Very good intelligence. An hundred eyes and ears was part of the Kings
character: they must have this particular from him whom they represent, as our
Law says, that they have their center every where, and their circumference no
where: and this either by keeping in pay some confidents, or maintaining some
picklocks: or breeding up some youth in foreigne parts, at our own, or our
Ambassadors charge: and having a watchful eye over Counselors, Ambassadors,
and privileged persons retinues in England.

8. To keep a check mate for France in Flanders or that way, France being now
as likely to be universal Monarch, as Spain was, if they cannot find a
salique Law in Spain as well as France; and more dangerous to us by reason of
our neighborhood to it, in situation and distance from its interest and
inclination. But the French designs are open.

There Interest is: 1. To counterpoise the Empire and Spain: France.
and therefore the first Card she plays is the embroyling of the Empire: which
is too great to be attempted until it be first divided.

2. To disturb the Pope who is always by his place, and now by Nation an
entire friend to his dear house of Austria. It was the saying of one Pope at
his death to those that wept about him, Do not weep for me as long as the
Catholic King of Spain is alive. And particularly France must much look to
her right to envest Churchmen.

3. To promote the war with Portugal, and engage the most Noble Commanders in
that service, especially Don John of Austria.

4. A moderation in point of Religion in opposition to the zeal and severity of
Spain that may draw the Protestant Estates and Kingdoms to this side of the
balance, together with a readiness to assist them against the Invaders of
their Estates and Liberties that may retain them here.

5. Spies and Pensioners in all the Courts of Europe, especially they that are
within the reach of Austria, to have before he clearly what passes among her
neighbors, and that as occasion serves she strengthen the weak, D. Rhoan.
assure the fearful, and stop the engagement of those that fall off, and by all
means to erosse the intelligence of Spain.

6. To be ready with Men, Munition and A^mes: an Army and a treasure in France
may do wonders in two respects, to buy or keep off the English sooting in
Flanders: to buy or force an interest in Italy, and to fit her for an elective
Kingdom moreover: a Law against expenses is a fundamental of France and England.

7. To meet Spoine in all treaties, especially in Germany and Italy, with such
flow and provident persons as may keep peace with what has overcome
Christendom by delays and reaches of many years foresight: who are to have a
particular eye upon the succession: and in the declining age of the King of
Spain to shuffle in some pensions (...) his very Counsel table, looking
backward strictly upon the Princes of the blood in France* among whom the King
is to appear moll active and careful of places of trust, when he knows not how
soon he may leave to considents while he is in pursuits of further interest.

8. A from league with the Switz for their land service* and the Hollanders for
their service at sea, especially in the Indier against the Spaniards dear wife
there. To all which add a reputation and secrecy the many designs of France
upon Poland, Italy, Germany, Spain, Flanders, England must move with
invincible springs, or else they lose their weight as they are discoverd:
whereunto a little of Spaines humor of dissembling is absolutely necessary to
the open French man's interest.

1. In a general peace to settle his Councels and people, Spain.
his Countries wasted with constant wars: to secure his Plantations, and
furnish his Navy, that great security of his Revenue and Treasure.

2. Securing the Empire and Italy, his great confidence, especially from the
French: for the Frenchmans business is to keep those two places open the
Spaniards to keep them shu.

3. Looking to the Pope and his election, in bearing up the reputation of a
zealous Champion of the Catholic faith, as if upon the support of his Monarch
depended the support of the Church: by this pretense of Religion, 1. He may
keep out any Prince from any considerable power in the Catholic Dominions, he
may solicit the Pope to put the Catholic King upon his exercising severity
upon their Protestant subjects: and underhand assist the Protestant Subjects
against those Kings, who are to be traduced as favorers of Here^icks, if they
persecute no^ the Protestants, and to be suggested persecutors if they do: to
maintain a seminary of Catholics in those Countries where the Protestant
Religion prevails, who shall study Divinity, but practice policy to promote
Spaines Catholic Monarchy, under the pretense of propagating Romes Catholic
Religion, to keep up animosities between the Catholic and reformed Switz, who
are now so closely leagued to France, to endeavor a division in the Low
countries, by a long truce and peace.

4. In retaining the ablest Jesuits, Monks, and Friars in all Countries, with
other the most useful pentioners and Intelligencers.

5. In interposing in the most considerable treaties, as Judge or umpire, and
disposing, the several parties to agreement in ways most agreeable to his
interest.

6. A truce with Portugal which he may corrupt sooner then conquer, and buy at
a cheaper rate then he can win.

7. A watchful eye over the French, especially in Italy and in Poland, which
may be the French his fetch about into the Monarchy of Spain upon the death of
this Prince, who either has none or very uncertain issue, and to that purpose
competent forces in Naples, Millan, and his Mediterarean Provinces, especially
Navarre, together with his old reputation for zeal and power are necessary,
together with a core of the fort Fuentes, and other passages from one part of
the divided Monarchy into another, to which I may add a care to exchange his
Militia, and that no garrisons be kept by their own Natives, but they of
Milloin, may be in Spain, and they of Spain in Milan, and to impoverish the
Natives, who may once in an age be coaxed with a few unexpected acts of grace.

8. Outbidding the French in the Switz market.

9. A League with the Pope, the Princes of Italy, the Emperor of Germany, the
Pole in behalf of the Church, the only interest that upholds that Monarchy,
and will bear up on that side.

These maxims observed, will abate the swelling of France, raise the low
condition of Spain, and secure the other Christian Princes, with such a
counterpoise of affairs as may preserve their present interest.

The Pope.
4. The Pope and the Italian Princes interest lies, 1. In privacy and peace
among themselves. 2. Because it is the firmest friend the Church has, 3.
Because it may be a bridle to restrain France, a consideration worthy all
their regards, especially the Dukes of Savoy; to whom I may add, the Switz,
and the united Provinces, who are to take heed of France, though they cannot
comply with Spain, and to secure the Navigation.

5. The interest of Germany, Poland, Denmark, and Sweden, is so to check the
growing power of Spain, as not to be surprised by a greater of France, to
attend the Diets, and to have a firm correspondence among themselves to bear
up against the Catholic league.

II. But now cannot all these particular interests be reconciled into one
communion against the public enemy: may not England secure her trade abroad,
by a strong Navy, and her peace at home by sending an army against him, being
safe from all neighbors, who are engaged in that common quarrel: is there any
thing in the French high way to an universal Monarchy, but the usurping
Infidel? what weakneth the Papal and Austrian interest, but the Turkish power?
what checketh the French, the Flemish and the British trade, but that great
Pyrate? what impeacheth the Catholic attempts upon Portugal, but those of
the Turks upon Germany? why droopeth the Patriarchal power at Rome, but that
the Catholic assistants are diverted to Hungary, and there maintain their own
Thrones, while they should uphold their fathers Chair, as more concerned for
their own Crowns then for his Mitre: would not a war with the Turk spend the
ill humors of England and Poland, secure the Dane, exercise the Swede, give a
truce to Portugal, give a respit to Spain, open fair opportunities to France,
settle the freedom of the Empire, and in a word satisfy the ambition of
Christendom: which strugled hitherto within he narrow bounds of Europe, but
now has its way open to Asia, Africa, and America.

Chapter 3. How the Christian Princes may balance the Turk in power, and how when
they have balanced him, they may dispose of their forces against him, and how
many ways they may Attaque him.

^. The Turk is not so strong as he is vogued, no more th^n the Lion is so
fierce as he is painted. His Forces are many, but they are disorderly: his
Territories large, but scattered: his government settled, but violent: his
people multitudes, but weary of him: his Janissaries strong, but mutinous: his
Councels steady, but corruptible, yet if he were never so puissant, they that
are for us, are more then they that are against us: as will appear from reason
and experience.

1. Our Sicuation is complete for mutual assistance. The Turks territories are
so scattered, that they offer great choice of the Scenes of War, and promise
slow succors unto those parts that shall be attempted. 2. Our method and
discipline is better, and our skill in ware more improved. 3. Their treasure no
doubt is great, yet it is uncertain, for their treasure is in their Subjects
estates, and their estates at the mercy of every invader. Besides that, their
treasure must be conveyed by Sea, and the Sea is at our mercy. On the contrary,
our treasure grows, our people are willing, eleven millions may be spared for
that service the first enterprise and then the war will pay it self.

2. Our men are many, 30000. Horse and Foot from England, 30000. Horse and Foot
from France, as many from Spain and its Territories, 50000. men from Germany
and the Provinces, 24000. men from the Northern Kingdoms, 18000. from Italy,
and the Isles adjacent. Besides the forces already raised: no new thing this,
for in the first voyage to the Holy war, there were 300000. men under Godfrey
of Jerusalem. In the second under Mouusieur Hugh of France 250000. In the third
no less* under Conrade the Emperor. At the fourth setting forth an 150000.
under Frederick Barborasta the then Emperor. 220000. under Richard of
Cornwall, and Philip of France:) and the world is more populous now. Besides,
we can set out 180. Galleons, Galleasses, and Galleys, 30 from England, says
one, 30. from Holland, 20. from Spain, 40. from the Pope, the Italian Princes,
States, and the free towns, 20. from France, 30 from the Baltic sea and the
Sound. This may be constantly maintained from Christendom, to the expense of
500000. men to the Turk, for Sea and Land and Garrisons. And we know that where
the Grand Seigniors horse treads as grass so men grow not: but as our men
are numerous, they are serviceable and valiant, not a heap of Barbarians, but
an Army of knowing and resolved men that understand Fortification, Navigation,
and all other mysteries of war. Its true there may be 2 or 300000 Turks in
the field, yet not a fourth part of them are armed, the rest follow the fate of
the Conquerours, and fill ditches, and choke death. There is not such a spring
and seminary of brave military men in the world as in Europe.

5. For Confederates, we know the whole world is jealous of the Turk, the Chrim
Tartar is in competition with him about their borders; Prester John is resolved
against him; once in 30 years comes a Caliph in Egypt that casts envious
looks upon him and the Christian world is threatened by him. Many of his Sultans
wish him far off, ( Turkey being a marsh that when pressed down in one end
rises in the other,) and although he may provide against some of these
inconveniences for the present by cunning negotiation, or prudentiall
settlements, yet they may break out hereafter upon his many emgagements into
all Accidents. However this is certain, while necessity leagues us, the truth
is much destitute of assured and confident confederates: so that we may say to
the Turk now, as a Councellor of State did to the Spaniard some years ago,
Sir, we will you thus much for your comfort, you have but two enemies, whereof
the one is all the world, the other is your own Ministers.

2. We have the advantage on our side in the five particulars of war, besides
that of a just cause, the recovery of our right, and the securing of our
Religion and Government, and a most gracious God: and so reason encourages us.
We have likewise experience on our side: for 1097. July 1. in the vale of
Drogordan, Solomon with all his might fell upon the Christians three to one, and
resolution it self may be pressed to death under the weight of a multitude: the
Sun scorching the Northern men, while the Turk had bodies of proof against it,
with all the disadvantages imaginable; yet the Turk was utterly overthrown, and
the Christians became twice victors, 1. Over their enemies. 2. Over all the
disadvantages that befriended that enemy: from this battle the Christians waded
through all difficulties and taking Iconium, Heraclea and Antioch it self,
after a long siege, June the 28, 1098. they fought Corbaran and his Persian
Army, and laid an 100000. of them dead upon the place. And in December
following under great extremities, which rather doubled then abated their
valors, took Jerusalem, and slew 30000.

Austust 12. following an in numerable ompany of Turks and Saracens under Amira
Visu their General encounter the Christians at Askelon, but God (says my
author) sent such a qualm of cowardliness over the hearts of these Infidels
that an 100000. of them were quickly slain, so that it was rather an execution
then a fight: a while after the Turks assanlted the Christians at Meander,
where the Christians passing the River strangly so affrighted 530000. of them
that they offered their throats to the Christians swords, and were killed in
such number that whole piles of dead bones remained there for monuments many
years after. Nov. 25. 1176. king Baldwin, with some 400 Horse and 1100 Foot
before Ashelon overthrew 26000. of great Saladins forces, as afterward at
Troboll he vanquished 20000. with 700. whom Frederic Borborosu seconded and
overcome Saladine in four great battles, where Richard of Conwall yet outdid
him near Bethem, where were slain more men of Saladines then in any battle for
forty years before: after whose success the Emperor Frederick recovered all
Palestine without any expense of blood or time. These things have been, and no
less may be done still, for afterward Philes with 5000. overthrew 52020.
Turks, An. 1422. Amarath makes an inrode into Hungary, besieges Belyrude in
vain, leaving 80000. men before it, and repenting heartily that ever he came
there went next year into Transylvania, where in a pitched battle with Hunniades,
he left behind him 20000. men, there being no more dead of Hunniades fide then
3000. as a while after he did 510000. In the next great battle of Castow,
fought between Amarath and Hunniades three days together, there were 40000.
Turk, slain for 17000. Christians; not to speak of Scanderbeg's miracles, and
Tamerlains wonders, Hunniades himself overthrew by Sea and Land 600000 Turks.
The Venetians won of the Turk 36. battles at sea, Solomon the great 1530. came
as far as Vienna, besieged it three quarters of a year, lost 80000. men
before it, and gave it over for impregnable. Charles the Emperor calls a Diet,
resolves upon an array of 84000. men, calls his old Captains out of Italy,
sends to his Admiral Deaurea to rig his ships, and invade Greece, meets Solomon
at Gunza, and there put 26000. of his soldiers to the sword, after Solomon had
thirteen times assaulted Gunza, but in vain; discomfiteth 15000. Turks that
were sent to spoil Austria, ransacks the Turkish fleet, takes his Port towns,
and returns with glory into Italy: and thence a while after invades Africa
with success, makes a league with the Bishop of Rome and the Venetians, to
send forth 200. Galleys against the common enemy, to whom the French added 26.
to scour the Mediterranean seas, who forced great Solomon to peace: which when
he afterward broke by a war upon Hungary, he was then met with by the united
forces of the Emperor and the Princes, and beaten home to Constantinople. The
Turk makes war upon the Venetians, they agree with Spain, the Pope and the
Princes of Italy to join against this common enemy, and that Spain should be
at half the charge, the other half being undertaken by the other three
parties, and thus pursue the great adversary to his own Port, and cudgel him to
overtures of peace. Besides that, they engaged the Persian King to attaque him,
and upon his second overthrow him at the famous Lepanto, and buried there
36000. of his Royal Navy, bringing the great Sultan upon his knees for peace.
1593. the Turk reinforceth his former attempts, the Emperor advertised the
Christian Princes of it, they appear in the field 163000. strong, and defeat
the invader at Alba regalis, where he buried 36000 men in three weeks time,
pursuing their victory under the conduct of Count Serim to the great Port it
self: 1604 their unwearied enmity recruting its self under Mahomet the third,
again threatened Christendom after various successes in Transylvania, at last
quite suppressed, and notwithstanding its Tartararian assistances awed into a
ten years peace, for the present, and put to an utter incapacity to incommodate
the Christians to this day, buting only some little enterprises at sea, where
the little Commonwealth of Venice outdared them* Thus have we common reason,
and many years experience encouraging the Christian Princes to encounter this
daring Infidel, whom they have hitherto out gone in power and success.

III. But the question is, how, considering the fears and jealousies, the
various interests and designs of Christian Potentates, they may if resolve on
an holy war, dispose their forces to each other satisfaction and content; to
which the answer is obvious: 1. It is not above threescore years ago sine an
universal conquest, being designed by the Infidel upon all believers, the
Christian Princes awaked and resolved upon a Catholic confederacy without any
scruples, agreeing that Saxony should send 2600, Francovia and Swovia 5000,
Tyroll 5000, Bavaria 3000, Bohemia 12000, Moravia 3000, Austria 8000, Hungary
6000, Spain 14000, Rome 10000, Tuscany 4000, Ferara 1500, Montua 1000, France
16000. Venice 5000, England 7000, Poland 12000. to Vienna where the general
rendezvous was appointed, the General pitched upon is Archduke Sigismund, the
Lieut. General Count Mansfield.

2. But if you will say that the state of Christendom must needs be altered
much under threescore years revolution, it will be naturally replied, that
though there have been some private alterations in some particular interests,
yet the main interest is the same, viz. the balance of France and Spain. And
if you retort, that it was not then, nor may it be now safe to admit any
Auxiliaries, especially those of France into the Empire, the current maxim
being, that a State had better be conquered with its own people, than conquer
with an Army of others, who may first overthrow their foes, and then their
friends. Your satisfaction is at hand, for there is no danger in Auxiliaries,
if 1. they have no Castles or Garrisons in their hands. 2. If they are no more
then the Natives may muster. 3. If they engage a Common enemy. 4. If they are
so mixed as the united forces of Christendom are supported. 5. If they are
commanded by the natives of that Country which they assist: or at least by
persons whose chief dependence is on that power which they have: but more
particularly, are the Protestants in Germany afraid of Papists? they may be
balanced with Protestants. Is the Emperor afraid of the French? they may be
counterpoised by the Spaniards and Italians, or to salve all the Germans, the
Hungarians, the Italians, the Spaniards, the English may meet the terror of
Gorony in Austria, while the French, the Dutch, the Venetians, the Muscovite,
the Polomian, the Dane and Swede, surprise him in his own Country, and make a
diversion that may relieve the Christian, if not utterly overthrow the Infidel.

IV. And by this time I suppose the Princes agreed, the armies raised, and a
resolution taken up by all the States to scour off the rust from their ancient
renown in the Holy war (whither Germany sent three Emperors with 450000. men,
France four Kings with their Armies, England one King and three Kings sons,
with 86000. men, Italy four Generals with four puissant armies, Spain two
Kings, and 52000. Poland one King with 13000. men, Norway a Fleet of 47. brave
ships, and Denmark the like. (Ancestors glory is a great motive to brave
enterprises, for late posterity) and the noble Gentlemen, of all Nations, that
bear their ancestors service in their Arms, thronging to make good their
honor; but which way may the Turk be invaded? We must know our ground before
we bowl right.

I. In general a Christian army must be led against the Turk not through wide
plains, but narrow passages, where the Mahumetan multitudes will be useless
against their enemies, and burdensome to themselves; and some such unusual
stratagem may be practiced as may amuse and disorder the Barbarian, who has
but one way to the wood, and that where his people are most discontent and
ready, as they are indeed every where, to entertain aid, and succor any by
whom they may have certain hope to wind their necks out of the yoke of that
Intolerable servitude which they now suffer:

2. More particularly to pass by the Seaports Leading into Asia out of the
North, we may go by Belgrade into Thrace on the one hand: or to Macedonia on
the other, thence through the Plains of Godomire and the upper River of Moravia
to Nilus and the River adjacent: thence over the vast Mountains Gunoronia to
Sorphea within twenty miles of Rhodop and the plain of Phillipi: this was the
Romans way to Asia, this was Godfrey of Bulloigns, way to the Land of Promise,
then through a plain by the River Hebers banks to Adrianople the Grand
Seignior Seat in Europe, thence to the Hellispont, and thence to
Constantinople, Another way from Belgrade there is through Moravia Alba regalis
Myha and Castovia that fatal velley for the French the Despol and Hunniades
his overthrow thence the way of Cuzan and Clistura between the two Rivers Labus
and Snithniza and the great hills of Pistun, within two days Journey of which
place is Scopia the Chief City of the Dardani, a most convenient place for a
Rendezvous: From this place there is an excellent narrow way through the valley
of Gegligore, and over the hills adjacent to Philipolis aforesaid. There is
another way from Pononia to Myfa by Saston, Vugbe, and Mount Larzus there are
other ways through Hungary, Transylvania, and other places: but there were two
ways, especially that the Roman armies passed through into Thrace, the one
called the Egnution way through the Pharsalian plains, levaing the River Drina
on the left hand, and the Thessalian hills on the right, leading to the plains
of Macedon: the other called the the Candarian way from Apollonia to the lake
of Valonu, and so the river Phidoris by the Sea side from the Conuthian
Isthmus, all along the Aegean sea to Thessalonica, and over Mount Athos to the
shores of Heber, whence they may go either on the right hand toward
Adrianople, or on the left over the bridge of Aegina by Callipolis, to the very
mouth of the Dardanelles: and all these ways, 1. Narrow and commodious,
against the Turks multitudes. 2. Fertile, and affording abundance of provision.
3. Christian, where the people are ready to rise, wanting nothing but the
covert and protection of an European army, toward their rescue from the
Grecian tyranny. In a word, 30000 resolved men, attended with competent
supplies and recruits, entering either Slavonia, Hungaria, Transylvania, or
Epirus, a stout Navy in the Dardanelles, and an inrode into Thrace, Greece, or
some other distant, but considerable Province, setleth Christendom, and it may
be, according to some men's conjectures at this time converteth the world.

Ch 4. Some particular advantages in reference to a Turk, the neglect whereof
has made us hitherto so unsuccesfull.

Christendom may be now presumed advanced to her great enemies terror, only
she watches her special advantages against that potent adversary, the
principal whereof are these:

1. He that would deal with the Musulmans powers sucessefully must protract and
delay the war as long as may be, waving all occasions of Engagement and
strengthening the passages as he goes, whereby. 1. The Turk may be tired as not
able to entertain and pay his gross multitude long. 2. His men may be
debauched with the Customs of other Countries: 3. And all his methods,
designs, and Stratagems by some Considarable times observation Effectually
discovered: the observation of this rule in the Holy war had put a period to
the persons and things we treat of a hundred of years before we were born.

2. A Turkish war is then managed with success when that enemy is attacqued in
several parts of his scattered Dominions, and distracted between the fear of
his open enemies, and the treachery of his private ones; nor he knows not which
province he may keep sure, which he can most securely loose.

3. A Christian army should be as exact, as sober, as temperate, and as just as
the Christian rule is: Intemperance, perjury, and Superstition were the bane of
the holy war:

4. A Good understanding with the Greek Church upon Nilus his moderate terms
would be a great advantage to this design, as the misunderstanding between us
upon civil and religious accounts was the great disadvantage of our former.

CHAP. ^5. An exact Chronology of the Several Successes of the Christians
against the Turks.
DIogenes the Emperor Husband of Eudoria, Discomfiteth the Turks, and takes
from them much booty and prisoners. 1040. 40000 Turks slain by the Christians
under the command of Godfrey of Bulloigne and other Christian Princes. 1097.
The Cities of Antioch and Heracleu wan by the Christians, Idem Jerusalem taken
by the Christians, with a very great slaughter of the Sarazins, and soon after
a hundred thousand Turks slain in one battle. 1099 Ptolomais won from the
Turks, and many thousand Sarazins slain by Prince Tancred. 1101 Dominicus
Michael Duke of Venice obtains a notable victory over the Turks at Joppa.
1124 The Christians take the City of Tire from the Turks. Idem Conrade the
Emperor gives the Turks so great an overthrow that the Valleys where it was
fought ran with blood, and the fields covered with the bodies of the dead. 1146
Noradin the Turk Discomfited with a great slaughter by Gilbert Lary Master of
the Templers. 1166 Saladin Sultan of Egypt having in his Army above 16 thousand
horsemen overthrown by Baldwin King of Je^usalem with four hundred horsemen and
some few footmen. 1177 Frederick the Emperor sets forward toward the holy
Land, overthrows the Turks in Lycaonia, takes the City of Iconium and
gives the spoil thereof to his soldiers. 1190 Frederick his Son
overthrows Saladine, and besieges Ptolomais. Idem Richard the first of
England, and Phillip King of France Set forwards for the holy Land. Idem
Ptolomais won from the Turks chiefly by the valor of King Richard. 1191 A
great victory obtained by King Richard and the Christians, wherein were slain
more Turks and Sarazins then in any one battle within the memory of man
before. Idem Many thousand Turks slain at Joppa by the Christians. 1197
Theod^rus Lasconis the Greek Emperor overthrows the Turks and kills
Jathalines the Sultan in single battle. 1208 Damiata in Egypt taken by the
Christians, whereof Seventy thousand persons in the City, at the Christians
entrance were found but three thousand. 1221 King Lewis of France sets
forward toward the holy Land, gives the Sarazins many overthrows, and again
takes the City of Damiata in Egypt. 1249 Edward the first of England arriveth
at Ptolomais, and performs many notable exploits against the Turks. 1271 The
Knights Hospitallers takes the Island of Rhodes from the Turks. 1308 The City
of Nice with diverse other Castles recovered from the Turks, and many
overthrows, given them by the Christians. 1328 Boga taken by the Christians,
and all the Turks therein put to death. 1365 The Castle of Sarkiue, with the
City joining unto it, taken by the Christians and rased. 1389 A great bloody
battle fought betwixt Tamerlaine the grear and Bajazet Emperor of the Turks,
wherein Bajaz^t was taken, put up like a beast in an iron C^^^^ against whose
Bars he beat out his Brains. 1397 Am^^^^ the Second besieging Belgrade in
Hungaria is rep^ised by the Christians with the loss of Fifteen thousand men.
1438 John Huniades Varnod of Transylvania obtained a notable victory over the
Turks. 1440 The same Huniades again overthrows the Turks, kills Mesites
their General, and 20000 of their Soldiers. 1441 Another great victory
obtained by Huniades in Transy^vania wherein the Turks lost above half their
vast Army, besides above 5000 taken prisoners. 1443 Huniades with 10000 men
assaulteth by night the Camp of the Turks, Slays 30000 of them, and takes
4000 prisoners. Idem Huniades joined battle with the Bassa Corambey,
overthrows his Army, and takes him prisoner. 1444 George Castriot, Nicknamed
Scanderbeg, Prince of Epirus, obtained the City of Croia by Policy, and takes
Petrellay, Petra Alba, and Stellusa by force. Idem Scanderbeg spoyleth
Macedonia, Alis Bassa sent against him, whom he overthrows, slays 22000.
and takes 2000 prisoners. 1445 Ferises sent by Amurath into Epirus against
Scanderbeg is by him overthrown, as also 5000 slain of the Army of Mustapha.
1446 Scanderbeg again overthrows Mustapha, Slays 10000 of his men, and
takes him prisoner. 1448 Makes a notable assault upon the army of Amurath
before, the Seige of Croia. 1450 Four Christian ships fight with the Turks
whose fleet, beat them and kill 1000 of their men. 1453 Huniades causes the
Turks to Fire their fleet, and after makes Mahomet the great to flee from the
siege of Belgrade having lost thereat 40000 Soldiers. 1456 Scanderbeg obtained
a notable victory against the Tuks, kills Debreas their General, and slays
4120 of them. 1455 Afterward overthrows all their force killing 11000 of
them. Idem Scanderbeg again overthrows the Turks, slays 30000 of them and
takes their General Amesa prisoner. 1460 Encountereth with Seremet Bassa near
to the City Ocrida, vanquisheth him, and Slays of the Turks Ten thousand.
1463 Vanquisheth Balbanus the Turks General with great loss in three Several
Battles. 1464 Balbanus and Jacuppe overthrown by Scanderbeg in two several
battles with the loss of 24000 men and 6000 taken prisoners. Idem Mathias King
of Hungaria takes the Kingdom of Bosua from the Turks, and forced Mahomet to
a Dishonorable flight. 1469 Raised the Turks from the Seige of Scodra wherein
they lost 14000 men. 1475 The Turks beaten off from the Seige of Rhodes with
the loss of above 3000 men. 1480 The Rhodes valiantly defended by the
Christians against the Seige of the Turks for six months together, wherein
Solomon lost, besides them that were slain, thirty thousand, that died of the
Flix. 1522 Solomon beseigeth the City of Vienna, is oftentimes repulsed, and at
last forced to forsake it, having lost thereat eighty thousand men. 1529 8000
Turks invading Austria, are slain by the Count Palatine. 1532 Tunis taken by
the Christians by means of 6000 naked prisoners in the Castle. 1535 The Turks
with a great fleet invade the Isle of Malta where after many repulses they were
at last driven out by valor of Valetta the great Master, with the loss of
twenty four thousand Turks. 1565 The Turks diverse times valiantly resisted at
the Isle of Cyprus, and afterward driven out of Creet with the loss of two
thousand men 1570 The Turks great Navy overthrown by the Confederate Christians
at the battle of Lepanto, two and thirty thousand slain and perished in the
waters, 161 Galleys taken, 60 Galliats, and other small vessels, and about 40
Galleys sunk and burnt 1571 Cutaro being besieged by the Turks, is relieved by
Superantius, who takes another great fort from them, putting all the Turks
therein to the sword idem The Turks receive several overthrows by John Vaynod
of Valachia and Moldavia 1574 A great battle betwixt the Turks and the
Christians near Siseg in Croatia, wherein 4000. Christians slew 18000 Turks
1593 Several Castles and strong holds taken from the Turks by Count Serini idem
The Christians obtain a memorable victory over the Turks before Strigonium.
1595 Strigonium and Vicegrad taken by the Christians with Several other
victories obtained by them against the Turks. Idem Vacia and Hatwan two Cities
in Hungaria besieged and taken by the Christians. 1596 The battle of Karesta
betwixt the Christians and Turks wherein were slain of the Turks 60000 1597 The
strong place of Kab Surprised by the Christans with a few men and about Six
thousand Turks slain. 1598 The Turks receive a notable overthrow upon the
River of Danubius, which made them for fear to forsake the City at Buda and
fly into the Castle. 1599 Alba Regalis taken by the Christians and the Bassa
of Buda slain, with Six thousand men 1601 2000 Turks defeated and slain by
Collonitz. 1602 A great victory obtained by the Christians thorough the
information of a Turkish Captain, and the Suburbs of Alba Regalis sacked and
burnt. 1603 2000 Turks slain in an ambush by Colinitz. Idem Hatwan a very
considerable place taken twice in short time by the Christians with very
considerable loss to the Turks. Idem The Vaynod of Valachia gives the Turks a
great overthrow overthrow and takes many prisoners. 1604 The Christians of
Posth give the Turks of Buda a great overthrow. Idem The Christians obtain a
great victory over the Turks at Presburgh. 1605 A great victory obtained by the
Imperials over the Turks, wherein was slain above a thousand of them. Idem The
Turks Surprised at Carmera, and a great many of them there slain. 1606 A great
victory obtained by the Florentines over the Turkish Galleys. 1610 The Knights
of Malta obtain a great victory over the Turks at Corinth. 1611 The Duke of
Transylvania obtains a great victory over the Turks at Agliman and ruinated
he City. 1613 Prince Coreski defeats the Turks in Vasseloy. 1615 The Christians
under the two Princes Tischeuich and Coreski overthrew the Turks at Cochine,
with the slaughter of above twelve thousand of them, besides the wounded and
prisoners. 1616 The Florentines under the conduct of the great Duke of Tuscany
named Cosmo, obtain a notable victory over the Turkish Galleys, where besides
the slain they took 240 Turks, and freed 430 Christians, gained prizes worth
200000 Crowns. Idem The Turks make a great Irruption into Poland, where by the
Sword, Famine, sickness and cold, they lost above eighty thousand men, and
above an hundred thousand horses. 1621 Captain Bundock Captain of an English
ship called the Safe Bonaventure, takes a rich prize from the Turks at Sea.
1618 Two Merchants ships of England maintained a fight with thirty sail of
Turkish Galleys, wherein was slain a thousand seven hundred Turks, and their
Admiral Galley with many others made unserviceable. 1633 Ragotzi Prince of
Transylvania challenges the Bassa of Buda, gives him a great overthrow, having
the pursuit of him thirty miles, an innumerable company of Turks slain. 1658
Being assisted by the Walachians and Moldavians he gives the Turks another
great overthrow. Idem Obtains another great victory over the Turks, wherein
he slew 6000 of them, but received a wound whereof he died. 1660 The Vaynod of
Walachia gives the Turks a great overthrow. Idem De Souches General of the
German artillery, enters the Turkish territories in Hungary, takes diverse
strong places, and obtains a great victory over the Turks. 1661 The two
Serini's make an inroad into Turks sack and burn many tents, and take a great
booty. Idem Count Serini gives the Turks an overthrow betwixt Cuniga and
Sigeth, wherein besides the slain were diverse persons of quality taken. 1662
Count Serini recovers the Castle Zephan, put 200 Turks to the Sword, and takes
300 prisoners afterward with 4000 men fell on 12000 Turks of whom he Slew
3000. 1663 Serini give the Turks a great defeat by Ambuscado wherein many
thousands of them are slain. Idem The Count Serini and Budiani make incursions
into he Turks Dominions wherein they do them great Damage. Idem Peter Serini
with 4000 men falls upon the Turks kills above 1000 of them, and takes 150
prisoners. Idem Peter Serini gives the Turks a great overthrow, takes 35
Ensigns the same of a Bassa, and several other prisoners. Idem Count Serini
gives the Turks and Tartars a great overthrow near Scotorito, about 2000 killed
and 1000 horse taken. Idem The Christians at Comorra defeat the Turks and take
a booty valued at 20000 Rix dollers. Idem Count Serini obtaines many notable
victories over the Turks, amongst others takes Five-kirk, a very considerable
place by storm, and puts all therein to Death. Idem
This Illustrious person Count Serini has already attained to so high a pitch
of fame, that his Name is renowned thoroughout all Christendom, and his hopes
will prove as great a maul and terror to the Turks ^s either Tamerlane the
Great, or that valiant Prince the renowned Scanderbeg.

FINIS.

