ANSWERS upon several heads in Philosophy, FIRST Drawn up for the private
satisfaction of some Friends; now exposed to public view and examination.

By William Marshall, Dr. of Physic of the College of Physicians, in London.

Dij been fecerunt in opis me, quodque pusilli.
Finxerunt animi, raro and per pauca loquentis:.
Hor. LONDON, Printed by T. L. for Nathaniel Brook, at the Angel in Cornh^^
near the Royal Exchange and at Gresham College. 1670.

To the right Honorable William, Lord Viscount Bronker President, and the rest
of the learned members, of the Royal Society.
To the Incomparably learned Dr. Francis Glisson President, and the rest of the
learned fellows of the, College of Physicians in London.
To the worthily famous Professors of Gresham College in London.
The Author wishes all happiness, submitting these his Philosophical answers to
their grave censure.
THe things here presented, and which shall be hereafter presented of the like
nature, will vindicate me from both suspicion in you, and expectation in the
Reader, of a dedicatory piece of flattery: I every where manifestly using a
Philosophical freedom. (...) so ill a servant either to (...) Honors, or to
noble truths, which are the choice food of refined minds, to make this address
unto you for the protection of any thing which may deserve a black censure. Let
every line bear its own fate in its own bosom. Only being well assured, that
these things in difference, and thus discussed between me and some friends; as
they have been contrarily taught by persons worthily had in singular
veneration, both in the present and former ages; so they concern some heads of
Philosophy, which are of no small consequence unto true learning; and besides,
lying deeper in the pit of obscurity then the first fadom, they ought to
receive the ablest decision; I knew not therefore how more heartily to strip my
self of any concern pervicatiously to defend any thing in these papers, then by
laying them and their fate at the feet of so noble and able Judges. Possibly
the thanks of private friends may have begot in me a (...) opinion of some of
these things the^ they may deserve: your judgment may correct the error of
their indulgence. As all that desire to learn, ought to wait upon you and your
honorable societies, as being together with the famous Universities and our
Law Colleges, I mean our Innes of Court, as the soul and spirits of the
Nation; so these Papers wait upon you, not presuming in the least to inform,
but submissely craving rather to learn of you what they ought to think of
themselves: according to the noble method of Philosophy in some of your
societies lately instituted and pursued, not seeking for a precarious
allowance, as a Rogue and Felone may find refuge and safety at an holy
sanctuary; but (however without the overweening dotage of self opinion) either
by their own fair truth and clearness to be justified, or else willingly to
embrace the flames, which their errors have deserved. I know you will pardon
the hasty rude dress, or rather nakedness, (best suiting the pursuances of
truth) in which these Answers to the questioning letters of some private
friends, were first of all conceived: which without falsiifyng could not
afterward be altered: and their highest ambition then was only private
satisfaction, though now, except I will leave those, for whose satisfaction
they were first written, unsatisfied, they must proceed to put themselves upon
the test for public, either justification, or disallowance. The which I am the
more easily persuaded to, observing it a method allowed and practiced both by
ancients and moderns to preserve and deliver scattered points of Philosophy by
way of Dialogues and Epistles. And indeed this method has this special
advantage in it; we may in a word present what we have to say that is new,
without loading the Reader with an unsavory crambe, which has been a thousand
times before in the press. As if these paters be able, which I leave to your
serious censure, to justify themselves: it is scarce possible for them to fall
into the hands of any Reader, who shall not herein, if he read them diligently
and with understanding, find, not only somewhat which is new, but as well that
is memorable, and beyond all doubting, certain, and perhaps neither by himself
formerly thought of, nor possibly every where in that vast Ocean of Books,
which are in the world, to be met with. In these philosophical oppositions,
till I be called to account, I have for the honor I bear them, spared those
great and venerable names both moderns and ancients, which I have herein
opposed: it being my method in private, to pursue what is publicly in you
exemplary Viz. to weigh controversies and questions in philosophy, not by
parties and factions, time and continuance, or number and opinion, but as near
as possibly I can, by observing how the scales bear between the opposite
reasons: and I wish the method might be so happy, as to become more common. For
the same reasons I have suppressed the names of my ingenious friends, in
opposition to some of whose thoughts these things were first of all written.
Every day make your names more illustrious for clearness of judgment in the
mysteries of nature. Being the desire of all, and doubtless expectation of most
and particularly of your Orator and servant

William Marshal.

To his worthy and learned friends with whom these things were first debated;
the Authors apology for the publication of these his papers.
TO some of you the name of an Apology might seem almost unintelligible, or
little less then mockery: your interest being no less in the birth, then in the
first conception of these philosophical discourses. Your quaerying curiosity at
first impraegnated the mind, with what your present importunity will not rest
without committing to the Press. To the rest of you, my wish is, that with the
favor of others, I might not have stood in need of this Apology. However let
not the publication be mis-construed, as if I accounted all here debated to be
peremptorily concluded, or all that I have opposed, conquered. The yet
dissenting of several of you from several of the things here by me owned, might
make a more hardy confidence then, I hope, I shall ever be guilty of, ^o become
modestly jealous of its own judgment. If the things here made public should
not be able to endure the piercing air of this knowing age, however our free
and mutual intercourse upon such and the like philosophical doubts cannot want
its justification. The publishing sometimes of a mistake is an occasion of
leading others into the right way. And because every one cannot see cross the
Mediterranean, we are not therefore to walk either with hooded eyes, or to
dis-own the seeing of any thing at all, or what appearances things make unto
us. Though the mind, which is the souls bed, be neither in all of the samesize,
nor in all equally luminous, or conceptive, yet each is equally concerned
diligently according, to the proportion of his window, to take a view of the
goodly scenes of nature. In these things't is better to err then to be idle:
as I am sure you are equally persuaded with

Your faithful friend and servant WILLIAM MARSHAL.

TO THE READER.
THe publishing these papers has now made thee my judge and censor: and they
were no otherwise designed, but for every one freely to exercise his judgment
about them. Most of these Problemes are more frequently upon the Anvile then
they are found easily malleable into fair, clear, doubtless conclusions.
Therefore if we miss the goal, it is but allowing one more in these sublime
things to run a planetary course. I shall in a word tell the worst, which can
justly be laid to their charge; some of the few things here discoursed, have
left the commonly trodden path; not as affecting novelty, against which upon
other oc^asions I appear for the ancients, but as choosing to follow reason
rather then the name of any Author. First therefore examine their reasons, and
then give unbiassed judgment for the truth; which for the truths sake I shall
be ready to accept, though against me. For if those to whom and against whom,
though in a vayled way, these papers were first written, are supposed not to be
exempted from error, there is no room left but only for weak minds in these
secrets of nature to arrogate unto themselves an infallibility. If any complain
of obscurity, as both have, and brevity, and the subject matter, and the manner
of writing, and the quality of the persons for whom these things were first of
all penned, may make them thereunto liable enough, however I shall be ready to
give both my account, and if valuable, my assistance to any who shall des^re it
relating either to the obscurity, or intricacy of any passage; and to accept
from them any reasons they shall be pleased to produce to the contrary,

Thine W. M.
From my Study in Nags head Court in Gray's Church Street.
A SYLLABE of the CONTENTS of these two SECTIONS.
In the first Section.
In the first Answer; is treated
Concerning the several Originals of Springs. Concerning the irregular Ebbings
and Flowings of diverse particular Springs. Of Chemical multiplication, or the
increasing of the quantity of liquours by destillation. Of the possibility of a
persons learning, in an hour or two, to write his mind in a language he is
ignorant of: so as, what he writes in the unknown language, shall be
constantly without error in the Grammatical concerns of it, and the sense good
and continued.
In the second Answer; is treated
Concerning sympathyes between several parts of Animal bo^yes. Particularly, of
the sympathy which is between the breasts and womb: and whether it be founded
upon inosculations of the Epigastrick and Mammary veins and arteryes. Whether
from view of the Breasts, judgment may be made concerning the sex of an unborn
conception? Of the Sympathetick relation of parts of the same side. Of the
forming of the Phases and Shapes of the Moon from its mutuatitious light, and
the proportion in which it has its situation to the eye: and why the Moon
appears to the eye rather plane then Sphaeral.
In the Third Answer.
Fresh Water Springs are asserted at the bottom of the Sea. Whether by frequent
transhaping, and working upon Mercury, somewhat be not lost irrecoverably,
beyond all possibility and hope of reduction? That the doctrine of the four
Elements as uncompounded bodies, cannot acquit it self, against many rational
doubtings and material controversyes, to be a Doctrine unquestionable. That the
four Elements cannot be the first Elements. Of the difficulty of bringing the
first Elements to view. That, in the Doctrine of the Ancients, seems a
greater number of first Elements asserted, then four. What may have been the
true rational intendment of the Ancients, in their introducing the Doctrine of
the four Elements.
In the Fourth Answer; is treated
Of the Sutures in the skull: and their distinctness according to their several
kinds, number, and order. How in the distinction of the futures, both as to
their number and order, is a certain latitude, admitting variety in the method
of their account, and the Anatomical Doctrine of them. The like latitude is
observable in several parts both of Concrete, and Abstract Mathematics.
Whether the praeeminence of right-side parts above the left, be natural or
arbitrary.
In the Fifth answer; is treated
Of the consistency of immense volatility with immense ponderousnes. Of making
tinctures by materation without addition. Whether predictions may be concerning
Comets before their appearance? What is her^in to be judged, of Comets which
are by new amassement? What is her^in to be judged, of Comets which are
supposed to be permanent Bodies, and not to be new amassements.
In the Sixth Answer; is treated
Of the motion of the Celestial Bodies about their particular Axes. Whether
such their Circumaxall motion afford a convictive demonstration and proof of
the Copernican Systeme? That the Earths motion is not sufficiently proved, upon
the Hypothesis granted, That Comets are nearest the Earth, when they are in
opposition unto the Sun.
In the Second SECTION.
In the Seventh Answer, is treated
COncerning Angles of Contact. In order thereunto, are given several
definitions of Plane Angles, and distinct names to them, according to those
diversityes of their kinds and constitutions, which, in this Question, are more
especially material and necessary to be distinguished. The state of the
Question is set forth. It is shown, that Recto-convexe Angles of Contact are
truly Angles according to the definition of Plane Angles. That Recto-Convexe
Angles of Contact are neither destitute of Quantity, nor their sides
coincident. In what several ways, one Quantity may be greater then another. Of
Homogeneity. What kind of Homogeneity it is, that is requisite for
proportionals? That Angles have Figuration, as well as Quantity. That in Angles
is observable an Homogeneity or Heterogeneity which is Mathematical, and also
an Homogeneity or Heterogeneity which is not Mathematical, nor any way
concerning their Quantity, but only their figuration, etc. How three Angles
being all Equal; the Equality between the first and second, may be more
absolute then the Equality between the first and third being only respective.
How some Angles are constituted by the Concrescency, Composition, and Annexion
of several parts and Angles, which are Heterogeneal each to other. Whether
like Angles, in unequal Circles and in like segments of Circles be always
equal; That all Equal Angles are not like. That all like Angles are not equal.
Whether this Controversy about the Recto-Convexe Angle of Contact, belong to
Concrete or Abstract Mathematics? What was the first mistake, that first
ministered occasion for the starting of this controversy, which has been so
long retained, in these Learnings, in which nothing is more monstrous and
unusual then pertinacious controversy;
These Escapes of the Press crave the help of the Readers Pen. viz,
Page 10. line. 11. read. aerial. p. 17. l. 2. r. heat. l. 16.17. r. reason. p.
18. l. 10. r. easily. p. 14. l. 19. expunge the semicolon. p. 21. l. 28. r.
Sympathy. p. 22. l. 15.16. r. tumultuous. l. 24. r. those. p. 23. l. 29. r.
concerning. p. 24. l. 18. r. falls. p. 29. l. 7. r. confessedly. p. 33. l.
penult. r. flushing. p. 35. l. 13. r. that that. l. 28. r. fire. p. 36. l. 13.
r. us. p. 39. l. 1. expunge the colon: l. 16. r. foetid. l. 26. r. their. l. 27
r. the. p. 41. l. 7. r. with the string. p. 43. l. 12. r. to the violating. p.
44. l. 2. and 7. r. inanimates. p. 49. l. 3. r. seame p. 56. l. 9. r.
certainly. p. 57. l. 15. for is regularly. r. irregugularly. p. 61. l. 7. for
if seeming. r. it seeming. l. 19. r. exact. p. 69. l. 5. r. limited. p. 71. l.
3. r. the Copernican. p. 75. l. 13. r. Jago. p. 80. l. 19. r. Lordships. p. 82.
l. 17. r. like. p. 86. l. 5. r. BA. p. 89. l. 16. for mooving by. r. by
mooving. p. 90. l. 2. r. an isoclitical. l. 28. r. Be again. p. 92. l. 30. for
AHH. r. AHF. p. 100. l. 6. r. even. l. 19. r. say. p. 101. l. 1. r. one or
each. p. 124. l. 29. r. recto-concave. p. 155. l. 26. and 28. r. crooked-lined.
p. 160. l. 18. r. not other. p. 187. l. 26. r. a mixt-lined secant angle or of
p. 200. l. 26. r. crooked-lined. p. 232. l. 1. r. constant.

The faults of the Orthography are referred to the Readers ingenuity.





The First SECTION of PHILOSOPHICAL ANSWERS CONTEINIHG The first Six Answers
upon several heads in Philosophy.

By WILLIAM MARSHAL

LONDON, Printed by T. L. for Nathaniel Brooks, at the Angel in Cornhil near
the Royal Exchange. 1670.

ANSWERS Upon several heads in PHILOSOPHY
The first Answer.
Concerning the original of Springs: that all Springs have not the same nor the
like original: that all Springs are not from the Sea: that several things may
by the way contribute as originals to the same Spring, whether by way of
dissolution, or condensation. Also of the ebbings and flowings of particular
Springs: in some more especially observed to be in an unaccountable
irregularity. Also of Chemical multiplication, or the distilling of liquors, so
as by distillation to increase their quantity to any given proportion. That
Mercury is not explicable by the Doctrine of the four Elements. That in an hour
or two's time a person of indifferent parts, able to read and write his native
language only, may be taught to write his mind in a foreign language, so as what
he writes shall be true in the foreign language, and the sense good and
continued.

AS Nature in generation works the first beginnings of things usually in a
very dark loom, not permitting common eyes to have a view of its un^aught art
in ordering and warping its first filaments, covering with shells and membranes
and diverse veils the mysterious nature of first productions: The same judgment
may be of Springs, which though every where obvious to the eye, by their
pleasant murmurings, crystalline pureness, and perpetual flux, delighting the
mind, as well as the sense; yet whence these Rise, and how they are fed, and
wherewith furnished, is more obscure and aenigmatical than to be resolved, as
many easily imagine, in a word. And yet I suppose, an erroneous Hypothesis may
be the chief ground of difficulty in this Question, while many generally expect
that all Springs should be of the same or like original. But why is that more
reasonable than to expect that all Springs should send forth waters of the same
taste, color, or virtue? Too many Instances, Examples and Experiments may be
produced of Springs owing their original to the Sea, percolated through the
Earth, to deny, or call in question so evident a Truth, without a manifest
crazing of our own judgment: yet that the Sea by such percolations is not the
original of all Springs, is as manifest, as true, and confirmed by as many and
weighty Experiences; not only of fresh Springs near the Sea, and inland
salt-springs; but especially if we consider the numerous Springs, which are in
the tops, or sides of several Mountains, vastly above the Seas level; and
therefore not possible in any Channel to be naturally raised so high, without
all stay, or impediment of percolation. Of which I have observed a special
instance in a low, somewhat rocky, wedge-like Mountain, situate along the brim
of the full Sea; but on the Land-side, at a little distance, set about with
numerous and vast Mountains: in which little wedge-like Mountain, though most
part immediately encompassed with a Plain, very considerably above the level of
the highest, aequinoctial, or other Tides; was a perpetual Spring of most
lympid, clear water, not unfamed for its singular medical virtues. It is scarce
consentaneous to sense, reason and experience, to derive such Fountains out of
the Sea only by way of percolation; which though it be allowed to contribute,
in some places, to the sweetning of the fountainous flux, cannot be conceived
apt to raise the water to an higher level than it had before. Not disallowing
the former therefore in its place; there is yet besides it some other Original
of Springs to be inquired after. And how perpetual Springs should come to be in
the tops of the highest Mountains of all, as the case of most difficult
explication, cannot with greater reason and clearness be explained, than by
bringing the waters thither, not in a watery form, but as vapors and
exhalations, at leastwise the most constantly, and in the greatest proportion;
after the manner of a Distillation, ordered and managed by the institutes of
Nature; and this without Espousing the Tenets of our new Platonists, that will
have several perpetuous continued Orbs of Fires, diversely graduated, for
special Theological ends, contained still between two and two perpetuous and
continued Crusts, or sphaeral shells of Earth, the one above the fire, the other
beneath it, in respect of the Earths Center. And those that know how under the
surface of the Earth, whether plain, or mountainous, are frequent stores, both
of Materials, and naturally formed Cavities, and other Instruments, easily
accommodable to such a work, will not conclude that to be a conjecture of
fancy, which not only for its possibility, but the high degree of its
probability, may justly claim to be entertained as a most real and undoubted
physical Truth. For what doubt can be made of subterraneous heats and fires?
and hot Baths and Springs, attest the, not only warmth, which is sufficient for
our purpose, but even the actual, and frequently intense, heat, and ebullition
of liquors within the Caverns of the Earth, and the perpetuity, or constant
continuance of such ebullitions: and as the Earth is well known to be furnished
with many natural Caverns, so in those Caverns, for shape, proportion,
situation, and other the like circumstances, we cannot but imagine there is
great diversity. So how variously and plenteously the Earth is watered with
subterraneous juyces, and moistures, cannot be denied by the observant, who
almost every where under ground find lesser veins of water dispersed up and
down the Body of the Earth, and in many places large concealed Rivers,
elsewhere unfathomable Vaults, and Abysses: Sometime seen Rivers in their
proper and perpetual Channels, make a dark course and discharge of their waters
into the unseen Bowels of the Earth. Upon the whole, in the method of this
explication, waters are, in the same manner secretly within the Earth, raised
to the top of the Mountains, in which, to our view, they are raised in the open
Air to those regions, from whence they fall back again upon us in the form of
rain. And in such vapid exhalations, it cannot be denied but in some places,
and at some times, the Mountain springs ranging in a much higher level, may by
possibility be furnished from the percolated seawater: but as the possibility
of this is admitted, so the universal and absolute necessity of it, may not be
averred: it seeming hard to say, that the Mountain-springs what distance soever
from the Sea, have no other way of being furnished, but only from thence. And,
I suppose, it will as uneasily obtain credit, that the Sea should run as fast
every way, under the Earth, to the Originals of Springs, as the Springs
generally do in seeking out their way unto the Sea. I doubt not, but besides
the Seas, there are under the earth many other liquors, contributing to the
origination of Springs, some having their first rise from dissolution, others
from condensation, whence, and from the passages thorough which they run, and
are percolated, rise very often those special virtues and dangers of some
peculiar Springs: and sometimes in a seeming praeposterous way, though very
consentaneous to the true nature of things, Springs adjoining to the Sea are
fresh, and at a vast distance from the Sea, in inland Countries sometimes
salt. But besides both the Seas, and those other waters bred under the earth;
its more than probable* the rains falling down in showers from Heaven, add not
a little to the flushing and continuance of the Springs. So medical Springs
after rains are noted for a while to be of less virtue; and in long droughts,
it is usual for very many Springs to be quite dried up, till rains fall again:
and where, by long obscure dens, caverns and passages under ground, access may
be had to subterraneous Rivers; such Rivers, though lying vastly deep under the
Earths surface, they are sound to swell at after rains, and by their accession
unto the wonted stream, frequently do make a most hideous and horrid noise,
full of terror to those in the Cave^ mouth, and at other times unusual. From
all which, seriously and impartially weighed, is made undeniably apparent, that
rains, in no contemptible proportion furnish forth matter to be ordinarily by
channelly veins conveyed, or else extraordinarily by a natural distillation
wrought up into the Springs. And as this much discussed Question is resolved in
these easy things, every where offering themselves to view in Nature; so I
doubt not, upon the same principles might also many other things, seeming at
first sight to be very mysterious, in the concern of Springs, as that which
with so much admiration is by the rude ignorant people cried up and observed in
some, having, as they term it, their Ebbings and Flowings in such irregular
frequency as by no art can possibly be reduced to any certainty of account, or
order: for the more special and clear observing of which they are wont to
receive the water from the Spring into some stone, or such like vessel
proportionately bored in, or near the bottom: all which in truth is without any
retrogradation and reciprocation of motion in its channelly veins; being
nothing else but an inaequality of the waters issuing from the Spring in equal
times, either by reason of its more plenteous filling at some times the
channelly veins of the Spring as it passes, or else by reason it passes with
a greater or lesser impetus; or possibly in some cases and places upon both
grounds: which what it has in it that is more admirable than the running of
any ordinary Brook, sometimes with a fuller channel, sometimes with a stronger
stream, I do not yet understand: and how easily, upon the former principles,
this is explicable any one may readily perceive: that we may more justly wonder
how some grave Authors came to be so transported with the sight or fame of some
such springs, occurring up and down in the World, as in their reports to offer
them to the thoughts of distant Students, and succeeding times, as containing
in them little less than miracle. And if the studious would observe diligently
what is in nature, possibly many other things, seemingly as intricate, might be
capable of as easy explications; especially considering the vast way a Spring
may run under the Earth before it break forth; fairly insinuated to us by the
pure fresh water Springs, bursting up a great way within the flood marks of the
Sea; clearly intimating to us, how two Hills at a considerable distance may
both be concerned in the same Spring and its Course. And whereas we number and
place Springs acaccording as we observe them to break forth and show themselves
unto the day; in the true aestimate, and upon laborious search, it has many
times appeared quite otherwise; that the original of the Spring, has been at a
great distance from the eruption, and the eruption has not been till after the
confluction and meeting of, it may be three or four several Springs, every one
carrying in it sometimes the dissolution, sometimes the spirit, or somewhat of
the first rudiments of some special Mineral; and altogether make up, not
seldom, an almost inimitable composition. Your other Quaery concerning
Chemical Multiplication, or the distilling of Water from a Pint to a Quart, if
my Genius fail me not, when rightly proposed and understood, cannot want some
affinity with the matters we have already been treating of. For if any would
impose that the same Water as by way of expansion, without other additional
water or matter, might by distillation be brought to a double, treble, and so a
thousand times as large dimensions as before, as Wines, Vinegars, and other
Liquors, have in them, without any further addition, so much Phlegm, and so
much Spirit of such a strength, whether fixed, or volatile; it would require a
very credulous judgment to allow the veracity, or possibility of such a
Problem: and I am clearly free, to disown the skill or power of any such
Chemistry; which once admitted, were it not for the shortness of humane life,
and the hopelesness of obtaining Vessels, and Instruments large enough for the
work, and convenience to place them, the world might be in danger of Drowning
from the lofty Artist; as once it was hypothetically threatened, with shaking by
the noble and ingenious Mechanist. But I had rather understand a Problem
favorably, so as it may carry truth, possibility, and reason along with it:
and so methinks may this be interpretable, to wit, subtly to contrive, find
out, and order expedients, ingenious helps, and advantages, to condense free,
and open exhalations into a watery form with dispatch and expeditely,
especially at any season, or time of the year: so as by this Art out of the
arrial vapors within a limited time to give any limited measure of water,
which reason can expect from Art, or without abjuring and putting off its own
nature, handsomely make demand of. And that this is the Philosophy of Nature
appears in every days dewes, the trickling moisture hanging on the chamber-side
of the Glass, when the Air is very sharp, and full of a nitrous coldness
without: and we cannot rightly conceive the Idea of that famously known and
frequently mentioned and in hot Countries, though rare, yet sometimes by sad
experience attested disease, the Diabetes, without admitting both the
possibility of such a Chemistry, and of Expedients for the more ready dispatch
of it: for without an aptness to imbibe, attract and condense the vapid
exhalations, which successively come to be near and about the Patient, and that
with very singular advantages for expedition, how possibly should the Patients
Urine come in a few weeks to weigh more than all, both the drinks and meats
taken by the Patient all along that time, and all the weight of the Body,
whenever it was heaviest during that time besides? To contract all into few,
the possibility of the Problem, according to this explication, needs not be
doubted, being an every where obvious work of Nature; as in the other sense it
seems vain and frivolous. And in researches about expedients for dispatch; it
is possible, here, as in other pieces of that ingenious Art, several Artists
may have several methods and contrivances, to suck in still more vapors in a
continued succession, and proportionably to condense them when sucked in; also
to dispose the vapors, before they are sucked in, for more expedite and easy
condensation at after: as every one has his peculiar Still, his peculiar
Solvent, Bath, Ferment and Furnace. And that this point of Philosophy were a
little more cultivated were to be wished, for the advantage of natural
Philosophy, and the concerns of it in some practical Arts: for so hereby the
difference of the Airs at several seasons, or at the same season in several
places, might come in some measure to be known, by the Taste and Eye, as well
as by the Nostril: and the concerns of Rokes, Fogs, Mists, and Airs any ways
altered, or infected, may be hereby more happily discovered in relation to the
health and sickliness of Man, and so of other Animals: so what difference there
is between the Breathings of several Animals of the same, or several Sexes and
Kinds, or of the same Animal at several times of its age, rest, motion, fear,
joy, hope, love, anger, health, sickness, peculiar conditions, or evacuations:
and the discriminations between simple Airs, and the Airs altered by
sprinklings, strewings, fumigations, from Minerals, Vegetables, Animals, may be
made more evident. Your tying up Mercury to the old Elemental Laws, is a true
semblance of the old Mezentian cruelty; and I should pity the poor Fugitive,
were I not ascertained from his constant course, that as a slippery Hocas, he
will never leave transhaping himself till, to your own confession, he has slipped
the Collar. Four qualities will as soon solve all questions, as four Elements;
which some of the learned Ancients, vainly hoped, not to say, foolishly
boasted, to do. As Philosophers distinguish between the sights of Age and Time;
Age first sees without, and after not without Spectacles: Time first sees with
them, and after better without them: the Elements were as Spectacles in the
Beginnings of those times, when men first set themselves about the studies of
Arts, that helped them in a sort to conceive somewhat of Bodies; but now the
Eye of time grown clearer, sees much more happily, as is by many supposed,
without them. More crass and thin, solid and fluid parts are not denied, but
apparently to be seen, offering themselves to view in several plain and easy
methods of analyzing Bodies; but the simplicity of those parts, obtained in
such Analysmes, is not yet demonstrated. The strange Monster reported with so
much averment to you, which seems so much to have startled your patience, to
wit, that a person of parts, educated only to read and write the Language of
the Nation wherein he was born, may in an hours time be taught to set down any
matter, secret, or other, in another language, as Latin, Greek, French, etc.
and the Latin, or other Language to be true, and the sense good and continued;
believe me, though it be true, as it is, yet it is not to be esteemed worthy
your least discomposure: it may be done many several ways, and yet when all is
done, it is but a slight of the Brain; like many of the mimical Miracles,
performed by nimble handed Egyptians. That there may be no room for distrust of
the truth of it, if affiance in me may so far prevail* you may be assured, I
have seen the whole Model and Systeme of it, in several Languages, besides our
own: and but that it would make my Letter of too great a Bulk, should herewith
have sent you a Transcript of one of them. In this, as in the foregoing
Problem of multiplying Chemistry; in words speaking and containing truth,
something seems to be offered to the understanding of the hearer, which is an
Herculian shot beyond it. Pardon the length in which I have labored
discursively to send back all the Quaeries and Objections of your last fully
answered.

The Second Answer.
Wherein of Sympathies between several parts of the same Animal Body in general
and particularly of the Sympathy which is between the Breasts and the Womb: and
that the ground of that Sympathy is not founded upon the inosculations of the
Epigastrick and Mammary Veins and Arteries. That that Sympathy instructs not
from the sight of the Breast concerning the Sex of the unborn Conception. Yet
parts of the same side more especially Sympathize one with another, than those
that are on contrary sides. That to found the Sympathy between the Breasts and
Womb; is no necessity of vessels passing directly between the one part and the
other: but the grounds of their Sympathy may be several other ways clearly
explicable, by manifest Arteries, Sinews, and other Vessels. That the several
shapes of the Moon have their original, forming, and alteration, from the parts
of its mutuatitious light, and their situation in respect of our Eye. That
there is not one general original of all light. And why the enlightened part of
the Moon is still toward the Sun. And why the Moon appears plane and not
sphaeral.

I should wrong the truth, if I should not acknowledge, all your Arguments and
Instances prove fairly the Sympathies, which nature has lodged in us, between
some special parts above others; to which may be added by way of Declaration;
that though no part in the whole animal Body, but is of affinity and concern
unto all the rest, yet some, besides their general relation as of the same
animal Body, have sometimes not only one, but several other more special
grounds of Sympathy, to tie and link them one to another; whether from
homogeneity of substance, or commonness of original, or unity and concurrence
in the same work, or concern in the same branchings of vessels, whether
Arteries, Sinews, or Veins, of what kind soever; each of which heightens the
general relation which is between the parts: and the more of these are found
inter-curring between any two parts, their relation is so much the more
fortifyed. But of all other, the Sympathy which you urge, between the Breasts
and Womb, in animals is too universally known, and variously evident to be
denied, or doubted. How often, among prying and suspicious Women, has the state
of the Womb been discovered from the color of the Nipples, and condition of
the Breasts? And the judgments of Physicians justified and admired, when upon
the manifest intercourse between these two parts, easily transferring humors,
whether natural, or praeter-natural, from the one to the other, they have
sometimes predicted long before the diseases of the Breasts, or Womb? So upon
expectation of the ones evacuation, the cure of the other has been ordered, and
the event and time of recovery foreseen? and observing how they grow and lessen
together, heal and fade together, become firm and flaccid together, replenish
and empty together, except when the one drains the other, the intercourse
between them, and their common concern is manifest; however the grounds and
passages wherein this intercourse is founded and carried on, possibly may not
be so very clear, as by many is presumed. And though I honor you for honoring
the Ancients; it is now especially less clear then ever; that the undeniable
consent and sympathy, which is between these two parts, has its foundation in
the inosculations of the epigastrick veins and arteries with the mammeryes:
Except we will so far degrade the examinations of reasons, and trials of
experience, as to make what is ancient, to be therefore indisputably
authentic; Concerning the sympathy of the Breasts and womb as held by the
Ancients) there are two things well deserving serious and further
consideration: For has not this sympathy been rackt beyond its nature, and
tentered beyond the truth, of what it is able to bear, or discover; when, upon
the view of the Breasts, declarations and predictions are made, not only of
conceptions, and abortions in general, with a probable prognostic of the time
and event of the feared abortion; but also from the difference of the Breasts
on each side, the sex of the conception, or abortion is peremptorily limited;
and when twins of several sexes have been conceived, the twin of whether sex
shall alone be aborted is foreshewn; in that rare and unusual case of aborting
one twin, and completing the due months of gestation with the rest? Not to
allege more of these impertinent medical Enthusiasmes; such groundless and
inconsequent deductions, as they are casily received by the superstitious, who
yawn after things novel and strange, and blindly swallow what is offered
without either praeexamining by the eye of reason, or proving them by the
praemastications of experience: so I doubt not but to sober minds they will
appear an apish overhugging the truth, to the ruin and destruction of it: an
overchurning a serious, secret, true, observation of nature into ranckness and
falsity; and a praeposterous grafting a wild, wandering fancy upon the most
cultivated stock of sober, true and certain observation. For since men have set
their minds to learn out of natures unwritten books, as well as out of the
writings of Authors; what has been more usual than to find male and female
conceptions indifferently on the one or other side, or horn of the womb? And
though against experience no Argument ought to avail; we shall not stiff what
they seem to have to say for themselves; That the left praeparing vein rises
from the Emulgent only, which may be suspected, to be a weakening of its power
and influxion; whereas the right praeparing, or spermatick vein rises
immediately from the great discending Trunk, of which the aforesaid Emulgent is
but an offset. All this is generally and in most Bodies true: and in former
Ages, with the glossiness of its probability, carried away the minds and
judgments of most: but now upon more curious searches made into the Bowels, and
heart of nature, the sophistry, and weakness of the former Argument manifestly
appears: the spermatick veins, if any be so pleased to continue that name,
being only reducing vessels, and carrying forth from the vital fountain nothing
at all to the Testicles, womb, Ovaries, or other organes of generation; as may
appear by observing; the motion of the juyces contained in them, notifyed from
the side on which the tumor and fulness suddenly upon an intercepting ligature
gathers. And the different rise of these spermatick veins is more aptly
referred to the indirect situation of the discending Trunk there; which usually
at the loins inclines a little rather to the right side, making the left
Emulgent accordingly, to be commonly a little longer than the right: so as for
a long tender venal vessel to have had its original so obliquely remote, and
sloping over the fore bodies of the Rack bones, might not seem sufficiently
secure; however in the more strongly coated arterial vessels, it is not
withstanding otherwise; the right and left spermatical arteries both rising
constantly from the descending branch of the Aorta. That Argument of the right
side parts being, stronger, hotter, nimbler, etc. than those on the left side;
annexeth an incohaerent sequel, to a Truth which is merely accidental: the
special strength of the right side parts not being any natural privilege, but
an advantage acquired by exercise, use and education; and by the same method,
as easily transferable to the other side. And if at any time Twin parts be not
equally concerned, it is because there is not equal relation to the sides: so
the Ovary of that Side to which the Conception is more principally affixed, in
many females is of a fleshy substance, of color like Sanders, or somewhat
brighter, the other all the while remaining without any alteration as a cluster
of watery Blebs and vesicles. But more particularly in the Copulations of
mankind, all such considerations of sides must of necessity be obliterated; the
right side of the one Parent being applied to the left of the other, and so on
the other side, the left to the right. In all this we deny not, but right side
parts have more special relation to right side parts, where the parts twin, and
are double: but to parts, which are single, and posited in the middle, Twin
parts have equal relation. So as upon the whole matter, the diseases of each
particular Breast are more prone to be transferred to the same respective side
of the womb, and those of either side of the womb to the respective breast; of
which are most apparent footsteps in the fabric of nature: for though in some
vessels, as Blood-veins, water-veins, chyle-veins, arteries, etc. this
distinction of sides be again lost and confounded by insertion into some common
Trunk, before they can be traced from the one part, to the other collateral
part; yet in some other vessels without any such confusion in the midway, the
same collateral vessels ramify themselves distinctly unto the parts all along
on the same side: as is most manifest in the visceral sinew, or wandering pair:
but yet hereby is not opened any window to see into the sex of unborn
conceptions. And, as herein I desire to reverence antiquity, but follow reason;
so upon your more serious thoughts, I doubt not but you will judge, with me,
another Point upon this subject very well worthy calling in Question: and that
is the much noysed ground of this sympatly between the Breasts and womb; said,
and formerly thought, to be the inosculations of the mammary veins and Arteries
with the Epigastriks. It is well known, how many lateral heterogeneal
inosculations, between Arteries and Blood-veins, have been introduced by closet
Anatomists; while, in Bloudless speculations, they formed nature according to
their reasonings, to solve appearing phaenomena's; instead of forming their
reasonings according to what they ought first to have observed in nature: the
verity and authority of all which, among Anatomists at sharp, that carry their
Eyes in their hands, and will believe no more than they see, is at present not
much; however formerly solemnly, and for singular purposes, placed in and very
near several of the chief Bowels: yet the fumultous aestuation which this
Hypothesis continually places nature under, like the meeting of two contrary
seas, may be sufficient, in reason also, to decry and discard it: for which
reason also lateral homogeneal inosculations of bloud-veins with bloud-veins,
as they are frequently found, so they may as easily in reason be admitted. But
the inosculations in the Question being final; I wave these that are lateral.
And final inosculations are on all hands, agreed to be in a manner impossible
to be shown; because, when granted to be, yet there where they are, the vessels
are so minute, and slender, that it neither can be easy for the quickest sight,
nor the most cautions hand, either, without hurting them, to come at the
vessels, where they are inosculated, or to distinguish the vessels when
heterogeneal at their inosculation, or to discern a final inosculation, whether
of vessels of the same, or of different kinds. So that this whole Question
about final inosculations being to receive its decision by the judgment of
reason; such final inosculations as are homogeneal, as of Arteries with
Arteries, and Bloud-veins with Bloud-veins of the same Trunk, such as in this
Point were understood and intended by the Ancients, are no way capable of
desence, allowance, or justification at the Bar of reason: for it
experimentally, and to the eye, appears, that if any such inosculations should
be supposed, the same Humors at the same time, from the same place, should
move two contrary ways, to wit, both to, and from the heart, and in vessels
rising from, or gathered at after into, the same trunk: in which account, the
lung vein, the hollow vein, and the port vein, though all of them bloud-veins,
yet because of the diversity of their Trunks, are to be esteemed as
heterogeneal. And final homogeneal inosculations generally, and therefore also
between the Mammaryes and Epigastricks, being thus everted; the old doctrine
oncerning the ground of the sympathy between the Breasts and womb cannot be
retained. And if any think by a short alteration of, and putting heterogeneal
inosculations for, the rejected homogeneal, the ground of this sympathy will
remain firm and clear as of old; to wit by making humors to be transferred
from the womb by the Epigastrick arteries and mammary veins to the Breasts, and
by the mammary arteries, and Epigastrick veins from the breasts to the womb; I
suppose, that though such inosculations be not as the other, impossible, though
undemonstrable to sense, yet upon mature considerations, these will not be
judged sufficient to found this sympathy upon. If we lay the matter seriously
in the balance, even such heterogeneal and final inosculations do rather
hinder the transferring of humors from the one part to the other: to be sure,
look how much salls, or is any ways drawn into their capacities and cavities,
cannot by them be so transferred, but is otherways disposed of: for the
mammarie veins carry not to the breasts, but to the subclavians, and so to the
heart, and the mammary arteries carry not to the breasts, but to the Muscles
and parts on the forebelly. In like manner the womb will appear equally
unconcerned in those veins and arteries: for the Epigastrick veins carry not
blood unto the womb but unto their collateral Iliacks, and so to the heart: and
the Epigastrick arteries carry not blood from the Iliacks to the womb, but to
the Muscles lying on the fore part of the belly. And of themselves, neither
mammary bloud-vessels reach the womb, nor either of the Epigastricks the
breasts: so as, notwithstanding any thing in these vessels, we yet seem to be
in the dark as to the grounds of this confessed sympathy. Not to add, that in
many Animals some, and, in some all, the breasts are quite out of the way of
the Mammaryes, on the same side of the Epigastricks with the womb, and, on that
side, as far removed from the capillar terminations of the Epigastricks and
mammaries, as the womb it self. And professedly I understand not, upon what
necessity the vessels founding, or contributing to the sympathy of these two
parts, must needs pass directly between the one part and the other; and may not
as well here, as in the sympathy of other parts be admitted sufficient for this
purpose, by their common concern and relation to some special branch, or
general trunk, And vessels thus related, touching and terminating in these two
parts, are not hard to be found in several kinds; as arteries and sinews to
convey like matter to both these parts: veins and sinews to reduce what is
improper, superfluous, useless, or redundant in either, or meet and apt to be
transferred from the one to the other: in which both cannot but be assisted by
the agreement of their similar attractions, and that conformity of substance,
which is either constant, or at some special times between some, or all of each
of their parts: which as it may be a ground of the maturation and exalting of
these parts together, so thereby the Bodies, pores, and passages, of both, are
alike open, for the reception of like humors: and the same conform substance
may be the cause why those vital emanations and irradiations which the
generative parts receive from the parts which are principal; when, I say, those
vital emanations come to be remitted and reflected back again from the
generative parts to all the rest of the body; then, above all others, the
breasts gather into themselves powerfully those forces of nature, which are so
reflected back again from the generative parts universally to the parts of the
whole. And such a course, as I have hinted, is both plain by view, undeniably
certain, and familiar in the usual method of nature; the breasts, above other
parts, being exonerated by the evacuations of the womb and the evacuations of
the womb, more especially then of other parts, being diverted by the excretions
of the breasts: so that these being the common and trodden paths of nature,
there cannot but remain an open way also for the translation of other matters.
And though by the Mammaryes and Epigastricks, whether inosculated, or not
inosculated, I have above shown, that such conveyances cannot be made; yet
nothing hinders, nay 't is very apparent, that such translations may be aptly
enough made, nay no doubt are made, by the thoracick and preparing vessels; to
wit, by the Arteries and some sinews directly, as bringing humors directly
unto the parts, and by other sinews and veins more indirectly, as they are apt
to carry, or not carry away what has by other vessels been transferred from one
of these parts unto the other. I had discoursed these things shorter, if I had
not been concerned to quit my self of rashness, with which you had attainted me
for seeming herein to have made a defection from the Ancients. I should as soon
defend the Moons Eclipsses to be a celestial fainting, and planetary sickness,
and to be cured by Cymbals, Drums, Cornets and Trumpets; because the Ancients
thought so. Yet for the same truths sake I account my self bound to justify the
old Astronomers in the causes by them assigned of the several shapes of the
Moon, as depending upon its mutuatious light, the proportion in which it is
received, and the positions from which it offers its self to our view; all
concerning the Earth in the shapes of its lucid parts, save in its Eclipsses
sometimes when it is at the full, being the product merely of ignorance and
want of observation. I am not of opinion with many, that there is but only one
fountain of light, which is the sun; to which by imaginary refractions, and
reflections, and strange labyrinthaean windings they would refer all other
lights; sending the most glorious of the celestial Bodies a borrowing to this
fountain; while evidently in these inferior Regions, in the mineral, vegetable
and animal Kingdoms, etc. not to speak of the caelestiall flames, several
special fountains of light have been, and are frequently observed, though
neither so full, nor durable, and perpetual as those above. However we cannot
but confess the Sun to be the Fountain of the principal Lunar light; as
another more faint light discernable in all parts of its body at whatsoever
age, so it be out of the Combustion of the Beams of the Sun, which lie betwixt
us and the Sun, or the Beams in vicinity to them, cannot be denied to be innate
unto it. And the roundness of the Moons and Suns bodies, being evident to the
Eye in every positure and revolution, and apparent in Solar and Lunar Eclipses,
besides several other demonstrations of their rotundity; it follows from hence
by necessary consequence that the Moons body cannot be gilded all over, at the
same time, with such luminous beams as it borrows from the Sun: seeing in any
two sphaeres, in whatsoever position, the one without the other, there is still
a certain part of the surface of the one, unto which without penetrating its
body from no point of the other can be drawn a straight line, as is easy to
demonstrate. And the magnitude of the bodies of these two Stars, being
confusedly unaequal the one unto the other, and the Suns the larger; it follows
in like manner by the same necessity, that though all the Moon cannot be at
once enlightened by the borrowed Solar light, yet at all times, more than half
of the Moons sphaeral surface, is so enlightened; except in those cases when
the interposition of the earth, or other opake bodies, obstructs the solar
radiations from falling upon it. For if a lesser, and a greater sphaere be put
and adapted into an Isoscelary Cone, whose Axe is perpendicular to the circular
Base at its Center, the Lines in which the surface of the Cone touches the
surfaces of the sphaeres, shall be two Circles less than the respective
greatest Circles, each of its own Sphaers as is not hard to demonstrate. And it
is as apparent, that the Isorrhopical center of that part of the Moons surface,
which is so solarly enlightened, is still the point directly obverted to the
Sun; through which point a straight line drawn between the centers of these two
Stars passes. So as the enlightened part of the Moon being still toward the
Sun, no wonder, if in their conjunction the Moon cannot be seen at all; as
chiefly because of its combustion, so also because the enlightened side of it,
is turned away from us toward the Sun: that though, by descending into deep
pits, Stars above the Horizon may be seen at Noon day, yet the Moon in this
case cannot by such helps be in like manner seen, its dark side being toward
us, and the most that our Eye can at any time at one view see of the Moons
surface, being ever less then the half of it, as is demonstrable. Upon the same
grounds, at the Opposition, i. e. full Moon, the enlightened part of the Moon
as it is toward the Sun, so it is toward us also, from whence follows, that
all, that we can then see of the Moon, is enlightened, and that much more of it
is enlightened, than it can be possible for us to see. In the Quadratures,
whether of increase, or decrease, the state and positure of the enlightened,
and unenlightened parts of the Moon, in respect of the Sun and us, offer
themselves in a less entire, divided, middle manner: to wit, the parts of the
Moons surface obverted unto us are but, as it were, half obverted to the Sun,
and the parts of the Moons surface obverted to the Sun are but, as it were,
half obverted to us: so as what is obverted to us in the Quadratures is, as it
were, half enlightened, and half unenlightned and at other not Cardinal times,
the nearer that the Moon is to the full, so much the greater part of the Moons
surface obverted to us, is by the Sun enlightened: and the nearer the Moon is
to its Change, whether past, or to come, so much the lesser part does the Sun
enlighten of the Moons surface obverted to us. And that these things are really
so, may be from hence confirmed: at whatsoever. Age of the Moons crescency, or
decrescency, if you observe its luminous parts seen by us, however horned, or
bunched, the Sun is still on the luminous side of the Moon. Now the cause, why
the Moons luminous parts appear plain and flat, rather than bearing out, like a
Sphaeral surface, or a portion of a Sphaeral surface, is because the inequality
of the visual beams, between the Eye and the several luminous points, is not so
proportionate as to be discernable by our ordinary sight: for without such
inequality, to be discerned in the visual beams, neither sense, nor reason can
conceive true Idea's of a spheral surface. And upon these Hypotheses and
principles all phaenomena's concerning the Moons shapes, as to magnitude,
proportion, continuance, situation, alteration, alternation, being perpetually
and accurately solved; the Novelty which would dethrone this doctrine so
apparent, so rational and unconvincible of the Ancients, as it is unworthy the
acceptance of the considerate and judicious, so it cannot but be unmeet for
them to impose and obtrude upon others; to omit the gross inconsistency
involved in it, which I shall in my next at large unfold, if these things fall
short of giving Satisfaction.

The third Answer.
That there are fresh watersprings at the bottoms of the most ancient seas.
Whether Mercury by frequent transhaping it self, and often reduction loose not
somewhat of its powers and virtues? That the Doctrine and being of the four
Elements, as unmixed bodies by their mixture making up all other bodies, is not
unquestionable. In the four Elements may be allowed to be the general and most
common lodges of the Worlds first Elements* but themselves at the most can but
be allowed to be only secondary Elements. How nature may so balance the first
or second Elements by some special Symbolical properties among them, as to
elude all the endeavors which art can possibly make for the bringing of the
first Elements to view and light. That the number of the four Elements and of
their properties or qualities singly or in Conjugations ascribed to them
seems insufficient to vest them in the right of first Elements; upon the
knowledge of whose natures, all Physical phenomenon should be capable of
explication. That the ancients seem to have allowed a greater number of first
Elements. A conjecture what the ancients might rationally at first design at
their first introducing the Doctrine of the four Elements.

SIR.
THat fresh water springs lie at the bottom of the seas, both frequent, and
with flashing issues; is to me upon several observations, not undiligently
made, as absolutely certain, as to you it seems impossible: and this I judge
not only in the seas, which have made inchroachments by inundation upon the
ancient bounders of lands, which before were plenteously up and down watered
with springs; but as well, there being the like reason, in those seas, which
are able to plead the highest and most ancient praescription, and cannot be any
other ways chargeable, then in their daily fluxes and refluxes, with the least
new invading of the earths bosom, and of those wells of coldboiling-natural
nectar, with which it is usually there stored. And why should natures opening a
vein of freshwater into the sea, seem such a sea monster when at land we
ordinarily meet with diverse springs, of different virtues and originals,
meeting at after together in the same channel; from their concourse and mixture
conceiving secret virtues, manifest alterations, and special properties, as
strange to the illiterate and unexperienced, and generally wondered at by the
most, as the boiling heat appearing presently in the suddenly mixed Oils of
Tartar and Vitriol, though cold, when poured together. I shall not urge, that
some, would have the seas, proportionately to their depth, fresh at the bottom.
I only move, if this be not more easy, to be assented to, then what is daily
seen, and therefore not to be questioned in point of truth, that the sea fishes
etc. Though continually living in that briny pickle remain still however fresh:
many times the sea-fowle, that most-what fly but about it, sometimes swim in
the surface of it, senting and tasting much stronger of the sea, than the fish
that live deep and constant in it. But Experience being the grand Umpiress in
the Question, in assurance of its convictiveness, I forbear at present. For
your reducing of Mercury after all operations of fire, whether actual, or
potential upon it, I have no reason to cherish suspicions of the truth of such
performances: but that reduction shall be so perfect, as to give back the
Mercury as absolute in all virtues, as it was, or could at first be delivered,
will not be easily consented to, by those that know that fire burns the chief
wing upon which in Amalgames Mercury carries along with it Gold: and the force
of fire upon it, is in the nature of a rape robbing it of that virgin treasure,
to which the noble metal is so sequacious; which once lost, can never be
restored again to the defloured Mercury: as in all volatiles that which is of
nimblest wing flies first, and the highest spirit first: and when an
impregnation is to be made by fire the work of Philosophy is judged chiefly to
lie in the governing, of the firing, that, like the Sun, it may give enlivening
heat, and not become, as a destroying Element. The reason, why so few are
acquainted with the excellency and praerogative of this pure Mercury, is
because generally it is a fire-burnt Mercury, which is at first delivered to
us. I omit that in a thousand instances, after Art has separated the natural
union of parts, though it may again unite them, yet that reunion will in many
points fall short of the first natural union. But why does it seem so monstrous
to you, to call in Question the existence of the four Elements, it being a
doctrine, which in all Ages has been attended with doubts? if you think you can
show as Air, and Earth and water, yet what show can you make of Elemental fire?
And since the dissolution of the Orbs, there being no Concave of the Moon,
what region is designed and intended for it? I presume both Hearths, and
Altars, are too low, to be the proper Sphaere of this high Element. And upon
the whole, as little can be said for any of the other three as for this: the
State of the Question and controversy being rightly understood. For it is not
fire that is denied, or Earth, or Air, or water, but all as Elemental. How
great a share and proportion these have in making up this part of the worlds
systeme, is too evident to sense to be called in Question: many leagues of
Earth, or sea, answering to each single degree: but that these four are the
first uncompounded compounding bodies, of which all others by their mixtion
consist, and are made; seems, from hence, to follow by a very sickly
consequence. Not without solid consideration, and sufficient cause, did the
Ancients honor the Earth with the style of the All-feeding-Earth: what
innumerable vegetables and Animals spring, live and grow in its bosom, not to
touch at the inestimable treasures lodged in its bowels? Others, and of the
worlds sages, with honors not unequal, assign unto the water not only Beauty's
birth, but the Rise and original of all things: and every moment convinces the
use and necessity of Air etc. These are Arguments of their universal use,
concern and excellency, but do not prove their Elementalness, no more then that
one Tree is the Element of another, because the one is engrafted into the
other, or that the mother is the Element of the child, while it lives annexed
unto her in the womb. That in these are the general and most common Lodges of
the worlds Elements, from which each nature may furnish it self with what is
convenient for its being, nutrition and growth, may easily be consented unto:
but that these are the very Elements unmixed and uncompounded, will be an
Herculean task to make forth by any Argument, or experience, so long as each in
its region appears replenished with all variety of Beings. What a numerous
diversity of Earths are to be found in the Earth, of diverse colors, weights,
virtues; some healing, some scouring, some binding, some Alexipharmical,
besides chalkes, and Marles, and several clayes, sands and gravels, noble
quarries, rich mines, coals, bitumes, marcasites, salts, minerals and metals?
so in water, all coagulable vapors and exhalations meet condensed with the
alluvion and dissolution of various salts and other minerals, together with
manifold subterraneous Oils and spirits; whence the wonderful difference of
their weights, sents, colors, tastes, consistence and operations. In like
manner the Air, what is it but an uncertain, unconstant, random composition of
all sorts of fumes and vapors, according to the nature and position of the
Atoms dispersed in it sometimes clear, sometimes cloudy, sometimes healthful,
sometimes pestilent, sometimes delighting, at other times offending the senses?
And as difficult will it be to find and show any uncompounded Fire. But you
will say, that though these be not Elemental Earth, Fire, Air and Water, it
hinders not but there may be such Beings and bodies; I answer, I have no
abhorrency against the opinion, if so by any practice, or in any dissolution
these Elements could but be shown, and their sufficiency to explain the
phenomenon of nature: but those parts, which, generally in dissolutions: are
offered to be accepted for these Elements, appear nothing less, and, beyond
all dispute, very distant from uncompounded natures; and the analogous parts in
several dissolutions, as different one from another, as one of the Elements can
be from another Element; which is repugnant to the nature of first Elements; as
is usually and truly urged against salts, sulphures and Mercuries to put by
their claim in first Elementarinesse, in the mixtion of bodies: Viz. that in
several dissolutions, the analogous parts answer not in the least one to
another, except it be in some very general, and external conformity; but one is
sour, another sweet, another sharp, another faelid, another fragrant, thus
expanding into all manner of variety, wherein should be nothing but the pure
simplicity of a first Element. In a good sense, and with fair Explications, I
have been ever ready to acknowledge their interest as secondary Elements, as a
doctrine consentaneons to the Sacred Traditions of Theology; or as before, as
the principal Lodges of the first Elements: but neither that which fills the
regions, nor that which remains after their dissolution of mixed bodies, could
ever yet to me seem capable of the denomination of first Elements. And possibly
it may be one of natures mysteries never to permit us to see the first Elements
naked so curiously ballancing them in their connexions, that all attempts of
Art, for their discovery, shall be eluded: so any Artifice to resolve and
anatomize a natural body into its first principles, grounded upon the fixedness
and volatility of the parts, is eluded, if first, or second Elements of the
same fixednes, or volatility be connexed: so if grounded upon dissolubleness in
a certain Menstrue, it is eluded by connexing several first, or second Elements
aequally dissoluble in that, or the like Menstrue: so corrosious by
separatories, fumigating, anointing, cementing are all eluded as to the bolting
forth of the first Elements, if they meet with several first, or other Elements
aequally passible in those operations. And the very number of the Elements has
not seldom rendered them unto me very suspicious, that they could not be first
Elements. For by what fair Argument shall the Quaternion of them be
demonstrated? if, as is usual, we argue from qualities, whether singular, or in
symbolismes, I see not how this number can be maintained: more qualities, and
more conjugations of them, ought by the same reason to prove a far greater
number of Elements And alas, how vainly light do they render themselves, that,
by four conjugations of disputable qualities, seek to solve all the phenomenon
which are in the world; of the Loadstones pointing northward, its drawing
untoucht steel, the Load-touched steels drawing of other steel, the bleeding of
the slain at the presence of the Murderer, the moving of an untouched
Lute-string being Unison, or in a strong consonancy string that is moved, the
sinking of persons drowned the first days, and then floating to the top at
after, they have laid soaking so long in the water, the Cramp fishes
astonishing the Fishers hand at the long distance of line and Angle, the
strange Ebbings and flowings of particular seas and springs, and a thousand
other? Upon the old principles, how lame is the doctrine of solidness and
fluidness, of opacity and transparency, in bodies sometimes of the same
solidnes, sometimes of the same fluidnes, besides a million of other instances,
whose resolution mateth the doctrine of the four Elements? However
mis-understand me not, as if I denied Elements, or first Elements: these must
either be allowed, or no mixtion; of which we have lucide examples in every
corner of the world: for it was a Golden-rule in the school, which now I am
opposing, that the same, or like, as so, working upon the same, or like, as so,
cannot make any alteration: that I suppose I have good reason not to be forward
to embrace the new received opinion, so much cherished by some persons of
Eminency and parts, that there is only one Element of all things licked into
several external shapes and forms. But this controversy not concerning your
judgment, it were trouble now to pursue an impertinent. The rest I suppose, any
where defensible, save at Stagira; where Fire must burn, Air poison, Earth
bury, and water drown, whatsoever shall be suspected in, or alleged against
the Traditions of the imperial Philosopher. However my thoughts are still
comported to yield up themselves to that doctrine upon the first clear and
experimental demonstration of it; if any such might be hoped. In the interim I
want not fair footsteppings in the Ancients to induce me to think, that when
they make Bodies to be composed of that which is hot, and that which is cold,
of that which is dry and of that which is moist; they mean nothing less then
these four bodies, or rather vast Amassements, vulgarly now known by the name
of the four Elements: but they rather intend, the true Elements of nature, it
may be seldom, or never seen alone; in which, such qualities, or properties are
specially eminent: and they are so far from restraining natural compositions to
the at present received Quaternary of Elements, that constantly at the same
breath they hint many other: adjoining in their recitals of natural mixtions,
temperaments, and compositions, to that which it hot, cold, moist, dry,
Elements endowed with several other properties, as that which is salt, that
which is sour, that which is bitter, that which is sharp, that which is sweet
etc. and the extremities and distempers intolerable unto nature, whether in
general the Animal nature, or more especially the Humane nature, are made to
be, when such Elements sever from their mixture, and go apart by themselves to
violating, and breaking up that sweet proportionate composition and harmony,
which is so friendly and grateful unto nature. As the Pyrotechnists analyze
bodies, upon the consideration of several differences and contrarieties which
are in their compositive parts, as that some will abide the fire, others not;
some be wrought upon by such dissolvents, or corroders, others not: so the
Ancients to reduce all inanimate things to four heads, may have insisted on
several contrarieties, paving the way to such a doctrine: Viz. that such bodies
are either firmly solid, or else fluid: and those that are fluid, are such,
either in a gross corpulent matter, or in fine exhalations: and those
exhalations, either apt to conceive a flame, and burn, or else of a nature,
thereunto indisposed. And according to such a distribution, many various bodies
fall aptly enough under the same head of Amassment: and all inanimals in the
world may be easily reducible to some one of these four heads. But then these
four heads are not particular first Elements, uncompounded, and so constitutive
of things in mixtion; but general notions, unto which the inanimals of this
lower part of the universe, are aptly reducible. Favor these Conjectures,
which obtrude nothing, only labor what they can to justify the methods of the
Ancients. Send back my instruments and the last transmitted Problemes with your
first convenience.

The Fourth Answer.
Concerning the seams of the Skull, and the number of the seams by which the
Skullbones are joined one unto another, over and besides the three principal
proper and true seams. That without contradiction, variety may be admitted both
in the number and order of such seams. That neither abstruct nor concrete
Mathematics are wholly exempt from a liablenes to such varieties. That the
pre-eminence of right-side parts is no way natural in such as twin but only at
pleasure.

SIR.
THe learned men were riper for controversy, than became the gravity of their
profession, or else upon the Point, which you have transmitted to me, held by
each with so little real, though a manifest nominal difference, it had not been
easy to have occasioned the hot language contained in your report. Though the
one make but five pairs of seams, by which the Temple bones are joined to the
wedge bone, and also to the two Crown bones, and those (besides the three
principal seams) to the forehead bone, or bones, and to the Nowl bone; and the
other, contrary to the general doctrine of the Anatomick School, asserts that
there are six; and both make their appeal to Autopsy and the Skeleton; I see
not wherein either is disabled to maintain his Assertion, as both agreeable to
truth and justifiable upon the view: only not without some rational ground for
the difference, Viz. either has, as I suppose, his different method, upon
which he insists in making up the account of the seams. For the number will
differ according to the ground by which you will distinguish and make out the
unity of each seam: as also according as the seams are accounted singly, or by
pairs; from which last manner of accounting may arise also a third different
number of them, though still without any change in the thing and object. Not
being privy to the terms upon which this controversy was between them managed;
this Reconciliation, though unquestionably true, and pertinent to the Question,
as by you in general proposed, may however possibly be inpertinent to it, as by
them stated and defended: though I understand not upon what other terms the
Assertions of both can be capable of justification: and I am not willing to
think otherwise, between persons, so eminently learned. It cannot be denied but
in these nicer things observed in the head, and distinguished usually by
numbers, as the seams, and holes of the scull, there has not wanted some
seeming diversity and obscurity: while it has been thought, that merely at the
pleasure of Authors and of those that sit in the Anatomical chair, sometimes
one thing, at other times another, and not constantly the same thing, is made
to give the order, unity, integrity and distinction of seams. So the Nowlebones
connection with the Crown bone, and Temple bone of the same side, is generally
construed to be two seams, and of two diverse kinds; the one true, the other
mendous, or defective: though so fair be the continuance of the one seam unto
the other, that the one is usually known by the name of an Additament unto the
other: and yet in other seams diversity of bones does not, with all, make
multiplicity of seams; as in the Lepidoidal, or scaleseam where the Templebone
is joined to the Crown-bone and to the wedge-bone by a future, generally
accounted but for one: so the connection of the inner process of the forehead
bone, to four several bones of the upper chapp, is by most accounted but for
one common seam. The like, or worse perplexities occur sometimes in the
account of the holes in the head; while some of the holes, which are common to
several bones are accounted in each bone: others, in like manner common only in
one of the bones, whence many times the number of the holes pertinent to each
bone is left confused, and imperfect. For the reverence I bear unto the great
Artists, in whom these things may be ordinarily observed; I am not willing to
impute them any otherwise then to their great intentnesse upon matter and
things; by which they seem overborn into a certain negligence of names and
appellations. And those whose study is rather to be Anatomists, then so
esteemed, and draw their Institutes and observations from the Body, more then
out of Books, will easily consent with me that in this whole Doctrine, of the
seams, and holes of the head, names and numbers are of less moment, so there be
a clear understanding of the things themselves. So none, who has truly made use
of his own Eyes can deny some parts, or sides of the true seams of the skull to
be mendous, and some parts, or sides of some of the mendous to be in a sort
true: that in several of them the distinction of true from mendous, and sutures
from harmonyes, seems to be often more matter of name imposed at pleasure,
without clear and sufficient ground for real and peremptory distinction. Things
thus standing, in the contest you mention; how easy is it to make, on the same
side, the seams, by which the Temple bone and wedge bone are joined one to
another, and (as before) to the Nowl bone, Crown bone and Forehead bone, to be
at pleasure, either five in number, or if you please six; For the one, or the
other number follows, according as you shall take the connection of the
Temple-bone with a Crown-bone and the wedge-bone, to be one seams as it is most
usually accounted; or else to be two; for which, being the connexions of two
and two several bones, there wants not, as appears, some fair and probable
ground. And thus though I would not charge with falsity, that whose truth is
from real grounds so plainly defensible, howbeit somewhat varying from the
ordinary methods, and systems of Authors; yet I judge it not meet we be too
forward, by reason of our more clear insight into things, in altering,
slighting and rejecting the Terms, names, distinctions and methods, which have,
time out of mind, been in continual use with learned men. For names, that were
first coined for distinction and instruction, if they should be daily and
hourly changed, would be sure to introduce confusion. And though in Names and
numbers the Ancients have used somewhat of authority, they have
notwithstanding, in the same subject, fairly exercised their reason. So, with a
very little allowance, this whole doctrine of the sutures, has been cast by
them into a Mould methodical enough: the sum whereof in few may be this. The
sutures of the head either concern not, or else concern the bones of the upper
chap: those which concern not the Bones of the upper chap, are either largely
toothed sutures, Viz. the Crown suture, the Dart suture, and the Lambda suture;
which may also receive another ground of distinction from their concerning the
two Crown-bones connection one with the other, or with the Forehead bones and
the Noul-bone: or otherwise; other sutures, not concerning the bones of the
upper chap, are not so fairly not deeply, sometimes scarce at all, at least not
so manifestly dented, or not in the same manner; as the Lepidoidal connexting
the Temple-bone to the Crown-bone and to the wedge-bone; the connection between
the Crown-bone and wedge-bone; the connection between the Noul-bone and
Temple-bone, commonly called the Additament of the Lambdoidal; the connection
between the Nouls additament and the wedge-bone; and the connection between the
Fore-head-bone and the wedge-bone: which may also receive another ground of
distinction from their concerning the connection of the Temple-bone and
wedge-bone one with the other and with the Noul-bone, Crown-bones, and
Forehead-bone. So the sutures, which concern the bones of the upper chap,
either concern some one, or more of them in common with some of the
aforementioned bones* or else they concern, the bones of the upper chap alone,
as connexed mutually amongst themselves. The sutures which concern some one, or
more of the bones of the upper chap, in common with some of the aforementioned,
make connection only with some of these, Viz. the Temple-bone, wedge-bone, or
Forehead bone; for the Crown-bones and Noul-bone are no where connexed to the
bones of the upper chap: And they are particularly these; Viz. the connection of
the outer process of the Forehead bone, with the inner process of the first
bone of the upper chap: the connection of the first bone of the upper chap with
the wedge bone: the connection of the inner process of the Forehead-bone with
the fifth, fourth, second and third bones of the upper chap, being in the order
recited, connexed from within outward: the connection of the outer, or yoke
process of the first bone of the upper chap, with the yoke process of the
Temple bone, in the middle of the yoke bone: which yoke bone is not a distinct
and several bone, but made up of two processes of two several bones: and the
last is the connection between part of the upper, part of the dissepiment and
the wedge-bone, Lastly the seams which concern the bones of the upper chap only
among themselves are the connection of the first and fourth bone, the connection
of the second bone with the third and fourth, the connection of the third and
fourth bones, the connection of the fourth and fifth bones, the connection
between the two fifth bones, the connection of the fourth and sixth bones, the
connection between the two sixth bones, the connection of the other part of the
upper part of the dissepiment with the fifth bones, the connection of the lower
part, of the dissepiment in the Plough-share bone with the sixth, i. e. the
palate bones and some small part of the fourth bones. In all which, if somewhat
at pleasure, they have used authority in the numeral order of the bones, and in
the account and order of the seams, it is no more than is freely allowed to
each Artist in his Art, so long as the Authority they use, neither bears, nor
creats any repugnancy to the subject matter. And so even in abstract
Mathematics, somethings are determined, not by necessity, because they can be
no otherwise, but by long usage and authority, because they may conveniently be
as is determined. So Arithmetical numerations, which are every where received
and taught in Decuple proportion; with as much facility and Mathematical
accurateness might be instituted in undecuple proportion; and then the usual
Probes, should not be by casting away of nines but of tens; or in sexage cuple
proportion; and then the Probes should be by casting away of fifty nines: or
non cuple proportion, and then the Probes should be by casting away of eights.
And the like instances might be given in Geometry; and in several, if not most
parts of Concrete Mathematics. So in ordering the Account of the Brain
ventricles, of the sides of the same bones, and sometimes of the branchings of
sinews, veins, Arteries, other vessels, and the like; custom, and authority,
commonly gives praecedency to the parts, cavities, or branchings, posited on
the right side; though without offense unto Truth, all Accounts might as
exquisitely be completed in a quite contrary order. But though these things
might be, and as well, as what is; yet what is, being as accurate, as what
otherwise might be, it is sufficient to know that these things might be
otherwise methodized, without renouncing the Ancients method. I have, you see,
too high an Opinion of the persons concerned, to imagine their difference could
arise from, some peculiarities in unusual skulls; in which it is not uncommon
to find great difference in the numbers of bones, seams and holes, not only
under diversity of Age and sex, which, is so common, it is not otherwise to be
expected; but as well when no such causes can be alleged, for the diversity:
nay, many times in the main and principal, commonly called True seams we do not
ever find a constant regularity and uniformity. But of those things, which
seldom are, we are not to maintain Controversy, as if they were the way of
nature. This, Sir, I have written not to Inform, but confirm your judgment;
which I know so well versed in the Syntaxe of this our humane body, that it
cannot dissent from what is.

The Fifth Answer.
That immense volatility may consist with immense ponderousness. That tincturs
may be altered by maturation without any addition, Whether the appearing and
motion of comets may be before their appearance predicted. That no such
particular predictions can be made concerning the meteors which are in the
Atmosphear of the earth, nor of the first appearances of such Comets as are
supposed to have their Original from new amassements of Cometical matter in
other Atmospheares; though after their first appearance, upon some observations
accurately made, somewhat, though nothing so peremptorily as in other cases,
may be predicted, relating to their future motion. That it is not impossible,
but concerning Comets which are permanent bodies, and not new amassements,
predictions may be made long before, of their future appearances and motion.

SIR.
I Take your satisfaction, upon my last proposed, clear, and doubtless
Experiments, now since by you proved and approved, as a fair acknowledgment of
that Truth, which however to me upon its former evidences needed no farther
confirmation: Viz. that so different are the genuine notions and qualities of
fixednes and gravity, that immense volatility may and is ordinarily consistent
with an immense specific ponderousness; arising not from the moles and
quantity of the bodies under consideration, but rather from their natures and
kinds. That what in your first velitation you assumed as absurdly gross,
inconsistent, and impossible; is now, upon your own acknowledgments, most
easily and obviously demonstrable by experience. No less certainly is to be
acknowledged, in what you propose for the tingeing of metalline bodies, only by
ordering and attending them in the management of their maturations, without the
addition either of body, or spirit, as being all the time of this operation
under the sure seal. Could I persuade my self it should not be resented as a
grand unkindnes, to be silent in what you call for my thoughts in, in the close
of yours; Viz. Whether prognostics at certainty, such as are of Eclipses, of
Coitions, oppositions, motions of other Stars, whether, I say, such
prognostics and of like certainty, may not also be made of Comets, of their
Appearances, common impediments removed, and of their motions; I should, if it
might be, herein, lay Harpocrates finger upon my lip, and seal them up into a
pertinacions silence. Not but I am desirous to know, and willing to search
after truth: only I fear me, these are secrets of nature, by their peculiar
mysteriousnes, sinking themselves so low into the pit of obscurity, that the
stock of observations and disquisitions about them, which the world as yet
has, is not able to raise them so high, and place them so near day, as to be
within humane reach and discovery. What I now offer is a Caesarean birth of the
mind, not brought forth by me, but cut out of the womb by your importunity: if
it want shape, licking and lineaments, accept it as an unripe Abort, and either
hatch it to perfection in your Thigh, or give it a little dust to cover it. I
take by way of praesumption, that in this Quaery and Question you mean not by
Comets, any of those more usual, less permanent is regularly moved Meteors,
bred* gathered, fired, and burning in the Atmosphaere of our Earth; after their
Appearance, there cannot be much certainty of their Motion, though sometimes
there may be conjectures probable enough, and in the Event by observation
justified, when the fuel, or fovent matter of such Meteors, is manifestly, upon
what account soever, known to be only, or most copiously situate and disposed
some one particular way: but of the generation and first appearance of such
Meteors, particularly the moment when, and the point, or exact place where,
they shall appear, much less of certainty, in such pronosticks is to be
expected; there being so much variety, contingency, and uncertainty, in the
causes and meeting together of those causes, which contribute to their
production. And though there are, and have been many praedictions in general,
and Rules of praedicting Astrologically, or Physiologically, from the seasons
of the year, the temperature, and distemper of seasons etc. Concerning such
meteors in general; yet in a matter so unallyed unto certainty, replenished
with all manner of casualties, to promote, or retard such productions, I have
not known any offer peremptory Pronosticks of the kind of the meteor, its
shape, magnitude, duration, motion, with absolute determinations of its time
and places, at any time beforehand. The quality and condition of the subject
matter, making it as impossible to bolt out scientifical and oracularly certain
predictions of such meteors, as it is, a year before, to prove, or show that in
such an hour, and in such a quarter, shall be a Rainbow, so colored, so
continued, or discontinued and of such limited dimensions: or that, such a
moment, from such a point of such an Azymuth, shall a devolant Star spring
forth, which, in its fall, shall run obliquely through such and such Azymuths,
and expire at such an height above the Horison; or that such an hour, in such a
Longitude and Latitude, shall in such Altitudet and positions, and of such
dimensions, be seen by day four Suns, or by night three Moons. To lay aside
therefore the consideration of these, as supposed impertinent to our present
purpose; what may judiciously be concluded upon your Questions concerning those
other Comets, which lie without the compass of this Earths Atmospaere? If
there be not two sorts of such celestial Comets; there are at least two several
and very different Hypotheses and notions under which they are considered by
Artists: and Artists of equal worth and fame, order their reasonings, some upon
the one supposition, some upon the other: Viz. Some, as if Comets were new made
bodies, amassed, and gathered in some of the superior Atmosphaeres; many of
which are, not without fair reason, supposed to be in those vastly remote
ethereal regions: others, as if Comets were coaeval to, and neither less
permanent, nor more new, then the rest of the Stars; only seldom seen, and
when seen, soon passing again out of sight, by reason of the Line, upon which
their Center is moved: and nothing as yet appears hindering the truth of the
possibility and consistency of both these Opinions; leaving it especially
indifferent in the later Hypothesis, to call such stars at pleasure by the
name, either of Comets, or New-stars, or rather seldom appearing Stars. Comets
upon the first supposition, seem not to want some affinity with several,
especially of the more eminent, meteors of our Atmosphaere: yet allowing a vast
difference between them in place, proportion, duration, motion, and the like
circumstantials. And as our Globe, though in its self large, is but a minute
thing, compared with many of the caelestial Bodies; that the vast error of the
Earths semidiameter, by taking the Earth for a small point, many times in
Astronomical, Gnomonical, and other operations, creates not by consequence any
perceiveable Error: so it is not unlike, but the Atmosphaere of our Globe is
vastly disproportionable to the Atmosphaeres of many of those heavenly lights:
which may in a sort be gathered also, from the small power, which our
Atmosphaere has in the pressures which it makes upon moist and liquid bodies:
as also from the common vastnes of cometical bodies, frequently accepted as
much larger then all both our globe and its Atmosphaere, and therefore
requiring a proportionately immense place both for their being and motions. And
that such huge dimensions are not groundlesly attributed to the cometical
bodies, is rendered undoubted from the glorious and glaring light, with which
eminently above most of other Stars, they dazzle, to admiration, the minds and
Eyes of mortals at so great distance, that some times little, or no Parallax
can be observed in them. As to these therefore to solve the Questions, unto
which you have tasked me; I cannot but judge it improbable, with any assurance
to make praedictions before hand, that in such limited moments of futurity,
shall appear such Comets, as are to be at after amassed, gathered, formed, and
embodied in the Atmosphaeres, which are above: if seeming no more wild to give
heed and credit to the superstitious Auguries and soothsayings of the Ancients,
then the most subtle reasonings upon which such predictions can be made, in a
subject of this nature. Yet though their first emerging and appearance cannot
upon any calculation be foretold; however at after they have a while appeared,
and some, though not very many, curious observations have been made of the
changes of place, and other circumstances, which they make in their several
appearances, at such and such exalt distances of time; it is fairly enough
probable, that often, by an ingenious prognostic, the course of such a Comet
may be nearly traced, and set down before hand, as to way and speed, only with
this limitation, if the substance of the Comet do not first vanish, or
dissolve, or by reason of its instant dissolution divert from, hasten, or
retard its course: upon which score of their dissolubleness, and therefore
their ere long to be expected dissolution, no prognostics, upon them and their
course, can be so absolute and peremptory, as those which may be made
concerning such Comets, as are properly couched under the second supposition.
And the grounds why most what in these Comets of the first constitution, or
supposition, from past observations, a fair conjecture may be made of their
future course notwithstanding their new production and amassement in
Atmosphaeres, are chiefly hereupon founded: that such cometical bodies, as they
are demonstrably vast, and manifestly, and by their nature dissoluble, so their
dissolution is not observed very momentaneous, but most what more, leisurely by
degrees and in time; in short, they flame forth of a sudden, but expire
gradually; so as to be able, for a while, to retain the impressions of regular
motion, whether communicated from somewhat in the Center of the same
Atmosphaere, or from the confluent efficacy of several Agents all contributing
constantly, each according to its nature, to the Comets alone, or its and its
Atmosphaeres motion, whether by aequilibration, pulsion, traction, pressure,
manifest, or secret; or else inwardly wrought into the very substance and
nature of the Comet: especially the Comets place being in those lofty ethereal
regions, where are perpetual circumgyrations and every motion that is
observable, the more accurately it is observed, it is found the more regular.
And if it be urged here-against that the motion of Comets seldom, or never
answers the motion of any other Star, but commonly has a cross trajecting
motion, whereby it moves asloope, athwart, transversely, or obliquely, varying
from the usual, formerly observed motions. As this cannot be denied, so it does
not at all infringe the possible regularity of such motions, which are observed
to be most what in the same plain, though oddly posited: and that there are
many and, diverse such undreamt of motions in the Heavens, constant and
regular, of which save by some such, or late discoveries, no hint has as yet
bin made forth unto us, may in as good reason be allowed, as that vast number
of Stars in the skies acknowledged, of which, without the Telescop, it is
impossible to have any discerning. And if we grant that in respect of its
peculiar Atmosphaere, the motion of a Comet solely considered as in it, be not
so strictly regular; yet the regular circumgyration of the Atmosphaere, in
which the Comet is carried, in respect of the Universe, cannot but with those
that Cant upon that Hypothesis, enforce the Confession of a great degree of
regularity in the Comets motion: and that Comets, in what part of the Heavens
soever appearing, move in some conformity with other celestial bodies,
notwithstanding the contrariety or diversity of their proper, or peculiar
motions from the rest, is, beyond all dispute, evident from their daily moving,
with the rest, from East to West. The manner of making observations,
calculating to know the place, the distance, speed of such a Comet, and when it
is at nearest, or remotest in its course from us, is no other then in Comets of
the second supposition. And from this whole discourse is manifest; the
Hypotheses, upon which Calculations are to be made, in order to such
praedictions, cannot be particularly in these Comets known before hand, but in
several such Comets may be very different; and are to be found out by curious,
and diligent Observations; which, in each respective Comet, must be accurate,
and at least four in number: and I think predictions pretended from three
observations, are over hasty, and, at best, can but be conjectural; nay, in
some cases, from four; as if you be unsatisfyed, I shall be ready, by
demonstrative instances, to remove your doubt. But if of these Comets any
should be found, to wander, so as the motion of its Center cannot possibly be
reduced any thing nigh unto the same plane, or regularity in change of Planes,
or that the motion of its Center, in the same, or several Planes, describe not
a Line regular, or near unto a regularity, it is not probably easy to make
predictions at any certainty of truth, of the future course and motion of such
Comets. Concerning Comets of the later kind, or Hypothesis; possibly it is more
easy to answer your Queries in them, then effectually without a world of time,
sagacity and diligence to accomplish and attain the purport of those Answers.
That the motion of such Comets of the second sort, being not truly new, but
rather seldom appearing, and soon disappearing Cometical Stars; that, I say the
motion of such, is not without some regularity, though it may not be concluded
without long observations and frequent experiences of their motion had, which
in such seldom appearing, and soon again disappearing Stars is difficult enough
to attain to; yet if we consider the steady, unbiassed course, held by most, if
not all the rest of the permanent Stars without deviation, though in different
periods and with many different latitudes and declinations, and great diversity
of motions, it cannot be less then mightily probable, nothing in sense, reason,
or experience appearing as yet able to demonstrate the contrary, but that a
fair, celestial regularity may rationally be expected in those their perpetual
motions, whether their Centers be carried in the same Plane, or in a continual
change, and alterations of Planes. And in diverse respects in some, if not all
of them, as in most other Stars, the same Center may be said to move regularly
and perpetually in the same Plane, and also without elenchtical contradiction
to move regularly with an incessant change of Planes: so the motion of any
Planet, or other Starr, whose motion we are versed in, taken concretely and
with complication of that mundane, or general circumvolution, which with all
the rest it has from East by South to West, though it be regular, yet it is
not without a continual shifting of the Planets, or Stars center from plane to
plane: whereas the proper motion of the same Planet, or Starr considered
abstractly and severed from the general circumvolution it has with the
celestial universe, as it is regular, so it may keep the center of the planet,
or Star constant in the same plane. And the Course, appearance, and returns of
such cometical Stars will be of much more easy calculation, if their motions,
in the regularity, propriety and peculiarity of them, be any ways reducible,
as is abovesaid, unto the same plane; of which plane by observations is to be
decided, whether it pass thorough the center of the Equator and universe; and
if the center of the universe lie out of it, what is the perpendicular from the
Center unto the plane; and in the plane, what regular figure, or journey is
described by the motion of the Comets center, and what are the Diameters or
Axis of such figures, or centers of such motions in that plane: in the easiest,
and plainest of all which cases, four observations are at least rerequisite:
but where the regularity of the Comets motion, being irreducible to the same
plane, is in a continual shifting from plane to plane, there many more
observations may scarce be enough, to clear up the regularity of the Comets
motion, sufficiently for easy calculation: and when a sufficient number of
exquisite observations have been made, the calculation, as it will hardly be so
accurate, so it will scarce be so easy, as in other cases- The observations, in
all cases and suppositions, are to make discovery of the exact place of the
Comets center at the moment of the observations, Viz. of its longitude,
latitude and altitude not in respect of Azymuthal arches, but in right lines
drawn between their center and the center of the universe. And the more
exquisite the observations are, they make way for clearer calculations; upon
which may be founded so much the more assured predictions. To answer therefore
your Queries in relation to these Comets of the second sort, or supposition; I
think it not impossible, but in time predictions may, it may be many Ages
beforehand, be made of the Appearing, or rather Re-appearing of such Comets:
according as, in the regularity of their motion, they come nearer or are
removed Farther off from us. So I remember a person of Quality in the North,
with an high measure of Assurance reported to me, that one of the late Comets
appearance and Emerging, was by a certain Genoese praedicted at least two years
before the Emersion and appearing of it: which if so, is to be referred, I
doubt not, to the principle and method, above insisted on. According to which,
after different intervals of years, several Comets may appear, one after
another, and sometimes several such Comets may appear all at once: and yet
there is no clear necessity of the constant re-appearing of the same Comet, in
the same Horizon, still at after equal spaces of time. And if the Emerging of
such Comets may be praedicted before their Appearance; upon the same
principles, the line of their motion, the casting of their Train, and their
future recess, may as well be praedicted, whether before, or after their first
appearance: as also when, and where shall be their Accelerations and
retardations in motion; especially, considering the advantage hereunto
accruing, from their nearness to, or distance from the Eye of the spectator:
not that this makes inequality, or inequability to be, but rather only to
appear, in their motion. Upon the same accounts, the daily rising, setting, and
Southing of Comets may be calculated: as also what parallel, or spiral it
describes: and how much it gains daily in its proper motion: as also its place,
as to longitude, latitude, altitude, above any limited Horizon, at any limite
moment: what constellations it shall pass thorough: and in what Aspect it shall
be posited to any Planet, or other Star: so of conjunctions, oppositions,
quadratures, combustions, Eclipses, and many such like affections, in common
incident to Comets with other Stars, there may as clear predictions be made: as
also when it disappears, not for its remoteness from us, but as other Stars
daily, because of the Suns propinquity to it, and our view, the times of its
not being seen by reason of the circumfusion of the greater light of the Sun,
being manifestly calculable; though of other obscurations by clouds, and such
like impediments and interpositions, no artificial prognostic can be made. So
in the first Approaches, or last recesses of Comets, by falling into such
circumfusions of solar light, the first appearance of the Comet will be later
then otherwise, and in the other case, its appearing cease sooner then might be
expected: and predictions are accordingly to be ordered. If I have been
unusually long beyond the proportion of a Letter, suppose it to be the long
Train peculiar to such Cometical, full-lighted, obscure-natured Stars, as you
are now Quaering about. And not to dismiss you without a Task; it were a noble
disquisition clearly to unfold, what it is in these Cometical Stars, alone, or
also in their circumfused Atmospheres, that enables the Sun, more especially to
affix such glorious, long luminous Tayls unto them more then to other Stars,
whether constant, or new, or rarely appearing Stars; which in whatsoever
position to the Sun, are still seen without any such long, beamy, luminous
Trains. But I commit this and those other Queries about the salts of the
highest volatiles to your serious leisure.

The sixth Answer.
That the motion of the Celestial bodies about their particular axes, is not a
satisfactory proof of their Copornican Systeme. That Comets though supposed to
be nearest to the Earth, when they are in opposition to the Sun, yet do not
thereby prove the Earths motion.

I See that neither the currency of Doctrines, nor the course of time, are able
to beat off from you your old Philosophical genius. You can swallow nothing
upon the mere Tradition of others, nor yet upon their reasons, till first
examined, concocted, and digested in your own. Your doubts seem not causeless
which you move upon that point; whether the motion of the Celestial bodies
turning themselves about, upon their own Axes, may be allowed for a just proof
of the Copernican systeme. It is a golden and noble branch of intellectual
Justice, so far as is possible, mathematically and to a punctillio, to clear
and set forth the bounders of Truth: yet as your modesty delivers your
judgment, I doubt not, by way of doubt; so I desire you read my Answer, as
writ only in the same Dialect; that I, in like manner, may not appear a rash
Judger, of what it seems has been concluded by men of great parts and learning.
The Artfullness of the Instruments, and diligence of the Observers that, from
several marks in several Stars, have noted this their circumvolution, I love
and honor: and am apt to conjecture, the like motions may in future be
discovered in other Stars, in which they have not as yet been noted: and shall
be ready to improve the Observation in all inferences authorized and
recommended unto us by the necessity of their consequence. But as things, at
first glance, commonly offer a fuller raye then they hold in constant; so I
suspect the glimmering probability of the Earths motion according to the
Copernican Hypothesis, upon the first discovery of this circumgyration of Stars
about their own Axes, will, upon farther consideration and deliberation, grow
still more faint. There being very few Hypotheses, with which (to give it a
short name) this circumaxal motion of the Stars is expressly inconsistent; it
not being impossible, if all things else would consist and cohaere, but such a
motion might be accomplished in the Hypothesis of Orbs and Sphaeres, so the
Star were but unfixed and set lax and free to move according to its nature in
its own orb, by a motion discharged, different and distinct from the motion of
its orb: So in the old Hypothesis, while they affixed and bound the Star unto
its proper Epicycle, yet in its larger Orb they allowed it to be therein
carried sometimes progressively, sometimes retrogradely, and sometimes
stationarily, according to the motion of the Epicycle, or Episphaere in the
larger sphaere. And without any sense as yet, that it deserves a blush, I
willingly profess, I want the Lyncean eyes and judgment, from such a
circumaxall moving of Stars, to deduce the Suns, or Earths central, either
rest, or motion: especially the vast distance, at which these bodies are
distant one from another, being on all hands yielded; which if it do not
necessarily, altogether amort, and abolish the powers, which one of these
bodies may possibly have upon the others, yet till such their powers over one
another in this point of motion be fairly proved, it leaves it easily manifest,
that any of these bodies may be moved according to its own peculiar nature,
without laying, by so long a reach, laws of necessity upon other Bodies, at so
great a distance, for their motion. As for example the bodies A. and B. either
of the same general, or special nature; they being severed and severally placed
at competent distance one from another; both, or either may be at rest, or in
motion, neither inferring upon the other the analogy either of its rest, or
motion, or to be suspected so to do, till it be pregnantly either so observed,
or proved: Viz. That either has upon the other, even at distance, such a strong
and efficacions power^ And if the stress of the ratiocination hang upon this;
that otherwise there would not be a conformity between the motions of the
Earth, the Sun, Saturn, Jupiter, etc. to my apprehension, nothing is more easy,
then not only to turn the edge, but break the back and overturn the foundation
of such an Argument. For first the motions, or unmovednes of these bodies, is
not to be made conform unto our retired thoughts, and speculations in a close
study, or to the motions, which we have observed, and justly concluded certain
in other noble Bodies in the world; but they are rather by all ingenions Arts
and instruments, to be each by its self particularly observed, how in Truth
they are, and so to be accepted and acknowledged in their appropriate sciences.
And what greater necessity is there of making the Sun, or the Earth in rest and
motion to be conform to Saturn, Jupiter, etc. then to be conform to them in
shape, magnitude, respective distances, which on no hand is ascerted, but for
the impossibility, and demonstrablenes thereof by observation, rather the
contrary? And why should there not be as great a necessity for them to be
conform in rest and motion, to the Stars passing generally under the notion and
title of Fixed, which has never yet been offered, because it is cl^^^ it cannot
be defended? And what less necessity is there, why they should not conform in
the celerity and nimbleness of their motion, as well as the form, kind and
manner of it? And what greater necessity for conformity of motion in Stars,
then in Animals, in which some creep, some fly, some go upon feet, some swim;
neither in their supposed and called Elements can any such necessity of the
same kind of motion be observed, though in the same Element. Upon the same way,
method and force of reasoning, when Jacob is at the Dancing, or Fencing Schools
in Oxford, Joga must be Galliarding or Brandishing it at the like Schools in
Salamanca. Every stone has not in it the mysteryes of the Magnet, and several
Jewels have their several splendours, virtues and properties: so several Stars
considering their several situations, shapes, magnitudes, distances and
diversities of nature, cannot but in rest and motion each have something proper
and peculiar: at least may not without cause be suspected to have otherwise,
till it be possible by some medium to evince the contrary. And as the
Copernican Systeme receives not much confirmation from the praecedent
circumaxal motion of Stars; so that Comets are nearest the Earth when opposite
to the Sun; with what greater strength does it, as others urge, prove the
Earths motion? wherein is requisite that the Hypothesis it self, be confirmed
by frequent Observation in several Comets, before it be allowed as general;
that as by way of Induction may be inferred, that every Comet when it is
nearest to the Earth, is then opposite to the Sun, and when this is allowed and
fairly proved, there is no necessity by which it follows, or can be inferred
from hence, that the Earth has its annual Revolutions about the Sun: all that
is in the allowed, and supposedly proved Hypothesis, being many ways
accomplishable, and as easily and clearly, the Sun moving about the Earth, as
the Earth moving about the Sun, in which I doubt not your judgment.

The Second SECTION of PHILOSOPHICAL ANSWERS. CONTAINING QUERIES Relating to
the Angle of Contact.

LONDON, Printed by T. L. for Nathaniel Brook, at the Angel in Cornhil near
the Royal Exchange. 1670.

To the right reverend Father in God, Seth Lord Bishop of Salisbury.
To the right reverend Father in God Lord Bishop of Chester.
My Lords.
ALthough I know, the raw, untrained Reader, upon this last Answer above the
rest, will be sure to pronounce his, Quis leget haec? and to bestow upon it, no
other fate then thuris and scrombrorum; judging all things impertinent, that
lie not in the dirty trodden way; or cold, which his torpid dullness is unable,
at least too slothful to strike any fire out of; and every thing to be
destitute of a kernel, which is too hard for his delicate Gum to crack the
shell of: however, I fear not the rendering my self faulty beyond Apology, in
laying this Answer, above all the rest divulged in this present manual, at your
Lordships feet. The singular happiness of both your Lordships in your studies,
drawing in by way of divertisement, what multitudes of others study seriously
and purposely for, and yet miss of, having made veneration to wait upon your
judgment, and your minds so seemingly fruitful, in multitudes of as new as
ingenious inventions; has too well acquainted your Lordships, with the
Scufflings which have been in former ages, and between men of the clearest
judgments, and most excellent parts, about these minute angles of contact;
being, by general confession, small beyond all proportion with rectilinearies;
and by others only denied to be minute, because they think they have no
quantity at all. Like as in solar Atoms, when myriades of them are before us,
we cannot be peremptory in asserting a full sight of any one of them. And
however I may have missed the Corinth I first hoysed sail for, I know when
retiring from your higher-region'd speculations you are pleased to make unto
your selves a Platonic divertisement, upon a deigned perusal of this scrole
to a friend, I doubt not but your Lordships will justify the essay, and allow
that by such sallyes, a firm comprehension may at last be attained of the
mercurial niceness of this question, which has so often eluded the grasp of
those wits, who have formerly thought they have had it so firm and sure. My
Lords, I know the admirable quality, and mighty merits of the persons that
think and have thought otherwise, then I have delivered my thoughts here;
however I should have dealt faithlesly with my friend, if I should have
returned him answer contrary to my judgment. And as I have been morally true to
him, so what right, or injury I have herein done unto Philosophical truths in
this nice, and hitherto inexplicable subtilty, none can better decide then your
Lordships; at whose feet it is left, by

Your Lordships Servant. W. M.

The Seventh Answer.
Concerning angles of contact. That recto-convexe angles of contact are truly
angles according to the definition of plane angles. That recto-convexe angles
of contact are not destitute of quantity. How many ways one quantity may be
greater then another, what kind of homogeneity it is that is requisite for
proportionalls. That angles have figuration as well as quantity. That in angles
is observable a homogeneity or heterogeneity which is Mathematical, and also a
homogeneity or heterogeneity which is not Mathematical, nor any way concerning
their quantity, but only their figuration, etc. Of several special properties
of magnitudes and angles. How some angles are Constituted by the concrescency
and annexion of several parts and angles which are heterogeneal each to other.
Whether like angles in unequal circles, and in look segments of circles be
always Equal? That all Equal angles are not like. That all like angles are not
Equal.

THough I cannot consent unto your thoughts about the Angle of Contact, I
should be angry with my own rashness, should I be forward to blame your late
speculations thereabout; seeing so many noble and sprightly wits, and such as
have deserved the honor of Europe, siding with you. Especially I honor your
thorow-conversation in the learned persons works, whom I perceive you so
largely to have gleaned after: you could not have plowed in these hard grounds
with a more worthy Assistant. But knowing it is not Complement you expect in
Philosophy but Reason; I shall in as short, as the matter will bear, and as
plainly as I can, sum up the grounds, why I as yet remain so far
dissatisfyed, that I cannot without injustice to my own judgment, desert the
generous and learned dissenters from your Opinion: or cease to aver Angles of
Contact to be true quantities, equal; or unequal one to another, though the
highest multiplex of the greatest citradiametral Angle of Contact, be never
able to exhaust, or equalize the least right-lined part of the most acute
right-lined Angle.

And that we may not mistake each other about the State of the Controversy; and
to be shorter, and more clear in the ensuing discourse; we shall first set down
the definitions of certain terms, about which I suppose there will be no
difference between us. As.

1st. (Our discourse extending no further then to plain Angles) that by a
Right-lined angle, we understand a plane angle contained under two concurring
sides, or lines, which are two right-lines not posited directly the one in the
production of the other, nor parallel the one to the other. As in fig. 1. the
Angle B AC is a right-lined angle contained under the two right lines BA and
CA; BA and CA not being so posited at A as to make one right line: nor can they
be parallel because of their rectitude and concurrence.

2ly. That by a crooked-lined Angle, we understand a plane Angle, contained
under two concurring sides, or lines, which are two crooked lines; as in the
fig. 2.3 4. the Angle B AC is a crooked lined angle contained under the two
Crooked lines B A and C A.

3ly. That by a crooked lined angle of concaves, or a Concavo-concave angle, we
understand a plane angle contained under two concurring crooked lines; both
which crooked lines obvert at the Angle first of all inwards, the concave side
of their Curvature, toward the angle under then contained. So in fig. 4. the
angle B AC is a crooked-lined angle of Concaves, or a Concavo-concave angle,
contained under the two crooked lines BA and C A both which obvert the Concave
side of their curvature toward the angle under then contained.

4ly. That by a crooked-lined angle of Convexes, or a Convexo-convexe angle, we
understand a plane angle, contained under two concurring crooked-lines; both
which crooked-lines obvert at the angle first of all inwards, the Convexe sides
of their Curvature toward the angle, under them contained. So in fig. 2. the
angle BAC. is a crooked-lined angle of convexes, or a Convexo-convexe angle,
contained under the two crooked-lines BA and CA, both which obvert the convexe
sides of their curvature, first of all inwards, toward the Angle under them
contained.

5ly. That by a concavo-convexe angle we understand a plane angle, contained
under two concurring crooked lines; the one of which, at the angle first of
all, obverts the convexe side of its curvature inwards toward the contained
angle, the other the concave side of its curvature. So in fig. the 3 d. the
angle BAC is a concave-convexe, or a convexo-concave crooked-lined angle,
contained under the two crooked lines BA and CA, whereof the one BA obverts the
convexe side of its curvature toward the contained angle, but the other CA
obverts the concave side of its curvature toward the same contained angle.

6ly. That by a mixed lined angle, we understand a plane angle, contained under
two concurring lines; whereof the one is a right line, the other a crooked
line. So in fig. 5 th. 6 th. the angle BAC is a mixed-lined angle, contained
under the right line CA. and the crooked line B A.

7ly. That by a Recto-concave angle, we understand a plane angle, contained
under two concurring lines; whereof the one is a right line, the other a
crooked line, having the concave side of its curvature obverted toward the
contained angle, so in fig. 5. The angle B.A.C. is drawn a recto-concave angle,
being contained under the right line C.A. and the crooked line B. obverting the
concave side of its curvature toward the contained angle.

8ly. That by a recto-convexe angle, we understand a plane angle, contained
under two concurring lines; whereof the one is a right line, the other a
crooked line, having the convexe side of its curvature obverted toward the
angle contained, so in fig. 6 th. the angle BAC. is drawn a recto-convexe
angle, being contained under the right line CA. and the crooked line BA.
obverting the convexe side of its curvature toward the contained angle.

9ly. That by an Angle of contact we understand a plane angle, contained under
two concurring lines; which two lines are neither one and the same line
produced, nor yet in their present positure and inclination can possibly cut
one another, how far soever either, or both of them be produced. So in fig. 7
th. and fig. 8 th. the angle B AC. being an angle of contact, if in either
figure the crookd-line BA, be produced beyond the point of contact A, unto D,
and in fig, 7 th. the crooked-line CA, in figure 8 th. the right line CA. be
produced beyond the point of contact A unto E; in neither the line C AE can fall
into the production of the line BAD, nor in either shall the line C AE cut the
line B AD. And

10ly. From the figuration, positure and properties of the sides of such angles
of contact; that by a recto-convexe angle of contact, we understand a plane
angle being recto-convexe, as above defined, and being also an angle of
contact. So in fig. 8 th. if in the recto-convexe angle BAC, the right line C A
touch and cut not the convexe arch B A the angle BAC is a recto-convexe angle
of contact.

11ly. That, by a recto-concave angle of contact we understand a plane angle of
contact, which is also recto-concave, as above defined. As in fig. the 8 th. if
in the recto-concave angle EAB the right line EA touch and cut not the concave
arch BA, the angle EAB is a recto-concave angle of contact.

12. That by a concavo-convexe angle of contact we understand a plane angle of
Contact, being also concavo-convexe, as above defined. So in fig. 12 th. if R
AH being a concavo-convexe angle, the arch RA touch and cut not the arch H A
then the angle R AH is a concavo-convexe angle of Contact.

13. That by a Citra-diametral-concavo-convexe angle of Contact, we understand
a plane concavo-convexe angle of Contact, both whose containing Arches lie on
the same side of the right line tangent, which touches both the arches in the
same point of Contact, As in fig. 12 th. the concavo-convexe angle of Contact H
AR, having both Arches H A and R A lying on the same side of the right line
tangent B A, which touches both the Arches in the same point A, the
concavo-convexe angle of Contact H AR is citradiametral.

14. That by an ultra-diametral concavo-convexe angle of Contact, we understand
a plane angle of contact being concavo-convexe, and having the one arch on the
one side of the diameter passing through the Contact point, and beyond the right
line tangent which touches the Arches in the same point; but having the other
arch on the other side of that diameter, and on the other side of the right
line tangent. So in fig. 12 th. the two Circles F AH and ADK touching in the
point A, and AK being their common diameter and AB being a right line tangent
to both, the concavo-convexe angle of Contact DAH is ultra-diametral.

15. That by a mixed crooked lined angle, we understand a plane angle contained
under two concurring crooked lines, of such several curvatures that it is
impossible for them to be coapted from the angular point the one unto the
other, or the one, or its production to be coapted to the other, or its
production, at and from the angular point, by any circumduction whatsoever, so
in fig. 9.10.11. the angle B AC, being a mixed crooked lined angle, AB as being
of a different curvature from AC, can no way possibly be coapted by any
circumduction to AC from the angular point A: and if B A be produced to D and
CA to E the crooked-line AB, because of its different curvature can neither be
coapted to the crooked line AC nor to its production AE: nor the crooked line
AC to the crooked line AB, nor to its production AD, by any circumduction upon
the angular point whatsoever.

16. That by the isoclitical sides of an Angle, we understand two such lines,
whether right, or crooked, containing a plane angle, as according to their
present site and positure, without inversion when crooked, moving by the sides
nearer one to another, will by such motion at last come to be coincident with
and coapted exactly the one unto the other: and that by an isoclitical angle we
understand a plane angle, contained under such isoclitical sides. So every
right lined angle is manifestly isoclitical; and its sides are isoclitical, the
sides by such motion on the angular point one toward another being manifestly
coincidible and coaptable So also in fig. 3 d. if in the concavo-convexe
crooked lined angle BAC. the crooked-lined side B A by moving upon the angular
point A toward the other crooked lined side CA, will at last coapt and become
coincident with the crooked lined side C A then are B A and C A isoclitical
sides and the angle B AC anisoclitical angle.

17. That by the anisoclitical sides of an angle we understand two such lines,
whether the one right and the other crooked, or else both crooked, and whether
both of the same or different curvatures, containing a plane angle, so as
according to their present site and positure, without inversion of either when
crooked, by moving the sides nearer one another, by the continuance of such
motion they can never be brought to be coincident with, and coapted exactly the
one unto the other and that by an anisoclitical angle, we understand a plane
angle contained under such anisoclitical sides. So all crooked lined angles of
concaves, though having sides of like curvature, all crooked lined angles of
convexes, though having sides of like curvature, all concavo-convexe angles,
whose sides are of different curvatures, all mixed lined angles, whether
recto-convexes, or recto-concaves, all mixed crooked lined angles whatsoever,
are all of them manifestly anisoclitical angles, and their sides anisoclitical.
So in fig. 4 th. though AB and AC. be supposed to be of uniform answering and
equal curvatures, and likewise in fig. 2 d. though AB and AC again supposed to
be of uniform, answering and equal curvatures, and in fig. 3 d. fig, 5, 6, 9,
10, 11. supposing AB and AC not to be of uniform, answering and equal
curvatures, by moving the sides AB and AC in that their present fire and
positure upon the angular point A, without the inversion of either, when both
are crooked, to bring the sides nearer the one to the other, it is manifest
that by the continuance of such motion they can never be brought to a
coincidence with, and to be coapted exactly the one unto the other, and such
also are all angles of Contact whatsoever, as in fig. 7, 8, 11. AB and AC are
as uncoincidable and uncoaptable as in the former, except only ultradiametral,
concavo-convexe angles of Contact, which are of equal and answering curvatures.

18. That by an Angle of curvature, or coincidence we understand a plane angle,
contained by any two parts of a crooked line at the point of their concurrences
any where to be imagined, or taken in crooked-lines. So in the 7 th. fig. let
BAD be the circumference of a Circle, Parabola, Hyperbola, Ellipsis etc. At the
mean point A, the sides BA and AD contain an Angle of Curvature, or coincidence.

19. That by autoclitical curvature, and so by an autoclitical crooked line, we
understand such a crooked line, as passing from the angular point of a right
lined angle, between the two sides, by the inclination of its curvature,
keeps the convexe side of its curvature, constantly obverted to one of the
sides, and the concave side of its curvature constantly obverted to the other.
As in fig. 17. in the right lined angle BAC, the crooked line AEF keeping its
convexity constantly obverted to the side AB, and its concavity to the side AC,
or so much of it as is intercepted between the intersection at F and the
angular point at A the crooked line AEF is autoclitical, i. e. the convexity is
all on one side, and the concavity all on the other.

20. That by antanaclitical curvature and so by an antanaclitical curve line,
we understand such a crooked line, as passing from the angular point of a
right-lined angle, between the two sides, by the inclination of its curvature,
has the convexe part of its curvature, sometimes toward the one side of the
right lined angle, and sometimes toward the other side of the right lined
angle, i. e. the convexeness and the concaveness are not constantly on the same
several sides. As in fig. 17. in the right lined angle BAC, the crooked line
AGH obverting the convexity at G toward AB, and at H toward AC is
antanaclitical.

These definitions praemised, to give now the true State of the controversy;
let there be, as in fig. 12. two equal Circles AHH and ADK touching in the
point A: and let AG be the Semidiameter of the circle ADK: and AB be a right
line tangent touching both the Circles in the point A: and let AEL be a greater
circle then either, touching both the former, and also the right line tangent
in the point A: and from the point A draw the right line AC at pleasure,
cutting the circle ADK in the point D, and the circle AEL in the point E: now
therefore whereas you say that the Recto-convexe angles of Contact BAE and B AF
are not unequal, and that neither of them is quantitative; and that the
crooked-lines E A, DA, HA are coincident, Sc. so as to make no Angle with the
right line AB, or one with another; and that the right-lined right angle B AG
is equal to the mixt-lined, i. e. Recto-concave angles of the Semicircles E AG
and D AG severally, and that those angles of the Semicircles E AG and D AG are
equal the one unto the other; and that the mixed lined Recto-convexe angle F AG
is severally equal to all, or any of the former; and that there is no
heterogeneity amongst plane angles, but that they are all of them of the same
sort, and homogeneal and undevideable into parts specifically different,
distinct and heterogeneal in respect of one another, and the whole; and that to
any mixed, or crooked lined angle whatsoever that is quantitative it is not
impossible to give an equal right lined angle: I acknowledge for all these
things you have disputed very subtly; yet I must with a clear and free
judgment own and declare a dissent from you in them all, for the reasons to be
alleged in the ensuing Discourse.

To clear all which, nothing can be of higher consequence in this Question,
then truly to understand the nature of an Angle, what an Angle is, what is an
Angle, and what is not. And to exclude the consideration of Angles herein
unconcerned; they are plane angles i. e. such as are contained by lines, which
lie wholly, and both in the same plane, the disquisition of whose nature we are
now about. And such is the affinity, which the inclination of one line has to
another in the same plane, with the nature of an Angle, that without it a plane
angle cannot be defined, or conceived. For where there is rectitude and
voidness of inclination, as in a right line and its production, there never was
justly suspected to be any thing latent of an angular nature; nor between
parallels, for want of mutual inclination. But yet the inclination of line upon
line in the same plane, is not sufficient to make up the nature of an Angle:
for in the same plane one line may have inclination to another, and yet they
never meet, nor have in their infinite regular production any possibility of
ever meeting; as the circumference of an Ellipsis, or circle to a right line
lying wholly without them, without either Section, or Contact; or the
Asymptotes in conjugate Sections, which though ever making a closer
appropinquation to the circumferences of the conjugate figures, yet infinitely
produced, never attain a concurrency. And though by possibility the inclined
lines might meet, yet if they do not, an Angle is not constituted: only there
is possibility of an Angle when being produced they shall meet. So as to make
up the nature of an Angle two lines must be inclined one to another, and also
concur, or meet to contain on their parts a certain space, or part of the
plane between their productions from their point of concurrence, or their
angular point. And this being the general, and proper nature of a plane angle;
as it is manifest, that in a right line there is no Angle, so it is dubious
what is to be judged of those curve, or crooked lines, whose curvature is
either equal, uniform, or regular: Sc. whether in such lines there be not at
every mean point an angularness, the lines still lying in the same positure. It
is clear in a right line no mean point can be taken, at which the parts of the
right line in their present position can be said to have any inclination one to
another: that though the parts concur, yet they want inclination: but in the
circumferences of circles, Ellipses, Hyperbola's, Parabola's and such like
curve, or crooked lines, being of equal uniform, or regular curvature, no point
can be assigned at which the parts in their present position have not a special
inclination one to another. So as, as before, inclination of lines and
concurrency making up the nature of an angle; it seems not reasonable to deny
angularity at any point of such crooked lines, however their curvature be
either uniform, equal, or regular. But I know it will be said that such crooked
lines of equal, uniform and regular curvature are but one line, and therefore,
by the definition of an angle, cannot contain an angle; which requires two
lines to its constitution. To which I answer, that in like manner, two
concurring right lines may be taken for one line continued though not in its
rectitude, and then the consideration of angularity between them is excluded:
however by reason of the inflexion and inclination at the point of incurvation,
there is an aptitude in that one produced line, there to fall, and distinguish
it self into two, with inclination of one unto the other, and so to offer the
constitutive nature of an angle: and so it is at every point of such crooked
lines, whose curvature is equal, or uniform and regular; being one, or more
lines, according as by our conceptions they are continued, or distinguished And
as a continued rectitude, such as is in right lines, is most inconsistent with
the nature of an angle, so what should be judged more accepting of the nature
of angularity, then curvature is, being thereunto contrariously opposite, and
by all confessed most what to be so, saving in the aforesaid cases when curvature
is equal, uniform, or regular. But why should equality, uniformity, or
regularity of curvatures, be so urged in the concern of angularity, by none of
which is angularity either promoted, or hindered? For there cannot be greater
equality, uniformity, or regularity, then is to be found in Rectitude as well
as angles, in right lines as well as Circles; the things constitutive of the
nature of an angle, being things quite different from them, Viz. inflexion or
inclination and concurrence; which are indifferently found in all curvatures
equal and unequal, uniform, or not uniform, regular, or irregular: and besides
are inseparable from them: curvature and a concurrent inflexion, or angularity
being but as two notions of the same thing, considered as under several
respects: Viz. curvature is the affection of a line considered as one: the same
being angularity and inclination, when from any point of the curvature the same
line is considered as two: so two concurrent right lines are said to be one
crooked line: but when a right-lined angle is said to be contained by them,
they are then considered as two from the point of their incurvation, or
inclination: and equality, and uniformity, and regularity of curvature implying
equality, uniformity and regularity of inflexion, or inclination, it is so far
from concluding against angularity, that it inferrs it with an additament, Viz.
of equal angularity, uniform angularity, and regular angularity; as might be at
large declared in the special properties of several crooked lined figures. And
in several uniform, and regular crooked lined figures, there are some special
points, offering even to view and sense a clear specimen of a more then
ordinary angularity, without any such loud calling for the strong operations of
the mind; as the vertical points in conjugate figures, in parabola's, and the
extreme points of either axes, in ellipses, and the like, And in the definition
of a plane angle, all the inclination, which is required in the concurring
sides, is only, that their inclination be (...) i. e. so as the sides make not
one and the same right line, as it is generally understood: however so far are
we from imposing upon any against their judgments, this special sort of
angles, that we readily acknowledge, if the words (...), in the definition of a
plane angle, be forced from the commonly received sense, of the sides not lying
in the same right-line, to signify the non-coincidency of the production of the
one side with the other, then according to that gloss upon the definition of
plane angles, this whole sort of angles is to be rejected; wherein every one is
freely left to his own judgment; the difference being a question and quarrel
about words, more then matter, and not concerning the present controversy.

However from the whole it out of Controversy appears, that recto-concave
angles of Contact are true angles, contained under two inclined sides,
concurring: also that ultradiametral concavo-convexe angles of Contact, whether
less equal, or greater then two right right-lined angles are true angles, for
the sides are inclined and concur: of their concurrence can be no doubt: and
that they are inclined must of necessity be yielded, seeing they neither lie in
rectitude, nor which to some might be a causeless scruple, the one in the
production of the other: so as their angularity is clear beyond all doubt: the
inclination understood in the definition of an angle being generally any
positure of one line with regard to another in the same plane, so as both
neither fall in one right line, nor be situated parallel one to another, nor
under such a manner of oblique extension, as may render their concurrence
impossible: it is not only the oblique positure of one line in reference to
another, as contradistinguished from perpendicularness in acute and obsuse
inclinations: but such is the comprehensiveness of its sense, in the present
acceptance, that every perpendicularness it self is taken for an inclination.

So likewise it cannot reasonably be denied but those special angles of
Contact, which are the chief subject of this present controversy, I mean
recto-convexe angles of Contact, are truly angles; except either the
inclination of their sides, or their concurrence could be called in question;
nothing else being requisite unto the nature, or comprised in the definition of
an angle: and the like is to be judged of all other concavo-convexe and
convexo-convexe angles of Contact. But you said that in the recto-convexe angle
of Contact the right-line tangent and circumference make no angle, because the
tangent is not inclined to the circumference, but coincident with it. What
mystery of reason, or force of Argument should be in this deduction? if you say
it is coincidence, you mean by non-inclination; I readily yield, where two
lines, become coincident, their former angle is thereby extinct; as thereby
they come under the consideration but of one line: as when two right-lines, or
two isoclitical crooked lines, are, one of each of them, so moved about the
angular point, till the two lines become one. But where is any such coincidency
between right-line tangents and circumferences? or what possibility is there of
any such coincidency: a crooked line and a right-line may no doubt be
commensurate, or proportionable in length, but in position it is impossible:
and if we imagine the tangent bowed to such a coincidence, then it is not any
longer a tangent, or right-line, but a circumference. And though as you urge, a
right-line circumduced about any middle point in the side of a regular
polygone, at last becomes coincident with the side, and looses all inclination
and angularity with the side; what does that concern, or how does that prove
the non-inclination of the tangent to the circumference; your selves sometimes
in every point, save only in the point of Contact acknowledging an inclination;
and as is else where hinted, in the point of Contact alone, and abstractedly,
the inclination it self, which is the habitude of the concurring inclined
sides, is not to be sought, but only the particular termination of their
inclination there. But you will say, it is non-secancy which is meant by this
coincidency: and what I pray is that more then the Lateran bells to the
concern, or constitution of angles? Are there not many regular curve lines
produced, some infinitely without Section, in which especially the
circumferences of circles, you are pleased sometimes every where to think you
have cause to imagine an angle. It were meet to know the meaning of such odly
connext terms, before reasonings upon them be regarded in questions of weight.

That the Contact of the angular sides, is as different from coincidency, as
from secancy, is most unquestionably apparent in angles of such sides, as are
capable of all three, Viz. Contact, secancy, and coincidence. For example in
fig. 16. let there be two Arches of equal Circles DAF and BAC. touching one
another in the point A. If the arch DAF be circumduced about the point A as an
unmovable center; at after an infinite succession of secancies, at last all
will terminate in a manifest coincidency, and the arch AF be coincident with
the arch AB, and the arch AD be coincident with the arch AC. So as secancy,
Contact, and coincidency are distinguishable one from another with as much ease
and cleareness, as an odd number from an even. But if it be urged, that you
assert not a coincidency between the arch. D AF and the arch BAC, but only that
GH being a right line and touching the arch B AC in the point A, that I say the
right line GH and the arch BAC are coincident. The vanity of this may be
evinced; in that by the same reason it follows, that the right line GH must be
coincident with the arch DAF, and so the arch DAF coincident with the arch B
AC; the contrary of which is above-shewn and confessed: and besides hereupon
should two arches B AC and DAF being convexo-convexely posited, and the right
line tangent GH be all coincident; which I leave for others to say rather then
my self.

When a right line tangent and many crooked lines of different curvatures, all
touch together in one and the same point, as in fig. 13; you say, though
without the angular point of Contact the sides are variously divaricated one
from another, yet in the point of Contact, they have not several inclinations,
for you say they have no inclination at all. The truth is the angular point of
its self is not capable of inclinations, nor for the indivisibility of its
nature can by any possibility comprehend them: yet that lines concurring in one
only point, and presently after receding each from the other, should not be
inclined each to other in or at the point of their concurrency, whether it be
by Contact, or Section, though in the case of Contacts the inclination be less,
then can be expressed by the inclination of any right-line upon a right-line,
is absolutely unconceiveable, there being no lineary coincidence, but only of
one point between them. For as else where, in the same plane, neither of point
to point, nor of point to line, nor of point to plane can be any inclination:
but in the present case of plane angles, inclination must be of lines, and may
be of them in the very point of concurrence; or else from the point of
concurrence they would not part several ways: for it is their diverse
inclination at that point, which makes their departure one from another when
they depart from thence. And as even in the angular point of right-lined angles
the lines have the same inclinations as else where, so in all other angles,
save only such angles of Contact, as are less then the least right-lined
angles, by drawing right-lined tangents to the arch, or arches at the angular
point, is shown in right-lines, either the very inclination of the sides, in,
or rather at the angular point, or else the least right-lined inclination,
which is greater, or the greatest right-lined inclination, which is less: for
though they may differ much in their distance and divarication one from
another, without the point of their concurrence; in the point of their
concurrence, without much absurdity, they may be said to be equally distant, i.
e. not at all distant there one from another, for there they are not indeed at
all distant any of them from the rest: yet it does not hence any way follow,
that in like manner it may be said of them without absurdity, that in the point
of concurrence they have equal inclinations, i. e. no inclinations one to
another: for though in the point of concurrence it is truth, they have no
distance, yet it no ways as may appear to those that will consider equally
follows, that they should there have no inclination.

Besides, that the urging of the coincidency of the sides in recto-convexe
angles of Contact is most directly opposite to the nature and properties of the
special lines under which such angles are contained. For, it is the special
property of some lines that they can touch, but they can no way be-coincident;
as Arches of unequal and unlike curvature: and a right-line and a crooked line:
some can be coincident, and can no way touch, as right lines: some can both; as
Arches of equal and answering curvature, which set concavo-convexely, and
citradiametrally cannot touch, but will fall into a coincidence: but posited
convexo-convexely, cannot be coincident, but may construct an angle of Contact.

So as the chimaera of the coincidency of the sides in recto-convexe angles of
Contact, if persisted in, is worth laughing at, and like his Philosophy who
when every one was at his high Lavolta's, denied the possibility of motion in
the world: But to justify the non-inclination of the sides against the eye and
reason, this horridly distorted Monster of their coincidency was introduced.
Indeed if they be coincident they make no angle: But it will cramp the
understanding of an Oedipus to declare how either a right-line, or a
crooked-line, touching another crooked-line in one only point and no more,
should ever be conceived, notwithstanding to be coincident with the production
of the other crooked-line, whether the tangencie of the crooked-lines be
concavo-convexe, or convexo-convexe, i. e. the one within the other, or else
the one turned away from the other. But you will say, you assert coincidency only
in the point of Contact. I answer, that is frivolous, not to say ridiculous and
impertinent; for coincidency in the present question of angles is taken as
opposed to inclination, which is an affection and propriety of the concurring
sides of the angle, not only of the angular point taken by it self
abstractedly. As inclination cannot be in a point, though it may be at a point,
so a point cannot be said to be inclined unto a line, especially it self being
in the same line: it may be said to hold such and such a distance from the
line, when it is without it, but not to be inclined unto it. And if the being
of the point of Contact, generally as a point of the one side, in the tangent
line, as in the other side, whether right, or crooked, make a coincidency
destroying inclination; then all inclinations and angles whatsoever are
destroyed; and every where will be a coincidency, for that is common to every
angle to have the angular point still common to both sides: and the secant
angles might as well be said coincident, as the tangent angles, For what you
say, that it is tangency as opposed to secancy, that you mean by coincidency; I
answer the gloss is improper and besides the anvil and tangency undenied, but
in this case impertinently by you alleged, till it be proved that tangency in
one only point, and no more, does quite annul and destroy the inclination of
the lines, though on both sides of the Contact clearly receding the one from
the other: till which be done happiness to my friend and no longer.

I might add that it is Touching which is only mentioned in the definition of
plane angles; but I shall dispatch all by setting the case before you in this
Diagramme in fig. 12. if the right line BA touch the arch LA in the point A and
the right-line LB be so drawn as to touch the arch LA in the point L, here now
is a plane on every side bounded by two right-lines, Viz. BL and BA and one
crooked-line, Viz. the arch LA. That LBA is an angle will not be doubted: and
because the three lines perfectly bound in and limit a plane on all sides; the
Arch LA can neither be coincident with the right line LB, nor with the
right-line AB, and in the angle LAB, the lines LA and BA; and in the angle ALB,
the lines LA and BL concurring without coincidency, and without lying in the
same right-line, or the one, so much as, in the production of the other;
inclination, and so the true nature of an angle, cannot be denied them;
according to the most severe limitations and hardest glosses, that can with any
reason be deduced from the definition of a plane angle. And to make all clear
let a Paper, or other plane be cut in the form of the mixed-lined Triangle ALB
and the wildness of questioning the angularity of the two recto-convexe angles
of contact LAB and BLA will be clear to all persons both rude and learned. I
take it therefore for granted; that, all suspicion of coincidency and
non-inclination, in whatsoever pertinent sense, of Contact-angle sides, being
evicted and sent of the scene, all recto-convexe angles of Contact are truly
angles.

To pass now unto another of your Thesis's in which you peremptorily conclude
Recto-convexe angles of Contact to be devoyd of all quantitativeness; when I
urge their quantitativeness, I mean not that they can at pleasure be divided
into parts in any given and limited proportion, or by a mathematical
homogeneity holding any proportion with the Angle of Contact divided; only that
from the angular point between the sides of the least Recto-convexe angle of
Contact infinite other lines may be drawn, dividing the angle, though
heterogeneally. And certainly its being an angle of Contact cannot in the least
prejudice its quantitativeness: for it is most apparent that a convexo-convexe
angle of Contact contained under Arches of equal curvature, may be divided into
two mixed-lined, i. e. recto-convexe angles of Contact, which hold proportion
of equality one with another, and each of them is in subduple proportion to the
convexo-convexe angle of Contact, which was divided: and infinite numbers of
Contact-angles of several sorts may be adjoined one unto another, distinct in
their situation, without drowning and extinguishing one another and each lying
without the other: which is not true of indivisibles when they are adjoined to,
and touch one another. Besides the recto-concave angle of Contact is greater
then the greatest right-lined angle, at the angular point of Contact having a
manifest inclination of the sides; for concurring, they neither are one
right-line, nor one crooked-line. Moreover ultra-diametral concavo-convexe
Angles of Contact may be equal to two right right-lined angles, or greater
sometimes: As in fig. 12. if the two Circles FAH and ADK be equal and touch in
the point A, and AK be diameter: and AR be another Arch falling beyond the
diameter AK and beyond the right line tangent AB: it is manifest that the
concavo-convexe ultra-diametral angle of Contact DAH is as to the recesse of
the sides equal to two right-lined angles: for the recto-concave angle of
Contact BAH is equal to two right right-lined angles, deducting the
recto-convexe angle of Contact HAS: and the recto-convexe angle of Contact BAD
is equal to the recto-convexe angle of contact H AS; therefore the
ultradiametral concavo-convexe angle of Contact D AH is equal to two right
right-lined angles: and therefore the ultra-diametral concavo-convexe angle of
Contact D AR is greater then two right right-lined angles.

And then, what greater Monster is discoverable in the doctrine of the
quantitativeness of the recto-convexe angle of Contact? it is demonstrated that
between the right-line tangent and the Arch which it touches, no right-line
can pass: i. e. the recto-convexe angle of Contact is less then the least
right-lined angle: but why should hence be inferred that the recto-convexe
angle of Contact has no true quantity? you will say, because a right-lined
angle is infinitely divisible into less and less parts, and therefore must at
last be less then the recto-convexe angle of Contact, if the recto-convexe
angle of Contact be a true angle, having truth of quantity. I answer, after all
possible divisions of a right-lined angle into parts of its own kind, I mean
such as are made by right lines, the least part is still a right-lined angle;
then which the recto-convexe angle of Contact is most fairly demonstrated to be
ever less: i. e. the inclination of its sides is eve^ less: and the convexe
arch will still at the angle fall within: so as truly from thence may be
inferred, that the recto-convexe angle of Contact can never be either a
right-lined angle, or equal to it, or greater than a right-lin'd angle: but
that therefore it is no angle, and has no true quantity at all, because it
has not the quantity of a right-lined angle, is a wild and perverse inference,
and elsewhere disproved.

And why should the quantitativeness of the recto-convexe angle of Contact be
called in question, because it is demonstrated less then the least right-lined
angle? If between the right-lined tangent and the arch a right-line could be
drawn, then you would confess the quantitativeness of it as undeniable: and
why does not the passing of a thousand crooked-lines from the angular point,
between the sides of the recto-convexe angle of Contact, as well prove its
quantity and divisibility, as the passing of one right-line between them could:
there being equal force of proof from the one, as from the other? And when a
right-line and two equal Circles, all three touch in the same point; there are
two equal recto-convexe angles of Contact adjacent the one continuedly to the
other, and situate the one without the other: which in indivisibles is
impossible. And when the question is of the quantity of angles, what is it we
enquire, but only, what is the inclination of the sides, especially at the
angular point? And in recto-convexe angles of Contact, the answer is; there is
no inclination at all as of a right-line to a right-line, but only as of a
crooked-line to a right-line: that it were wildness to say; because in
recto-convexe angles of Contact, there cannot be the inclination of a
right-line to a right-line, that therefore the sides meeting and parting one
from another, and not lying both in a right-line, do make no inclination one to
another.

And seeing the convexo-convexe angle of Contact contained under two Arches of
equal curvature is dividable into two equal parts by a common right-line
tangent to them both; angle of Contact, and of both the recto-convexe angles of
Contact, clearly appears; though the quantitativenes of every one of them be
demonstrable to be less then the quantity of any the least right-lined angle
whatsoever: because right-lines cannot contain a less angle then is agreeable to
the inclinations they possibly can have one to another: whereas in crooked
lines generally, these are the constant properties of curvature; though the
angles of coincidence, or curvature, as we for method, brevity and distinction
sake named them, may be very unequal one to another, according to the degrees
of the inflexion, inclination and curvature; yet constantly the angle on the
concave side, from any point of the curvature manifestly if it be equal,
uniform and regular, is still greater then any the greatest acute, right, or
obtuse right-lined angle: and the angle between the convexe arch and a
right-line tangent, at the same point, is constantly less then any right-lined
angle: and yet either may be made still infinitely less, or greater, the
recto-convexe angle of Contact still remaining less then the least right-lined
angle, and the angle of curvature, or coincidence greater still then the
greatest right-lined angle: which is as much as to say, that in curvatures the
difference between the angle of curvature and two right right lined angles,
cannot be a right-lined angle; as in truth it cannot, nor is in reason so to be
expected, but of necessity it must be a mixed-lined, Sc. a recto-convexe angle:
and is the recto-convexe angle of Contact at the same point. And that a
recto-convexe angle of Contact, by no multiplicity can equal, or exceed a
right-lined angle; does not disprove either its angular nature, or its
quantitativeness, both which are otherwise cleared, but it is rather a
confirmation of the heterogeneal difference, which is between the angles of the
one sort and the other. And in my judgment there needed no greater argument of
the quantitativeness of recto-convexe angles of Contact, then the absurdity
following upon the contrary doctrine; that the angle of a Semicircle, and a
right right-lined angle are equal, Viz. The whole and a part, the one being a
mixed-lined and the other a right-lined angle; and in the endeavor of
coaptation, and being coapted on one side, the other side all the way falls
within, or without the other, so as both the sides of the one angle are
impossible to be coapted to both the sides of the other, but will both still
lie within both the sides of the other. And the angles of semi-Circles must
either be confessed unequal in unequal Circles, or the curvature of unequal
circumferences, be manifestly against the truth asserted to be equal. And if
still they be averred to be equal, its desired their equality should be
demonstrated, and the way of admeasuring their equality shown.

But you will say, if recto-convexe angles of Contact be quantitative, why can
they not exhaust any other angle whatsoever contained under the very same
sides; for possibly you will urge, that we should not question the homogeneity
between such angles? To this I answer, without examining what homogeneity may
in other respects be between them; that a quantitative and mathematical
homogeneity can with no reason between them be imagined: because the difference
which is between them is a right-lined angle, to which all angles of Contact
whatsoever are heterogeneal; and your self will not assert any mathematical
homogeneity, or at least proportionablenes which as to this purpose is all one
between any recto-convexe angle of Contact and a right-lined angle. As in fig.
18. let KAB be a recto-convexe angle of Contact, and KAF another recto-convexe
angle under the very same sides: and let AD be a right-line tangent upon the
arch AF: therefore the recto-convexe angles of Contact D AF and KAB being
equal, the right-lined angle KAD is the difference of the recto-convexe angle
of Contact KAB and the other recto-convexe angle KAF under the divarication of
the very same sides. So as it is impossible to divide this, or any other angle
whatsoever, which is not isoclitical, to divide, I say, all of it into any
numbers at pleasure given of parts, which shall be homogeneal all of them one
unto another: for how many soever be homogeneal, the angle of Contact, or that
which is taken out of it, or that unto which it adhaeres, will have and make
heterogeneity.

And if you say, how can recto-convexe angles of Contact be said to be parts of
such concrete and composite angles, if unable by any multiplicity to exhaust
the composite angle? omitting the answer that parts are sometimes essential and
of the definition, and yet by no multiplicity can equalize the whole; as four
angles in the definition of a Tetragone, and a foot line in the definition of a
foot Cube: I answer chiefly, that where the integral is heterogeneal as here,
and made up, and properly and naturally resoluble into several heterogeneal
parts, and connot be divided into any numbers at pleasure of parts all
homogeneal, there some parts may never be able by any multiplicity to equalize
the whole, or some other heterogeneal parts. And elss-where that under the same
coaptable sides may be angles different in their ultimate kind in some further
respects, though not without proportionableness in this instance, is most
apparent among right-lined angles, by comparing a right right-lined angle, and
an acute right-lined angle, and an obtuse right-lined angle together; which all
receive their specific differences from the specific differences of their
inclinations: in right right-lined angles the inclination being no more one way
then the other, no more from the angle side, then to the angle side, Sc.
perpendicular: in acute angles the inclination being to the angle side: and in
obtuse angles the inclination being more especially from the angle side.

And yet though we defend the quantitativeness of recto-convexe angles of
contact we are equally obliged to assert their improportionableness to
right-lined angles: nor will there be any difficulty in answering that
suggession you cast, though in another name; that a recto-convexe angle of
Contact is in proportion less then a right lined angle, as being both
homogeneal; and that by the multiplicity of the recto-convexe angle of Contact,
an angle may be made equal to a right lined angle, or greater, only by changing
its kind, Sc. into a right-lined angle: Viz. in the same manner, as an acute
right-lined angle, being less then a right, or any obtuse right-lined angle, by
its multiplicity may with change of its sort and kind become equal, or greater
then a right, or any given obtuse right-lined angle. To which may be answered,
omitting what kind of distinction it is which is between acute, right and
obtuse right-lined angles, as not pertinent to the present controversy; it
would be well done to show what multiplex of any recto-convexe angle of
Contact, is equal to what right-lined angle, that so a right-lined angle might,
upon that proportion, be formed equal to, or less then the recto-convexe angle
of Contact; contrary to what has been clearly demonstrated, and is generally by
all consented to in Geometry. Though acute and right right-lined angles are
less then any obtuse whatsoever that are right-lined; however they hold
proportion one with another: but recto-convexe angles of Contact cannot be
demonstrated to hold any proportion with any right-lined angle, but clearly the
contrary. And as by the divarications of the sides of an acute right-lined
angle is made a Genesis of a right and infinite obtuse right-lined angle: there
cannot so by the divarication of the sides of a recto-convexe angle of Contact
be effected any Genesis of right-lined angles, but only of recto-convexe
mixt-lined angles, whose sides concur by way of section; and between which
and the recto-convexe angle of Contact is no proportion, as there is between
the divaricated acute right-lined angle and the other right-lined angles
created from that divaricacation. The reason of which is clear, for that the
recto-convexe angle of Contact being demonstrated of it self to be less then
any right-lined angle whatsoever, by the divarication of the sides of it, there
are continually greater and greater right-lined angles added to it, so creating
an improportionality between the one, and the other.

The comparison made between Ciphers and angles of Contact, to draw the one, as
well as the other into the notion of nullities, is unhappy enough: for single
and several Ciphers are not greater, or less in power one then another (though
they may make other figures to be so) as the angles of Contact are, and may be
made larger, or lesser, and many of them one without or within another,
contiguously and continuously conjoined together, with enlargement, or
diminution of their angularity; which is impossible in indivisibles, and
unappliable to, and unintelligible of, mere nullities.

That your Lemma is without exception, and without proof might have been
admitted: Viz. That two quantities by the ordinate application, or motion of a
line, or plane, increasing, or decreasing proportionably, whether by a
proportionality in the same, or different powers, when the ordinate
application, or motion attains the end, and bounding term of the one quantity,
it at the same moment reaches and has attained the bounding term of the
other, and when it has passed the one it has passed the other. But the
objection against the quantitativeness of the recto-convexe angle of Contact,
which you would hereupon found, has no reason to expect the like allowance.
You say, the right-lined right angle at the point of Contact contained under
the right-line tangent, and the diameter of a Circle, equally with the
circumference intercepted, increases, or decreaseth by the motion of the
diameter upon the point of Contact, as a Center; which is true and
acknowledged: and whereas you say, that therefore when the diameter leaves
nothing at all of the circumference in its circumvolution about, un-run over,
but attains the last bounder and termination of it, in the point of Contact,
then as the circumference is quite exhausted and vanished, so is the angle too:
this also we acknowledge to be undeniable. But whereas when the diameter is
come so near the right-line tangent in its circumvolution upon the angular
point of Contact, as to intercept nothing at all of the circumference between
them, you then imagine still an angle remaining, which you say, is either the
recto-convexe angle of Contact, or not less then it; you herein forget the
force of your own manifestly true lemma, which you took so much pains to prove;
except against Geometrical demonstration you could discover a possibility of
dividing a recto-convexe angle of Contact by a right-line: for it is out of
doubt and in Geometry, as above demonstrated, that when the diameter in such
circumvolution intercepts nothing of the circumference between its self and the
right-line tangent, the diameter is then coincident, and the same right-line
with the right-line tangent; and of the former angle therefore, has lest
nothing at all, because of the coincidency of the two right-lines, whose parts
can in that positure have no inclination one unto another: and therefore there
is not so much as the least angle of Contact, or any other angle whatsoever,
left after this circumvolution: so as the whole Argumentation is a long arrow
out of a strong Bow, but quite besides the mark.

It is a seeming weighty objection that which is urged out of optics, and the
usage in that science, to demonstrate in conical figures, the angles of
incidence and reflection to be equal, only with respect to the right-line
tangent, touching the figure in the point of incidence and reflection, without
special respect to the curvature in the conical section. But hereto without
wrong, either to truth, nature, or that noble science, may be upon good grounds
answered. 1. That optics is not pure Geometry, and obstructed stereometry, and
mathematics; wherein quantities, mensurations, and proportions are considered
merely as in themselves without relation to matter, and the uses to which in
other faculties they are applicable: but in optics, is an improvement of what
in nature may be observed about luminous and visual beams, and luminous mediums
and objects, by mathematical demonstration and assistance. Now 2ly. Nature does
not tie it self in its ways so strictly to an indivisible, absolute, vertical
punctilio, that if it cannot reach, without impediments, that mathematical
exquisitenes, it will not act at all. If heavy things on the clive side of an
hill cannot descend in a direct line toward the Center, however they will seek
it in the nearest oblique line possibly they can, so long as the motion brings
them nearer: all animals are not formed in the same mould, or with equal
strength of Body, or vigor of spirit. So as in these optical instances, the
brave Authors sell not in the least short of their task, when they had
demonstrated the most equal right-lined angles which nature could cast it self
into, in the alleged cases, Viz. angles of incidence and reflection equal, if
compared with a right-line tangent at their point. For as elsewhere, they are
but very few points in most conical sections, where, by a right-line, their
angularity can be divided into equal parts: nature therefore when it cannot
attain its prime and general design, which is a perfection and absoluteness in
its work, it does not therefore slugge and do nothing, but seeks to approach
its first design as near as possible: and that is in making with right-lined
beams equal angles respectively to the right-line tangents at the points
concerned; which angles so formed at those points with respect unto the
right-line tangents, are as is elsewhere shown, either the least of the greater
right-lined angles, or the greatest of the less right-lined angles: that in
such curvatures with great judgment the quality of the angles of incidence and
reflection, in beams passing by right-lines, as affected for their directness
and shortness, and as near as possible endeavored by nature, is in
demonstration referred to examination at the right-line tangents of the same
points; an absolute equality by right-lines to be made, being most what
impossible, and that demonstrably in such curvatures: so as causeless was the
exception which was made against the demonstrations of the noble
Perspectivists: nor stood, either they, or nature in need of that improper,
lame solution and help, by making recto-convexe angles of Contact to be neither
angles, nor quantitative.

The truth of the angularity and quantitaveness of recto-convexe angles of
Contact thus asserted; however, the rest of the things in this controversy
cannot be determined without a clear understanding of what homogenealness it is
that is requisite for proportionals, and which is mentioned in the definition
of proportion. To bring our selves unto the right understanding of which, know
there are three ways whereby one thing may be said to be greater then another.

1st. Improportionably, and by the whole kind; as in heterogeneals: in which
sometime the least of the one is still, beyond all proportion, greater then the
greatest of the other: as the least surface is greater then any line; for a
longer line may be drawn in the least surface, then any the longest line, that
can possibly be given: and so the least body is improportionably, and
heterogeneally, and by the whole kind greater then any surface: for by the
dividing, or altering the figuration of the least body, it may be made, by its
perimetry, to exceed the quantity of the greatest surface, that possibly can be
given: so a point, or a circle of a foot diameter, is said to be less then the
whole world; which is to be understood, as by the whole kind, and without
proportionableness. And so I doubt not, but it will be confessed, that the
least recto-convexe angle of Contact, is greater then the greatest acute, right
or obtuse right-lined angle: and the least right-lined angle, then the greatest
recto-convexe angle of Contact.

2ly. One thing is greater then another infinitely, or, if you please,
indefinitely: so an infinitely, or indefinitely enlarged line, is longer then
any given line, without limitation, and so consequenely without proportion. Or,

3ly. One thing is greater then another, rateably and according to the
proportion, which they hold at the same standard, whereby they are after the
same manner measured, in the same kind in which they are compared. So one
lenght, or line is longer then another, according to such a proportion of
length when both are measured as lengths at the same standard upon an
indefinite line; and this, whether the lengths, or lines be, one, both, all,
neither, or none of them directly, or indirectly posited, in right, or crooked
lines; and whether the one be a depth, and the other a height, or another a
breadth, or a fourth a periphery. So one number is greater then another number,
according to such a proportion: and, though it is well known to be determined
in Philosophy, that numbers are of different kinds, yet for the proportion they
hold one to another in their common nature, there cannot be denied unto them
the truth of a mathematical and analogical homogenealness.

And as things are said to be several ways one greater then another; so
homogeneity wants not its several acceptations. What homogeneity is, is not at
all any where expressly defined in the mathematics; but we are left at large,
rationally to collect, what is by that Term in those faculties to be
understood. The most usual acceptance of the word homogeneity in Philosophy is
to compare any divisible being with the parts into which it may be divided:
those things being said to be homogeneal, which cannot be separatingly divided
into parts of any other name, or nature then the whole is: as the least
separable part of water is said to be water; of wine, wine: and the least
separable part of a line, a line: and those things are said heterogeneal, which
by possibility may be separatingly divided otherwise; Viz. into parts of
different name and nature from the whole. All which, as appears, has its
dependence upon the similar, or dissimilar natures of the whole and parts. So
all solids, surfaces, lines, and plane angles may be said to be homogeneal; for
by dividing and separating them part from part, every part of the solid is a
solid, of the surface a surface, of the line a line, and of the plane angle a
plane angle: and by taking number in a large sense, every part of a number may
be said to be a number. But then if you descend lower in numbers and angles,
even and odd numbers, etc. and right-lined and mixed-lined and crooked-lined
angles will scarce be able to defend their homogeneity at this touch: for Even
numbers may be divided into parts that are odd: and a right-lined plane angle
may be severed into parts whereof the one may be a recto-concave angle of a
Semicircle, the other a recto-convexe angle of Contact; of which last
mentioned severed part you say, it is no angle, and therefore it must be
heterogeneal: and we assert it heterogeneal, because it is improportionable,
and its quantity not mensurable after the same manner, that the quantity of
right-lined angles is measured.

And with reference to the same acceptance, two distinct beings, being
compared together, as to homogeneity and heterogeneity, they are then said to
be homogeneal, when both having the same name and nature, the one may be the
severed part of the other, or both together the severed parts of an integral of
the same both name and nature. So all solids are homogeneal: all surfaces: all
lines: all plane angles and all numbers whatsoever.

But sometimes also in an abusive acceptance, the agreeing, or disagreeing of
things in some general, or special kind and nature, passes for a certain kind
of homogeneity or heterogeneity among them: so bodies and surfaces and lines in
respect of their common agreeing in quantity, continuity, longitude, latitude
and profundity, are partly homogeneal, partly heterogeneal: so numbers in
respect of their general quantitativeness, parity, imparity, symmetry and a
symmetry etc. Are partly homogeneal, partly heterogeneal; and so solid,
sphaerical, and plane angles, and all their several kinds are partly
homogeneal, and partly heterogeneal.

So as from any of the former acceptations it is no way possible to determine
what is that mathematical homogeneity which is every where hinted unto us in
the definitions of proportion; for the bolting forth of which we shall be
constrained of necessity to betake our selves to another course, in the quest
of which, it is not likely but we shall meet with some abstruseness and
difficulty.

To make therefore an Essay; proportion being the habitude of the compared
magnitudes according to quantity, it is an homogeneity in quantity which is
only herein required; not an homogeneity in substance, quality, site, or other
kinds and manners of being: for heterogeneity in any of those other respects,
as substance, quality, site, or other kinds of being, does not hinder, but they
may notwithstanding be one proportionable to another, if any quantitative
homogeneity be to be found amongst them. So the heterogeneity of figure and
figuration, which is between a Circle, pentagone, square, triangle, surface of
a pyramide, etc. Hinders not, but they may be compared and hold proportion in
respect of their Area's and superficial contents; wherein they retain a
quantitative homogeneity: and those of them which are merely bounded planes,
also have a homogeneity in respect of their perimetries, or the like quantities
which they hold in common. So crookednes and rectitude are different kinds of
positure, and make an heterogeneity in situation; yet a right line and a
crooked-line, hold still a quantitative homogeneity, in respect of their
longitude and extension. So the different positures of the surfaces in a
sphaere, and in a cone, and in a plane, hinders not their analogy in Area and
quantity.

But further to pursue this diquisition; though it be homogeneity in quantity,
which is herein understood yet it is not the being quantities, or magnitudes in
general that does make up, or can complete the homogeneity hinted in the
definition of proportion: for then lines, and bodies, and numbers, and
surfaces, being all of them magnitudes and quantities, there should be a
proportionablenes between lines and bodies, bodies and surfaces, surfaces and
numbers; which in such a general-homogeneity it were vanity to look for. In
like manner, though plane, sphaerical and solid angles be all angles, yet I
think there are very few, that because of that their general homogeneity will
expect a proportionablenes amongst them.

Besides as little necessity is there of restraining this homogeneity of
magnitudes, unto their very last, and in every respect, ultimate kinds: except
you will understand it to be in respect of some indefinite, most pure
abstracted quantity, in which the compared magnitudes are to be each of them
measured. For though some referr all numbers unto quantity, distinguishing them
into several kinds, not only from their parities and imparities, with all their
variations thereupon, but making every number to be of a different kind,
receiving its specification from the last unite; as some also referr unto
quantity all lines, which they distinguish into several kinds, and the like
specific distinctions are made by others of surfaces and bodies: yet between
proportionals, for their homogeneity, is not, we confess, in this sense
required, that both magnitudes be of the very same ultimate kind: for
hyperbolar, parabolar, elliptical, circular arches, and right-lines are
homogeneal in length, extension, and as lines, so holding analogy, though in
respect of rectitude and curvature, and their several kinds of curvature they
be heterogeneal. So all numbers, even, odd, commensurable, or incommensurable,
however, as above is said, heterogeneal, yet as multitudes and numbers in
general, and the accounts how often an unite and its parts is posited, or how far
in account is proceeded, whether retrogradely or progressively from an unite;
so, all numbers are homogeneal, holding mutual analogy one to another. So
notwithstanding the distinction between acute, right, and obtuse, right-lined
angles, all truth and exquisitenes of proportion, as the measure of their
quantitative relation, is most apparent amongst them.

Which again does further show unto us what and how great is the difficulty of
limiting the homogeneity expressed in the definition of proportion; so as
neither to set it uselesly too high, nor sink it lower then is necessary for
proportionality. For right right-lined angles are proportionate, one to
another, but there can be amongst them no proportion of inequality: and no
given acute right-lined angle can have so small a proportion to any acute
right-lined angle, as it may have and has to a right right-lined angle, or to
any obtuse right-lined angle: and though all even numbers hold analogy and
proportion one to another, yet even numbers are not capable of all diversities
of proportion; as in uneven numbers, duple and subduple proportions are
impossible: nay numbers in general, I mean unbroken and integral numbers, are
not capable of all kinds of analogy; as particularly not of such proportions as
are asymmetral.

But not to be nice in my thoughts to my friend, I never in this point and
question understood any other thing to be meant by homogeneity in the
definition of proportion, then a mensurablenes of the quantities of two, or
more magnitudes in the same indefinite quantity for kind, as the measure of
their quantity and of the quantity of all their homogeneals, the mensuration
therein still being according to that same kind of quantity of which the
indefinite quantity is. And so proportion is the rate and habitude, which the
rateable magnitudes hold mutually one to the other in respect of the same way
of measuring their quantities, or in respect of the same kind of indefinite
quantity in which their quantities are measured. And upon this gloss as the
true and genuine meaning of this mathematical homogeneity, I ever understood
that postulate to be founded in which is required and granted, so to multiply
any given quantity, as to exceed any other given quantity whatsoever of the
same kind. For if that mensurablenes in the same indefinite quantity, as a
measure, and according to that same kind of quantity of which the indefinite
measure is, were not the very thing designed by mathematical homogeneity, the
matter of the Postulat were not fit to be granted without proof: for it is
because they are measured in the same indefinite quantity for kind, and
according to the same kind of quantity, i. e. they have the very same way of
measuring in the same indefinite quantity (which is their homogeneity, by
necessity of consequence creating a proportionablenes between them) that the
less by multiplying may be made greater then the greater, and the greater by a
continual cutting off still more then half may be made less then the less.

And though hereby homogeneity and proportionablenes be not made to be the very
same thing, however in the mathematics, where the physical natures of things
are not inquired into, the one by a necessary consequence does immediately flow
from and is annexed unto the other; and because of their necessary connection,
in usual speech and acceptance, the one may be allowed to be taken for the
other. And when in the definition of proportion, proportion is said to be the
mutual habitude of magnitudes of the same kind according to quantity, or if you
please multiplicity; the meaning is no other, but that proportion is the mutual
habitude of magnitudes, which have their mensuration after the same manner,
according to quantity, or multiplicity; taking the word multiplicity in a large
sense: i. e. according to the quantity and multiplicity, which they have each
to other in the same indefinite quantity and measure, upon which they are in
the same manner and according to the same kind of quantity measured. However in
natural Philosophy for very weighty reasons homogeneity and proportionablenes
are to be acknowledged of very distant and different natures. So I presume in
Mathematics it would be taken for a solaecisme to say a body and a line were
homogeneals and of the same kind, because all separable parts of each agree in
their being all of them continuous quantities; though in the Physiological
school that they do concenter and meet in the same general nature is not
deniable; and so they may carry a seeming shadow of homogeneity, so far as
homogeneity may be abusively wrested to denote any such common agreement in a
general notion and nature. So it would be a solaecisme in Mathematics to say,
that a solid angle, a sphaerical angle and a plane angle were all homogeneal,
because they are all angles and every separable part of each is an angle: but
to pro^e Mathematical homogeneity, the mensurablenes of the quantity of the
compared magnitudes in the same indefinite quantity, or measure for kind, and
according to the same kind of quantity with the indefinite measure is to be
made out: for that all are quantities, or all angles, makes them not in the
mathematical school homogeneal; except by reason of this mensurability of the
quantity of both in the same indefinite quantity, or measure, according to the
same kind of quantity, the less by multiplying can be made greater then the
greater, and the greater by dividing less then the less. And indeed this is the
true homogeneity, not denoting a general convenience in their natures in
respect of some abstracted notion, but rather a special identity by reason of
their mensurablenes in the same substrate kind of quantity and measure, only
with difference, or proportionablenes of magnitude between both the wholes, and
all the least, or greatest, proper, i. e. homogeneal parts of each: as if one
be a line, so is the other, and the greatest and least proper, i. e. homogeneal
or homometral parts of each are lines and proportionable to either. For, if
besides the mensurablenes of the quantity of the compared magnitudes in the
same indefinite quantity, or measure, be not also added that condition, that in
that indefinite quantity, or measure they are also mensurable according to the
same quantity for kind, of which the indefinite measure is, and so consequently
proportionable one to another; by nothing will it yet be determinable, whether
all angles be not homogeneal: for in every angle, though of several kinds,
every part of each angle is an angle: nor will it be determinable, whether all
continuous quantities be not homogeneal; for every part even of heterogeneal
continuous quantities is a continuous quantity: nor will it be determinable
whether all numbers be not homogeneal; for that all numbers are of the same
kind will be found a doctrine of very hard digestion any where save in the
mathematick school: yet according to this explication of mathematical
homogeneity, notwithstanding the diversity of their kinds in other
philosophical considerations, they have in them a clear mathematical
homogeneity: and even an unite, which in other parts of Philosophy is not
passable for a number, will fall also within the verge of the same homogeneity;
as will also all the parts of an unite, whether commensurable, or
incommensurable. And this explication of mathematical homogeneity will be
allowed its due right and justification more easily, by those who note how the
main matter and design of mathematical definitions is but exegetical to clear
up what is meant by the terms in those sciences used: for what other occasion
could there be in the Mathematics to intermeddle with homogeneity, but to
explain the noble points of proportion and proportionality.

And yet though in mathematics there be such a grand affinity between the
proportionablenes and homogeneity of magnitudes and in common use and spee^h
the one may be put for the other, yet as above the notions are easily
distinguishable by the understanding: Viz. two, or more magnitudes are said
homogeneal chiefly in respect of the same way of measuring them, or in respect
of the same kind of indefinite quantity in which they are both mensurable: but
they are said proportionable in respect of the mutual habitude and quantitative
relation which is between themselves upon such their mensuration, in the same
way, or according to the same kind of quantity. So all finite lines are
homogeneal, as mensurable in the same indefinite line; but that one finite line
is double to another is the habitude of the one to the other declared upon that
mensuration.

That upon the whole matter mathematical homogeneity does not insist only upon
identity in kind at large, or restrain unto identity in kind at all points, and
in every respect and consideration; but it is identity in quantity and therein
particularly in the manner of the mensuration of their quantities, in which the
homogeneity of magnitudes is chiefly lodged: and that is that which I ever
understood in those words (according to quantity, or if you please, rather
quotuplicity) which are in the definition of propo^tion, viz. quantity and
quotuplicity in the same way of measuring.

And if you urge here, according to this account I must conclude all
incommensurables to be heterogeneal; I answer, not in the least: for though
they may have no common measure, which can by possibility exactly measure both
or all, yet there may be a common indefinite measure, in which each may exactly
measure forth its own quantity. As for example in fig. 24. Let A and B be
incommensurable lines, and DC. an indefinite line, beginning at D, and on the
part of C infinitely produced: from the point D in the line DC take the line DE
equal to the line A: and also in the line DC take the line DF equal to the line
B. here in the line DC as a common indefinite measure of their homogeneity, the
two lines A and B, though incommensurable, have measured forth themselves by
the lines DE and DF. So in fig. 1. upon A the angular point of the right-lined
angle BAC, as Center, draw the Arch dfe cutting the line AB in the point d, and
the line AC in the point f, and the right-line Ae in the point e, so as the
Arch df be incommensurable to the Arch fe. Here the two right-lined angles d Af
and f Ae are incommensurable, yet have a common way of measuring their quantity
and proportion, Viz. by Arches of Circles drawn upon the angular point, as
center, intercepted respectively between the sides: as by the Arch dfe, the one
being in that Arch measured by the Arch, df, the other by the Arch fe. So as by
mathematical homogeneity is understood an homometricalnes, or autometricalnes
with the necessary consequent of a rateablenes therein, without any necessity
of symmetricalnes between themselves at all. For still, if in homogeneity
besides homometricalnes in the same indefinite quantity be not also included,
that the mensuration of both be according to the same kind of quantity, of
which the indefinite quantity, in which they are measured, is; a point and a
line may measure themselves in an indefinite line, and a line and a surface may
measure themselves in an indefinite surface, and a surface and a solid may
measure themselves in an indefinite solid. But true mathematical homogeneity is
when two, or more quantities being mensurable in the same indefinite quantity,
or measure, and according to the kind of the indefinite quantity are by
consequence rateably, i. e. proportionably and homometrically equal, or the one
bigger then the other, not the one infinitely bigger than the other, as an
infinite line is longer then a finite line, for between such it is acknowledged
there is no proportion nor mathematical homogeneity; nor the one bigger then
the other by the whole kind, as every solid is bigger then any surface, and
every right-lined angle then any recto-convexe angle of Contact: and proportion
is the rate, or quantity of their mutual habitude in that their homogeneity, or
homometricalnes: i. e. proportion is the rate, quantity, or account of their
proportionality. And applying our minds rightly to conceive of homogeneity as
mathematical; of necessity such, and no other can be the notion of it, thereby
making two quantities to be rateably, i. e. proportionably equal, or the one
bigger then the other, and according to their capacity and possibility in any
rate and proportion so to be constituted and set out. For the genuine well
known notion of homogeneity in general, what is it but that all and each of the
proper, i. e. homogeneal parts, and the whole, fall under the same Denomination
and nature, as if one be a line, all the rest to be lines, if one be water, or
stone, or oil, etc. all the rest of the parts and the whole to be so also? And
in the mathematics what is said properly and homogeneally to be a part of any
magnitude, but only such lesser magnitudes separable from it as are able to
measure out, i. e. by their multiple to exhaust the first magnitude? For a
surface is not said to be an homogeneally proper part of a solid: nor a line of
a surface. And by such measuring forth of the integral magnitude by its
homogeneally proper, i. e. exhausting parts, is not understood the symmetry of
the parts, and whole, for the whole and its true homogeneal parts, may be
incommensurable; but that which is understood is the true mathematical
homogeneity of the whole and the parts in respect of their common way of
measuring, and the proportionality, which is thereupon lodged between them So
as by laying these undeniable remarks together, mathematical homogeneity in
respect of the same integral magnitude, is that every part thereof being
proper, i. e. mensurable in the same indefinite measure according to the
special kind of its quantity, and therefore able to exhaust the whole, be all
of them only in respect of their quantitativenes, not their figuration, or
other respects, of the same nature and denomination, and any proportion
whatsoever (according to the capacity of such kind of quantities) possible to
be constituted amongst them. And by consequence several magnitudes are then
said to be mathematically homogeneal, when being the one able to exhaust the
other, and so in proportion one unto another, both and all the proper parts of
each, all of them, as being of the same nature fal^ under the same quantitative
denomination.

And here it is worth our noting, how some magnitudes are so homogeneal, that
they cannot be separatingly divided into parts, or magnitudes which are
heterogeneal; but all the parts into which they are separatingly divided will
still be homogeneal, both one with another and with the whole: So a line can no
way be separatingly divided into parts which are magnitudes, but each is a line
homogeneal to the whole and to all parts whatsoever of whatsoever other line:
neither can a body and surface be separatingly divided, but into bodies and
surfaces; each of whose parts are still able to exhaust the whole and are
thereunto proportionable. But such an absolute homogeneity is not in all other
magnitudes, especially in heterogeneally concrete magnitudes, but that the
whole may be divideable into parts separable one from another, which yet are
heterogeneal: as in the present case of angles a right right-lined angle is
divideable into a recto-convexe angle of Contact, and the recto-concave angle
of the semi Circle; which are separable one from another, and therefore truly
parts; yet neither of them is homogeneal to the whole, nor one of them unto the
other: for neither can the whole right right-lined angle, nor the recto-concave
angle of the semi Circle ever be exhausted by any number whatsoever of such
heterogeneal parts, as is the recto-convexe angle of Contact: nor ever any
equality, or other proportion can possibly be shown between the right
right-lined angle, and the recto-concave angle of the semi Circle, because
there is no way possible in which their quantities can be proportionably
mensurable. For not without very good reason unto all magnitudes are to be
allowed their special properties; as to all positures and figuration, theirs.
To angles these things are peculiar, being otherwise in other magnitudes: Viz.
in angles which are truly and on all hands confessedly homogeneal, you cannot
to any given angle, set forth another of the same kind in any given proportion
at pleasure: for every right-lined angle by a necessity of nature, must be less
then two right right-lined angles: and in a plane all the angularity at any
point cannot exceed what the circumjacent space, or plane is capable of; which
is only four right right-lined angles. That as number cannot be infinitely
divided without fraction; so angularity cannot at pleasure at the same point,
in the same plane, be enlarged: whereas some other quantities have both
infinite divisibility and infinite multiplicability.

So another property of the magnitude of angles is, that it may not only in
notion and speculation, but in truth and severingly, be divided into parts
either able, or unable to exhaust the whole: as when a right right-lined angle
is divided into the recto-concave angle of a semi Circle, and a recto-convexe
angle of Contact: you may sever them the one from the other: and angularity is
equally, if not much more apparent in the recto-convexe angle of Contact, then
in the recto-concave angle of the semi Circle; yet the one of them is
demonstrated and confessed unable ever to exhaust the right right-lined angle,
the other not.

A further property of the magnitude of angles is, that sometimes the same
part, which has already been severed from it, cannot exactly and immediately
again by its equal be severed from it on the same side, though the remaining
angle be by the whole kind greater. So after a recto-convexe angle of Contact
is taken out of a right right-lined angle, there cannot again immediately on
the same side, be severed from the remaining angle another angle equal to the
recto-convexe angle of Contact, which was before severed from it. If it can,
let it be performed.

Also the divisibility which is in the magnitude of all Angles, though boundles
and infinite, in some however, leaves the dividing of the Angle into two equal
parts, impossible: as notwithstanding the perpetual divisibility of lines, the
side and diameter of a square are left incommensurable. So some other angles
may be divided into two equal parts, but it is impossible to divide them into
three equal parts: as convexo-convexe angles of Contact, with infinite other
convexo-convexe angles and concavo-concave angles being contained under equal,
uniform and answerable Arches.

To consigne this point, the principal thing we have labored herein to
dilucidate, and as we doubt not have effected is, that mathematical
homogenealness is not an homogeneity of all the parts whatsoever, that are in
the magnitudes, which are homogeneal in respect of some special way of
measuring their quantities; or an undivideableness of such homogeneal
magnitudes into parts otherwise heterogeneal according to which acceptance the
word is chiefly taken in other parts of Philosophy: for there is no right-lined
angle whatsoever, nor any other angle whatsoever, but as is up and down herein
shown may be separatingly divided into heterogeneal parts: but mathematical
homogeneity is homogeneity in the way of measuring the quantity of the compared
magnitudes, Sc. in the same indefinite measure and quantity, and according to
the kind of the indefinite measure, and which thereupon follows, a
proportionality between them, in respect of their common way of measuring: and
of this mathematical homogeneity, fair foot-steppings are to be found every
where in the deducing of those demonstrations which concern proportions and
proportionals. That, such magnitudes as have no common way of measuring their
quantity, as weights and measures, are heterogeneal: or if they have a common
way of measuring in which they may measure themselves, but therein do not
measure themselves according to the same kind of quantity with the indefinite
measure, and so want proportionality, yet notwithstanding they are
heterogeneal: as all recto-convexe angles of Contact, all recto-concave angles
of semi Circles, all recto-convexe angles of semi Circles, all acute, or right
right-lined angles, these may all measure themselves, and in what order their
sides fall within, or without in any obtuse right-lined angle whatsoever: yet
because this their homometry is only of the situation, or order, in which the
sides part from the angular point, but not of their quantity in an indefinite
measure and according to the denomination of the same quantitative measure, so
as to lodge a proportionality between the magnitudes so compared together in
their common way of measuring; they are not, nor can thereby be vindicated from
their otherwise innate mathematical heterogeneity: which concerning some of
them is confessed on all hands and is without the verge of the controversy. And
as follows, angles are of a concrete nature, having in them something
quantitative and something not quantitative: whereas that which is to be the
indefinite measure of homogeneal quantities is to be considered abstractly as
quantity without heterogeneal concretion: so it is the circumference of a
Circle that measures all right-lined angles. And when all plane angles are said
to be homogeneal, it is not in respect of a common indefinite quantity by which
they are all measured, which the recto-convexe angles of Contact do
sufficiently evince, but as is manifest it is only because of the position and
situation of the sides in the same plane; which homogeneity is of no concern
unto quantity, nor by any necessity can thereupon infer the consequent of
proportionableness.

But to proceed; as is said, besides the former mathematical and quantitative
homogeneity and heterogeneity there is also an extramathematical and
extra-quantitative homogenealnes and heterogenealnes in angles every where
observable in their shapes, figures, positure of their sides, such like
schematismes and other respects. In general as is above hinted, every part of a
plane angle is a plane angle, even the recto-convexe angle of Contact, however
you deny it to be an angle and quantitative: but then this is not a
mathematical homogeneity, but only in respect of a certain figuration, in
respect of the positure and situation of the surface in which those angles are;
showing how all plane angles from the greatest to the least, agree in that
particular of their general figuration, Viz. of having their containing sides
to lie still in the same plane; whereby they distinguish themselves from all
other superficial angles, which are heterepipedal, whose containing lines, or
sides lie in several planes: such as are all sorts of sphaerical, cylindrical
and conical surface-angles. But if ever a mathematical and quantitative
homogeneity be proved among all plane angles, you that know that it is not my
use to start from my word, shall hereby rest assured, upon the first summons I
will give up this cause.

And we are not to think strange, that a figuration is asserted to be in
angles; for if we seriously consider, we shall find there is shape and figure
in angles, as well as quantity; as lines, and surfaces, and bodies have their
figurations, the positure of their parts, their shapes and forms, as well as
their quantities and magnitudes: in each, their figuration being manifest; Viz.
in lines, in respect of their lineary positure: in surfaces, in respect of
their superficial positure: in bodies in respect of their solid positure: and
in the casting of each of their schematismes quantity is involved, as length,
breadth, depth, Viz. their quantities, and the quantities which are compounded
of several, or all of them together.

And here by the figuration which we assert in angles, we cannot be thought to
mean that any right-lined figure can be completed, perfectly to bound up a
plane on all sides, by one angle; it being beyond the power of two: and three,
being the least number of angles, requisite so to constitute and perfectly
limite out a right-lined plane figure. And though some plane figures are
perfected, and perfectly bounded, without any such angles as are contained by
sides concurring by way either of section, or Contact, as namly all Circles and
Ellipses; yet the angularity of curve coincidence is every where found, or at
pleasure assignable in the bounders of such figures. But our meaning is, a
plane angle, though most what it do not by the continuation and production of
its sides, perfectly bound in and limit out a certain plane and space on evry
side, however being the mutual habitude of concurring lines, it gives an
imperfect figuration to the plane and space on its part. And as a bounded plane
cannot be without some kind of plane figure, so a limited angle ever implies in
it an imperfect figuration of some sort, or other. For figuration is the
consectary of material finiteness and limitation in the position of lengths,
breadths, depths, surfaces and solidities; that every angle having its limits
and bounds cannot be thereof destitute. And if the name of figures be so
frequently given to hyperbola's, parabola's, and the like, which neither do,
nor ever can by any possible production perfectly bound in their planes; what
reason is there then why angles should be denied an imperfect interest in the
name. Besides as a plane in its own general nature at large does not denote any
special plane figure; but the rise of figures, I mean plane figures, is from
the bounding of the plane: so it is in angles, as they by the mutual habitude
of their concurring sides give imperfect limits and bounds unto the space and
plane, so they therein make an imperfect figuration. That in angles something
of form and figure is to be noted as well as magnitude. And one line cannot
concur with and be inclined upon another, but an imperfect figuration will
arise from that their mutual inclination. And the same two angles may have the
inclination, i. e. the recesse of their respective sides one from another
equal, though there be no analogy between the figurations of the angles, or the
shapes in the which the sides are inclined in the one and in the other. For by
reason that in angles form and figure are to be observed as well as quantity;
crooked-lined and right-lined angles may be equal in some particular quantity,
yet other-wise not of the same kind: they having equality in some magnitude,
but being distinct in the manner of their forming, figuration and constitution:
as equality may be between a square and a triangle, though figures altogether
different in kind.

And in respect of such their figurations, plane angles receive distinction,
either from the diverse manners in which their containing sides do concur, or
else from the diverse natures, and figurations of the lines under which they
are contained, or, which is tantamount from the diversity of the inclinations
and inflexions, or rather inclinablenesses and imflexiblenesses by which they
are inclined each to other, or from several of these grounds of distinction
taken together.

Plane angles from the different manner of their sides concurring, may aptly be
thus distinguished, Viz. into angles, whose sides concur by way of section;
or else that have their sides concurring only by way of touch in some single
singular point without mutual section; or else their concurrence is in
curvature, where, after the meeting of their sides in the angular point, the
sides do not in their productions depart one from another, neither by way of
touch, nor section; but become, the production of the one side coincident with
the other side; so as this kind of angles may aptly be called angles of
coincidency, or angles of curvature: and in these lies the genuine Ratio and
true account of the curvature.

From the diverse figuration of the lines, under which a plane angle is
contained, very many differences of angles may arise, according to the various
distinctions, of which lines themselves are capable, I mean such lines, as fall
not without the capacity and comprehensivenes of the same plane: as that some
are helicoidal, some parabolar, some elliptitical, etc. But as of lines, so
hence of angles, the chief and primary distinctions are especially these, Viz.
that plane angles are either right-lined angles, contained under two inclined
right-lines; or not right-lined angles.

Not right-lined angles, are either mixed lined angles; contained under one
right-line, and one crooked-line: or crooked-lined angles contained under two
crooked-lined sides. And from the several kinds of special, or ordinary
curvatures, as Circular, elliptical, hyperbolar, etc. The mixt-lined, and
crooked-lined angles, are capable of many farther and more particular
distinctions; but especially from the site of the convexeness, or concaveness
of the lines to, or from the angle side: though all such secondary distinctions
rising from these two last mentioned heads, are as properly and pertinently
referable to the other ground of distinguishing plane angles, taken from the
differences which may be in the inclinations of the one containing side to the
other. For a vast difference is in the inclination of a crooked-line, by
obverting the concave, or convexe side to any other line. So the constituting a
circular, or elliptical arch etc. For one side, makes a vast difference in the
inclinations, because of the difference in their curvatures.

Also another principal distinction of angles from their sides, may be into
angles, whose sides are coaptable, and by possibility may be coincident one
with another: or else such as have between them no possibility of coaptation
and coincidence. Of the former sort are all right-lined angles, and all
concavo-convexe angles contained by Arches of equal homogeneal, uniform,
regular, or answering curvatures: of the later sort are all other; whether mixed
lined angles, or crooked-lined angles; whether they be mixed crooked-lined
angles, or unmixt crooked-lined angles. And consequently thereupon, besides the
numerous distinctions of angles in respect of their different inclinations,
such as above mentioned; one is more eminently material above the rest, that
the inclination of the sides, is sometimes with an equability all along their
production; though imagined to be infinitely extended, in such lines as by
possibility may with reason be imagined so to be: and sometimes there is
nothing of equability to be found in the inclination of the several parts of
each side to the other; though it may be one of the sides be a right-line, or
an Arch of most equal, uniform, regular and homogeneal curvature. And this
equability and inequability of the inclination of the sides, strangely alters
the properties of angles. As in right-lined angles, for the equability of the
inclination of the sides, no parts of the one side are more inclined then the
rest unto the other side: and so in concavo-convexe angles of equal curvatures,
no parts of the one Arch are more inclined then the rest unto the other; but
the one Arch is all along inclined unto the other, as at the angular point; and
the inclination, which the one bears unto the other at the angular point, is
obviously expressable as to the quantity of the recesses, which they make one
from another, by the inclination of a right-line to a right-line, except when
the inclination of the Arches is equal to, or greater then two right
right-lined angles. And in such crooked-lined angles, whose sides have
equability of inclination, the points, which from the angular point are at
equal distances along the Arches, are also absolutely at equal distance from
the angular point, along the chords: and right-lined tangents at any two such
homologal points, where ever taken, always meet and contain a right-lined
angle, equal as to the quantities of the recesses of the sides, to the
crooked-lined angle contained by the two Arches; as is obvious to demonstrate,
especially in circular Arches. And the right-lined angle contained under the
two right-lined tangents touching at the two homologal and answering points,
which is equal to the isoclitical crooked-lined angle, if the two right-lined
tangents occur on that side of the right-line connecting the homologal points
on which the isoclitical angle falls, then it is the angle contained by the two
right-lined tangents into whose space part of the space comprised between the
two Arches at first falls, which is equal to the crooked-lined isoclitical
angle: but if they occur on the other side of the right-line connecting the
two homologal points, i. e. aversely from the crooked-line isoclitical angle,
then it is the complement of such an angle, which is equal to the crooked-line
isoclitical angle: but if the two right-lined tangents occur in one of the
homologal points, the angles either way contained under the two right line
tangents are equal, viz. right right-lined angles; either of them making forth
what is herein asserted. As in fig: 19. under the two circular isoclitical
arches bda and acn let there be constituted the isoclitical angle bac; and let
the right-line ag touch the Arch acn in the point a: and let the right-line af
touch the Arch adb in the point a: so making the right-lined angle fag equal to
the isoclitical concavo-convexe angle bac. Then take in the Arch adb any point
at pleasure, Viz. the point d: and draw the chord ad. Then in the Arch acn take
the Arch ac subtended by the chord ac equal to the chord ad. Therefore because
of the isocliticalness of the circular Arches the two points d and c are two
homologal, i. e. answering points the one in the one Arch, the other in the
other, Viz. the point d in the Arch adb and the point c in the Arch acn. Then
draw the right-line dc connecting the two homologal points d and c. Also draw
the right-line de touching the arch adb in the point d; and the right-line ce
touching the Arch acn in the point c. And let de and ce the two right-line
tangents be produced till they meet in the point e; which in this figure is on
that side of the right-line dc on which the concavo-convexe angle cab lies. I
say therefore that the right-lined angle dec contained under the two
right-lined tangents de and ce touching the Arches respectively at the
homologal points d and c is equal to the right-lined angle fag, contained under
the two right-line tangents fa and ga touching the Arches respectively at a the
angular point of the isoclitical concavo-convexe angle. For the right-lined
tangent fa cutting de the other right-lined tangent of the same Arch adb in the
point h; and the right-lined tangent de of the Arch adb cutting the chord ac in
the point k; upon this construction the right-line da is equal to the
right-line ac; and the right-line tangent dh is equal to the right-line tangent
ha: therefore the right-lined angle adh is equal to the right-lined angle dah
and so to the right-lined angles ace and cag severally. And therefore the
right-lined angle ahe being equal to the two right-lined angles hda and dah
taken together, and the right-lined angle hda being equal to the right-lined
angle cag; the right-lined angle ahe is equal to the two right-lined angles cag
and dah taken together. Therefore that which makes each equal to two right
right-lined angles; the two right-lined angles hka and hak taken together are
equal to the two right-lined angles hak and dal taken together. Therefore the
right-lined angle hka is equal to the right-lined angle dal. Therefore the
right-lined angle cke is equal to the right-lined angle dal. And therefore that
which makes either equal to two right right-lined angles, the two right-lined
angles kce and kec together taken are equal to the right-lined angle dag, which
is equal to the two right-lined angles dac and cag taken together: and the
right-lined angle cag is equal to the right-lined angle kce: therefore the
right-lined angle kec is equal to the right-lined angle dac: therefore because
the right-lined angles dah and cag are equal; also the right-lined angle kec S
c. dec is equal to the right-lined angle hag S c. fag, which was to be
demonstrated.

But if the two right-lined tangents de and ce as in fig. 20. do not occur
toward the concavo-convexe angle bac, but on the other side of the right-line
dc in the point e; then is the right lined angle dec contained under the two
right line tangents de and ce touching at the homologal points d and c, not
equal to the concavo-convexe isoclitical angle bac, or the right lined angle,
equal unto it, fag, but to its complement unto two right right-lined angles,
Viz. unto the right lined angle fall; the right line la being the production of
the right line ga. For as before by construction, the right line chords da and
ca to the homologal points d and c are equal: and the right line fa cutting the
right line de produced in the point h, the right lines dh and ah being two
right lines tangents of the same Circle adb, occurring, are equal. And let the
right line ac produced, occur with the right line de produced, in the point
k. As appears; the right lined angles adh, dah and cag, as before, are equal;
and the right lined angle ahe is equal to two right right lined angles, all but
the two right lined angles hda and had that is, all but the two right lined
angles cag and had. Therefore the right lined angle ahe being equal to the two
right lined angles hka and kah; the two right lined angles hka and kah are
equal to two right right lined angles all but the two right lined angles cag
and had. Therefore two right right-lined angles are equal to the four right
lined angles cag and had and hka and kah. Therefore out of equals taking
equals, the right lined angle hka, which is the right lined angle cke is equal
to the right lined angle dal. Therefore what on either side remains to make up
two right right lined angles on either part; the two right lined angles kce and
kec are together equal to the right lined angle dag, which is equal to the two
right lined angles dac and cag taken together. And producing the right line ec
till it cut the right line ag in the point g; the right lined angles cag and
acg and kce are equal. Therefore the right lined angle kec is equal to the
right lined angle dac. And because the right-lined angle dah and cag are equal,
therefore adding the common angle fac, the two right lined angles dac and hag
are equal. And therefore the right lined angle kec is equal to the right lined
angle hag. And therefore their complements unto two right right lined angles,
Viz. the two right lined angles dec and hal are equal; which was to be
demonstrated.

So in fig. 22. if the right line tangent de pass directly unto the other
homologal point c, as it does when the isoclitical concavo-convexe angle is
equal to a right right lined angle, and the homologal points d and c are taken
at quadrantal or other distances from the angular point; then most manifestly
the rightlined angles dcg and fag are equal, being under the two and two
respective right lined tangents; and between the angles and their complements
unto two right right lined angles is no difference, as appears by what is in
the former demonstrations. So in fig. 23. if the homologal points d and c be so
taken, that the chords da and ca be the diameters: then producing the right
line tangent ce till it occur with the other right line tangent de in the
point e, and with the other right-line tangent fa in the point f; the right
lined angles cfa and fag are equal. And in the trapezium def a the two right
lined angles eda and daf are each of them a right right-lined angle, therefore
the right-lined angle dec is the complement of the right lined angle efa unto
two right right-lined angles, i. e. it is the complement of the angle fag unto
two right right lined angles; which was to be demonstrated. And like
demonstrations may be formed upon every other case. But where the isoclitical
arches are not circular the demonstrations must vary according to the propriety
of every several curvature, notwithstanding its equability and isocliticalness.

But to return, in angles contained by sides whose inclination each to other is
without any such equability, (except only in unmixt crooked-lined anisoclitical
angles) the account of the homologal points along the chords and along the
arches is still different: but in none of them do the right line tangents from
the two and two homologal points, still in their meeting make the two same
angles which are made by the two right lined tangents at the angular point; nor
can any right line angle express the inclination, which the sides have each to
other at the angular point.

Hence is manifest how the same angle may from several of the grounds of
distinction here proposed be referable to several heads, or kinds. So right
lined angles as isoclitical, have always equability of inclination; and the
concurrence of their sides is always by way of section and cannot be by
Contact, or coincidency. So mixed lined angles being anisoclitical have always
inequability in the inclination of their sides; and their concurrence may be
either by Contact, or Section, but never by coincidence. And in crooked lined
angles, their sides may have either equability, or inequability of inclination:
and accordingly the concurrence of the sides may be by section, or Contact; and
with, or without possibility of coincidence Sc. Isoclitical crooked-lines, but
they must be posited convexo-convexely, or anisoclitical crooked-lines posited
whether convexo-convexely, or concavo-convexely, or a right-line and a crooked
line, any two of these may touch without cutting, and so the angular sides have
inclination tangent and not secant, So isoclitical concavo-convexe angles may
have sides circumducted to coincidence: but the same sides posited
concavo-concavely, or convexo-convexely become anisoclitical in the
circumduction, one in respect of the other; yet either is isoclitical sometimes
and in some cases with the production of the other.

From these things though distinguishing angles into their several kinds, only
with respect to the diversity of their figuration, may however more abundantly
appear how unmanageable a task they take upon themselves, who to exclude
recto-convexe angles of Contact from being angles, and from quantitaveness,
would force all plane angles to be of the same kind, allowing no specific
difference possible among them. Not here to pursue what other diversities in
kind may be observed among angles; how can the inclination of a crooked-line
upon a right-line differ less then in kind from the inclination of a right-line
upon a right-line? For as a right-line and a crooked-line agree as lenghts and
in lineariness and are therein mathematically homogeneal, but as right and
crooked differ in kind and have therein heterogeneal figuration; the
crookedness of the crooked-line having no analogy to the rectitude of the
right-line, nor the rectitude of the right line any proportionableness unto the
curvature of the crooked-line; so the inclination of a crooked line upon a
right line, and of a right line upon a right line they agree in the common
nature of inclination, and the one may be greater and the other less as the
respective sides fall within, or without: but this relation of greater, or less
is without any proportionableness, and only by the whole kind, depending upon
the passing of the respective sides, the one within, or without the other. For
these two inclinations differ so far in kind that neither the curvature of the
mixed lined inclination has any thing in it conform, or proportionable to the
rectitude of the right-lined inclination, nor the rectitude of the right-lined
inclination to the curvature of the mixed lined inclination. In a word, so
different is the inclinableness of a crooked line upon a right line, from the
inclinableness of a right line upon a right line, that it is impossible for the
one ever to be either equal, or any way determinately proportionable unto the
other: because the coaptation of a right line as a right line, to a
crooked-line, as a crooked Iine is against the properties of their figurations,
kinds and natures. And for what reason should there be lesser difference
between a crooked-lined inclination and a right lined inclination, then there
is between a crooked-line and a right line? Yet all this their distinctness
concerns only an heterogeneity in their figuration and not at all, or not
primarily their quantities.

The argument, if they be angles, or plane angles, they are homogeneal and of
the same kind, is of no more force then this consequence; if they be
quantities, or continuous magnitudes, they are homogeneal and of the same kind.
And they that deny all heterogeneity in angles, because they are all angles;
will find it an hard task upon the same ground to maintain an analogous
homogeneity, or any other considerable homogeneity, between right lined angles
and sphaerical angles, or any other angles, made by planes cutting the
heterepipedal surfaces of solids, and especially solid angles, of what sort
soever. And to yield that all plane angles are homogeneal; for it is true: and
the most absolute, proper and genuine homogeneity is among plane angles: i. e.
no part of a plane angle can be any other then a plane angle, how great, or
little soever, and whether proportionable, or improportionable one to another,
i. e. whether mathematically homogeneal, or heterogeneal: yet if we seriously
consider what is this homogeneity which is among plane angles, that all their
parts are plane angles, it is not as is said any quantitative, or mathematical
homogeneity, the contrary of which is plentifully demonstrated in Geometry to
be possible; nor any such homogeneity in respect of the manner of their
positure and figuration, as to exclude all farther distinguishableness in
respect of figuration; but only denotes that in every plane angle, and in every
part of every plane angle, the sides lie still in the same plane: which
homogeneity, as is plain, excludes neither heterogeneity, in respect of
figuration, nor in respect of proportion and identity in the way of measuring
their quantities.

To the objection that in fig. 12. the recto-convexe angle of Contact BAF can
be added to the right right-lined angle BAG, so making the outer angle of a
semi Circle F AG; or taken out of it, Sc. the recto-convexe angle of Contact
BAD out of the same right right-lined angle BAG, so making the inner angle of a
semi Circle GAD: and that therefore the recto-convexe angles of Contact F AB
and B AD and the right right-lined angle BAG, and the two angles of the semi
Circle GAD, and FAG, are all of them homogeneal and of the same kind; I answer.
First what need is there of such endeavors, for you to prove their
homogeneity, it being Geometrically demonstrated and confessed that there is no
analogy, or proportion between them; I mean between the recto-convexe angles of
Contact and either the right right lined angle, or either of the angles of the
semi Circles? And according to your opinion that which is added or taken out is
said to be nothing. But especially its thought strange, why there should be
such doubting, that heterogeneals can be added and laid up together as into one
repository; it being with as easy connection performable, as is usual in the
addition of incommensurables and specious quantities of which it is not known,
whether they be homogeneal, or heterogeneal. And out of an heterogeneal sum, as
a storehouse, why cannot some of the heterogeneals be subducted, the rest
remaining? and what is more usual then the adding of heterogeneal figures one
unto another? and subducting out of a given figure some other figure, which is
quite heterogeneal to the first given figure? So to add together numbers, and
measures, and weights? the sum of which may be divided, multiplied, increased,
or lessened, notwithstanding its heterogeneity. As supposing A B, C, D, all
heterogeneal, as is usual in analyticks, the half, or third part, or any
proportionable part of this heterogeneal sum may be given: and any one of the
heterogeneal magnitudes subducted, the rest remaining: or a fifth heterogeneal
magnitude added to the former sum: or any Algorythme, ever speciously,
sometimes completely and absolutely thereupon performed.

Besides upon geometrical demonstration and your own confession, all
recto-convexe, convexo-convexe and citradiametral concavo-convexe angles of
Contact must necessarily by your own principles be allowed to be absolutely
heterogeneal to all right-lined angles whatsoever; your self acknowledging that
neither in equality, nor in any kind of multiplicity, or submultiplicity is any
proportionableness possible amongst them. And where between angles a
mathematical homogeneity is confessed and allowed, yet heterogeneity in respect
of their Schematismes and figurations is undeniable.

The things therefore constituting and distinguishing plane angles in respect
of their figuration are, as above, their sides, their inclinations, or rather
inclineablenesses, and their concurrence. That when two angles have all these
in the same respective kinds, the angles are upon good reason in this sense
concluded to be homogeneal: but when between two angles is an heterogeneity in
any of these things, which are of the essence and constitution of an angle,
those angles may justly be judged in this sense to be heterogeneal. And that
such a specific heterogeneity may be in each of these, may easily be declared
as above. As first in lines which are the containing sides, how easy is it to
discover such an heterogeneity? For though a right line, and a crooked-line
agree undeniably in the general nature of a line, and of length, and of
extension, yet the rectitude of the one and the curvature of the other, are
several kinds of positure, into which the length of the one, and of the other
is disposed: that except, in contrarieties, we can see nothing but homogeneity,
such an heterogeneity must needs be acknowledged between them. And whereas
homogeneity, as to sides, inclination and concurrence, is required to the
homogeneal figuration of angles; the heterogeneity of the sides hinders the
possibility of ever making them out to be such; or that by any altering their
divarication, keeping their present properties they can be coaptable. And that
angles contained by heterogeneal sides may be equal, proves only the equality
of the inclinations in either, but not the homogeneity of the figuration of the
angles, or inclinations; as the equality between a square and triangle in
respect of their equal perimeters, area's, heights, bases, proves not in the
least the homogeneity of their figures. And as right-lines and crooked-lines
are heterogeneal, as above, not possibly to be coapted, with the precedent
limitations; So also are all curve lines, whose curvature is unequal and
unlike, nay though it may be they be but several parts of the same line, or
though the curvature of both, be every way, and every where equal and like, yet
if the convexe and concave parts of the one be not alike posited as in the
other, there will be a manifest heterogeneity in them, and an impossibility of
coapting them, observing the limitations as above.

And why does the heterogeneity in the sides make heterogeneity in the angles,
but because thereby is founded an heterogeneity in the inclinations, or rather
in the inclinablenesses of the one side to the other? For here, it is not the
several degrees of the same kind of inclination that is intended; for then all
unequal right-lined angles should be altogether heterogeneal one to another:
but it is a more then gradual, a specific distinctness in their
inclinablenesses, which we are now discovering to make the figuration of the
angles more fairly and fully heterogeneal. And as inclination is the habitude
of line to line, not being posited in the same right line, nor parallel, for
even perpendiculars are in this sense here said to be inclined; so, as above,
from the heterogeneity of the lines will arise an heterogeneity of
inclinations: and indeed for no other reasons do heterogeneal lines make
heterogeneal angles, but because their inclinations are necessarily
heterogeneal. And, as above, heterogeneal inclinations being respectively
equal, as in some right lined and crooked lined angles, this does not in the
least annul the heterogeneity of their inclinations; as a right line and a
crooked line may be equal, yet as to the positure of their extension they are
heterogeneal.

And as heterogeneity of sides, or inclinations makes heterogeneity of angles,
so likewise does any heterogenealnes in the other point requisite to the nature
of an angle; which is the manner of the sides concurrence. And there are only
three ways in the concurrence of the sides of angles, according to which they
can be heterogeneal one to another. For either the production of the one
concurring side becomes coincident with the other concurring side, or else it
departs from it on the same side on which it did occur; or else it departs
from it on the contrary side to that on which it did occur: all which are
clearly not several degrees of the same manner of concurrence, but several
kinds of concurrence: Viz. the one by way of Contact, the other by way of
Section, and a third by way of curvature, or coincidence. That as these are
diversified in angles, I mean from kind to kind, not from degree to degree, so
there is thereby lodged in their figurations an heterogeneity, though in some
mathematical respects, neither sides, nor inclinations can sometimes be denied
to be however homogeneal. So particularly angles of Contact in respect of their
figuration must necessarily be acknowledged clear of another kind, then all
other angles: because the inclination of their sides is tangent, concurring
only in a punctual touch, whereas the inclination of the sides of all other
angles is secant, and at the point of their concurrence by reason of their
inclination they cut one another, or else they are coincident; then which, what
can make a more material difference in the inclination of the sides? And as
more especially relating to that so much urged analogy between right-lined
angles and angles of Contact; the inclination of the containing sides in every
angle of Contact is such as is impossible to be between the sides of any
right-lined angle: for the sides of no right-lined angle can touch without
cutting. And what more manifest and material difference can be in the
inclinations made upon, or unto a right-line, then if in the one case a
right-line be inclined unto it, and in the other a circumference, or other
crooked-line? Yet further to clear that differency of kind, which is between
angles of Contact and other angles; I think on all sides it will be judged
unreasonable to make those angles of the same kind; which have neither one
common way of measuring, nor are coaptable, nor any way proportionable one to
another, nor can any way by the contraction, or dilatation of their sides be
made equal one to another; and this we shall find to be the condition of many
angles one in relation to another. However mis-understand me not, as if I made
any commensurability a full mark of a full homogeneity: for as before
crooked-lined and right-lined angles may be equal and of different kinds;
having their inclinations different in the kinds of their figurations, though
equal in the recesses of the sides.

And thus having at large deduced the grand difference which is between the
mathematical heterogeneity of angles, and their heterogeneity in respect of
their figurations, it will now be easy for us to extricate our selves out of
all the difficulties with which former Disquisitions upon this subject have
been involved.

As first what is to be understood by the equality, which is asserted to be
between right-lined, and isoclitical concavo-convexe angles. For it is out of
controversy and on all hands yielded, that to any right-lined angle given may
be given also a concavo-convexe isoclitical angle equal; and that also, in a
thousand varieties; as is most manifest, in the circumferences of any two and
two equal Circles, or any two and two equal Arches. And so in a converse
manner; to any isoclitical concavo-convexe angle given, whose sides make their
recesse one from the other by an Arch less then a semi Circle, may be given an
equal right-lined angle: although in the infinite number of right lined angles,
it is impossible to find any more then one right-lined angle equal to the given
concavo-convexe angle; because in rectitude there can be no diversity, as there
may and is in curvatures. Now in the above recited cases, why is equality
between such different angles asserted possible? and what is meant by their
equality? and whence, and how is the equality of them to be demonstrated? Of
necessity it must be founded upon some special method of measuring angles, or
of somewhat which is in some, if not in all angles; of which in common both
these different sorts of angles are naturally and indifferently capable. And to
be short, particular and plain; all the mysteriousness of this their equality
is founded upon this: that these two sorts of angles, right lined angles, and
concavo-convexe angles of equal arches, they both have in common one special
property, of which all other sorts of plane angles whatsoever are destitute.
Viz. that each in their kind are isoclitical angles, and the sides in each are
isoclitical, and in each angle the one side by the adduction, contraction, and
drawing together of the sides will be coincident and coapted unto the other.
And as the coincidence of right lines the one upon the other makes a right
lined angle of Contact impossible, so the coincidence of isoclitical
crooked-lines the one upon the other makes an isoclitical angle of Contact
impossible, except only in an ultradiametral positure. And as the mensuration
of right lined angles is by the Arches of Circles drawn upon the angular point
intercepted between the two isoclitical sides, to show how far they are
departed from their coincidence; so in isoclitical crooked lined angles, by the
same way of mensuration an account may be taken of the departure, which each
isoclitical side has made from the other since their coincidence: and this is
the point in which their equality consists and is accounted, and which founds
the mathematical homogeneity which is between them. To instance in the case
which is most manifest; in fig. 18. from the angular point A, let the two
arches ABC. and AFH of equal circles constitute and contain the isoclitical
concavo-convexe angle CAF, and let the arches ABC and AFH be equal: then
through the points C and H draw the two right-lines AD and AG. According to what
is above delivered; it is on all hands agreed, that the isoclitical
concavo-convexe angle C AH is equal to the isoclitical right-lined angle CAH:
as is copiously demonstrable from the equal arches of Circles drawn upon the
angular point as center, cutting all the four lines: viz. the Arches comprised
between the two isoclitical crooked-lines, are still equal to the respective
arches comprised between the two isoclitical right-lines. For example in the
chord AH take any where at pleasure the point I and from the center A draw the
arch IB cutting the arch AFH in the point F and the right-line AEC in the point
E and the arch ABC in the point B. The arch BF between the two isoclitical
arches ABC and AFH is still equal to the arch EI intercepted between the two
right-lines DA and GA. For the arches ABC and AFH being equal in equal
circles, the right-lines AC and AH are equal: and also AE semidiameter is
equal to AI semidiameter: and by the converse of the same ratiocination AB
arch is equal to AF arch: so as in short by superposition, or adaptation the
arch BE will appear to be equal to the arch FI: and therefore adding the common
arch OF; the arch BF intercepted between the two isoclitical crooked-lines ABC
and AFH is equal to the respective arch EI intercepted between the two
isoclitical right-lines: and this wheresoever the point I be taken in the
right-line AH. So as by this common way of mensuration, common to both these
sorts of angles, by reason of the isocliticalness, and the coaptability and
coincidibleness of the sides in each, the one being an isoclitical concavo
convexe angle is copiously demonstrated to be equal to the other being a
right-lined angle. But now after what manner are we to understand this equality
asserted between such right-lined and isoclitical concavo-convexe angles? It is
not an every way absolute equality which is between the angles, such as is
between two equal squares, or two like and equal triangles, or any two
regular and equal figures of the same kind or, to come nearer to the matter,
it is not such as is between two equal right-lined angles, or between two
equal, isoclitical, concavo-convexe angles, all whose four sides are all of
them isoclitical each in respect of all the rest: but as things that are like
each other, are like only in some things, and unlike it may be in many others;
such is the equality between any two such angles; Viz. only a respective
equality, such as is possible among heterogeneals, and inferring a necessity of
some other respective inequalities. And such an equality may be between two
mere heterogeneals; they may be of equal length, and different breadth, or
weight: so a Triangle, and a square and a Circle may be all equal, either in
perimetry, or surface, but not in both; so a right-lined angle, and an
isoclitical concavo-convexe angle may be equal in respect of the recesses which
the isoclitical sides make each from other and from their coincidence and
coaptation, but in other respects they want not their manifest inequalities and
heterogenealness. As a solid to a solid may have equal proportion that a line
to a line, yet solids and lines are heterogeneal: so a crooked-line from a
crooked-line may make equal recesses, as a right-line from a right-line, and
yet in many other things much heterogenealness may be in the angles which they
constitute. You will say wherein? I answer in the rectitude and curvature of
the containing sides. And in these different respects two isoclitical
concavo-convexe angles may be both equal and unequal the one unto the other,
Viz. equal in the recesses of the sides, but unequal in the curvatures of the
sides: in the same manner as two figures may be equal in their perimetry, or
superficial, or solid content, and yet be figures of different kinds under
diverse inequalities: as the one a Rhombus, the other a square, the one a
Cylinder, the other a Dode^aedron. So a thousand concavo-convexe isoclitical
angles may be equal in respect of the recesses of the sides, yet each of a
several kind: as a thousand figures different in kind may be equal in
perimetry, height, base, superficial, or solid content. But you will say, what is
the rectitude, or curvature of the containing sides to the nature of
angularity? I answer, they are of essential concern to the limiting and
determining the nature of angles: angularity being the habitude of concurring
lines each in respect of the other, as to their concurrence and inclination.
And though the inclination of isoclitical crooked lines may be equal to the
inclination of right-lines one upon another, in respect of the equal recesses
and departures which the isoclitical lines make each from the other; yet there
still remains a vast inequality, dissimilitude, and unanalogableness between
the angles and their inclinations, in respect of that little of figuration,
without which neither can an angle be constituted, nor an inclination made: in
a word the sides may make equal recesses, yet be unequal in their curvature,
and unlike in their figuration: and neither by imagination, nor circumduction,
nor any other operation can the one possibly be reduced, or coapted to the
other, without setting the homologal points at improper and undue distances and
positures one from another; which shows a specifical difference between the two
inclinablenesses of the one and the other: besides that a right-lined angle can
continue its inclination between the sides infinitely, but many isoclitical
concavo-convexe angles thereunto equal by the necessity of their curvature must
terminate within a very little space: circumferences and several other arches,
not being possible to be produced beyond their integrity; so as some three
given angles constituting a given triangle as to its angles, cannot, in like
manner, constitute a triangle of any given magnitude; which is otherwise in
right-lined angles. And that the equality between isoclitical concavo-convexe
and right-lined angles is not so absolute as to make them every way alike,
equal, and of the same kind, may appear especially in this, which is elsewhere
demonstrated; Viz. that an ultradiametral concavo-convexe angle of Contact,
being isoclitical, is always equal to two right right-lined angles, which no
one right lined-angle can be: and if it be anisoclitical of the larger, it is
ever greater then two right right-lined angles can be, which is impossible also
for one right-lined angle to be.

And the difference between mathematical heterogeneity and the heterogeneity of
angular figurations being as above discovered; the nature as well of
anisoclitical crooked-lined and mixt-lined secant angles will as clearly
appear: Viz. that comparing them with right-lined angles they are compound and
concrete angles constituted of right-lined angles and angles of Contact; which
are demonstrated every way heterogeneal: and such anisoclitical secant angles
cannot be divided into any number at pleasure of parts homogeneal either
mathematically, or in respect of their figuration, but of necessity some of
them must be both ways heterogeneal. This is manifest, because the flux, or
circumduction of angles of Contact or of one of their containing sides adds
only a right-lined angle to them: after the same manner as the four right
right-lined angles, which complete the space in any plane, about any given
point, may be exhausted by the circumduction of a crooked, concave, or convexe
autoclitical, or antanaclitical line, as well as by the circumduction of a
right-line. And that this ties not both angles to be of the same kind, may
easily appear from the heterogeneity between lines and their fluxes, which are
superficial; or surfaces and their fluxes, which are solid. No wonder therefore
if by the flux of an angle of contact, or of one of its sides, be created
another kind of angle, holding no analogy with the former: the heterogeneity
and improportionableness of right-lined angles and angles of Contact having
been demonstrated.

So upon the same ground we may be assisted to look into the special
properties, considerable in the several kinds of angles peculiar unto some and
incommunicable unto others, for example.

In right lined angles, neither the greatest possible angle, nor the least
possible angle can be given; though all usually said to be within the compass
but of one kind. But to pursue the difference which is in angles; angles of
Contact, except such as are contained under lines of the same rectitude and
curvature are every one of a several kind, either mathematically, or in respect
of their figuration, or both. And except convexo-convexe angles of Contact of
equal arches, which may be divided into two equal angles by common right-lined
tangents; all other angles of Contact are, every one, both the greatest, and
least possible, of their special kind: and every angle of Contact contained
under the convexe side of its arch, or arches, is the least possible under
those sides; which I suppose was the speculation unhappily missed by those
learned men, who would have imposed upon the world, upon that their mistake,
the dream of the coincidence of the sides in such angles.

Again a right-line may be drawn dividing a convexo-convexe angle of Contact,
whether it divide it equally, or unequally, but a right-line cannot be drawn
dividing either of the recto-convexe angles of Contact into which the former
was so divided; whether the two recto-convexe angles of Contact be of the same,
or different kinds: as is up and down demonstrated in Geometry.

In citradiametral concavo-convexe angles of Contact, either the Arches are of
unequal curvature, or which is tantamount, though they be of equal curvature,
yet they touch not at homologal and answering points, being not all over of
equal curvature; which makes them notwithstanding the respective but not
answering equality of their curvature to be anisoclitical. And between their
Arches containing the angle of Contact, a right-line cannot be drawn; but
infinite crooked-lines in number may be drawn, bearing in like manner their
convexity toward the concave which is inward, and their concavity toward the
convexe of the other side, which is also inward.

Concavo-convexe angles concurring by way of section, and having two right-line
tangents drawn upon the Arches at the angular point are equal unto the
right-lined angles contained under those right-lined tangents; adding
respectively to each right-lined angle one of the recto-convexe angles of
Contact, and subducting out of it the other recto-convexe angle of Contact: and
when those two recto-convexe angles of Contact are equal, as they are, when the
sides are isoclitical, then the concavo-convexe angle is exactly equal to the
right-lined angle: but when the two recto-convexe angles of Contact are
unequal, as they are when the sides of the concavo-convexe angle are
anisoclitical then the concavo-convexe angle and the right-lined angle are
unequal.

Concavo-concave angles concurring by way of section (as all such ever do; or
by coincidence, and then one right-lined tangent gives the analysme of them,
showing the two recto-convexe angles of Contact, by which the angle of
coincidence is less then two right right-lined angles) are by two right-lined
tangents at the angular point reduced into the right-lined angle; which is the
least of those right-lined angles that are greater then it, exceeding it only
by two recto-convexe angles of Contact to be taken out of it.

Convexo-convexe angles concurring by way of section are by two right-lined
tangents at the angular point reduced into a right-lined angle; unto which to
make it equal to the convexo-convexe angle, are to be added two recto-convexe
angles of Contact. And the right-lined angle is the greatest of all the
right-lined angles that are less then the convexo-convexe angle.

Recto-concave angles concurring by way of Contact are the greatest angles
possible under those two sides.

Recto-convexe angles concurring by way of Contact are the least angles
possible under those two sides.

If we compare recto-concave angles of Contact with right lined angles, they
are less then two right right-lined angles by one only recto-convexe angle of
Contact. And the least recto-concave angle of Contact is greater then the
greatest right-lined angle whatsoever.

Recto-concave angles concurring by way of section compared with right-lined
angles which are constituted, i. e. completed by the right-lined tangents
drawn upon the Arches at the angular points; are less than such respective
right-lined angles by a recto-convexe angle of Contact.

Recto-convexe angles concurring by way of section compared with right-lined
angles which are constituted, i. e. completed by right-line tangents drawn
upon the Arches at the angular points; are greater then such right-lined angles
by a recto-convexe angle of Contact.

Every angle of curvature, or coincidence, having a right-line tangent drawn
upon the angular point, appears to be less then two right right-lined angles by
two recto-convexe angles of Contact.

The inclination of the sides without the angular point at any two respective,
or other points, the one taken in the one side, the other in the other, is very
nearly shown, and as nearly as is possible in right-lines, by the right-line
tangents of those respective points: but in mixed lined and mixed crooked-lined
angles by several ways of accounting, several points are made to answer one
another, as by accounting by distance from the angular point, or by accounting
by equalness of lines along the sides etc.

Mixed lined angles of Contact, when they can be, and are, divided by a
right-line, the parts are heterogeneal and unequal: and one of the unequal
parts is a right-lined angle.

Every recto-convexe, and convexo-convexe, or citradiametral concavo-convexe
angle of Contact is the least possible under those sides.

Rectilineary mensurableness in mixed lined, crooked-lined angles concurring by
way of section, begins from the recto-convexe angle of Contact: as in
right-lined angles from coincidence.

A convexo-convexe angle of Contact, in respect of dividableness by right-lines
is an angle made up only of heterogeneal parts, when it is a mixt-crooked-lined
angle: but when it is an unmixt crooked-lined angle, it has some parts which
are homogeneal, Viz. two equal recto-convexe angles of contact, which are
therein added the one unto the other. And those two equal recto-convexe angles
of contact, as they are homogeneal, I mean of the same kind one with another,
both mathematically and in respect of their figuration; so mathematically they
are homogeneal and of the same kind with the convexo-convexe angle which was
divided; but in respect of it, as to their figuration, they are heterogeneal
and of another kind.

The most simple angle may be divided into heterogeneal parts: i. e. the
inclinableness of the one side to the dividing line both in respect of
figuration and proportion may be specifically different from the inclinableness
of the other side to the same dividing line: as a pentagone may be divided into
a tetragone and a triangle, so a recto-convexe angle of Contact may be divided
into two parts heterogeneal the one to the other, and to the first angle of
Contact, both in respect of figuration and proportion: viz. into a new
recto-convexe angle of Contact, and a concavo-convexe angle of Contact.
Therefore no angle can be said homogeneal in that sense, as if it could not be
divided into parts heterogeneal; whether you please to understand it, in
respect of mathematical homogeneity, or positure, and figuration, or what
respect soever else that limits and distinguishes plane angles one from
another.

And to give a brief and general account of the comparative admensuration of
angles, as not being right-lined, yet by way of comparative admeasurement, they
may in respect of their rectilineary parts be reduced and referred to those
that are right-lined; the containing sides not being right-lines, at the
angular point draw right-line tangents touching the arch, or arches in the
angular point; and the right-lined angle contained by those right-lined
tangents will be, as to the recesses of the sides at the angular point, either
equal unto the first proposed angle, or the least right-lined angle greater
then it, or the greatest right-lined angle lesser then it: or if two
right-lined tangents cannot be thus placed at the angular point, either the
first proposed angle was a mixt-lined angle of contact, said, if a recto
convexe to be less, if a recto-concave to be greater then any right-lined
angle; or else it is a crooked-lined angle of contact, which if
convexo-convexe, or concavo-convexe and citradiametral is less then any
right-lined angle, but if concavo-convexe and ultradiametral, is greater then
any right-lined angle, nay sometimes equal to, or greater then two right
right-lined angles: or else it is an angle of coincidence, or curvature. All
which is to be understood to show the inclination of the sides at the angular
point, as the chief for use in Geometry, but not necessarily elsewhere. So
crooked-lined, or mixed lined angles are compared with right-lined angles by
drawing at the angular point right-lines touching the Arches there, and
comparing the crooked or mixed lined angle with the right-lined angle so
constituted, respectively adding, or subducting the recto-convexe angles of
Contact hereby created: and this, whether the Arches be isoclitical, or
anisoclitical, or however posited. So all crooked, or mixed-lined angles
concurring by way of section may have a right-lined angle given, which if it
fall short of equality is either the least of the right-lined angles that are
greater, or the greatest of the right-lined angles that are less then the first
crooked-lined, or mixed lined angle. And so an analysme may be made of the
greater angle into its heterogeneal parts; and the crooked lined, or
mixed-lined angle may be reduced unto, or compared with right-lined angles,
only with the addition, or substraction of recto-convexe angles of Contact,
being angles less than the least right-lined angle whatsoever.

All angles have their inclinations compounded of the inclinations of the
interjacent lines each to other in order: and of the inclinations of the sides
to the lines next adjacent to them; which composite inclination may be
heterogeneal, as well as homogeneal in respect of the inclinations of which it
is, or may be compounded.

Equally arched convexo-convexe, or concavo-concave angles, may by a right-line
be divided into equal parts mathematically homogeneal, but heterogeneal in
respect of their figuration: but such angles cannot be divided into any more,
or any other equal parts, for the reason immediately to be subjoyned.

Heterogeneals taken together in several concretes proportionably, S c. each
respectively in the same proportion, they hold exact proportion, concrete to
concrete: as double cube and double line, are double, to single cube and single
line, Viz. the concrete to the concrete: but set them out of the same
respective proportions and the concretes are no way proportionable, or in
analogy, concretely to be compared: as double cube and treble line, are in no
proportion, to single cube, and single line. So double number, and double
weight, and double measure, the whole concrete, is double, to single number,
single weight and single measure: but setting them out of the same respective
proportions; double number, and double weight and treble measure, being
altogether concretely taken, are mathematically heterogeneal and
improportionable to single number, single weight and single measure; being in
like manner concretely taken: because the heterogeneals in the one concrete
^old not the same respective proportions to the answering heterogeneals in the
other. So convexo-convexe, or concavo-concave equally arched angles being
secant, hold proportion when divided equally, as they may, by right-lines: but
they are merely heterogeneal and without proportion, when divided by a
right-line unequally. The ground of which is the heterogeneity of the parts, of
which such concrete angles are made up when compared with angularity
constituted by right-lines; which heterogeneal parts, when the angle is divided
equally in two by a right-line, are in the concretes, each respectively in the
same proportion; so making the concretes, though of heterogeneal parts, to be
mathematically homogeneal and proportionable one unto the other: but when the
angle is unequally divided; in the two concretes the heterogeneal parts, of
which they are made up, are not respectively in the same proportion; for the
recto-convexe angles of Contact, in the concrete angle, are divided equally,
and the right-lined angle, which is in the concrete angle is divided unequally:
so making the parts of the divided angle mathematically heterogeneal and
improportionable; because the compounding heterogeneal parts are not
respectively according to the same proportion divided.

The least possible angle under any two given incoincidible lines is the least
angle of Contact which is possible under them.

Recto-convexe, and citradiametral concavo-convexe angles of Contact as they
are the least angles possible under their sides; so they are indivisible into
parts holding all each to other any thing of mathematical homogeneity, or
proportionableness: Like unites they may be multiplied to any proportion as
whole numbers, and separately set: but cannot at pleasure be divided, nor at
all into parts which are all of them mathematically homogeneal: nor can any
number of them be at pleasure adjoined one to another. So to any right-lined
angle another may be imagined in any proportion, but sometimes it must be the
composition of seseveral angles, and more then can stand at the space
circumjacent about any one point. It not being possible for above four right
right-lined angles to stand about the same point. As to a given point, other
points may be given in any proportion, as whole numbers; but they must not then
be adjoined one to another: but properly by the dividing of a point, farther
proportions are not to be expected. So in such angles, though heterogeneal
divisions be infinitely possible; homogeneal, I mean mathematically, being
impossible, are not, as above, to be expected.

Two unequal anisoclitical angles contained under the same two anisoclitical
sides, though in respect of their figuration, both are formed upon the same
inclinableness of the sides one to another, yet they are mathematically
heterogeneal: because being two concrete angles made up of heterogeneals, viz.
of the angle, or angles of Contact and right-lined angles; in the two concrete
angles, the angles of Contact are in the proportion of equality, and the
right-lined angles in the proportion of inequality: so as the concrete angles
can have no proportion the one to the other.

The half of the inclinableness of any arch upon its self, i. e. upon another
arch like and equal, is still comprehended and contained under the
inclinableness of a right-line upon the same arch: that though their
figurations are ever heterogeneal, and their inclinations can never be equal,
yet they may be mathematically homogeneal: as different numbers are always
unequal though ever proportionable.

To no anisoclitical angle, whether of Contact, or concurring by way of section
can any right-lined angle be made equal. And generally between isoclitical and
anisoclitical angles equality is impossible. And when anisoclitical angles are
compared with those that are isoclitical as greater, or lesser; it is not to
denote in both any mathematical homogeneity, and that so by possibility they
are reducible to a true, complete and analogous equality; but the intent is
only to declare, whether of them has, or can have the containing side, or
sides falling within, or without the other; which is only from their inequality
by the whole kind. So though anisoclitical angles may be greater, or less then
a right-lined angle, yet between the one and the other there is neither common
way of measuring, nor any proportion, though both of them be quantitative plane
angles. There is no common way of measuring them, because of the
anisocliticalness, and if there could be any proportion between them, then
might a right-lined angle be given equal to such anisoclitical angles; the
contrary of which is otherwise clearly demonstrable. So as a thousand angles
quantitative by conf^ssion and having right-lined angles lesser and greater
then themselves, yet can have no right-lined angle equal to them.

A right-lined angle cannot have its inclination at the angular point, much
less all along the sides divided equally by a crooked-line, whether
autoclitical, or antanaclitical, or of what curvature soever: though any such
crooked-line may from any angle divide equally the plane bounded within a
right-lined triangle: for if in fig. 17. BAC be a right-lined angle: I say, no
crooked-line etc. can divide it at the angular point equally. If it be possible
let it be divided into equal parts by the arch AGE whether autoclitical, as
when it is conceived to be part of the arch AGEF, or antanaclitical, as when it
is conceived to be part of the arch AGEHD. Then let the right-line AD divide
equally the right-lined angle BAC. It is manifest, if the crooked-line AG never
occur with the right-line AD, that then it does not divide the angle B AC
equally; for the right and crooked-lines cannot be coapted. Let therefore, if
they do occur, the place of their first meeting, or occurrence be at E.
Therefore the arch AGE falls within the angle BAD and therefore divides the
whole angle BAC unequally, whether it be autoclitical, or antanaclitical. And
by the same demonstration appears that it is as impossible for it to divide the
inclination all along the sides equally. And though a crooked-line may divide
any right-lined figure, because of its perfect bounds, from any angle into
equal parts; yet this no way evinceth any possibility of dividing a right-lined
angle by a crooked line into equal parts: and though from any point of such a
dividing crooked line, lines might be drawn making up a figure, whose parts
divided by the crooked line from the angle are equal; yet this is no more then
is performable upon any point of any crooked line drawn between the sides of a
right-lined angle at random, whether the parts of the angle be homogeneal, or
heterogeneal, equal, or unequal.

Difference of curvature by a perpetual necessity infers difference of
inclination, whether the curve line be inclined upon a right-line, or upon a
curve line; for still the one of the curve lines will fall within, or without
the other. So let inclination upon a right-line be in a recto-concave angle of
Contact, recto-convexe angle of Contact, recto-concave, or recto-convexe secant
angles; by no right-line can any of those inclinations be made upon the first
right-line, nor by any other crooked-line: but still the lines will fall either
within, or without* And all angles of Contact under lines of different
curvature and rectitude, as they are of ^ thousand Mathematically and
extra-quantitatively different kinds one from another, so they are (...)
manifestly distinct in kind from all right-lined angl^^ whatsoever. And as
every number is a different kind, in like manner as to positure and figuration
is every line a distinct kind differing from all other not agreeing with it in
rectitude and curvature; whether the curvatures be homogeneal, i. e. every
where equal, as in Circles, or heterogeneal, i. e. unequal in the several
parts, as in ellipses, hyperbolas, parabolas, etc. And accordingly judgment is
to be made of the sides under which angles are contained, and the angles
contained under them: alter the kind of either side, and the kind of the angle
is changed; ever, in respect of figuration; and most what, mathematically;
because the former inclinablenes of the sides is taken away, and a new kind of
inclinablenes introduced between them. Hence appears; no two recto-concaves, no
two recto-convexes, no two concavo-convexes, no two convexo-convexes, being all
angles of Contact can be equal, except their sides have the very same rectitude
and curvature. In general, equality is not to be asserted between angles,
except either for the mensurablenes of both in some common way of measuring, or
at least because they can be so cast into a coaptation, as that either shall
contain all the quantity which is in the other. And as he erred in squaring the
superficial content of a circle, that in his quadrature left out a small
lunular figure; so neither can he be justified to have given one anisoclitical
angle equal to another, who, as he must of necessity, takes in, or leaves out
an angle, or some angles of contact which are in the one and not in the other.

Particularly no mixed lined, nor mixed crooked lined angles whatsoever,
whether secant, or of contact, can by any possibility, either by right-line, or
crooked line be divided into equal parts, or angles, whether of the same, or of
different, kinds. And in few, those angles, which cannot be divided into two
equal parts cannot be divided into three, four, five, or any other number of
equal parts.

The comparative admensurement, as above, of right-lined and not right-lined
angles is as well of their heterogeneal inequality, when heterogeneal, as of
their homogeneal equality and proportionablenes when homogeneal.

All not right-lined angles comparatively admeasured, to right-lined angles,
only with the addition, or only with the subduction of any angle, or angles of
contact, are heterogeneal to all right-lined angles, as also, if when one angle
of contact is to be added, and another subducted, the two angles of contact be
unequal. And as is manifest, of several not right-lined angles, that is still
the greater, whose comparative and relative admeasurement is made to the
greater right-lined angle: and of those, whose comparative admeasurement is
unto equal right lined angles, they are greater, or equal, or less according to
the equality, or inequality, and comparing together of their angles of Contact*
And of concavo-concave angles the right-lined angle cannot be given, which is
the greatest of those right-lined angles that are less then the concavo-concave
angle: nor in convexo-convexe angles can be given a right-lined angle, which is
the least of those right-lined angles which are greater then the
convexo-convexe angle: nor in recto-concaves the greatest of the less: nor in
recto-convexes the least of the greater: whereas in concavo-convexe angles, the
right-lined angle to which the comparative admeasurement is made, may according
to the case be either equal, as when the sides are isoclitical; or the greatest
right-lined angle that is less, as when the concave side is of less curvature;
or the least of the greater, as when the concave side is of greater curvature.

From these things may appear how that objection is to be answered, in which
you urge that there is a proportion between mixed lined angles, whose sides are
seca^^, and right-lined angles, because the one by its multiple may exceed the
other; and that therefore an homogeneity, mathematically to be understood, is
to be acknowledged amongst them. To this is answered that all anisoclitical
angles whatsoever having their sides concurring by way of section when compared
unto right-lined angles are heterogeneal compositions of angularity, i. e.
cannot be divided into any number at pleasure of parts all equal; but as is
manifest, they in that their relative nature are concrete and composite angles,
formed of right-lined angles by adding to them, or subducting from them mixed
lined angles of Contact: so as the right-lined part of the secant anisoclitical
angle, or any the least part of it has true proportion with all right-lined
angles; and the whole being heterogeneal, yet has a semblance of proportion
with right-lined angles, because of those parts which it has which are
homogeneal with them; but between the other heterogeneal part which is the
mixt-lined angle of Contact, and right-lined angles, neither is, nor can be any
proportion: and it is because of this part that it is not a true, but a seeming
proportion only, which is between the whole concrete heterogeneal, composite
anisoclitical angle, and right-lined angles: for if it were a true proportion
and proportionablenes which were between them, it should then be possible to
give a right-lined angle equal to such an anisoclitical secant angle; which
when done, I have no more to say, being well assured I am able to demonstrate
the contrary upon whatsoever right-lined angle shall be offered under that
notion. And whereas it is urged that a right-lined angle is, and may be equal
to a mixed lined angle; all their difference being only in this, that the sides
of the one are more spread and divaricated then the other; what is this else
but to say, that they are equal, saying that the one is bigger then the other.
For angles of Contact can divide angularity, or space equally, or unequally
into more, or fewer parts: and they are not indivisible, because every one
contains innumerably more in it: and by the definition of an angle, lines have
a sufficient inclination to constitute an angle, if in the same plane, they lie
not both in the same right-line. And to all other cases and objections of the
like nature grounded upon them athematical heterogeneity of the parts, of which
such special angles are constituted in respect of right-lined angles, like
answers may be addressed.

Though a right-lined angle cannot be divided into equal parts of the same kind
mathematically, or in shape by a crooked-line, nor a mixed, or crooked-line
angle by a right-line into parts of the same kind in respect of figuration; yet
some crooked lined angles may be divided into parts exactly equal of the same
kind one with another, and with the whole mathematically by a right-line. For
it is apparent, there may be between magnitudes a sufficient homogeneity for
proportionablenes without excluding all further discriminableness between them:
as between equal arched convexo-convexes, or concavo-concaves and their parts
when they are equally divided. So between lines of all kinds, and numbers of
all kinds, is proportionality. Yet still their proportionality is in respect of
somewhat which is homogeneal in them. Viz. that they are all resoluble into
parts that are homogeneal, or parts into which the rest are homogeneally
resoluble, or after the same manner mensurable, as equal arched convexo-convexe
angles into two equal recto-convexes: yet notwithstanding the proportionablenes
between the convexo-convexes and the recto-convexes; such an heterogeneity is
in their figuration, that by no divarication of sides can they ever be made
equal. And though the equal arched convexo-convexes and concavo concaves may be
divided by a right-line into two equal parts; by no lines whatsoever can they
be divided into any more equal parts nor their recto-convexes by any line
whatsoever into two equal parts; such parts of such angles being more
impossible to be given in Geometry, then the square roots of unsquare numbers,
or cubicke roots of uncubical numbers are in Arithmeticke. As any two points,
or any two indivisibles may have some few proportions amongst them, but no
more: the latitude of proportionablenes being limited by the special natures
and kinds of things: so between special kinds of numbers cannot be all
proportions: nor between special lines all angles, or all proportions in all
angles.

Hence also we may clear the possibility of that speculation of the learned
persons by you named, that in heterogeneals there may be a passing from greater
to less, and from less to greater in a continuous manner without, ever passing
through equality; however you are pleased to bestow upon it a contemptuous
smile, if not an hiss: Viz. that we should assert that mixed lined, or crooked
lined angles can pass by the divarication of the same sides from being greater
to be less then given angles, or contrarily by their contraction, and yet in
that transit, never be equal. What is more obvious then to give instances of
anisoclitical angles, less then a given isoclitical angle, and by divaricating
and distending the sides of the anisoclitical angle, it may be made to exceed
the first given isoclitical angle; yet in all the way they could never be equal
the one to the other; the one being isoclitical, the other anisoclitical:
coaptation and the passing of the sides from the angular point every where
prove their inequality: and let those that assert their equality any way show
and admeasure it. And the sober understanding of those sayings, that such
angles pass from less to greater without ever being equal, is not to assert
any homogeneity, or proportion of any kind between them, or common way of
measuring their quantity in and according to the same indefinite quantity, but
only to show how the sides may pass within and without each other; but because
of their anisocliticalnes and difference in respect of rectitude and
curvatures, they can never be brought to be coincident. And why should this
appear so monstrous, that transitions should be, in the sense abovesaid, made
from greater to less, without passing through equality? seeing it is most
manifest that though a crooked-line circumducted about the angular point of a
right-lined angle makes infinite divisions of the right-lined angle; yet they
are ever unequal, and never by possibility can be equal: though
notwithstanding, the same crooked line may divide a crooked lined isoclitical
angle equal to the given right-lined angle into equal parts; which besides
plentifully shows the heterogeneity which is between equal right-lined and
crooked-lined isoclitical angles, notwithstanding their equality: yet by making
up the right-lined angle into a compleately bounded figure, the crooked-line
may divide the plane of it into equal isoepipedal and isorrhopical parts: as is
more easy to demonstrate then that there should be any need to set it down. And
it is not to be stranged at, that we assert a crooked-line can divide a
right-lined triangle into equal parts, but not any of its right-lined angles:
for the figuration of the one is complete, and the production of the
crooked-line, as well as of the lines containing the right-lined angle, in the
triangle are limited; all which are quite otherwise in mere angles, being in
many kinds of angles and inclinations very alterable by the production of the
lines. And if you will pertinaciously say that a crooked-line may divide
equally a right-lined angle, show their equality, and your way of admeasuring
the equality of the parts: both coaptation of sides, in whose habitude the
nature of angles chiefly consists, and also the way of measuring by interjected
arches demonstrating and declaring the contrary: Nay sometimes in quantities
among which there is true proportion, the special differences of their kinds
may be the author of little less. So commensurable quantities, being in their
commensurability infinitely divisible, may be continually increased, or
lessened by quantities vastly, less then any given quantity; yet as they pass
from less to greater never can hit equality with any the like quantities of the
same general kind, being incommensurable. So in the present question,
heterogeneity of sides makes an impossibility to coapt, though by straitning
and divaricating they may fall within, or without, and so be less, or greater,
but being impossible to coapt, and incapable of any other common way of
measuring, equality cannot be conceived in them; in which is praesupposed a
common way of measuring to declare and prove their asserted proportion and
equality. And in this whole matter what is more said then that the cutting
inclination of a right-line upon a right-line, and of a right-line upon a
crooked, or of a crooked-line upon two crooked-lines being all of different
curvature, may any of them be greater, or less then one another heterogeneally,
but can never be equal; as to those that will consider, is most clearly
manifest and necessary. And this is no more strange, then that odd numbers may
be less, or greater then any even number, at least above two, yet by their
constitutive nature, they can never be equal: and for the same reason
magnitudes commensurable and incommensurable may be greater, and less then one
another, and by a less quantity then any quantity that can be given; yet, for
the specialty of their natures, they can never be equal, remaining so distinct
in their ultimate kind: and however they have many general things in which they
agree, yet they are not accountable specially, but by several ways and
algorythmes. And as it is the binding up of numbers to the specific properties
of Evenness, or oddness, and of magnitudes to commensurability, or
incommensurability, that makes equality between their kinds impossible; so it
is the incoaptablenes and want and impossibility of a common way of measuring,
which is between the two and two sides of such heterogeneally unequal angles,
keeping all along the properties of their inclination, that renders equality
between their kinds impossible; though either may sometimes truly and
manifestly be greater or less then the other, however without proportion. For
in heterogeneals may be a two fold inequality, either an inequality according
to proportion, or an inequality without proportion: and though they be
heterogeneals, if it be a true limited, determinate proportion of inequality
which is between them, as between an odd number and an even, a commensurable
magnitude and an incommensurable, they are then considered as some way, or
according to something which is, homogeneal, not heterogeneal, in both: but if
their inequality, though real and apparent be without any true and homogeneally
determinable proportionablenes, as between right-lined and anisoclitical
angles, then the consideration had of them is in their heterogeneity. So to the
objection, that right-lined angles, and recto-convexe angles of Contact have
proportion of greater and less, and are therefore homogeneal, if any
quantitativenes be to be asserted in the recto-convexe angles of Contact; and
so of the rest: I answer, there is not a proportionable inequality between
right-lined angles and recto-convexe angles of Contact, and the like; but an
inequality, which is improportionable: as when the Earth is said to be intruth
greter then a point; though in many particular hypotheses contrarily conceived,
for the better observing and accounting several phenomenon, and the better
accommodating of instruments for the making of observations. So in the genesis
of quantities and figures, when one quantity has its genesis by the flux, or
motion of another, the quantity formed by that motion is greater then the
quantity moved, though still without any proportion: so by the divaricating of
the sides, by the motion of one of the sides, of a recto-convexe angle of
Contact, is a genesis of recto-convexe angles of section; and the recto-convexe
angles of section are still greater then the recto-convexe angle of Contact, or
its respectively moved side: and all still without any proportion. And
inequality without proportionality being so usually asserted, and familiar
between mere heterogeneals, does easily acquit it self from the reproach you
charge it withal, of being a contradiction in the very terms; for finite and
infinite never were denied to be unequal, yet never can be made out to be
mathematically homogeneal and proportionable. For though all proportion is
either of equality, or inequality; that hinders not but an inequality in
heterogeneals may be admitted, without an asserting of proportion between them.
So as mathematical homogeneity is not proved by inequality, till
proportionablenes be as well proved as inequality* Of the same leaven is that
strange kind of reasoning you use; to any right-lined angle a crooked-lined
angle may be made equal (we confess a thousand several crooked-lined angles may
be made equal to any one right-lined) angle) but you from thence infer that
therefore all crooked lined angles and right-lined angles are of the same kind;
without adding as well, that to any crooked-lined, or mixed lined angle, a
right-lined angle also might be made equal; which can never be done; the
contrary thereof being confessedly demonstrated in Geometry: or if any be so
opinionated that it is either easy, or feasible, let them give a right-lined
angle equal to an anisoclitical angle, whose sides concur by way of section
or to an ultradiametral convexo-concave angle of Contact: and try whether the
equality of the two angles be not disproveable. In the same manner inequality
without proportion, is asserted between both the recto-concave and
recto-convexe angles of the semicircle, i. e. the inner and outer angles of
the semicircle, and a right, or any other right-lined angle* But to return,
from the concrete and composite nature of not right-lined angles, when compared
with right-lined angles; the enigmaticalnes of the proposition, that magnitudes
of one sort may be greater, and less then a given magnitude of another, but
never equal, becomes most clear and doubtless: as infinite solids may be given
greater, or lesser then the heterogeneal concrete magnitude of a cube foot and
a foot-line; but never can any solid be given thereunto equal: so likewise
infinite heterogeneal concrete magnitudes consisting each of solids with the
accrescency, or annexion of a foot-line, may be given greater, or lesser then a
cube elle; but in such comparisons, never can the concretes of the heterogeneal
magnitudes be equal, or in proportion to any solitary, single, one, of the
heterogeneals.

In like manner it manifestly appears what is to be thought of that often
pretended equality between the two angles of a semicircle and a right
right-lined angle: for by coaptation and the goings forth of the lines from the
angular point it appears otherwise. And how will they that assert their
equality demonstrate it? and by what way will they admeasure it? for
interjacent and intercepted arches of Circles drawn upon the angular point as
center, can in these angles contribute nothing to the admeasuring of them: and
coaptation makes against their equality: and is so far from making a right
right-lined angle to be the constant standard of all angles of semi-circles,
that it manifestly shows the angles of greater semi-circles to be greater and
of less, lesser. The objection, that unequal circles, semi circles, and
segments of equal degrees, cannot be judged like and homologal figures, except
all their respective angles be equal, as well as the sides homologal: this may
be easily answered; Viz. that it is like genesis that makes like figures, which
in all right-lined figures makes the answering angles equal, and in all figures
the sides to be homologal, and the difference of the homologal angles to be
less then the least right-lined angle.

In Circles the same genesis, by the circumduction of the semi-diameter about
the Center, which makes the figures like, and the sides homologal, makes in
unequal circles the curvatures, angles of coincidence, the angles of the semi
circles, and of homologal segments, necessarily unequal. Or, then figures (...)
be judged like when in a concentrick (...) the perimeter, sides and lines of
the (...) proportionable to those in the other, (...) or may be placed
parallel, or (...) those in the one, to those in the other*, (...) which in
right-lined figures, it is true, th^^^ always follows equality between the
answering angles, but not so in other lined figures. And because equality of
angles in like right-lined figures is so much urged; the difference of the case
of angles in like right-lined and like crooked-lined figures may plainly appear
in another remarke; Viz. that in like right-lined figures, the sides of the
answering angles may from the answering angular point be exactly coapted one to
another; which in unequal Circles, though never so like figures, is most
apparently impossible: that it cannot but be unreasonable to expect as absolute
a conformity between the answering angles in like crooked lined figures, as
there is in like right-lined figures; being so manifestly against both the eye
and demonstration. And therefore like segments of Circles, are not defined by
equality of angles contained between their arches and their chords; but by the
equality of the angles contained in them; the one being certain, constant in
all, and demonstrable; the other in most cases, not only doubtful, but
impossible. So the objection, from the asserted equality of alternate angles,
made by a right-line cutting parallel circumferences; is readily answered by
denying the truth of what is presumed in the objection, as never by any
demonstrated, or ever possibly demonstrable, Viz. that the alternate and
vertically opposite angles, made by a right-line cutting parallel
circumferences are equal. And the tyranny of forcing lines out of their natures
and special properties, may appear in that very instance of compelling the
parallelisme of curve lines to answer the consectaries and idioms of the
parallelisme of right-lines: in which, to omit the alleged instance, as by
you unproved, and for good reasons by us to be denied, a right-line tangent of
the lesser concentrick Circle cuts the circumference of the greater, and
infinite right-lines cutting the greater, neither cut, nor touch the lesser,
which is repugnant to the nature of parallelisme in right lines. That that
which is so much contended for, that a crooked-line and a right-line are
homogeneal as to length and their general lineariness, was, or ought never to
be denied, there being all possibility of equality, and truly proportionable
inequality between them, what kind of curvature soever the crooked-lines bear:
but that they are homogeneal as to the positure of their longitude; the site
and manner of their extension, has unto me been always unconceivable: whence
the truths on both hands clearly follow, Viz. that an arch and a right-line may
be equal and hold always a true limited, exact proportion one to another, but
the arch and its chorde never can be equal, i. e. there never can be equality
between a right-line and a crooked-line, both posited between the same two
terminateing points, nor any analogy between the rectitude of the one and the
curvature of the other. And the seeking to prove the equality of angles
contained under homologal lines, the one curve, the other a right-line from
your usual fancy of a regular polygone of infinite angles in every circle, is
too wild to be persuasive: for though at any mean point in curve lines, the two
parts of the curve-line may be conceived specially to meet as several parts and
lines, and so to have inclination the one to the other, and so to constitute an
angle; which we call the angle of curvature and coincidence, not reasonably to
be denied by those, with whom it is so ordinary to make such suppositions, and
especially such as can so usually against possibility imagine angles in a
right-line remaining a right-line: yet that angles should be without sides, and
a perimeter of any figure conceived at once to be all angular points and no
lineary sides, clearly ^^^^stes the perimeter of the nature of a line: (...) to
me it seems far from the nature of a ^^^ular figure, that has nothing but
points ^^stead of lines to bound it: but which is most material; that a number
actually infinite should be so easily given, is hard to allow: and that
indivisibles, as points, should be so adjacent (...) to another, one without
another, with^^^ coincidence, identity and unity, is new ^^^^osophy, and not
easily capable of any in(...) defense. Therefore that argumentation (...), that
such a regular polygone of in(...)whether sides or angles is either a circle,
(...) inscribable in a circle, is too vain: for it can be neither, being
nothing, because there neither is, nor can be any such thing: for if any such
were allowed they must of necessity have equal and infinite perimeters; which
is too gross to be admitted in it self, and besides renders the whole matter
unapplyable to Circles, which are acknowledged, to be some less then others. So
as all discourses of a regular polygone of infinite angles, are discourses not
only of a nonentity, but an absolute impossibility, which renders all
suppositions thereof unjustifiable. And of the same fineness are those sayings,
that the magnitude of an angle is not to be judged of from the divarication
which the sides have without the angular point, or point of concurrence, but
from the divarication which they have in the point of concurrence; as if in an
indivisible point they could have any divarication at all. But as if it were
resolved that even this should be transcended in monstrosity, for the
justifying of the equality of mixed lined angles contained by homologal sides
in unequal Circles, by an instance from the coapting of unequal hexagones to
the same line, as a common side in them all, divided equally by a perpendicular
passing through the centers of all, a right-lined angle is strangely constituted
either of three right-lines concurring, but not in the same point, or of two
lines without any concurrence, or else the instance must be void of all
pertinency to the question. So to all those objections seemingly founded upon
that proposition, or postulate, that what is less then any positive quantity
whatsoever is not any quantity at all, is justly answered; that the proposition
or postulate is most true and reasonable, and cannot by any of sound mind be
denied, or doubted: but no force of objection could be made out of that, if
other things of a less veritable nature had not been taken in; as in most of
them the fancyed possibility of a regular polygone of infinite angles; and
frequently that a Circle is that regular polygone.

But besides, though what is less then any positive quantity whatsoever be not
any quantity at all; yet this hinders not, but quantityes may be mathematically
heterogeneal and improportionable one to another: so every surface is less then
any solid: and angles of Contact are not less then any quantity whatsoever, for
there is in the least of them an endless, unexhausted divisibility; which how it
can consist with a nonquantitativenes, let those that have a mind to be serious
solemnly consider. To the objection that would prove, neither
semi-circumference to contain an angle with the right-lined tangent of it in
its extreem point, because the two semi circumferences contain no angle at that
point, but are one regularly continued line, and the circumference and
right-lined tangent are lines coincident, at least as to the point of Contact;
manifest and reasonable answers cannot be to seek out of what has already been
said. For first what hinders the reasonable conceiving of angularity at any
point of a curve-line, where is both concurrence, inclination and divisibility,
more then the notion of divisibility at any mean point of a right-line? And not
to doubt but a curve line may be conceived reasonably as one continued line, as
well as two, or more, inclined and concurring right-lines; yet that the
right-line tangent and curve-line which it touches, should be said to be
coincident lines, in such sense as to exclude angularity; or that any two lines
can be so coincident in one only point, as to exclude angularity, and the
inflexion of one to, or from the other, except both lie in one and the same
right-line; has, as elsewhere, been plainly and abundantly answered to. To the
objection that the Area of a Circle is equal to a rect-angle under the
semidiameter and semi circumference; and that therefore the semidiameter in a
Circle is perpendicular to the circumference in a Circle and makes at the
circumference four equal right-angles; is answered, that the whole objection is
a manifest paralogisme. For it is not denied but in the right-lined rect-angle
under the semidiameter, and a right-line equal to the semi circumference, is
presumed, and by the definition of a rect-angle inferred, that the angle under
those two right-lines is a right right-lined angle: besides it is not denied,
but the diameter falls perpendicularly in the circle upon the circumference:
and that the four angles made by the falling of the semidiameter upon the
circumference differ from one another less than the least right-lined angle:
however that cannot force the falling of the semidiameter perpendicularly upon
the circumference into the properties of perpendicularness between right lines,
which still divides the space at the angular point into four angles always,
every way alike, and equal; which in right lines perpendiculars upon curve
lines in the same plane, is impossible to be, and therefore impossible ever to
be demonstrated.

It will not be unuseful here to enquire wherein the likeness and unlikeness of
angles does consist, and whether there be any such thing as likeness and
unlikeness in angles, or whether the likeness, or unlikeness of figures be only
in the similitude, or dissimilitude of the sides. And that by a circumspect
consideration of the nature of mathematical similitude in other cases, we may
be the better guided into the true and most rational notion of similitude in
angles, let us remember what has already been judged in this point, and what
is herein confessed on all hands. First, in right lined figures, those figures
are judged like, whose answering angles are equal, and the answering sides and
other lines proportionable; and if they be equal, they may be coapted,
homologal side to homologal side, and answering angle to answering angle; or
whether they be equal, or unequal, all the sides and other answering lines of
the one may be set, as from the same center, each at parallelisme, or
coincidency with the answering sides, or lines of the other, so as in like
right lined figures is proportionablenes* in the answering sides, equality of
the answering angles, coaptability of all the answering sides into either
coincidence, or equidistance, and a proportionate distance of the answering
angles, each from the other. But now the similitude of figuration which is in
circles founded upon the like genesis of all circles is in the equidistance, or
coincidence of their circumferences, when the center of the one is coapted to
the center of the other; and that equal angles from the center intercept
proportionable parts of the circumferences, and that proportionable parts of
the circumferences are connected by proportionable chords, and contain and
sustain equal right lined angles. And the like speculations might be pursued in
other figures both plane and solid. In a rational application of which to the
disquisition of angles, it may be first enquired, whether there be any such
thing as similitude and dissimilitude to be owned or observed among angles; and
if so, how that similitude is to be understood; and whether it be inconsistent
with inequality in the answering angles. To clear all which we must know, that
in unequal but like right lined figures, the homologal angles are always equal,
being contained in both figures under right lines: but in unequal, and like
mixed lined and crooked lined figures, the homologal mixed lined, or crooked
lined angles, neither are, nor can be equal; only their difference is ever less
than the least right lined angle; and their similitude has never rationally
yet by any been questioned but with good reason according to the following
gloss is to be justified. The more clearly to demonstrate all which in Fig. 21.
upon the common center A. draw two unequal Circles, Viz. HEG. the lesser, and
BCD. the greater. Then from any point B. in the greater circle BCD. draw the
right line BEAFK. thorough the common center A. cutting the circumference of
the lesser circle HEG. in the point E. then take AF. equal to BE. and upon the
center F. and semidiameter FE. draw another circle ECKD. equal to the greater
circle CBD. Here on all hands is agreed, that the lesser circle HEG. and the
greater circle CBD. are like figures, and that therefore the two mixed lined
recto-concave angles ABD. and AEG. are like angles. And by the construction it
is apparent that the two recto-concave angles ABD. and AED. are equal: and that
the two recto-concave angles AEG. and AED. are unequal: and that the
recto-concave angle AED. is greater than the recto-concave angle AEG. and in
all like cases it is always so; however the difference of the two angles must
necessarily be less than any right lined angle, because all such citradiametral
concavo-convexe angles of contact, as GED. are always less than any right lined
angle; as is consequent to what has been demonstrated in Geometry, which was
to be shown. Whence we may clearly observe that similitude of Figures lies
chiefly in the proportionality and like positure of homologal sides, in respect
of parallelisme and coincidence, without imposing any other necessity for the
equality of answering angles, then as it may consist with the proportionating
and like positing of the homologal sides and lines. And such inequality of the
answering angles, as is requisite to the proportionating and alike positing of
the homologal sides and lines in like and unequal mixed, or crooked lined
figures, is so far from being inconsistent with their figurative similitude,
that they cannot without it, under inequality keep similitude in their
figuration. And though the inequality, which is between angle and angle be less
then that which is, or may be, between the Homologal sides and lines; yet the
inequality of the angles is more different, being an inequality without
proportion, whereas the inequality of the homologal sides and lines is ever
according to proportion. Upon the whole, it is not equality that generally
makes angles to be like, for a right lined, and an Isoclitical concavo Convexe
may be equal angles, but never can be like, nor were ever suspected to be so:
but that which makes angles to be like is rather their being contained under
homologal sides, posited so as to construct a like and homologal figuration.
And this whole matter depends upon what I before hinted, Viz. the figuration of
lines and angles; Sc. rectitude, being one single, simple, figuration of lines
incapable of any variety, like angles under right lines are always equal, and
never can be unequal: but (...), being infinitely variable, those (...) are
said to be like, i. e. homologal, those construction is like, so as in like
figure^ upon a common center, to set homologal sides and lines proportionably
equidistant, or coincident; as circumferences of like though unequal circles,
ellipses, etc. And so under a thousand inequalities such mixed and crooked
lined angles may be like: as in Fig. 21. the recto-concave angles AEG. and AED.
being unequal, are both like to the angle ABD. and so is every angle how
different soever, if contained under a diameter and a circumference. And indeed
the figuration of angles, being incomplete, and the length of their sides
undetermined, neither parallelisme, nor coincidency, nor proportionality, nor
homologal positure, can, when they are unequal, be conceived in their sides,
without special relation to some complete Figure and its Center: so the
recto-concave angles AEG. and ABD in Fig. 21. are like, as conceived to be each
contained respectively under a diameter and a circumference, and so upon a
common center positable into parallelisme, coincidence and proportionableness,
and all possible likeness and homologalness of figuration. In right-lined
angles, where homologal and like angles are always equal* for the same reason
every angle equal to a right-lined angle, is not presently a like angle: (...)
a thousand equal angles, are all, ever, and to all purposes, unlike; as two
equal isoclitical right lined and crooked lined angles, because they can never
be coapted to be answering angles, in like Figures, or to set their containing
sides homologally, and in parallelisme, or coincidence. That equality of
answering angles is not so of the essence of like Figures, as proportionality
of sides, and answering lines, with their parallelisme, or coincidency: only
from the propriety of like plane Figures, follows an equality in all like
right-lined angles; and in like curve lined Figures, that their inequality is
ever less than the least right-lined angle. Hence therefore appears that from
the similitude which is in unequal circles, the equality between angles of
semi-circles and right right-lined angles is not effectually proved. And
notwithstanding any thing in those arguments tendered and proved, every
recto-concave angle contained under a concave arch of a circle and a
right-line, which is perpendicular to the right line tangent of the arch at the
angular point, is greater than any right-lined acute angle, and less than a
right right-lined angle: and the recto-convexe angle contained under the
convexe arch and the right lined tangent is less than any right lined angle
whatsoever: and the other recto-convexe angle contained under the convexe arch
and the right line, which is perpendicular to the right line tangent at the
angular point, is greater than a right right-lined angle, and less than any
obtuse right-lined angle whatsoever. And whereas you object that if, as in Fig.
12. the right line KG A. be the diameter of the circle K AD. and AB the right
line tangent, then KAB is a right right lined angle: and the recto-convexe
angle of contact DAB is no part of the right right lined angle KAB. that
therefore the angle of the semicitcle KAD is still equal to a right right lined
angle, because what is taken out of it was no part of it. I answer, the
recto-convexe angle of contact DAB is indeed no proportionable part of the
right right-lined angle KAB, but yet it is truly a part, though
improportionable, and so mathematically heterogeneal: for if it had been no
part at all, and nothing, then the angle of the semicircle KAD. (nothing being
taken out of the right right-lined angle KAB, but the recto-convexe angle of
contact D AB, which is said by you to be nothing, and no angle) it should ^^ill
remain a right right-lined angle; which is not by any asserted, the contrary
being so manifest: besides that the separability of the recto-convexe angle D
AB from the recto-concave angle KAD makes clear and certain, the truth of its
being a part of the right-lined angle KAB.

And likewise from what has been before declared in our opening the nature of
a plane angle may clearly appear, that we are not to understand that a plane
angle is merely the angular point, or merely in the angular point, as
contradistinguished from the containing sides, though it there terminate, or
thence have its rise; but angles are in the habitude of the concurring,
containing and inclined sides: Viz. the habitude which they hold each to other
all along their tendency unto the angular point, or their rise from thence, if
we would have the full notion, inclination and figuration of an angle. For
there is often a great inequality and vast imparity between the inclination,
sometimes of one part of the containing side to the other containing side, and
the inclination thereunto, of other parts of the same first containing side; as
may appear in all mixed lined, mixed crooked-lined and all other anisoclitical
angles. And the nature of an angle consisting in inclination as well as in
concurrence, though concurrence may be and is in a point, and inclination at a
point, yet inclination must be in the lines and of the lines, and cannot be in
a point separately. And methinks the nature of an angle, and its inclination,
is scarcely so fully held forth, when the inclination of the two lineary sides
containing it, as if the sides were not therein concerned, is ordered to be
observed only in the angular point, and not out of it: because, as you say,
though you urge it to the contrary, many times out of the angular point in the
containing sides, no two points can be shown in the one side, where it has
the same inclination unto the other. Certainly in an indivisible, such as is
the angular point, if abstractly considered, it were vain to expect and
impossible to observe any inclination: and no doubt as the magnitudes inclined
are without the angular point, so is also the inclination: though as they
terminate in the angular point, so does the inclination. So the angle of a semi
circle is not the common term of the diameter and the semi circumference,
excluding the diameter and the semicir-cumference for then in an abstracted
point it should be possible to observe an inclination; and a point being
indivisible should be inclined unto its self; which is not convenient to
assert: but rather the angle of a semi circle is the inclination of the semi
circumference to the diameter, terminated in the angular point, which is common
to both. And whereas it is said that out of the angular point, no two points
can be shown in the diameter, at which the diameter is equally inclined to the
semi circumference, nor in the semi circumference where it is equally inclined
to the diameter; all is allowed and averred as glosseably true, and this is
that which makes the great difference between anisoclitical and isoclitical
angles, and renders it so impossible to give an anisoclitical angle equal to an
isoclitical angle. For in isoclitical angles the inclination of the sides, the
one unto the other, is at all points the same without any variation; as every
where appears by the interjected arches of circles drawn upon the angular point
as Center: but in anisoclitical angles, at every several point, the one
containing side has several and different inclinations to the other containing
side: which is the cause that isoclitical angles may possibly and easily be
given, sometimes greater, and sometimes lesser then anisoclitical angles, but
never equal: because in the one the inclination of the containing sides still
varieth, in the other not at all. And if the whole nature of an angle lie in
the angular point, without extending the habitude of it farther into the
production and figuration of the containing sides; it will not only be
necessary for us to yield unto you that recto-convexe angles of contact are not
quantitative; but besides both you and we, contrary to what we have always
hitherto judged, shall be constrained to acknowledge that there is no
quantitativenes neither in crooked-lined, nor right-lined, nor any other angles
whatsoewer, whether superficial, in one, or several plains, or solid. And can
any thing be more horrid then to say, the quantity of angles is not to be
measured by the divarication of the sides at the angular point, but by their
divarication in the angular point, where they have none at all? But yet though
it is thus evident, that the inclination of the sides at the angular point, may
and frequently is much less or greater then the inclination of the same sides
at other points; which, as is above hinted, is not to be left out in the full,
genuine and clear consideration of the nature of angles, their kinds,
figurations and quantities: however the inclination of the sides at the angular
point, is that which is most usually enquired after, and most useful to be
searched and observed in Geometry; for the discoveries which are from thence
made of lines, how they fall coincidently, or within, or without others. To the
objection that in fig. 12. the right-lined tangent AB and the arch AL make all
one and the same equal inclination to the right-line secant AC in the common
angular point A; and that therefore the right-lined angle BAC under the
right-lined secant AC and the right-line tangent AB is equal to the mixed-lined
recto-concave angle EAL under the right-line secant AC and the arch AL; I
answer as before, inclination is not in the angular point abstractly considered
without regard to the sides passing out of it, but inclination is the relative
situation which the concurring sides have at the angular point: at least that
is their inclination there: for a point to a line can have no inclination: it
may have distance from the line, but cannot be inclined unto it, because of its
indivisibility. And having already shown the inclination of side to side to be
of the essence, notion and nature of an angle; a little may be reply enough to
all those hypersceptical objections which are sounded upon the imagination of
an angle in a right-line, or any inclination, or angularity imagined between a
right line and a point, especially the point being in the right-line. And
equality, or inequality of angles is not, nor can be judged of by the so
abstractly considered angular point; in which a thousand several sides of
several and unequal angles may meet indifferently; but the judgment of the
magnitude and equality and inequality of angles is from the sides, and the
order of the divarications, in which they pass, especially first of all, from
the angular point. Besides how strangely is it taken for granted, without
proving, th^^ the right-line tangent AB and the arch AL are equally in the
angular point A inclined unto the right-line secant AC? If that could be once
proved, the concern of it would turn the scales of the controversy: but
demonstration is so clear to the contrary, that as without proof it is not fit
to be admitted, so for the proof of it, I know nothing can be produced besides
an utter despair of ever making it out.

For if the congruency of the sides terminatively in the angular point, were
sufficient to constitute equality in angles, it appears not how any angles
meeting in the same or different angular points could be unequal: every point
by reason of its indivisibility being incapable of inequality, as well as
inclination.

And if all such angles so constituted by the falling within, or without of the
sides, shall be doubted and questioned whether they be true and quantitative
angles, and whether the addition, or subduction of them be able to diversify
other angles and their quantities; all the pains of the Geometricians to prove
the intracadency and extracadency of the angular sides from the same angular
point, were vain and to no purpose; the angles remaining altogether the same
and equal, whether such angles of contact be added to them, or taken from them.
But yet though the true, (...) and genuine nature of an angle consist in the
mutual habitude and inclination of the containing and concurring sides, it is
not ever necessary to consider it with such a largenes in Geometry. The
inclination which the sides bear mutually each to other at the angular point is
out of doubt that which is of most constant necessity, highest concern and
usefulnes in all angles to be observed. It is true in isoclitical angles, the
inclination of the two containing sides being every where the same and equal,
it is indifferently by Geometricians taken by a circle whose center is in the
angular point, of what diameter soever thereunto applyable, and at what same
distance soever from the angle, or at what same longitude soever from thence in
the sides the points be, at which their inclination is observed by intercepted
arches: and the same two points, terminating the intercepted arches at which
their mutual inclination is observed, constantly offer themselves together,
whether you take points at equal distance from the angular point, or
intercepting in the sides equal longitudes between them and the same angular
point But in anisoclitical angles; the inclination of the anisoclitical sides
varying still in the continuity of their production, if we use the former
method of measuring the inclination of the sides by intercepted arches of a
circle drawn upon the angular point as center; in them therefore Geometricians
concern themselves little further then to observe the mutual inclination of the
sides at the very point of their angle: and not at any other points in the
anisoclitical sides, save only the point of their concurrence; because of the
constant variation of their inclination, both in respect of such, and every
other method and way of measuring, according to the continuity of their
production. And by arches of circle drawn upon the angular point as center, it
is impossible to measure the inclination of the anisoclitical lines at the
point of their concurrence; the only way therefore which remains unto
Geometricians to measure such anisoclitical angles, i. e, the inclination of
their sides at the point of their concurrence, is by observing the lines in
what order they depart from the angular point: Viz. which line falls within,
which without, and which is coincident with that unto which it is compared. So
in fig. 12. if AHF and ADK be equal circles touching in the point A: and G the
center, and AGK the diameter of the circle ADK: and AEL the arch of a greater
circle touching both the former circles in the same point A and with its
concave side at A respecting the center G, and with its convexe side at A
respecting the circle HAF: also if AB be a right-line tangent touching all the
three former circles in the point A, and the right-line ADEC cut the circle
ADK in the point ^, and the circle AEL in the point E: here the Geometrician
demonstrates the angle K AB to be a right right lined angle, and that the arch
AFH passes out of the angular point A without and beyond the right-line
tangent AB, and without the right right-lined angle K AB: and that the arch AEL
passes from the angular point A within, or on this side of the right-line
tangent AB, and within the right right-lined angle KAB, but without the arch
ADK, and without the angle of the semi circle KAD: and that the right-line ADEC
passes from the angular point A within the arch ADK, and within the angle of
the semi circle K AD. And this is all which is intended in Geometry when
recto-convexe and such like angles of contact are said to be less then the
least right-lined angle: not that there is any proportion between any angles of
contact and right-lined angles; for there is none: but that the sides of any
such angle of contact are coaptable, both of them within any the least
right-lined angle. In like manner when one angle of contact is said to be
greater or lesser then another; it is not the intendment of the Geometrician to
assert any proportionablenes between them, but only to set down in what order
the inclined lines pass, each in respect of the rest, from the angular point,
or point of concurrence: and how each is conseque^^ly more, or less inclined in
that respect, to any one of the rest, though by the whole kind and without
proportion, and without a common way of measuring their quantities in some
indefinite quantity, according to the kind of the measuring, indefinite
quantity* the semblablenes of saying, one angle of contact is greater, or less
then another being only in this, that when one side is coapted, the other falls
within, or without; or when neither sides can possibly be coapted, both fall
within, or both fall without, so as the one is really greater, or less then the
other, not in proportion, but by the whole kind and heterogeneally, as a two
foot right-line is lesser then a four foot square, and a two foot right-line
cannot be contained in an inch square, though in an inch square may be drawn a
line ten thousand times longer, only out of rectitude. And to prove such an
heterogeneal inequality, whether of the greater, or of the less between angles,
is that which is frequently sufficient for many Geometrical purposes.

Only two things now remain of all your objections and scrupulous quaeries. Viz.

First, why in some quantities, between the homogeneals, to a given quantity
you cannot give another in what proportion you please greater or less, The
answer is clear out of the foregoing discourse: because some quantities have
but a limited extensibility: and other quantities have but a limited
divisibility. All proportions at pleasure with respect to any given quantity,
are only assigneable in those homogeneals whose quantityes have both an
unlimited extensibility and an unlimited divisibility; either of which failing,
though they cannot be, save in a limited proportion one to another, and to
every given homogeneal, yet they cannot be in any proportion, at pleasure, to
any given homogeneal.

And 2ly. for your other Quaery; whether this controversy about the
recto-convexe angle of contact concern abstract Mathematics, whose glory used
to be that it was devoid of Controversy, locking forth and keeping out all
unpeaceful bickerings with the diamond-key of doubtless demonstration; or
whether it concern concrete Mathematics, which for its concretion unto matter
cannot so well free its self from the intanglements of doubts and disputes? and
if it concern the more abstract part of the Mathematics; what was the first
slip that drew so unworthy a disparagement upon that most noble piece of
learning? In the preceding discourse you may observe, I have been free and
clear in my judgment concerning this; that it is a controversy of the purer
and more noble part of the Mathematics: and therefore of the higher concern,
that it be brought to a fair decision and irrefragable diremption: and that the
first spark from whence all this heat afterward arose, was at first struck out
of the dubiousnes and aequivocation of the word homogeneity, mentioned in
certain Mathematical definitions and Postulates; but of it self no where
expressly defined in the Mathematics; except we shall take one of the
Pustulates, for its definition cast into the form of a Postulate; or as
cryptically implying that definition and the postulate to be thereupon
immediately formed: especially when they compared homogeneity in a mistaken
sense, with some mathematical conclusions, which they had observed to be fairly
demonstrated.

Pardon this my zeal on the behalf of the old learned Roman professor. And if
these papers seem long, remember yours were not short; and the question has
long troubled the world: and in matters that are new, and scarce yet well
understood, to inculcate once and again the same things, is not only justified
as allowable, but judged expedient and in such cases necessary. If you please,
let the whole pass for a fuse Comment upon this; that in recto-convexe angles
of contact is the inclination required for an angle by the definition of an
angle; and therefore they are angles and their sides not coincident: and they
are angular parts of acknowledged angles separable from the remaining angular
parts; and there is an infinite divisibility in them, so as they must be
quantitative: and yet it is demonstrated that they are improportionable to all
right-lined angles; therefore they are heterogeneal: which inference is the
more necessary, when upon examination we find nothing so convenably to set
forth unto us the nature of mathematical homogeneity, as the homometricalnes
and the thence arising proportionablenes of the magnitudes, and of mathematical
heterogeneity as their heterometricalnes and improportionablenes.


