Roman Catholics UNCERTAIN Whether there be any True PRIESTS OR SACRAMENTS IN
THE Church of Rome: Evinced by an Argument urged and maintained (upon their own
Principles) against Mr EDWARD GOODALL of Prescot in Lancashire.

By THOMAS MARSDEN, Vicar of Walton in the same County.

The Treatise divided into Two Parts. The First being Explicative of Terms. The
Second Argumentative.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's-Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXVIII.

THE EPISTLE TO THE PROTESTANT READER.
Courteous Reader,
IF thou art skilled in good Authors, I freely make thee Judge of these Papers,
and covet thy Admonition, if thou see any thing Material amiss in them,
defiring nothing more than that Truth may take place. I have nothing more to
say to thee, if thou art what I suppose thee to be.

But if thou art less seen in Books, I crave leave to give thee some Advice.
Read over this small Treatise with a present Mind, and such Light may chance to
beam forth from it upon thy Understanding, as may show thee the crazy Estate of
the Roman Church, notwithstanding the proclamations many make of its welfare.

If thou find that not one Person of that Communion, measuring his State by
their own Doctrine, can be certain whether he enjoys the Ordinary Means
appointed by God for Man's Salvation, (which I pretend to prove) I would oblige
thee to these few Things, 1. Heartily to pity them, and pray that it may be
better with them. Pray, I say, that they may see and reject their Errors, and
retain neither more nor less for Faith, than That once delivered to the Saints.
2. To praise God thou art in Communion with the Established Church of England,
whose Faith rests Immovable upon the Holy Scripture and Ancient Creeds, and
whose Government (for the Substance of it) is truly Primitive and Apostolical.
3. As thou have sound, so to hold fast That which is Best. Let neither a fond
Affection to Novelty, nor a groundless Admiration of Mis-called-Antiquity turn
thee aside from the truly Old Paths. In Order to This, strive to work thy Soul
to an high Esteem of Truth and Peace, the two Grand Legacies our dear Lord has
lest his Church: For These cannot be in safe Keeping, unless the Heart assist
the Head, in Order to their safeguard. Cold Speculation secures not from the
prevalency of Temptations. Men may part with Truth, not because they like it
not at all, but because they hope by Exchanging it for Error, to get something
to boot, they like better. All times and places have Experience of This.


Now if thou expectest to be assisted with some previous Instructions, for thy
more Useful Reading of what follows; Know, I need but give thee Little here,
having all-along in my passage enlarged (some will say, to a fault) on several
Heads, that I might acquaint thee with the whole Nature of the Subject, treated
of. The Fourth Part of what I have written, might, I suppose, have sufficed to
have let my Adversary know my Mind, so far as he has obliged me to impart it.
The Rest is employed in Unfolding Things for thy sake. And more I would have
done for thee in this kind, had not the Multiplicity of my Affairs, which for
many Years have divided my Endeavors into several Channels, allowed me only
much interrupted parcels of time for this Occasion.

Being jealous of being mis-understood, I shall explain a few things here,
which otherwise might possibly chance to be a Stumbling Block in thy Way.

1. I frequently call men Priests and Bishops, whilst I am questioning whether
they be truly Such. And I say, They Baptize and Ordain, whilst I question the
validity of those Acts. Which may seem to thee a sort of Contradiction.

But know, all Authors speak in the like manner, who speak of the like Matters,
I deal with. The meaning is but this, We call them Priests and Bishops, because
the Matter and Form of Ordination has been Outwardly applied to them, and they
are therefore reputed such. In like sort, I. say, They Baptize, Consecrate,
etc. When the Outward Sacramental Action is performed, and They are therefore
reputed to do so.

But since the Roman Church declares, That an inward invisible Act of the
Minister's Will, called his Intention, is necessary to the perfecting
Ordination and Baptism, etc. I therefore question How her reputed Priests or
Bishops can be known to be true Priests, or Bishops: Or their reputed Baptism,
true Baptisne, according to their Doctrine.

To save a Circuit of Words, Men generally speak, as is aforesaid; and the
Meaning of the Words is easily known by the other Words they are connected
with, in the Discourse.

2. Note, when at any time I call the Church of Rome The Church, it is where
the Contexture of the Matter obliges me to accommodate my Language to them,
and not otherwise: for I am fully satisfied the Roman is out a Church, not the
Church; viz. but a particular, not the universal Church.

3. If at any time I say to this Effect, -- Ordination and your other
Sacraments, I do but occasionally suit my Words to theirs; as not at all
approving their Number of Sacraments. God has blessed me with better eye sight,
I praise his Name for it, than to agree with the Roman Church in any One point,
wherein She disagrees with the Church of England.

I add, Thou art not in a Discourse of this Nature to expect a Style dressed
with brisk Metaphors, or pretty little Turns of Wit, nor yet with much variety
of Words. To speak openly and with sure dependence, is the Province of a
Disputant, and all that a Wise man looks for from him.

This is all I had a mind to tell thee, and so I bid thee heartily Farewell.

The General CONTENTS OF THE FIRST PART.
SECTION I. MAtter of Fact related. 2 SECTION II. Mr. G. Unseasonably calls for
Explication of Terms. His request is granted. The Order of proceeding in it set
forth. 7 SECTION III. What Councils have dealt with the Intention. The Roman
Church requires it as necessary to a Sacrament. 10 SECTION IV. The Intention of
doing the Exterior Action is not required, but presupposed. 16 SECTION V. The
Intention defined. That of the End required. 22 SECTION VI. The End
particularly considered is not required; but generally. The Virtual Intention
is required, and held sufficient. 32 SECTION VII. R. Catholics not certain of
their Priesthood taken in general by any simple or absolute Certainty. Nor
certain of it taken in special by any simple, or so much as a Moral Certainty.
35 SECTION VIII. The several Explications before given, summed up. And the
Question resolved into its parts. 41
The General CONTENTS of the SECOND PART.
SECTION I. THe General Order of proceeding. The first part of Mr. G's Letter
set down and examined. 43 SECTION II. Mr. Goodall sets forth the Argument, and
his Answer to it, as follows. 50 SECTION III. A more general view of the
mistakes of Mr. G's. Answer. 54 SECTION IV. The Intention of the Bishop in
Ordination cannot be made appear either by Reason or Authority. 60 SECTION V.
The Intention is not knowable by Authority, whether Divine or Humane. 71
SECTION VI. Roman Catholics have but a bare Opinion to secure them of the
point. 78 SECTION VII. The Ordaining Bishops not certain whether there be true
Priests in the Roman Church. 88 SECTION VIII. Consequences drawn from the
Uncertainty of the Roman Priesthood: and the feeble condition of that Church,
issuing from thence, shown. 97 SECTION IX. The Banks Mr. G. has cast up to
secure the Roman Priesthood, taken in general, cast down. 109 SECTION X. Mr.
G's Argument, urged by way of Retort, examined and enervated. 127
IMPRIMATUR Liber cui Titulus, Roman Catholics uncertain whether there be any
true Priests, etc.

Guil. Needham RR. in Christo P. ac D. D. Wilhelmo Archiep. Cantuar. a Sacr.
Domest.
April 20. 1688.
THE UNCERTAINTY Of any True Priests or Sacraments In the ROMAN CHURCH: Proved
against Mr. EDWARD GOODALL.
The First Part, Being chiefly Explicative of Terms.
SIR,
WERE You and I called to represent all the accidental Discourse that passed
between us, when I was last at Your House, I fear we should vary in our
Reports: for when you undertook within an hour after to tell part of it at the
Inn, you found your self to be contradicted by those that heard us. And indeed,
we penetrated so little into the Merits of any Point we spoke of, (but how that
happened our Auditors can best say) that it would not be worth the while either
for us to tell, or others to hear, the unready fruitless story of it.

However, to make way to our present business, I think fit to entertain the
Readers (for as your Papers have already, so mine may meet with more eyes than
yours and mine) with a little of what passed before the close of our
Altercations. Which being done, I shall proceed to the work which you have
since scored out for me. And for better Order-sake, and that you may with more
ease let me know the Faults you find with me, I shall divide my Paper into
several Sections and and Paragraphs.

SECT. I. Matter of Fact related.
. 1. WHEN you alleged that our Orders in the Church of England were invalid,
in the judgment of Roman Catholics, (a thing I could not wonder at, having
cause to believe You had renounced them) I straight justified them by those of
the Church of Rome, unto which our first Reformed Bishops were admitted. You
said, They had indeed been good, had our Bishops kept to the old Ordinal; but
that They forsook it, and only gave power to dispense the Word and Sacraments,
which any Deacon might do: and that afterward, perceiving the Nullity that
happened by it, They again altered the Form, and gave power to do the Office of a
Priest. Thus you.

. 2. TO this I returned, That Words and Phrases might be changed, and yet their
matter remain the same: and that so it was in this case. You took the word
dispense, I told you, in too narrow and crampt a sense, making it denote only
distribution, with respect to the Eucharist; whereas Our Church made it there
signify Consecration also. I added, Scripture Language would secure us in
this: for S. Paul himself sets forth the entire Office of the Gospel Ministry
by (...), the Dispensation of the Gospel; and all Gospel Ministers (those of
the highest rank not excepted) by (...), Dispensers of the Mysteries of God.
Which you could not gain say.

And hence I concluded, that the Alteration spoken of, was Verbal only, and not
Material.

. 3. This ended, to occasion you to take a view of some Fetters which the Roman
Church had put upon her own claims, I denied that She could be certain,
according to her own principles, that she has any true Priesthood. I thought,
Sir, some of your Councils had put the stamp of Faith upon a Doctrine which
would in its just consequences so far blot the Evidences of your Priesthood,
(and of all other your things that depend upon it) as to make them not
certainly Legible, and therefore I used those words -- according to your own
principles.

And finding you not forward to prevent me by proving the Affirmative, I gained
your leave to make good the Negative, which I attempted to do by the following
Argument.

. 4. All Churches that make Priestly Ordination depend upon a Condition, that
no man living knows whether it be fulfilled, must be uncertain, whether they
have any true Priesthood.

But the Roman Church makes Priestly Ordination depend upon a Condition, that
no man living knows whether it be fulfilled: Ergo,

The Roman Church must be uncertain whether she has any true Priesthood.

. 5. When I complained of your repeating my Syllogism imperfectly, you alleged
it was a long one, and therefore desired me to write it down for the help of
your memory. To gratify you, I writ the whole as it stands, saving, that I
only hinted the praedicate of the Minor, as sufficient for your help.

After perusal of it you denied the Minor, which I proved thus,

. 6. The Intention of the Bishop is a Condition, which no man living knows
whether it be fulfilled or no.

But the Church of Rome requires the Intention of the Bishop to Ordination:
Ergo,

The Church of Rome requires a Condition to Ordination, which no man living
knows whether it be fulfilled or no.

. 7. Now, in compliance with the words of the former Syllogism (not adverted
to, through have, when I formed the Second) I shall present the Matter of this
latter thus,

The Intention of the Bishop is a Condition, that no man living knows whether
it be fulfilled.

But the Roman Church makes Ordination depend upon the Intention of the Bishop:
Ergo,

The Roman Church makes Ordination depend upon a Condition that no man living
knows whether it be fulfilled.

I have not, Sir, made this digression for your sake, who did not before by
word, nor since by writing, find the least fault with my barely verbal
Alteration: I did it only out of a respect to Decorum. But I must go on with it
a little for the sake of the less discerning Reader.

The minor Propositions, wherein the variation lies, I will place together, for
the more easy comparison of them.

The Church of Rome requires the Intention of the Bishop to Ordination.

The Roman Church makes Ordination depend upon the Intention of the Bishop.

Upon the first view of them thus placed, it appears that they are equivalent
Propositions, giving the very same sense; and so are both alike true, or both
alike false. For by the word requires, I mean, requires as necessary. This I
have added, lest any should be apt to conclude, They see another person because
they see another dress.

But to return from this unnecessary Digression.

You denied the Major of my second Syllogism, alleging that it was not
universally true, forasmuch as the Ordaining Bishops knew whether they intended
to Ordain or no.

. 8. To this I replied, by Explicating what I meant by these words, the
Intention of the Bishop, viz. the Intention of such as were truly and indeed
Bishops. Upon which I added, That your Bishops know not whether they exert that
Intention which your Church requires to Ordination, for want of certainty that
those duly Intended who Ordained them, and consequently that themselves are
true Bishops. For it is not the Intention of a man considered otherwise than as
a true Bishop, that will serve to the purpose of Ordination. Nor can any Bishop
be surer that his Intention (together with the due application of Matter and
Form) is effectual to Ordination, than he is, that his, who undertook to Ordain
him, was so. But how he should be certain of that, I am to learn.

. 9. The Sum then is, Nothing short of all this I have expressed, will reach home
to the purposes of your Church; and therefore your Councils have fallen short
of their main end, if in handling this matter they require not all this in
their Definitions; or at least presuppose not that part of it as necessary,
which they do not formally require. And sure I am, That none is more sure that
he Intends as a Bishop, than he is sure, That he is a Bishop: Which assurance
he may begin to seek when he pleases, but I am confident he will never find it,
till he has found a Casement in his Ordainer's breast, through which he may
view his very heart.

The Major then (for ought I see) remains true in the most extended
signification of the words, no man living (no, not the Ordaining Bishops
themselves) knowing that the Condition of the requisite, effectual Intention of
any Bishop is fulfilled in Ordination.

Although, Sir, I spoke not all these words to you, yet you know I expressed the
full matter of them.

. 10. But because you was not satisfied with this Notion, (but why you should
not, let others judge) I limited the Signification of those words [no man
living] by contradistinguishing all men to the Ordaining Bishops. And then the
sense stood thus, No man living, except the Ordaining Bishops, know whether the
required Intention be present in Roman Catholic Ordinations. Which explication
of the words you accepted.

I was well content, I confess, to take up with this for that time, as thinking
with my self, That the Romanists might well forbear their mighty claims, if it
could be made appear (and this I never doubted) That no Priest, nor Deacon, nor
Subdeacon, nor any of the lesser Orders, nor any one Lay-person amongst them
can be certain, That there is any true Priesthood in that Church, nor any true
Sacraments given or received in it.

. 11. I would with your patience, add one thing more. Immediately after. I had
received my Paper from you, you demanded to have it in keeping: and when I told
you there was no reason you should have my Script in exchange for your vanished
breath, you acted a sort of triumph, telling me I durst not give it, as being
conscious to my self of its infirmities. You too often dared me to give it you,
with repeated promises you would answer it. At last, wearied with
importunities, I gave it, and you engaged to answer it, under your hand.

I have not reported this out of any design to blame your zeal, but to let
others know you may thank your self for it, if I chance to toil you a little
more than you have a mind of.

. 12. Sir, I hope your memory when a little rubbed up, will serve to assure
you, That what I have now related as matter of Fact, is substantially true.
However I am ready to give you a Certificate of any part of it, which you shall
please to question, Signed by the hands of the then present Gentlemen.

SECT. II. Mr. G. unseasonably calls for Explication of Terms. His request is
granted. The Order of proceeding in it set forth.
. 1. NOW I come to acknowledge the receipt of your Letter, dated London
September 29. in Answer to my Paper delivered to you about the Sixth of August.
It is, I hope, the issue of mature advice and deliberation, and therefore may
save me the trouble of expecting from you any thing of greater moment on this
subject. It Is some satisfaction to know the uttermost strength of an enemy. You
pronounce it a full Answer to my Argument; and full admits not of increase. You
also insinuate it probable that I may acquiesce in it, which indeed I ought to
do if it be a full Answer; Truth being the thing you and I are to run in quest
of, and to rest in, being found. But if I chance not to see your Answer such,
(as in truth, I cannot, for want of eyesight, or for want of Object) and will
therefore pursue the point further, you invite me to state the Case distinctly
and clearly. Your words are these,

. 2. If you have any thing more to Offer against us, be pleased to state the
point distinctly and clearly, by telling us what sort of Intention you think is
required in these Councils, [ viz. of Florence and Trent] as a Principle of our
Church, when you say, That the Intention of the Bishop is a Condition which no
man living, viz. contradistinguished from the Ordaining Minister, knows whether
it be fulfilled, or no. Whether you think an Habitual, Actual or Virtual
Intention be there declared; and whether such as is conversant about the Act
which is exercised, or about the End; and whether this End be Proximate or
Vltimate. As also what certainty you speak of in your Propositions, whether it
be Moral, Metaphysical or Mathematical. That so I may return you a distinct
answer.

. 3. Sir, Your request that I would explicate the Terms in my Propositions, is
reasonable; but it had been more reasonable you should have made it sooner, if
you really doubted of my meaning in them. First, to write a deliberate Answer
from a seven weeks consideration of the Terms I used, and after that to ask the
meaning of them, is wonderful inartificial: such a (...), as a person of your
standing in an University is seldom guilty of.

While you look upon my Words as Equivocal, you can fasten no determinate sense
on them, and then except you had run through all the various significations of
them, and showed that none of them would be serviceable to me against your
Church, you have answered but at a venture, and fought hoodwinkt.

Had you proceeded after this manner: Sir, If you mean, That the Intention is
required to be conversant only about the Sacramental Act, none in his wits can
miss it; and so no uncertainty arises thence: if about the end, you mistake
our doctrine; or, we are sure the Ministers of the Sacraments, always carry
their Intention so far. If you mean an actual Intention is required, you
misunderstand our Church; if an habitual or virtual, this is indeed required,
but then the Ministers can never fail of Intending so, etc.

Had you done this, you had not needed now to crave of me the Explication of
the Terms, as having your self met with them in all their shapes, and rendered
them unuseful to my interest. But not having done this (as will appear beneath)
you have run the risk of making an impertinent answer, whatsoever it may prove
to be, at last.

Not to speak ad idem, is to speak to no purpose, and you know not you have
spoke ad idem, till you know what I mean.

. 4. Had you asked me at Prescot what I meant by them, I must have told you, or
become the object of your scorn: for he that cannot explain the Words he has
spoken by way of Argument against another, will be thought to want common Wit,
or Language; and he that will not explain them to a fair inquirer will be
suspected to have spoken no good sense. But you were not then doubtful of the
Terms, as appeared by your bare denying a Proposition, without more ado.

5. Or, had you, by the Post, called me shortly after, to this performance, I
must for the same reasons have been your Obedient Servant. But not to ask this
till your Answer was given, is a very great rarity.

. 6. However, though it come unseasonably for your self, your request is just,
and I will set my self to fulfill it. And I shall the more largely explicate the
Terms you mention, (with some other things, if I find, as I go on, that
occasion requires it) for the ampler satisfaction of the Reader; for saving my
self all future trouble in this kind; and for bringing the matter in
Controversy to a more evident period.

In Order to this work, I shall require that two things be granted me by the
Romanists.

. 7. 1. That when your Councils speak of the Intention of the Ministers of the
Sacraments, they mean something by their Words; and also express their Sense in
such sort that it may be understood. To deny me this would be to blast the
reputation of your Oracles.

8. 2. That the Romanists, (at least) whose Faith is guided by, or rested upon
such Councils, are, and have been able to declare the true Sense of their
Decrees and Definitions. This follows from the other: for if the Councils writ
intelligibly (which I take for granted) the Romanists have concern enough to
inquire into, and skill enough to find out their Sense; and therefore shall be
concluded to have done so.

This being premised, I shall explicate the Terms (so far as is needful) from
Roman Catholic Authors. What they mean by them, I must mean by them; otherwise
our Controversy can be nothing else but a strife about words.

. 9. To do this more Orderly, I shall show, (1.) What your Councils say of the
Intention: (2.) In what manner of quality, or under what Notion they require
it, with relation to the Sacraments: whereof they make Orders one. (3.) About
what it is conversant there. (4.) What sort of Intention is required. (5.) What
certainty I speak of, when I deny that the Roman Church is certain of her
having any true Priesthood. This done, I shall attempt to judge of the strength
or weakness of your Answer, according to the state of the Question.

SECT. III. What Councils have dealt with the Intention. The Roman Church
requires it as necessary to a Sacrament.
. 1. FIrst, Two of your Councils only have dealt in this Matter. What they
were, and what they have said of it, I come now to show.

Pope Eugenius's Decree propounded by way of Instruction to the Armenians, was
read and approved in the Florentine Council, and thereby made a Synodical
Decree, in the year 1439. Wherein, after the Number and Names of the Sacraments
are recited and fixed, and the Ends or Uses they serve to, specified: We read
this,

Haec omnia tribus perficiuntur, viz. rebus tanquam Materia, verbis tanquam
Forma, Persona Ministri conferentis Sacramentum cum intention faciendi quod
facit Ecclesia. Quorum si aliquod desit, non perficitur Sacramentum. i. e.

All these [Sacraments] are perfected by three things, Viz. Things as the
Matter; Words as the Form; and the Person of the Minister conferring the
Sacrament, with an Intention of doing what the Church does: if any of which be
wanting the Sacrament is not perfected.

. 2. The Council of Trent in the year 1547. the 7th. Session, 11th. Canon (De
Sacram. in genere) says thus, Si quis dixerit, in Ministris dum Sacramenta
conficiunt and conferunt, non requiri intentionem saltem faciendi quod facit
Ecclesia, anathema sit. i. e.

If any one shall say, That there is not required in the Ministers, whilst they
make and confer the Sacraments, an Intention at least of doing what the Church
does, let him be accursed.

Thus have we seen what these two Councils have said of the Point.

. 3. Secondly, I am to show in what Manner, or under what Notion they require
the Intention. And here I doubt not to affirm, That they require it as
Necessary to the very Being of the Sacraments; insomuch that though all the
Externals, according to Christ's Institution be exactly performed, yet there is
a Nullity in them, if the Intention be a wanting. The Council of Florence
speaks clearly enough to this purpose, making the Word, Perfected, equally
respect Matter, Form and Intention: And consequently a Sacrament may as well be
perfected without Matter, or Form, as without the Intention: That is, Not at
all. This the dullest eye may find by a review of the Citation.

. 4. I confess, the Trent-Council only says, The Intention is required, not
adding How far, or in What manner, it is so: But that it means, required as
necessary to the Being of the Sacraments, I prove by these Arguments:

. 5. (1.) It will be granted me, that the two Councils determining or declaring
the very same Article, must by their Words mean the very same thing. And Nature
teaches me to make the more plain Unfolded Words of the former a Commentary
upon the more general infolded Words of this. And then there can be no Orders
or other Sacraments, where there is not the required Intention.

. 6. (2.) I prove it from the Style of the Trent-Council, which makes the Word,
[requiri] required, wherever it is mentioned in her Canons, to signify
required as of necessity to the thing it is applied to. For instance, in the
14th. Session, 9th. Canon. De Poen. Sacram. we read thus, -- If any one shall
say, That the Confession of the Penitent [non requiri] is not required in Order
to the Priest's Absolving him, let him be accursed.

Again, in the 4th. Canon, thus, If any one shall deny that Contrition,
Confession, and Satisfaction [requiri] are required in the Penitent, as the
matter of the Sacrament of Penance, etc. let him be accursed. And so the Word
is used elsewhere. And then the Sense runs thus, As there can be no Absolution
without Confession, so there can be no Sacrament without the Intention.

. 7. (3.) I prove this from the Rubrics of the Mass Book of Pope Pius the V.
corrected and set forth by the Decree of this very Council, De Defectibus circa
Missam occurrentibus, Number. 1. Where we read, Quicquid horum deficit, scil.
Materia debita, Forma cum Intention, and Ordo Sacerdotalis in Conficiente, non
conficitur Sacramentum. i. e.

Where any of these are wanting, viz. Due Matter, Form with the Intention, or
Priestly Order in the Consecrator, the Sacrament is not made up.

Note here. Although the Eucharist only be spoken of in this Citation, yet by
Parity of Ground, Orders, and the rest are equally concerned, as to the
Intention. Thus then it has appeared, That the Council of Trent, as well as
that of Florence, makes the Ministers Intention necessary to the Being of all
the Sacraments.

. 8. However, lest it should be suspected, that I have taken a false Survey of
the Matter, I shall go on to justify it from Roman Authors, so far as can
fairly be required to our present purpose.

. 9. Of these some assert the Thing expressly, and others by most certain and
unavoidable implication.

. 10. But before I produce them, I shall desire the Reader to remember, in
Order to the better understanding of what follows, That if some of the Authors
I shall cite, declare the Intention of the Minister to be Necessary, or
Essential, or Substantial, to this or that particular Sacrament (as Baptism, or
the Eucharist, etc.) it is as much as if it had been affirmed concerning all
the rest of them; it being by virtue of its generical ingrediency, that it
belongs to any or all the Species. If it be necessary to Baptism as a
Sacrament, it must be equally so to all the other Sacraments.

. 11. Of those that assert the Point directly, Thomas Aquinas shall speak
first. Sacramenta requirunt Intentionem Ministri par. 3. qu. 64. Art. 8.


The Sacraments (says he) require the Intention of the Minister. And Cajetan
upon him thus, Intentio Ministri exigitur ad perfectionem Sacramenti.
The Ministers Intention is required to the Perfection of the Sacrament.

According to this Author it appears, That the Intention is not called for
only as a thing congruous in the Minister, or such as that he cannot but sin,
if he confer the Sacraments without it: But it is required to the perfecting or
making up the Sacrament it self. The very Nature of the Sacraments requires it,
as well as the Church does.

. 12. The Summa Sylvestrina affirms, Par. 2. Verb. Sacram.
That there are three things [ de Substantia -- ] of the Substance of a
Sacrament, viz. Due Matter, Due Form, and the Intention of the Minister
coupling together the Matter and Form.

. 13. Gabriel Biel is of the same judgment, Who says, Li. 4. Did. 13. q. 1.
That to constitute a fit Minister of the Eucharist [de necessitate requiritur
-- ] there is necessarily required the Power of Order, the Faculty of Speech,
and Integrity of Intention.

. 14. Johannes. de Burgo speaks to the same purpose, Pupil. Oc. ca 2. de Baptis.
To the Integrity of Baptism (says he) three things are required, viz. Matter,
Form of Words [and Intentio Baptizantis] and the Intention of the Minister.

. 15. Dom. a Soto speaks on the forecited place of Aquinas thus, Conclusio
praesens non solum intelligitur quantum ad decentem Sacramenti ornatum. imo
Intentio de ejus existit essentia, quemadmodum in Concilio Florentino
declaratum est. in 4. Senten. Did. 1. q. 5. Art. 6.
The present Conclusion [of the Intention] is not only understood of the
Decent Ornament of the Sacrament, but the Intention is of its Essence, as was
declared in the Council of Florence.

. 16. Bellarmine may serve me the labor of bringing in more Testimonies for
this Point, Who declares it to be the judgment of Catholics in general, adding
withal that the Councils of Florence and Trent teach it. Sententia Catholicorum
est, requiri Intentionem, etc. De Sacram in genere. li. 1. cap. 27.


. 17. When I spoke of producing some Authors that attest this Thing (not so
expressly, but) by most certain implication, I meant it of such as bring the
Intention into the definition of a Sacrament. Now a definition being nothing
else but an Explication of the Nature or Essence of a thing, their putting the
Intention there infers that they held it necessary to the Being of the
Sacrament.

. 18. Jo. de Burgo tells us, in the forenamed place, Est al lutio corporis
exterior in aqua, cum Intention debita, facta sub forma Verborum praescripta.
That the common definition the School Divines give of Baptism [est talis] is
to this effect;

Baptism is the external washing of the Body with water with due Intention,
made under a prescribed form of Words.

I could in a good measure verify this Authors words by setting down several
definitions of the like sort, out of Summa Sylvest. Gabriel, Alstentaig and
others; which were founded before them by Guil. Parisiensis, Aquinas, Alensis,
Scotus, Occam, etc. But I have no mind to burden my Paper with needless Ink, on
this account.

. 19. I shall trouble the Reader but with one definition more, which the same
Author gives of Penance, (...) est absolutio hominis poenitentis facta certis
verbis cum debita Intention, prolatis a Sacordote, de Sacram Poen. in. gener.
cap. 1.
The Sacrament of penance is the Absolution of a Penitent man, made with
certain words pronounced by the Priest, with due Intention.

Now by the same reason that Baptism and Penance may be defined by the
Intention; Order and the other Sacraments may be so.

Thus have I besides setting the two Councils in full view, given a taste of
Roman Authors, that lived some of them, sometime before either of them, some
between them, some at and after the time of the latter; who agreeably declare
the Ministers Intention to be so necessary to the Sacraments, that there are
none where that is absent. Which was the thing I undertook to show.

I have omitted to write several Citations at length in the Author's words,
because to do it would clog my Paper, and I am under no fears that disguising
their Sense will be charged upon me.

It Is a fault I confess, to overdo a thing, and I fear I am guilty of it, at
present. But know, Sir, the greatest part of this Section is not writ for your
sake, who, I acknowledge, did not call for it; but for theirs, whether of your
or our Communion, that are not satisfied, That any such Doctrine is established
as matter of Faith in the Roman Church. I know there are such of both sorts.

SECT. IV. The Intention of doing the Exterior Action is not required, but
presupposed.
I Am now to show what the Intention, which the Roman Church requires, is to be
conversant about, in the Sacraments.

You, Sir, ask me whether it be such as is conversant about the Act to be
exercised, or about the End. Now that the less learned Reader may understand
the Nature of your Question, and be thereby better enabled to judge how I
proceed, I shall explain it to him from the Pen of Gabriel Biel, one of your
own renowned Doctors.. 1. His words are these, Intentio potest dupliciter serri
in aliquid, velut in Objectum; vel ut in terminum aut finem. Sic Intentio
Baptizantis potest ferri in actum baptizandi sicut in Objectum, and sic nibil
aliud est quam velle actum istum porficere^ 'Potest etiam ferri in aliquid ut
in finem, scil in illud propter quod v^lt Baptizare; ut velle fieri illud
propter quod Baptismus est institutus. l. 4. did. 6 q. 1.
The Intention may two manner of ways be carried to some thing, either as to
its Object, or to its Term or End. So the Intention of the Baptizer may be
carried to the Act of Baptism is to its Object, and so it is nothing else than
to will the performance of that Act. It may be also carried to something as its
End, viz. to That for which he wills to Baptize; as to will that to be done,
for which Baptism was instituted.

It is but making the case of Ordination parallel with the instance given of
Baptism, and all will be clear. If a Bishop purpose, will, or intend barely to
pronounce the words your Church uses in Ordaining Priests, viz. -- Receive thou
power to offer Sacrifice in the Church for the quick and dead, in the name of
the Father, etc. (which you make the form of that Sacrament) and to deliver to
them the Paten with Bread, and the Chalice with Wine, (which you make the
matter of it) without going any farther: in this case the Intention is said to
be conversant about the Act. But if he also will or intend the Effect or End,
to which the Sacramental Act is instituted as subservient, he is said to intend
the Effect or End.

. 2. The First, for distinction sake, is by good Authors called the Exterior
[outward] Intention, the latter, the interior [inward] or Mental Intention.
Which Terms I shall use in what follows, for saving a Circuit of Words. And for
the same end I will call the Application of Matter and Form the Sacramental
Act, or Action.

Having said this in a previous way, I come now to Answer your Question,
Whether your Councils require such an Intention as is conversant about the Act,
or End of the Sacraments.

. 3. And I boldly affirm, 1. That it is not the First only (if at all) which
they require. 2. But that it is the latter.

And I hold my self concerned to make ample and firm proof hereof, in regard
all the inferences I am to make against you in this dispute, will especially
lie upon these two grounds.

1. For the First, That it is not the Exterior Intention your Councils require
by way of Decree or Definition, I shall endeavor to prove by these Arguments,

. 4. (1.) This point is not proper matter for Councils to deal with. It is
Matter of divine Faith, Worship, or Government that They (acting within their
sphere) are to debate upon, and Synodically to determine: and not Matter of
common natural Knowledge, whereof the Heathen Philosophers were as competent
Judges as they. To an assent to Propositions of this (latter) kind, our
judgments are to be wrought by the power and force of Reason: nor can our
ignorance of them be conquered by any other weapons. This knowledge is not to
be beaten into men's heads by bare Ecclesiastic affirmations and Anathema's.
Nor did ever wise men take this course to do it. Well, The necessary presence
of the Intention, or Will, to all external Actions that are humane and free, is
a point of mere natural Knowledge; it being in plain speech nothing else but
this, That a man willingly does (acting humanely) the external actions he does.
Which [Velle] motion of the Will cannot be wanting to such Actions, except in
the case of Drunkenness or Frenzy, or something else, which in like manner robs
the Will of her Guide. Yea, it is such a common Operation of the Will, we now
speak of, as no more concerns those of the Sacraments than all other Actions in
the World, that are humane and voluntary, whatever the Object, or End of them
be. Thus when a man promises a thing which at that time he resolves never to
perform, he yet intends to make that promise. When he threatens another only in
terrorem, without purposing ever to execute that threat, he then intends to
make that threat. And the Intention is so altogether presupposed to outward
Actions, that in common use of Speech we omit [say nothing of] it, in
commanding, or forbidding, or reciting exterior Acts, etc. We say, Read me a
Chapter; make ready my Dinner, etc. without adding any thing more. For though
these Actions now mentioned, are imperate Acts of the Will; that is, though the
Will commands the inferior powers to do them, as the hands to act, and the
Tongue to speak, etc. yet the Act of the Will [ viz. the Intention,] is not so
much as named when we speak of such Actions: and to do it would be superfluous,
inasmuch as it is necessarily supposed to attend them. All men take it for
granted that men intended to do, what they see them do in good Order. And this
assurance is grounded on the mere Natural knowledge of the Nature of humane
Acts, which are therefore called Voluntary, because of the Will's Efficiency in
them; or because of their necessary dependence upon and connection with the
Elicite Acts of the Will.

. 5. And in particular; for this Reason, Learned Men discoursing about our very
Question, make the Action of the Sacraments express this intention, without
otherwise naming it; except upon some special occasion. Dom. Soto speaks
plainly with a respect to this Point (in 4. Sent. Did. 1. q. 5. art. 8.) Actus
enim exterior and volitio interior pro eodem reputantur. i. e.

The exterior Act and the interior Volition [Act of the Will] are reputed for
the same.

His meaning can be no other than this, The Outward Act is the Object of the
Inward Act of the Will, and together with it does compound or constitute one
humane Action; and so may fitly denote the whole. Which is a very obvious Truth
to all, whose thoughts have been any whit thinn'd and improved by Observation.

. 6. Thus have I made it appear, That the Necessity of the Exterior Intention
to all humane Acts (of which number are the Sacramental) falls under the
Cognizance of Natural Reason: And indeed it is such Doctrine as has been
taught passing well in the Heathen Schools. Wherefore I conclude that your
General Councils at Florence and Trent (which you must say knew and were
mindful of their proper Province) did not gad so far out of their Way, as to
determine and decree mere unrevealed Natural Points, such as this we have in
hand.

. 7. To prevent mistakes. I wot well there are several Points of Natural
Knowledge revealed in Scripture, which are therefore (by accident) become also
Points of Faith: And that if these were denied by any Body of Christian People,
Councils might congruously declare them. But the Exterior Intention is none of
these; and my Argument respects only such as this.

. 8. I add, if your Councils might draw within their Sphere mere Points of
Natural Knowledge, like this I have insisted on; Aristotle's Books might chance
to be adopted into our Christian Creed; which would look but odly. Could such
work rightly be done, it would be worth a Council's while to make a Complete
Course of Infallible Philosophy, to save much pains and endless wrangling in
your Schools. For if all such things were once defined, a Roman Catholic could
no longer question them.

. 9. But this only upon Supposition your Councils have defined the Intention
to be necessary to humane Acts. I, for my part, clear them from any such guilt.
But if you do, Sir, What means your Question?

. 10. It appears also, That there is such an evident dependence of the
Sacramental, and all other humane Acts upon the Will or Intention, that no Man
of Sense ever did or can question it: And therefore besides that the work were
improper for a Synod of Divines, it were altogether needless and fruitless to
determine it: it were to act without a Motive, in my Opinion. Those that would
do This, might at the next step, be expected to decree it Necessary, That all
Lectors open their eyelids when they read a Chapter; and that all Preachers
open their Mouths when they exhort the People.

Now, Sir, you must either join with me in loading your Councils with these
absurdities, or in concluding; That it is not the Exterior Intention which is
the Matter of their Decree and Canon.

. 11. But whatever you do, Bellarmine will befriend all I have said on this
Head. ( De Sacram. in genesis l. 1. cap. 27.) Neque tamen volumus a Concilio
definitum id quod vult Catharinus, and Chemnitius vellet, nimirum ut solum
intendat Minister facere actum exteriorem, quem Ecclesia facit: id enim non
erat opus definire, cum a Nemine unquam negatum fuisset, nec posset neg ari. i.
e.

We mean not that That is defined by the Council, which Catharinus means, and
which Chemnitius would have; namely, that the Minister should only intend to
do that Exterior Act which the Church does: For there was No Need of defining
That, in regard it has never been denied by any body, nor could be denied.

The Cardinal here declares, 1. That the Council [of Trent] did not define the
Intention we now speak of. 2. That they had no Motive to do it, forasmuch as
none ever did or could deny it. Whose Testimony shall shut up this Particular.

. 12. (2.) I argue from the Nature of the Controversy between Papist and
Protestant about the Intention: Which cannot respect it in the present Sense of
the Word, there being no Protestant, that I ever read or heard of, who denies
its necessity to the Act. None of us ever asserted that any Madman (as such)
was fit to manage any Civil Concern, much less Spiritual. In this case then, we
could hardly contend, because we concur in the Thing. Or at least, it would
follow, That the Learned men of both Parties quarrel not only about Trifles,
but about just Nothing. Which thing, methinks, a Romanist should be unwilling
to impute (however he judge of us) to the wisest Men of his own Communion.
Hence then I conclude, That it is a further Intention than this of the Act,
which the Roman Church requires: And this breeds the Quarrel.

. 13. After all this: Were it supposed that your Councils had stooped to that
impertinent and needless work of defining the Necessity of the Exterior
Intention; You are not a-whit the safer, except they had only done that. Had
they done that, and stopped there, we could not possibly have inferred from
thence, That you were therefore uncertain of the Truth of your Sacraments. But
if they have required the Intention of the End, which lies not open to humane
perception, you must still be liable to my charge. And that it is such a One
which they require, I am to show, in the next place.

SECT. V. The Intention defined. That of the End required.
HAving already showed, that the Intention of the Act is not that which is
established in your Councils, I apply my self to evince what it was, that is: I
affirmed it was the Intention of the End or Effect of the Sacraments. And I
shall prove this, according to my Method, from the Learned Writers of the Roman
Church: Some of which assert the Thing expressly; Others obliquely, by putting
or stating Cases, from which a very mean Understanding cannot but infer the
truth of what I have affirmed. But before I produce them, I think fit to
premise these things,

1. What Intention properly so called, is? According to the general consent of
School men, I may safely define it thus,

. 1. It is an Act or Motion of the Will, tending to some End, by or through
some Mean or Means.

To this very purpose speaks Aquinas, Gerson, Gabriel, Sylvester, and Others.
The words of some of them, I shall set down, but need not English them, the
sense of them amounting to no more than the Definition now given.

Motus voluntatis qui fertur in finem, secundum quod acquiritur per ea quaesunt
ad finem, vocatur Intentio, says Aquinas, (1a 1ae q. 12. art. 4.) Est actus
voluntatis in aliquem finem tendentis per aliquid vel aliqua ad illum finem
ordinata, says Altenstaig from Gerson (verb. Inten.) Intentio est motus
voluntatis tendentis in finem per aliquod medium, says Sylvest. (verb. Inten.)
Intentio proprie accepta est volitio finis assequendi per media, says Gabriel
Biel (Repert. l.} 2. did. 38.)

. 2. I note from hence, That the mere Intention of the Act, which took up our
last Section, is not Intention, properly so called; inasmuch as it came short
of the End, to which the Act was to serve as a Mean. I note also that the
Minister then only properly intends whiles he celebrates the Sacraments, when
he wills the End of them (considered generally or specially; some way or other)
as attainable by the Use of the instituted Actions.

. 3. 2. I premise, That if my Authors prove the Intention of the End to be
required, they also make out, That the Intention of the Act only is not
required. Your question, Sir, is disjunctive, Whether -- of the Act or the End.
If I prove the latter, I remove the former.

3. I repeat my desire to have it kept in memory, That the Sacraments faring
all alike with a respect to the Intention, if my Authors shall, under that
Relation, speak of any of them, they as truly do it of all the rest. Now to my
Authority.

. 4. I begin with Gabriel Biel, the clearness of whose words leaves no room for
cavil. Ad veritatem Baptismi requiritur Intentio Ministri, non tantum respectu
Actus Baptizandi ut Objecti, sed etiam respectu ejus ut Finis and Termini. l 4.
did. 6. q. 1.


To the truth of Baptism the Intention of the Minister is required, not only in
respect of the Act of Baptizing as its Object [viz. as that which the Intention
is only carried out to, stops at, or is terminated by,] but also in respect of
its effect, as its End and Term.

This Author divides this conclusion into parts, and presents Arguments for the
proof of them. But it would be superfluous to transcribe the whole. He says,
the Intention to do the Act is necessary; but adds [non sufficit] that it is
not sufficient. And the Reason he gives amounts to this, That though the Act of
Baptism be done with Intention, yet in several cases it may become fruitless
and void [there may be no Baptism notwithstanding that Act] for want of another
Intention, viz. that which respects the End. Again, our Author speaks clearly,
Non sufficit Intentio exercendi Baptismum. ut est talis Actus in Natura, sed ut
est signum ad certum finem institutum.
It suffices not that the Minister intends to Baptize, as that is a Natural
Act; but as it is a Sign instituted to a certain End.

. 5. Here note, That none can use a Sign, as such, but he must have a respect
to the thing signified, to which the Sign, as such, has an essential Relation,
and cannot be considered, as a Sign, without it. So that all Sacraments being
[in genere Signi] Signs, as all the Roman Doctors do, and must teach; and the
Ministers being required to exercise them as such, (as the cited place affirms)
the Intention, according to them, must not be terminated or rest in the Outward
Act of the Sacraments; but it must in some manner reach the Effect or End of
them, without which, we see, They are not made and conferred.

And hither (to save time) I refer Bellarmin's saying, That the Action is to be
done, not as it is a certain Natural work, but as it is a Sacred work, [Sed
utest opus Sacrum] de Sacram. l. 1. c. 27.
which equally proves our point, and is to be understood in the like manner.

. 6. Gabr. Biel writ in the time between the Two Councils, and has spoken
fully and plainly to our purpose: and his Seniors would assure us, had we a
mind to consult them, that his Language was no novelty in the Roman Church.
Alexander Alensis Intendere facere quod facit Ecclesia. est intendere abluere
exterius, ut Deus abluat interius, de Sacr. Bapt quaest. 8.
may serve to do this, who is very liberal upon the same subject: To Intend to
do what the Church does, is to intend to wash outwardly to the end that God may
wash inwardly.

He tells us, the Sacramental Action [est actio relata] is a Relative Action,
and that which it relates to, is the Action of God, and collects [unde intentio
respicit utramque actionem] that the Intention respects both the Actions, as a
Cause without which there cannot be a Sacrament.

Our Author has here taught us by most transparent words, That the Intention
must of necessity be carried to the Action of God, which is nothing else but
the conferring of Sacramental Grace; and this Grace is the End or Effect of the
Sacraments. Which was the Thing to be proved.

. 7. Guliel. Parisiensis speaking of Orders, cap. 5. asserts the [mental]
Intention to be Essential to the Form of the Sacraments; and that though the
words be duly pronounced, yet a contrary Intention evacuates, and robs them of
their meaning.

Again treating of Baptism, cap. 2. he declares, That vicious Ministers cannot
deprive the Sacraments of their due Effects, nor defraud the worthy Receivers
of them: but he does it with this reserve, That they strive not against them
with a contrary Intention. He implies, All is nothing if that should happen.

. 8. Aquinas Cum aliquis non intendit Sacramentum confer. par. 3 q 64. art.
10.
makes the Action void, When the Minister intends not to confer the Sacrament.

I grant he speaks a little before, as if it were sufficient to intend the bare
Action; ( art. 8.) But besides the contradiction he would in that case be
liable to, the learned Romanists declare he meant no such thing. I shall call
two of them out to speak to this, because I would not have so great a man to
stand in my way.

. 9. Thus speaks Cardinal Cajetan upon the place, Non est intelligenda ut verba
sonant, puta quod non requiritur in Ministro Intentio proprie mentalis, sed
sufficit Intentio Ecclesiae per verba expressa, quicquid intendit ipse Minister
interius.
His mind is not to be understood as the words sound, as if there was not
required in the Minister an Intention properly Mental, but the Intention of the
Church expressed by the words would suffice, whatever the Minister may intend
in his mind.

. 10. Vt Opinio illa salsissima est, ita nullatenas est S. Thomae -- Requi^itur
secunaum cum Intentio non solum ap. licandi materiam and formam, sed ipsius
effectus.
Dom. Soto shall make up the pair, who was one of the most renowned Members of
the Trent-Council. As the Opinion that Intending to do the Act only is
sufficient, is a most false one; so it is not at all S. Thomas 's -- For
according to him there is required not only an Intention of applying the Matter
and Form, but of the Effect it self.

. 11. Aquinas's sense of the Article being fixed, let us further observe Soto's
judgment. He delivers it a little before thus, Ea ratione Christu discipulos
suos Sacramentorum Ministros sibi substituit. ut sua ipsius Intention
bujusmodi obsequia perficerent.
Christ therefore substituted his Disciples to be Ministers of the Sacraments
that they might perform such Offices with his very own Intention.

And he calls This, an Intention like to that of God.

Now it being plain, that the gracious Ends or Effects of the Sacraments are
intended by Christ, he infers they are also to be Intended by his Ministers.
And this he all along makes Essential to a Sacrament.

. 12. I cannot forbear to recite what I meet with to this purpose in
Altenstaig, viz. That it is required to intend to exhibit the matter and words
of the Sacraments, Tanquam ea quae ad certum effectum instituta sunt a Christo,
and hoc est exhitere in fide Ecclesiae. Verb. Sacram.
as those things which are instituted by Christ to a certain Effect; and This
is to exhibit them in the Faith of the Church.

. 13. All I shall say by way of remark upon the several Authors already cited,
is only this, That if the Reader has born in mind, what I was to make out,
viz. That the required Intention respects the End or Effect of the Sacraments,
he cannot but see that they have manifestly proved it.

I designed also in a particular manner to confirm my Assertion from those
Roman Casuists that have laid down Grounds, from whence the same appears by a
fair and unconstrained inference. But to avoid further tediousness, I shall
only point to their usual way of handling things of this kind; and subjoyn two
particular instances, of a pretty odd Nature.

. 14. They generally put the Case, That the Sacramental Form [or Words] may be
abused by Addition, Substraction, Transposition, and false Pronunciation; and
upon This they put the Question, Whether a Sacrament be perfected in such
cases. And they commonly resolve it thus, If those Additions, etc. be not
corruptive of the Substance of the Form, [that is, if they pervert not the
Sense of the Words] there may be a Sacrament notwithstanding: Provided still
(Mark that) that the Minister intends not that undue alteration; For if he
does, they conclude the Sacrament to be evacuated. Their Argument lies thus, He
that on purpose corrupts the Form may be judged not to intend to do what the
Church does; and without this Intention there is no true Sacrament. But then if
the intention be right, the Sacred Work is perfected, notwithstanding the
'foresaid imperfections. The Act is here supposed to be the same, whether it
happen to prove a Sacrament, or no; it is the Mental intention then that makes
or marrs all. Which was the thing to be showed.

. 15. Now to the Instances. Soto, on the 'forecited Article, teaches thus, Si
quis haberet Intentionem singularem Baptizandi Petrum, scilicet filium Regis
cum exclusione cujuscunque alterius, videlicet si mente diceret, Si non es
silius Regis, non te Baptizo; tunc si quem alium baptizaret, seu foeminam,
Sacramentum non esset validum, quia non interfuisset Intentio Baptizandi illum
qui baptizatun.
If any Minister should have a singular Intention to Baptize Peter the King's
Son, exclusively of all other Persons, Viz. If he should say in his Mind, if
thou be not the King's Son, I Baptize thee not; then if he should Baptize any
other Male or Female, the Sacrament would not be valid for want of his
intending to Baptize him, who is Baptized.

. 16. I take my second Instance out of the Mass book of Pope Pius Quintus Si
quis habeat coram se undecim hostias, and intendat consecrare solum december, non
determinans quas december intendit: in his casibus non consecrat, quia requiritur
intentio. De defect. circa Mis. occur. Number. 7.
corrected and set forth by Order of the Trent-Council; where we read,

If any Priest have Eleven Hosts before him, and intend to Consecrate only
Ten, not determining which Ten he intended to Consecrate; in this case there is
no Consecration made for want of the Intention.

. 17. We are not to imagine that in either of these Cases, the Priest sees his
mistake till the Action is over; and therefore must suppose him seriously to
perform it, and for ought he knows really to confer Baptism, and consecrate the
Eucharist. And yet afterward it being found out that there are Eleven Wafers
instead of Ten; and that the Child, washed solemnly in the Name of the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, was not the King's Son; here is neither Baptism nor
Consecration made, for want of an absolute Intention. The Priest had as good
have done Nothing.

Oh, the force and value of the Intention!

. 18. But not to protract this overlong Section, I shall vertually cite a
hundred Authors more to the same purpose, by speaking a very few Words. All
that make Matter, Form, and the Minister's Intention, necessary to the
Sacraments, (and which of your Writers that treat of that Subject, do not so?)
do mean by the word Intention the interior Intention, the exterior being
included in the Act.

. 19. In forma intelligitur verbum vocale; says Sylvest. (Verb. Bapt.) i. e.
By the Form is understood the Word spoken.

And then by proportion; By Matter must be meant Matter applied. And this is
supposed to be spoken and done with the Will or Intention. Now then when
besides all this, the Intention is added as a distinct thing, it must be
interpreted of the interior Intention. The bright Words of Soto shall Seal up
this,

. 20. Si nulla esset intentio necessaria faciendi quod facit Ecclesia, vana
esset assertio Doctorum and Concilii Florentini, qua definitur requiri praeter
Materiam and Formam, Intentionem Ministri: Nam in hoc quod dicitur Materia and
Forma, intelligitur quod velit tam Materiam applicare quam formam. Actus enim
exterior and Volitio interior pro eodem reputantur. Cum ergo insuper addatur
requiri intentionem, alia intentio intelligitur. i. e.

If the Intention of doing what the Church does, was not necessary, the
assertion of our Doctors and the Council of Florence were vain, by which it is
defined, that besides the Matter and Form, the Intention of the Minister is
required: For in the naming the Matter and Form, it is understood that he [the
Minister] intends to apply both Matter and Form: For the exterior Act and the
interior Intention [of doing that Act] are taken for the same Thing or Act.
When therefore it is further added, That the Intention is required, another
[Intention] is understood.

. 21. Thus, Sir, have I declared that the Intention your Councils require, is
to be conversant about the End of the Sacraments; and showed that the Stream of
your Authors assist me with their Suffrage. If I err herein, they have led me
out of the way: But then it is to your great harm, but not at all to mine. For
if they understand not what your Councils require, as Essential to the
Sacraments in general, then they must be uncertain whether they have any true
Sacrament; and in particular, whether they have that of Orders, and so any true
Priests. How can you be certain you have enough, if you know not what is
enough? were this the case, my point is proved from your confessed ignorance,
as much as it could be from the most shining demonstration.

. 22. Indeed, Sir, I have been more luxuriant in my proof of the subject matter
of this and the foregoing Section, for these two Reasons: 1. To lay a sure
Ground for the deductions I hope to draw anon, to your disadvantage. 2. To
confront some false Assertions of a certain Priest of your Communion, made some
time ago, to a person of Quality, who was concerned to enquire of him what the
doctrine of the Intention amounted to, as established by your Councils.

He affirmed to the Lady, as I can show under her well known hand, these three
things:

. 23. 1. That the Intention respected the Exterior Act only, saying, That it is
impossible for a Priest that is in his right Wits, to perform the exterior
Action required, without Intending to do as he then does.

Now I have proved that there is required an Intention of the End, which
confounds his false account of the matter.

. 24. 2. He said, The Roman Church never declared the Doctrine of the Intention
to be matter of Faith.

But I have proved it to be One, if a Decree or Definition of such Councils as
the Body of Roman Catholics hold for General, can Oblige to Faith. And if
these cannot do that, farewell Pope Pius's Creed.

. 25. 3. He only assigned this for the occasion of the Councils meddling with
this matter, viz. That some held an Opinion that the Consecrating and
Conferring the Sacraments by madmen, who knew not what they were about, was
valid.

But I have showed, that it is granted aforehand, That the Exterior Action
should be Humane, i. e. the issue of previous Knowledge; which a madman, as
such, cannot exert. And I have also shown that the Intention the Councils deal
about, reaches farther, and is of another Nature. And so his frantic Story is
void of Patronage.

. 26. I confess School men, treating of their Matters, put every Objection that
can possibly come into their too fine spun thoughts; but if a man hatch from
thence in his head swarms of Sectaries, that are supposed seriously to embrace
the matter of many of them, he can make them exist no where but in his fancy.

. 27. And I doubt this is the case, when any one reports there were a Sect of
people who held stark and staring Mad men to be effectual Ministers of the
Sacraments. Authors do indeed speak of Madmen with a respect to our Case, and
pronounce them unfit Ministers, because they (as such) cannot exert Humane
Acts: but then their Argument amounts to this, because Mad men cannot do the
less, viz. Intend the exterior Act, much less can they do the more, viz. Intend
the End or Effect of an Institution; which is required by the Roman Church.

. 28. I wish the Assertor would tell us, in what Age there were such a Sect of
men; in what Region they lived; who headed them; who began the Error; what Pens
seriously defended it; what Bishop excommunicated any man for holding it; or
what Pope suspended or deprived any Bishop for embracing it. I would learn what
Notoriety of Fact there was for these things, that it should be worth a General
Councils while to cast an eye this way, and labor to stop the growing evil.

. 29. I have read several Catalogues of Heresies, some Ancient and some Modern,
but I can find nothing like This amongst them all.

I wish my plain dealing with him, to which I have had more than sufficient
provocation, may whet him to the innocent revenge of making good against me (if
he can) his Affirmations above described. Till this be done, I shall conclude
him either a most unlearned man; or one of a poor Spirit, who could find in his
heart so to abuse and impose upon a worthy Lady's want of skill in Roman
Doctors and Councils.

Sir, I acknowledge I have stepped out of our way, a while, to salute a friend;
but I do not desire you to take any notice of that, unless you please. However,
those that are more concerned, will do it; and subscribe to the justice of my
Visit.

SECT. VI. The End particularly considered is not required; but generally. The
Virtual Intention is required, and held sufficient.
HAving already proved the Intention of the End to be required, I come now to
view your next Question, whether that End be Proximate or Ultimate.

. 1. And I must say, I see not what Reason you have to ask this Question here,
the matter of it having no necessary influence upon the subject of our debate.
For if it be the End, however considered, whether confusedly and in general, or
distinctly and in special; it is alike out of the compass of the Inspection of
others, which is the formal Ground I argue from, to your Uncertainty of having
a true Priesthood or any Sacraments at all.

I say, if it be the End more generally considered, ex gr. to do an Action as
Sacred, as Relative to an Institution, as a Mean to this or that indefinite
End; all this comes to one, with a respect to my design.

. 2. Nevertheless, I shall cheerfully go some paces (though upon a needless
Errand) which way you shall please to drive me. I affirm then, Your Councils
and Doctors require not the intending any End, thus, or so distinctly
considered or specified; but as something in general, which Christ and the
Church; or, Christ or the Church intends to do by the instituted Action.

. 3. This something is (it seems) sufficient to the Sacraments, although very
hardly, as we may learn from the words of the Trent-Council, which I shall here
repeat, There is required of the Ministers of the Sacraments an Intention of
doing, at least, what the Church does. The saltem [at least] sounds, to me, a
poor word, where a dogmatical Article is defined: however, I must take it as it
is, and shall explain the matter briefly from your Authors.

. 4. After G. Biel had told us (as is aforesaid) That the Ministers are
required to will that to be done, for which the Sacrament was instituted; he
immediately adds,

Et haec Intentio est duplex, scil. specialis, qua intendit ut Baptizatus fiat
filius Regni; qui est finis remotus: vel propinquus, qui est remissio peccati
Originalis and Gratiae infusio; aut quod fiat Chritianus and membrum Ecclesiae
militantis: vel generalis, ut fiat quod Ecclesiae intendit, licet non cogitetur
aut ignoretur vel etiam non credatur id conferri per baptismum quod Ecclesia
intendit, i. e.

And this Intention is twofold, viz. Special, whereby he intends that the
baptized person may attain Salvation; which is the remote End; or that he
obtain the pardon of Original Sin and the infusion of Grace; or that he be made
a Christian or a Member of the Church Militant; which is the proximate End of
it. Or it is general, viz. that That may be done which the Church intends,
although it be not considered, nor understood, or not believed that That is
conferred by Baptism which the Church intends.

We see here, it is a very general and indistinct End that is set forth by
these words, what the Church intends or does. And our Author goes on to reach
our point in his third Conclusion.

Ad veritatem Sacramenti non requiritur intentio Ministri respectu. effectus
Baptismatis in specie: sed sufficit intendere quod Ecclesia intendit in genere,
i. e.

To the truth of the Sacrament there is not required such an Intention of the
Minister as respects the effect of Baptism in special: but it suffices to
intend what the Church intends in the general.

. 5. De Burgo, ( cap. 5.2. par.) having described the Intention in the like
manner concludes thus, Requiritur ergo generalis intentio ad minus, etc. i. e.
There is a general Intention required at the least, etc. Which exactly jumps
with the sense of the Trent definition. But I need cite no more for This, the
Roman Doctors being generally of the same mind.

. 6. You ask again, Whether the Intention required, he Habitual, Vertual, or
Actual. To which my Answer must be the same your selves use to give, viz. The
Habitual is too short, as being no more than one asleep may have: The Actual
through humane infirmity and wandering of thoughts may sometimes happen to be
wanting in well-meaning Ministers, and therefore is not necessarily required.
But the Vertual is necessary to the Sacraments.

. 7. By Vertual, Roman Catholics mean the force of the Actual Intention,
exerted a little before the doing of the Sacramental Action, ex. gr. If a
Bishop intends actually to make N. N. a Priest of Christ's Church, (or to do
something to him which Christ or the Church has appointed the Action of
Ordination for, or the like,) and goes to Church and attires himself, etc. for
that purpose; though while he applies the respective Matter and Form, his mind
happens to range out to some other Objects, yet the Action done by virtue of
the late Actual Intention has those influences shed into it from the past
Intention, which suffice to perfect the Ordination.

. 8. I shall set forth Bellarmine's words to evince the point because they are
short and clear, ( de Sacram. in genesis l. 1. c. 27.) Non requiritur necessario
actualis intentio, nec sufficit habitualis, sed virtualis requiritur and
sufficit; quamvis danda sit opera, ut actualis habeatur, i. e.

Actual Intention is not required necessarily, nor is Habitual sufficient; but
a Virtual Intention is required, and is sufficient; although endeavors are to
be used, that the Actual may be had.

. 9. To him I shall join a Book which will outweigh ten thousand private
Authors, viz. the Mass Book of Pope Pius the 5th. ( de defect. etc. number. 7.) Si
intentio non sit actualis in ipsa Consecratione propter evagationem mentis, sed
Virtualis, cum accedens ad Altar intendit facere quod facit Ecclesia,
conficitur Sacramentum: etsi curare debet Sacerdos, ut etiam actualem
Intentionem abhibeat, i. e.

If there be not actual Intention in the very Consecration [of the Eucharist]
by reason of the wandering out of the mind; but a Virtual one, when the Priest
coming to the Altar intends to do what the Church does, the Sacrament is made:
although the Priest ought to take care, that he also actually intend.

We conclude then that the Actual Intention is congruous, but the Virtual is
necessary, and sufficient.

SECT. VII. Roman Catholics not certain of their Priesthood taken in general
by any simple or absolute Certainty. Nor certain of it taken in special by any
simple, or so much as a Moral Certainty.
YOur last Question is, What certainty I speak of in my Propositions, (when I
deny the Roman Church to be certain She has any true Priesthood) whether it be
Moral, Metaphysical, or Mathematical.

. 1. Here I must premise a distinction in Order to the clear resolution of your
Question. Your Priesthood may be considered either confusedly and in general,
as inherent or existing in some persons of your Church indeterminately
considered; as if it were said, there are in the Roman Church some true
Priests, although it be not known that This or That individual person be such a
one: Or distinctly and in particular, as inherent in These or Those persons
determinately considered, whose names may be told, or their persons marked or
pointed out. As if it were said, Father. A. or B. is a true Priest.

. 2. Now for Answer: I deny the Roman Church is simply or absolutely certain
that she has any true Priesthood, in the first sense. The Proposition is not
evident by its own light to all that understand the Terms; and therefore I deny
that you have for it the certainty of Intelligence: which is all one, I
suppose, with that you call Metaphysical certainty. Nor is it any Conclusion
evidently deduced from first Principles, and therefore I deny that you have for
it the certainty of Science: which is the same, I suppose, that you call
Mathematical certainty. If you make good your Priesthood either of these ways,
our understandings could not resist the evidence presented, inasmuch as the
Reason of our assent to first Principles is the clear immediate connection of
the Terms; and the Reason of our assent to Scientifical Conclusions is the
clear connection of the Terms with an evident Medium. But your men never
pretended to prove this point either of these ways, that I have heard of: nor
would I have said one word of this kind, had not the Terms of your Question
offered me the occasion. However, to accommodate my self to your thoughts so
far as I can, I will suppose, You meant not to use those words, Mathematical
and Metaphysical, in a proper sense; but only in an allusive way to denote by
them a simple Certainty, equal to that of Intelligence or Science, which you
suppose to spring from a diverse root, viz. Divine Revelation. But then I must
answer on, as I have begun, by denying that you have any Certainty of Faith for
the Matter.

. 3. For the Proposition taken in the second Sense, viz. That you have any
Persons in your Church determinately or singularly considered, as Father A. or
B. who are true Priests; I deny that you have for it either the absolute and
infallible Certainty of Faith, or so much as a Moral Certainty, properly so
called.

. 4. And here it will be as needful a piece of work, as any I have yet done, to
prepare the Reader for making a sure judgment of what shall follow, to open the
Nature of Moral Certainty. And because your Authors are sufficiently agreed
about it, it will not matter much, which of them I call forth to describe it.
Let Cardinal Bellarmine be the Man, who sets forth the Matter very distinctly (
Le justif. lib. 3. cap. 2.) He then (as others do) having divided Certainty
into Evident, and Obscure Certainty, assigns three degrees to both of them. Of
the Evident he gives the first degree to first Principles, the second to
Science, the third to Experience. Of Obscure Certainty he gives the first
degree to Divine Faith, the second to Humane Faith, the third to Opinion.

Having said this in a previous way, I shall now produce what he says touching
Moral Certainty. Secundum gradum, etc. Those things (says he) obtain the
second degree of Obscure Certainty, which are believed for the sake of Humane
Authority, but so confirmed and celebrated a One, [ut omnem formidinem prorsus
excludat] that it altogether excludes all fear. Such as are these, That Cicero
and Virgil were famous Men: that Augustus governed a great part of the World
happily: that there are many famous Cities in Provinces at a great distance
from us, as Alexandria in Egypt, Constantinople in Thracia, Jerusalem in
Palestine, Antioch in Asia. And this is called the Certainty of Humane Faith,
or Moral Certainty; which although it be not so great, that it can be no way
false, (for every Man is a Liar) yet it is so great, that he may deservedly be
judged temerarious, who thinks or disputes against it. Thus Bellarmine.

. 5. Hence it is obvious to collect, 1. That Moral Certainty is the
experimental knowledge of others conveyed to us by due Testimony. 2. That this
Certainty bred from the Evidence of the Motives (I say not of the Object) that
cause our assent, so far fills the Mind with tranquillity and security, that
there is no place left for rational doubts or fears, lest our conceptions
should not be answerable to their Objects. And truly when I reflect upon my
belief in this kind, and the grounds of it, (and fear can only arise that way)
I find my self no more tempted to doubt, whether there has been such a City as
Constantinople in Thracia, which I have never seen, than I am whether there
has been such a City as Lisbone in Portugal, which I have seen. Though it be
not repugnant to the Nature of Man to be deceived, and to deceive; yet how such
Multitudes of Men of several ranks, qualifications and Countries, should be
deceived in a most sensible Object; or conspire to deliver a falsehood for
truth, especially when by the report they could not hope to reap to themselves
any possible advantage, (this, I say) is so utterly unperceivable by any
regular Thoughts, that he may well be deemed to want the use of his reason, who
is afraid of being deceived in his belief, that there has been such a place as
Constantinople, upon so credible Testimony. The bare possibility of a thing's
being otherwise than we judge it to be, (when the exactest disquisition can
make no more of it) so little affects the Mind, that I have not so much as the
Shadow and Figure of fear, lest there should not be such a place as
Constantinople.

I know indeed there may be some degrees of Moral Certainty proportioned to the
Motives or Mediums that beget it; but yet it belongs to the Nature of it in
general, firmly to adhere to its Object, from the perception of truth and
conviction of the Mind, so far that it is not in our power, acting reasonably,
to dissent from it, or to fear that we judge amiss.

This Point will yet look brighter, if I set forth what Bellarmine immediately
subjoyns to the Words last cited.

. 6. Tertium gradum habent illa, etc. Those things (says he) have a third
degree of Certainty, which rest on so many signs and conjectures, as render a
Man secure and exclude anxiety, [non tamen formidinem omnem expellunt] but yet
expel not all fear; and this is called conjectural Certainty, and rather
belongs to Opinion than Faith. Thus he.

. 7. Now by comparing Moral and Conjectural Certainty, according to their
Descriptions newly given, we find a considerable difference between them. The
first shuts out fear, as being the result of a brighter Motive; the latter lets
in fear through the in-evidence of its Medium. The first is a firm adherence to
a Thing as true, the latter is an infirm adherence to a Thing as likely to be
true. And therefore the first deserves the Name of Certainty, but the latter is
abusively so called. Wherefore the Cardinal seeing what he calls Conjectural
Certainty, unworthy to stands upon the same level with Moral, reasonably
thrusts it down into an inferior Place.

. 8. I know indeed that Aristotle and his Followers, speaking as Natural
Philosophers, make not Humane Faith [or Moral Certainty] a Middle thing, nor
place it in a distinct Class, between Science and Opinion: But the Reason of
that is, it was not their design to make any exact comparison of the greater or
less strength or weakness of Assents to particular contingent things, and to
give them distinct Seats, accordingly; but to compare them in a lump with
Science; and to show, That the highest Assent below That, may possibly be
false. And so they leave these two lapt up in a Bundel without distinction,
under the Name of Opinion. But those that speak of them, as Moral Philosophers
do very manifestly, and upon good Cause distinguish them, as Bellarmine has
here done; making Moral Certainty to exclude fear, and Opinion to admit it. And
none can question, but when there is foundation for them in the Nature of
things, distinctions are to be allowed.

. 9. But if any list to retain the former way of speaking, it will come to the
same; provided we thus distinguish of Opinion, viz. Opinion is either most
vehement and intense, such as, Morally speaking, excludes all fear; Or light
and weak, which necessarily gives way to fear: And provided we make Moral
Certainty the same thing with the first Member of this distinction: Men may be
allowed to use what words they please in Polemical Discourses, supposing we
understand what they mean by them.

Thus, Sir, have I dispatched the Explication of those Terms that you called
for, and of some others which might puzzle some Readers, unless they were
attended with such help. This work I thought I was obliged to extend to an
unusual length for these Reasons, (mentioned before) 1. To enable the more
unlearned to become competent Judges of the strength of my Arguments, or your
Answers to them. 2. To save my self much possible trouble of Papers, which
might be multiplied upon Occasion of a few Words left in ambiguity and
darkness. When men are once engaged in Controversy, we find by daily
Experience a small matter serves almost endlesly to keep them doing, to the
loss of their time, and disquiet of their Persons. 3. I add, our Disputative
part will look clearer, when we need not blend it with requiring and giving any
explanation of words.

Now because what I have done in this kind lies scattered in the several
Sections, I shall gather them together, and in brief, present them at once to
your view, in the following Section.

SECT. VIII. The several Explications before given, Summed up. And the Question
resolved into its Parts.
1. I Have declared, That your Councils require the Minister's Intention, as
necessary to the Being of a Sacrament. Sect. 3.

2. That the Intention they require, is not that of the Outward Act, (its
presence to the Act being presupposed.) Sect. 4.

3. But it is That of the End or Effects. Sect. 5.

4. That it is not necessary to Intend the End distinctly considered, as
Proximate or Ultimate, but as something in general, which relates to Christ's
Institution, or the Appointment or Practice of the Church, or the like. Sect. 6.

5. That a Virtual Intention is Necessary and Sufficient. Sect. 7.

Your Sense of the Terms must (as was said before) be mine: And that I have
truly represented your Sense, your Authors already produced, or referred to,
will amount to a full Certificate. They will secure me upon the Supposition
made, that the Doctrine of your Councils is capable of being understood, at
least by the leading Members of your own Church. If it be not, you magnify
those your Councils without Reason, which either could not speak intelligibly,
or for some odd Ends seemed to define Faith, when they did Nothing.

6. I deny that your Priesthood taken Indeterminately or in general, does (in
an Ordinary way, or without Special Revelation) admit the infallible Certainty
of Divine Faith: Or that taken determinately, or in particular, it admits
either the aforesaid Certainty of Faith, or an Experimental, or yet a Moral
Certainty properly so called.

. 1. By certainty, I still mean an Intellectual certainty, such as is
consentaneous to its Object, which is the Measure and Foundation of it.

These things being thus set in open view, it will be easily apprehended, That
our Question is a Complex Question, and is resolvable into two simple ones;
which as they are stated, will stand thus,

. 2. 1. Whether the Roman Church, which makes Priestly Orders necessarily
depend upon the Ordaining Bishops (at least) Virtual Intention of the End of
Ordination, can be certain with an absolute or infallible Certainty of Faith,
that they have some true Priests, in general.

. 3. 2. Whether that Church -- can be certain with the aforesaid Certainty of
Faith; or with a Moral Certainty; That they have This or That true Priest in
particular.

Now I deny to your Church the forenamed respective Certainties of their
having a true Priesthood, in either Sense: and which is more, have taken upon
me to prove the Negative, a task I cannot complain of, (though it be not very
natural) because I was, for once, content to take it upon my self.

Pray mark, That I moreover deny a Theological Certainty of your Priesthood
taken in either of the Senses of it abovementioned. That is, I deny that it
can be concluded either from two Revealed Propositions, or from one Revealed
and another Evident by the Light of Nature.

Bellarmine's Silence of it tempted me to omit it in the last Section.

THE SECOND PART BEING Argumentative.
SECT. I. The general Order of proceeding. The first part of Mr. G's. Letter
set down and examined.
HAVING finished the Explications required of me, in a far other and ampler
manner than was required, and whatever else I thought useful in a previous way,
for the clearer sight of the point in question; I shall now declare in what
general Order I purpose to proceed.

. 1. 1. I shall evince by managing the Medium already exhibited, that the Roman
Church is uncertain of their having any Priesthood; as Priesthood is taken
determinately, or (as I may say) in the parcels.

This was the only thing I formerly stood upon, when I had occasion in a very
short Paper (a single Folio page) to expose the Evils incident to Roman
Catholics from their doctrine of the Intention. Let me say, by the way, I mean
that Paper, to which one of your Priests told me in your hearing, he had some
years ago seen an Answer. I add, I wish I could see it too, that I might, for
some reasons, compare it with yours.

And this was the only thing I intended to do at the first starting of the
Argument with you; as knowing it would enable me (when made good) to load you
sufficiently with unwelcome consequences; and to set That in the light, which
it would be your interest to keep in darkness.

. 2. 2. I shall consider a little (beyond my first purpose) how far your
Priesthood taken indeterminately, and (as I may say) in the gross, will follow
the fate of the other.

This being said, I come to produce your Letter purporting an Answer to my
Argument, and to examine its force. If I find my self so bridled up by it that
I cannot run my designed course, I will acknowledge the power of your Curb: but
if not, I surely go forward to your loss.

The former part of Mr. Goodall's Letter.
Sir, It was alleged to you that the Orders of the English Church had been by
Roman Catholics judged invalid by reason of your altering the Form of
Ordination, and sufficient discovering your. Intention not to do as the Church
does in that Sacrament. And your way of defending your Ordination seemed to me
very strange, when you retorted in this manner: I deny, say you, that the Roman
Church is certain that she has any Priesthood or Sacraments according to her
own Principles, and I oblige my self to deal with Mr. Goodall about this point.
Witness my hand, Thomas Marsden. I accepted and subscribed, Edward. Goodall.
For when you deny that we are certain that we have any Priesthood according to
our own Principles; it were but reasonable for you to expect of us, that we
should be uncertain at least, that you have any, since you so earnestly contend
to derive your Succession and Orders from us, [See for this Mr. Mason,
Archbishop Laud, Bishop Bramhal, Bishop Tailor, Dr. Fern, Dr. Hammond, etc.]
And there is an old rule, you know, Nil dat quod in se non habet. But
whatsoever you pretend of our being uncertain concerning the truth of our
Priesthood, yet, for our comfort, you are certain enough of it, and therefore
you never reordain those Priests, who sometimes, though rarely, Apostatize from
the Roman Catholic to join in your Communion. The words you have used in
Stating the point against the Roman Catholic Church are very extraordinary,
when you deny her to be certain that she has any Priesthood or Sacraments,
according to her own principles. Thus you.


The Examination of it follows.
Sir, Although the Prefatory part of your Letter here recited, does not at all
affect my Argument by way of Answer, and so without any prejudice might be
passed by without regard; yet on other accounts I find it my concern to dissect
it, and to expose its putrid parts.

. 3. You then undertake two things in it, 1. To relate some matters of Fact
which passed between you and me. 2. To insinuate some disadvantages incurred on
my part, through (at least) an unwary manage of things. Both these shall be
inspected.

For the first: Your Relation of Fact contains two things;

1. Your charging the Church of England with the invalidity of her Orders, both
because we had altered the Form of Ordination, and also discovered our
Intention not to do as the Church does, in that Sacrament; as you term it.

2. My attempt to discharge her by denying the Roman Church to be certain, that
she has a true Priesthood or Sacraments, according to her own principles; and
obliging my self to deal with you on that Head. This is what you declare for
Fact.

Now I confess, were the case exactly such as you represent it, I made but a
very weak defense of our Church, how freely soever I might strike at yours. To
argue that my Coin is current, because my Neighbor cannot prove his to be so,
would be very inconcluding. But what would not a man give for Faith in a
Historian!

. 4. Sir, You have said both too little, and too much, concerning your self and
me.

1. Too little. For when you affirmed our Orders to be invalid in the judgment
of Roman Catholics, I justified them by those of the Roman Church unto which
our first Reformers were admitted. And when you said the Nullity of our Orders
proceeded from our forsaking the old Ordinal, and from our giving power to the
Ordained only to dispense the Word and Sacraments, which, said you, any Deacon
might do; I showed how you mistook the thing by taking the word dispense in too
narrow a sense, whereas it comprehends the whole duty of Gospel Ministers; and
therefore the alteration was only verbal and not real.

This Fact I have set forth more particularly, Part I. Sect. 1. whither I refer
the Reader.

This, Sir, was a direct Answer to your Objection, and consequently a perfect
desence of our Priesthood against your assault.

Now I am sorry you should conceal not only the forenamed Relation I made to
your Orders, but also the Instance you gave, and my Answer to it, on purpose
(as much as I can gather from your words) to make people believe I had nothing
at all to say in behalf of our Ministry, but deserted it at first view of your
wretched Objection, and requited you with a bare Recrimination: Nay, which is
yet more gross, that I used that as a Medium, and my only Medium for the
Vindication of our Church. Your own Conscience, besides the Testimony of our
Auditors, (who were no Children,) can assure you that such was the Matter of
your Objection, and such the Matter of my Answer, as is set down before.

. 5. 2. You have said too much, in reporting that to invalidate our Orders, you
urged our sufficient discovery of our Intention not to do as the Church does.
This, Sir, I am obliged to call pure fiction, no such words being named but by
me upon the Question now in hand, after our slight skirmishes concerning the
other were ended.

I could make your own Authors ridicule you about the very matter of your
charge, but I forbear lest you should take some light occasion from it to
desert your less grateful POST. What I quarrel is only your report: and truly I
would hope that some cares or troubles had blended your thoughts when you writ
these things, being loath to think there was much of Will in these Errors.
However, I would as a friend advise you to be cautious hereafter, of treating
even your enemies at such a rate.

. 6. For the Second, viz. the disadvantages you suppose me to ly under by some
unlucky or unadvised proceedings on my part. (I know not well how to word it.)

. 7. The first (reputed) disadvantage is my strange way of defending our Church
by taxing yours. Answer, This is washed off already by detecting (to speak
softly) your partial Relation of Fact.

The Second is, If we make you Uncertain of your own Priesthood, you must be
supposed to be, at least, Uncertain of Ours, who contend to derive our Orders
and Succession from you.

. 8. Answer, 1. Pray, What mortal harm is this to us, who rest not for any
thing of moment upon the sole judgment of the Roman Church? 2. For our deriving
our Orders from you, we mean only this by it, that our first Reformers received
their Orders from Christ by the Ministry of such English Bishops as were in
Communion with the Roman Church; and these considered only as Christian
Bishops. Which surely might be done, and yet you may have embraced a Doctrine,
which till you discard it, will render you uncertain that you have, and
consequently convey true Orders. And whether that of the Intention be not such
is to be the matter of the approaching tug between us, and therefore is to be
referred to its proper place. 3. Your Nihil dat quod in se non habet, seems
quite besides our business; which is not to scan whether you have none, but
whether you are uncertain of your having any Priesthood. You may have and give,
without being certain of either, whilst you hold to the Doctrine of the
Intention.

The third is, Though we pretend you to be Uncertain, yet for your Comfort, We
are certain enough of the truth of your Priesthood, and therefore never
reordain, etc.

. 9. Answer. You are, it seems, grown wonderful kind upon a sudden, in granting
us to be certain enough of the truth of your Priesthood.

To be certain, is a great Word: Certain enough, a greater: And your Priesthood
is a great Matter to be certain of. You puzzle me to think How this should be:
For your great Writers allow not us (you call Heretics) to understand
Scripture, or Fathers, or Councils, but appropriate all this to the Sons of
your Church. And then what Way is there left for us to arrive at this
Certainty? But I will take your Word for it, and desire you to remember against
another time, that Protestants (whilst such) may be certain of Matters of no
small moment in Religion. But I should not, I think, build too much upon this
concession, because I have sometimes found a trick in things of this kind, viz.
Our judgment is good when we declare any thing in your Favor: But when we
charge you (to the best of our judgments) with any Errors, We are very Idiots.

. 10. This is surprising also, that you build Comfort upon our Certainty of
your Priesthood. I had thought Roman Catholics were so top full of Comfort from
their own Grounds, that there was no room left for our supplying them, but you
have undeceived me here; We add, it seems, to your stock. Comfort is a precious
thing; and you ought henceforth, instead of counting us a mere Offense to you,
to acknowledge us for your Benefactors.

. 11. But hark you. If we be certain of the Thing (which you grant) and you
chance to be uncertain, how redound this to our disadvantage, unless our
perfection be reckoned against us as a Crime? Or, what is the Reason of your
mentioning our Certainty here? Is it, that if we be certain, you must be so too?

Non sequitur. If one Man so hoodwink himself that he cannot rightly
distinguish Objects relating either to himself or others, may not he yet do
both, who keeps the muffle off his face. This is the case, You are hoodwinked
with the Doctrine of Intention (as will be found anon) but we are not so: And
till you put that off, you will not be able to see any one man in your Church
to be a true Priest. And, by the way, if you put off That, you withal put off
your (pretended) Infallibility.

The Fourth is, That my Words are very Extraordinary, when I say, I deny the
Roman Church to be certain that She has any Priesthood or Sacraments,
according to her own Principles.

. 12. The Extraordinary words you refer to, if I may guess by the score of your
Pen under them, (to express which, I have put them in a different Character)
are these, -- any Priesthood or Sacraments.

Answer. The words are ordinary, that is, in familiar use, taken single, or
apart; and in their Contexture they are not otherwise, unless they give
impertinent Sense or Nonsense. But till you be at leisure to make this appear,
I shall not be at leisure to frame an Apology.

. 13. But you may perhaps think it extraordinary, that I deny you to be certain
-- according to your own Principles, and may have put your lineal Mark under
the foregoing Words by mistake. For I perceive, that for some reason or other,
you afterward give me a Memento concerning them. If it chance to be so, (for
that I suppose is but a small Error) I shall return a few words to it:

Had I made a Doctrine common to you and us the Basis of my Argument, though my
manifest Inferences from it must have bound you, yet I could not properly have
called this Arguing from your own Principles: But if I prove the undertaken
Conclusion from a peculiar Article of your own, viz. that of the Intention;
then you are uncertain that you have a Priesthood, etc. according to your
Principles; forasmuch as a Conclusion evidently deduced is the genuine issue of
its Principles or Premises, and virtually contained in them.

. 14. Thus have I (if I flatter not my self) disarmed the several disadvantages
you suppose me to have incurred, of all the Advantages you could hope to reap
from them; and therefore abide hitherto in a state of safety. Which is all a
Man can desire, considered as Defendant; and I have sustained that Notion
well-nigh throughout this whole Section.

Having done with the Proem of your Letter, I shall in the next place set forth
the Answering part of it.

SECT. II. Mr. Goodall sets forth the Argument, and his Answer to it, as
follows.
-- BUT your bare saying so, will not make the World believe it. Let us then
see how you undertake to prove it.

All Churches, say you, that make Priestly Ordination depend upon a Condition,
which no Man living knows, whether it be fulfilled, must be uncertain whether
they have any true Priesthood. But the Roman Church does so. Ergo, The Roman
Church is uncertain, whether she has any true Priesthood.

You endeavor to prove your Minor Proposition after this Manner,

The Intention of the Priest is a Condition, say you, which no Man living
knows, whether it be fulfilled or no in Ordination. But the Church of Rome
requires the Intention of the Bishop to Ordination. Ergo,

The Church of Rome requires a Condition in Ordination, which no Man living
knows, whether it be fulfilled or No.

I admit of the following Interpretation, wherein you say, That by every Man
living you mean all Persons contradistinguished to the Ordaining Bishops.

In answer to your Syllogisms or forms of Argumentation, you must give me leave
first to distinguish in the major Proposition of the former, between that
Knowledge which is obtained by the Observation of the exterior Actions and
Gestures, and attention to the Words of the Prelates in any particular
Ordinations; and that knowledge we have from the consideration of the Nature
and End of Ordination in general, and which is also necessarily deduced from
other known Principles of the Roman Catholic Church grounded upon Divine
Revelation.

First then, if you understand by knowing here knowing in the former way only,
which you seem to me to do, I deny this your first Proposition to be true. For
supposing (not granting) that the Roman Catholic Church does make Priestly
Ordination to depend upon a Condition, that no Man living, contradistinguished
from the Ordaining Bishop, knows, in the former way ( viz. by observing only
what is outwardly done, etc.) Whether it be fulfilled or no, yet it does not
follow that she must be uncertain whether she have any true Priesthood: Because
others, besides the Ordaining Prelates, know, that she has true Priesthood by
the second way of knowledge abovementioned, that is, from the nature and end
of the thing, and necessary deduction from other true Principles: For they
know, as to the nature of the thing, that it is Morally impossible that all the
Prelates in the Roman Catholic Church should be so Malicious, as wilfully to
have omitted any thing in Ordination, which they believed to be essential to
it, and which the Church requires as so, supposing it possible for them to do
it, and not be discovered. It is impossible for us to believe, according to our
Principles, that they should all turn Devils, and conspire, as much as in them
lies, to damn the whole Church in their time, and all succeeding Ages, when
withal they could propose no advantage at all to themselves by this, but the
clean contrary. Again, Roman Catholics hold this as a Principle, viz. That
there is but one Holy, Catholic, Apostolic Church, and that This, in the
Communion of which they live, is It; and that God will preserve and continue
this Church to the Worlds end, and all this from Divine Revelation.

Now they are not so dull therefore, as not to be able to conclude necessarily
from hence, that they must always have a true Priesthood: For the Means is
necessary for the end. Therefore whatsoever Intention of the Prelates is by
them believed, as necessary for this end, they do certainly believe according
to their Principles, that God's Providence will secure it. His Omnipotence is
able to make good his Fidelity. Remember now that you are arguing with Roman
Catholics, according to their own Principles, and these last mentioned are
certainly so.

Thus I have showed the first Proposition in your first Syllogisin to be false,
though upon it your whole Argumentation depends. Secondly, If you mean by
Knowing that way of Knowledge which is thus necessarily deduced from
Principles, and the Nature and End of Ordination, then for the last mentioned
Reason, the Minor of your former Syllogism, and the Major of your latter are
both false. For the Roman Church does not make Priestly Ordination depend upon
a Condition which no man living besides the Ordaining Bishops know, ( viz. in
the way of knowledge last mentioned) whether it be fulfilled. And the Intention
of the Ordaining Bishop is not a Condition, which no man, besides himself, thus
knows to be fulfilled. If you understand the word knows in one of these senses
in your first Proposition, and in another in your following, then your
Syllogism is vicious, because it has four terms.

My Answer will be made more clear by an Instance which I shall use by way of
Retort upon your Argument. You take it for a Principle amongst you, That there
is a certain number of those that are truly elected to Salvation, in your
Communion. And you will allow this also as a principle that these Elect must
have true saving Grace in their hearts, as a condition necessary to their
Salvation; which saving Grace because you do not know to be in any particular
man, therefore you cannot be certain that he is one of those that is Elected to
Salvation: yet you would say that the man were a very bad Logician, and
maliciously bent against you that should thus argue: That Church which makes
Salvation depend upon a Condition, which no man living knows whether it be
fulfilled in order to Salvation, must be uncertain whether they have any who
shall be saved in their Communion. But the English does so. Ergo, The English
Church is uncertain whether they have any which shall be saved in their
Communion.

True Grace in the heart is a condition which no man living knows whether it be
fulfilled or no in order to Salvation. But the English Church requires true
Grace in the heart in order to Salvation. Ergo,

The English Church requires a Condition in order to Salvation which no man
living knows whether it be fulfilled or no. For you will say that in the
general way of knowledge beforementioned you know certainly that this Condition
is fulfilled, though you know it not as to particulars. The Argument may be
thus applied to any Christian Church in the world, or to all of them together;
but you see it is vicious upon the same reason that I have alleged against
yours, as is manifest: Therefore so is yours too. I desire you also to take
notice here, that I do not deny that the Intention of the Ordaining Prelate may
be sufficiently known in both the ways of Knowledge abovementioned, which will
make the case different from the instance but now brought. But it is enough for
the present that I have fully answered your Argument.

SECT. III. Mr. G's Answer summed up, and some strictures made upon it.
SIR,
I Have done you justice in truly exhibiting your Answer, and have presented it
at once, as it lies in your Paper, to the Readers view; lest if I had given it
in parcels, and interposed my Reflections by the way, it might have been said,
I had robbed it of somewhat of its beauty or strength by breaking its face or
dependence. The sum of it (to my understanding) comes to this,

. 1. The Ordaining Bishop's Intention is knowable either by the observation of
his doing the Exterior Action, and his Gesture, in particular Ordinations: or
by considering of the nature and end of Ordination in general, and also by
deductions from other known Principles of your Church grounded on Revelation.
You deny not but it is knowable both of these ways, but you seem to fix your
confidence especially on the latter: and so between hope and fear, apply your
distinction to several of my Propositions. Supposing, not granting, say you, it
cannot be known that way, yet it may this way, and so if the first way fail,
our Church is not yet uncertain of her Priesthood. Then you tell more
particularly what you mean by Nature and End of Ordination. 1. As to the Nature
of the Thing, that it is Morally impossible all the Priests of your Church
should maliciously conspire to omit in Ordination any thing which they believe
to be essential to it, and which the Church requires as such; and thereby
endeavor to damn the whole Church. 2. That this is a Principle with you, That
the Roman Church (I mean it in your latitude of sense) is the Universal Church,
which Christ has promised to maintain and propagate to the worlds end. 3. That
your Priesthood is a necessary mean to this end, and therefore God's power will
make good his promise, by the continuation of your Priesthood. Lastly, you
pretend to retort the like Argument I have urged against you, and that it
failing, mine must do so. To this purpose you.

. 2. In the way to the work I chiefly intend, I shall acquaint you with a few
of the incongruities of your Answer, reserving the farther sifting of it to its
proper place.

. 3. 1. When you have distinguished of Knowing a Condition to Ordination to be
gained either by observing the Ordaining Prelates exterior Action, Words and
Gestures, etc. Or by considering the Nature and End of Ordination, etc. You
say, if I understand by knowing, knowing in the former way only, which you say,
I seem to you to do, then the first Proposition of my first Syllogism is false.

Now that the Reader may see whether you dream not both of my sense of the word
knowing, and also of the falseness of the Proposition, I will set it down
before his eyes. It is thus,

All Churches that make Priestly Ordination depend upon a Condition which no
man living knows whether it be fulfilled, must be uncertain whether they have
any true Priesthood.

Let it be noted that these are the very first words put by way of Argument
upon the Question, and then let any man tell me what he sees in them that has
any appearance so grossly to shackle and confine my sense of the word knows.
Nay, I must first be supposed to act the mad man before I could seem so to
mean: for to what purpose do I charge another with the ignorance of a thing,
and hope to annoy him with consequences drawn from that ignorance, if all this
while I suppose that though he cannot know it one way, yet he may know it well
another, and so is not at all ignorant as I pronounce him to be. Sure it must
be thought I meant it could no way be known, speaking relatively to the charge
I give, which appears in the state of my Question.

Now, Sir, I leave it to judgment what a sorry shift you have made to get a
color to accuse a Proposition of Falsehood. I also leave it to judgment,
whether it is not most probable that the Un-Scholar like course you took of
deferring to call for the State of the Question, till your Answer was given,
was not chosen on purpose, that when your Matters failed, you might have this
to say, for ought I knew he might have understood the terms otherwise. But it
will not serve you for a Blind, even to the meanest capacity that reads what I
have said of this, Part I. Sect. II.

It remains then that your Supposition is false, and my Proposition true, for
any thing you have said, as yet.

. 4. 2. I note, If your making and applying the said distinction to the former
Syllogism be either a necessary or proper work, then you were wanting to your
cause at Prescot, where you barely denied the Minor without any hint of
distinction or limitation offered; or saying one word to the Major.

. 5. 3. You put me in mind, that I am to prove you Uncertain according to your
own principles. Which is a needless office, since you find me doing it already,
if you own (as you must) these two Articles to be your Principles, viz. That
the Intention is necessary to the Sacraments, and That Ordination is truly and
properly a Sacrament. But then for you to take a poor color from those words
to mention your other (fanciful) principles, particularly your believing your
selves to be the Catholic Church, and to aim at obliging me by virtue of those
words of mine, to submit to your deductions from them, is an apparent design to
escape from me, and such as betrays your apprehension of the necessity you are
under to quit the field. I have accounted for the sense of those words before,
and will keep you within just Boundaries.

. 6. 4. I shall show from the manifest drift of your Answer, that it is not a
full Answer as you pretend, and your undiscerning Friends proclaim it to be.
This will appear as follows.

. 7. I purposed at first, as I have told you, only to prove you Uncertain of
having any true Priests in particular, because the Prelat's Intention is not
discoverable in your particular Ordinations (an Opponent, let me say, by the
way, may be allowed to give the Sense of his own words, provided the Sense he
gives make against his Adversary, and so contain him within the compass of an
opposition to him.)

. 8. I add, it appears you apprehended That to be, at least, part of my
meaning: for when you had distinguished of Knowing the Prelate's Intention
either by observing his Actions Words and Gesture in particular Ordinations, or
by considering the Nature, etc. you say thus, If you under stand by Knowing
here, Knowing in the former way only, which you seem to me to do, etc. I meant,
Sir, at that time what in part I seemed to you to mean, viz. to confound the
certainty of your Ordinations in particular. And it was sufficient to argue
from your Not knowing by any sort of means the Ordainers, Intention in
particular Ordinations to your Not knowing the Ordained, in particular, to be
true Priests; there being with you and essential dependence between the one and
the other. The rest your words fix upon me you shall hear of afterward, as you
have done in part already.

. 9. You knew I meant this, as appears; and now I refer it to all discerning
Readers whether you have hinted one single ground in your Answer in Bar of such
my attempt against you; or so much as pretend you have. For ought you have
said, I may go on with my design against you without stop or remora. I perceive
you thought, I might also by defeating your Certainty of having any Priesthood,
in particular, go on to conclude by way of Induction your Uncertainty of it, in
general; and therefore you have cast up some sort of Mud-walls (whose strength
I shall try anon) to secure your self on that side: but you have left your self
naked and open, where you were sensible I must first assault you. Which happened
not, I think, for want of regard to your cause, but because you had no general
story to tell, which would seem to secure you, as to this.

. 10. 5. I apprehend not your Answer to be either necessary or artificial. When
you hold the Intention knowable in both the ways you mention, and consequently
that my Propositions you apply your distinctions to, are altogether or
absolutely false, what need you as Respondent, do more than Simply deny them?
In a course of Argumentation, a full stop is that way put to Falsehood; and so
there needed not very many Words to have effected this. It is the Truth of
Propositions in one Sense, and not in another, that makes distinctions
requisite; and therefore yours cannot be requisite while you deny Mine to be
true in any Sense. The manner of applying Distinctions by Learned men evinces
all I say, which usually runs thus, If the Word, or, etc. be taken in this
Sense, your Proposition is false for this or that Reason; but if in that Sense,
I may grant the Thing without any disadvantage to my self.

But if a Man pleases to make an unnecessary distinction, saying, Such a
Proposition may admit these two Senses, but it is false in both of them; and if
he proceed to assign Reasons why it is not true in one of those Senses,
methinks Order requires he should likewise do it in the other, there being the
same Reason he should omit or perform it in both.

. 11. This, Sir, is your Case; your Answer is made up partly of a distinction,
which is unnecessary upon your Supposition of the absolute falsity of my
Propositions; and partly of (seeming) Reasons given why they are false in one
of the two Senses, mentioned; but there is no Cause alleged why they are not
true in the other: Wherefore I conclude your Answer is neither necessary nor
Artificial.

I heartily beg the Readers pardon for having spent too much time in the more
general consideration of your Answer, which yet I have done to undeceive the
Applauders of it. I shall now bend my self to my Undertaken Province, viz. to
prove the Major of my second Syllogism, to which your distinction may (in some
sort) be applied, though it could not congruously to any Proposition in the
first.

SECT. IV. The Intention proved not to be Knowable by Reason.
SIR, the Proposition which you deny, and I am now to prove, is this, The
Intention of the Bishop is a Condition which no Man living knows, whether it be
fulfilled or no in Ordination. To be short and clear, I put it thus, No Man
knows whether or no the Bishop's Intention be present in Ordination.

We are to keep in mind, that his Intention of the End (in some sense or other,
in some degree or other) is here meant Pard. l. Sect. 5.
, and that the Intention is a mere interior Act of the Will, as was shown above
Par. l. Sect. 4.. 1.
. This premised, Thus I prove the Point:

. 1.No man knows whether the Bishop's Intention be present or no in Ordination,
either by Reason or Authority. Ergo, No man knows whether or no the Bishop's
Intention be present in Ordination.

All the ways whereby the Intention can be supposed to be known are put in the
Antecedent; if Which be proved, the Consequent must be good.

Now I proceed to prove the Parts of the Antecedent in Order.

1. It cannot be known by Reason, as I prove thus,

. 2. No man knows whether or no the Bishop's Intention be present in
Ordination, either by the Evidence they have of it in its self, or in any
Effects of it: Or (which comes all to one) no man knows it either by Intuition
or Discourse, Ergo, No man knows by Reason whether or no it be present in
Ordination.

All the ways that can be supposed to know the Intention by Reason, are
reckoned up in the Antecedent; and therefore if That be made good, the
Consequent stands firm, by reason of its just dependence on it.

I shall evince that it can be known neither of these ways; and shall use more
and freer words to do it, than a rigorous frame of Argumentation would admit,
because Men not bred to the strict formality of discourse may that way judge
more naturally of what is offered; and might otherwise be at some loss.

. 3. I shall, in passing, describe Seeing of a thing in it self, or intuitive
Knowledge to be That which is formed by the proper Idea, or Similitude of the
Thing known, and when the Understanding is carried immediately to the Object,
without the help of Discourse. It may be illustrated by our Experience of
Sensitive intuition, ex. gr. We immediately know those proper Objects of Sight
that are set before our eyes; and not by any run of our thoughts from one thing
to another, in order to get the Knowledge of them. By this we may measure the
Nature of intuitive Intellection. Now to the Point.

. 4. 1. The Intention of one Man cannot be known to another, in it self, or by
intuitive Intellection. For though God has given us Faculties to assure us
immediately of the proper Objects of our Senses, and of those Verities usually
called First Principles, or Common Notions, by which we measure the knowledge
of other things; yet he has not thought fit to give us any, immediately to
inspect the secrets of another's heart. Now the Intention of the Bishop,
whereof we treat, is most properly one of those Secrets.

Liberty and Freedom is Essential to the Will, (which is the only power
capable of exerting that Act:) and therefore, though it be furnished with all
prae-requisites to its Acting, yet it may intend, or it may not; and how can
any man pretend to know whether it do, or not? Humane Understanding cannot
penetrate the recesses of that free immaterial power, nor break open that best
secured of all created Closets.

. 5. So far are the particular mere Acts of the Will from being pervious to the
eye of man, that according to the most and greatest Authors, the Angels
themselves cannot (at least, this way) know them. Aquinas, Cajetan, Suarez,
Valentia, Vasquez, Hurtad, and many more, determine the Thing, as I have said:
And indeed the case is so clear, that I need but touch upon the words of one or
two of them.

The Question in Aquinas, is Vtrum Angeli cognoscunt cogitationes cordium.
, Whether the Angels know the thoughts of the heart? And he resolves it in the
Negative, upon this ground Ex sola voluntate dependet quod aliquis actu aliqua
consideret. Pars 1. Quaest. 57. Art. 4.
, It wholly depends upon the Will that any one actually considers any thing.
Because the Will is the only power in Man, that is formally free, and this
power sets the understanding on work, he concludes that the particular acts of
the understanding cannot immediately be known by the Angels themselves. If then
these cannot be known for the Reason alleged, much less can the mere Acts of
the Will, which is intrinsecally and formally free.

Cardinal Cajetan words it thus Dicimus quod Cogitatio, co quod volita seu
libera, est naturaliter occulta. in locum.
, We say that the Thought, because it is voluntary or free, is therefore
naturally secret, or hidden.

Suitably to these two Authors does Hurtad offer the same Doctrine by way of
remark Adverte secretum cordis esse solos actus voluntatis. Metaph. Disp. 12.
Sect. 4.. 30.
. Mark, says he, that only the Acts of the Will are the Secrets of the Heart.

Now if the Will be sealed up from the view of Angels, much more is it from
that of Men. Were it needful, Saint Paul's Question would put this Point out of
doubt, 1 Cor. 2.11. What Man knows the things of a Man, save the Spirit of
Man which is in him?

. 6. It will farther appear, that these Secrets fall not within the immediate
cognizance of Man, if I show in a few words, that they are only open to the
eye of God, Who at once knows all things, past, present, and to come, by a pure
and immutable Act; that is, by his very Essence. The Authors newly named,
having denied that view to Created Beings, go on to appropriate it to God. I
will only mention Aquinas's Words, which are short and plain Ea quae ex
voluntate sola dependent, vel quae in voluntate sola sunt, soli Deo sunt nota.
Loco citato.
.

Those things which depend on the Will only, or which are in the Will only,
are known to God alone.

But a far greater Authority, viz. the Scripture, leaves no doubt for this,
asserting in many places, that God reserves the Knowledge of those Secrets to
himself, as an incommunicable Prerogative. I need refer but to a few. Jer. 179,
10. -- I the Lord search the Heart, I try the Reins. 1 Chronicles. 29.17. 1 Samuel
16.7. Psalm. 7.9. Acts 1.24, etc.

The Sum of what has appeared here, is, That the Intention of the Ordaining
Bishop is not Knowable immediately or in it self, by any created intellect: Nor
can it be seen in its Cause, by reason of that Dominion a Free Agent has over
its own Acts; which it may, or may not, exert, when it pleases.

If it be asked me, Why God has given any Faculty to any of his Creatures,
which as to its particular tendencies, is impenetrable to the sharpest eye of
Man or Angel; I might take up with resolving it solely into the Divine
pleasure. However, it seems congruous to Reason, it should be so: Which thing I
shall set forth in the Words of Balthazar Tellez Ordo Naturalis praestantiaque
intellectualium Crcaturarum postulabant, ne Secreta suorum cordium intuitive al
is manifestarcntur, praeterquam Dco, qui solum, ut testatur Scriptura, renum
testis est, and cordis Scrutator vcrus. In Logic Disput. 14. Sect. 1.
, and so shut up this particular.

Natural Order, says he, and the Excellency of intellectual Creatures did
require that the Secrets of their Hearts should not be intuitively manifested
to any besides God, who alone, as the Scripture attests, is the Witness of the
Reins, and the true searcher of the Heart.

2. As I have shown that the Bishop's Intention cannot be known in it self by
any besides himself; so, Sir, I now come to show that it cannot be known by any
effects.

. 7. The Reason is, It is so merely and entirely an Act of the Will, that it is
the Act of no other power; and consequently does not of it self produce any
Term or Effect without the Will; for which reason such Acts are called immanent
both by Philosophers and School Divines. But it would be needless here to cite
them. The Term or Effect then being shut up in the Will, it is no more
discoverable than the Act it self, which you, without ground, suppose to be
manifested by it; and so you have nothing to argue from in that case, as from a
thing more known, to a thing less known, and therefore must remain uncertified
of the Being of the Act, unless you can invent some other mean of discovery.
The Will has no such dependence upon, nor connection with any natural cause in
its acting, as that it must impress upon the Body any sensible marks of its
motions, in which we may surely read when and what it acts; as alteration of
Voice, change of Countenance, or any the like thing from which you pretend to
make a judgment of it. Aquinas will tell you this, with the reason of it. In
actu appetitus intellectivi non requiritur aliqua transmutatio corporalis, quia
bujusmodi appetitus non est virtus alicujus Organi, prim. secund. q 22. Ar. 3.


No change in the Body necessarily attends an Act of the Will, because such an
appetite is not the virtue of any [bodily] Organ.

I add, if any motion should by accident result in the Body from the actual
Will, as signs of joy, or sorrow, or shame, etc.. yet this can lead only to the
discerning some affections of the Will, in general; but not any particular Act
of it.

Hence I conclude, you can never secure your notion of knowing the Bishop's
Intention by observing his Action, etc. till you make the Will to be a material
power, and immanent Actions to be transient; which yet is impossible to be done.

Now because you assign no other way of knowing the Intention in particular,
than making the forementioned observations, I will take the freedom to deal a
little more samiliarly with you about it.

I will suppose here, that a Bishop does with a laudable show of Gravity
pronounce the Words, and do the exterior Action your Church requires to
Ordination, and that hardly any Bishop comes short of that, who pretends to
confer holy Orders; but when I have done, I remain ignorant how I may certainly
conclude from such his performance, whether he thereby intend to confer
Spiritual power, or to do as the Church does; and therefore would learn that
skill from you. Either inform me that there is an individual connection between
his doing the one, and intending the other, or tell me when, and in what
circumstances, the connection fails. The exterior Action is too dim, and indeed
too uncertain a Glass to see this in.

. 8. May not a man do a thing materially good, and directly commanded by God,
without intending the End God requires? What think you of some men's relieving
the poor, from no higher a Motive than that of vain glory? Matt. 6.1. What
think you of some men's frequent saying their prayers for the same low end? v.
5. Our blessed Savior plainly intimates that others may mistake the Intention
of such, and earnestly applaud them for righteous persons; and that God only,
who sees in secret, can detect their carnal purposes and crooked wills. Did not
Judas declare it his desire to have the Bag saved for the sake of the poor,
when he meant it only for his own advantage? John 12.6. He spoke good words,
and did a seemingly-kind action to our Lord, he said, Hail Master and kissed
him, when he intended not to express any true affection but to betray him,
Matthew. 26.49. I forbear to multiply instances of this sort, these now given
being sufficient to evince, that there is no necessary dependence between the
exterior actions of men and their interior Intentions, and consequently it is
no sure arguing from those to these.

. 9. For the Ordainer's Gesture, I think you bring it in to no great purpose.
Do you fancy Judas laughed in our Savior's face when he passed upon him that
treacherous Ceremony? Or that the Pharisees flear'd or made Mowes, when they
gave their Alms, or said their Prayers, in token of their acting for undue
ends? Are there not Sinons yet in the world? May not a serious face frequently
disguise a dissembling heart? Were the outward appearance always the true
Picture of the mind, Hypocrisy would upon the matter, be wholly divested of
its Essence. In an Irony there is indeed (as it were) a natural discovery of
the contrariety of the Mind to the Words spoken; but in formal Hypocrisy a
studious concealment of the repugnance between the motions of the heart and the
outward appearance.

Were your Bishops wont in an openly ludicrous or sportive manner to pronounce
the Form and apply the Matter of Ordination, your observation of their Gesture
might tend to your discerning that sometimes they were not in earnest, but
still we want a mean to know when they intend aright. We have proved a grave
outside will not assure us of this. But I think no Bishop in the world will do
so childish an act, or expose himself to scorn or hatred, or danger by an
apparent mock-Ordination, and so your observing of their Gesture will not so
much as enable you to know when they intend not. I will put the Case further,
may not a Bishop who actually intends to make a Priest, chance to smile at some
odd sight when he is pronouncing the words -- Accipe potestatem, etc. Or would
any man in that case pronounce the Ordination a nullity? I think not. Pray tell
us then in what manner you are guided to the knowledge of the Ordainer's
Intention by your observation of his Gesture. I am afraid, when you explain
your self we shall have a sad story of it.

Besides, there is a manifest insufficiency in your Rule of judgment, which is
the Bishop's words, actions and gesture in Ordination; for after your way, you
can only pretend to know whether or no he actually intends in the
Administration of Orders: but supposing you could find that he does not then so
intend, your observation is worth nothing; For, 1. Your Church requires it not
as necessary that he should then actually intend; if he do it virtually, it
will answer the End it is required for, as is proved before Part I. Sect. VII.
. 2. Your observing his Action afterward cannot surely lead you to an
intrinsecally contingent Act of his Will which passed a minute or two before
the Action done. He may have intended for ought you know, before, (which is
called the virtual Intention in the time of the Action) but whether he did or
no, you cannot be certified by the subsequent Action, except you have a
singular gift of discerning, not known to the rest of Mankind.

If you have such a gift, and can communicate your skill of knowing the secrets
of man's heart by observing his Words, Actions and Gestures, it may be of
extraordinary use to the world. Many sorts of men might avoid great harms
otherwise incident to them, by virtue of your instructions. Princes would be
secured from employing servants that meant not Faith and Secrecy when they
promise them. Masters and Parents would at a notable rate inspect the minds of
servants and children. And Mental Reservations would hereby become
unprofitable, which would be a great loss somewhere. If you can in the manner
aforesaid, judge of such a particular Act of the Will, you are sufficiently
enabled to make all these and many more such discoveries.

But alas! Your Notion is a mere dream, as I have showed by barely declaring,
That the mere interior, elicit Acts of the Will (and our Intention is one of
them) make not of themselves any such sensible impressions upon the Body, as
that another can make thereby any sure judgment of them: and that they make no
such impressions by accident as will reach that end.

I have therefore forborne to confirm what I have said of the Nature of the Will
and her Acts, by numerous Testimony, because I expect no Adversary here.
However I will add a few words more to confront your method of Trial.

. 10. Your greatest Authors describe the Intention I speak of, by such Epithets
as show they held it not to be knowable by your way. They call it mental
Intentio Mentalis. Aquin. par. 3. qu. 64. art. 8.
, properly mental Proprie mentalis, Cajetan in locum.
, internal Interna, Bellar. de Sacram. in Genesis l. 1. c. 27.
, occult Occulta, Medina in prim. secund qu 112. art. 5.
, etc.

Now they would not have spoken thus, merely because the Intention is not
knowable immediately, or in it self, if yet it had been knowable by any
necessary connection with some other thing we know by the Ministry of Sense or
Experience; for they call That evident knowledge which is so collected. But
they call it properly Mental, Occult, etc. because it is not so connected with
any other thing which may surely lead us to it. I shall illustrate this by an
instance, when outward Actions are done immediately or proximately by the lower
executive powers, upon the command (as I may say) and motion of the Will,
(which are therefore called imperate) such Actions are called the actions of
the Will, or voluntary actions: and yet no wise man will call these Occult or
properly Mental. For though the motion of the Will be secret in it self, yet we
have now some sensible effect so dependent upon and connexed with it, that all
that are not strangers to the Ordinary course of Nature, may be assured of the
presence of the Will in such Actions. I must grant, Sir, your writing an Answer
to my Argument to be a voluntary action, and that your purpose to write it was
not visible in it self; yet it is sufficiently made so by your doing it. And on
this score your Will or purpose to write it ought to be called an open or
exterior, not an interior or hidden purpose. But then if we seek after the
particular End you intended in writing it, we shall not be able to find the
secret. Whether you thereby intended to honor God by vindicating a supposed
Truth of his, which I had assaulted; or to please your self by baffling your
obscure neighbor, or to gain some reputation (or other advantage) with your
party by a dextrous defense of your Cause, is, and must be, a secret to all
besides your self; nor would the best observation made of your Action and
Gestures, while you was at work, have ascertained the Spectators of your
Intention.

So then your purpose to answer me is manifest by what I see; but your intent
in doing it I must remain uncertain of, for want of a sure ground to argue
from, to the knowledge of it.

Well. That concerned in our Question is the Intention of the End, etc. which
effects nothing without the Will, from whence we may derive any certainty of
it, and therefore it is truly called inward and hidden, and mental by your
Authors last cited; and consequently the Ordainer's Intention is supposed by
them (and many others that speak the same language) not to be discoverable by
your external observation.

. 11. I add, If it be God's prerogative to search the Heart, your Notion of
discerning the Intention wants foundation, in as much as That does not only
exclude Man from the intuitive, but also from the discursive Knowledge of it.
For if it might surely be known this way, then Men were also Searchers of the
Heart. On that supposition, the Thing is not denied to Men, but only the Mode
of it. But if the Manner of Knowing made all the difference here, Why should
the Knowledge of the Heart be more eminently ascribed to God, than the
Knowledge of any thing else, since he knows all things alike, and the same way,
viz. by his own Essence? I conclude then the meaning of the Attribution to be
this, That God has reserved the inspection of the Heart to his own eye, having
by the Spirituality of its Nature, so shut it up from others, that the Agent
himself cannot in some cases assure another of the Being of its particular
Acts. And the Prelate's Intention (as has been often said) is one of these.
Hence your ablest Writers speaking of this Act, do not only say, it may be
hid, but that it is always so. Take a taste of such their language.

The Intention of the Minister is always hid from us, without which we cannot
know there is a Sacrament, says Medina Semper Intentio Ministri est nobis
occulta, sine qua Sacramentum non constat. in prim secund. qu. 112. art. 5.
. And again he says in the same Article,

They that are present [at Baptism] cannot determine whether the Minister
Intend to do as the Church does Qui intersunt non possunt flatuere an Minister
habuerit Intentionem faciendi quod facit Ecclesia.
.

Now, Sir, what becomes of your pretended Knowledge of the Intention, by
observing the Action, Words, and Gesture of the Minister? Tell us how You
therein see the lively Effigies of it, when it is not visible to other-Men.

Man may indeed guess at, and fancy things, but none in the World are so
Eagle-ey'd, as to see That in any Effects. D. Soto's eyes were in his Head, and
he had occasion to make a narrow search for this Thing, and after all, he
affirms by a Rhetorical Question, that no man could surely find it Quis potest
certior omnino fieri, quod ille qui haptizat, habeat Intentionem Baptizandi. De
Natura and Gratia, lib. 3. c. 13.
.

Who can be fully certified that he who Baptizeth has an Intention to Baptize?

Thus have I said enough (and I fear far too much) to evince, That the
Intention of the Ordaining Bishop cannot be known by Reason, as being evident
neither in it self, nor in any Effects.

SECT. V. The Intention is not knowable by Authority, whether Divine or Humane.
SEcondly, I shall prove the said Intention cannot be known by Authority, in
this manner,

. 1. It cannot be known either by any general Revelation made by God, nor by
the Authoritative Testimony of Men: Ergo, It cannot be known by Authority.

I mention not Good Angels here, because, 1. The Secrets of man's Heart, as
appeared before, is locked up from them. 2. Were they privy to them, yet we have
no Ordinary Observable Commerce with them. 3. Nor have Rules to discern their
true Declarations of Fact from Satanical Delusions.

I therefore made the Testimony of God and Men to be a sufficient Partition of
Authority in the present case.

I shall now make good both Parts of the Antecedent, and then the Consequent
will stand firm.

. 2. 1. It is not knowable by any Revelation of God. For if we read Scripture
from beginning to end, we shall find neither Prophecy to foretell, nor Promise
to assure, That all the Roman Bishops in general, nor this or that in
particular, throughout the several Centuries from the Apostles days, nor in any
one of them, shall in their Ordinations intend the end of their Institution, or
to do therein as the Church does. Nor does the Scripture furnish with any Rule,
by which we may certainly judge when they so intend, and when they do not.

Tradition is also silent here; nor is it, whatever other uses it may serve to,
pretended to prefent us with such Notices. Wherefore I conclude, We cannot
attain the Knowledge of the Bishop's Intention by Revelation.

. 3. 2. We have for This no such Humane Testimony, as may beget that certain
Knowledge of it, which is properly called Moral Certainty. (And what is below
this, excludes not rational fear, and therefore is but abusively called certain
Knowledge.)

To make this good to full satisfaction, 1. I shall reckon up the several
things required to found the said Moral Certainty: And withal show what-like
Assent they breed. 2. I shall manifest that those requisites do not concur in
our case of the Intention, and that therefore we cannot know it with the
foresaid Knowledge; The House cannot be strong, where the Foundation is weak.

. 4. To Moral Certainty it is required,

(1.) That the Objects of it be Sensible Objects; and such as are obvious to
the Observers; Things so notable or Remarkable, that if some Men should chance
to make false reports of them, others may, or might have contradicted them.

I note it here as a Thing ordained by the Divine Wisdom, to preserve us from
Impostures, that Men are (as it were) naturally bent to detect the Errors of
others, and to expose such as they observe to advance a Fiction for true Fact.
A secret pleasure attends this work, and a Reputation follows it; and sometimes
an uncharitable Temper promotes it. And consequently insensible notable
Objects, the misreports of some will be blasted, by the contrary affirmation of
others, at least so far, that they shall not gain the Authority of an
Universal, uncontrouled Testimony.

. 5. (2.) That a competent number of Persons of known Sense and Probity, openly
and constantly declare, that they have a Physical Certainty of such Objects;
that is, that they saw such Sights with their own eyes, or heard such Words or
Sounds with their own ears.

Nothing less can be of Weight and Strength to persuade Men to entertain a
prudent Belief of what the first Reporters say, and to set on foot a Tradition
of it to Posterity.

. 6. (3.) That no Advantage can be well thought to accrue to the Reporters, by
imposing upon others Falsehood instead of Truth.

Every Eye sees what vast power Secular Ends have, to deprave the Heart and
Tongue of frail Man; and therefore when it may be reasonably supposed, that
Persons may say this or that in a subserviency to such Ends, discreet Men
cannot entirely credit them.

. 7. (4.) That none qualified, as I have supposed the first Reporters to be,
oppose their Experiences in Contradiction of them.

Were there such Opposers, it would forbid all Certainty. For the Eyes and Ears
of one Man may be as good, and ought to be regarded as much as the Eyes and
Ears of another; provided the Object be Evident and Obvious, and the Witnesses
alike credible on both sides.

. 8. Where these Requisites meet together, I take their Testimony to be a
Virtual Communication of their Sensations to Others. We do, upon the Matter,
see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and cannot reasonably fear, that
the Matter should be otherwise, than it is represented to us. Though That was
physically evident to the Spectators, etc. which is only Morally so to me;
that is, though they had the assurance of an Object by Eyesight, and I only by
Hear say, yet my Hear say may be so encircled with solid and convincing
Circumstances, that I can no more question the Truth of what I hear, than I can
of what I see. Ex. gr. When our Seamen or Merchants are failing, first time,
for Amsterdam in Hol land; they are no lefs sure beforehand, that there is
such a City, than they are when they arrive there. This certainty is expressed
by Medina thus Quod certum csi Moraliter, absque aliqua baesitatione potest jur
amcuto confirmari. in prim. secund. qu. 112. art. 5.
,

That which is Morally certain, a Man may swear to without Haesitation.

His notion, I confess, seems somewhat uncouth, but it amounts to a full
description of the Nature of properly-Moral Certainty, as it is exclusive of
all Fear, lest Things should be otherwise in the Understanding, than they are
in themselves. The Author means the same thing, (and no more) by the Words now
cited, that he fets forth in these Words Certitudo moralis omncm excludit
dubitationem, convincit and necessitat intelleclum. Nemo enim sanae meant is
potest regare quod Roma sit. bidem.
,

Moral Certainty shuts out all doubt, it convinces and necessitates the
Understanding to assent. For no Man in his Wits can deny, that there is such a
place as Rome.

Melchior Canus, speaking of Things so attested, comes up to the same height
Haec non modo negare, sed in his otiam addubitare stultissimum est. Le Locis
Theolog li. 11. c 4.
,

It is a most foolish thing, not only to deny these things, but even to doubt
of them.

It reaches so near to the Certainty of Sense, that Suarez advances such an
attestation to a kind of Evidence Humana quaedam evidentia. De Trip. virt.
Theol. Disp. 10. Sect 2.
.

Having thus recounted the Pillars that bear up Moral Certainty, and also shown
the weight of the Assent, that rests upon them, I shall now set forth by way of
Comparison, that the pretended Knowledge of the Intention has no such
Firmament to support it.

. 9. (1.) It is not a Sensible Object, but a Spiritual or immaterial Act, shut
up in a Faculty, which (as we have seen already Part 11. Sect. 4.
) is inaccessible to the eyes of Men and Angles.

. 10. (2.) And consequently, as no creature can see it but the single Agent
himself, so none is capable of contradicting his Relation of it, if it should
be (as it may be) in it self false. So then a grand Rule of Trial most
conducible to Moral assurance, is wanting on this score, and then what a
rational stress can be laid on such Testimony?

. 11. (3.) Were the Object of it self liable to common observation, yet one
witness is not sufficient to challenge our Credence.

God himself was pleased in the Old Testament Deuteronomy 19.5.
to intimate, that a single witness was less credible than many, and not to be
trusted in matters of moment; and our Blessed Savior has repeated it in the
New Matthew. 18.16.
; -- That in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be est
ablished. From whence we may estimate how slender a satisfaction the Bishop's
word would give in that great concern, if he should say, I intended to do as
the Church does, in my Ordaining such a person.

. 12. (4.) As there can be no more but a single witness in the Case, so he may
reasonably be suspected to affirm on his own behalf, or for his own Interests:
and if so (which will appear shortly) it will much lessen the value of his
Testimony. With a respect to This our Blessed Savior said John 5.31.
, If I bear witness of my self, my witness is not true.

Gagneius's Gloss upon the Text may both illustrate and accommodate it to my
Case, loquitur ut purus homo: hominis autem puri testimonium de se recipi non
solct. in 8. cap. Johannis.
Jesus speaks as a mere man: and it is unusual to give credit to a mere man
when he bears witness on his own behalf.

. 13. Now that any Bishop in the world may be a party concerned (and therefore
an incompetent witness) in affirming he intended as the Church requires, will
be easily made appear. If he be declared Anathema (as he is by the Trent
Council) who denies the necessity of the Intention to the Sacraments, sure no
light punishment would be allotted to that Bishop who should discover that he
defeated his Ordinations of their Efficacy by omitting to intend as the Church
requires. This crime is called Sacrilege by your Authors; and it must be such
in a high degree according to your Hypothesis, it being beyond comparison, more
heinous to rob men's souls of Sacramental Grace, than Churches of consecrated
Cups or Patens. Excommunication may be well supposed to be inflicted upon the
Criminal Bishop, which Censure is followed with suspension from Office and
Benefit, and with the loss of the privileges of the Laws, as your Authors
teach See for this Card. Cajetan's Summuls. verb. Excom.
.

At best shame and reproach will attend such a discovery: on which account I
find some of your Casuists shie of advising the Ministers of the Sacraments to
reveal the matter, when they have rendered them inessectual through their
Not-intending or otherwise. For example, when a Priest has given an invalid
Absolution, he must be cautious of making it known Ne si poenitens admoneatur,
sequetur scandalum vel infamia. Suarez. tom. 4. par. 2. disp. 32. Sect. 6.
, Left some scandal or infamy follow his revealing it to the Penitent.

But on the contrary, he is obliged (say they) to make the defect known, when
it may be done without any great harm to himself, and without scandal quando
sine gravi nocumento ipseus confessoris and sine seandalo seri potest. ibid.
.

But guilt is jealous of the harms sometimes subsequent to such discoveries;
and since the offender will be judge, he will hardly think himself safe, save
in a deep concealment of such his faults; and therefore will like those Authors
best that furnish him with the best Evasions.

. 14. Thus have we found that the Bishop's confession of their Not-intending
aright, may expose them to loss, or shame, or both; and sad experience tells us
that many are more tender of their Riches and Reputation, than of their
Conscience; and apt to sackisice Truth to their worldly welfare. And therefore
when a Bishop is asked, how he intended in such an Ordination, none knows but
such respects may prevail with him to make an untrue Answer. If he have
wilfully offended in that point, we may expect he will cloak his malice with a
Lie; if through gross carelessness, he may studiously conceal it: But suppose he
has done his duty, his telling us so cannot prove it, because it is but every
way the same Answer they give, who have transgressed it.

. 15. The sum hereof is this, There is hardly any thing alike between the two
Things I have now compared. There an object liable to the observation of many;
not so here. There several Witnesses affirm, here is only singularis testis.
There no personal interest makes the Testimony suspicious, here the single
witness deposes for himself.

The Inference from hence is this, There a strong Assent is founded, here a
weak one. There is certainty, here is none.

. 16. I add, I am persuaded that Roman Catholics seldom (if ever) actually
have the slender security of the said single Testimony. For I never heard in my
Converse with them, nor read in any of their Books, that they use to ask their
Ministers, whether they Intend aright or no. They presume they do so, and rest
in that good natured belief, without troubling them with such questions. But we
are to consider, that a blind Persuasion and Intellectual certainty are far
different things. That is incident to all sorts of Heretics, This to the
Orthodox only.

. 17. Now, Sir, if I am not a partial judge in my own Cause, I have made it
plain, that the Ordaining Prelate's Intention cannot be known either by Reason
or Authority; (than which I find no other grounds of certain Knowledge.) Which
was the thing I undertook to prove.

SECT. VI. Roman Catholics have but a bare Opinion to secure them of the point.
. 1. IT now remains, Sir, that I only leave the Roman Catholics that weak
assent to the point, usually termed Opination. Had this been granted me at
first, viz. That you hold your Priesthood considered in particular, by no other
claim than that of bare Opinion, as Opinion is opposed to moral certain
Knowledge; I had not taken the trouble of writing much, but gone on immediately
to infer from that Grant the crazy estate of your Church. I shall briesly say
upon What some of your great men found their Assent to the presence of the
Ministers Intention, and then evince that their Foundation will bear up no more
than bare Opinion.

. 2. 1. It is the Probity of the Ministers of the Sacraments they rely on, as a
sufficient security that they intend aright. Soto shall declare this for
himself and others -- Cum videmus homines probos uti forma and Materia
Ecclesiae; credimus sanas etiam Christianasque habere mentes dum Sacramenta
ministrant, in 4. Sent. did. 1. qu 5. art. 8.
.

When we see honest [sincere, vertuous] men use the matter and form of the
Church, we also believe that they have sound and Christian minds while they
administer the Sacraments.

2. To show what a small weight this ground will bear, I will proceed by some
degrees. But in the way hereunto I premise these things,

. 3. (1.) Your Authors agree That those may be true Ministers of the Sacraments
who have neither Faith nor Probity: for which they give this reason, Sacraments
have their Efficacy from the Divine Institutor, and therefore depend not for
this, upon the Qualifications of the Minister, provided he perform what is
required by the Institution. And I find them accursed by your Trent Council,
who deny that a wicked Minister does validly administer the Sacraments Si quis
dixerit Ministrum in peccato mortali existentem -- non consicere aut confcrre
Sacramentum, anathema sit. Ses. 7.. Ca. 11.
.

. 4. (2.) I never found it in practice among you, to judge the Dispensing your
Sacraments more or less valid for the greater or less Temperance, Continence,
Devotion, etc. of your Ministers.

. 5. (3.) I then account it your great infelicity, if as the cited words
intimate, you cannot be well satisfied that any Minister intends aright; whom
you know not to be a good and sincere Man.

Among the vast Numbers of your Clergy, (as it also happens to those of other
Churches) there must be many irreligious and immoral men, not so Christianly
qualified, as You and I could wish: And then according to the Rule laid down,
How many Hosts consecrated by such, may be adored with doubting Minds; How many
Absolutions given, whose Virtue may be rationally questioned, etc?

. 6. But enough of this. I will now try how firmly your security lies, even
upon the conceived Probity, or Sincerity of your Ministers. I take the Argument
to be this,

Good men will not be wanting to their duty. Good Ministers will be sure to
Intend as the Church requires.

What I shall say to this Argument, is as follows,

I confess, a good Conscience, or a Principle of Grace, is a very Operative
thing, and excites to watchful diligence in duty, where it really is: But it is
fit we should know, 1. In whom it is, before we conclude the Minister's
Intention, or any other good Effects from it, in particular. 2. Whether that
Effect necessarily follow from that Cause.

. 7. First, Let us inquire, how it can be known, where it surely is. For
satisfaction in which Point, I shall lay this down as evident, That we know not
any other Man's frame of mind, so well as himself knows it; as whether he sigh
for his sins in secret, strive to mortify the unruly Motions of his Heart,
values himself chiefly upon God's Mercy, through Christ, loves God above all
things, and purposes to obey him without Reserve, etc.

Having said this, I shall determine according to your own Doctrine, (for I am
not concerned here to interpose my own judgment) how far your Ministers of the
Sacraments are certain, that themselves are sincere Christians, or in a state
of Grace: And then compare That with What others know of it.

. 8. (1.) Themselves cannot infallibly know this, without special Revelation,
as your Trent-Council defines Nullus scire vales certitudine Fidei, cui non
potest subesse falsum, se gratiam Dei esse consecutum. Sess 6. Cap. 9.
.

No man can know with the infallible Certainty of Faith, that he has obtained
the Grace of God.

. 9. (2.) Roman Catholics cannot agree to allow any Man such a Certainty of
it, as is equal to Moral Certainty, which excludes all rational Fear of being
deceived. Aquinas says Homo non potest per certitudinem dijudicarc utrum ipse
ha eat Gratiam. prim. secund. qu. 112. Art. 5.
,

No man can judge certainly, whether he have Grace.

And he proceeds to say, Men know this only by way of conjecture, Ibidem.
gained by some Signs or other: [Conjecturaliter per aliqua Signa.].

Medina (upon the place) words it thus Vir justus non potest habere
certitudinem ^ae gratiae, sed tantummodo conjecturalem, and quae non tran
cendis limits Opinionis human^, quae habet semper formidinem adjunctam.
, A just man can have no more than a conjectural certainty of his Grace, and
such as transcends not the limits of Humane Opinion, which always has Fear
adjoined to it.

. 10. (3.) From the Knowledge you allow your Ministers to have of their own
Sincerity and Grace, it will be easy to collect in what measure others are
able to know their state, if the Rule of judgment, I premised, be remembered,
viz.

That every thinking man knows the affections and state of his own Heart,
better than another man can do it.

. 11. If your Ministers then, who have experience of their own internal Acts,
know not certainly whether they Fear and Love God above all things, (by which I
now describe being in Grace). much less can others, who can view only outward
Signs and appearances, but are strangers to the Root and Spring of them.

. 12. Supposing your Ministers had undeniably a certainty of their Grace, equal
to a Moral Certainty, which admits no fear of the contrary; yet all besides
themselves, for the Reason given, must fall short of that Assurance, and so
take up with Unstable Opinion.

. 13. But since you will not agree to allow them to be so certain of it, others
must still proportionably fall below them, and be content with a lean and
languid Assent, which shakes and totters for want of Evidence.

From what has been thus set forth, I shall now destroy the Argument offered
by the cited Author, in favor of your being satisfied, that your Ministers of
the Sacraments duly intend in the Administration of them.

. 14. If Roman Catholics cannot be so much as Morally Certain of the Probity
and Christian mindedness (to speak with the Author) of their Ministers, on
which Qualifications they ground their confidence of their due Intending; (as I
have proved they cannot) then they cannot be Morally certain of their so
Intending. The building cannot be stronger than the foundation; nor the
conclusion more evident than the premises.

. 15. Moreover: Your case is yet worse than this; For you are greater Strangers
to the particular Mental Acts of your Ministers, than you are to the Frame and
Habit of their Minds. For you may fairly guess at This, by observing a full
course of their Outward Actions, but not near so well at these Acts. The Reason
is, a good Man may omit a good act, or do an ill one, without the destruction
of his good habit, which denominates him such. To accommodate this to our case,
it is to be noted, That the Minister's Intention may be obstructed, not only
by malice or contempt of Religion, or gross Negligence; but also by Natural
inadvertence, or such accidental prevalent cares, or fears, or deep concerning
Studies, as in gross, and (as I may say) swallow up the mind, or hale it from a
duty in hand, elsewhither. In these latter Instances, there may chance to be a
defect of the Intention, without a wicked Habit in the Minister: So then the
Connection between good Habits and such particular Acts is not certain, and
therefore not to be depended on.

. 16. The result, as to our present concern, is this, 1. As it is but probable
(as probable is opposed to morally certain) your Bishops have Christian minds,
(remember I speak of them in particular) So is it but probable that in their
Ordinations they intend as your Church requires, the Evidence of the latter
depending on that of the former, according to the Argument I deal with. 2. It
is not so probable that they so intend, as it is that they are Christianly
affected, a good man being liable to omit a good Act he ought to perform, and
this not destructive of his gracious Habit. Nothing is left for you, but loose
Sand, instead of a pretended Rock, to build your certainty upon.

Having largely examined the most plausible Plea, Roman Catholics have for
their Security, that their Ministers intend as they ought, and disarmed it of
its strength; I shall now, in way of surplusage, show how hopeless it is, for
the end it was brought for, from the Context of the cited place.

. 17. For this end, I will repeat the cited passage, prefixing to it the
foregoing Words.

The Author had declared, that though the interior Intention be required to the
Sacraments, yet when men see the exterior Actions done, they may quiet their
minds with a persuasion, that the Ministers intend as the Church requires them:
And seeing an Objection stare him in the Face, He sets himself to Answer it.
The Objection is this, Isla non est evidens certitudo.


That certainty [or perswasion] is no Evident certainty.

He returns this Answer to it,

I ingenuously confess it; Fatemur equidem ingenue: sed nec requiritur evidens,
sed, illa satis est ad Conscientiae quietem: quouiam neque scmper certitudinem
^abemu^ an Ministri sint vere Sacerdotes. Sed cum videmus homiues probos uti,
etc.
nor is an Evident Certainty required; but That is sufficient to quiet the
Conscience: because we are not always certain that the Ministers are true
Priests. But when we see honest men use the Matter and Form of the Church, We
believe that they have found and Christian minds, while they administer the
Sacraments.

Behold, here a Learned man is sorely puzzled, through the infirmity of his
cause. He would have men satisfied of the validity of their Sacraments, by some
assurance of the Minister's Intending as he ought to do. But see how he is
forced to cook the matter.

. 18. (1.) He grants there is no Evident Certainty of the Thing: And
consequently that it is not liable to the view of the Understanding.

. 19. To make it as intelligible as I can, I will give a short account of the
meaning of the Terms, Evidence and Certainty. And this I will do (according to
the method I have used) from one of your Authors. Peter Hurtad de Mendoza
defines both of them Evidentia est claritu sive perspicuitas qua intellectus
quasi videt Objecta.
:

Evidence is that clearness or perspicuity, by which the Understanding does as
it were see Objects.

Certainty is a firm determination and adhesion of the Understanding to Truth
as Truth. Certitudo est firm a determinatio adh^esioque intellectus ad verum ut
verum est. Disp. 10. Sect. 3. de Demonst.


The Author then having granted that there is no Evident Certainty of the
Intention, does in effect grant, that the Understanding cannot view it for want
of light, nor embrace it as a Thing in Being. Evidence does indeed Naturally
cause certainty. As I can no longer question the Being of what I see plainly
with my bodily eyes, so neither can I, what I see with those of my mind. But no
Natural Beams lighten this Object; it is confessed to lie in darkness.

. 20. (2.) He says, such certainty is not necessary, in order to the Quiet of
the Conscience. But, I say, something is necessary to that End, because Anxiety
would oppress the Soul, were it left to fluctuate about the weighty matters of
Religion, such as the Truth of our Sacraments are acknowledged to be. And it
has been shown that the Truth of these cannot be known, unless the Minister's
Intention be so too. Well: Evident certainty is given away; but what brings the
Author to supply it? Why, he lays no claim to that obsoure Certainty that is
founded on Authority. He neither says, There is the infallible Testimony of
God for the Thing, nor yet the credible Testimony of men: Which silence is a
tacit confession, he had no such thing to plead, it being then his Province to
say all he could to secure the Soul in that Point.

. 21. (3.) He gives this most sorry Reason, why it was not necessary so to know
the Intention in Baptism, (of which he was speaking) viz. because, says he, we
are not always certain that our Ministers are true Priests.

The relation of these Words to the former, seems to make the whole sound but
this, viz. Baptism fares no worse than Ordination; let us hope well of both,
but we are certain of neither. When he cannot cure the malady, he gives them
Narcoticks to still and stun the Spirits, that they may be less sensible of
their pain. Let us not torment our selves but believe the best, is the effect
of his words, to my understanding.

. 22. Yet he minces the matter. We are not always certain, etc. says he. Then
never certain, say I, upon the account of the Intention: (which he purposely
treats of in that Article.) But are there not greater hopes when moral men
Administer? Yes. But I have proved there is no certainty.

. 23. But because of some inconveniences which that distinction of good and bad
Ministers, as applied before, may chance to breed among Roman Catholics, I
will now suppose that by the words, Good Men Homines probos.
, the Author meant to describe all their Ministers promiscuously However not
daring to trust this Notion; I have considered them as implying the forenamed
distinction. I would not impose a meaning upon any man's words, but take his
own, if I knew it. In this method I cannot miss his Sense: it must be here or
there.

. 24. Well, I construe the words thus, when we see any Minister do the
Sacramental Actions, we believe he has a Christian mind and duly Intends. Now
I proceed to say, it has already appeared that there is neither Evidence nor
Authority claimed by the Author to secure the Conscience in this matter: And
therefore I conclude his Credimus [We believe] only denotes the judgment of
Charity, which he conceives sufficient to stay and settle the mind.

. 25. Sir, I will freely grant you this judgment of Charity for your Ministers,
and consequently for their intending aright. For where there are not manifest
tokens of Vice, we are to account every man Virtuous; and for things that look
doubtful, we are rather to interpret them in the more favorable sense, when
there is an Obligation upon us to pass our judgment. But this tie of making a
charitable judgment is too weak a stay for Conscience in the great concerns of
Religion, such as the Minister's Intention, on which you make your Baptism, the
Consecration of the Eucharist, etc. depend. This will appear by considering
these two things,

. 26. (1.) The judgment of Charity always supposes the Object Uncertain; or to
speak more properly, the Understanding Uncertain. For what needs Charity come
into the Scale, if Evidence has weighed it down beforehand? What needs the
Will come into the work, but that the Understanding is at a loss?

. 27. (2.) The Soul is not a jot nearer Truth by this judgment of Charity. The
pious affection of the Will is indeed exercised, but it makes not the Act of
the Understanding more certain. Truth is the Object of the Intellect alone, and
therefore certainty is not at all taken from the Will, but from the Evidence of
the Object, or from the motive to Faith.

. 28. I forbear to add, That the Understanding may be easily, and is often
exposed to the danger of falsehood by the charitable inclination of the Will;
and that ignorance may contribute much to the false quiet of the mind. The will
has nothing to do with the Understanding (that I know of) in order to
Knowledge, but barely to stir it up to act. When that is done, it must judge
for it self, and has Rules of its own to examine things by; but the bent or
biass of the Will is none of them. And he that makes himself (as I may so say)
certain without or beyond Rational Motives, is but blindly persuaded or
pertinacious.

I have said enough, if not too much, to convince That the judgment of Charity
concerning the Intention, amounts not to an intellectual certainty of it. Which
is the only thing I was concerned to make out, in this place.

. 29. Now since neither Reason nor Authority will ascertain the Intention, and
since the Judgment of Charity falls short of the mark, I may, I hope, without
presumption conclude that my Proposition is verified, viz.

That the Intention of the [Ordaining] Bishop is a Condition which no man
living knows whether it be fulfilled or no in Ordination.

And then the premises being true, the conclusion is so too, viz.

The Church of Rome requires a condition to Ordination which no man living
knows whether it be fulfilled or no.

I confess I have extended my proof to a far greater Latitude (as I have done
some other things in these Papers) than any thing you have offered, exacted
from me: but I had rather be accused of being over than short. Besides, I had a
mind to prevent the often re-hearing of the Cause, to which several little new
Suggestions might give occasion, by a more particular sifting of it. I had also
a respect to some others, who had never seen the Subject set in a full light.
But after all, I am sensible I have done something more than needed.

. 30. I have indeed considered the Proposition only under the limitation before
expressed, excepting the Ordaining Bishops out of no man living knows. Who may
therefore pretend to know their own Intention, and by consequence that there
are true Priests among you. But if an Interpretation I gave you of my
Proposition at Pn. had not (without Reason) been displeasing to you, what I
have already done would have left your Bishops unsecured of your Priesthood, as
well as all the rest of your Communion.

However I shall with little ado cure that defect by offering the same thing in
such words, as will not, I think, be evaded.

SECT. VII. The Ordaining Bishops not certain whether. there be true Priests in
the Roman Church.
HAving already proved, That all Roman Catholics, except the Ordaining
Bishops, are Uncertain whether the said Bishops Intend aright in their
particular Ordinations, and consequently as uncertain whether they make any
true Priests, I come now to prove That the Ordaining Bishops (so called) are
uncertain whether or no they Intend with such an Intention as is available or
effectual to Ordination.

In order hereunto I will let my first Syllogism stand as before Part I. Sect.
l.
. The minor Proposition of it, which only could regularly be denied, is this,
The Roman Church requires a condition to Ordination which no man living knows
whether or no it be fulfilled.

To wrap up the Bishops in the same uncertainty with the rest, I prove it thus,

The Intention of a person who is a true Bishop is a Condition which no man
living knows, the Ordainers themselves not excepted, whether it be fulfilled in
Ordination.

But the Roman Church requires the Intention of a person who is a true Bishop
to Ordination. Ergo,

The Roman Church requires a condition to Ordination, which no man living
knows, the Ordainers themselves not excepted, whether it be fulfilled in
Ordination.

The minor is clear, for it is not every man's using the Matter and Form of the
Church, and intending to do as the Church does, (although you say, This may
suffice to Baptism) that you hold to be sufficient to ordination. You judge not
only Laymen but simple Priests incapable of doing that work, as the Curse of
your Trent-Council makes appear Si quis dixcrit Episcopos non esse Presbyteris
superiores, vel non babete potestatem Confirmandi and Ordinandi, vel came quam
habent illis cum Presbyteris communem esse, Auathema sit. Sess. 23. Can. 7.
.

If any one shall say, That Bishops are not Superior to Priests, or have not
the power of Confirming and Ordaining, or that the power they have is common to
them with Priests, let him be Anathema.

The Ordainer then must of Necessity be a Bishop. This for the Minor.

If there be any difficulty in the matter, it respects the Major: But I am now
to show there is none at all. This then I lay down as evident, except the
Ordainer know that he is in Truth what he is called, viz. a Bishop, he knows
not that his Intention is such as operates in, and is effectual to Ordination,
nor consequently that he makes a true Priest. My Medium, you know, points
directly at this, and the connection is unquestionable, according to your
selves. Which being said, it only remains that I make out,

That none of your Bishops know that they are true Bishops. I do it thus,

No Bishops that are Uncertain, whether or no they are true Priests, know that
they are true Bishops.

But all the Roman Bishops are uncertain, whether or no they are true Priests.
Ergo,

No Roman Bishops know that they are true Bishops.

To verify the Major, I need but say, 1. Your Church holds, That no man can be
a Bishop, who is not first a Priest. A taste of Authority may satisfy for this.

If any one (faith Suarez Si quis ita consecrcetur Episcopus per saltum ut
Sacerdotii Ordinem praetermittat, eum non solum mancre suspensum, verum etiam
non manners conjecratum: quia character Episcopalis, si quis est. essentialiter
requirit charactarem Sacerdosalem. Suarez. Tom. 5. Disp 31.. 53.
) should of a Deacon be made Bishop without first taking Priests Orders, he
does not only remain suspended, but Vn-consecrated: because the Episcopal
Character, if there be any such, Essenitally requires the Priestly Character.

D. Soto delivers the matter in short Episcopatus dependet a Sacerdotio, nam
conjecratio Episcopi antequam sit Sacerdos, non valeret. De just, and jure, li.
10. qu 1. art. 2.
.

The Episcopate depends on the Priesthood; for the making a man Bishop before
he is made Priest, would be of no avail.

The Reason hereof, is, No man can give that which he has not himself; the
Pro-eminent power the Bishop has, was especially given him for Constituting
Priests for the Service of the Church; and therefore it is necessary, that he
have what he confers.

The power of the Keys is founded in the Priestly Character, says Gab. Biel
Potestas clavium fundatur in charactere Sacerdotali. Li. 4. Did. 19. qu. 1.
art. 1.
.

Though your lessor Orders may be jumped over, I am sure you will not say, This
can; Which if he want, he has the Name of Bishop, and no more. This for the
Dependence of the two Orders.

2. As your Ordainers know not whether they had Priestly Orders, so they cannot
know, for that Reason, whether they had Episcopal Orders. The Uncertainty of
the former necessarily destroys all certainty of the latter. Thus much for the
Major.

As for the Minor Proposition, it is largely proved beforehand, viz. That all
Roman Bishops are Uncertain, whether or no they be true Priests, for want of
knowing their Ordainer's Intention.

Now the Premises being safe, the Conclusion is set beyond all hazard, viz. No
Roman Bishops know that they are true Bishops: And consequently they know not
that their Intending is available to Ordination.

But supposing them to know that they were truly made Priests, (which yet, as
appears, they neither do, nor can know) yet they cannot know that they are true
Bishops, for the same Reason that Priests cannot know that they are true
Priests, viz. Their Ignorance of their Consecrator's Intention. Bishops are as
far from inspecting the Hearts of their Consecrators, as Priests are from
inspecting the Hearts of the Bishops. There is Parity of Reason on both sides.

I will advance one other Medium, to prove your Bishops to be Uncertain of
their Orders. I take my Argument from their Not-knowing that they were indeed
Baptized. And I will take your Simple Priests along with them for Company. In
Form it runs thus,

No Bishops or Priests, that are uncertain whether or on they were truly
Baptized, know whether or no they be [respectively] true Bishops or Priests.

But all Roman Bishops and Priests are Uncertain, whether or no they were truly
Baptized. Ergo,

No Roman Bishops or Priests know whether they be true Bishops or Priests.

The Major Proposition must be granted, if these two Things appear, (1.) That
there is a Necessary Dependence of Holy Orders upon Baptism. (2.) That there is
between them a Dependence of Knowledge, as well as Being. What shines not of it
self, I shall, after my wont, prove from your own Authority.


For the First. Your Angelical Doctor has long ago acquainted us Qui
characterem baptismalem non habet, wullum aliud Sacramentum recipere poiesi.
Addit. ad tertiam partem. qu. 34. art. 3.


That he is not capable of receiving any other Sacrament, who has not the
Baptismal Character.

And he does not only say this in general, which yet had been sufficient, but
he applies it to our particular Baptismia est janua Sacramentorum, ergo cum
Ordo sit quoddam Sacramentum praesupponit Baptismum. Ibidem.


Baptism is the Gate of the Sacraments, and therefore since Order is a certain
Sacrament, it presupposes Baptism.

He goes on to certify us Talis si promoveatur ad Sacerdotium, non est
Sacerdos, nec conficere potest, nec absolvere, etc. ibidem.
, That if any Unbaptized person be promoted to the Priesthood, he is no Priest,
nor can he either consecrate, or absolve, etc.

To be short, Your Canon teaches In Decret. li. 3. ti. 43. cap. 1.3. de
Presbyt. non 'Baptizat.
, That they who are promoted to Orders, unbaptized, shall be Baptized and
Reordained.

This I have said, is enough to evince the necessary dependence Orders have
upon Baptism, which is the Gate through which your other Sacraments enter; and
which being shut, they are kept forth.

For the Second, I need add nothing to enlighten it: For the abovesaid
dependence being acknowledged, no man has power to deny, That he who is
uncertain that he was Baptized, must be so that he was Ordained. This for the
proof of the Major.

The Minor is this, All Roman Bishops and Priests are Uncertain whether or no
they were truly Baptized. But this is proved beforehand, by those Arguments
that convinced, that the Minister's Intention is not Knowable by any besides
himself.

Now the Premises being sted fast, the conclusion stands most firm, viz. No
Roman Bishops or Priests know whether they be true Bishops or Priests.

I shall not be reckoned to have made superfluous proof of this Point, if the
Reader shall consider the Fruit it yields, the several Mediums being so many
Hammers to break to pieces the pretended Certainty of the Roman Priesthood. If
it be born in mind, that the Intention is a Mental contingent Act, which the
Agent may, or may not do, at his pleasure; and that none can discover, whether
he exert that Act, or not, it will be very obvious here to view the several
Grounds of the Uncertainty of their Priesthood. If the Bishop was not Baptized
with due Intention, he cannot Ordain. If he was not so made Priest, he cannot
Ordain, if he was not so consecrated, he cannot Ordain. And it plainly appears
that himself cannot be certain of any of these, and therefore cannot be certain
he makes a Priest, because all these go to qualify him for that Work. And the
Priest, besides these insuperable uncertainties, common to the Bishop with him,
is vexed with one more as bad as the rest. He knows not that the Bishop (if he
should chance to be capable of doing it) intended to communicate Spiritual
Power to him.

So that there are three hazards to allay the Bishop's confidence of his making
Priests, and a fourth more to allay That of the Priest.

But this may be accounted a small thing in comparison of what follows. The
Consecrator of our present Bishop was liable to the same three Uncertainties,
and these are chargeable, in their Effects, upon our Bishop. If his Ordainer
and Consecrator were not truly Baptized, made Priest, and Bishop, (and God only
knows that) They had no Faculty to Ordain or Consecrate, and then our Bishop
has but an empty Name. And the fourth comes in too, he knows not what his
Consecrator Intended.

So then our Bishop and his Consecrator, with respect to their Knowledge,
whether they ordain Priests, are necessarily liable to Six Contingencies, any
of which falling out will Un bishop him, and therefore make void his
Ordinations.

Think then how vastly these Contingences will multiply from the Apostles times
to ours, and that our present Bishop is so far chargeable with any one of the
said Omissions of Intention, that he has lost his Power and Office, if any
such has happened in a direct descent.

According to the Suggestions of common Reason, your Mass-books, and other
Books contain Suppositions, That there may be defect of due Intention: And
Priesthood comes down no other way but by a claim of Succession; Intention is
necessary to hold the links together, and is concerned in the manifold
particulars specified; and if any of the links be broken all falls to pieces;
No Bishop or Priest afterward in that particular Line to the worlds end.

Now I refer it to every inquisitive man, whether the ground be not too
slippery for Certainty to stand on, amidst the manifold variety of those
contingencies 'forementioned.

Though I allowed you, for Argument sake, the judgment of Charity for all your
Bishops of this time, yet supposing they mean never so honestly in their Acts,
it appears now That is not sufficient to decide the question; for their
Intention may be void and ineffectual, though not through want of Will, yet for
want of Power. Their Baptizers or Ordainers may have neglected them, and These
upon this score are made useless to others. The fault may have been committed
several Ages ago, which yet the poor Gentlemen can neither know nor remedy.
What room then is there for certainty in this thick contexture of hazards?

We shall find that even the dark judgment of Charity will run very low, if we
follow the Ordainers up into some distant Ages, wherein Ignorance and Vice
strove, as it were, for mastery in the Roman Church. What say you of the 9th.
and 10th. Ages, and the four next following, wherein Learning was generally
fallen asleep in the Western Europe, and wickedness as much awake in it? If
Historians of those times may be credited (as they must, or farewell Authority)
great breaches might very probably be made in the Sucession of Bishops in many
Sees; for such as are blind and careless of their own Souls will hardly be sure
to look out sharp, and be regardful of the Salvation of others, in their
Administrations.

It ought to be observed, With what ease and speed Nullities may be diffused
and multiplied. Let us put a fair case, Suppose a Bishop, within whose Diocese
the greatest University of a Nation is, should out of unbelief, contempt of
Religion, supine carelessness, or from any other cause, omit to Intend as is
required, in his frequent Ordinations of the Collegians: it would follow that
the Bishops taken out of these Priests, though never so good men and careful to
Intend as they ought, must yet act ineffectually, and fill many places with
empty names, instead of power. The more such, so much the worse; and the longer
they live, the bigger is the mischief. And who can secure us against this
Supposition? Now considering that Nullities may have at any time thus spread,
(I speak still with a Relation to your doctrine) and that the farther they go,
they grow far more numerous, what can a thoughtful man fin amidst all this for
the certainty of the Roman Priesthood!

If it be said, No man knows on the other hand, that they fail to Intend. I
answer, It is not enough to Certainty not to know that they fail, we are to
know that they fail not. Knowledge stands not in Negatives, it is Positives
that stay the Understanding.

Give a positive Reason why they must hit the mark, and I shall be sure they
cannot miss it. But none we have found can do this.

The result is, Not one of the Roman Church, except the Ordaining Bishops, can
know the Intention of the Ordainers. They know it not either in it self, or in
its Cause, or by any Effects. They are not assured of it either by Divine
Revelation, or by sufficient Humane Authority. And therefore they have no true
certainty of their Priesthood which depends upon it. They have not (to use your
own terms) either a Metaphysical, or Mathematical, or yet a Moral certainty of
it. They have not (to speak my own language) either Divine or Theological or
yet Moral certainty that any one of all the reputed Clergy of the Roman Church
is a true Priest.

For the Ordaining Bishops, They may indeed know whether themselves Intend, but
know not whether there be any force or virtue in their Intention for making
Priests, for want of knowing the Intention of the whole Succession of their
Baptizers, Ordainers and Consecrators. So that not one Soul in the Church of
Rome has any true certainty of the matter.

You see I have laid the weight of what has been said, on these two grounds:
1. That a Mental interior Intention is required to the very Being of your
Sacraments, which has been shown from your own Authors. 2. That Holy Orders is
a Sacrament, and so as much depends upon the Intention, as any other of them.
This I have indeed taken all along for granted; but shall now prove it from the
Council of Trent Dubitare nemo potest Ordinem esse vere and proprie unum ex
septem Sanctae Ecclesiae Sacra mentis Sess. 23. cap. 7.
.

None ought to doubt that Order is truly and properly one of the seven
Sacraments of the Holy Church.

These Two (I say) are your own Principles, and from them I have concluded your
Uncertainty of your Priesthood considered in particular, and so have made good
my word.

It now remains that in the next Section I draw from hence such Consequences or
Consectaries as will set the feeble estate of the Roman Church in so full a
Light, that all that wink not, must needs see it.

SECT. VIII. Consequences drawn from the Uncertainty of the Roman Priesthood:
and the feeble condition of that Church, issuing from thence, shown.
. 1. IF no Roman Catholic can be certain that there is any one true Priest in
particular, in their Church, This necessarily follows in the general, That each
of them must be uncertain whether he have the benefit of any one Sacrament
which depends upon the Priestly character. Now you teach that all your
Sacraments do so depend, except Baptism and Matrimony: So then five of the
seven are unavoidably uncertain to each of you, by immediate inference from the
Uncertainty of your Priesthood.

. 2. Moreover, You are uncertain upon the same ground, viz. your ignorance of
the Minister's Intention, of having the two other, whether administered by
Priests who are the ordinary Ministers of them, or by others whom necessity
makes such in the Priests absence.

Christ surely instituted his Sacraments for great Spiritual Ends, which are as
surely attained by the worthy partakers of them. How deplorable then is the
estate of the Roman Church, since not one of its Members knows that in his
whole life time he receives any One Sacrament! this in general.

. 3. I will now infer more particularly, from the Virtue of the Premises
already laid down and proved;

1. Not one Member of your Church can without special Revelation (which is
excepted in the State of our Question) be ascertained he had the Blessing of
Christian Baptism, which you hold to be a Sacrament necessary to all; and
without which your Trent Council says, There is no Salvation Siquis dixcrit
Baptismum non esse necessarium ad salutem. Anathema sit. Sess. 7. c. 5.


. 4. I know the Canon is generally interpreted thus, An adult is Savable by
Contrition and the desire of Baptism, if the Minister chance to have robbed him
of it by Not intending. But behold the miseries he is yet liable to,
notwithstanding that: (1.) You cannot plead that such a one is capable of any
Office purely relating to the Service of God's Church, (2.) nor that he is
capable of the Benefits of any other Sacrament. Sacraments, as I said, were
appointed by Christ for great Blessings to his people, as being not only signs,
but also instrumental causes of the Grace they signify: and therefore the next
to the misery of wanting them, it is most lamentable to be Uncertain whether or
no a man indeed has them; which is apparently the Case of all Roman Catholics.

. 5. But if an Infant dye defrauded of the Baptizer's Intention, (and none can
be assured that any particular one is not) according to the current of your
doctrine he is eternally shut out of the Kingdom of Heaven; in as much as he is
not capable of making up the defect by Contrition and desire of Baptism. If
there be no assurance had of the Baptizer's Intention, there can be none had of
the Child's Salvation, according to your doctrine. Which must make the Funerals
of poor Babes far more bitter to their Christian Parents, and Friends, than
they would be, had they just grounds of security for their Reigning with Christ
in Glory.

. 6. 2. No Roman Catholic is sure that after a Confession of sins made to his
Priest, he gains from him a true Sacramental Absolution.

As Baptism is, with you, necessary to all without exception, for taking away
Sin, and for the infusion of Grace; so is Penance necessary to all them that
after Baptism have fallen into mortal sin: and the effects of it are no less,
say you, than Pardon and Reconciliation. This is the only Plank to swim safe to
shore on, after a moral Shipwreck; without which all such sink down into the
Abyss of Perdition. Well, the more necessary you esteem This to be, and the
more valuable its Effects, the more comfort would proportionably fall to your
share, if you were sure you had it. But on the contrary it will be your misery
not to know you are enriched with that treasure. When you have come to the
Priest Contrite, and opened all your sins to him without Reserve, and are
disposed to satisfy for all injuries done by you, it is a mournful thing,
after all this, to come away Uncertain of your being indeed Absolved, for want
of Knowledge that the Priest could Effectually, and did Actually Intend to
Release you of your sins. Which is the sad case of every Roman Catholic.

. 7. 3. No Roman Catholic is certain that he at any time receives the
Sacrament of the Eucharist

Though you make not This altogether so necessary, as you do Baptism and
Penance, yet you hold it to be matter of great advantage to the Soul. The
Substantial Body of Christ, you say, is received there, and with, and by it
Spiritual Nourishment, whereby the Graces of the Spirit are sustained and
increased; and the Soul consequently made more vigorous for performing all
Christian duty. Now the more excellent the Effects of this Sacrament are known
to be, the greater comfort it is apt to yield to all that are certain they
receive it, and do this, as they hope, Worthily. But on the contrary, how
doleful is it to be uncertain (how great soever their preparations have been
for it) whether they at any time truly have it, for want of Knowing that the
Priest could Effectually and did Actually Intend to Consecrate, without which
the Elements remain Unsanctified, and cannot be Vehicles of those Blessings
designed by Christ to be communicated that way to the Soul. And yet this is the
sad case of Roman Catholics.

. 8. It remains that I add, you are not only unhappy in not knowing This, with
respect to the foresaid Blessings to be received by it; But also with respect
to two great Duties (as you count them) to be done, which depend upon the
Consecration. One is the Adoration of the Host; the other the Offering it as a
Sacrifice both for the quick and dead. If your Church do both these on
Uncertain grounds, it will look a very sad thing: And that she does so, will be
inferred from what has been already proved, Consecration it self, which alone
can be supposed to support them, being found to be an Uncertain thing. That
nothing may remain obscure, touching these matters, I shall take room enough to
explain them.

For the First, viz. Adoration of the Host; The Trent-Council delivers this
Doctrine to warrant the practice of it:

There is no place left for doubt, but all the faithful of Christ may exhibit
Adoration, which is due to the true God, to this most Holy Sacrament, in their
Veneration of it. Nullus dubitandi locus relinquitur, quin omnes Christi
fideles -- latriae cultum qui vero Dco debetur, buic sanctissimo Sacramento in
veneratione exhibcant. Sess. 13. cap. 5.


And the Council there subjoins, that the Custom was piously and religiously
brought into the Church, of Yearly setting a Day apart, for carrying the
Sacrament in Solemn Procession, through frequented Ways and public Places, in
order to its being Adored, etc.

It is too well known to be insisted on, that as soon as the Priest has
consecrated, he pays to the Sacrament the Worship that belongs to God alone;
and the People present, upon the Usual Notice given them, do the same: And that
in the most populous Towns of the Roman Communion, when it is carried through
the Streets to any Sick person, under a Canopy, all that meet it fall down and
adore it.

. 9. I have said all this, to evince that the Adoration spoken of, has not for
its Object our Blessed Savior considered as corporally present in Heaven, but
as present under the Species of Bread or Wine; or both. It is the Sacrament
that is to be Adored, your Council and practice tell us. But now the Body is no
Sacrament without the Species, for there would be wanting in that case a
Visible Sign, which is the Genus of a Sacrament. This Point being fixed, I come
to ask, What if there happen to be no true Consecration, when the Exterior
Sacramental Action is done, which is a thing you all grant may happen?

. 10. Why, the same Adoration is paid still, upon a presumption of true
Consecration. If I ask again, What is adored in that case? It must be answered,
a Creature, viz. the Bread, is adored instead of God.

And then this is in one sense or another, Idolatry.

It follows also, upon the same ground, That when men are Uncertain whether
there be true Consecration, they are also uncertain whether they commit not
Idolatry in such their Adorations.

Now I conclude, that Roman Catholics are at no time certain, that they commit
not Idolatry in Worshipping the Host.

I add, God is very jealous of his Honor, and Men should be tender of it too;
and therefore I would think they should have either simple Evidence or
Revelation for the Divinity of the Object, before they pay to it that greatest
Tribute of Adoration: But Roman Catholics light far short of that Certainty of
the matter, and yet venture to adore, hit or miss.

. 11. For the Second: The Eucharist, according to you, is a proper Sacrifice:
That is, the Body and Blood of Christ, are by the Priest truly and properly
offered to God in the Mass, under the visible Species of Bread and Wine: And
this is a Propitiatory Sacrifice. God being pleased with this Oblation, grants
to those, for whom it is Offered, Grace, Repentance, Remission of many and
grievous Sins, and Supplies for their several Necessities. Nor does this profit
Men alive only, but after Death. Thus your Church teaches.

I cannot but acknowledge that this Doctrine is believed among you, for I find
that most Men of Estates in your Communion, do at their Death leave good round
Sums of Money to certain Priests, who in consideration of it, are to shorten
their Benefactors stay in the acute pains of Purgatory, by saying of Masses, or
Offering this Sacrifice in their behalf. And if this Doctrine be true, the
Service done them is worth their Money; which cannot be better employed
otherwise.

. 12. But if there be no Consecration made by those respective Priests, who
promise to help them by that Means, there will be a great disappointment
somewhere. But I shall say no more of that. However, this I may say, (having
laid down a Warrant for it) that neither Priests nor People are certain, that
there will be a return of Masses for the Money, as not knowing whether they be
true Priests, and so (intend how they will) capable of turning the Bread and
Wine into the Body and Blood of Christ, which are the supposed Matter of that
Sacrifice. In this condition are all Roman Catholics.

Thus, Sir, supposing, for Argument-sake, your Doctrine of Transubstantiation to
be true, (though I profess, it was never in my power to believe it) the sundry
things I have here alleged, do nevertheless hold good against you.

. 13. 4. No Roman Catholic is sure that he ever partakes of your other
Sacraments, not yet particularly mentioned by me, as Confirmation and extreme
Unction, as not knowing whether the Ministers of them could effectually, and
did actually Intend in the Administration of them. Without which, as I have
often showed, there is no Sacrament. Being almost weary of enlarging on
particulars, I have put these together.

Number and describe all the great Effects you can attribute to them, (and in
any thing of this kind I will grant your Supposition, for argument-sake, as I
have all along in these Papers) and after you have done this you will find,
that no Roman Catholic is fure he shares in any one of them, for the Reasons
often alleged before. Bishops, Priests, and all other Members of your
Communion are wrapped up in an inextricable Uncertainty.

. 14. All I can honestly (to the best of my Knowledge) grant you, according to
your Principles laid down, is this, That the Ministers of Baptism know that
those they have Baptized are partakers of that Sacrament. I mean it only of
Infants, who could not put in a bar against the Efficacy of it. But yet neither
the said Ministers nor any other of your Body knows that himself was Baptized,
as not Knowing how he intended who Baptized him. So that what I inferred stands
firm, viz. that not one of you knows that he does or has received any one of
your Sacraments.

. 15. I advertise, This is it which makes the difference in this respect
between the Ministers of Baptism and those of your other Sacraments, treated of
before, Those need no special character to qualify them for that work. Any man
or woman, whether Jew, Heathen, or Turk, may Baptize with Effect, provided they
Intend to do what the Church does; according to your doctrine: Whereas the
Ministers of the other Sacraments (Matrimony excepted) must have special power
and authority from Christ to Administer, or else they Act in vain. And though
Matrimony depend not (to speak your language) on the Priestly character, the
parties Marrying being the proper Ministers of that Sacrament; yet I cannot
grant them the same Certitude with the Ministers of Baptism, because Two must
there Intend alike, or nothing is done; and neither of them can be sure judges
save of their own respective Intention.

That they make a civil Contract to lead an individual life plainly appears,
when he says, I take thee for my Wife: and she, I take thee for my Husband.
But whether both parties also Intend to make those Words signify the sacred
Conjunction of Christ with his Church, (in a general or special Sense, in a
more distinct or confused) and thereby to obtain Grace, cannot appear to either
party. The man can be sure but for himself, nor can the woman but for her self.

. 16. Here is to be noted, when I make the Contracting parties Ministers of
Matrimony, I follow only the greater part of your Authors. Where you vary, I
cannot represent you as agreed. But for those that make a Priest the Minister
of it, they are not a whit the nearer Certainty, because they know not his
Intention.

Before I move forward, I shall re-mind the Reader that the Inferences hitherto
drawn speak forth misery to Roman Catholics on these two grounds, put
together. (1.) There is no Sacramental Grace conveyed, where there are no true
Sacraments. The Terms are essentially Relative. (2.) There is an equal
Uncertainty of the Sacraments, and of the fruits of them.

Now I say, each Roman Catholic, for ought he can know, wants the Sacraments,
and by consequence their Effects; and if he have them, he yet wants the comfort
of Knowing it. Which makes the Roman Church in a sad condition.

Sir, When you have considered what has been already said, I would commend a
few Inferences more to the exercise of your thoughts.

. 17. 1. If none of you can know that any particular man in your Church is a
true Bishop or Priest, (which is proved) it follows that the Jesuits, who lay
so much weight upon the Papal Chair, cannot know the Pope to be so much as a
Priest, nor consequently that he is an Infallible Judge of Faith.

Those they account Successors of Saint Peter in the Universal Pastorship of
the Church (to whom they appropriate special Privileges, and particularly that
of Infallibility) are not to be Laymen sure, but such as have the Sacerdotal
Character. But since no man alive (as is proved) is sure according to your
doctrine, that any particular man is Priest, no man is sure the Pope is such,
and consequently that he is an Infallible Judge of Controversies.

The Intention of him who Baptized and Ordained the Pope, and the capacity of
his Ordainer were, and ever will be hidden things: and hence springs the
Uncertainty.

. 18. 2. Now a word to those called the Parisian Divines. If you cannot know
that any particular men are true Bishops or Priests, you cannot know that any
of your Roman Councils have defined Infallible Truth, in as much as your selves
hold that the promise of Divine Assistance, by which alone they can be supposed
to be preserved inerrable, is not made to any Assemblies but such as consist of
men in Holy Orders.

You are indeed content that Laymen be present there, and act in a certain
inferior Sphere, viz. That they assist in examining difficulties, consult,
debate, approve, protect, etc. But to none of them do you allow the power of
Determination or Decision. Those Synods then, as your selves hold, are to be
made up of Bishops, or Priests, or both.

Now because it cannot be known that these ever had Priestly Orders, for want
of Knowledge that they were truly Baptized and Ordained, you must be Uncertain
whether such were true Councils, and consequently whether they decreed and
defined Infallible Faith.

Although you may have some true Priests in general, yet in regard you are
uncertain who they are, How know you that the major part of such Councils, ex.
gr. that of Trent, were true Priests and consequently capable of making
Infallible determinations? I will speak a less word, How know you that the 4th
part there were such? You might have a true Clergy, I say, and yet it is
possible that few or none of them might be in that Synod. For the Clergy in a
Council usually bears but a very small proportion, for number, to the rest.
Many of these may possibly have true Orders, when most of the Members of such a
Council want them. Unless you know both the capacity and Intention of those who
Baptized and Ordained such Members, you are not (as has been proved) assured
they were Bishops or Priests; and consequently that the Holy Ghost assisted
them in their work.

If sending men to a Council will indeed by Post-fact justify men's Baptism and
Orders, it were well worth the while (whatever it cost) to have as frequent
Councils as possible; and to send numerous flocks of the Clergy thither to stay
one Session, to be succeeded still by more, till the Uncertainty of the Baptism
and Orders of most of the Bishops and Priests be removed. But I think my self
the first that ever spoke of this Cure for this Disease, and therefore think it
will never be pleaded against me by my Adversaries. However, the distemper
remains till some Remedy be found out, you know not that the Members of your
Council are true Priests, and so interessed in the promise of Divine
Assistance, and so capable of making infalltble decisions.

. 19. 3. For those that hold Pope and Council, when conjoined, to be
Infallible, I say but this to them, Neither Pope nor Council will be more
surely proved to have had Baptism and Orders, when they are together, than when
they are a-sunder; that is, it cannot be proved at all, if the Roman doctrine by
me exhibited be true: and then they can hardly be thought to be Infallible
Determiners of Faith.

. 20. 4. If no Roman Catholic can know that any particular man of theirs is a
true Priest, then the boasted Argument taken from the Un-interrupted Succession
of Lawful Pastors in the Roman Church, is of no force, till they can be sure of
the Intention of the respective Baptizers of every Pope, and that every Pope
from the Apostles days hitherto was Ordained by such as were capable of giving
them Orders, and Intended to do it in each respective Ordination, (which, as I
have evinced, can never be known) their Succession rests but upon bare
presumption without proof, and therefore amounts not to a cogent Argument.

Thus have I, as I think, accomplished my Undertaking, not leaving one Member
of the Roman Communion certain that there is among them any one true Priest in
particular, nor any Sacraments in particular, given or received in the Roman
Church: and all this from the Medium I laid down at first, viz. your doctrine of
the Intention.

. 21. Now I think fit to re-mind the Reader, that to do This (1.) I have
explicated the Terms from Roman Catholic Authors. (2.) I have taken their
doctrines for the grounds of my Inferences: nor have I in Order to any part of
my work, needed to ruffle or quarrel any of their Notions, otherwise than my
mere deductions from their Principles will do it. It is all one to me if they
would make Seventy instead of Seven Sacraments, provided I prove they are not
certain of their Giving and Receiving them. It is all one to me if they should
make each Bishop of their Church as Infalllible as the Jesuits make the Pope;
and every Provincial Council as Infallible as they do those they call General,
provided I prove they cannot be sure that those Bishops, or Members of Councils
are in Holy Orders, and thereby capable of that power of Decision or
Determination, which they would attribute to them. None then ought to wonder,
that I speak their language, without crossing several Principles of theirs,
which I have occasion to mention, since it has been my only design to render
all their things loose and uncertain from their own Doctrine.

. 22. If it be said, I have proved some things which Roman Catholics deny not.
I answer, (1.) The worst that will follow hence, is, There is a little labor
lost. (2.) It may be of some advantage to the Truth to publish That among the
Vulgar, which though the more learned Romanists cannot deny, yet they would
gladly bury in silence. This Article of the Intention, I believe to be one of
that kind.

For want of representing This honestly and generally, the Credulity of Persons
of both Persuasions is apt to be abused.

. 23. 1. Not a few of the Romanists are liable to be filled with an ungrounded
Confidence, that Sacramental Grace ever attends the performance of the exterior
Sacramental Actions. One of that sort I can name, who upon receiving an
Absolution from his Confessor, came forth of his House, and leapt up for joy,
and told some judicious Protestants, (who were occasionally before his Door)
That he was then as free from Sin, as is an Infant newly Baptized.

Had this Man known and considered the Truth I have here sifted out, he would
either have been modestly silent, or tempered his Speech with these Conditions,
If I be a true Penitent, and if my Confessor be a true Priest, and be thereby
capable of Absolving me, and also did I intend to do it, then am I freed from
Sin. But I fear most of your Laity entertain the like confidence, bottomed upon
the like Ignorance.

. 24. 2. The vulgar People of our Communion, for want of skill in this Point,
are more obnoxious to the Snares of your Priests, who tell them they both can,
and will forgive them their Sins, if they will come into the Bosom of the Roman
Church, and confess them. Now the Conscience being afraid of nothing, but Sin,
a confident promise of Remission is often hearkened to readily, and with some
pleasure, even when there is nothing sufficient to warrant it.

Whereas, if all our People knew, that those stout Promisers could never prove,
that themselves were truly Ordained, nor consequently Authorized to forgive
Sin; nor so much as that themselves were ever Sacramentally Absolved from any
one of their Sins, (all which I have proved.) They [our people] would smile at
their Confidence, and bid them go find out a way for their own safety.

. 25. The Conclusion is, My true Representation of Things, to such as have not
had the opportunity to know them before, may excuse my insisting upon some few
things, which perhaps may not be denied by Roman Catholics, when they are
squeezed to a Declaration of the Truth.

SECT. IX. The Banks Mr. G. has cast up to secure the Roman Priesthood, taken
in general, cast down.
SIR, I had, together with the last Section, ended all the trouble I purposed
to give You, had you not by your way of Answer drawn me somewhat farther. I
have said more than once, I thought it Manifestation enough of the weak Estate
of your Church, to prove her Uncertain, whether she have any true Priests or
Sacraments in particular. And I leave it to the judgment of the discerning
Reader, whether I have not effected that, by showing the Uncertainty both of
the Bishop's Intention, considered in it self, and also of the Validity of it,
in case he does Intend. But because you would have more, you shall.

. 1. And this more shall be chiefly to cast down or demolish the Bulwarks, you
have cast up for the Security of the Bishop's Intention, in order to the
Defense of your Priesthood in general. And truly this is all, that in
strictness can be required of one that Undertakes to prove a Negative. What he
does more, may well be accounted Surplusage.

Having premised this, I shall again set down your Distinction in your own
words, and then try what tendency it has to the End you bring it for.

. 2. You must give me leave, say you, to distinguish in the major Proposition
of the former Syllogism, between that knowledge which is obtained by the
Observation of exterior Actions and Gestures, and attention to the words of the
Prelates in any particular Ordinations; and that knowledge which we have from
the Consideration of the Nature and end of Ordination in general, and which is
also necessarily deduced from other known Principles of the Roman Catholic
Church grounded upon Divine Revelation.

First then, if you understand by knowing here, knowing in the former way
only, which you seem to me to do, I deny this your first Proposition to be
true. For supposing (not granting) that the Roman Catholic Church does make
Priestly Ordination to depend upon a Condition, that no man living knows in the
former way ( viz. by observing only what is outwardly done, etc.) whether it
be fulfilled or no, yet it does not follow, that she must be uncertain, whether
she has any true Priesthood, because others, besides the Ordaining Prelates,
know that she has true Priesthood by the second way of Knowledge
abovementioned; that is, from the Nature and End of the Thing, and necessary
deduction from other true Principles. Thus far you.

. 3. I shall now examine this distinction, taking in your Explication of it,
and try how far it may bestead You.

To gain an opportunity of making a distinction, and applying it with some show
of pertinence, you seem to fancy my sense of the matter to be this, viz. The
Ordainer's Intention cannot indeed be known by observing his exterior Action
and Gesture in his particular Ordinations, but it may be known some other way.
What else do these words of yours signify, viz. If you understand, say you, by
knowing here, knowing in the former way only, which you seem to me to do, etc.
This, Sir, is a groundless conceit, hatched on purpose, I think, to serve a
turn. For, as to your Ordinations in particular, upon which your Priests in
particular depend for their Being, (which it was my only aim to deal with) I
have denied that the Bishop's Intention in them can any way be known, and have
made my denial good. If then you apply both the Members of your distinction,
with a respect to this Acception of the Terms, you pronounce my Proposition
false, upon a figment of your own brain, which yet you would father on me,
though I never gave you the least temptation to entertain it. But if you make
the latter Member of your distinction, not to respect the Thing considered in
particular, but only in general, then (1.) It is not applied ad idem, and
therefore gives you no relief against my declared design. (2.) If it only
respect (I say) the Ordainer's Intention in general, I deny that it can be
known infallibly either of these ways, or any other whatsoever: And then there
is no room here for your Supposition. It remains then that these Words in my
Proposition -- a Condition which no man living knows, etc. are absolutely
Negative, with respect and proportion to the State of the Question laid down
before.

Which state had you called for, before you gave an Answer, your Things would
have been no less pertinent.

. 4. As you have without cause made me think what best likes you, so you are
too often leaving the thread of my Argument, which yet you are altogether to keep
to, if you will be pertinent. I expected you would (as you should) have spoken
here with a formal relation to my Proposition, which is this, all Churches that
make Priestly Ordination depend upon a Condition which no man living knows
whether it be fulfilled, must be Uncertain whether they have any true
Priesthood. Hence it evidently appears it was my direct business to prove you
uncertain of your Priesthood from your Uncertainty of the performance of a
Condition required to Ordination: and you did not, could not deny the firm
Connection of the Medium with the Extreme. Let us see now how you order your
Matter.

. 5. You distinguish of Knowing without mentioning, for some time, any object
of that Knowledge: which you should have supplied thus, I distinguish between
Knowing of a Condition required to Ordination, etc. Then though you mention a
Condition, yet you do not keep to it, but forthwith as it were forgetting it,
run from it to Priesthood it self; that is, you run away from the consideration
of a Sacrament to the [res Sacramenti] Effect of it. Your words are these --
Supposing the Roman Catholic Church makes Priestly Ordination to depend upon a
Condition that no man living -- knows in the former way -- whether it be
fulfilled or no, yet it does not follow She must be Uncertain whether she has
any true Priesthood. This is true if the Condition can be known to be fulfilled
any other way: but it is impertinent in this place, for it should have been
thus said -- Yet it does not follow she must be uncertain whether the said
Condition be fulfilled or no. Or, if it may not be known that way, yet it may
be known another. Here then is a manifest sliding from the Condition required
to Ordination (which I afterward made to be the Ordainer's Intention) to the
Priesthood.

. 6. Now had I in my Reply grossly swallowed this Gulgeon, and submitted my self
to deal about the proof of the Roman Priesthood in an indefinite unlimited
manner, I must have lost my present Argument which precisely depends upon the
incapacity of all men to know another man's Intention. But know, Sir, your
Answer is no Answer to me, farther than you speak relatively to my Argument:
and though you seem willing to slink away from a Condition to Ordination to
Priesthood, the Effects of it; which you would find some plausible way to
maintain, if you could shake off my Medium, yet I will surely keep you to it.
It is an Argument, ad hominem, I grant, but it will bite you sorely.

. 7. Here I shall take occasion to advertise the Reader, that though an
Argument ad hominem be in many cases less considerable, yet in mine who argue
against Roman Catholics from their established doctrine, it has as much Virtue
and Cogency against them as if I made my Inferences from the four Gospels, or
the Divine Epistles. For they hold the voice of their Church in their Councils
of Florence, Trent, etc. to have the same Obligation upon Conscience that those
Gospels and Epistles have. If my deductions be good, they must either grant the
whole to their great loss, or by denying the Principles I go upon, loose and
undo the whole frame of the Roman Church.

Other Churches that assume not Infallibility, in such a case, part only with a
particular Tenet, the rest of their frame standing as it did before; but Roman
Catholics who attribute un errableness to their Church (on which pretended
ground their present Fabric stands) utterly ruin their whole Building, if they
grant their Councils to have been mistaken in any one Article they have defined
for Faith.

. 8. Now I come to the Matter your Words present us with, for ascertaining the
required Intention of your Ordaining Bishops, considered (I suppose you mean)
in general.

As your Words seem to run at first sight, you lay down two Grounds for this.
1. The Nature and End of Ordination in general. 2. Deductions from other known
Principles of the Roman Catholic Church. I shall consider both these.

. 9. For the first, I know indeed that every Institution sets forth the Nature
of what is to be observed, and the Ends they are appointed for, are notified by
the Institutor: but I never learned that Institutions carry power in them to
cause themselves to be observed. The Churches named in the Revelation, which
long since perished, (these and others) once had all Christian Institutions,
but in process of time lost or left them, what proof then is the Nature and End
of Ordination of its true Existence, or due performance in the Roman Church?

But if you intended the Two I mentioned to be but one Groundwork by their
conjunction, so that the Sense is this, The Nature and End of Ordination in
general, in Union or together with Deductions from other known Principles of
the Roman Catholic Church, etc. I am well content, as not being inclined to
make any man's words (howsoever put) to signify what their speaker or writer
meant not. And I confess some of your own words persuade me they look this way.
I shall therefore consider them together under the next particular.

. 10. For the second. You tell of the Bishop's Intention to be Knowable by way
of Deduction from some known Principles of the Roman Church, grounded upon
divine Revelation. The Reader may mark, you do not say, This Knowledge is
immediately deducible from divine Revelation, but from some Principles grounded
on it. For ought I see by this, you are not agreed to claim an Infallible
certainty of the Intention of your Ordaining Bishops, even considered in
general; that is, that there are any at all in the Roman Church that exert the
required Intention. And yet without this, we have found there is no Ordination,
and so no Priest, nor any of those 5. Sacraments that you consent to say depend
on the Priestly character, or lastly, that your Church is a true Church; which
yet is less than an Infallible Church. Deductions are but the work of Reason,
and Reason is but a fallible Principle, say many of you.

The dependence of all the links of this Chain has been made good before, save
the last, which is this, where there is no true Priesthood there is no true
Church: Where there is no Infallible Certainty of the Being of a Priesthood,
there is is no Infallible Certainty of the Being of a Church. To confirm this I
need but say little.

Thomas Aquinas lays down this distinction. A thing may two manner of ways be
called necessary in respect of an End: 1. When the End cannot be had without
it: as Meat is necessary to sustain man's life. And this is simply necessary to
an End. 2. When the End cannot so conveniently be obtained without it: as a
Horse is necessary for a journey. But this is not simply necessary to an End.

This being premised for the clearer Resolution of the Case in hand, he adds,

There are three Sacraments necessary by the first way of Necessity; two to
particular persons, viz. Baptism simply and absolutely, and Penance upon
supposition of mortal sin committed after Baptism. But the Sacrament of Order
is [ viz. simply] necessary to the Church. But other Sacraments are necessary
by the second manner of necessity, etc. Primo igitur modo necessitatis sunt
tria Sacramenta necessaria; duo quidem personae singulari: baptismus quidem
simpliciter and absolute, poenitentia autem suppoposito peccato mortali post
baptismum. Sacramentum autem Ordinis est necessarium Ecclesie. Sed secundo modo
necessaria sunt alia Sacramenta, etc. Sum. Theol. par. 3. q. 65. art. 4.


Nor have any of his Commentators, that I have met with, excepted against This,
nor any others of your Church. Your self a little beneath grants the point,
where you say with relation hereunto, The means are necessary to the end.
Several of your men, Bellarmine in particular De Clericis, cap. 3.
, contend that Protestant Churches are no true Churches, because as they
allege they want a true Priesthood. Besides, enough is to be fetched for this
purpose out of your Trent Council Sess. 23 de Sacram. Ordinis.
, but it is needless to do it.

. 11. From hence then I present you with this Scheme founded on your own
Authority, you are no surer you have a true Church, than you are that you have
a true Priesthood; you are no surer that you have a true Priesthood, even taken
in general, than you are that you have true Ordination; you are not surer that
you have true Ordination, than you are that your Ordaining Bishops Intend as
your Church requires. Now in regard you agree not to claim for the Intention,
the Infallible Certainty of Faith which immediately depends upon divine
Revelation, I see not how you can reasonably agree to claim the Infallible
Certainty of Faith for the truth of your Church. Which I commend to the
Reader's observation.

. 12. You first tell us in general of some Known Principles of your Church from
which the Knowledge of the Intention is deducible, and afterward reckon them
to be these, viz. That the Roman is the only Catholic Church; That God will
continue and preserve that Church to the Worlds end: and all this, say you,
appears from divine Revelation. You conclude hence they must have a true
Priesthood, the Means being necessary to the End.

Therefore, say you, whatsoever Intention of the Prelates is by them believed
as Necessary for this End, they do certainly believe according to their
Principles that God's Providence will secure it; his Omnipotence is able to
make good his Fidelity.

. 13. For reply, 1. I observe to the Reader, That though you have presented us
with a list of those Principles from which you pretend to deduce the Knowledge
of the Ordainer's Intention, yet you only say, They appear from Divine
Revelation, without showing either what this Revelation is, or where it is to
be found.

. 14. 2. As our discourse was at first Personal, every one will conceive, that
if your thoughts had then enabled you to make the abovenamed distinction, I
must have asked, What the Revelation was and where it appeared, on which your
said Principles are pretended to rest: Nor could you have refused to satisfy
my Question, without bringing a Cloud upon the Cause you manage.

And you may easily believe, that if I had known what you had been writing at
London, I should have wished you would have set down What and Where the
Revelation you speak of, is; that so I might have consented with you, or
refuted you, according to the best judgment I could make of the Thing
exhibited. I assure you, Sir, to obtrude upon the World, Doctrines, under the
Notion of Articles of Faith, without due proof of their Divine Original, is too
great an Empire for Creatures to arrogate to themselves; nor can one reasonably
submit to another in such cases, whether they respect God's honor, or their
own safety. Therefore when you talk of Divine Revelation, you should have
showed it.

. 15. You would surely enroll me in the Catalogue of Franticks, if I should
upon this Occasion spend Years in hunting through all Books for Texts of
Scripture, which your Popes, or their Subjects have fancied to be useful for
proving the Roman to be the Universal Church, and in confuting their vain
Glosses, when I have sound them. Your Person is not adverse to me, but your
Cause; and therefore you leave the Field, and cease to be my Adversary, unless
you show me your places of defense, and wherein their strength lies, and then
defy my Assaults. But this is not done here.

Tell me, is the Revelation you speak of, recorded in the first Verse, or
Chapter of Genesis, or the last Verse of the Revelation, or in any Verse
between those. Have you not read that Pope Boniface the VIII. proved the Pope
of Rome to be the sole Head of the Christian Church (with relation-to which
Head you call yours the One and the Whole Church) out of the first Verse of
Genesis, In the beginning God created, etc. He collected the Argument thus,
Dicitur in principio non in principiis, etc. It is said, quoth that Pope, in
the Beginning; not, in the Beginnings, etc. And this is urged to prove, that
there must be One visible Head of the Church, and this the Pope of Rome, with
whom all Christians must believe, and to whom all must submit. Have you not
read how Pope Gregory the VII. a great while before that, fetched a proof for
the Point, out of the 16th. Verse of that Chapter, God made two great lights,
the greater light to rule the day, etc. -- Illa [dignitas] quae praeest diebus,
id est Spiritualibus, Major est. That is, -- That Dignity that rules the Days,
that is Spirituals, is greater. I shall omit the comparison between Popes and
Kings, which this Text is brought to settle, and only apply it to the Point in
hand;

That God made the Pope to Rule all Christians, is all that I shall take Notice
of, as proved by it.

I have brought these two infallible Interpreters of Scripture upon the Stage,
(and which of you should be such, if your Popes be not) only to show it would
be endless to seek out those many Texts supposed by Roman Catholics to tend to
make out, that the Roman is the One Catholic Church of Christ upon Earth, and
to expose their extravagant Mis-expositions of them. I might soon begin with
Genesis, but might be long before I had run through the Bible. If these two
Popes had spoken only in general words, as you do, of Divine Revelation for
their Headships, (on which your Matter vertually depends) I am so dull, I
should never, unless by chance, have found out what Scriptures they referred to
for it: And so, though I had discussed a hundred other Texts, if those had been
left out, it might have been said, I had left my work undone. But wise Men will
not judge I ought to undertake Unreasonable tasks, or seek a Needle in a Bottle
of Hay.

But I spend time: For, it had been enough to say, I am only proving a
Negative, and need do no more than over-turn what you are pleased to erect for
your Defense. You have set me no more work here than I have considered, and so
I have no more to do here about your divine Revelation, whether you refer to
Scripture, or any thing else.

. 16. Yet it cannot but be worth our Notice, That your Method of maintaining
your Church is most easy and expedite. When you find your selves unable
particularly to prove your performance of those things which your Councils
require to the making your Institutions valid, yet your work is done by saying,
We are the Catholic Church, which God has promised to preserve to the World's
end; and therefore all we require will be certainly performed, though we cannot
otherwise make it out.

You may also prove all your more speculative Doctrines (had you a thousand
more than you have) by the same easy Method. We are the only Church, you may
say, to which God has promised his Spirit to lead us into all Truth, and
therefore our Articles cannot be false, though we cannot otherwise prove them to
be true.

. 17. If this be sufficient, how imprudent have many of your Men been, to spend
their pains, and health, and time, about evincing your particular Points to be
founded on Revelation, when a few general Words would have done it to rational
Satisfaction. Besides, as Cart loads of Books, on this supposition, are
unnecessarily written, so the Readers of them are at unnecessary expense of
Moneys in buying them, and of labor in perusing them. What an easy World
should we have had, if this your Method had all-along generally obtained. To
shorten the way to knowledge is a praiseworthy enterprise, and to teach how to
defend truth without care and trouble is a mighty thing. Well; You have showed
us an expedite Art of Controversy, and such as may be taught even illiterate
Plow-men in half an hours time. And I leave it to the Reader to determine,
whether a Plowman of your Persuasion, could have said less in this Matter, than
you have done, We are the Only Church, etc.

. 18. However, consider, Sir, This you use, is but an accidental Argument, and
can bestead you no longer, if any other Body of Christians shall please to call
themselves the Catholic Church, without offering the least proof of it. Which
is most apparently your case here. The Donatists of old, who appropriated to
themselves the name of the Catholic Church, might have easily quelled all
Arguments brought against them, at your rate of answering: For the said name
being arrogated, and the premises belonging to it, all the rest will follow
readily.

. 19. If you think to relieve your self by saying, I am bound to accept any
deductions you shall make from any of your Principles, I reply, no surely. I
was indeed to prove a Point from some of them, and have, I hope, done it. The
more you speak of That, I fear you expose your self the more to derision.

. 20. From the view of your Answer, it will appear, that though you called to
me, out of due time, for the Explication of more than a few Terms, yet you have
not had the heart to explain one of them in your Answer, neither what you mean
by Intention, nor what by Certainty, nor any of the rest. Instead of saying,
what is the particular nature of the Intention required by your Church, you
describe it no otherwise than thus -- Whatsoever Intention of the Prelates is
by them believed as necessary --. Instead of telling us the particular nature
of your knowledge of the Intention, you only say, I deny not that it may
sufficiently be known --.

You have no mind it seems to swim out of your depth, it being a silly thing to
court danger: nor are you so hardy a Champion as to step a few paces out of
your hold to meet an enemy, being mindful enough of the old Proverb, It is good
sleeping in a whole skin. Your frank opening your self this way might have led
me, if I had mistook any thing of yours, to the true mark, but could not have
caused my digression from it; and therefore though you were not bound in rigor
(further than to make your Answer apposite and useful) to have done this, yet
it would have looked brave and generous to have done it. Whether others shall
interpret your carriage in this kind to be due caution or no, I shall not
concern my self. Nevertheless I must say this, you knew the point must be
beaten out at last, and it had been manly to have contributed something toward
it: whereas he that knew not the particular Nature of the Subject before, knows
it but very little better by any help you give him in your Answer. I hope the
Reader will excuse me for staying a little too long here, in recompense of the
labor I have been at in the first part of this Tractate, to make the state of
the question plain to him.

. 20. Whatsoever shall become of any higher Certainty which you cannot
challenge me to yield upon Principles you have hitherto barely begged, without
offering the least color of proof for them; you seem to have a mind to secure
to your self a moral Certainty of the Intention of your Bishops in general.
Your words are these,

It is morally impossible that all the Prelates in the Roman Catholic Church
should be so malicious as wilfully to have omitted any thing in Ordination
which they believed to be Essential to it, and which the Church requires as so,
supposing it possible for them to do it and not be discovered. It is impossible
for us to believe, according to our Principles, that they should all turn
devils -- and conspire to damn the whole Church -- when withal they could
propose no advantage at all to themselves by this, but the clean contrary: Thus
you.

I Reply: The Pillar you have placed here for supporting your moral certainty
of the Intention, is too weak to bear it up. Which will appear by considering
the following particulars.

. 21. 1. You say not, It is impossible that any one, or several, or many of
your Bishops should out of Malice withdraw the required Intention.

You only say, It is morally impossible that all should turn devils and
conspire to damn the whole Church --

. 22. 2. I say, if Some may withhold their Intention through Malice, (which you
deny not) Others may upon other accounts omit it, viz. for Unbelief, culpable
Ignorance, gross Negligence, natural Inadvertence, etc. I shall speak a little
of some of these.

. 23. For Unbelief. It is Morally possible that some of your Bishops have
internally or mentally embraced Paganism or Judaism notwithstanding their
profession of the Christian Religion. It is notorious that the Inquisitors of
Heretical pravity in Roman Catholic kingdoms have often met with such men,
after they had many years lain hid under the disguise of the Christian
profession: and is it any way repugnant that the same Cloak which frequently
covers Merchants and Gentlemen and others, should cover Priests and Bishops
also? Now these disbelieving the virtue of all Christian Institutions, and that
of Ordination in particular; nay judging them to be the devices of certain
Politic men, or the Offspring of deluded Fancies, may omit Intending in their
Ordinations, without designing to damn or otherwise hurt the Ordained party.

. 24. For Culpable Ignorance, which the Schools call Antecedent. It is morally
possible that more than a few in your Church have in several ages been promoted
to the dignity of Bishops, who have been men of very little Learning and much
laziness, and so may have fallen short of Knowing either That your Church
requires the said Intention at all, or at least under the said Necessity: and
no wonder then if they may have omitted it. But here is yet no malice nor
devils in the case; for I may suppose if such had known it, they would have
roused up themselves to the performance of their duty.

. 25. For Supine Negligence: It is too frequently seen that many grossly slight
and neglect those duties which yet they know are to be done for the good of
others, without harboring any malicious design against them.

. 26. It is enough to hint to the Reader, that the Intention may fail through
occasional Cares, or Fears, or Crosses, or deep Studies (spoken of before)
which either put the Thoughts often to long stands or pauses, or else hurry
them away from duty else whiter. Many men are enabled by sad experience to
conceive this I have said, to be very probable.

. 27. Besides Natural Inadvertence incident to all men, There is in many a very
dull unactive temper of Mind arising either from Natural Constitution, or
sometimes from contracted Bodily distempers, whereby the thoughts are many
times hindered from rising higher than to what is sensibly to be done. And it
cannot be denied that it is morally possible that such Impersections may be
incident to your Bishops, (as well as other men) and that their due Intending
may be obstructed by them.

. 28. Now, Sir, I must put you in mind, you have not made any tolerable
Enumeration of the Causes of the defect of Intention: and while you have only
put a Bar against an Universal Conspiracy from malice, you give room for the
defect from all other Causes which you have no way provided against; and so you
are stark lame in your defense. If you are well acquainted with Roman Catholic
writers, I wonder you should take up so short, since they assign the same
Causes I have done.

Suarez does in one place, add to Malice other two Causes of this, among other
things, viz. Culpable ignorance, and Natural Inadvertence which excuses from
sin Sive id fecerit ex malitia, sive ex ignorantia culpabili, sive ex naturali
inadvertentia quae excusat peccatum. Tom. 4. disp 32.
.

And your Authors in their applying Remedies against this Evil seem to have
their eyes chiefly fixed upon other Causes than Malice. To show this, and the
defectibleness of the Intention, I shall produce only-one Testimony. It is a
passage in the famous Mass Book, ad Vsum Sarum Cautclie Missae.
.

If any Priest in the time of Consecration be distracted from Actual Intention
and devotion, Siquis tempore Consecrationis ab actuali intentions and devotione
distractus fuerit, nihilominus consecrat dummodo intentio habitualis in eo
remanscrit. Si autem per summam distractionem habitualis intentio cum actuali
tollcretur, videtur quod deberet verba consecrationis cum actuali intention
resumere.
he nevertheless consecrates, provided the Habitual Intention remain in him.
--. But if through very great distraction his Habitual Intention be taken away
as well as the Actual, it seems that he ought to resume the Words of
Consecration [say them over again] with Actual Intention.

Here note, that the words Habitual and Virtual have the very same
signification, as to our case: and that Aquinas with the other elder Schoolmen
described this Intention by the word Habitual, till Scotus his time, who
substituted the word Virtual as more proper to express the said Notion, and is
followed ever since by the writers of the Roman Church.

. 29. Now I go on to say (1.) This passage of the Massbook is an express
acknowledgment, that Priests when they do the Exterior work of Consecration may
fail to Intend both Actually and Virtually. Which upon the same ground is
equally applicable to Bishops with respect to Ordination.

(2.) It prescribes this Remedy against the said defect, that the Offending
Priest go to the work again, and do it better. I wish the advice had power to
necessitate those it is addressed to, to follow it. But that (alas!) cannot be
hoped for.

. 30. (3.) This advice is not offered to such as withdraw their Intention
through personal malice, or contempt of Religion, (which is the thing I here
directly aimed to show,) but to such as fail by inadvertence or dispersion of
thoughts.

And such are omitted in this address perhaps for this Reason, That such cannot
be well looked upon as capable (in any proximate degree) of the Advice given,
whereas some, at least, of those other careless blundering (yet charitable)
Priests may.

(4.) I observe once again, from the scope of the cited passage, against a
certain Person I mentioned before, That the distraction or disturbance here
mentioned, as the Cause of the failure of the Intention, cannot be meant of the
distemper of Frenzy or Madness. For, 1. The Advice is offered to such as
perceive their own defect, which Mad men, as such, cannot do. 2. Wise men (and
such I hope the Compilers of the Sarum-Missal will be held to be) advise that
Physic be given to Madmen for the Recovery of their Reason, rather than
directions to act wisely by, which supposes them already in the state of it.
If a Madman (who had gained a Habit of Baptizing before his distemper) should
rush into a House, and wash an Infant, newly born, with the Invocation of the
most Blessed Trinity, no wise Man would desire him to do it again with due heed
and Actual Intention, his supposed condition, forbidding him either to hit the
Intention at first, or to amend it in the repeated Action. This advice then
given, must be concluded to be directed to persons capable of receiving it;
which therefore cannot be frantic Priests. Hereby is confounded the
affirmation of the Priest I point at, viz. That none but madmen could fail to
intend aright.

. 31. You fee, Sir, several purposes are served by this Citation, besides that
I directly brought it for, but all of them tend to the illustration of the
Subject treated of. I shall only add this at parting with it, That it is not to
be looked upon as a single Testimony only, but instead of a thousand such, as
implying the judgment of all those Clergymen, who used and approved that
renowned Missal. And what a considerable part of our Nation that Book obtained
in, before that of Pope Pius the V. was framed for the general Uniformity of
your Worship, I leave you to think of: and consequently, what a vast Company of
your Clergy (who sure were the best Judges in this case) did implicitly and by
true Interpretation acknowledge, that there may be a defect of the Intention,
both Actual and Virtual, which may proceed from other Causes, than that of
Malice, which yet is the only thing alleged by you to that purpose.

. 32. Next, as an enforcement why there could be no malicious conspiracy of
your Prelates, you add this, They could not, say you, propose any advantage to
themselves by it, but the clean contrary.

But you forget the Genius of Malice, to which doing mischief is an agreeable
thing, without any allurements of Worldly profits, or the like. Remember the
sad Instance of Satan's murdering our first Parents. This I say not, as
believing any such conspiracy; nor is the fancying such a thing at all needful
to my business, having showed that what Malice may do in some, the same may
other Causes effect in others, as to the spoiling of the Intention: I say it
only to show that to be weakness, which you bring to strengthen your Ground.

. 33. There will need no conspiracy of any sort to render you uncertain of the
validity of your Ordainer's Intention, if you remember what I said before,
(after the dispatch of my first task) viz. That all the defects of Intention,
in your Ordaining Bishops from the Apostles death, hitherto, are chargeable
upon, and utterly disable all that are reputed to derive power from them; and
that the longer the Line is spun out by time, there will be more Nullities in
the Intention, both of Bishops and Priests.

. 34. To rivet this, I ask, What if the Catholic Church for many Ages after
Christ did not require this Intention, as necessAry to the Sacraments? If so,
the grand Motive to vigilance and heedfulness of Intending was wanting, and so
it is more probable, defects might then arise, which might baffle and enervate
the greatest care and circumspection of succeeding Bishops. I cannot find that
it was uninterruptedly so required; but if you can, I entreat you to show it.

The Sum hereof is, (1.) You have attempted to arm your self only against one
of the many Causes of defect of Intention, letting in the rest like a Flood
upon you. (2.) You have falsely supposed, that the effectual valid Intention
cannot have failed in your Church, without an Universal Conspiracy of the
Bishops of one Age: Whereas the defect may have been let in by degrees, and so
may have overspread your Church, for any thing you have said to the contrary on
this Head.

SECT. X. Mr. G.'s Argument, urged by way of Retort, examined and enervated.
NOW you come to instance in, and frame an Argument upon a desperate Subject,
which you take to be exactly parallel to mine, and say, That is vicious, and
therefore Mine must be so. And to make the clearer way to your Syllogistick
Forms, you pretend to lay down two Principles of our Church, as the Groundwork
of them.

Of the First you express your self thus,

You take it for a Principle amongst you, that there is a certain Number of
those that are truly Elected to Salvation in your Communion. You mean in the
Church of England.

. 1. For Reply. Holding you to be well seen in the Doctrine of our Church, I
would desire you to instruct me, where I may find that Principle. I had thought
our Church had dealt with such Things only in a general way, with a respect to
the Universal Church; and left particular Churches to try their Election, by
making sure their Calling. Of our Articles, the 17th. only concerns this
point; Which so far, as I am concerned to produce it, runs thus,

Predestination to life is the everlasting purpose of God, whereby He has
constantly decreed by his Counsel, secret to us, to deliver from curse and
damnation those whom he has chosen in Christ out of Mankind, and to bring them
by Christ to everlasting Salvation, as Vessels made to honor.

And of the Promises relative unto this, the same Article says, Furthermore we
must receive God's promises in such wise as they be generally set forth in holy
Scripture.

You see how indefinitely our Church speaks in this Matter -- Those whom he
has chosen in Christ out of Mankind: And -- We must receive God's promises, as
they be generally set forth in holy Scripture.

It Is our Principle, you see, That some in God's Church belong to the Election
of Grace; and that God will make good his Promises by Saving them. But we
descend no lower, nor need we, as thinking it sufficient for any particular
Church to be able to say,

We have all necessary Doctrine, both Dogmatical and Moral, and may be Saved,
if we truly Believe, and Sincerely obey it; to both which God in his mercy call
us. We venture not to say, God has Elected and promised to Save those in
Italy, or these in England: But we say, Whosoever truly Repents and Believes
the Gospel shall be Saved, whether in Italy or England, or any other place. We
have Divine Warranty for this: But we have none to give a Local or Personal
description of those that are Elected, and shall through Grace be Saved.

. 2. Nevertheless we have as great ground of Hopes, judging of the Tree by the
Fruits, that many of the Members of this Church are of the Number of the Elect,
and so will be saved, as you can have that the Members of the Italian, or
Spanish, or French Church are such. But we do not, cannot (I say) undertake
Unerrably to determine the Estates of particular Men, or Men of particular
places. When we bury Men of the most pious and exemplary conversations, you may
remember we express our strong Hopes only, but not perfect assurance of their
Bliss. Secret things belong to God.

. 3. However, this will not alter the Nature of our proceeding, because you
afterward say, The Argument may be thus applied to any Christian Church in the
World, or to all of them put together.

The Universal Church exists in all of them put together, and since you make
the Case of That and particular Churches all One, as to this Matter, I have the
Liberty to make the Argument to respect all of them put together, or the
Universal Church.

You mention a Second Principle in this manner,

And you will allow this also as a Principle, That these Elect must have true
Saving Grace in their Hearts, as a Condition necessary to their Salvation.

This, Sir, I acknowledge to be one of the Principles of our Church, and of all
other Christian Churches in the World.

Then you proceed from hence to add this,

Which saving grace, because you do not know to be in any particular man,
therefore you cannot be certain that He is one of those that is Elected to
Salvation. Which is unquestionably true.

Now I am to examine your Forms of Argumentation, pretended to be parallel to
those, I urged against you. Your first is thus,

That Church which makes Salvation depend upon a Condition, which no Man living
knows, whether it be fulfilled, in order to Salvation, must be Uncertain
whether they have any, who shall be saved in their Communion. But the English
Church does so. Ergo, The English Church is Uncertain, whether they have any
which shall be saved in their Communion.

. 4. Now because you say, The Argument may be thus applied to any Christian
Church in the World, or to all of them together; I shall alter the Form a
little, and make it respect all of them. Thus it goes,

Whosoever makes Salvation depend upon a Condition, which no Man living knows,
whether it be fulfilled in Order to Salvation, must be Uncertain whether they
have any who shall be saved in their Communion. But all the Christian Churches
in the world put together, do so. Ergo, All the Christian Churches in the world
put together, are Uncertain whether they have any which shall be saved in their
Communion.

In regard, I say, One and all Christian Churches fare alike, according to your
own acknowledgment, with respect to this Argument, I have placed this latter
form also in view. And what I shall say of them, is as follows.

. 5. I shall admit the parity of either of these Syllogisms with my first,
under your own Notion of them newly mentioned: yet must tell you, in my way to
your other, that though you made a distinction, and, at least, unnecessarily
applied it to my first Proposition, and thereupon causelessly pronounced it
false; yet I shall not imitate you in your indiscretion; but grant your Major,
as generally put, to be true, because of the Connection of a necessary Condition
with That it is required to: whether it be in deed necessary, or only so in the
Estimation of the Church that requires it. For the Not-knowing a Condition to
be fulfilled, upon which the Being of a Thing is suspended, evidently
necessitates the Uncertainty of the Thing it self.

. 6. Pray know, Sir, had I not been prevented by your Compliance and
Concessions, I would have dealt more distinctly with relation to the Instance
you have put before I had given an Answer to it. I would in time have asked you
a few of those questions you asked me out of time, as what Knowledge or
Certainty you denied in your Instance, etc. or parted the sundry senses my
self, and applied them; but I perceive I now need not.

I shall then only deny the Minor which you prove in this manner,

True Grace in the Heart is a Condition which no man living knows whether it be
fulfilled or no in Order to Salvation.

But the English Church [ or, all Christian Churches put together -- ] requires
Grace in the Heart in Order to Salvation. Ergo.

The English Church [ or, all Christian Churches put together -- ] requires a
Condition in Order to Salvation, which no man living knows whether it be
fulfilled or no.

. 7. Before I speak to this, I advertise That you here pretend only to make one
man Uncertain of the truth of Grace in another man's Heart, as I did to make
one man Uncertain of another's Intention when you gave this Answer. And indeed
the making your Instance a parallel to mine confines the sense hither. So that
here is, according to your self, room left for every man to judge as well as he
can, of his own Grace, and so whether he be one of God's Elect. Which thing
falls not here into dispute.

. 8. This premised, I will thus distinguish in the Major of this Syllogism, of
true Grace in the Heart. By Grace in the Hearts of men is meant either -- in
the Hearts of men considered [determinate] in particular, or -- in the Hearts
of men considered [indeterminate, vel in confuso] in general.

. 9. If when you say True Grace in the Heart is a Condition which no man living
knows, etc. you mean it of men in particular, I will freely grant your
Proposition to be true. For no man has full certainty that another has true
Grace in his Heart, God having reserved that prerogative to himself, who is the
only searcher of the heart Jer. 17.10.
.

. 10. But then I add, my granting this brings no disadvantage at all upon us.
The Knowledge of our having the true means of Grace, (with their Effects) as
God's holy Word and Sacraments, and Persons duly Authorized to Administer them
(the Knowledge hereof, I say) is not any whit obstructed or clouded by our
ignorance of another man's grace: inasmuch as a graceless man may be a true
Minister of them, and the Efficacy of divine Ordinances depends upon the
merciful Operation of their Institutor, and not on the Grace of those that
Administer them. Whereas on the other side, your ignorance of the Intention of
your Ministers in particular, renders you Uncertain whether you have the true
means of Grace, and consequently the Benefits God is ordinarily wont to confer
by them; as has above been shown. Which amounts to a vast difference.

. 11. But if you mean it of Grace in the Hearts of men taken in general, (which
acception alone your Instance seems to respect) So that the Sense of the
Proposition is This, True Grace in the Heart of some or other, some where or
other, is a Condition which no man living knows, etc.

. 12. I, without more ado, deny your Major as utterly false in this Sense: and
so may either dismiss you re infecta, or put you to the trouble of making
another Syllogism before I need to assign the manner of Knowledge, whereby we
know Grace to be in some or others. But I will be good natured and supply your
defect. You should then have gone on to urge to this purpose.

If true Grace in the heart be a Condition which any man living knows whether
it be performed in order to Salvation, then he knows it either by some
Principles evidently grounded on divine Revelation, or some other way.

But he knows it neither by any Principles evidently grounded upon divine
Revelation, nor any other way: Ergo,

Grace in the heart is a Condition which no man living knows whether it be
performed in order to Salvation.

. 13. Now, Sir, and not till now, am I obliged to assign the way by which true
Grace may be known to be in some or others, though we know not who. Upon my
denial of the Minor when you are pleased to say, ad parts, I must tell which
way I know it, or give up my Cause.

. 14. Well. Without the formality of your distinction I say, This may be known
by a Knowledge grounded immediately on divine Revelation. The whole of this
matter appears in Scripture.

1. When our B. Savior promises That the gates of hell shall not prevail
against his Church Matt. 16.18.
: He says in effect, that in despite of men and devils, he will at all times
even to the worlds end maintain some in his true Faith and Worship, and also
save them at last.

2. He determines true Grace or Purity of heart to be necessary in order to the
Salvation of such. Blessed are the pure in heart for they shall see God Mat.
5.8.
. Which words by true and unquestionable implication exclude all impure persons
from Salvation.

But in many Texts such are formally excluded from it. Without holiness no man
shall see the Lord Heb 12.14.
.

3. His promise to maintain and continue such a people cannot fail by reason of
his divine Perfections -- God that cannot lie promised Tit. 1.2.
. He is faithful that has promised Heb. 10.23.
.

. 15. Thus according to express Scripture we find, that Grace in the heart is
necessary to Salvation: that God has promised he will ever preserve and save
some in the world who are Faithful and Gracious: that his promise cannot fail.
All which put together truly grounds our Knowledge, that there is true Grace in
some Members of the Christian Church, though we know not who or where they are
in particular.

Thus have I spoke to your Argument considered in itself, and this more
regularly than you have done to mine, if I flatter not my self.

. 16. But that which is the main concern, I do not find that parity you pretend
there is between your second and mine: pray where find you in the divine
Oracles that the Intention I have described, is as necessary to the Being of
the Sacraments, as they teach that Grace is to the being Saved. Had God indeed
knit them individually together, and declared the necessary dependence the
Sacraments have of this Intention, we should have been sure from divine
warranty (as I have proved we are in the matter of Grace) that some Bishops and
Priests in God's Church have from time to time duly Intended. But alas! you
have exhibited nothing of divine Revelation to show this; the chaffy general
words you have given have nothing of weight or cogency in them. This grand
disparity is very apparent, and you have said nothing to hinder any man from
apprehending it such; and so the design of your Instance is defeated, and
shares with the rest of your Answer in its misfortunes.

. 17. I may well forbear to speak of other things; for, Fancy what promises you
please, as peculiarly made to Men of your Communion, yet know, God is not bound
to enable Men to believe and perform what himself has not made necessary, in
order to Grace and Salvation.

. 18. I shall now, Sir, desire the Protestant Reader to remember, as an
Antidote against Temptations from Roman Catholics, the uncertain comfortless
Estate you are in. For pick you out the most discerning Layman amongst you, and
suppose all your reputed Clergy to pass leisurely by him, one by one, yet he
shall not upon sure Grounds be able to say, of any of the whole Number, This is
a true Bishop, or a true Priest: Nor can any of Them with better Warranty
affirm of themselves, I am such a One.

Nor can one Member of your whole Body assuredly say, I have once in my life
time been partaker of one true Sacrament. All this I have made good.

If you could say, some or other of our Clergy are true Bishops and Priests;
and some or other of our Body have received true Sacraments, though we know not
who, or where those are; yet it is a very lamentable thing for each of you to
be uncertain concerning himself, and incapable of applying those Mercies to any
particular Persons. And yet it appears you have taken no great Care to secure
even this heartless General Good to your Church.

Had you armed your Paper with any particular strength, with relation hereunto,
you should have found me an easy Enemy, inasmuch as I had not, nor needed to
have, any design that way upon you, what I have done otherwise, being
sufficient to expose your Nakedness.

SIR, After you have delivered what you call your Full Answer, (which I have
examined) you write something more, though not under that Notion. And that I
may appear just and fair to your Expectation, I will in short acquaint the
Reader, what the Severals of it are; and subjoin a few Words to each of them.

. 1. 1. You desire me to declaro, What our Doctrine is of the Subject in
question.

Answer. It was the only business I undertook, to distress you with Consequents
from your own Doctrine; and while I am a doing this, you call to me, Pray, Sir,
What is the Doctrine of your Church? Now let the World judge, whether your
request be not a calling me off from my proper Work, and very probably seeking
an Occasion to leap aside from your Province. For whatever we hold, (which yet
you was long enough a Student amongst us to under stand) what could my telling
you that, boot you, so long as I evince that your own Doctrine intails
afflictions on you?

. 2. 2. You call for an Explication of several Terms.

Answer. I have told you how unseasonable your Call was, but withal have done
at large what you requested.

. 3. 3. You say, It would have been more for the Satisfaction of my Protestant
Auditors, if I would have proved (as you proposed) the Lawfulness of our
Separating, at the pretended Reformation, from every Communion of Christians in
the World: or that any one Term of your Communion (you say, you gave me my
Choice) was Unlawful, or just Ground of our Separation.

. 4. Answer, 1. Among sundry other things then started, those you speak of were
indeed mentioned, and I gave such Grounds of Resolutions of them, as seemed
sufficient to my self, and the Protestant Auditors. And I gave more than you
had a Mind of, for when I was laying down the Terms of Christian Communion, you
flung off from the Consideration of it, saying these Words, You now enter into
the Merits of the Cause! As if that was no time or place for it. And this the
Auditors say, They very well remember.

. 5. 2. Your great Undertaking is well worth observing. You take no less upon
you, than to maintain for just and lawful, every Term the Roman Church requires
to her Communion. Your Province is Wide, and requires an Universal skill in the
Controversies between the two Churches, as will thus appear. (1.) She requires
the Belief of all those Articles your Councils have defined to be Matter of
Faith. And these will be found not a few, if we compare Pope Pius his, with the
Ancient Creeds. (2.) She requires an Assent to, and Compliance with your whole
Worship. Now each of these Articles you are, it seems, furnished to maintain,
as also the whole frame of your Worship: and this not against me only, but
also against Dr. Wr. Mr. P. and (for ought I know) all Comers.

. 6. Sir, I love courage in any Man, but I love Caution too. Pray tell me, How
it happens, that in your Study of Theology, for full twenty years in our
Communion, you were not able to find one of their distinguishing Articles
defensible; and now in One years time see them all perspicuous and surely
founded. Your concern to search for truth was the same before, as lately, your
Purse enabled you to buy Books, and your Education and Parts to read them, and
you will not, I suppose, be Unwilling We should believe you weighed the
Arguments on both sides. Pray then tell us, how, all at once, you happened to
find all those Points we call Popery, to be Warranted by Divine Authority.

. 7. If you be inspired, I am sure to have the worse in contending with you. If
you be not, I have no reason to dread your Challenge.

. 8. But I have found out your strength; you can justify all your particular
Points with a few begged general words, viz. We are the only Catholic Church,
and therefore whatsoever We teach for Faith, cannot sail of being true. And
what we require as necessary, cannot fail of being done.

. 9. I confess you are able at this rate to baffle all the Protestants in the
World, and on that Score may dare us, even from Dan to Beersheba. But we only
smile at such impotent conceits.

I have set forth the Matter of this last part of your Letter, though our
present Controversy is not touched in it, that You may have no Color to
Complain, I have suppressed any thing of Yours.

. 10. It was my only business to present You with a View, of the Feeble Estate
of Your Church, which I hope I have performed, and so rest,

Yours, etc.

FINIS.

