The CONFESSION Of the New Married Couple, Being The Second Part of the Ten
Pleasures of Marriage.

Relating The further delights and contentments that ly masked under the bands
of Wedlock.

Written by A. Marsh. Typogr.

LONDON, Printed in the year 1683.

To the READER.
Courteous Reader,

THy kind acceptance of the First Part, has encouraged me to go forward with a
Second, which I here present thee with; being now indifferently confident that
it will be no worse used by Thee then the Brother of it was: I hope there is
never a Part of it, in which thou will not find something that will please thy
Fancy: But for such as profess to be of the zealousest sort of people, and make
use of the gestur of casting up the whites of their eyes, when they intend to
tell you a notoriously, I would not have them to study in it, by reason it
speaks a great deal of truth, and will not be so suitable to their humors;
because it is a bundle of matter that is scrambled together, which could not be
wrapped up in such clean linen, or dressed up in such holding forth Language and
pious hypocrisy, as such generally make use of: It is only fit for truehearted
Souls that will solace their Spirits with a little laughter, and never busy
their brains with the subversion of State and Church government: And being well
received by such, it is as much as is expected by him who is thine Farewell.

The CONFESSION Of the New Married Couple, Being The Second Part of the Ten
Pleasures of Marriage.
INTRODUCTION.
IT is an inexpressible pleasure for Travelers, when after many traverses and
tossings too and again, they return quietly home to their studies and
rememorates all the unexpected pleasure that they encountered with upon the one
Coast, and the horrible vexations and confusions that they had upon another.
And the very penning thereof, does, as it were anew, repossess them of all the
pleasures, and conveyeth them through all the Countries, without so much as the
least moving of a foot. Just so it goes with those that have been under the
Bands of Matrimony, and are loosed from them: These being then come to be
solitary, at rest, and in quiet, can the more seriously rememorate and
recogitate what pleasures they injoied at one, and what thwartings and crosses
they met with at other times. And the writing down of these, does not only
afresh regenerate in them the received pleasures; but serves also for a
Lookingglass to all married Couples, for them to recogitate what pleasures they
have already received, and what joys are still approaching toward them. And
for those which as yet know not the sweetness of the Nuptial estate, it serves
for a Fire-Beacon that they may with all earnestness Sail unto it, and possess
those joys also. Of those we have before demonstrated unto you Ten Pleasant
Tables: But because the Scale of Marriage may hang some what evener, and not
fall too light on the women's side, we shall for the Courteons Reader add unto
them Ten Pleasures more, being that which some Married people have since
confessed, or to be short with you, was formerly winked at, and passed over.

The First Pleasure.
The young Couple begin to keep Shop, and demand their promised Portion.
TIll now, O new Married Couple, you have passed through the First part of your
Wedlock with feasting and pleasures, and have injoied no small delights in it.
But what is there in this World that we grow not weary of? You have seen that
the sumptuosest Feast full of delicate dishes, and the pleasurablest Country
Scituations, with all their rich fruits, finally cloggeth, through the continual
enjoyment of them.

Nevertheless it is the general desire of all persons, forasmuch as it is
possible, to live in the World in pleasure and delights. Amongst the rest the
gain of money is none of the smallest pleasures, and this appears to be the
least burthensom, tho it have much trouble in it. Therefore is it very much
commendable, O young Couple, though you have a pretty estate of your own,
according as your Contract of Marriage testifies, and as we have also seen by
the Wedding you kept, your apparel, and the other ap and dependances, that you
begin to meditate how to make the best benefit of your stock; and so much the
more, because your Predecessors got it with a slavish diligence, reaped it
together with sobriety, kept it with care, and finally left it unto you for
your great pleasure. It is then also not strange, if you, as true bred
children, keep it carefully, and make the best profit of it; to the end, that
your Successors, when time shall serve, may find that they have had frugall
Parents; and so walk in your footsteps. Verily this is one of the necessariest
meditations in the World. If we could but any ways make the dead sensible of
it in their grave, undoubtedly the Relics of your Parents would rejoice at so
happy and careful an intention of you their children.

And truly, what is there, among other cogitations, more pleasurable, then to
begin with a handsome Shop-keeping? For this through the daily gain, yields
every day new pleasures, and by consequence a merry life. It Is true,
Merchandise bears a greater respect, and yields also sometimes great gains; but
with these trouble sometimes, it is for the most part subject to great and
weighty losses, which is the destruction of young people, and so intangles the
merriest part of their lives, that fears and cares deprives them of their night
rest. If the wind blow hard, they are presently in a fear that the Ships at sea
laden with their Goods and Wares may be Shipwrack'd. If they will assure them,
then the Assurer goes away with the profit: and they are also so greedy and
cunning, that the least storm or bad tiding makes them very slow and
circumspect; or if they be not so, it is to be feared, so there happen many
losses, that then the Assurer himself might come to be lost.

But the handsome Shop-keeping is the surest and pleasurablest; for every moment
you get new customers as well from abroad as at home, who buy continually with
ready money; or otherwise pay the old score, and trust the new. Yea all the news
that goes about the City, is brought home and imparted to you. There Is not a
man dies, or woman brought to bed, but you have knowledge of it. Well then,
what greater pleasure can there be then this?

Also, young Woman, you may, through love and care, here in be assistant to
your husband oftentimes, which you cannot do in Merchandise, and so by degrees
learn to understand the Shop, and converse neatly with the customers; whereby
you can in his absence, also help the customers, and give them pleasing
answers, insomuch that your oftentimess attain to as perfect a knowledge of the
Trading, as your husband himself.

You are happy, yea ten times over happy, O house wively young Woman in this
choice, and that not only so, your husband, but principally for your self. For
if that mischance might happen to you, that death should bereave you of your
husband, you find your self oftentimes settled in a way of Trading, which you
can manage your self, and set forward with reputation. Nay though you might
happen to have children, you have the opportunity your self to bring them up in
the same way, and so get a due, faithful and careful assistance from them,
which will not so well be done by Men and Maidservants, and over whom there is
feldom so much command, as over ones own children.

And if your husband continue in health, and find that Trading grows quick, he
perceives that by the assistance of his wife, something else may be taken by
the hand that is also profitable, and then he will always exercise some sort
of Merchandise that is secure and advantagions.

It is most certain, sweet Woman, you will be the more tied to your
housekeeping, and cannot so often go to visit and take your pleasure with your
Gossips as you formerly did, in Coaches or by Water; as if your husband had
taken any sort of Marchandice in hand; because that a Woman who is married to a
Shopkeeper, is as it were also wedded to the Counter, by reason you dare not
trust your Shop to old, much less to new men or Maidservants, because they do
not perfectly understand the Trade, and thereby also find occasion to make one
bed serve for both and junket together; which makes no small confusion in the
family; but little regard must be taken about that, for the importantest must
always be taken care of.

And be assmed, if the desire of gain, small Trading, and bad payment, begin
once to take possession of you, the thoughts of all the former pleasures will
remove, and you will exchange them for those that are more noble and becoming,
viz. in the well governing of your Men and Maidservants in the Shop and House,
and taking inspection that they be obedient unto you; the Family must be well
taken care of; going to Market with the Maid to buy that which is good, and let
her dress it to your mind; and every Market day precisely, with the Maid neatly
dressed, and following you with a hand-basket, go to take a view of Newgate,
Cheapside, and the Poultry Markets; and afterward, when your got a little
farther, then to have your Baby carried by you, neatly and finically dressed up;
and in hearing of it, whilst it is in the standing stool, calling in its own
language so prettily Daddy and Mammy. O that is such an extraordinary pleasure,
that where ever you go, what soever you delight in, all your delight is, to be
at home again in your Shop, by your servants; and most especially (when you
have it) to be by your Baby.

And if you do get a fit to be gadding abroad with some of your friends and
neighbors (for one cannot always be tied as if they were in Bridewell, nor
the Bow ever stiff bent) why then you have Ascen-sion-day, which may as well be
used for pleasure as devotion. And if that be too short, presently follows
Whitsontide, then you may sing tantarroraara three days together, and get your
fill of it. So that you may find time enough to take your delight and pleasure,
tho you be a little tied to a Shop.

This being then in such manner taken into a ripe deliberation by some of the
nearest relations, it is concluded on to set up a handsome Shop, and to furnish
it with all sorts of necessaries; and by that means make that you may always
say Yea and never No to the Customers.

O how glad the good Woman is, now she sees that her husband, who is otherwise
somewhat stifnecked, lets himself be persuaded to this, by his friends! and how
joyful is the husband that his Wife, who at first seemed to be high-spirited,
is now herewith so absolutely contented.

O happy Match, where the delight and pleasure of both parties, is bent upon
one subject. How fast does this writhe and twist the Bands of Wedlock and love
together! Certainly to be of one mind, may very well be said to be happily
married, and called a Heaven upon Earth.

Here they are cited to appear who display the married estate to moonstrously,
as if there were nothing but horrors and terrors to be found in it. Now they
would see how that Love in her curious Crusible, melts two hearts and ten
senses together. To this all Chemists vail their Bonnets, though they brag of
their making the haidest Minerals as soft as Milk and Butter. This Art
surpasses all others.

Yet here ought to be considered what sort of Trading shall be pitched upon The
man has good knowledge in Cloth, Silk stufs, French Manufactures and
Galantries, etc. But the Woman thinks it would be much better, if they handled
by the gross in Italian Confits, Candied and Musk sugar plums, Raisons of the
Sun, Figs, Almonds, Pistaches, Bon Christian Pears, Granad-Apples, and dried
fruits; together with Greek and Spanish Wines, delicate Sack, Muskadine, and
Frontinyack Wine; which is a Negotiation, pleasing to the ey, delicious for the
taste, and beloved by all the World. And by this she thinks she shall procure as
many Customers as her husband, because she has familiar acquaintance with
several brave Gentlewomen, that throw away much money upon such commodities,
and make many invitations, Treats and Feastings. And she her self could always
be presently ready, when she received an honorable visit.

O happy man, who has gotten such an ingenious understanding wife! that takes
care and considers with her self for the doing all fit and necessary things to
the best advantage. And really she is not one jot ont of the way, for this sort
of Merchandise is both relishing and delightful, and must be every foot bought
again.

Now the time requires going to market to buy Fir, Oak, and Sackerdijne Wood,
and to order that the Shop may be neatly built and set up. And you are happy,
that Master Paywell, who is a very neat Joiner and Cabinet-Maker, is of your
very good acquaintance, and so near by the hand: He knows how to fit and join
the pannels most curiously together, and so inlaies, shaves, and polishes the
fine wood, that you would swear it is all of one piece.

Well here again is another new pleasure and delight? If all things go thus
forward, certainly the wedding-cloaths will in a short time be, at the least, a
span to little. O how glad you will be, when this trouble is but once over! and
that the Shop is neatly built, painted, gilt, furnished, and sinely put into a
posture.

O how nobly it appears, and how delightful and pleasing it will be when this
new Negotiant sees his Shop full of Customers, and he at one Counter
commending, praising and selling, and one servant bringing commodities to him,
and another has his hands full with measuring and weighing! And his beloved at
another Counter finds imploiment enough with telling money, weighing of gold,
and discoursing with the Customers. Then it will not seem strange unto you, how
it came to pass that your Predecessors got such fine sums of money together, and
left them unto you to be merry with. Therefore you ought also, even as they
did, to provide your selves with a curious and easy to be remembered Sign,
because your Customers by mistake might not come to run into your Neighbors
Shops.

I have not yet forgotten that your Grandfather, being a Woollen Draper, first
hung out the Sign of the Sheep, and his name was James Thomson, but by reason
of his great custom, they called him, by the nick name, of James in the Sheep;
which remains still as a name to the generation. And in like manner your wives
Grandfather, a well customed Shopkeeper in zilk-stufs, whose name was William
Jackson, hung out the sign of the Silkworm, but his son going to school with
another boy whose name was also William Jackson, for the making a distinction
between them, they gave him the name of William the Silkworm, which also
remains as a name to the Family. This is not common only among the Londoners,
but in other Cities and Country Towns, also among Coachmen, Wagoners, and
others.

But come we will take our leaves of these people, and turn again to our new
married Couple, who can hardly rest quietly a nights, for the earnest desire
they have to see all things accomplished, and their Trading going forward. And
in time Tom Thumb got on his doublet, tho he was seven years pulling on the
first sleeve, Yet before you come to this great pleasure, you will meet with a
troublesome obstruction in the way, which if you can but turn of bravely, it
will be much the pleasanter.

For before the Shop is fully furnished, you will see what there will be wanting
to fill all the corners and places with commodities that must be sold by length
of time, and to stand out the trust; and also with patience and meekness expect
the coming of money from slow and bad paymasters: therefore it begins to be time
to speak of the promised Portion.

Uds bud, what a racket is here now? For the young man's father had made his
full account that he should not already be dun'd for the promised Portion; not
doubting but that the young woman's lay all totally ready told of in bags; and
thought to take it in the best sense, I will pay my son his interest yearly;
and afterward, in peaceable times, when there is little or no impositions, and
that my Coffers are better furnished, will then give him the principal.

And seriously the old man seems to deal herein very cordially, since other
men's fathers do not do half so well, and only give this for an answer, With
young men must be promised, and with daughters must be given. And others make
their sons give them a bond, wherein he, as by example, acknowledges to be
indebted to his father six hundred pound, whereupon the Father closes the
match, and promises to give in marriage with his son six hundred pound: which
at last comes to nothing at all, and only serves for a perfect cheat to deceive
and hood-wink the eyes of the pretended Gentlewoman and her Guardians.

It is no wonder where such Matches are made, if, when such thing are
discovered, there be a great deal of time spent, before they can come to the
true pleasure.

But you, O new married man, who have a liberal father on your side, you can
get provisionally your interest, and when times mend your principal. Perhaps it
will not be half so well with your wives estate, for she it may be in her
maiden estate, has spent and run out more in gaudy apparel, to entice a Lover,
then the interest of her estate could bear, insomuch that the principal is
diminished, or the revenues there of received and consumed long before they
were due.

's Wounds in what a sweat and fear, whith these sort of cogitations, is this
approaching new Shopkeeper in? How earnestly he runs to her Guardians, to see
if they will unriddle him this doubt that he is in. But to his good fortune, he
finds it in a much better condition then he thought he should. For his dearest,
has spent much less in her apparelling and maintenance, then she could have
done, so that there is not only money in stock, but rents of her real estate that
are yet to be paid unto her, though there was very much consumed for her Brides
apparel and the other accoutrements. Well this is an extraordinary pleasure,
and a great comfort for his panting heart. Uds life how many hundred kisses are
now offered at the Altar of her sweet lips, that otherwise would not so much as
have been thought upon. Therefore one may easily perceive that money increases
love very much; and that Lovers in these times are so bent upon money, and so
diligent in search of it, is no admiration; nay they scruple not to inquire of
the Guardians, and up and down by unsworn Brokers, who negotiate with a very
close intelligence in this sort of Flesh-Trade, and draw ten double salaries
(and that ofttimes too from both sides) if they can but help any one to a good
bargain, and that he obtains access; and afterward wheedle it about so, that
it finally comes to be a match. But what sad issue generally such sort of
Matches are attended with, is well known to the whole World.

You, O Lovers, who seek to be Livry men of the great Company, and aim to
possess the pleasures of Marriage, have a care of the enchanting voices of
these crafty Sirens, because they intend to batter you upon the Scylla and
Charibdis where the Hellish Furies seem to keep their habitation. These are the
only Occasioners of bad Matches, and Such as raise a Scandal of that Estate,
which at once affoards both Pleasure, Mirth and Joy.

But our new married Couple went clear another way to work, who now to their
full contentment, act so many pretty Apish tricks, enjoy such multiplicities of
kindnesses, and toss each other such quantities of kisses, as if there were a
whole Kingdom, or at the least a vast Estate to be gained thereby: So that they
find, that in that estate, there are not only Ten, but a thousand Pleasures
cemented together in it; whereof in the following shall be demonstrated in some
part the imperfect gloss, but never the accomplished Portrait.

The Second Pleasure.
The Husband grows Pipsy; and keeps the first Lying-in: Takes the Doctors
advice. Is mocked by his Pot-Companions.
JUst as one Candle lights another, so we see also, that two, sympathetically
minded, know, by the cleaving of their lips together, how to breath into each
other their burning hearts-desire, wherewith the one does as it were kindle the
other, and do every moment renew and blow on again their even just now
extinguished delights.

Of this you have here a pattern from our late married, for whom the longest
Summer-daies and Winter nights fall too short to satisfy their affections and
amiable imbracings; they hardly know how to find out time that they may bestow
some few hours in taking care for the ordring and setting all things in a
decent posture in their new made Shop; imagining that they shall always live
thus, Salamander-like in the fire, without being ever indamaged by it, But time
will teach them this better. In the mean while we will make our selves merry
with the pleasure of this married Couple, who see now their Shop fully in
order, furnished with several brave goods, and a pretty young fellow to attend
it.

But because Customers dot not yet throng upon them, they find no other pastime
then to entertain each other in all manner of kind inbracements, and to cheer
up their hearts therein to the utmost. Here it may be plainly seen how pleasant
and delightful it is for the young woman, because her physiognomy begins to
grow the longer the more frank and jocund.

So, that to us, her countenance does display.
Her souls content, e're since her Wedding day.
But just as a burning Candle does consume, though to it self insensible, yet
makes of hers joyful by its light, so does our new married Man, before few
months are expired, find that he becomes the very subject of flouting at and
laughter, among his former boon Companions; because every one jestingly tells
him, that he poor Venus Knight is found to be too light for the Sadle, and too
weak in her Field; as also that the paleness of his Face, the lankness of his
Cheeks, and thinness of his Calves, does show it most plainly.

And verily there are some artificial Jesters who do it so neatly, that he
himself believes it almost to be true: yet nevertheless, to avoid their
mockeries, casts it of from him as far as possible may be. But his own opinion
does so clearly convince him, that in himself he ponders and considers what
course is best to be taken.

But housoever as long as he goes and walks up and down, eats and drinks, he
thinks that the tide will turn again. Yet finding himself inwardly weaker of
body rallies with his own distemper, in hopes that by his jesting, among his
merry Companions, he may from them understand what is best, upon such
occasions, to be done or avoided; and they seriously jesting say to him: O
friend, wean your self from your wife and Tobacco, and drink Chocolate, and eat
knuckles of Veal, or else you will become like one of Pharaohs lean Kine. Oh ho,
thinks he, if that be true, I have spent my reckoning this evening very happily.

Now young woman, don't you admire if your husband comes home at night
discontented in mind, for his wits run a Wool-gathering, and he has walked in a
dump from Towerhill to Tuttle Fields contriving what is best for him to do, and
how to compass the matter neatly. For to remain so from his dear and delicate
Wife, not paying unto her the usual family duty, is below the generosity of a
man; and to tell her what the matter is, is yet worse. To leave of Tobacco, and
eat knuckles of Veal, is feasible. But to go to a Coffehouse and always drink
Chocolate, that sticks against the stomach.

Nevertheless Necessity has no Law. And the Occasion overpowers affection.
Insomuch that after a thousand pondrous considerations, he resolves to deny his
dearly beloved Wife a little of that same; and to that purpose will sometimes in
an evening feign to have the headake, or that he is very dull and sleepy,
(which is no absolutely;) and thereby commands his man to call him up sometimes
very early in the morning, as if there were forsooth Customers in the Shop,
etc. and hunts up and down among the Chocolate Dealers to get of the very best,
preparing it himself in milk, treating all that come to visit him with
Chocolate instead of Tobacco; and he feigning that he has an extraordinary
delight in it; and on the other side, persuade his wife that hei as huge mand
to eat a knuckle of Veal, some good broth, and new-laids Eggs, or some such
sort of pretty conceited diet.

But perceiving that this avails little, and that he grows rather weaker then
stronger; away he trots to the Scotch Paduan Doctor, who immediately prescribes
a small Apothecaries Shop, at the least twenty or more several sorts of herbs,
to be infused in a pottle of old Rhenish wine, and twice a day to drink half a
quartern thereof at a time: Item a Plaster to be applied to his Stomach; a
Balsem to anoint the privy Members and an unguent for the pit of the Stomach,
under the nose, and to chafe the Temples of the head; but most especially to
keep a good strengthening diet, etc.

But this seems to have too much stir in the view of his wife; therefore must
be laid aside; and away he goes then to a High German Doctor, who without stop
or stand, according to the nature of his Country, Mountebank-like begins to
vaunt, as follows: Ach Herr, ihr zijt ein hupscher, aber ein swaccher
Venus-Ritter; ihr habt in des Garten der Beuchreiche Veneris gar zu viel
gespatzieret, und das Jungfraulicken Roszlein zu (...) gehantiret; ihr werd ein
grosze kranckheyt haben, wan ihr nicht baldt mein herlich Recept gebraucht,
aber wan ihr dieses zu euch neimt, ihr zold alzo baldt hups gecuriret worden,
zolches das ihr wie ein redlicher Cavalier andermaal tzoegerust, daz
Jonfferliche Slosz besturmen, erobren, und da uber tri^msiren zol. Dan ihr must
viel gebrauchen daz weise von Ganze und Enteneyeren, die wol gebraten sind,
Rothkohl mit feysem fleisch gekockt, alte Huner kleyn gehacket, Hanen Kammen,
Swezerichen, Schaffe und Geisse-milch mit Reisz gekockt, auch Kalbs und
Taubengehirn viel gegessen mit Nucis Muscati; und Reinischer Wein mesich
getruncken; es is gewis wan ihr dieses vielmaal thut, ihr zold wieder kreflich
und mechtich werden, und es werd si^ner liebsten auch gar wol gevellich zein.
In English thus. OH Sir, you are a brave, but a weak Venus Knight, you have
walked too much in the mid-paths of the Venereal Garden, and plukt too often
from the Ladies Rose-tree, if you make not use of my noble remedies, you will have
a great sit of sickness; but if you do take it, you will be very quickly and
dexterously cured; in such a manner, that like a Warrior being again well
mounted, you may both storm and take the Ladies Fortress, and triumph over it.
Be sure then to make often use of the whites of Geese and Ducks-Egs roasted,
Red-Cabidge boild with fat meat, old Hens beaten to pieces, Cox-combs, Sweet
breads, Sheeps and Goats milk boild with Rice; you must also often eat Calves
and Pigeons brains with Nutmeg grated in them; and drink temperately Rhenish
Wine; it is most certain that by a frequent doing of this, you will grow both
able and strong again; and it will also be very acceptable to your dearly
beloved.


Here stands the poor Cully again, and looks like a Dog in a Halter, and
perceives that this Doctor Jobbernole gives him an abundance of words but few
effects for his money; because all his boasting, does, for the most part,
contain what he had before made use of; and is therefore unwilling to trouble
his wives brain with all that boiling and stewing, and all the rest of the
circumstances. This makes him take a resolution to let it take its course. But
still growing weaker and weaker, is at last fain to keep his bed, and
constrained to send for one of our own Country Doctors, and makes his complaint
to him, that he is troubled with an excessive head-ake, weakness in the reins
of his back, a lameness in his joints that he can hardly lift his arm to his
head; together with a foulness of his stomach, which makes him that he can
retain nothing, but is fore't to vomit all up again, etc. Out of all which
reasons the Doctor perfectly understands the ground of his distemper; and in
the absence of his Wife, reveals it unto him, and orders him to make use of:

. Ag. Menthae.
Melissae.
Rosar. a iij.
Cinamom^. j.
Conf. Alkermesincompl.
Hyacint horum. a j.
Lapid. Bezoardic. Oriental. ss.
Syrup. Limonum. j ss.
(...) in (...)
To this he recommends the good woman, to cause her husband every morning to
eat a good Caudle; and at noon a Poulle fricasse with good store of Coxcombs in
it: Item, sometimes too a glass of pure Sherry, or old Hock, to refresh and
quicken the debilitated parts, that they may again recover strength. And then
also, which indeed is very necessary, that all things may be still and without
any noise, to the end the Patient may get some rest.

This being thus made use of, and the Doctor coming again, he perceives some
small amendment, incourageth the Patient very much, and orders him as follows

. Rad. Satyr. Eryng. Cond. a^ j.
Sem. Cardam. Erucy Piper. a^ j.
Amygdal. dulc. Nuel pin^ Pistac. a^ ij.
Sacchar. albi ad pondus omnium addendo Sir. Melissae qz.
Fs. art. Morselli.
Take of this daily every three hours a little Cake, and drink always upon it
half a pints glass of good Hock. This the jesting Master Doctor perceives has
done indifferent good operation: Therefore, because it would not appear handsome
for him to go away without ordring something, he goes for wards and writes:

. Pulv. testum Gallor. exsiccator. ij.
Sem. Cubeba Piper. Longi. a^ ij.
Rasur. Priapi Cervi. j. Priapi Vulpis a^ j.
Sacchari albi ad pondus omnium.
F. Pulvis.
Take of this daily, all at once, every three hours j. with some Frontinjac
Wine; and with this oil anoint the bottom of your belly, and round about the
Navel:

. Ol. Cappar. Amijgd. dulc. Cappilli Veneris. a^ ij.
Upon my word this makes no small show that the Doctor at one time prescribes a
double Receipt; and thereby orders what diet must be made ready for him against
dinner, a knuckle of Veal well boiled, and some yolks of new-laid Eggs beaten
into the broth; having satisfied nature there with, then to be well covered,
that he may take some rest upon it.

O how delicately these Cards are shufled! if the game go thus forward, it will
come to be a stately Pleasure! but principally for the Doctor, who privately
simpers at the playing of his own part, and never fails to note down his
Visits; but most especially if he have the delivery of the Medicines into the
bargain; placing them then so largely to account as is any ways possible to be
allowed of; which makes the Apothecary burst out into such a laughter, as if he
had received the tiding of a new Bankrupt.

But go you forwards Doctor, it must be so, you have not studied for nothing;
and it is no small matter to be every time ordering of new remedies; especially
when we see that you constantly write.

. Vini Rhenani vetustissimi and generosissimi. ij.
And then again to eat oftentimes Pistaches, Almonds, Custards, and Tansics,
etc.

Though since the Patient, like making a Martyr of himself, is in this manner
fallen into the hands of the Doctor, his dearly beloved Wife is not negligent
to acquaint all the friends with it; who immediately come running to give a
visit to the sick, and speak words of consolation to the good woman. But alas
grief and sorrow has taken such deep root in her heart, that no crumbs of
comfort, though ever so powerful, can dispossess her calamities: for the
seeing of a husband who loved her so unmeasurably, and was so friendly and
feminine, to ly sick a bed, would stir up the obdurest heart to compassion, and
mollisie it with showers of tears.

But even as all the Relations, by messengers, are made acquainted with this
sickness; report in like manner is not behind hand with making it known to good
acquaintance and arch Jesters, who (as I showed you before) are very ready to
appear with their flouts and gibes, and instead of comforting, begin to langh
with the Patient, saying: O Sir, we have perceived, a long time since, that you
were more then half your reckoning, and that your lying-in was much nearer then
your wives; and we always thought, because we had tasted out such delicate
Wedding-wine for you, that you would have desired us to have taken the like
care for to have such at yours, and afterward at your Wives lying-in. Yet
since it has not so happened, we hope that the Doctor has taken so much the
better care for it.

Thus rallying, they begin to get the bibbing-bottle, and guess at the same
time, as if it had been told them, that the Doctor in his last receipt had
ordered Rhenish Wine.

And just as the Women in the Eighth Pleasure of the First Part, produce
abundance of Remedies for the curing of sore breasts and cloven tipples; the
assembly of Men do here in like manner cast up a hundred Receipts to cure the
Pipsy; which makes Peggy the maid blush and be most cruelly ashamed at; but
behind the Window she listens most sharply to hear what is told and confessed by
those that be in the Chamber, as to the further matter of fact.

For Master Barebreech relates, that as he was traveling the last Summer into
the North, and so forwards into Scotland, going through Edinburgh, met there
with his cousin Master Coldenough, who looked so lean and palefac'd; that
Master Barebreech told him, in truth Cousin, I should hardly have known you;
verily you look as if you were troubled with the pipsy; and I believe you have
the feeling of a first lying in through all your joints. Well Cousin, says the
the other, it seems that you are deeply studied in the Art of Witchcraft, for I
fear its too true. I went from home on purpose to take my pleasure for three
weeks or a month, that I might store my self with fresh provisions, and sing a
sweet ditty in commendations of my Betty. Ho, Ho, says Master Barebreech,
flatter not your self with such a fancy, that you will get as much up again in
three weeks or a month, as you have been running behind hand in four. If you will
do well, let us for a frolic go into France, there is a gallant air, and we
shall bevery good company together, and fear not but that we will make much of our
selves; then when we come home again, you will find your self so well fortified,
that you will never faint in the engagement, and both you and your wife will be
thankful to me as long as you live for my good advice of taking this journey.
To be short, the Cousins travel together, and Master Coldenough came home so
lusty, fat and plump, that all his acquaintance, and especially his hungry
wife, admired mightily that he was so fat and corpulent; but most of all when
she found that he could harp upon her string with several Musical notes.

Just such another have I known, says Master Lijwell, that was my neighbor
when I lived in the Suburbs, who had married an indifferent old Pinbox, that
was very well pencisied; she took little or no regard of worldly things, but
loved nevertheless to have her bonelace cushion often made use of; and longed
for a pretty pattern to set upon her Pillowbears and in her sheets. And really
it did not want for her endeavors. Yet, as we know, the sticking-pin, with the
continual use of it upon old and hard parchment, grows stumpish, so that she
begun to complain of it. Well says he, Sweetheart, I intend to go to Sheffield
there is a gallant Master that makes such curious Lances, Razers, Bodkins, and
sticking-pins, that are so bravely steeled, that they never turn point or grow
stump. I will go thither to him, and lay out some money for your Pincushion. Oh
me, I pray do, my dear, says she, but I shall long till you come home again.

A way he goes. Having been abroad something more then a fortnight, and treated
himself very nobly, comes home again, and shows his wife what a curious
sticking-pin he had brought with him, which she often making use of, found to
be good, and that it did not turn point: Insomuch that she said, O Sweetheart,
that man has not cheated you, but has deserved his money very well: But where
have you left the old one? That, my dear, says he, I threw away, because it
was good for nothing. I am sorry for that, she replied, if you had brought it
along with you, it might have served our Maid for a time.

At this all the jesting-wags burst out into a laughter. But having tossed up
their cups bravely about again, Peggy comes in with a fresh Kan, and Master
Winetast begins to relate how that he used to be familiarly acquainted with a
certain brave Judge, who had a bucksom bouncing Lady to his wife. The Judge
feeling that the Pump grew dry, was willing to repair it, to that end feigns a
Letter, which at noon, as he was sitting at Table with his Lady, was brought
him very cleaverly by his man. He seemingly unknowing of it, opens and reads,
that he must immediately, without further delay, go upon a journey; having read
that, prepares himself with his man forthwith to be going.

But whilst the Judge was gone into his Closet, as seeming to take some
important writings along with him; the Lady calls his man privately into the
Parler, and forces him by threats of her displeasure to tell her, who delivered
him that Letter; with a promise of her favor if he spoke the truth. Whereupon
the fellow trembling, answered, Madam, I have received it from my Lord the
Judge; but he has strictly commanded me to keep it secret, so that if he come
to know that I have mentioned any thing of it to your Ladyship, he will have
the greatest displeasure of the World against me. Do not you fear any thing,
said her Ladyship, but be faithful in what you do.

A pretty while after, the Judge having been some time at home, and walking
with his Lady toward their Garden, they met with a drove of Sheep, having but
one Ram amongst them: Whereupon her Ladyship asked, Sweetheart, how comes it,
that that one Sheep has such horns, and the to others none at all? My Dear,
said he that is the Ram, the He-Sheep. What, said she, are the others then all
She Is? O yes, my Love, answered he. How! replied she, but one Ram among so many
Sheep. Yes Honey, says the Judge, that is always so, then (sighingly she said)
alas poor Creature, how must you long then to walk some other Road!

There had been more related; for Master Carouser was entered upon a new
subject; but because the Doctor came in, they were constrained to break of.

But Ellen the starchster, being busy in the Kitchen with the Mistress about
ordering the Linen, having let the Doctor in; says, Mistress, the Doctor is
come there, and is gone into the Chamber; by my truly Mistress, I hear say that
my Master has got the pipsy; my Mothers Hens used to be cruelly trowbled with
it, and then she made Pills of sliced Garlic with some butter and course
pepper, which helped them exceedingly; and who knows, my dear Mistress, but that
mit ight be good for my Master, what if you asked the Doctor. O Nel, says the
Mistress, this is clear another thing, this sickness is not without great
danger; and not like unto that of Hens that may be cured by thrusting a feather
through their noses, or with cloves of Garlic. It would be no such wonder, if
my husband happened to die of it; and where should we then find the Pleasures of
Marriage that some arch Jesters so commonly talk of.

But kind Mistress be not so hasty, it is impossible to express all the
Pleasures so fully in one breath: you must note, that they are all as it were
for the present hid behind the Curtains; neither must you expect to sail
always before wind and tide; and believe me there are yet other Nuts to be
krackt: But as soon as your Beloved is recovred, and you creepig close to him;
O then you will begin to perceive how gloriously the sun, after it has been long
Clouded, will begin to appear again, and then you will apprehend that the curing
of the Pipsy is one of the greatest pleasures in the World. And you may freely
imagine, that then also the true state of your Lying-in is most certain to
follow; for all those Caudles, Pullets, Rhenish wine, and the other Receipts,
will but then begin to make their best operation.

The Third Pleasure.
Whilst the Husband is from home, the Wife plays the Devil for God's sake.
The Husband upon his journey will want for nothing.
IT seemed to be a divellish blur in the Escucheon, and a cruel striving
against the stream, that as soon as the Shop was just made and furnished, then
the good Manfalls sick, and keeps the first Lying in: but being it is now over
again, it affords each of them a double pleasure, for the good woman by
creeping finely and closely to her bedfellow, apprehends it to be a new Wedding
night, and hopes that it will be Fairtime all the year long. And the good man
does not only rejoice at his r^ very, and the pleasure he receives with his
kind bedfellow; but that he may also be again seen in his new Shop, taking care
of his affairs.

But Experience having taught him, that with relishing and solid dishes a man
may overclog himself; he thinks it not unadvisable, to take a journey now and
then from home, to see if he can get some new Customers in other Towns, or buy
in some Goods and Wares for his Shop; by which means he may as well take as
good care for his health, as he does of his Shopkeeping.

Yet what comes here in the way', the pleasure is so great, and their loves so
tender and newly stamped to each other again; that the young woman thinks she
shall do, as formerly Cyana did, either consume her self in tears, or drowned
her self in a River, if she must suffer this.

Oh, the whole World will be unto her as dead, and without any thing of
mankind, if her dearly beloved depart from her! Well, who will not then but
believe that the married estate is full of incomprehensible and inexhaustible
pleasures and sweetnesses? Do but behold how these two Hony-birds, sing loath
to depart! Yea, pray observe what a number of imbracings, how many thousand
kisses, and other toyisch actions are used, before this couple can leave one
another! Nevertheless the reason of necessity, does forsooth conquer in a
vigilant husband these effeminate passions.

Therefore away he goes, leaving his whining beloved sitting between her Sister
and her Niece, speaking words of consolation to her; and using all arguments
possible to enliven and make her sorrowful heart merry; either of them
striving to be most free in proffering to be her bedfellow, and the next day to
keep her company: But alas, says she, suppose ye did all this, yet
nevertheless I have not my husband with me!

But because time and good company help to decline and pass away sorrow; she
very happily begins to consider, that she has now a fit opportunity, to invite
her Neeces and Bridemaids and other good acquaintance, with whom she has been
formerly mighty familiar, to come and take a treat with her, and to drink a
dish of Tee; for they have, when she was in her Maiden estate, treated her so
many times with Tarts, Pankakes and Fritters, Custards, and stewed Pruins, that
she is as yet ashamed for not having made them some recompense. And she never
could find an occasion that was convenient before, because one while she dwelt
with her Guardians, and at another time with her Uncle; who took very sharp
notice where on, and in what time her pocket-mony was spent and consumed, that
they continually gave her for trivial expenses. Which vexed her so much the
more, because the treat she received, was for the most part done, to bring her
acquainted with this or that Gentlewomans Brother, or Cousin, or some other
pretty Gentlemen; to the end, that by this means she might happen to make a
gallant Match; and indeed the first original of the wooing, and acquaintance
with her beloved, had there its foundation.

To treat these Gentlewomen when her husband is at home, would no ways appear
so well; and so much the more, because they generally suffer themselves to be
conducted to the place by one or other of their Gallants; who then either very
easily are persuaded, or it may be of themselves, tarry to take part with them.
Therefore this must be done and concluded on, because she has now the disposal
and keeping of the money as well as her husband.

Here now must Doll run up and down tan^twivy to borrow a Rowlingpin, and some
other new invented knick-knacks, to bake Cheesekakes and Custards in; whilst
Mage is also hardly able to stand longer upon her legs, with running up and
down to fetch new-laid Eggs, Flour, Sugar, Spices, blanched Almonds, etc. The
Mistress and Doll are able to perform this duty well enough; for they both helped
to do it, very neatly at her Neeces birthday; but the Pastry-Cook must be
spoken to for the making a delicate minced Py; and Mage must run to the
Consit-makers in Blackfriars, to fetch some Conserves, Preserves, and of all
other sorts of Sweetmeats, Raisins of the Sun, and more of the like
ingredients, etc. for she knows best where all those things are to be had. And
for a principal dish there ought to be a Pot of Venison, a couple of Neats
tongues, a delicate piece of Martelmasbeef, some Anchovis, and Olives for the
Gentlemen, because they certainly will accompany the Gentlewomen. And truly
they that bring them, may very well tarry to carry them home again; it is also
but one and the same trouble. Goodman Twoshoes is gone out of Town, and sees it
not, neither need he know it when he comes home: He treats so many of his
friends and acquaintance, and then again next day following invites them to a
Fish-dinner. I may very well play my part once in my life, and have all things
to my mind, let come on it what will, who knows whether such another occasion
may happen again this three years. And against next morning, very privately,
she invites the Gentlewomen alone, to come about nine a clock in the morning,
to cat hot Buns, and Cakes, for then they come precisely out of the Oven; and
in the afternoon again, to some curious Fruit, Pankakes and Fritters, and a
glass of the purest Canary let it cost never so much, or be fetched ne^sr so far.

Thus runs the tongue of this pretty housewife, that but a while ago was so
sorrowful for the departure of her beloved husband. Certainly there is nothing
comes out more suddenly, or dries up more easily, then women's tears!

But hangt no more of that; for the guests will be here presently, therefore
all things ought to be in order for mirth. And moreover there are some of them
that frequent Mr. Baxter's Puritanical Holding-forth, whose heads will
immediately, in imitation of their Patron, hang like Bull-rushes; for they are
tught to moum with the sorrowful, and to rejoice with the joifull. But it is
now a time to be merry, and throw away masks and vizards; for all is done under
the Rose, and among good acquaintance. And verily if the good woman had not
this or some such sort of delight, where should we find the pleasures of
marriage? sor in the first Lyingin of the husband there was no looking for them.

Come on then, that mirth may be used, let the Cards also be brought in sight;
which formerly, out of a Puritanical humor, ought not to have been seen in a
house; nay, not so much as to have been spoken of; but now every one knows how
to play artificially at Put, all Fours, Omber, Pas la Beat, Bankerout and all
other games that the expertest Gamesters can play at. And who knows whether
they do not carry in their Pockets, as False-Gamesters do, Cards that are cut
and marked. They learn to play the game at Bankrout so well with the Cards,
that in a short time they can and also do it with their Housholdstuf, Wares,
and Commodities. To be sure, you will always find, that every one of them, by
length of time, are capable of setting up a School, and to act the part of a
Mistress. And most especially they learn to discourse very exactly touching the
use and misuse thereof; just as these dissimulating Wigs intend to do, though
indeed men have never seen that they practiced this lesson themselves.

But, although the Mistress and her Companions know little or nothing of these
tricks, they serve howsoever, without setting up a School, and that also for
nothing, for good Instructresses to their servants, who hereby are most
curiously taught, what paths they have to walk in, and what is best for them to
do that they may follow their Mistresses footsteps, as soon as their Master and
Mistress are but gone abroad together; who then know so exactly how to danc^
upon those notes, that we thought it necessary, as being one of the
principallest Pleasures of Marriage, also to be set down in the Third Table of
the First Part.

Many women, who are sick of this liquorish and sweet-tooth'd disease, will be
grumbling very much at this, that such a blame and scandal should be cast upon
their innocent sex; and say that Batchelors hereby will be afraid to marry; But
if they, and the Gentlewomen that were in private domineering together, had not
gone to Confession, and made a public relation of it, who would have known it.
Therefore this sort of well treated female Guests, are like unto those that
when they have gotten a delicate bit by the by, cannot fare well but they must
cry roastmeat, though they should be beaten wit the spit for it.

But the good ones, though they are thin sown, who are not distempered with
this evil, never trouble themselves at what one will say, or another write
concerning women, because their guiltless consciences, serves them as well as a
thousand witnesses; and they are very indifferent whether that the deceased
scandal raiser Hippolitus do arise, and come into the World again; daring him
in this manner

S^rge then Hippolytus, out from thy Ghostly nest:
Who scandal least esteem, revenge themselves the best.
Yet howsoever though this is true, nevertheless I must furnish the delicate
stomackt Ladies with some sort of weapons, that they may be in a posture of
desending themselves against their vituperous enemies: For verily there are
several men that walk not so even and neat in their ways as they ought to do;
and who knows, whether our Mistresses dearly Beloved, at this very present,
does not as many others have done; who when they are traveling any whither,
the first thing they do, is to be very diligent, and look earnestly about,
whether there be not some handsome Gentlewoman that travels with them, by whom
they very courteously take place, showing themselves might humble and
complacent, and telling them that they are Batchelors or at the least Widowers;
then casting out a discourse of playing a game at Cards, that they may the
better see what mettle the Lady is made of, and then again when they come to a
Baiting-place, or where they must stay the night over, there they domineer
lustily with them, and play the part of a Rodomontade. Where many times more is
acted and spent, then they dare either tell their Wives, or their father
Consessors of.

Others there are, who seek not so much such company, but very artificially
before hand, know how to find out such Fellow-travellers as most suit with
their own humor; to that end providing themselves with some Bottles of Canary,
and pure Spanish Tobacco; and where ever they come are sure to make choice of
the best Inn, where there is a good Table, delicate Wine, (and a handsome Wench)
to be had.

Certainly, if the Husband thus one way, and his Wife another, know how to find
out the Pleasures of Marriage, they are then both of them happy to the utmost?
Is it not possible, but that they might, if this continued long, take a journey,
for pleasure, to Brokers-Hall? For at first it was by them esteemed too mean a
place to be looked upon, and not worth their thinking of: but then its probable
it may come into their considerations, by reason that rents are low there,
provisions very cheap, and pleasures in abundance; neither has Pride or
Ambition taken any habitation there. Nay, who knows but that they might chance
to observe that there is no such need of feasting and jun ketting; nor be
subject to so many visits, because there dwells not such a number of their
friends and acquaintance: and besides all this, you may there, for a small
matter, agree with the Collectors of the Excises, so that, for a whole year,
you may have Wine, and several other things plenty, for little or nothing.

But let us lay aside all this, because they are untimely cogitations, that fly
astray; and it is much decenter that we turn again to our kind-hearted Mistress,
with her merry companions; who now, are about the taking leave of each other;
using, to show their gratitude, whole bundles full of complements; offering
them up with an inexpressible amiablenes and eloquency for the respect and
honor they have received; and confirm them with so many kisses, cursies, bows
and conges, that it is easy to be perceived, that on both sides its cordially
meant. And Doll, that good and faithful servant, is not able to express how
pleasing this entertainment has been to all the company. Nay, it lies buzzing
her so in the pate, that she cannot be at quiet in a morning, whilst her
Mistress is a sleep, but she must, with the Neighbors Maids, either at the
opening of the Shop, or sweeping of the street, be tatling and telling of it to
them; putting, every foot, into their hands privately, some Almonds and
Raisins, that came in by legerdemain: Relating unto them, as if she did it by
a scrole, what a horrible quantity of things she has to scour and wash, that
must be made clean, and set in order, against the time that the Bridemaids, as
it was mentioned, are to come again alone; and so much the more, because her
Master is daily expected home. Who then finally coming in, is not ordinarily
welcomed, for she is so full of joy that her husband is come home, that both
her tongue and actions are incapable of demonstrating her felicity; and he on
the the other side, is so glad to find his dearly Beloved in good health, and all
things in decent order, that it is beyoud imagination.

All this while they both laugh in their sleeves, that each one, in th'absence
of the the other, has taken to themselves such a private an cunning pleasure.
Finding so much content and ^njoiment therein, that they both hope to serve
themselves again with the like occasion. O mighty Pleasure of Marriage! Who
would not but be invited to go into this estate? Especially if we proceeded to
write down and rehearse the further Confession of the separate Pleasures of Man
and Wife, which is preserved as matter for the infuing Fifth and Sixth Pleasure.

The Fourth Pleasure.
The Wife will be Master of the Cash, or money Chest.
AS Money is one of the most curiousest Minerals, is it, in like manner, the
less admirable, that the handling and use there of renders the greatest
Pleasures of the World. It is Loves Fire, and Charities Fountain. Yea, if Man
and Wife in their house keeping may be esteemed or compared to the Sun and Moon
in the Firmament; verily, those merry white or yellow boys, may very well be
considered of as twinkling stars.

It rejoiceth all mankind to behold in the sky the innumerable multitude of
glittering Stars: but it is a far surpassinger Pleasure, that the new married
Couple receive, when they see vast heaps of Silver and Goldly dazzling their
eyes, and they Lording over it.

You, O lately married Couple, possess this Pleasure to the utmost; you have to
your content received your promised Portions; you only want the great Iron
Mony-Chest to lock it up in securely, and to keep it safely, that it may be
laid out to advantage. O how pleasant the free dispensation thereof is unto
you! What a noble Valley it is to walk in between these Mountains, and to
delight your eyes with such an object!

Yet nevertheless, O faithful Couple, here is need that a great deal of
prudence be used, as well in the laying of it out, as the preserving of it. In
ancient times it has been often observed and taken notice of, that where money
was hid, the places were generally hanted with terrible spirits, and strange
Ghosts. That walked there, coming in frightfull apparitions: but since they
have been driven out of our Country and Houses; there is another sort of Imp
come in, ten times wickeder then any of the other; which regards nor cares
neither for Crosses, Holy Water, Exorcisms, or any sort of Divel-drivers; but
dares boldly show himself at noonday, namely a Plague-Divel, which sets Man an
Wife together by the ears, to try who of them both shall have the command and
government of the Cash or money box.

And to the end he may herein act his Part well, he knows how very subtlily
first to fill the weak woman's ears full, that she ought above all things to
have the command of the cash; because she had such a great Portion; and that it
is her money which she hears gingle so. And then again, because the care of the
housekeeping is appropriated to be her duty, it is against all reason, that
she, like a servant, should give an account to her husband, what, wherefore, or
how that the money is laid out; because the necessaries also for housekeeping
are so many, that they are without end, name or number, and it is impossible
that one should relate or ring them all into the ears of a Man. Likewise the
good woman cannot have so sit an occasion every foot to be making some new
things, that she may follow the fashion, as it is usual for women to do; much
less to have any private pocket-mony, to treat and play the Devil for God's
sake, with her Bride-Maids, when her husband is gone from home.

And on the contrary, when men pay out any thing, it goes out by great sums,
according as is specified by the accounts delivered, which must be set to book,
and an acquittance given: This cannot be so done with every pitiful small
thing that belongs to housekeeping. Insomuch that the Husband can then, with
all facility, demand what Money is needful for his occasion from his Wife.

Moreover, when the Wife has the command of the money, she can always see in
what condition and state her affairs stands; and by taking good observation
thereof, her husband cannot fop her of with Pumpkins for Musmillions; but she will
easily perceive whether she be decreasing or increasing in her estate. So that
if her husband might come to die, and she be left a Widow with several children,
she can immediately see and understand in what posture her affairs stands, and
whether she be gotten forward or gone backward in the World.

And what is more yet, it would be a great shame for a Woman, who has always
been so highly respected by her husband; and as it appeared to all the World,
was honored like a Princess; that she should within doors be as servile as a
servant; and must be fed out of her husbands hands, just as if she were a
wastall, a sweet-tooth, or gamestress, etc.

With these, and a thousand such like arguments, does this Plague-Divel know
how to puff up the vain humors of the weak Women, to the true pitch of
high-mindedness. And on the contrary, is in the mean while busy with
flatteries, to stir up the husband. To idle imaginations and
self-conceitedness; demonstrating unto him, that he is the Lord, and guide of
his Wife; created to command her, and she to obey him. That it is most easy to
be perceived, what a noble creature Man is, whilst that Woman who is so
handsome and haughty, is nevertheless but added unto him as a servant. Therefore
if he once admit his Wife into an equality with him; he will then be subject to
see that she will be striving for the predominancy: and that it is the greatest
curse imaginable in a Country, for Women to Lordize over Men. And for these
reasons they ought to be but like the null in Figures, and to be kept as a
Controuler by the Harth, the Pot, and the Spinning-wheel. Whilst they that
deliver up to them the keys of the Mony-Chest, are deprived of all their
superiority, and like Men unmanned, have only the name but cannot obtain the
effect.

In such manner does as yet this Divelplaguing Spirit domnieer, by clear
daylight, in many of the principallest houses and hearts, and makes oftentimes
so great a difference and discord about the key of the Cash, that the Cash it
self seems to get Eagles Wings, and swiftly flies away. Whilst the hushand,
perceiving that the Wife seeks to deceive and take the key from him, is always
possessed with abominable suspicions; certainly thinking that she is minded to
make some unnecessary thing or other, or to hide some money from him; which
makes him watch her waters so much the stricter; and is not ashamed to give out
and make what he has a mind to for his own pleasure.

And the Wife, perceiving that her husband is so sneaking, and forsooth so
circumspect, with subtilety contrives and practices how to make him pay out
money for all what she has any ways a mind to; by that means making her self
Mistress of the Mony-Chest, beyond his knowledge, though he has the name, and
carrijs the keys in his Pocket: for if she have a mind to new Stays for her
self or daughter; away she goes to a Silk-shop, buies Stuf to her mind, and
causes it to be made as modish as possible may be; and having tried that it
fits and pleases her fancy fully; then it is brought home by one or other of
her trusty acquaintance, who come at a convenient time appointed, just like
some petty Brokester, proffering it forsooth in sale to the Mistress, and
telling her a relation that it was really made for such a Lady, but that she
died whilst it was making; and for that reason it may be had for a very low
price; yea, that it is such a cheap bargain, that perhaps the like may not be
had again this ten years, etc.

Thus the good wife knows rarely well how to play her part, and begins to
reckon how many else of Stuff, how much for lining, and the making thereof
would come to cost: so that her husband, by reason of the cheapness is curious
of himself to desire her to try it on; and finally, sees that it sits her, as
if it had been made for her. To be short, after much cheapning and bargaining,
the price is concluded on, though it be against the husbands stom^ck, or the
Cash well can bear it; and then the Brokeer is ordered when the has such or the
like other good bargain, to come again, and let them see it.

In this manner the Wife fetches about by the by as much as she can, and
hoodwinking her husband even as she pleases; for at other times there comes to
be sold Table-cloaths, Napkins, and then again Coats, Sheets, Blankets, and all
sorts of necessaries for housekeeping and habit, from some Gentlewoman or other
that its left to, by the decease of some friend, etc.

Insomuch that the Wife, through the niggardliness of her husband, imbezles
away and buies more, then otherwise she would do; making it all her delight and
sole pleasure, to blind fold her narow-soul'd Peep in the Pot, (as she calls
him;) although she, by these ways and means, does jestingly consume her own
self. But this belongs also to the Pleasures of Marriage. And if it in the
conclusion prove to be a pain, patience is the best remedy.

But be merry, O new married Couple, that you, like unto young Toby, have found
out the remedy, how to drive away this Devil-Plaguer of your Wedlock; by living
in love and tranquillity, equally considing in each other, desiring no
superiority; but with a true cordiality, interchangeably granting, and having
each alike freedom of the moneys; the Husband has the keeping and government
of the keys, and the Wife wants for no money; nay has access also her self to
it. Who can doubt but that your family will be blessed, and your stock of moneys
increase.

And that so much the more, because the Husband hates playing at Tables, and
the Wise is an enemy to Cards, which has been the occasion ofttimes on both
sides of the consuming much money, and therefore is little used by some
Shopkeepers; leaving that to Gentlemen to lose both time and money, who therein
seek their pastime, delight and pleasure. And this is in like manner imitated
by many great Ladies, who are often so cruelly addicted to Cardplaying, that
they sometimes value not, in one evening, the losing of very great sums, and yet
know how to maintain their respects therein very prudently and gallantly; but
in the mean while let the Millaner, Linnen-Draper, Tailor, and Shooemaker run
most miserably and shamefully after them for moneys from one month to another,
ofttimes from one year to another, as if they came begging to them for a piece
of bread; and when they do pay them, it must not be taken notice of by their
Lords and husbands.

These generally use the greatest violence against the peace of the Family;
because this superfluous expense, and liberal disposition of my Lady, is very
seldom pleasing to my Lord, who little thought that her Ladyship would have
been such a spend-thrift of the Cash.

Bu^ since great Lords, as well as other meaner sorts of persons, are shot and
pierced by one and the same blind Cupid, they are in like manner subject to
such casualities of adversities and pleasures; and every one perceives, when it
is too late, what kind of election he has made; just as they do who begin a
War, but before its half finished are weary of it. Therefore.

To Battle be ye slow, but slower be to Wed,
For many do repent, until that they be dead;
But if avoided then, by you it cannot be,
A thousand Counselors will well deserve your Fee.
The Fifth Pleasure.
Of Men's negligence of their affairs; whereby their Antic-tricks and loss of
time is discovered.
VErily the Women, being the weakest Vessels, are many times most cruelly
impeacht, when the Marriage-Ship sails not well before Wind and Tide: just as
if they, to whom is only given the charge of the Family, care of the Kitchen,
and nourishment of the Children, were the occasioners of sad casualities and
disasters in the Merchandi zes and Shop-keepings: When, on the contrary, the
negligence of the Men is many times so great, that if the Woman knew not how to
carry her self like a prudent Abigail, it would be impossible ever to bring the
Ship to a safe harbor, and to free it from Shipwreck, but all things must run
to a total destruction.

Many men are free hereof, who are continually using their utmost endeavors,
and take their chiefest delight in the promotion of their affairs, by day with
their bodies, and at night with their senses, are earnestly busy in contriving
them it. Whose main aim is, to live honestly, to get a good name, to show good
examples to their Children and Servants, to leave something to their Widows, and
never to be a laughing stock or derision to their enemies. And this manner of
diligence makes no labor irksom, no morning too early, nor no evening too late
for them.

But others, on the contrary, are so easy humoured, and so negligent of their
vocation, that they think its much below the respect of a Man, to be seen whole
days in their houses with their Wives, and about their affairs. Then in such
cases, there must, by every one in his calling, be found a multitude of lame
excuses, before they can blind the eyes of a quick-sighted Woman, or pin it upon
her so far, that she perceives not he seeks his pleasure from her, in whom his
whole delight ought to be.

If it be Doctor of Physic, he forsooth has no time to study, because he must
go to visit a Patient that has a violent Ague, to see what operation the
Cordial has done which he ordered him to take yesternight; for if any thing
else should come to it, he would certainly be a dead man, etc.

And if you do but trace his paths and Patient, it is by his friend, who
yesternight was troubled with a vehement Cellar-Fever; and at the very last,
before he went to sleep, took in a swinging bowl of strong liquor; which made
his Pulse beat so Feverish and disorderly the next morning, that he was
necessitated, at one draught, to whip off a lusty glass of Worm wood-Wine, (an
excellent remedy for the Ague;) and then to walk an hour or two upon it,
wherein the Doctor accompanying him, it causes the better operation.

Here now you see the Doctor, and what Ague the Patient has, what he takes
for it, what comes to it, and how dead a man he is. Truly the Doctor has made
as neat a guess at it, as if he had studied long for it. Hang the Books, when a
man has his Art so perfect in his Pate.

For this, the Doctor has so much good again, when he has a mind to visit a
Pauent in Tuttle-street, or St. Jameses Square, this Patient walks along with
him for company. And when one hand washes the other in this manner, o then they
are both so Silver clean!

Turn you about now to the Counselors, and see how their Studies are all on
Fire, only to be going too and again from one Court to another, to hear,
forsooth, this or the other Cause pleaded, that mightily concerns them, thereby
to take their measures accordingly: When to the contrary, it serves to no other
purpose then to sell a parcel of Chatwood, and tatle tales, of some brave
Practitioners, a great deal worse then women would do; and finally to appoint a
place, where in the evening they may accompany their Fraternity at a good glass
of Wine.

Under this bundle resorts continually the Shittlecock Excisemen, accompanied
with Collectors and Promooters, who are the greatest Bell-ringers in Taverns,
and sometimes, in one evening, spend as much in Rhenish Wine, Oisters and
Tobacco; as ten sufficient Families would do in a month. These live without
care, and command freely out of a full purse, imagining in themselves that all
the Revenues are their own. And if their Wives do, in the least, but peep into
their concerns; they presently baptize it with the name of going upon an
exploit, to chase a fat Do, or neatly to attrap some Defrauder. And that this
part may have the better gloss, when they come home in the morning, they have
their pockets full of money, which they throw into their wives laps; and tell
them that they have attrapped some body, and agreed with them for a great sum
of money, having in part of payment received this; when to the contrary, it is
all the King and Countries money, only taken out of their Offices. This
generally lasts so long, till they are pursued by the Treasurer, and are
arrested, and clapped up, or that they prevent it by playing Bankrupt, and in
this manner leave a sorrowful Widow and Children behind them.

By these the Foolwise Notary's for the most part join themselves; making their
Wives believe that they are sent for into this or the other Alehouse or Tavern,
about an Excise-mans business; or to write a Will, or a Contract of agreement
of Merchandise; though it be to no other end or purpose then to have a perfect
knowledge who plays best at Ticktack, Irish, Backgammon, Passage, or
All-fours. From thence then they cannot come before it be late in the night,
and have learnt there to make a Scotch Will so well, that they are, by two
witnesses, half carried, and half trail'd home to their houses; bragging still,
that they have had Wine and Beer, and received money into the bargain. Thus all
things is baptized with the name of having earnest business.

The like knowledge have also the Merchants, Shopkeepers, and others who love
company, to allege for their excuses and defense; but the most fashionable,
give it the name of going to a sale of some Lands and Houses, Parts of Ships,
Merchandises, Shop-Wares, Meetings, or Arbitrations. Though many times, in more
then a month, there has not be the least sale of any of the aforenamed
Commodities, or occasion for any such sort of businesses.

And verily whom do you see sooner or later at the Exchange then these sort of
people? And it is no wonder: for since they endeavor not to have the name of
brave Negotiants, their principallest aim is to obtain the name of great
News-mongers, and that has so much tittle-tattle in it, that it requires a
person free from all affairs and business to be employed therein.

Here you may perceive them to be the most diligent of all others, oftener
inquiring what tidings there are in the French, English, and Flanders Letters;
then to know what news from the Seas, concerning the arrival or loss of Ships,
or what Merchandises, Commodities and Wares, are risen or fallen in price.

Nevertheless these make the greatest bawling and scolding at their Wives, if
they have not their Dinners miade ready for them precisely an hour before
Change-time, just as if the main weight of all the Traffic and Negotiation at
Change, lay upon their shoulders; though it only tends to sollow the train, and
to hear some news, or to seek some Pot-Companions.

These Blades will be sure also, in the Winter time by four, and in the Summer
time by six a clock in the evening, to be precisely at the Coffe-houses; where,
under the taking of a pipe of pure Spanish Tobacco, some dishes of Coffe,
Chocolate, Sherbate, or Limonado, there is a relation made os the newest
tidings, or what is most remarkable of things that have happened here or there.
They hear there no clock strike, nor think upon Wives, Children, or Servants,
though it were never so late.

There Is another sort of Men, that do not frequent the Exchange, and go out
only about their Shop affairs, these we see taking their pleasures for several
hours together at Queenhithe and other places, with selling of chatwood; and
when they are a weary with walking and talking, away they go to the Plume of
Feathers to rest themselves, and call for half a pint, or a pint of Sack, and
some to the Strong Water Shop, and drink a quartern of Cinnamon water,
Clovewater, or Aqua mi^abilis.

And these imagine themselves to be of the most orderly sort; by reason that
some men, in the Summer time, take their pleasure most part of the morning, to
be busy at their Wormwood Wine; and consume their afternoon in clashing and
quasing off the bottels of Old Hock and Spaw-water. And when it grows cold, and
the days short, then they are early at the Strong-water Shop; and in the
evening late in the Coffehouses; and again twice or thrice a week precisely,
and that more devouter then once in a Church, they are most certain to be found
at the Playhouses.

Whilst others again are earnestly employed in taking their pleasures in a
Coach, or on horseback, ambling, trotting and gallopping along the high ways,
from one Country Fair, or Horsemarket to another; and at every place where they
see but a convenience to stable their Horses, there they are certain to bait;
and consume an infinite deal of time; especially if they happen to find any
Horse-Coursers there to be chatting and chaffering with.

These are much like unto those that take delight in Pleasure-boats and Barges,
who with the smallest gale of wind, are stormed out of all their occupations;
nay, although they were never so important, yet the very breathing of a warm
Zephyr blows not only all businessout of their heads, but themselves in person
out of their Shops and Countinghouses.

Here you may behold them with unwearied bodies rigging of their Masts,
spreading of their Sails, halling up their Spreet and Leeboards, and all in a
sweat catching hold of the Oars to be rowing, whilst at home they are too weak
or lazy to move or stir the least thing in the World, nay can hardly bring pen
to paper. For to neglect such a gallant and pleasant day of weather, would be
acrime un pardonable.

No lover of a boat, may stay within a Port,
Though Shop and Office both, should dearly suffer for it.
Others again are sworn Pigeon Merchants, and every Market day in the forenoon
precisely, let it cost what it will, must be attending there, and the rest of
the week both morning and afternoon at their Pigeon-traps. Here in they take an
infinite pleasure, hushing up their Pigeons to slight, then observing the
course they take; looking upon the turning of their Tumblers; and then to the
very utmost, commending the actions, carriages and colors of their Great
Runts, Small Runts, Carriers, Light Horsemen, Barberies, Croppers, Broad-tail'd
Shakers, and Jacopins; taking care and making so much provision for their young
ones, that they let both their own young, and the housekeeping, run to
destruction.

But there are the Cock-Merchants surpass these abundantly; who, upon certain
penalties, must at the least, thrice a week appear in the Cockpit; and there,
before the Battle begins, consume two or three hours at Tables, and in Wine,
Beer and Tobacco; whilst they attend there the coming of their Adversaries and
other lovers of the sport. Here then a view must be taken of each others Cocks,
which are forsooth according to their merits and value, set apart in their
Coops either in the yard, or above in the Garret, to be fed as is most
convenient; and there is then a discourse held concerning them, as if they were
persons of some extraordinary state, quality, and great valor. Not a word must
be spoke, (as much as if there were a penalty imposed upon it) but of
Cock-fighting. Here Master Capon vaunts that his Game-Cock was hard enough for
the gallant Shake-bag of Sir John Boaster; although Sir John Boasters famous
Shake-bag, but three weeks before, had fought against that incomparable
Game-Cock of Squire Owls-eg, and clawed him off severely.

Here you may see abundance of Country Gentlemen and rich Farmers, coming from
several parts with their Cocks in their bags to the Battle; hanging them up
there in ample form till it be their turns to fight. And there also you may
behold Lord Spendall brought thither in his Coach very magnificently, and
carried home in no less state; but seldom goes away before he has either won
or lost a pretty number of Guinneys.

Yea there is Squire Clearpurse, with his Princely companion, who keep always
six and thirty Game-Cocks at nurse by the Master of the Pit; never goes away
from thence, before he has got, by his ordinary dunghill Cock that runs about
the streets, and without false spurs too, half a score Crown-pieces, and as
much more as will pay his reckoning in his pocket. But if they both begin to
appear with their Shakebags, then it is, Stand clear Gentlemen, here comes the
honor of the Pit; and then the Master of the Pit must have out of each Battle
for Sharpning the Spurs, and clipping of the neck feathers, half a Ginny; and
then when the Battles ended, he brings into the reckoning half a Crown extra
for Brandy, Salve, and cherishing and chafing it by the fire, etc. But for
this, they have the honor also to be in the Chamber with the principallest
Gentlemon, to sit in the best places of the Pit; to turn the hourglass and
like prudent Aldermen, in the presence of all the Auditors, to give their
judgments touching the contending parties; where there are generally more
Consultations, Advices, and Sentences, held and pronounced, then are to be
found or heard of in the principallest Law Books or Statutes of the Kingdom.

It would be here an everlasting shame; if the Conqueror, like a Niggard,
should carry all this money home; therefore the greatest part must be given and
generously spent with the company. This is the duty of every one, whose Cock
has beaten another out of the Pit, and went away Crowing like a Conqueror.
Nay, what is matter if it were all spent, its no such great piece of business;
the honors more worth then the money.

In the mean while it grows late in the night, and the good woman, with the
Table covered, sits longing, telling every minute, and hoping for the coming
home of him, who seems to find and take more pleasure in Cockfighting, then
like a brave Game-Cock himself to enter into the Pit with his Wife. O most
contrary and miserable Pleasure of marriage on the men's side.

But amongst these Cock-Merchants, I am of opinion, there is none has more
pleasure then the Master of the Pit; because he gets more for the feeding,
clipping, salving, and anointing of them, etc. then ten good Nurses, and put
them all together. And moreover he has all the pleasure for nothing, and is
mighty observant to feed and tickle their fancies, and obey their commands,
that their delight therein may the more and more increase, and the reckoning
also be never a whit the less.

And these Lovers and Gentlemen are no sooner departed, but he lays him down
very orderly in a very fashionable Bedstead, hung round about the Curtains and
Vallians with Hens-Egshels sucked out. But if he did, for the same purpose,
suck out all the Cocks-Eg-shels, it would be a much more rare and pleasant
sight.

There isyet another sort of men, which we in like manner find, that consume
their time, neglect their occasion, and spend their money with Dog-figthing,
Bull and Bear-baiting, as the Cock-Merchants do with Cock-fighting. One way
that they take pleasure in, is to bring their Dogs together, and there fight
them for a Wager of five, or ten pound, and sometimes more; which money must be
set or staked down, though they hardly know how to find as much more again in
the whole World, and there the poor Dogs by biting and tearing one another
skins and flesh in pieces for the pleasure of their fantastical Masters; and if
the Wager be, in the least manner to be contradicted, then to it they go
themselves, and thump and knock one another till they look more like beasts
then men.

This being done, the next meeting is, to try their Bear and Bull-Dogs at the
Bear Garden; the match being made, all their wits must be screwed up to the
highest, how to get money to make good their wagers; though Wife, House and
Family should sink in the mean while: Then away they go with their Tousers and
Rousers to the Bear-garden, and then the Bull being first brought to the stake,
the Challenger lets fly at her, and the Bull perceiving the Dog coming, slants
him under the belly with her horns, and tosses him as high as the Gallerys,
this is much laughed at; but his Master, very earnestly and tenderly, catching
him in the fall, tries him the second time, when he comes off with little
better success: Then his Adversary lets loose his Dog at the Bull, who running
close with his belly to the ground, fastens under the Bulls nose by the skin of
the under-lip; the Bull shaking and roaring to get him loose, but he holds
faster and faster; then up fly caps and hats, shouting out the excessive joy
that there is for this most noble victory.

Now comes the Bear dogs, being stout swinging Mastives; and the Bearard having
brought the Bear to the Stake, unrings him, and turns him about, so that he may
see the Dog, that is to play at him; the Challenger let us fly his Dog, which
being a cruel strong Currises up to the Bears nose, fastens and turns him
topsy-turvy; there is no small joy and an echo of Shouts that makes the very
earth tremble; then there is pulling and hawling to get him off from the Bear:
Then the Adversary let us fly his Dog, who coming to fasten, the Bear being
furious and angry that he was so plagued with the first Dog, claps his paw
about the back of him, and squeezes him that he howls and runs; there stands
the Master, looking like an Owl in an Ivybush, to see the stakes drawn, and he
happily with never a penny in his pocket, has no money at home, nor knows not
where to get any. And that which vexes him worst of all, is, that his delicate
Dog is utterly spoiled.

But we will leave of these inhuman, and brutal stories; and rather relate the
Consession of another sort of Men; who are generally of a longing temper, not
much unlike to the big-bellied weak women; nay, sometimes do therein far surpas
the Women: And although they know that it is never so damagable or hurtful unto
them, yet dare boldly say:

When Women long, it harms by chance,
But men's desire's a worser dance.
And in this they are both bold and shameless, clear contrary to Womenkind; in
so much that they without fear or terror, dare, at noon day, say to their
Pot-companions: I have a mighty mind to a pipe of Tobacco, come lets go to the
Sun, half Moon, or to the Golden Fleece, and smoke a pipe: where they rip up
such a multiplicity of discourse, and consume so much time and Tobacco; that if
they tasted neither beer nor wine, they might with all reason be upbrai'ded to
be debauched persons. But it would be a work as inexpressible as infinite to
relate their longing appetites at all other times, to Musm^llions, Seldry,
Anchovis, Olives, or slubbring Caviart, with all their appurtenances. Much more
their liquorishness at Oisters, where they stand greedily swallowing them up in
the open shops, not giving themselves time to send for them to a Tavern, and
eat them decently.

If they did thus, in the presence of their Wives, they might have some
pleasure of it also: But the content hereof seems to consist therein, that
either alone, or with their Fraternity, they may thus lustily satisfy their
longing appetites.

Here we shall commend the Lovers of Tee, because they are willing to make use
of it in the company of women; although there be now a days so much formality
used with it, and so much time idly spent in the consumption of it, that it
seems almost as if this herb were found out, or brought over to no other
purpose, then to be the occasion of an honest chatting-school, between men and
women; where you may have intelligence of all that passes betwixt married and
unmarried persons throughout the whole City. And woe be to them that have the
least symptom of a meazle upon their tongue, for the true lovers of Tee, are
like unto the Suppers up of Coffy, and are the best News-Mongers for all things
that happens in the City, yea almost in all Kingdoms; and when you hear the men
speak seriously of such matters; it is as if they had the best correspondence
for intelligence out of all Princes Courts; but especially, if this miracle be
wrought thereby, that the Water be changed in to Wine.

Others, who love neither Tee nor Coffy, and yet are very desirous to know what
passes in the World; you may find mighty earnestly, for some hours, stand
prating in the Booksellers Shops; always asking what, news is there, what
Pamphlets, what Pasquils, what Plays, what Libels, or any of the like
Bomfodder, is lately come out; and then they must buy and read them, let it
cost what it will.

Here they make the sole balance of State-business. Here, with great prudence,
discourse is held of the importantestState-affairs, and of the supreamest
persons in authority; and in their own imaginations know more then both the
Houses of Lords and Commons. Although they never sat in Council with any of
their Footmen. Nay they know to the weight of an ace, and can give a perfect
demonstration of it, which of the three Governments is best, Monarchy, Anarchy,
or Democracy. Which many times takes such a deep root and impresssion upon
them, and touches them so to the very heart, that they absolutely forget the
governing of their needful affairs which they went out about; for when they
come to the place where their occasions lay; they find the person either long
before gone abroad, or so employed with his own business, that he can hardly a
quarter do that he ought to do.

It Is true some soft natured women, that are as innocent as Doves, observe not
these sort of actions and tricks; but suffer themselves easily to be fopt off
by their husbands; or else by a gentle salutation are appeased; but others who
are cunninger in the cares of their Shops and Families, can no ways take a
view of these doings with eye of pleasure.

Yet this is nothing near the worst sort* and is naught else but a kind of a
scabbiness that the most accomplishedst marriages are infected with. And verily
if the husbands do thus neglect their times, and their Wives, in the mea while,
like careful Bees, are diligent in looking after their Shop and housekeeping;
they ought, when they do come home to speak their minds something freely to them.

But the imaginary authority of men, many times surges to such height, that it
seems to them insupportable, to hear any thing of a woman's contradiction,
thinking, that all what ever they do, is absolutely perfect and uncontrolable.
And can, on the contrary, when their Wives go to the Shambles or Market, reckon
to a minute in what time they ought to be back again: And woe be to them, if
they do, according to the nature of women, stand and prattle here or there
their time away, concerning Laces, Cookery, and other household occasions.

But you, O well married Couple, how pleasant it is to see that you two agree so
well together? That either is alike diligent and earnest in taking care of
their charge. That your husband many times says unto you his houswise, my
Dear, it is a curious fair day, go walk abroad, and give a visit to some or
other of your good acquaintance; I shall tarry at home the whole day, and will
take sufficient care of all things, and in the evening come and fetch you home,
etc. And you again in like manner, upon a good occasion, releeve your husband,
and take delight in his walking abroad with some good friends to take his
pleasure, and to recreate and refresh his tired senses.

If he be a little sickish of that distemper and that he will sometimes spend a
penny upon a Libel or new Tiding; that is a great pleasure for you, because you
know that the Booksellers and Printers must live; and every fool must have one
or the other bawble to play with.

You had great reason to be dissatisfied if he consumed his money in the Tavern
or with Tables. But you know that Been Johnsons Poems, and Penbrooks Arcadia,
did so inchant you, that they forced? the money out of your Pocket; yet they
served you in your Maiden estate with very good instructions, and showing you
many Virtues. You may therefore think, that such men who desire to surge higher
in knowledge, will have something also to be reading. And it is most certain,
whilst they are busy with that, their Wives are free from being controled.
It Is also undeniable, that men cannot always be alike earnest in their
affairs; for verily if they be so, they are for the most part great Peep in the
Pots and directers of their Wives, who have certainly their imperfections. And
it is the principallest satisfaction, and greatest pleasure in marriage, when a
woman winks or passes by the actions of her husband; and the husband in like
manner the actions of his wife; for if that were not so, how should they now
and then in passing by, throw a love-kiss at one another; or how should they at
night be so earnest in pressing one another to go first to bed.

It Is therefore, above all things, very needful for the increasing of love,
that a woman wink at many of her husbands actions; especially if he keep no
correspondence with Tiplers, that will be always in the Alehouses; and there
too will be served and waited upon, forsooth, to a hairs breadth; nay, and as
we perceive, if the Wife brings in the Anchovis upon the Table, without watring
them a little, as oftimes happens there, then the house is full of Hell and
damnation. For these smaller sort of Gentlemen, are they who sow strife and
sedition between man and wife, and continually talk of new Taverns and
Alehouses, clean Pots, and the best Wine; they always know where there is an
Oxhead newly broached: and the first word they speak, as soon as they come
together, is, Well Sir, where were you yesternight, that we saw you not at our
ordinary meeting place? Ho, says the the other, it was at the Blew Boar, where I
drunk the delicatest Wine that ever my lips tasted. You never tasted the like
on it. If I should live a thousand year, the taste would never be out of my
thoughts. Nay, if the Gods do yet drink Nectar, it is certainly pressed out of
those Grapes. Words cannot possibly decipher or express the taste, though Tully
himself, the father of eloquence, having drunk of it, would make the Oration.
What do you think then, if you and I went thither immediately and drunk one
pint of it standing? I am sure, Sir, that you will, as well as I, admire it
above all others. Done it is, and away they go: But it is not long before you
see those roses blossoming in their hands, of whose smell, taste, and color a
neat draught is taken, and an excellent exposition of the qualities. Yet the
the other Gentleman commends it to the highest; though he is assured that he
tasted a Glass in Master Empty Vessels Cellar that was far delicater, and that
he would far esteem beyond this. Nevertheless he acknowledges this to be very
good. But the pint being out, the first word is, Hangt, What goes upon one leg?
Draws the other pint of the same Wine. And then they begin to find that the
longer they drink, the better it tastes; which is an undeniable sign that it is
pure good Wine. And this pint being out again; presently says the the other, All
good things consist in three: so that we must have the the other pint. Where upon
the second says, As soon as this is out, we will go with the relish of it in
our mouths to Master Clean Pints, to taste his and this against each other. I am
contented, so said so done; and thus by the oftentimes tasting and retasting,
they grow so mighty loving, that it is impossible for them to depart from one
another, because they every foot say, they cannot part with an empty Pot, and
this love in a few hours grows on so hot, that the love of the Wife is totally
squencht; not only drawing men mightily out of their business, but keeping them
late out from their families; and making them like incarnate Devils against
their Wives. From whence proceeds, that when they come either whole or half
drunk home, there is nothing well to their minds, but they will find one thing
or another to control, bawl or chide with.

To these also may be adjoined those who generally resort to the Miter, Kings
Arms, and Plume of Feathers, or some other places where the commonly make their
bargains for buying and selling of Goods and Merchandises; from whence they
seldom come before they have spent a large reckoning, and lost more then three
of their five senses; thinking themselves no less rich then they are wise; and
ly then very subtlely upon the catch to overreach another in a good and
advantageous bargain; by which means they themselves are sometimes caught by the
nose with a mouldly old sort of unknown commodity, that they may walk home
with, by weeping cross; and next morning there they stand and look as if they
had sucked their Dam through a hurdle, and know not which way to turn themselves
with their Merchandise they have made; in this manner, bringing their Wives and
Children (if they let them know it) into excessive inconveniences; and for all
this want for nothing of grumbling and mumbling.

Some sorts of men,
Are Tyrants when.
Their thirsty Souls are filled:
They scold sore hot
Like Peep inth' Pot
And never can be stilled.
They talk and prate
At such a rate,
And think of naught but evil;
They fight and brawl,
And Wives do mawl,
Though all run for the Devil.
But at their draugh,
They quaff and laugh
Amongst their fellow creatures.
They swear and tear
And never ^ear
Old Nick in his worst features.
Who would but say
Then, by the way
That Woman is distressed,
Who must endure
An Epicure
With whom she will never be blessed.
In this last many Fathers commit great errors, who, when they are hotheaded
with multiplicity of Wine, take little regard of the bad examples they show
unto their Children and Families. Nay some there are that will in their sobrest
sense go with their sons, as if they were their companions, into a Tavern
without making any sort of difference; and also, when there is a necessity or
occasion sor it, know but very slenderly how to demonstrate their paternal
prudence and respect; but in this manner let loose the bridle of government
over their children.

Thus I knew an understanding Father, do who with some other Gentlemen, and his
son, being upon a journey together, to take care of some important affairs; but
seeing that at every Inn where they came, that his fellow-travellers were
resolute blades, and that he must pay as deep to his son as himself; exhorted
his son to take his full share of all things, and especially of the Wine; every
foot whispering him in the ear, Peter, drink, and then after a little while,
again, Peter, drink; And as he recommended this so earnestly to his son, he
himself very diligently lost no time to get his share; which continued solong
that going out of the chamebr to evacuate their bladders, they both fell into a
channel, where clasping each other in the arms, the son said, Father! are we
not now like brothers?

By this we may observe, what the Father of a Family, by his examples, may do.
But you, O well-match'd Woman, have no need to fear this sort of president in
your husband, because he is a perfect hater of excessive drinking, and an enemy
to such company that always frequent Taverns and Alehouses; and if he does go
once among good acquaintance, and take a glass more then ordinary, which is but
seldom, there is nothing that he does less then maunder and mumble; but he is all
for kissing, feeling and dallying; hating pot-company to the highest, or those
that make it their business, or spend their times in the Summer with going a
Fishing, and in the Winter go a Birding; upon which sort of Gentlemen this old
rhyme was made:

Who in the Winter Bird, and Summers go a Fishing,
Have no bad meat in Tub, that is not worth the aishing.
But your husband on the contrary, takes especial care of his affairs; and for
the pleasure and case of his wife, goes himself to market, there buies a good
joint of meat or a Fowl, and gets it made ready, and sits down and eats it with
his beloved: Then when he and you have very relishingly satisfied your
appetites, and drunk two or three glasof wine into the bargain, he invites you
very quietly to walk up stairs into your chamber to say a day-lesson. Well who
could wish for greater Pleasure then this!

O good Woman, how happy are you, if, as well as your husband you can keep your
self in these joys and delights. What state or condition is therein this World
that may be compared to such a loving, friendly and well accomplished match!
For without jesting, it happens hardly once in a thoufand times that a match
falls out so well. And al though it did, yet it is not free from a thousand
crosses and dissatisffactions, which are done unto you either by children,
wicked friends, or sometimes bad neighbors: and are ofttentimes so many, that
if they were all drawn up in one Picture; we should, in good truth, see more
grief and horror in it, then is demonstrated in the very Picture of Hell it
self. But one pound of the honey of sweet love, can easily balance a hundred
weight of that terrible and bitter Wormwood.

But where is there one among all the whole number of tender young Gentlewomen,
who being incountred by an airy exquisite Lover, that does not start back with
a thousand troublesome cogitations; and believes, that he, who thus earnestly
affects her, is at the least possessed with one of these terribly evil natures?
Nay, perhaps with some what else, as a cross-grained pate, a grumbling gizzard,
not well in his senses, jealous thoughts, or the actions of a Cotqucan are his
companions; and that more is then all these, keeps hid a certain imbecility in
his defective nature; which is no ways to be discovered till the nuptial rites
be absolutely celebrated.

This seems to be a great occasion and reason to have an abhorrance for
marrying. But when we begin again with serious judgment to consider, the
weaknesses, strange humors, and deficiences, that the most gaudiest and neatest
Ladies are subject to; experience will teach us, that they are Cakes baked of
one Dough, and Fruits of one Tree.

And therefore they are very happy, if two of one mind, and alike natured meet
together; but if two of contrary humors happen together, there is nothing to be
expected but grief, sorrow, and destruction; unless it happen that the
understanding of the one knows extraordinarily how to assist the weakness of
the other; by sometimes letting loose a rope and then drawing it in again;
whereby they may the prudentlier sail against wind and tide. These do arrive in
the Haven of the Pleasures of Marriage, where as others on the contrary suffer
most miserable Shipwreck.

The Sixth Pleasure.
The Woman has got the Breehes. Wh^ mischecfes arise by it. Counsel for the
unmarried. To shun those that are evil natured.
UNder a thousand Pleasures that we find in the estate of marriage, (...) is
none of the least, to see the Woman put the breeches on, seeming that she will
act the part of a Jack-pudding. Bu^ melancoly men oftentimes cannot bear with
such sort of jesting, and presently bawl and rail at such a Woman, calling her
a Monster, or some other ill name. Although they know very well that such sort
of Monsters are now a days so common, that if they were all to be shown in
Booths for sarthings a piece, there would be less spectators, then there was to
see the Sheep with five legs, or the great Crocodile.

Verily, such men are unhappy, and they do not a little also neglect these
Pleasures; when they, forsooth, think that by the putting on of the breeches,
must be understood that they are over Lorded, and that the Hen crows louder
then the Cock. O miserable man, if your head be possessed with this kind of
frenzy, and cannot be removed! Verily, if you had but seen the Plate of the
Women fighting for the Breeches, you would be of another judgment. For in
those days the man was glad to be rid of them, if he could but get the lining
untorn or indamaged; for he saw perfectly that the World was at that time so
full of those pretty Beldams, that there was begun a most bloody War between
the better sort of Gentlewomen, and the meaner degree of Women, for the gaining
of the Breeches, wherein Ketels and Pans, Tongs and Fireshovels,
Spinningwheels, Brooms and Maps were all beaten out of fashion. And it may very
well be thought, that if the Woman had put them on at first, and so have helped
him to have kept them, this wonderful and destructive War would never have
risen to that fury. Therefore it is no small prudence of the Women in these
days, who are descended from that family, to take care, at the very first, for
the good of their husbands, that the Breeches may be will preserved.

But let us be serious, and pass by all these kind of waggeries; if we consider
the husband as Captain, and the Wife as Lieutenant, is it not in the highest
degree necessary, that she should have also a part of the masculine knowledge
and authority. Besides, women must be silent in Politic and Church Government,
why should not they have something to say in those places where they are
houswives? We see certainly, that the men, for the most part, cannot tarry at
home, and will be going hither or thither to take the air, or for his pleasure,
or to smoke a pipe of Tobacco; as is showed you in the Fifth Confession; if
then, in the mean while, the Woman, through occasion of some Customers in the
Shop, or in the government of the Men and Maidservants should not in some
measure show that she had in part the Breeches on, and that she could in the
absence of her Captain, take care of his Command; how is it possible that the
Trading should be kept in order, and the Children and Servants well governed? I
will not so much as mention that there are several men, who are so
dull-brain'd, and so excessive careless, that if they had not had the good
fortunes to get notable shorp-witted young women to their Wives; they of
themselves would have been quickly out of breath, and might now perhaps be
found in the Barbado's or Bermoodo's planting Tobacco.

O stout Amazonians, who thus courageously, take the Weapons in hand, to defend
and protect your Husbands, Children, Servants and houskeeping; why should not
you have as great commendations given you, as those noble Souls of your Sex had
in former times? and who would not rather engage in the embracing of you, then
any ways to affront or bespatter you?

I know well enough there will come some times a whiffling blade, that will be
relating one or other long-nosed story, hon like a drunken Nabal, he was well
instructed by his prudent and diligent wife; and how little that he would obey
or listen to the commands of so brave a Captain; but they will very seldom or
never say any thing what grounds or provocatives they have given her for so
doing.

Nevertheless my intent is, not so much to flatter the evil or bad natured
women, as if their throwing out their ire upon their husbands, had always a
Lawful excuse or cause. Just as Xantippe did, who was Socrates's wife, think
that she had reason enough on her side to scold, brawl at, and abuse that wise
and good natured Philosopher, and to dash him in the face with a whole stream
of her hot Marish piss. Or that it did any ways become that hotar'sd whorish
Faustina, to govern that sage and understanding Emperor Marcus Aurelius. By no
means, for the^ that hot-spirited, and high-minded sex would prick up their
Peacockstails so much the higher. But happy would all these hair-brained
houswives be, if they had such Tutors to their husbands, as Aurelius was; it is
most certain, that then that corrupt seed, would be cropped in the very bud and
not be suffered to come to perfection.

Yet you new married Couple, are both in heart and mind concordant, and all
your delight is to please each others fancy: you have no difference about the
Supremacy; for the Authority of the one is always submitted to the other; and
so much the more because your husband never commands you as if you were a Maid;
but with the sweetest and kindest expressions, says, my Dearest, will you bid
the Maid draw a glass of Beer or Wine, or do this or that, etc. Oh if you could
but both keep your selves in this state and posture, how happily and
exemplarily would you live in this World! But it happens many times, that the
Women through length of time, do take upon them, and grow to be so free, that
they will be solely and totally Master; and if their husbands through
kind-heartedness have given them a little more then ordinary liberty, they will
have the last word in spite of sat.

So have I seen one who could by no means keep her self in that first and
Paradice-like life; who observing her husbands good nature, thought her self
wise enough to govern all things, and to bring him to her Bow; which, by
degrees, to his great discontent, did more and more increase in matters of the
housekeeping.

But it happened once that the good man, went to the Market, and having bought a
delicate Capon, meets with a friend, whom he invited to be his guest; and going
home with it, his wife powts, maunders and mutters and looks so sour that the
guest saw well enough how welcome he should be. The good man with fair and kind
words sought to remove this, which was in some measure done.

But a pretty while after, the goodman being in the market, buies a couple of
delicate Pullets, and sends them home with a Porter; but the Wife told him she
had made ready something else, and had no need of them; therefore, let him say
what he would, made him bring them back again: The good man meeting with the
Porter, and perceiving the cross-grainedness of his wife, sends them to a
Tavern to be made ready, and gets a friend or two along with him to dispatch
them, and dript them very gallantly with the juice of Grapes. At this, when he
came home, his wife grin'd, scolded, and bawled; yet done it was, and must
serve her for a future example. And she on the contrary persisting in her
stif-necked ill nature, made a path-road for the ruin of her self and family,
because he afterward; to shun his wife, frequented more then too much Taverns
and Alehouses, and gave the breeches solely to his wife.

Not long ago, just in the like manner, there married an indifferent handsome
Gentlewoman, with a proper, handsome, honest and good natured Gentleman; but the
Gentlewoman imagining her self to be as wise as a Doctor, acted the part of a
Domineerer, controuling, grumbling and chiding at all whatsoever he did;
insomuch that all his sweet expressions could no ways allay her; but rather
augmented her rage; yea insomuch that at last she saluted him with boxes and
buffettings. But he seeing that no reasons or persuasions would take place, and
that she grew the longer the more furious, locks the door to, and catches her
by the coif, nstructing her with such a feeling sense, that at last she got
open a window and leaps out, there by escaping the remaining part of that
dance. Away she flies immediately to her Father and her Brother, but they, very
well knowing her ill-natured obstinacy, both denied her houseroom. Yet the next
day, through the in tercession of others, there was a pacification made and a
truce concluded on, which did not long continue so. For she, beginning again
her former wicked actions, made him run to the Tavern there to allay his
disturbed senses, leaving her to wear the Breeches. But now they are rid of
money, credit, respect, and every thing else.

Another Gentlewoman of late days, seeing that she had married a good
mildnatured husband, that was not guilty of any vice, exercised her authority
and wickedness so much the more over him; yea so far, that in the presence of
several neighbors, she oftentimes, knocked, thumpt, and cudgelled him; that at
last she was called by every one The incarnate Devil. But he, after some years
of suffering this martyrdom, happening to die, there comes another Lover very
suddenly to cast himself away upon this Hellish piece of flesh; but she had of
him, being a just punishment, such a beloved, that he thunderd her three times
as bad about, as she did her first husband; and then flew Pots, Kans and
Glasses ringling and gingling along the flore, and she on the top of them, well
and warm covered with good thumps and fisty-cuffs, and sometimes traild over the
flore by the hair of the head. O miserable terrors of such a horrible State and
condition! Who can but shake and quiver, yea with fear start back, when they
begin to feel the least motion to the same in their bodies? and so much the
more, because that we see that this present World is so mightily replenished
with such numbers of monstrous, wicked and unhappy women, who hide their
wickedness and ill natures under their powdered locks, and flattring looks; and
like a Camelion, in their Maiden estate, will be agreeable to all things that
are propounded to them; but being married, they abandon all rationality, make
their own passions their masters, and cannot understand by any means the
pleasures of their husbands. Though they certainly know, and have daily
experience, that there is nothing under the Sun, which has a bewitchinger power
upon the hearts of their husbands, then the friendliness and kind compliance of
their Wives. This has in ancient times done a thousand wonders and is as yet
the most powerful to drive all stuborn and ill natured humors out of the heads
of men; and can lead them, as it were by the hand, in to the paths of Reason,
Equity and Love.

O happy Women, who, in this manner have the hearts of men in your hands, and
can bring the same to your obedience where you will; what means and ways ought
you not to endeavor by dallyings and kind actions to gain the same on your
side! you certainly know, that the main Butt which is aimed at by all mankind,
is to pass through this short life of ours with pleasure and quietness: But
alas! what life, what rest, what pleasure can he possess in this World, who
has happened upon a scolding, and no ways friendly wife?

Oh if all Lovers knew this so well, they would never suffer themselves to be
led away captive by the jettish eyes, and marble-like breasts, or straagle
themselves in the curled locks of women; but would embrace their kind
naturedness to be the surpassingest beauty.

But the carnal desires, and covetousness of money, blinds the eyes of so many,
that oftentimes for the satisfaction there of, they will, contrary to all
exhortations, run headlong, and cast themselves into a pit of infinite horrors
and vexations of Spirit: choosing rather a proud, finical, blockheaded Virgin
with two thousand pound, then a mean, kind-hearted, understanding one, with ten
thousand Virtues.

This was that which the prudent King Lycurgus sought to prevent, when he gave
out his commands that no Parents should give any Portions with their Daughters
in marriage, or might leave them any thing for an inheritance; because he would
not have them to be desired in marriage by any, but for their beauty and
virtues; in those days the vicious remained, just as now does the poor ones,
most of them unmarried, and cast aside, and every Maid was hereby spurred up,
that her Virtues might in brightness and splendour surpass others.

Happy are you, O Father of the Family, who without the least thoughts of
Lycurgus, have made so good a choice and have gotten a Wife that is beautiful,
rich, good natured, and virtuous; you learnt first to know her well, that you
might the better woe her, and so be happy in marriage. Make this your example,
O all you foolish and wandering Lovers, who are so desirous to taste of the
Pleasures and sweetness of marriage; and are sometimes so disquieted and
troubled till you cast your selves upon an insulting, domineering Wife, who
perhaps has the Breeches already on, and will vex you with all the torments
imaginable in the World. Do but use these few remedies for your squandered
brains, and be assured they will bring you to have good fortune and tranquillity.

Search not after great Riches, but for one of your own degree; for the Rich
are insulting, self-conceited, and proud.

Admire no outward beauty; because they are proud of their beauty, and imagine
themselves to be Goddesses, whom their husbands ought to obey.

Shun those who are much lesser then your self: For when a mean one finds her
self pro moted by a great Match, she is much prouder and self-conceited then
one of a good extraction; and will much sooner than another endeavor to
domineer over her husband.

Dissemble not in your wooing. For dissimulation deceives its own Master.

Be not too hasty. For a thing of importance must be long and prudently
considered of, before a final conclusion can be made.

Follow the advice of understanding friends. For to be wise, and in love, was
not given to the Gods themselves.

Choose no Country wench: For she will want a whole years learning, before she will
know how to shite upon a house of Office, and two years to learn to make a
cursie.

If you marry, arm your self with patience. For he that has the yoke of
marriage upon his shoulders, must patiently suffer and endure all the disquiets
and troubles that, that estate is subject to.

If these things be observed by you innocent and wandering Lovers, they will
much assist you in your choice, but not preserve you from being a slave;
because the Gentlewoman whom you have chosen, has till this time be past, had
one or other ill condition, which she knew how to hide and dissemble with, that
you never so much as thought of, or expected from her. Cornelius Agrippa knew
this in his days, when he said, men must have and keep their wives, even as it
chances; if they be (says he) merry humored, if they be foolish, if they be
unmannerly, if they be proud, if they be sluttish, if they be ugly, if they be
dishonest, or whatsoever vice she is guilty of, that will be perceived after
the wedding, but never amended. Be therefore very vigilant, you wandering
Lovers, and sell not your liberty at so low a price, which cannot be redeemed
again with a whole Sea of repentances.

And you, O silent Gentlewomen, methinks you long to know whether there be no
remedies for you to be bad, that you may also be as well armed against the
rigid natured, subtle and dissembling Lovers; as well as they have against the
vicious Gentlewomen; take notice, that since you have subjected your selves to
that foolish fashion of these times, never of your selves to go a wooing; but
with patience will expect who will come for you, that rule must be first
observed, and regard taken of him that comes, then it is the time to consider,
principally.

Whether he loves you for your money, or for your beauty.

Inquire whether he have a good method, or way, for the maintaining of a
Family. For if he have not that to build upon, the whole foundation will tumble.

Search also whether he be of an honest, rather then great extraction. For
Virtue is the greatest Gentility.

Inquire also whether he be a frequenter of Alehouses; especially of such as
are of an evil reput.

To be a lover of such houses,
Makes him to think of other Spouses.
If he be covetous of honor, he has several other Virtues.

Hate a Gamester like the Plague; for they are consumers of all; nay their very
gain is loss.

Abhor a person of no employ, or gadder along the streets; for they are fit for
nothing.

If you marry, show all honor, respect, and love to your husband. Endeavor
not to Lordize over him; because that, both by Heaven and nature is given unto
him.

In so doing, you will have, as well as our new-Couple, the expectation of a
happy match; which though it falls out well, yet is subject to several
accidental corruptions; as you will perceive in the further Confession of the
ensuing Plea^ures, even as if they were a Lookingglass.

The Seventh Pleasure.
The bad times teaches the new married Couple. Makes them brave housekeepers.
They take in Lodgers, and give good examples to their Children.
IT was formerly very pleasant living, when Trading and Marchandizing
flourished so nobly, that every evening people were fain to carry a whole
drawer full of money out of the Counter in to the Counting House; and then the
good woman had always two or three hours work to sort it, before they could so
much as think of going to bed: but it seems that destructive War, as being a
scourge from Heaven, for our dissatisfied Spirits; has so lamentably humbled
the Land of our Nativity, that there are very few who have not now just causes
enough to complain.

And you, O young people, shall be witnesses here of, who have already, in that
short time that you have been married, experience that things do not always
run upon wheels so merrily as was expected. It Is true you possess the Pleasure
of an indifferent Trade, as well as the rest of your Neighbors; but it is not
in any measure to be compared with those golden days that your Ancestors had,
when they could lay-up so much wealth, and yet complained they had but little
custom.

Verily, when I rightly consider it, methinks you are happier then they were.
For at that time all their delight was, by a covetous frugality, to reap much
riches together, and though that happened very well, yet there was never enough;
for money is no impediment to a covetous soul because it always earns for more.
But now on the contrary, it is esteemed to be very nobly done, and people take
an absolute delight in it, if they can but tell how to scrape so much together,
that they may keep the Dunners from their doors, bring up their children
indifferently well, and pay the taxations and impositions that are imposed upon
them. In good truth, they that can do this now, are worthy of as much credit
and reputation, as those were that prospered much in former days; and their
Pleasure ought not to be lesser then the others before was.

O happy Successors, who through the contentment of your minds, possess now as
great Pleasure, as your rich Parents formerly did, in their plentiful days.
Verily, you gain is comparatively better them theirs, because you are satisfied
with so much less; and by consequence when the hour of death approaches, you
can so much the easier depart from this World, by reason you shall not leave so
many knives behind you that may cut your childrens throats.

Therefore if your Trading should come to diminish more; and that you can
hardly tell how to keep both ends together; then comfort your selves with this
happiness; to the end that the Pleasures of your marriage, may thereby not be
eclipsed. For in bad times you must as diligently search after the Pleasures of
Marriage, as for gain and good Trading.

But it seems, as you imagine, that this Pleasure rather decreases then
increases; because that the small trading, is accompanied with bad payment; and
where ever you run or go to dun, you find no body at home, but return back to
your house with empty pockets. For there is Master Highmind, and Squire
Spightfull, who come every day in their Velvet Coats to the Change, are not in
the least ashamed that the Goods, which they bought to be paid ready down,
after the expiration of a full year, are not yet paid. And Master Negligent,
who is always in an Alehouse, and seldom to be found in his Counting house or
at the Change, thinks it is abundance to early in July, so much as to look upon
the reckoning of last New-year, much less to pay it.

Nevertheless others have their Creditors also, and this Bill of Exchange, and
that Assignment must be paid at their due times; yea, and the Winter is
approaching, Wood and Coals must be bought, the Cellar furnished with Beer and
Wine, and some Firkins of Butter, and provision made for the powdringtub to be
filled, as well as several other sorts of necessaries for the Family that will
be wanting. Insomuch that this affords but a very slight appearance of
concluding the year in Pleasure.

But, O careful House Father, if you knew in what a happy age you live, you
would not go away so dissatisfied, but embrace all these affairs very joifully
for extraordinary Pleasures.

Hitherto you have gone forward like one young and unexperienced, and have
meant with Master Dolittle, alias John the Satisfied, that things were to be
done with kissing, licking, dallying, and other fidle-fidles; but now you are
come to a more sober, serious understanding, and to have man's knowledge, and
the same prudent conduct that your Parents and Friends had, when they were
assembled together about your Contract of Marriage, and then thought of all
these things. Now you are grown to be a Master of Arts in the University of
Wedlock. And great Juno laughed, that Venus has so long hood winked you.

Come on then, these films being now fallen, from your eyes, do but observe how
prudent careful Time has made you, and how circumspect and diligent you begin
to be that you may get through the World with honor, commendations, and good
respect; how like a care taking Father you are now providing for your Wife,
Children, and whole Family. Oh if your Father and Mother were now alive, how
would they rejoice in this your advancement; which are indeed the upright
Pleasures of Marriage. For all married people, draw the cares, here mentioned,
along with them; though they come with a bag full of money about their necks in
to the World.

Do but see, till now you have had a brave and splendant house, paid great
^ent, only for your self and family to live in; now you begin to consider with
understanding and Pleasure, whether a dwelling of less price would not serve as
well, in which you might have a Chamber or two that you could let out to some
civil Gentlemen, who might diet with you; it would help to pay the rent, and
bring some profit in besides; and it is all one trouble for boiling, roasting,
and going to Market: the day goes about nevertheless, and the Maid suits her
work accordingly. And moreover, you have good company of them in your house,
and always either one or another at dinner begins to relate some kind of
pretty discourse, that is continually very pleasurable and delightful to be
herad.

Observe how glad your Wife is concerning this resolution! There has not been
these three years any Proclamation published, which pleased her fancy better:
for now her husband will have some pastime, and good company at home, so that
he needs not go to seek it in the evening in Alehouses or other places. Well
who cannot but see here how one may learn through honest Time and Experience,
what Pleasures they are accompanied with?

But stay a little, and to be serious with you, when you get such guests, you will
see how they will plague you; for the general imaginations of such Gentlemen
are, that all the moneys they spend, is pure gain, and that the Landlord and
Landlady always ought to provide such sort of diet as they have most a mind
to: and though it be never so well dressed, yet there shall hardly come one dish
to the Table, but they will be finding fault that this has too much pepper in
it, and that too much salt, etc. Besides all this, both Maids and Men, and all
what is in the house, must be at their commands; nay be readier and nimbler to
serve them then their Master and Mistress. And that is more, you are deprived of
the whole freedom of your house and table. It happens also many times, that
they have so many visiters, and runners after them, that they require more
attendance; and the maid has more work with them alone, then the whole
housekeeping besides.

This is the general course of all fellow Commoners; I will not say any thing
of a worset sort, which are many times amongst them; who run in the mornings to
Strong-water Shops, and in the afternoon to Taverns; where they so disguise
themselves, that one must be ashamed for honest people who are in the Shop, or
standing upon the flore, that sees them either come in a doors or down from
their Chambers, hardly able to stand; besides they value not if they tarry out
late at nights; and, if it be possible, they will entice the good man of the
house to debauch with them. And then again they are seldom free from private
chatting and prattling with the Maid and Men servants.

But perhaps you may light of a better sort, which Time, who is the mother of
all things, will make appear. Let it be as it will, here is always pleasure
and delight to be expected for the good man, because the good woman by this
means increases to more knowledge of housholding affairs; and therefore is
always busy, like a prudent mother, in educating, governing, and instructing
her children.

Yea, if you, O Father of the Family, will go a little further, and behold with
clear eyes, how far your wife, through these bad times, is advanced in
understanding and knowledge; I do assure you, you will find your self as
ravished with joy; because this is as great a transformation as ever Ovid writ
of. For whereas at the beginning of your mar^iage, all her cogitations were
employed ^or the buying of large Venetian Loo^ing-glasses, Indean Chainy, Plush
^tools and Chairs, Turkish Tapistry, ^ich Presses and Tables, yea and
what^oever else was needful for neatness and gallantry; we see now, that all
her senses are at work, where everthey may or can be, to save and spare all
things, and to ^ke care that there may not so much as ^match negligently be
thrown away.

Formerly, your good wife used, by ^eason of her youth, and want of know^dge,
to walk very stately, hand in ^und with you, along the streets, fini^lly trickt
up with powdered locks, and a laced Gorget and Gown, and had commonly need of,
at the least, three ^ours time, before she, with the help of two serviceable
assistants, could be put to her mind in her dress; and then ^gain all her
discourse was of walking or ^iding abroad, and of junketting and merriment;
whereas now on the contrary, seeing the small gain, she is sparing of all
things, and ordring it to the best advantage for the family; without so much as
setting one foot out of her House or Counter unnecessarily. Never thinking more
of gadding abroad, to take pleasure; but finds all her delight by being busy
in her houskeeping, amongst her children and servants. Here you may behold her
driving the maid forwards, and setting her a spinning, to keep the sleep out of
her eyes; and with this intent also that she may have the delight to get yarn
enough ready toward Winter, to let a brave Web of Linen be woven for the
service of the Family. Yea, and here she shows you, that though before she was
but a Bartholomew Baby, that she is now grown to be a brave houswife. And that,
if need requires, she can put a hand to the plough stoutly.

O happy man, who in such a sad and troublesome time* can find out so many
Pleasures of Marriage, and who art already so well instructed in that most
illustrious School!

It Is true, you will meet with some jeering prattle-arses, that will say, is
this that brave couple, that there was such a noise made of when they were
married! Is this the Gentlewoman that used to go so costly in her Gorgets and
Gowns! Goes she now with a plain wastcoat! alas and welladay! does her feathers
begin to hang thus! Well is, this the Gentlewoman that used always to keep two
maids! Can she now make (...) shift with a little wench that earns her wages
with spinning, and her diet with doing the house work? it must certainly ly
very nastily and sluttishly at her house.

It Is very true, this might happen to you, and it would seem to eclipse the Sun
of your Pleasures of Marriage very much; if you had not now, O well matched
Couple, through the instruction of the winged Time, gotten such prudent eyes
that you can easily see through such vain and simple Clouds.

But now you apprehend, to your great joy and comfort, that this arrow comes
out of the Quiver of such as are indebted to every body, and suffer themselves
daily to be durrid; who are continually prattling with the Neigbors, and gadding
along the streets; they take notice of every door that opens, and neglect their
own houskeeping having no understanding to govern it; the dishes, pots and pans
are always standing in the middle of the flore; and Benches and Stools are all
covered and ly silled with the Childrens shitten clouts, and the Windows are so
thick with dirt, that the Sun can hardly shine through them. Whose first word
is, when any body comes in to their house, What! by reason of these sad times a
body has neither joy nor delight in their houskeeping. If we wash the glass
windows, they are in danger of breaking, and at present we cannot bear with any
losses. And these ordinarily have more prattling and fetling then any other
women, and no body knows any thing better then these sworn tittletattlers; they
are seldom to be found with a pincustuon upon their laps; and are the occasion
that their houses, children and Maids stink of filtlr and sluttishness, with
their clothes out at the elbous, and their stockins out at the heels. Whilst
their husbands sit in the Alehouses, and seek by drinking, domineering and
gaming to drive these damps of the sad times out of their brains; which
continues so long, till that all is consumed, and they both fly damnably in
debt to their Creditors.

Well then, you worthy and faithful Houskeepers, you see now the unhappy state
and condition of these venomous controulers of others: And on the contrary, you
may perceive how happy the bad times, like a prudent Instructor, makes you;
what a quantity of understanding and delight it imparts unto you, whilst you
both, with joint resolution, diligent hands and vigilant eyes, endeavor the
maintenance and setting up of your Family. Be assured, that this care and
frugality will so root it self in your very bones, that although the times
changed and grew better, you would reserve a stedsast delight in the promoting
the good and benefit of your houskeeping; and withal leave to your children
such riches and good examples, that they will follow your footsteps of
carefulness with delight, and lay a hand to the plough, thereby to demonstrate
that they were of a good extraction: which if it so happen, you will inherit
one of the greatest and desiredst Pleasures that is to be found in the Married
estate.



The Eighth Pleasure.
The Parents would bring up their son in (...) their way of Trade, but he has
no (...) ^ind to it. He is put to School out of the (...) City. Grows a
Scholar, commits much (...) ^ischief. Is apprehended and informed (...) what a
Schollerlke life is.
UDs life, now I think on it, amongst the Pleasures of Marriage, this is ^e of
the least, when one sees their chil (...) feed well, and grow up healthfully
^dmerrily; and their stomachs in a mor^g are as soon open as their eyes; then
(...) noons they can claw it away at a good ^sh, as well as persons of full
growth ^d years; and about four of the clock (...) appetites are again prepared
for an ^ternoons lunchion; insomuch that ^y can eat you into poverty, without
^king their teeth bleed. O it is such (...) delight to see that they
continually ^ow up so slovenly and wastfully in ^ir clothes, that they must
needs have every half year almost a new suit, and that always a little bigger;
whereby the Father sees that he shall in short time have a son to be his man in
the shop, and the mother a daughter to be her caretakester and controulster of
the Kitchen.

Thus we advance in the estate of Marriage, from one pleasure to another. O how
happy you will be, if your children be but pliable and courteous, and grow up in
obedience, and according to your example! But we see in the generality, that as
their understanding increases, that also their own wills and desires do in like
manner not diminish.

Perhaps you meet with some such symptoms as these are in your own son; for
having been some years learning the Latin Tongue at Paul's or Merchant Tailors
School; he is then inveagled by some of the neighbors sons to go with them to
learn the Italian or French language; to which purpose they know of a very
delicate Boarding-school a little way out of the City; and then they baptize it
with the name, that he has such a longing and earnest desire to learn it, that
he cannot rest in the night for it.

What will you do? The charge there of, the bad times, and the necessity you
have for him at home, makes you persuade him from it, and to proffer him
convenient occasions in the City; but what helps it, the fear of drawing the
child from that which he has so much a mind to; and may be, that also, wherein
his whole good fortune consists, causes you to take a resolution to fulfill
his desire. Away he is sent then, and agreed for. And then there must be a Trunk
furnished, with all manner of linen and clothes, with other toys and sweet
meats; and money in his pocket to boot.

Having been some small time there he sends some letters for what he wants.
Which is, with recommendations of being saving and diligent, sent unto him. And
it is no small pleasure for the Parents, if they do but see that he is an
indifferent proficiant. All their delight and pleasure is, when time will
permit, to go to their son, and to show him their great love and affection.

But the Daughter, which goes along with her Mother, is kindled with no small
matter of jealousy to see that her Brother puts her Parents to so much charge,
gets what he pleases, and that their minds are never at rest about him. When
she, on the contrary, being at home, is thrust by her Mother into the drudgery
of the house, or kept close to her needle. Yet these are pacified with a fine
lace, a ring, or some such sort of trinkom trankoms; and then with telling them
into the bargain, when your brother comes home he shall keep the shop.

This the Father is in expectation of. And the son being come home, gives a
great Pleasure to his Father and Mother, by reason he speaks such good Latin
and Italian, and is so gentile in his behavior: but to look to the shop, he
has no mind to. Say what they will, talk is but talk. All his desire and mind
is to go to the University either of Oxford or Cambridge. And although the
Father in some measure herein yields and consents; the Mother, on the other
side, can by no means resolve to it; for her main aim was, that her son
shouldbe brought up in the shop; because that in the absence, or by decease of
her husband, he might then therein be helpful to her. Besides that, it is yet
fresh in her memory, that when her Brother studied at Oxford, what a divellish
deal of money it cost, and what complaints there come of his student-like manner
of living. Insomuch that there was hardly a month past, but the Proctor of the
College, or the Magistracy of the City must have one or other penalty paid
them.

Now they try to employ the son in the shop, who delights in no less melody
then the tune of that song: letting slip no occasion that he can meet with to
get out of the shop; and show himself, with all diligence, to willing be a
Labourer in the Tennis Court, or at the Bilyard-Table; and is not ashamed, if
there be hasty work, in the evening, to tarry there till it be past eleven of
the clock. What a pleasure this vigilance is to the Father and Mother, those
that have experience know best. Especially when they in the morning call their
son to confession, and between Anger and Love catechize him with several
natural and kind reproofs.

It Is but labor lost, and ill whistling, if the horse will not piss. What remedy?
turn it, and wind it so as you will

The son his mind to study is full bent,
Or else will live upon his yearly rent.
Here must be a counsel held by wisdom, prudence, love and patience. Here also
the imaginations of incapableness or want of moneys must be conquered; for to
constrain a son to that he has no mind to, is the ready way to dull his
genious, and perhaps bring him to what is worser, to wit, running after whores
or Gaming. And to teach him how to live upon his yearly means, the tools are
too damned costly. So that now the Parents have true experience of the old
Proverb.

The Children in their youth, often make their Parents smart,
Being come to riper years, they vex their very heart.
Neverheless, after you have turned it and wound it so as you will, the sending
of him to the University of Oxford bears the sway; and there to let him study
Theology being the modestest Faculty, by one of the learned and famousest
Doctors. And verily, he goes forward so nobly, that, in few months, before he
half knows the needful Philosophy, he is found to be a Master of Arts in
Villainy. And moreover, the Parents were by some good friends informed, that
lately he was acting the domineering student, and being caught by the watch,
was brought into the Court of Guard; but through the extraordinary intercession
of his own and some other Doctors, they privately let him go out again.

A little longer time being expired, he sends Post upon Post dunning letters;
his quarter of the years out, his Pockets empty, and the Landlady wants money;
besides there are several other things that he wants, both of Linen and
Woollen; all which things yield an extraordinary Pleasure, especially, if the
money which is sent, without suffering shipwreck, be employed and laid out for
those necessaries.

For some students are so deeply learnt, that they consume the moneys they get
in mirth and jovialty, and leave their Landladies, Booksellers, Tailors,
Shoomakers, and all whom they are indebted to, unpaid. Nay, his own Cousin,
that studied at Cambridge, knew very learnedly how to make a cleaver dispatch,
with his Pot-Companions, at Gutterlane, of all the money that was sent him by
his Parents, for his promotion; and under the covert of many well studied lies
desired more.

But who knows, what wonderful students tricks, before he is half so perfect,
your son will have learnt, to make his Father and Mother merry with; for, as I
have heard, he has gotten so much aquaintance, that he has the Bookseller to
be his friend, who sets down the prizes of the Books he delivers, three times
as much again as they are worth; and for the overplus, he, with some other
students, are bravely merry together.

Yea, he is come so far himself, that he does, to get money, know how to sell his
best Authors; and sets in place of them some Blocks very neatly cut and
colored like gallant Books. And if any one comes that will lay their hands
upon them; he says immediately, eat, drink, smoke and be merry to your hearts
content; but whatsoever you do, touch not my books; for that is as a Medean Law
and an inviolable statute in my Chamber; as it does, to the same purpose, stand
written thus before my Chamber of Books:

Be jolly, sing, and dance; commaud me with a look,
One thing I do forbid, you must not touch a Book.
The old Proverb says, it must bend well, before it can make a good hook. But
it is easy to be perceived by the beginning, what may be expected from the
flexibility of this precious twig, O extraordinary and magnisicent pleasure for
the Parents, when they see that their son, in so short a time, is so damnably
advanced! And so much the more, a little while after, there comes one and tells
them by word of mouth, that there were several Scholars, which were playing
some antic tricks in the night; and amongst some others both their Son and
their Cousin were apprehended, and at this very present sad accusations were
brought in against them. In the mean while, the Chancellor, having heard that
they are all persons of good Parentage, and that there will be brave greasing
in the case, laughs in his fist because such things as those are generally
moderated and assopiated by the means and infallible virtue of the correcting
finger herb.

This brings the Parents a fine Bartholomew Baby to play with; and if their ly
loosely in a corner a fifty pound bag they will go nigh to see how they may
make use of it. And this gives a horrible augmentation to the Pleasures of
Marriage! But let them turn it and wind it which way they will, the Parents
must go thither, and seek by all means possible according to their ability, to
pacify the matter.

As they are upon their journey, they hear in every Town where they come, how
debauched and wicked lives the Students leads, not only concerning that which
was lately done at Oxford, but at other places also. Which makes them be in no
small fear, whether their son, perhaps may not be guilty only of this, but some
worser misdemeanor, and is therefore at present clapped up.

Here Master Truetale begins to relate, that lately there were four Students,
who for some petulancy, had been at Confession by the Mayor, and he with their
vomiting up some Guinies, gave them their absolutions; but they perceiving that
hereby their purses were cruelly weakened; and that the return of moneys did not
come according to expectation, took a resolution to get some revenge of him for
it. And he having built a new house, caused it, by a curious Workman, to be
neatly painted on the outside: which these four Students seeing, they took a
good quantity of Tar, and did so damnably bedawb it, that it looked as if old
Nick had been there with his rubbing brush. Which the Mayor seeing in the
morning, seemed to be little troubled at it; but said, certainly some body has
done this, that I have taken too little money of, and therefore in gratitude
have, for nothing, thus bepainted my delicately painted house.

But nevertheless the Mayor sends in the evening five or six Spies abroad into
those Taverns and Alehouses where the lightest Students generally frequented;
who Were smoking and drinking there, and amongst other discourses related, how
it tickled their fancies, that the covetous Mayor was served such a delicate
trik, etc. Whereupon some of them hearing that the action was so much
commended, and that the Mayor made no search about it, says, that was my work
with James Smith the Londoner, Jack Dove the Kentishman, and Sanny Clow the
Scotch man. Upon this they were all four apprehended in the night, and very
cleaverly clapped by the heels, etc.

Hereupon Mistress Credit, said, There are no such wicked inventers of mischief,
as moniless Students; of which we had lately a new example, for some of those
Blades wanting money, were resolved to act this trick, viz. Some few days
before there was a malesactor hanged, and one of them between eleven and twelve
of the clock at night, gets hard by the Gallows where he hung, and feigned to
be the spirit of the malefactor; sometimes appearing, and then again vanishing;
in the mean while the rest of his companions, all separate from each other, as
if they had been strangers, placed them selves not far from it. Each of them
seemed to be frightened, and showed unto all the passers by that there was the
spirit of the malefactor that was executed. This run forward like wild fire, in
so much that the number of the spectators increased abundantly. And whilst
every one was so busy in beholding it, the moniless Students were as serious
in picking of their Pockers, cutting the silver buttons off their clothes,
which no body perceived, till the Spirit was vanished, and they were gotten
home.

So did I know, says Master Mouth, two necessitous Students, who at a
Fairtime, observed that a Country man, having sold some commodities that he
brought to Market, had received five or six Crown piecos for them; and went
amongst the Booths to buy something, but feared in the throng one or another
might steal them from him; therefore would not trust them in his Pocket, nor
with his Purfe in the breast of his doublet; but puts them in his mouth;
saying, No body I Am sure can take them from thence, and walks into the Booths,
there cheapning a hat; in the mean while, one of these Students goes to the
very next Booth, buies some pedling thing, and pulling money out of his Pocket
to pay, says what a pox is the meaning of this? Just now I had several Crown
pieces, and now I have nothing; and since that, there has no body else been
near me, but this Country fellow; and begins to catch him by the shoulders;
saying, hark ye Squire, I miss several Crown pieces which I had but just now.
This so amazed the Country man, that he began to mumble with the Crown pieces
in his mouth; whereupon the Student said, I verily believe the villain has
them in his mouth. The Country man answered thereupon, those that I have in my
mouth are my own, I received them just now for some commodities; But let the
Country man say what he would, it was not believed; he was lamentably beaten,
his Crown pieces taken from him, and given to the Student.

By this you may perceive, says Master Otherway, that the Proverb is true,
Poverty is subtle. I was lately told of some poor troublesome Students, who had,
a little way off the City, caused a dainty Feast to be made ready for them; and
knowing that the Landlord had a brother, whom he extremely loved, which lived
about five and twenty miles off; write a Letter to the Landlord, and therein
acquaint him that his Brother was very desperately sick, oftentimes calling for
him; therefore if he would see and speak with him alive, he must with all
possible speed immediately come thither, etc.

Then they found out such a cleaver contry vance to have this Letter delivered
into the hands of the Landlord, that he had not the least distrust of a cheat;
but away he rides immediately. In the mean while, these Students committed much
sauciness and wantonness with the Mistress and the Maid; till at last locking
them both up in a Chamber, away they went without paying.

To this a Miller that sat close by, relates, that lately, not far from his
house, two Students laid violent hands upon a woman, and bound her to a Post,
both defiling her.

It Is a Wonder, says Master Demure, proceeding forward, that since they commit
such wicked and so many base actions, more of th^se Students are not
apprehended. When I dwelt at my Country house, there came a parcel of these
drunken blades, that were expressly gone abroad to play some mad tricks; they
pulled down the pales of my neighbors Garden; and one among them that served
for Chief, commanded pull off these planks, tear up this Post, etc.

In the mean time, a poor Country man coming by with his empty Wagon; begs of
this commander, that he would be pleased to bestow upon him those old Planks
and Posts for his winter firing, because he was so poor, that he knew not where
to get any: which this Gentleman granting him, he lays on a lusty load upon
his Wagon.

Being drove a pretty way of, the owner comes to the place, and sees in what a
lamentable condition his Garden lay; asks who had done it, and understands that
they were Students which had taken their march toward some of the adjacent
Country Towns, but that the Country man with his Planks, must needs be got very
far from the City, etc. Away runs the owner with all speed, makes his
complaint, and gets an order to arrest the poor Country man, his horse and
Wagon. Who coming to be examined at his trial, was condemned to be set in the
Pillory, with two Planks set before him, upon which must be written in great
white Letters.

Garden-Theef.
These wicked Students stood together to behold this, and laughed till they
^plit, to see that this poor innocent Country man, must suffer such shame and
punishment for his winter firing.

Just in the same manner, not long ^go* I some divellish Students, had taken a
heavy rail from before a house which was newly set there, but hearing that the
Watch or Bell man approached; they presently whept it before another man's door,
where there was none; and leaning all of them over the rail; saluted the Watch
with saying, Good night Gentlemen, Good night; and the Watch the like to them
again: But the Watch was no sooner gone then they fell to breaking of it all in
pieces, and run away as fast as they could drive.

Those people are unhappy, says Master Talkon, especially such as live in
Country Towns, that are near to Cities where there are Universities; for many
times one or another must be a sufferer from these roguish natured Students;
and they imagine in themselves that all what the Country people possess must be
at their pleasure and disposition. Whereby it happens, in the Summer, that for
their wicked pastime, they go to rob the Orchards of the best fruit, and to
steal Hens, Ducks, and Pigeons; and then again to destroy the Fields of
Turnips, Carrots, Parsnips, Beans and Pease, etc. Tearing up such
multiplicities, that it would be incredible if we should relate it all. But it
is common for them to destroy ten times as much as they can eat or carry away.

And when the Summer is past, that there are no fruits either in Orchards or
Fields; then their whole delight and recreation is to commit insolences in the
Streets of the City by night; and if they can but any ways put an affront upon
the Watch; that is laughed at, and esteemed to be an heroic act.

It happened lately, that some Students walking out of Town, saw a little boy in
the Fields, that was holding the cord of an indifferent Kite, which was in the
Air, in his hand; they laughing at him, said, The Kite is bigger than the Boy;
come let us ty the cord about the Boy, then they will not lose one another. And
immediately catching hold of the Boy, they forced the cord from him, and bound
it fast about his middle in a great many knots, then went their way.

Whilst the Boy was very busy and endeavoring to unty the knots, the Wind
grew high, insomuch that the Boy used all his strength to hold back the cord;
but his strength failing him, he was with a furious blast snarcht up by the
Kite from the ground, and presently after let fall again into a pretty deep
ditch, where the poor innocent Boy was unhappily drowned.

It would be sempiternal for us here to make a relation of all the petulancy
and wickedness of Students, whereof these and other Parents, each in their
particular, are miserably sensible of. For every one acts his own part, but it
tends altogether unto wickedness, lavishness, and troublesomness.

Here you may see Master Emptybelly takes the greatest delight in the World,
nobly to treat some Northern Gentlemen of his acquanitance and Pot-companions,
and then again to be treated by them: where there is an absolute agreement
made, that when any one of them gets money from their Parents, he shall give the
company a treat of five Guinnies. And though they generally observe, that
before they part, one quarrel or other arises, and the Swords drawn; yet this
Law is inviolabler, than ever any Statutes of Henry the VIII. were. Which
continues so long till one of them be desperately wounded or killed, and he
that did it apprehended; and to the great greef of his Parents tried for his
life, or else slies his Country to, ^ive it.

Others we may see, that have no greater pleasure then to sit whole nights with
their Companions playing at Tables; and there game away Rings, Hats, Cloaks and
Swords, etc. and then ply one another so close with whole bumpers of Sack and
old Hock, that they are worse then senceless beasts, feeling and groping of the
very Walls, and tumbling and wallowing too and sro in their own nastiness. And
esteem it to be a Championlike action if one can but make the the other dead
drunk by his voracity of sucking in most. As if they intended hereby to become
learned Doctors.

Some again are most horribly addicted to frequent the pestilential
Bawdy-houses; of which they are never satisfied, till money, clothes, books, and
their own health of body is consumed; and then come home to their Parents
soundly peppered with the Pox.

Some there are that oftentimes so deeply engage themselves with their
Landlords daughters, that they can anwer to her examination without the
knowledge either of their Parents or Doctors, and are fit for promotion in the
Art of Nature. But if the Landlady has never a daughter of her own* there is a
Niece or Neighbors daughter, which knows how to show her self there so neatly,
that with her tripping and mincing she (...) makes signals enough, that at
their house Cubicula locanda is to be had. And these are the true Diverse, that
know infinitely well how to empty the Students Pockets.

Thus does every one act their parts. Whilst the Parents are endeavoring to
gather and scrape all together that they can, that their Son, who is many times
the onliest or eldest, may go forward in his study, and become perfect in one
Faculty. And the more, because they see that he is sharp-witted, and according
as his Doctor says, a very hopeful young man. Little thinking that he makes
as bad use of those natural benefits, as he is lavish of his money.

But it is a common saying that the London-youths must have their wills. Which
oftentimes occasions, that when they have studied a long time in Divinity, they
finally turn to be some Inns of Court Gentlemen; fearing that their wild
Students life, might in any other vocation, be cast in their teeth.

Yet sometimes it also happens, that from the very first they behave themselves
modestly, and advance so gallantly in their Studies, that it is a comfort for
their Parents, and great benefit for themselves. But nevertheless, though they
obtain their Promotion with commendation reputation, and great charges; yet it
is all but fastidions, unless their Parents can leave or give them some
considerable means; or that they through their brave behaviors, perfections,
and sweet discourses, can inveagle themselves in to a rich match. For many
years are spent before they can get a Parsonage or Benefice, and when it does
happen in some Country Town, the means will hardly maintain them.

If he be a Counselor or Doctor of Physic, what a deal of time runs away
before he can come in to practiced especially if in the one he has not the
good fortune to get the two or three first causes for his Clients; and in the
other, not to make satisfactory cures of his first Patients. Therefore, what a
joy would it have been for the Parents if their Son had spent his time in
understanding Shop-keeping, and been obedient to the exhortations of his
Parents!

But though some do this, and are therein compliant to their Parents; yet we
perceive that this also is subject to: many vexations, by reason that the
children through a contrary drift, many times disturb their Parents night rest;
especially when there are such kind of Maids in the house, that will listen to
their humors and fancies.

These will, for the most part, please their Master and Mistress to the full;
and do all things so that their Mistress shall be satisfied, and have no
occasion to look out for another: And yet, in the mean while, all their main
aim is, to get and entice the son, with their neatness, cleanliness,
friendliness, and gentileness, to be on their side. To that end knowing how, as
well as their Mistress, to Hood themselves, curl their locks, and wantonly
overspread their breasts with a piece of fine Lawn, or Cambrick, that they seem
rather to be finically over shadowed then covered, and may the better allure
the weak eyes of the beholders.

These know that Dame Nature has placed her best features in a City Maid, as
well as in a Lady at Court: And that there are no keener Swords, or stronger
steels to penetrate through the hearts of men, then the handsome bodiedness,
comely and kind behavior of women.

This is oftentimes the occasion that the son has more inclination toward
her, then he has for a Gentlewoman of a good family and indifferent fortune;
nay it transports him so, that they finally make use of one bed; and the son
(much unexpected by the Parents) is come to be Father himself. But what an
inestimable Pleasure of Marriage this is for the new Grandfather and
Grandmother, every one may judge. Especially, if it happens, as I saw once,
that the Prentice lay with his Masters Daughter; and the Son with the Kitchen
Wench; and the Prentice run away with the daughter; and the Son would by all
means marry with the Kitchen Wench. Which was such a great grief for the
Parents, that it might be justly termed rather one of the Terrors than
Pleasures of Marriage. So that we see, although the Children be at home by
their Parents, or in the shop, and remain under their view and tuition; yet
nevertheless, by one or other, never to be expected, occasion, they fall in to
evil courses; which every one that brings up children has such manifold and
several ways experience of, that it would be infinite and too tiresom to give
you an account of all the Confessions. Therefore we will pass by these, (as if
we were ruming a horse-race,) and to shorten our journey, return again to our
well married Couple, from whom we are cruelly straied.

You see and observe then, O well married Couple, what strange tricks and
actions that children will play. If yours act then the part of a liberal Son,
or wanton Student, rejoice therein that you have not brought forth a dunce or
blockhead; but since his Doctor says that he is sharp-witted, and a hopeful
youth; doubt not, but that you will, when he comes to his seriou^r years, with
delight and pleasure se^ him to be a great man.

For it has many times happened, that those who have been the maddest and
wildest Students at the University, have afterward come to be noble
Personages, Ministers of State, and learned Doctors. Of whom we could relate
unto you several examples, if we knew-certainly that the revealing of that
Confession would not be ill taken.

Thrice happy are you, o noble Couple, that you are yet in possession of the
Pleasures of the first Marriage, and are not troubled with the contention of a
cross-graind Father-in law, or Mother-in-law over your Children, nor with their
fore-children, or Children of the second bed. For whatsoever happens to you
now, comes from a Web of your own spinning, and your love to that, conquers and
covers all infirmities; because we know very well that that certainly compleats
one of the Pleasures of Marriage.

The Ninth Pleasure.
Of base conditioned Maidservants.
't IS true, it seems to fall both tart and bitter, when the children take such
lavish courses, and get such wild hairs in their nostrils; tho sons acting the
parts of spend-thrists, and petulant Students, and the Daughters of light
Punks; as long as these things remain so, they appear to be but very sober
Pleasures of Marriage. But when we perceive, that these thorns benig past, the
pleafant roses appear, and that these light hearted Students finally come to be
gallant Practitioners; o that affords you the most satisfactory and largest
Pleasure of Marriage that ever coule be expected.

So also, if you perceive that your Daughters are lively, active and airy; that
sometimes they would rather go to a Play, then to Church; or rather be merry of
an evening, than at Sermon in the morning, and grow to be altogether mannish
minded; you must then conclude these are natural instincts. If it happen to
fall out, contrary to your expectation, that she has more mind to a brave
young fellow that is a Prentice, whose parts and humor she knows, then she has
in a Plush Jacketted or gilt Midas; then make your selves joyful in the
several examples that you have of others, who being so married, have proved to
be the best Matches; of which examples multiplicities are at large prostrated
to your view in the Theater of Lovers. So that you do herein yet find the
Pleasure of Marriage.

But it is much farther to be fought for among the vexations which
housekeeping people have not only from children, but from base-natured, lafie,
tatling, lavish, and ill-tongued servants; done unto them sometimes by their
men, but generally by the foolish and stifnecked Maids. These can make their
Master totally forget his Base Viol and singing of music, and their Mistress
the playing upon the Virginals. It was a much less trouble for Arion and Orfcus
to charm all the senceless creatures both of Sea and Land in those days; then
it is now for housekeepers to bring their servants to a due obedience.

Neither is this strange, because some Maids, when they see they have gotten a
kind natured and mild Gentlewoman to their Mistress; immediately practice, by
all means possible, to rule and domineer over her; insomuch that whatsoever the
Mistress orders or commands, she knows how, according to the imagination of her
own understanding, to order and do it otherwise. And dare many times boldly
contradict them, and say, Mistress, it would be better if this were done then;
and that so.

And if the Mistress be so mild that she condescends and passes by this some
times; they are immediately, in their own conceits, as wise again as their
Mistress; and dare, when they come among their tatling Gossips, brag that they
can bend their Mistress to their Bow; and if their Mistress bids them do any
thing, they do it when it pleases them, or at their own opportunity; for their
Mistress is troubled with the simples, a Sugar-sop, etc.

But if it happen so that one of these Rule-sick Wenches, comes into a service
where the Mistress is a notable spirited woman that looks sharply and
circumspectly to the government of her Family, then she is damnably put to it;
and is troubled in spirit, that her Mistress will not understand it so, as she
would fain have it, according to her hair-brained manner, and gets this to an
answer, Jane, do it as I command you, then it is well, though it were ill done.
Let your Mistress command, its your duty to obey; or else, next time you must
hire your self out for Mistress, and not for Maid, etc.

How pleasant this answer was to Jane, it appears, because she no sooner gets
out, but she runs to Goody Busie-body that hires out servants; where she makes
no small complaint of her Mistresses insulting spirit; and asks whether she
knows not of a hire for her by some hous-keeping Bachelor or Widower; because
she understands the ordring of her work very well, is a special good Cook, and
loves Children, etc. Then she would leave her Mistress, and tell her that her
Ant was very sick and lay a dying, and that she must go thither, etc.

Goody Busie-body is presently ready, because she sees here is a means to earn
double wages, the Maid must be provided with another service, and the Mistress
with another Maid; so she begins, like a Broker, to turn and wind it about
every way to rid her self of the one, and then to recommend another in the
place. Though it be mighty inconvenient for the Mistress, and troubles her,
because she many times may be near her lying in, or some other pressing
necessity, etc.

Whose merrier then Jane, for she has gotten a new service by a Widower, and
can order and govern all things now according to her own mind; where she has
not the name of a Maid, but of a Governantess. Nay, now she is cunning enough to
bridle in all her ill conditions, and watches the very ey of her Master,
keeping all things very cleanly and neat in order; upon hopes that her Master
might fall into a good humor, and make a place also for her in his bed. For
verily she loves Children so well that she would be helping to get one her
self. To which purpose she uses all inventions imaginable, running too and
again about the house bare-necked, and her breasts raised up; or comes to his
bedside all unlaced, or fains to sit sleeping by the fire side with her coats
up to her knees, against her Master comes home, with the key in his Pocket,
merrily disposed, from his Companions; or with a short Coat on, stoops down
very low in the presence of her Master, to take up something from, or clean the
flore; or climbs up a ladder to rub the glass windows; and knows of a thousand
such manner of inticements, of which there is, never a one of them, but, if the
Master have any flesh or blood in him, are sufficient to catch and ensnare him.
For this happened to her fellow Creature who having dwelt some indifferent time
with a Widower, he came home one evening pretty merry, and jestingly talked to
her about her sweetheart; See there, Peggy, be careful, and when you come to
marry, I will give you this bed that I ly on, with all that belongs to it.
Whereupon the Maid answered, Well Sir, if I shall have all that justly belongs
to it, I must have you also Sir, for it is yours, and you ly upon it. The
answer pleased the Master so well, that he catches Peggy in his arms, throws
her upon the bed, and lies down by her; till at last, inspite of all his
relations, he made his Maid his Wife: who being married, then began to discover
her stifnecked, cross graind humors, that she had so long kept secret; but it
was the occasion of both their ruins.

But we will leave Jane and Peggy with their Widowers, and take a view what
kind of a Pleasure of marriage that our Mistress possesses with her new Maid;
for Goody Busie-body recommended her highly to be a very honest, virtuous Maid,
of a good family, and gave her self security for her fidelity.

Nevertheless, there are hardly three days past, but the Mistress perceives
that she is notably inclined to toss, up her cup: but for the better certainty,
the Mistress commands her to draw some Wine in a glass that was very clean
rinsed; which she no sooner brought back, but the Mistress observed that greasy
lips had been at it; yet before she sent her the second time, she takes a
trencher and holds it over the smoke of a Candle to grow black, then with her
finger rubs that soet upon the edge or hollow part of the glass; and commanded
her, as she did before, to draw some Wine; but when she came back again, the
Mistress then perceived that the round circle of the glass was impressed upon
both sides of her mouth and upon her forehead. Who can abstain themselves from
laughter, when they see such a marked sheep come out of the Wine Cellar? Who
could imagine that a Maid in three days time should occasion so much pleasure
of marriage! How much more mirth will you receive from her, when she has taken
a good bowsing cup to be jolly! You have here a trial of her fidelity, that
Goody Busie-body vaunted of. For the future she may very well say, that she is
mighty dexterous at smuckling of Wine; who knows but she may get an Angel a
year the more wages for it.

But whilst she pleases her Mistress with this sight, the the other causes her to
enjoy a new recreation: for she having gotten leave to go to Church in
th'afternoon, tarries out till seven of the clock in the evening, tho she knows
there are friends invited to supper, the children must be got to bed, and all
things set in good order; neither is it strange, for she thinks, I am now the
eldest Maid, the the other may attend. When I hired my self, my Mistress told me I
should go on Sundaies to Church; and also, when occasion served, after Sermon I
should walk abroad for an hour or two; and now there is a very good
opportunity, because she has another Maid at home, etc.

She keeps singing in this tune. And finally coming home, thinks that she has a
great deal of reason on her side, and is not ashamed to retort ten cross words
for one. 't Is no wonder neither, for she had been talking with Mistress say-all
the Cupster, who had Cupt her but the Sunday before, and then told her that she
could observe out of her physiognomy, and the course of her blood, several
infallible signs, that she should come to be a woman of good quality, and that
she would not be above a year unmarried. Also there came thither at the same
time Dorothy and Margery, whom Mistress Sayall had in like manner prognosticated
what was befallen them. These did not a little admire, that she, being now the
eldest Maid, earned such small wages, and that her Mistress did not raise it;
because she deserved at the least fifteen shillings a year more, and a better
New years gift, and Fairing.

Thus they stuff one another pates full. And Mistress Sayall, and Goody
Busiebody, seem to be as if they were sisters cast in one Mould; for the one
knows how to blow the simple wenches ears full; and the the other, worse then a
Bawd, makes them cross-grained; and keep both of them a school for illnatured
Wenches, and lazy sluts, to slatter, to exhort, and to exasperate in; yet these
half Divel-drivers, carry themselves before the Mistresses like Saints; but do
indeed, show themselves to be the most deceitfullest cheats, who carry always
fire in one hand and water in the the other.

These know how, very subtlely, many times, to fatten their carcasses with meat
and drink out of the Mistresses Cellars and Butteries; keeping always a fair
correspondence with the theevish Maids, which know many tricks and ways how to
convey it unto them; and scold and brawl against those whose stolen meat and
drink they thus idly and basely convey away. These use again all possible
endeavors ^o recommend them here or there to (...) sweetheart, and make their
own houses serve as an Exchange for this Negotiation; where they appear as
^recise at their hours, as a Merchant ^oth at Change-time.

This it is, that makes them look like a Dog in a halter, when they cannot get
leave on Sundaies to go a gad^ng; and it is a wonder they do not bargain for it
when then hire themselves: though there are some that are not ashamed, (who
dare not so openly confess this) to bargain that they may go every Sunday to
Church, as if they were extraordinary devout, when it is really to no other
end, then to set out their gins, to catch some Tailor, Baker, Shoemaker,
Cooper, Carpenter, Mason, or such like journey man: which is hardly passed by to
satisfy their fleshly lusts, before they perceive that they have chosen a poo^
and wretched for a plentiful livelihood and are often, by their husbands,
beaten like Stockfish, though Len^ be long past. But what delight they have, in
being curried with this sort of five-tooth'd Comb, the neighbors can judge by
the miserable songs they sing.

These find also the Pleasures of Marriage, at which they have so long aimed,
and so much endeavored for and would now gladly lick their fingers at that
which they have many times thrown away upon the Dunghills, or (...) the
Kennels; falling many times ^to deplorable poverty, or to receive ^lms from the
Churchwardens and charitable people; of which there are ^ast numbers of
examples, too lamentable and terrible to be related.

By this small relation you may see that kind of points these sort of people
^ve upon their Compass. But to write ^e true nature and actions of such
^ubbish, were to no other purpose ^en to foul a vast quantity of paper ^ith a
deal of trash and trumpery. ^or many are damnably liquorish ^oth'd, everlasting
Tattlesters, lazy ^y servants, salt Bitches, continual ^umblers out of their
Pockets, wicked Scolds, lavish Drones, secret ^inckers, stifnecked Duncos,
Tyrants ^er Children, Stinking Sluts, moldy Brained trugs; hellish sottish
Gip^s; nay and sometimes both Whorish ^d Theevish; and must, therefore, not
have come into consideration here, if they did not so especially belong to the
disconsolations of Marriage; occasioning many times more troubles and disquiets
in a Family, then all the rest of the adversities that may befall it.

This is the reason that makes the Mistress many times turn one after the other
out of doors; and is afreard that a new one should come in again. And is also
ashamed that the Neighbors should see every foot a new Maid upon her flore; who
by an evil nature, are ready to believe the worst of their fellow neighbors,
what is told them by a tale-carrying, long-tongued Slut of a Maid; though they
many times observe how wickedly they are plagued with their own.

O super-excellent Pleasure of Marriage! where shall we make a conclusion, if
we should set; all things down according to their worth and value! Certainly
every one would, to that purpose, want a Clark in their own ^mily.

The Tenth Pleasure.
An empty Purse, makes a sorrowful Pate. The Husband grows jealous. And the
Wife also. The Husband is weary of his wife, and seeks to be divorced.
AS continual prosperity gives a great satisfaction to married people; and
congealeth their hearts more and more with a fervent Love; so, on ^e contrrary,
we many times see, ^at when they are oppressed with bad ^ading, Bankrupts,
chargeable house-^eeping and Children, it occasions and raises a coolness in
the affections; in^much that it disquiets their rest, and they consume the
whole night many ^mes with flying fancies and cogita^ons, how such an
Assignment, or that Bill of Exchange, or the last half years rent shall be paid,
etc. because the emptness of their Purse, and the slow payment of their Debtors
too much impedes them. And their yearly rents are so small and uncertain, that
there runs away many times more in reparations and taxations annually then the
rents amounts to. This occasions disquiet. From this it proceeds, that many
times when they rise, their wits run a wool gathering, and they are more
inclined to look crabbedly, grumble and mumble, then to show each other any
signs of love and friendship: for an empty purse, makes a sorrowful pate. This
gives no small defeat to the Pleasures of Marriage. Now they begin to observe
that there is no state or condition in the World so complete, but it has some
kind of imperficiency.

This kind of necessity may, by a man, in a Tavern, with good company, be
rinsed with a glass of Wine, but never thereby be supplied: And the woman may
with singing and dandling of her children, or controuling and commanding of her
servants, a little forget it, yet nevertheless when John the cashier comes with
the Bill of Exchange, and William the Bookkeeper with the Assignment, they
ought both to be paid, or else credit and respectly at the stake. This requires
a great deal of prudence, to take care for the one, and preserve the other.

The best sort of Matches have found this by experience to be true: And for
that reason they ofttimes stop a little hole to make a bigger. But because this
can be of no long continuance, some do measure their business smaller out at
first, and dwell at a lesser rent, hire out their Chambers and Cellars; and
afterward, make money of some movables, will not turmoil themselves with so
much trade, and great trust; nay sometimes also, take some other trade by the
hand, the commodities whereof are of a quicker consumption. And if this happen
to people that are not so perfectly well matched, as our self-same-minded
couple, and that the husband has been a frequenter of company, you shall then
seldom see that the husband and the Wife are concordant in their opinions; for
he generally will be for trading in Wine and Tobacco, in which sort of
commodities he is well studied; and the woman is for dealing in linen,
stockings, gloves, or such like Wares as she knows best how to traffic with.
And verily it looks but sadly (although it oftentimes happens) when a Man and
his Wife do contend about this. Nevertheless some men, because they imagine to
have the best understanding, use herein a very hard way of discourse with their
wives, making it all their business to snap and snarl, chide and bawl, nay
threaten and strike also; which indeed rather mars then mends the matter,
little thinking that quietness in a family is such a costly Jewel, that it
seldom can be valied.

Others, on the contrary, take their greatest delight, when they know how, with
affableness to please their wives humor, and with plausible words can admonish
them what is best and fittest to be done; and rather to extol those graces
which are found in them, than to reprove their deficiencies: According to the
instructions of the prudent Emperor Marcus Aurelius, who said, that men ought
often to admonish their wives, seldom reprove them, and never strike them.

But many men whose understanding is turned topsie turvy in their brains, seek
it in a contrary place, and where the Bank is lowest, the Water breaks in
soonest. In such case the Women suffer cruelly. For if he be foul-mouthed, he is
not ashamed openly before his servants and other people to check, curb, and
control his wife lustily; and when they are in private together, reprehends
her so bitterly, that he would not dare to mention it in the ears of honest
people: because having seen that his Border, out of mere civility, cut many
times the best piece at Table and presented to his Wife, bilds thereupon a
foundation of jealousy, and an undoubted familiarity, which he privately twits
her in the teeth with; though in public he is ashamed to let it appear that he
is jealous; because then he would be laughed at for it; therefore he does
nothing but pout, mumble, bawl, scold, is cross-grained and troubled at every
thing; nay looks upon his Wife and all the rest of his Family like a Welsh
Goat, none of them knowing the least reason in the World for it.

In the meanwhile he uses all possible means privately to attrap his wife; for
to see that which he never will see; and at which he is so divellishly
possessed to have a wicked revenge; nay which he also never can see though he
had a whole boxfull of spectacles upon his nose; because she never has, or
ever will give him the least reason for it. In that manner violating loves
knot, and laying a foundation of implacable hatred.

Verily, if a woman be a little lighthearted and merry humoured, it is a great
delight and pleasure for her to be taking notice, and every way to be scoffing,
with all the foolish tricks and devices of such a jealous Coxcomb. But
otherwise there is no greater Hell upon Earth, then for an honest Woman to
dwell with a jealous husband; because in his absence she dare not in the least
speak to any one, and in his presence hardly look upon any body. This is known
to those, who have had experience of it, and it never went well with any Family
where this damned house-divel ever got an entrance.

It Is true, all men are not defiled with this dirtiness. But such Loggerheads
many times occasion, through their wicked folly and evil doings, that the
Woman; who before never thought of jealousy, now begins to grow jealous her
self. For she, considering that her husband is so without any ground or reason,
looks so sour, and ill-natured; and always when he comes home every thing
stands in his way; besides, that the soothings and friendly entertainments,
should differ so much from those of former times, and especially from them of
the first year; cannot imagine that the small gain and the bad times are the
occasion of it; therefore she thinks that there is some open-ars'd Gypsy, that
puts him on to these base humors, or that he is led away by some or other
charming Punk.

And it is no wonder, because coming home lately he said, that somewhere as he
was walking home he had lost his Watch, which he had just as he was coming out
of the Tavern. And two or three weeks before came home without his Cloak,
saying, that some wicked Rascals had taken it from him in the streets. Moreover
she rememorates, how he related not long since, that he had been, out of jest,
one evening, with three or four others, in six of the most vile and wickedest
Bawdy houses in the City, though that he had committed nothing unhandsom there,
as he said; therefore she thinks that she has more reason to suspect his evil
doings, then he has of hers. And so much the more, because that a few months
since, being at Branford, who but he, at a Country Wedding, amongst the Country
Lasses, to play at blind man's buff. Here he related, that he came into Goodman
Stones his house, his familiar acquaintance, in the evening past ten of the
clock, where he presently went to the daughters chamber, and found her in bed
under a very thin coverlid, with her arms at the top of her head, and her
breasts with as little covering as was suffrable: there he tarried talking,
kissing, toying, and playing till one of the clock in the night, which she
thinks is mighty unbecoming an und married person, (though it be much done in
that Town) and much less ought to be done by any married man, as her husband is.

And having pondered upon all these things, this and the other way, imagines
that she has a great deal of reason to suspect him. Nay, the daily grumbling
and mumbling, the lessening of the money, his coming home late at nights, his
cool kindness, besides all the rest, seem to be sufficient proofs. So that here
the Pleasure of Marriage is so monstrously Clouded, as if there were a great
Eclipse of the Sun, and it will be a wonder to see with what kind of color it
will appear again. For the Husband catechizes his Wife with such a loud voice,
that it is generally heard through the whole neighborhood; and the Wife, to
vindicate her innocence, lets fly at him again with such a shrill note, as if
she had gone to school to learn it in Drury Lane, or Turnball street. And it is
a wonder that the first Chyrurgian is not sent for to cure this Woman of her
bad tongue.

Here you ought to come, o restless Lovers, to behold your selves in these two
darlings; you, who in your wooing are also possessed with jealousy, if you see
that another obtains access to your Mistress; or who, perhaps as well as you,
does but once kiss the knocker of the door, or cause an Aubade to be played
under her Chamber Window: Look sharply about you, and behold how these Aubades
decline, or whether it be worth your while to give your Rival the Challenge; or
to stab, poison, or drowned your self, to show, by such an untimely death, the
love you had for her; and on your Grave, bear this Epitaph, that through damned
jealousy you murdered your self. These married Couple, used to do so; but see
now what a sad life they live together, because jealousy took root in them so
soon, and now brings forth such evil fruits.

Oh that this, now senceless, married Couple, had here, like the Athenians,
prudent Umpires! how easily might they, perhaps, be united and pacified! For
the Athenians had constituted a certain sort of superiors, whom they entitled
Pacificators of the married people; whose Power was to appease all differences
between married people; and to constrain them that they must live in peace and
unity with each other. In like manner at Rome a Temple was built, where
scolding married people, being reunited, came to sacrifice, and to live in
better tranquillity.

But alas! it is now clear contrary, such contentious Couples, use all the
means and endeavors they possibly can rather to be divorced, then reunited; to
that end soliciting both the Majestical and Ecclesiastical Powers; to whom are
related a thousand sad reasons by each party, because either of them pretends
to have the greatest reason on their side; of which this Age imparteth us
several examples, wherewith the Magistracy, Ministry and Elders find no small
trouble; especially, if they be people of a brave extraction, good credit and
reputation, who have procreated several children together. For this jealous
and contentious house Devil, domineers as well among people of great respect,
as those of lesser degree; though there be some which so order it, that they
smother this fire within doors, and suffer it not to burst out at the house
top. Nevertheless it is impossible to hide this unkindness from the eyes of them
that are in the Family. Therefore it is to be admired, that the sister who
dwells with this married Couple, and sees and hears all this unkindness,
mumbling and grumbling, yet has such an earnest desire to be set down in the
List of the great Company. Nay though she had read all the twenty Pleasures of
Marriage through and through, and finds by the example of her Brother that they
are all truth; yet she is like a Fish, never at rest till she gets her self
into the Marriage-Net, where she knows that she never can get out again:
According to these following Verses, which she has sung somany times:

You may in sea lanch when you will,
To see the boistrous Main,
Great storms, and wind, your sails will fill,
Fore you return again.
The married state, is much like this,
Overwhelmed with many crosses,
Yet must be born, see how it is,
With tauntings, toils, and losses.
But I believe that the Sister makes flesh and blood her Connsellors, just as
her Brother did, who has now totally forgotten these Verses; for since the
flesh is almost come to the very bone, all his designs and endeavors seem to
bend now to the being separated from Bed and Table: and, if fortune would
favor it, he would rather see it done by death, then any Civil Authority; fot
then he might look out again for a new Beloved, and by that means get another
new Portion; though it might lightly happen to be some mendicant hous-divel,
for a reward of his jealousy.

And perhaps he little thinks how that bawling and scolding, between him and
his Wife, is spread abroad. But it has often happened, that those who would be
separated, very unexpectedly have been parted by death; but not so neither,
that they who most desired the separation, have just remained alive.

Happy were those restless Souls, if they did like the wise and prudent
Chyrurgians, who will not cut off any member, before they have made an
operation of all imaginable means for cure and recovery thereof: And that they
first learnt to know their own deficiences perfectly, that they might the
better excuse those of their Adversary.

O how thrice happy are our wellmatcht Couple! who like a Lookingglass for all
others, live together in love, pleasure and tranquillity, and have banished that
monstrous beast jealousy out of their hearts and house; wishing nothing more
then to live long together, and to die both at one time, that neither of them
both might inherit that grief to be the longest liver, by missing their
second-selves. These do recommend marriage in the highest degree to the whole
World, as the noblest state and condition; and despise the folly of those who
reject it, imagining in themselves that they have more knowledge and
understanding then all the wise men of Greece ever had; who by their marrying
demonstrated, that they esteemed the married estate to be the best and
commendablest though some of them were married to women, who notably bore the
sway.

We may very well then contemn the chattering of Epicurus that pleasurable
Hoggrubber, who said, that no wise man would ever give himself in to the Bands
of Matrimony; because there is so much grief, trouble, and misery to be found
in it. For we see to the contrary, that the Wise men long to be in it, and that
the Sun of understanding appears more gloriously in them, when it is nourisht
and inlivened by marriage; especially, if they have got, like unto our
well-married Couple, good Matches. To this end, all those that are unmarried,
ought to look very circumspectly, for the getting themselves such a
second-self, that they would never desire to part with. And for the exhortation
of every one to this, I will break off and conclude with that faithful warning
given by that great Emperor and Philosopher Marcus Aurelius (...) saying,
Because the life of Man cannot remain without Women, I do warn the young, pray
the old, admonish the wise, and teach the simple, that they should shun
^ist-natured Women as much as the Plague: for I say, that all the vene^ous
Creatures in the World, have not so much poison spread or contained in their
whole bodies; as one divellish* natured Woman alone has in her tongue.

The End of the Second Part of the Ten Pleasures of Marriage.

