THE Gospel-Mystery OF SANCTIFICATION Opened in Sundry Practical Directions,
Suited especially to the Case of those who labor under the guilt and power of
Indwelling Sin. To which is added a Sermon of Justification.

1 Cor. 1.27, 28, 29, 30, 31. God has chosen the foolish things of the world,
to confound the wise; and God has chosen the weak things of the world, to
confound the things which are mighty;

And base things of the world, and things which are despised, has God chosen,
yea, and things which are not, to bring to naught things that are:

That no flesh should glory in his presence:

But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption:

That, according as it is written, He that glories, let him glory in the Lord.

By Mr. WALTER MARSHAL, late Preacher of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed for T. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside,
near Mercers Chapel. 1692.

THE PREFACE.
READER,
MR. Walter Marshal, Composer of these Directions how to attain to that
practice and manner of Life which we call Holiness, Righteousness, or
Godliness, was Educated in New College in Oxford, and was a Fellow of the said
College, and afterward he was chosen a Fellow of the College at Winchester,
but was put under the Bartholomew Bushel, with nigh two Thousand more Lights, (
a Sin not yet repented of) whose illuminations made the Land a Goshen. He was
esteemed a Presbyterian, and was called to be Pastor to a People at Gospert in
Hampshire, where he shined though he had not the Public Oil; the substance of
these Meditations were there Spun out of his own Experiences, he having been
much exercised with troubled Thoughts, and that for many Years, and had by many
Mortifying Methods sought Peace of Conscience; but notwithstanding all, his
Troubles still increased. Whereupon he consulted others, particularly Mr.
Baxter, (whose Writings he had been much conversant with,) who thereupon told
Mr. Marshal he took them too Legally: He afterward consulted an Eminent
Divine, (giving him an Account of the State of his Soul, and particularizing
his Sins that lay heavy on his Conscience;) who in his Reply told him, He had
forgot to mention the greatest Sin of all, the Sin of Unbelief, in not
believing on the Lord Jesus for the Remission of his Sins, and Sanctifying his
Nature. Hereupon he set himself to the studying and preaching of Christ, and
attained to eminent Holiness, great peace of Conscience, and joy in the Holy
Ghost. Mr. Marshal's dying Words were these, The wages of sin is death, but the
gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord, having but just
before said to those about him, that he now dyed in the full persuasion of the
Truth, and in the comfort of that Doctrine which he had Preached; the sum
whereof is contained in the ensuing Discourse.

Some time since he was translated by Death, Elijah-like, dropping these
sheets, as his Mantle, for succeeding Elisha's to go forth with for the
Conversion of Sinners, and Comfort of drooping Souls.

These Papers are the profound Experiences of a studious Holy Soul, Learned of
the Father, coming from his very Heart, and smell of no Party or Design but for
Holiness and Happiness; yet it is to be feared they will scarcely go down with
the heady Notionalists of this Age, who are of the Tribe of Reuben, wavering
with every Wind of Modish Doctrine, but in Judah it will be praised, and we may
hope that many Shrubs and Cedars hereby may advance in knowledge and comfort.
But not to detain thee longer, read over all these Directions (that you may
fully understand the Author) or read none; if you do it with the serious humble
spirit in which they were wrote, it may be hoped (the matter being so weighty,
and from so able an Hand) through the Grace of God they will sink into thy
Conscience, and make thee a solid Christian, full of Faith, Holiness and
Consolation.

N. N.

THE Author of these Directions was well known to me, and was with me in my
House a Month together, above twenty years past, and I esteem him a Person
deserving the Character which this Preface gives him.

T. Woodcock.

The GOSPEL MYSTERY OF SANCTIFICATION.
DIRECTION I.
That we may acceptably perform the Duties of Holiness and Righteonsness
required in the Law, our first Work is to learn the powerful and effectual
Means whereby we may attain to so Great an End.

EXPLICATION.
THIS Direction may serve instead of a Preface, to prepare the Understanding
and Attention of the Reader for those that follow: And First, It acquainteth
you with the Great End for which all those Means are designed, that are the
principal Subject to be here treated of: the Scope of all is, To teach you how
you may attain to that Practice and Manner of Life, which we call Holiness,
Righteousness, or Godliness, Obedience, True Religion; and which God requires
of us in the Law, particularly in the Moral Law, Exodus 20.
summed up in the Ten Commandments, and more briefly in those Two great
Commandments, of Love to God and our Neighbor, Mat. 22.37, 39. and more
largely explained throughout the Holy Scriptures. My work is to show how the
Duties of this Law may be done, when they are known: therefore, expect not that
I should delay my intent to help you to the knowledge of them, by any large
Exposition of them; which is a Work already performed in several Catechisms and
Commentaries: yet, that you may not miss the Mark for want of discerning of it,
take notice, in few words, that the Holiness which I would bring you to, is
spiritual, Romans 7.14. It consists not only in external Works of Piety and
Charity, but in the Holy Thoughts, Imaginations, and Affections of the Soul,
and chiefly in Love, from whence all other Good Works must flow, or else they
are not acceptable to God: not only in refraining the execution of sinful
Lusts, but in lusting and delighting to do the Will of God, and in a cheerful
Obedience to God, without repining, fretting, grudging at any Duty, as if it
were a grievous Yoke and Burden to you.

Take Notice further, That the Law, which is your Mark, is exceeding broad,
Psalm. 119.96. and yet not the more easy to be hit, because you must aim to hit
it in every Duty of it, with a performance of equal breadth, or else you cannot
hit it all, Isai. 2.10. The Lord is not at all loved with that Love that is due
to him as Lord of all, if he be not loved with all our Heart, Spirit, and
Might. We are to love every thing in him, his Justice, Holiness, Sovereign
Authority, All-seeing Eye, and all his Decrees, Commands, Judgments, and all
his Doings. We are to love him not only better than other things, but singly,
as Only Good, the Fountain of all Goodness; and to reject all fleshly and
worldly Enjoyments, even our own Lives, as if we hated them, when they stand in
competition with our Enjoyment of him, or our Duty toward him. We must love him
as to yield ourselves wholly up to his constant Service in all things, and to
his disposal of us as our absolute Lord, whether it be for Prosperity or
Adversity, Life or Death: and for his sake we are to love our Neighbor, even
all Men, whether they be Friends or Foes to us, and so do to them in all things
that concern their Honor, Life, Chastity, Worldly Wealth, Credit, and Content,
whatever we would that Men should do to us in the like Condition, Mat. 7.12.
This Spiritual Universal Obedience is the Great End, to the attainment whereof
I am directing you. And that you may not reject mine Enterprise as impossible,
observe that the most I promise, is no more than an acceptable performance of
these Duties of the Law, such as our gracious merciful God will certainly
delight in, and be pleased with, during our State of Imperfection in this
World, and such as will end in Perfection of Holiness, and all Happiness in the
World to come.

Before I proceed further, stay your thoughts a while, in the contemplation of
the great Dignity and Excellency of these Duties of the Law, that you may aim
at the performance of them as your End, with so high an esteem as may cast an
amiable luster upon the ensuing discovery of the Means. The principal Duties of
Love to God above all, and to each other for his sake, from whence all the
other Duties flow, are so excellent, that I cannot imagine any more Noble Work
for the Holy Angels in their glorious Sphere: They are the chief Works for
which we were at first framed by the Image of God, engraven upon Man in the
first Creation, and for which that beautiful Image is renewed upon us in our
New Creation and Sanctification by Jesus Christ, and shall be perfected in our
Glorification. They are Works which depend not merely on the Sovereignty of the
Will of God, to be commanded or forbidden, or left indifferent, or changed, or
abolished at his pleasure, as other Works that belong either to the Judicial or
Ceremonial Law, or to the means of Salvation prescribed by the Gospel; but they
are in their own Nature holy, just, and good, Romans 7.12. and meet for us to
perform, because of our natural relation to our Creator and Fellow Creatures;
so that they have an inseparable dependence upon the Holiness of the Will of
God, and an indispensable Establishment thereby. They are Works sufficient to
render the Performers holy in all manner of Conversation, by the Fruits which
they bring forth, if no other Duties had ever been commanded, and by which the
performance of all other Duties is sufficiently established as soon as they are
commanded; and without which there can be no Holiness of Heart and Life
imagined, and to which it was one great Honor of Mosaical, and is now of
Evangelical Ordinances, to be subservient, for the performance of them as Means
which shall cease, when their End, this never-failing Charity is perfectly
attained, 1 Cor. 13. They are Duties which we were naturally obliged to, by
that Reason and Understanding which God gave to Man at his first Creation, to
discern what was just and meet for him to do, and to which even Heathens are
still obliged by the Light of Nature, without any written Law, or supernatural
Revelation, Romans 2.14.15. Therefore they are called Natural Religion, and the
Law that requires them is called the Natural Law, and also the Moral Law,
because the Manners of all Men, Infidels as well as Christians, ought to be
conformed to it (and if they had been fully conformable, they would not have
come short of Eternal Happiness, Mat. 5.19. Luke 10, 27, 28.) under the penalty
of the Wrath of God for the violation of it. This is the true Morality which
God approves of, consisting in conformity of all our Actions to the Moral Law;
and if those that in these days contend so highly for Morality, do understand
no other than this, I dare join with them in asserting, The greatest Saint is
the greatest Moralist.
that the best morally honest Man is the greatest Saint, and that Morality is
the principal part of true Religion, and the Test of all other parts, without
which Faith is dead, and all other Religious Performances are a vain show, and
mere hypocrisy; for the faithful and true Witness has testified concerning
the two great Moral Commandments of Love to God, and our Neighbor, that there
is none other Commandment greater than these, and that on them hang all the Law
and the Prophets, Mar. 12.31. Mat. 22.40.

The Second thing contained in this Introductory Direction, is the necessity of
learning the powerful and effectual Means, whereby this great and excellent End
may be accomplished, and of making this the first Work to be done, before we
can expect success in any attempt for the attainment of it.

This is an Advertisement very needful, because many are apt to skip over the
Lesson concerning the Means (that will fill up this whole Treatise) as
superfluous and useless. When once they know the Nature and Excellency of the
Duties of the Law, they account nothing wanting but diligent performances; and
they rush blindly upon immediate Practice, making more have than good speed.
They are quick in promising, Exodus 19.8. All that the Lord has spoken we will
do, without sitting down, and counting the cost. They look upon Holiness as
only the Means of an End, Eternal Salvation, not as an End itself, requiring
any great means to the attaining to the Practice of it. The enquiry of most,
when they begin to have a sense of Religion, is, What good thing shall I do
that I may have Eternal Life? ( Mat. 19.16.) Not, How shall I be enabled to do
any thing that is good? Yea, many that are accounted powerful Preachers, spend
all their Zeal in the earnest pressing the immediate Practice of the Law,
without any discovery of the effectual means of performance; as if the Work of
Righteousness were like those servile Employments, that need no skill and
artifice at all, but industry and activity. That you may not stumble at the
Threshold of a Religious Life by this common oversight, I shall endeavor to
make you sensible, that it is not enough for you to know the matter and reason
of your Duty, but that you are also to learn the powerful and effectual means
of performance, before you can successfully apply yourselves to immediate
Practice. And for this end I shall lay before you the Considerations following.

1. We are all by Nature void of all strength and ability to perform acceptably
that Holiness and Righteousness which the Law requires, and are dead in
Trespasses and Sins, and Children of Wrath, by the Sin of our first Father
Adam, as the Scripture witnesses, Romans 5.12, 15, 18, 19. Ephesians. 2. v. 1, 2, 3.
Romans 8.7, 8. This Doctrine of Original Sin, which Protestants generally
profess, is a firm Basis and Groundwork to the assertion now to be proved, and
to many other assertions in this whole Discourse. If we believe it to be true,
we cannot rationally encourage ourselves to attempt an holy Practice, until we
are acquainted with some powerful and effectual means to enable us for it.
While Man continued upright in the Image of God, as he was at first created,
Eccles. 7.29. Genesis 1.27. he could do the Will of God sincerely as soon as he
knew it; but when he was fallen, he was quickly afraid, because of his
Nakedness, but could not help it at all, until God discovered to him the means
of restoration, Genesis 3.10. Say to a strong healthy Servant, Go, and he goes;
Come, and he comes; Do this, and he does it; but a bedridden Servant must know
first how he may be enabled. No doubt the fallen Angels know the necessity of
Holiness, and tremble at the guilt of their Sin; but they know of no means for
them to attain to Holiness effectually, and so continue still in their
wickedness. It was in vain for Sampson to say, I will go out as at other times
before, and shake myself, when he had sinned away his strength, Judges 16.20.
Men show themselves strangely forgetful, or hypocritical in professing Original
Sin, in their Prayers, Catechisms, and Confessions of Faith, and not urging
upon themselves and others, the Practice of the Law, without the consideration
of any strengthening, enlivening Means, as if there were no want of ability, but
only of activity.

2ly, Those that doubt of, or deny the Doctrine of Original Sin, may all of
them know concerning themselves, (if their Consciences be not blind) that the
exact Justice of God is against them, and they are under the Curse of God, and
Sentence of Death for their actual sins, if God should enter into Judgment with
them, Romans 1.32. and 2.2. and 3.9. Gal. 3.10. Is it possible for a Man that
knows this to be his Case, and has not learned any means of getting out of
it, to practice the Law immediately? To love God and every thing in him, his
Justice, Holiness, Power, as well as his Mercy, and to yield himself willingly
to the disposal of God, though God should inflict sudden Death upon him? Is
there no skill or artifice at all required in this Case, to encourage the
fainting Soul to the Practice of Universal Obedience?

3ly, Though Heathens might know much of the Work of the Law by the common Light
of Natural Reason and Understanding, Romans 2.14. yet the effectual Means of
performance cannot be discovered by that Light, and therefore are wholly to be
learned by the teaching of supernatural Revelalation. For what is our Natural
Light, but some sparks and glimmerings of that which was in Adam before the
Fall? And even then in its brightest Meridian, it was not sufficient to direct
Adam how to recover ability to walk holily, if once he should lose it by sin;
nor to assure him beforehand that God would vouchsafe to him any means of
recovery: God had set nothing but Death before his Eyes in case of
Transgression, Genesis 2.17. and therefore he hid himself from God, when the shame
of his Nakedness appeared, as expecting no favor from him. We are like Sheep
gone astray, and know not which way to return, until we hear the Shepherd's
Voice, Can these dry Bones live to God in holiness? O Lord thou know, and we
cannot know it, except we learn it of thee.

4ly, Sanctification, whereby our Hearts and Lives are conformed to the Law, is
a Grace of God communicated to us by means, as well as Justification, and by
means of teaching and learning something that we cannot see without the Word,
Acts 26.17, 18. There are several things pertaining to Life and Godliness, that
are given through knowledge, 2 Pet. 1.3. There is a form of Doctrine made use
of by God to make People free from Sin, and Servants of Righteousness, Romans 6.
v. 17, 18. And there are several Pieces of the whole Armor of God necessary to
be known, and put on, that we may stand against Sin and Satan in the evil day,
Ephesians. 6.13. Shall we slight and overlook the way of Sanctification, when the
learning the way of Justification has been counted worth so many elaborate
Treatises.

5ly, God has given in the Holy Scriptures by his inspiration, plentiful
instruction in Righteousness, that we may be thoroughly furnished for every good
work, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. especially since the day spring from an high has
visited us, by the appearance of the Lord Jesus Christ, to guide our feet in
the way of peace, Luke 1.78, 79. If God condescend to us very low, to teach us
this way in the Scriptures, and by Christ himself, it must needs be greatly
necessary for us to sit down at his feet and learn it.

6ly, The way of attaining to Godliness is so far from being known without
learning out of the Holy Scripture, that when it is here plainly revealed, we
cannot learn it so easily as the Duties of the Law, which are known in part by
the Light of Nature, and therefore more easily assented unto. It is the way
whereby the Dead are brought to live unto God, and therefore doubtless it is
far above all the thoughts and conjectures of human Wisdom. It is the way of
Salvation, wherein God will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and bring to
nothing the understanding of the prudent, by discovering things by his Spirit,
that the natural Man receives not; for they are foolishness to him, neither
can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 1.19.21. and
2.14. Without controversy, great is the mystery of godliness, 1 Timothy 3.16. The
learning of it requires double work; because we must unlearn many of our
former deeply rooted Notions, and become fools that we may be wise. We must
pray earnestly to the Lord, to teach us, as well as search the Scriptures, that
we may get this knowledge. O that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes.
Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy statutes, and I shall keep it to the end,
Psalm. 119.5.33. Teach me to do thy will, Psalm. 14.3, 10. The Lord direct your
hearts unto the love of God, 2 Thessalonians. 3.5. Surely these Saints did not so much
want teaching and direction concerning the Duties of the Law to be done, as
concerning the Way and Means whereby they might do them.

7ly, The certain knowledge of these powerful and effectual Means, is of
greatest importance and necessity for our establishment in the true Faith, and
avoiding Errors contrary thereunto: For we cannot rationally doubt, that the
Moral Duties of Love to God and our Neighbor are absolutely necessary to true
Religion, so that it cannot subsist without them. And from this Principle we
may firmly conclude, that nothing repugnant to the practice of these holy
Duties ought to be received as a Point of Faith delivered to us by the most
holy God; and that whatsoever is truly necessary, powerful, and effectual to
bring us to the practice of them, ought to be believed as proceeding from God,
because it has the Image of his Holiness and Righteousness engraven upon it.
This is a sure Test and Touchstone, which those that are seriously Religious
will use to try Spirits and their Doctrines, whether they be of God or no: And
they cannot rationally approve any Doctrine as Religious, that is not according
to Godliness, 1 Timothy 6.3. By this Touchstone Christ proves his Doctrine to be
of God, because therein he seeks the Glory of God, John 7.17, 18. And he
teaches us to know false Prophets by their fruits, Mat. 7. v. 15, 16. wherein
the fruits which their Doctrine tends unto, are especially to be considered.
Hence it appears, that until we know what are the effectual Means of
Holiness, and what not, we want a necessary Touchstone of Divine Truth, and
may be easily deceived by false Doctrine, or brought to live in mere suspense
concerning the truth of any Religion, like the Seekers. And if you mistake
those Means to be effectual that are not, and those that are effectual to be
weak, or of a contrary effect, your Error in this will be a false Touchstone
to try other Doctrines, whereby you will readily approve of Errors, and refuse
the Truth; which has been a pernicious occasion of many Errors in Religion in
late days: get but a true Touchstone, by learning this Lesson, and you will be
able to try the various Doctrines of Protestants, Papists, Arminians,
Socinians, Antinomians, Quakers, and to discover the Truth, and cleave to it,
with much satisfaction to your Judgment, amongst all the Janglings and
Controversies of these times. Hereby you may discover whether the Protestant
Religion established amongst us have in it any Sinews of Antinomianism, whether
it be guilty of any insufferable defect in Practical Principles, and deserves
to be altered and turned almost upside down, with new Doctrines and Methods, as
some learned Men in late time have judged by their Touchstones.

8ly, It is also of great importance and necessity for our establishment in
holy practice: For we cannot apply ourselves to the Practice of Holiness with
hope of success, except we have some Faith concerning the Divine assistance,
which we have no ground to expect, if we use not such means as God has
appointed to work by. God meets them that remember him in his own ways, Isai.
64.5. And makes a breach upon them that seek him not after the due order, 1 Chronicles. 15.13. He has chosen and ordained such means of Sanctification and
Salvation as are for his own Glory, and those only he blesses to us; and he
crowns no Man that striveth, except he strive lawfully, 2 Timothy 2.5.
Experience shows plentifully both of Heathens and Christians, how pernicious
Ignorance, or mistaking of these effectual Means are to an holy practice. The
Heathens generally fell short of an acceptable performance of those Duties of
the Law which they knew, because of their ignorance in this point. Many
Christians content themselves with external performances, because they never
knew how they might attain to Spiritual Service. And many reject the way of
Holiness as austere and unpleasant, because they know not how to cut off a
Right Hand, or pluck out a Right-eye, without intolerable pain; whereas they
would find the ways of Wisdom (if they knew them) to be ways of pleasantness,
and all her paths to be peace, Prove. 3.17. This occasioneth the putting off
Repentance from time to time, as an uncouth thing. Many others set upon the
Practice of Holiness with a fervent Zeal, and run very fast, but tread not a
step in the right way, and finding themselves frequently disappointed and
overcome by their Lusts, they at last give over the Work, and turn to wallow
again in the Mire, which has occasioned several Treatises, to show how far a
Reprobate may go in the way of Religion, whereby many weak Saints are
discouraged, accounting that these Reprobates have gone further than
themselves; whereas most of them never knew the right way, nor trod one step
aright in it, for few there be that find it, Mat. 7.14. Some of these ignorant
Zealots do inhumanly macerate their Bodies with fasting, and other austerities
to kill their Lusts, and when they see their Lusts are still to hard for them,
they fall into despair, and are driven by horror of Conscience to make away
themselves wickedly, to the scandal of Religion. Peradventure God may bless my
discovery of the powerful Means of Holiness, so far as to save some one or
other from killing themselves; and such a Fruit as this would countervail my
Labor; though I hope God will enlarge the Hearts of many by it, to run with
great cheerfulness, joy, and thanksgiving in the ways of his Commandments.

DIRECT. II.
Several Endowments and Qualifications are necessary to enable us for the
immediate Practice of the Law: particularly we must have an inclination and
propensity of our Hearts thereunto: and therefore we must be well persuaded of
our reconciliation with God, and of our future enjoyment of the everlasting
heavenly Happiness, and of sufficient strength both to will and perform all
Duties acceptably, until we come to the enjoyment of that Happiness.

EXPLICATION.
THose Means that are next to the attainment of the Great End aimed at, are
first to be discovered, that we may learn how to get them by other means
expressed in the following Directions: Therefore I have named here several
Qualifications and Endowments that are necessary to make up that Holy Frame and
State of the Soul, whereby it is furnished and enabled to practice the Law
immediately, and that not only in the beginning, but in the continuation of
that Practice: and therefore note diligently, that these Endowments must
continue in us during the present Life, or else our ability for an holy Life
will be lost, and they must be before Practice, not in any distance of time,
but only as the Cause is before the Effect. I do not say, that I have named
particularly all such necessary Qualifications; but thus much I dare say, that
he that gains these, may by the same means gain any other that should be
ranked with them. And this is a matter worthy of our serious consideration; for
few understand that any special Endowments are required to furnish us for an
holy Practice, more than for other voluntary Actions. The first Adam had
excellent Endowments bestowed upon him for an holy Practice, when he was first
created according to the Image of God; and the second Adam had Endowments more
excellent to enable him for an harder Task of Obedience. And seeing Obedience
is grown more difficult, by reason of the opposition and temptations that it
meets with since the Fall of Adam, we that are to be Imitators of Christ, had
need have very choice Endowments, as Christ had: at least as good, or something
better than Adam had at first, as our Work is harder than his. What King going
to make war against another king, sits not down first, and consulteth
whether he be able with ten thousand, to meet him that comes against him with
twenty thousand? And shall we dare to rush into Battle against all the Powers
of Darkness, all Worldly Terrors and Allurements? and our own inbred
domineering Corruptions, without considering whether we have sufficient
Spiritual Furniture to stand in the Evil day? Yet many content themselves with
such an ability to will and do their Duty, as they would have to be given to
Men universally, whereby they are no better enabled for the Spiritual Battle,
than the generality of the World, that lie vanquished under the wicked One, and
therefore their standing is not at all secured by it. It is an hard matter to
find what this universal ability is, that so many contend so earnestly for, of
what it consists, by what means it is conveyed to us and maintained.

Bodily Ability has Spirits, Nerves, Ligaments, Bones to subsist by; but this
Spiritual Universal Ability seems to be some occult Quality, that no
sufficient Account can be given how it is conveyed, or of what it is
constituted: That none may deceive themselves, and miscarry in their
Enterprises for Holiness, by depending on such a weak occult Quality, I have
here showed four Endowments, of which a true ability for the Practice of
Holiness must necessarily be constituted, and by which it must subsist and be
maintained; intending to show afterward, by what means they are given unto us,
and whether the inclination or persuasion here mentioned be perfect or
imperfect. And they are of such a mysterious nature, that such as own the
necessity of Endowments to frame them for Holiness, are prone to think that
less than these will serve, and that some of these frame us rather for
Licentiousness than Holiness, as they are here placed before any actual
performance of the Moral Law; and that some things contrary to them would put
us into a better frame for Holiness; against all such surmises I shall
endeavor such a demonstration of these Endowments particularly, as may gain
the assent of right Reason, insisting on them in the same order wherein I have
placed them in the Direction.

In the first place, I assert that an Inclination and Propensity of the Heart
to the Duties of the Law, is necessary to frame and enable us for the immediate
Practice of them; and I mean not such a blind Propensity as inanimate Creatures
and Brutes have to their natural Operations, but such an one as is meet for
intelligent Creatures, whereby they are by the Conduct of Reason prone and bent
to approve and choose their Duty, and averse to the Practice of Sin: And
therefore I have intimated that the Three other Endowments mentioned in the
Direction, are subservient to this as the chief of all, which are sufficient to
make it a rational Propensity. This is contrary to those that out of Zeal for
Obedience according to Knowledge, contend so earnestly for Free Will as a
necessary and sufficient Endowment to enable us to perform our Duty, when once
we are convinced of it, and of our Obligation to it, and that extol this
Endowment as the great Benefit that Universal Redemption has blessed all
Mankind with, though they Consider this Free Will without any actual
Inclination to Good; yea, they cannot but acknowledge that in most of Mankind
that have it, it is encumbred with an actual Bent and Propensity of the Heart
altogether to evil. Such a Free Will as this is, can never free us from Slavery
to Sin and Satan, and fit us for the Practice of the Law, and therefore is not
worthy the pains of those that contend so hotly for it. Neither is the Will so
free as is necessary for the Practice of Holiness, until it be endued with an
inclination and Propensity thereunto, as may appear by the follow Arguments.

First, The Duties of the Law are of such a nature, that they cannot possibly
be performed while there is wholly an aversness or mere indifferency of the
Heart to the Performance of them, and no good Inclination and Propensity toward
the Practice of them: Because the chief of all the Commandments, is to love the
Lord with our whole Heart, Might and Soul, to love every thing that is in him,
to love his Will and all his Ways, and to like them as good, and all Duties
must be influenced in their Performance by this Love; we must delight to do the
Will of God, it must be to us as our Meat and Drink, we must long and thirst
for it, it must be sweeter to us than the honey or honey comb, Psalm. 40.8.30.4,
34. Psalm. 63 1. and 119.20. and 19.10.

And this Love, Likeing, Delight, Longing, Thirsting, Sweet-relishing must be
continued to the end; and the first indeliberate Motions of Lust must be
regulated by Love to God and our Neighbor; and Sin must be lusted against,
Gal. 5.17. and abhorred, Psalm. 36.8. If it were true Obedience (as some would
have it) to love our Duty only, as a Market-man loves foul Ways to the Market,
or as a Sick man loves an unpleasant medicinal Potion, or as a Captive Slave
loves his hard Work for fear of a greater Evil; then it might be performed
with averseness of Inclination; but we must love it as the Market-man Gain, as
the Sick man Health, as pleasant Meat and-Drink, as the Captive Liberty.
Doubtless there can be no Power in the Will, for this kind of Service without
an Agreeablene^^ of our Inclination to the Will of God, a Heart according to
his own Heart, an Averseness of our Hearts from Sin, and a kind of Antipathy
against Sin; for we know the Proverb, Like loves like; there must be an
Agreeableness of the Person or thing beloved to the Disposition of the Lover.
Love to God must flow from a clean heart, 1 Timothy 1.5. Cleansed from evil
Propensities and Inclinations, and Reason will tell us, that the first Motions
of Lust which fall not under our Choice and Deliberation, cannot be avoided
without a fixed Propensity of the Heart to Holiness.

2ly. The Image of God (wherein God according to his infinite Wisdom judged it
meet to frame the first Adam in righteousness, and true holiness, and
uprightness, Genesis 1.27. Ephesians. 4.24. Eccles. 7.29.) consisted in an actual Bent
and Propensity of his Heart to the Practice of Holiness, not in a mere Power of
Will to choose Good or Evil: For this in it self is neither holy nor unholy, but
only a Groundwork, on which either the Image of God or of Satan, may be drawn;
nor in an indifference of Propensity to the choice of Sin or Duty, for this is
a wicked Disposition in an intelligent Creature that knows his Duty, and
fitteth us only to halt betwixt God and Baal. God set Adam's Soul at first
wholly in a right Bent and Inclination, though Adam might act contrary to it if
he would; as we may be prevailed upon to do some things contrary to our natural
or rational Inclinations, and it is easy to fail of our Duty though great
Preparation and Furniture be required for the Performance of it. The second
Adam also, the Lord Jesus Christ, was born an holy thing, Luke 1 35. with an
holy Disposition of his Soul and Propensity to Goodness; and can we reasonably
hope to arise to the Life of Holiness, from which the first Adam fell; or to be
Imitators of Christ, since Duty is made so difficult by the Fall, if we be not
renewed in a measure according to the same Image of God, and enabled with such
a Propensity and Inclination.

3ly, Original Corruption (whereby we are dead to God and Godliness from the
Birth, and made willing Slaves to the performance of all actual Sins, until the
Son of God make us free) confisteth in a Propensity and Inclination of the
Heart to Sin, and Averseness to Holiness. Without this Propensity to Sin, what
can that Law of sin in our members be, that warreth against the law of our
mind, and leads us captive to the service of sin? Romans 7.23. What is that
Poison in us, for which Men may be called serpents, vipers? What is that Spirit
of whoredoms in men, by reason of which they will not frame their doings to
turn to God? Hos. 5.4. How is the tree first corrupt, and then its fruit
corrupt? Matthew. 12.33. How can Man be said to be abominable and filthy, that
drinks iniquity like water? Job 15.16. How should the mind of the flesh be
continual enmity to the Law of God? Romans 8.7. I know there is also a blindness
of Understanding, and other things belonging to Original Corruption, which
conduces to this evil Propensity of the Will, but yet this Propensity it self
is the great evil, the indwelling Sin which produces all actual Sins, and must
of necessity be removed or restrained, by restoring that contrary Inclination,
wherein the Image of God confisted, or else we shall be backward and reprobate
to every good work, and whatever Freedom the Will has, shall be employed only
in the service of Sin.

4ly, God restores his People to Holiness, by giving to them, a new heart, a
new spirit, and taking away the heart of stone out of their flesh, and giving
them an heart of flesh, Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. And he circumciseth their heart to
love him with their whole heart and Soul. And he requires that we should be
transformed in the renewing of our mind, that we may prove what is his
acceptable will, Romans 12.2. And David prays for the same end, that God would
create in him a clean heart, and renew a right spirit within him, Psalm. 51.10.
If any one can judge that this new, clean, circumcised Heart, this Heart of
Flesh, this new right Spirit is such an one as has no actual Inclination and
Propensity to good, but only a Power to choose good or evil, undeservedly called
Free Will, with a present Inclination to evil, or an indifference of Propensity
to both contraries, it will not be worth my labor to convince such a Judgment,
only let him consider whether David could account such an Heart to be clean and
right, when he prays, Psalm. 119.36. Incline mine heart to thy testimonies,
and not to coveteousness.

The second Endowment necessary to enable us for the immediate Practice of
Holiness, and concurring with the other two that follow, to work in us a
rational Propensity to this Practice, is that we be well persuaded of our
Reconciliation with God. We must reckon that the breach of Amity which Sin has
made betwixt God and us, is made up by a firm Reconciliation to his Love and
Favor; and herein I include the great Benefit of Justification, as the means
whereby we are reconciled to God, which is described in Scripture, either by
forgiving our Sins, or by the imputation of Righteousness to us, Romans 4.5, 6,
7. because both are contained in one and the same justifying Act; as one act of
Illumination comprehends expulsion of Darkness and introduction of Light, one
act of Repentance contains Mortification of Sin, and vivification to
Righteousness, and every Motion from any thing to its contrary, is but one and
the same, though it may be expressed by diverse Names, with respect to either of
the two contrary terms, the one of which is abolished, the other introduced by
it. This is a great Mystery (contrary to the Apprehensions, not only of the
Vulgar, but of some learned Divines,) that we must be reconciled to God, and
justified by the Remission of our Sins, and imputation of Righteousness before
any sincere Obedience to the Law, that we may be enabled for the Practice of
it. They account that this Doctrine tends to the Subversion of an holy
Practice, and is a great Pillar of Antinemianism; and that the only way to
establish sincere Obedience, is to make it rather a condition to be performed
before our actual Justification and Reconciliation with God. Therefore some
late Divines have thought sit to bring the Doctrine of former Protestants
concerning Justification to their Anvil, and to hammer it into another form
that it might be more free from Antinomianism, and effectual to secure an holy
Practice; but their Labor is vain and pernicious, tending to Antinemian
profaneness, or painted Hypocrisice at best; neither can the true Practice of
Holiness be secure, except the Persuasion of our Justification and
Reconciliation with God be first obtained without works of the law, that we may
be enabled thereby to do them, as I shall now prove by several Arguments,
intending also to show in the following Directions, that such a Persuasion of
the Love of God, as God gives to his People, tends only to Holiness, though
a Misperswasion of it be in many an Occasion of Licenciousness.

First, When the first Adam was framed for the Practice of Holiness at his
Creation, he was highly in the Favor of God, and had no Sin imputed to him,
and was accounted righteous in the sight of God, according to his present
state, because he was made upright according to God's Image, and there is no
reason to doubt but that these Qualifications were his advantage for an holy
Practice, and the Wisdom of God judged them good for that end, and as soon as
he lost them, he became dead in sin. The second Adam also in our nature was the
Beloved of the Father, accounted righteous in the sight of God, without the
Imputation of any Sin to him, except what his Office was to bear on the behalf
of others. And can we reasonably expect to be Imitators of Christ by performing
more difficult Obedience than the first Adam's was before the Fall, except the
like Advantages be given to us, by Reconciliation and Remission of Sins, and
imputation of a Righteousness given by God to us when we have none of our own.

Secondly, Those that know that natural Deadness under the Power of Sin and
Satan, are fully convinced, that if God leave them to their own Hearts, they
can do nothing but Sin, and that they can do no good work except it please God
of his great Love and Mercy to work it in them, Joh. 8.36. Philip. 2.13. Romans
8.7, 8. Therefore that they may be encouraged and rationally inclined to
Holiness, they must hope that God will work savingly in them. Now I leave it to
considerate Men to judge, whether such an Hope can be well grounded without a
good Persuasion of such a Reconciliation and Saving-love of God to us, as
depends not upon any precedent goodness of our Works, but is a cause
sufficient to produce them effectually in us: Yea, we know further, if we know
our selves sufficiently, that our Death in Sin proceeded from the Guilt of the
first Sin of Adam, and the Sentence denounced against it, Genesis 2.17. And that
it is still maintained in us by the Guilt of Sin, and the Curse of the Law, and
that Spiritual Life will never be given us to free us from that Dominion,
except this Guilt and Curse be removed from us, which is done by actual
Justification, Gal. 3.13, 14. Romans 6.14. And this is sufficient to make us
despair of living to God in Holiness, while we apprehend our selves to be under
the Curse and Wrath of God, by reason of our Transgressions and Sins still
lying upon us, Ezekiel. 33.10.

Thirdly, The nature of Duties of the Law is such, as requires an Apprehention
of our Reconciliation with God, and his hearty Love and Favor toward us for
the doing of them. The great Duty is Love to God with our whole Heart, and not
such a contemplative Love, as Philosophers may have to the Object of Sciences,
which they are concerned in no further than to please their Fancies in the
knowledge of them; but a practical Love whereby we are willing that God should
be absolute Lord and Governor of us and all the World, to dispose of us and
all others according to his Will, as to our temporal and everlasting Condition,
and that he should be the only Portion and Happiness of all those that are
happy; a Love whereby we like every thing in him as he is our Lord, his Justice
as well as any other Attribute, without wishing or desiring that he were better
than he is, and whereby we desire that his Will may be done upon us and all
others, whether for Prosperity or Adversity, Life or Death, and whereby we can
heartily praise him for all things, and delight in our Obedience to him, in
doing his Will, though we suffer that which is never so grievous to us, even
present Death. Consider these things well and you may easily perceive that our
Spirits are not in a fit frame for the doing of them, while we apprehend our
selves under the Curse and Wrath of God, or while we are under prevailing
Suspicions that God will prove an Enemy to us at last. Slavish Fear may extort
some slavish hypocritical Performances from us, such as that of Pharaoh in
letting the Israelites go sore against his Will; but the Duty of Love cannot be
extorted and forced by Fear, but it must be won and sweetly allured by an
Apprehension of God's Love and Goodness toward us, as that eminent, loving and
beloved Disciple testifies; 1 Job. 4.18, 19. There is no fear in love; but
perfect love casts out fear, because fear has torment: He that fears is
not made perfect in love, we love him because he first loved us. Observe here
that we cannot be before hand with God in loving him before we apprehend his
Love to us. And consult your own Experience, if you have any true Love to God,
whether it were not wrought in you by a sense of God's Love first toward you.
All the goodness and excellency of God cannot render him an amiable Object to
us, except we apprehend him an agreeable good to us. I question not but the
Devils know the excellency of Gods Nature, as well as our greatest Metaphysical
Speculators, and this does but fill them the more with tormenting horror and
trembling that is contrary to Love, Ja. 2.19. The greater God's Excellency and
Perfection is, the greater Evil he is to us if he hate us and curse us; and
therefore the Principle of Self-preservation deeply rooted in our natures,
hinders us from loving that which we apprehend as our own Destruction; if a
Man be an Enemy to us, we can love him for the sake of our loving reconciled
God, because his Love will make Man's Hatred to work for our good; but if God
himself be our Enemy, for whose sake can we love him? Who is there that can
free us from the evil of his Enemity and turn it to our Advantage, until he be
pleased to reconcile himself to us?

Fourthly, Our Conscience must of necessity be first purged from dead works
that we may serve the living God, and this is done by actual Remission of Sin,
procured by the Blood of Christ and manifested to our Consciences, as appears
by Christ's dying for this end, Heb. 9.14, 15. and 10.1, 2. 4. 14, 17, 22. That
Conscience whereby we judge our selves to be under the guilt of sin and wrath
of God is accounted an evil Conscience in Scripture, though it perform its
Office truly; because it is caused by the evil of sin, and will it self be a
cause of our committing more sin, until it can judge us to be justified from
all sin, and received into the Favor of God. Love, which is the end of the
Law, must proceed from a good Conscience, as well as from any other cleanness
of Heart, 1 Timothy 1.5. David's Mouth could not be opened to show forth the
Praise of God, until he was delivered from Blood-guiltiness, Psalm. 51.14, 15.
This evil guilty Conscience, whereby we judge that God is our Enemy, and that
his Justice is against us to our everlasting Condemnation, by reason of our
sins, does strongly maintain and increase the Dominion of Sin and Satan in us,
and works most mischievous effects in the Soul against Godliness, even to
bring the Soul to hate God, and to wish there were no God, no Heaven, no Hell,
so we might escape the Punishment due to us. It so disaffecteth People toward
God, that they cannot endure to think, or speak or hear of him and his Law, but
strive either to put him out of their minds by fleshly Pleasures and worldly
Employments, and thus they are alienated from all true Religion, only blinding
it, and stopping the mouth of it. It produces Zeal in many outside religious
Performances, and also false Religion, Idolatry, and the most inhumane
Superstitions in the World. I have often considered by what manner of working
any Sin could effectually destroy the whole Image of God in the first Adam, and
I conclude it was by working first an evil guilty Conscience in him, whereby he
judged that the just God was against him, and cursed him for that one Sin, and
this was enough to work a shameful Nakedness by disorderly Lusts, a turning his
Love wholly from God to the Creature, and a desire to be hidden from the
Presence of God, Genesis 3.8, 10. which was a total Destruction of the Image of
God's Holiness. And we have cause to judge that from the same cause proceeds
the continual Malice, Rancour, Rage, Blasphemy of the Devil, and many notorious
wicked Men, against God and Godliness. Some may think Job uncharitable in
suspecting not merely, that his Sons had sinned, but that they had been so
abominably wicked as to curse God in their Hearts, Job 1.5. but Job well
understood that if the guilt of any ordinary Sin lie upon the Conscience, it
will make the Soul to wish secretly that God were not, or that he was not so
just a Judge, which is a secret Cursing of God, that cannot be avoided until
our Consciences be purged from the guilt of Sin, by the offering of Christ for
us, which was then figured out by the Burnt-offerings of Job for his Sons.

Fifthly, God has abundantly discovered to us in his Word, that his method in
bringing Men from Sin to Holiness of Life, is first to make them know that he
loves them, and that their Sins are blotted out. When he gave the Ten
Commandments on Mount Sinai, he first discovered himself to be their God, that
had given them a sure Pledge of his Salvation by their Delivery from Egypt, in
the Preface, Exodus 20.2. And during all the time of the Old Testament, God was
pleased to make the entrance into Religion to be by Circumcision, which was not
only a Sign, but also a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, whereby God
justifies People, while they are considered as ungodly, Romans 4.11.5. and this
Seal was administered to Children of eight Days old, before they could perform
any Condition of sincere Obedience, for their Justification, that their
Furniture for an holy Practice might be ready before hand. Furthermore in the
time of the Old Testament, God appointed diverse Washings, and the Blood of
Bulls and Goats, and the Ashes of an Heifer sprinkling the unclean, to prepare
and sanctify them for other Parts of his Worship in his Tabernacle and Temple,
to figure out his purging of their Consciences from dead works by the Blood of
Christ, that they might serve the living God, Heb. 9.9, 10, 13, 14, 22. This I
say was then figurative Sanctification, as the word Sanctification is taken in
a large Sense, comprehending all things that prepare us for the Service of God,
chiefly the Remission of Sin, Heb. 10.10, 14, 18. Though if it be taken in a
strict sense, respecting only our Conformity to the Law, it must necessarily be
placed after Justification, according to the usual Method of Protestant
Divines. God also minded them of the necessity of purging away their guilt
first, that their Service might be acceptable, by commanding them to offer the
Sin-offering before the Burnt-offering, Levit. 5.8. and 16.3, 11. And least the
guilt of their Sins should pollute the Service of God, notwithstanding all
their particular Expiations, God was pleased to appoint a general Atonement for
all their Sins one day every Year, wherein the Escape goat was to bear upon him
all their Iniquities, unto a Land not inhabited, Levit. 16.22. 34. Under the
New Testament God uses the same Method in loving us first, and washing us from
our Sins by the Blood of Christ, that he may make us Priests to offer the
Sacrifices of Praise and all good Works to God even the Father. He enters us
into his Service by washing away our sins in Baptism, he seedeth and
strengthens us for his Service by Remission of Sins given to us in the Blood
of Christ at the Lord's Supper, He exhorts us to obey him, because he has
already loved us, and our Sins are already pardoned. Forgive one another even
as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you. Be ye therefore followers of God as
dear children, and walk in love as Christ has loved us, Ephesians. 4.32. and 5.1,
2. I write unto you little children because your sins are forgiven you for his
name sake. Love not the world, neither the things of the world, 1 Jo. 2.12, 15.
I might quote abundance of Texts of the same nature. We may clearly see by all
this, that God has accounted it a matter of great Importance, and has
condescended to take wonderful care in providing plentiful means both under the
Old and New Testament, that his People might be first cleansed from guilt, and
reconciled to himself, to fit them for the acceptable Practice of Holiness.
Away then with all the contrary Methods of the new Divinity.

The Third Endowment necessary to enable us for the Practice of Holiness,
without which a Persuasion of our Reconciliation with God, would be of little
efficacy to work in us a rational Propensity to it, is that we be persuaded of
our future Enjoyment of the everlasting heavenly Happiness. This must precede
our holy Practice as a cause disposing and alluring us to it. This Affertion
has several sorts of Adversaries to oppose it; some account that a Persuasion
of our own future Happiness before we have persevered in sincere Obedience,
tends to Licentiousness, and that the way to do good Works, is rather to make
them a Condition necessary for the procuring of this Persuasion. Others condemn
all Works, that we are allured or stirred up to by the future Enjoyment of the
heavenly Happiness, as legal, mercenary, flowing from self-love, and not from
any pure Love to God, and they figure out sincere Godliness by a Man bearing
Fire in one hand to burn up Heaven, and Water in the other to quench Hell,
intimating that the true Service of God must not proceed at all from hope of
Reward or sear of Punishment, but only from Love. To establish the Truth
asserted against these Errors that are so contrary to it and to each other, I
shall propose the ensuing Considerations.

First, The nature of the Duties of the Law is such, that they cannot be
sincerely and universally practiced without this Endowment. That this Endowment
must be present in us is sufficiciently proved already by all that I have said
concerning the necessity of the Persuasion of our firm Reconciliation with God
by our Justification, to prepare us for this Practice, because that includes a
Persuasion of this future Happiness, or else it is of little worth. All that I
have to add here is, that sincere Obedience cannot rationally subsist, except
it be allured, encouraged, and supported by this Persuasion. Let me therefore
suppose a Sadducee believing no Happiness after this Life, and put the
Question, Can such an one love God with his whole Heart, Might and Soul? Will
he not think it reasonable rather to lessen and moderate his Love toward God,
lest he should be overmuch troubled to part with him by Death? We account it
most reasonable to sit loose in our Affections from things that we must part
with. Can such an one be satisfied with the Enjoyment of God as his Happiness?
Will he not rather account that the Enjoyment of God and all religious Duties
are Vanities as well as other things, because in a little time we shall have no
more Benefit by them than if they had never been? How can such an one be
willing to lay down his Life for the sake of God, when by his Death he must
part with God as well as with other things? How can he willingly choose
Afflictions rather than Sin, when he shall be more miserable in this Life for
it, and not at all happy hereafter. I grant if Affliction come unavoidably upon
such a Person, he may reasonably judge that Patience is better for him than
Impatience; but it will displease him that he is forced to the use of such a
Virtue, and he will be prone to fret and murmr at his Creator, and to wish he
had never been, rather than to endure such miseries, and to be comforted only
with vain transitory Enjoyments. I think I have said enough to show how
unfurnished such a Man is for Holiness; and he that will burn up Heaven and
quench Hell that he may serve God out of Love, does thereby leave himself ^
little better furnished than the Sadduce, the one denies them, the other will
not have them at all to be considered in this case.

Secondly, The sure Hope of the Glory of Heaven, is made use of ordinarily by
God since the Fall of Adam for the Practice of Holiness, as the Scripture does
abundantly show, Christ the great pattern of holiness for the joy that was set
before him, endured the cross, despising the shame, Heb. 12.2. And though I
cannot say that the first Adam had such a sure Hope to preserve him in
Innocence yet he had instead of it, the present Possession of an earthly
Paradise and an happy Estate in it, which he knew would last if he continued in
Holiness, or be changed into a better Happiness. The Apostles did not faint
under Affliction because they knew that it worked for them a more exceeding
eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.16, 17. The believing Hebrews took joyfully
the spoiling of their Goods, knowing in themselves that they had an Heaven a
better and more enduring Substance, Heb. 10.34. The Apostle Paul accounts all
his Sufferings unprofitable were it not for a glorious Resurrection, and that
Christians would be of all Men most miserable, and that the Doctrine of the
Epicures were rather to be chosen, Let us eat and drmk, for to morrow we shall
die. And he exhorts the Corinthians to be abundant in the work of the Lord,
knowing that their labor shall not be in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.58. As
worldly Hope keeps the World at work in their various Employments; so God
gives his People the Hope of his Glory to keep them close to his Service, Heb.
6.11, 12. 1 John 3.3. And it is such a sure Hope as shall never make them
ashamed, Romans 5.28. Those that think it below the excellency of their Love to
work out of Hope of the Heavenly Reward, do thereby advance their Love beyond
the Love of the Apostles and Primitive Saints, and even of Christ himself.

3dly, This persuasion of our future enjoyment of everlasting Happiness, cannot
tend to Licentiousness, if we understand well that perfect Holiness is a
necessary part of that Happiness, and that though we have a Title to that
Happiness by free Justification and Adoption, yet we must go to the possession
of it in a way of Heliness, 1 Jo. 3.1, 2, 3. Neither is it legal or mercenary
to be moved by this Persuasion, seeing the Persuasion it self is not gotten by
the Works of the Law, but by free Grace through Faith, Gal. 5.5. And if it be a
working out of self-love; yet for certain it is not that carnal self-love,
which the Scripture condemns as the Mother of Sinfulness, 2 Timothy 3.2. but an
holy self-love enclining us to prefer God above the Flesh and the World, such
as God directs us unto, when he exhorts us to save our selves, Acts 2.40.
And it is so far from being contrary to the pure Love of God, that it brings us
to love God more purely and entirely. The more good and beneficial we apprehend
God to us to all Eternity, doubtless the more lovely God will be to us, and our
Affections will be the more enflamed toward him. God will not be loved as a
barren Wilderness, a Land of Darkness to us, neither will he be served for
naught, Jer. 2.31. Is. 45.19. He would think it a Dishonor to him to be owned
by us as our God, if he had not prepared for us a City, Heb. 11.16. And he
draws us to love him by the Cords of a Man, such Cords as the Love of Men
uses to be drawn by, even by his own Love to us, in laying his Benefits before
us, Hos. 11.4. Therefore the way for us to keep our selves in the Love of God,
is to look for his Mercy unto eternal Life, Jude. 21.

The last Endowment, for the same end as the former is, that we be well
persuaded of sufficient Strength both to will and perform our Duty acceptably,
until we come to the Enjoyment of the heavenly Happiness. This is contrary to
the Error of those that account it sufficient, if we have strength to practice
Holiness, if we will, or to will it if we please, and this is the sufficient
strength which they earnestly contend for, as a great Benefit bestowed on all
Mankind by universal Redemption. It is also contrary to the Error of those that
think the Practice of Godliness and Wickedness to be alike easy, excepting
only some difficulty in the first Alterations of vicious Customs, and in
bearing Persecutions, which they account to be a rare Case, since the Kingdoms
of the World have been brought to the Profession of Christianity, or that think
that God requires of Men only to do their Endeavor, that is, what they can
do, and it is nonsense to say they cannot do what they can do. According to
their Judgment it is needless to concern our selves much about sufficient
Strength for holy Practice. For the confirmation of the Assertion against these
Errors take these Arguments.

First, We are by nature dead in Trespasses and Sins unable to will, or do any
thing that is spiritually good, notwithstanding the Redemption that is by
Christ, until we be actually quickened by Christ, Ephesians. 2.1^ Romans 8.7, 8, 9.
Those that are sufficiently enlightened and humbled, know themselves to be
naturally in this Case; and that they do not want only executive Power to do
good, but chiefly an Heart to will it, and to be pleased with it, and that if
God work not in them both to will and to do, they shall neither will nor do any
thing pleasing to him, Phil. 2.13. And that if he leave them to their own
Corruption after he has begun the good Work, they shall certainly prove vile
Apostates, and their latter end will be worse than their beginning. We may
conclude from hence, that whosoever can courageously attempt the Practice of
the Law without being well persuaded of a sufficient Power whereby he may be
enabled to be heartily willing as well as to perform when he is willing, until
he has gone through the whole Work of Obedience acceptably, such an one was
never yet truly humbled and brought to know the Plague of his own Heart,
neither does he truly believe the Doctrine of Original Sin, whatever formal
Profession he makes of it.

Secondly, Those that think sincere Conformity to the Law in ordinary Cases to
be so passing easy, show that they neither know it nor themselves. Is it an
easy thing to wrestle, not against Flesh only, but against principalities,
powers, spiritual wickedness in high Places? Ephesians. 6.12. Is it an easy thing
not to lust or covet according to the Tenth Commandment? The Apostle Paul found
it so difficult to obey this Commandment, that his Concupiscence prevailed the
more by occasion of the Commandment, Romans 7.7, 8. Our work is not only to alter
vicious Customs, but to mortisie corrupt natural Affections which bred those
Customs, and not only to deny the fulfilling of sinful Lust, but to be full of
holy Lust and Desires, that even the restraining the execution of corrupt
Lusts, and crossing them by contrary Actings, is in many cases like the cutting
off of a right hand, and plucking out a right eye, Mat. 5.29, 30. If Obedience
be so easy, how came it to pass that the Heathens generally did those things
for which their own Consciences condemned them as worthy of Death? Romans 1.32.
And many among us seek to enter into this strait gate, and are not able, Luke
13.24. And break so many vows and Purposes of Obedience, and fall back to the
Practice of their Lusts, though in the mean time the Fears of eternal Damnation
press hard upon their Consciences?

As to those that find Persecution for Religion to be so rare a thing in late
days, they have cause to be suspected, that they are of the World, and
therefore the World loves his own, else they would find that national
Profession of Religion will not secure those that are truly godly from several
sorts of Persecutions. And suppose Men do not persecute us for Religion, yet
there is great Difficulty in bearing great Injuries from Men on other Accounts,
and Losses, Poverty, bodily Pains, long Diseases and untimely Deaths, from the
ordinary Providence of God, with such hearty Love to God and to injurious Men
for his sake, and such a patient acquiescence in his Will as the Law of God
requires. I acknowledge that the work of God is easy and pleasant to those
whom God rightly furnishes with Endowments for it; but those that assert it to
be easy to Men in their common Condition, show their Imprudence in
contradicting the general Experience of Heathens and Christians. Though many
Duties do not require much labor of Body or Mind, and might be done with ease,
if we were willing, yet it is easier to remove a Mountain, than to move and
incline the Heart to will and affect the doing of them. I need not concern my
self with those that account that all have sufficient Strength for an holy
Practice, because they can do their endeavor, that is, what they can do; for
God requires actual sulfilling of his Commands. What if by our Endeavors we
can do nothing in any measure according to the Rule, shall the Law be put off
with no Performance? and shall such Endeavors be accounted sufficient
Holiness? And what if we cannot so much as endeavor in a right way? If Man's
Ability were the measure of acceptable Duty, the Commands of the Law would
signify very little.

Thirdly, The Wisdom of God has ever funished People with a good Persuasion of
a sufficient Strength, that they might be enabled both to will and do their
Duty. The first Adam was furnished with such a Strenght, and we have no cause
to think that he was ignorant of it, or that he needed to sear that he should
be left to his own Corruptions, because he had no Corruptions in him, until he
had produced them in himself by sinning against Strength, and when he had lost
that Strength, he could not recover the Practice of Holiness, until he was
acquainted with a better Strength, whereby the Head of Satan should be bruised,
Genesis 3.15. Our Lord Christ doubtless knew the insinite Power of his Diety to
enable him for all that he was to do and suffer in our Nature. He knew the Lord
God would help him, therefore he should not be confounded. Is. 50.7. The
Scripture shows what plentiful Assurance of Strength God gave to Moses,
Joshua, Gideon, when he called them to great Employments, and to the Israelites
when he called them to subdue the Land of Canaan. Christ would have the Sons of
Zebedee to consider whether they were able to drink of his cup, and to be
baptized with the baptism that he was baptized with, Matthew. 20.22. Paul
encourages Believers to the Life of Holiness, by persuading them that sin
shall not prevail to get the Dominion over them, because they are not under the
law, but under grace, Romans 6.13, 14. And he exhorts them to be strong in the
Lord and in the power of his might, that they might be able to stand against
the wiles of the devil, Ephesians. 6.10, 11. John exhorts Believers not to love
the world, nor the things of the world, because they were strong and had
overcome the wicked one, 1 Jo. 2.14, 15. They that were called of God
heretofore to work Miracles, were first acquainted with the gift of Power to
work them, and no wise Man will attempt to do them without knowledge of the
Gift: Even so when Men that are dead in Sin are called to do the works of holy
Life, which are in them great Miracles, God makes a Discovery of the gift of
Power unto them, that he may encourage them in a rational way to such a
wonderful Enterprise.

DIRECT. III.
The way to get holy. Endowments and Qualifications necessary to frame and
enable us for the immediate Practice of the Law, is to receive them out of the
fullness of Christ, by Fellowship with him; and that we may have this
Fellowship, we must be in Christ, and have Christ himself in us, by a Mystical
Union with him.

EXPLICATION.
HEre, as much as any where, we have great cause to acknowledge with the
Apostle, that without Controversy great is the Mystery of Godliness, even so
great that it could not have entered into the Heart of Man to conceive it, if
God had not made it known in the Gospel by supernatural Revelation. Yea, though
it be revealed clearly in the holy Scriptures, yet the Natural Man has not
Eyes to see it there, for it is foolishness to him; and if God express it never
so plainly and properly, he will think that God is speaking Riddles and
Parables. And I doubt not but it is still a Riddle and Parable even to many
truly Godly, that have received an holy Nature in this way: For the Apostles
themselves had the saving benefit of it before the Comforter discovered it
clearly to them, John 14, 20. And they walked in Christ, as the way to the
Father, before they clearly knew him to be the way, John 14.5. And the best of
us know it but in part, and must wait for the perfect knowledge of it in
another World. One great Mystery is, that the holy frame and disposition
whereby our Souls are furnished and enabled for immediate Practice of the Law,
must be gotten by receiving it out of Christ's fullness, as a thing already
prepared and brought to an existance for us in Christ, and treasured up in him;
and that as we are justified by a righteousness wrought out in Christ, and
imputed to us, so we are sanctified by such an holy frame and qualifications,
as are first wrought out, and completed in Christ for us, and then imparted to
us: and as our natural corruption was produced originally in the first Adam,
and propagated from him to us; so our new nature and holiness is first produced
in Christ, and derived from him to us, or as it were propagated. So that we are
not at all to work together with Christ, in making or producing that holy frame
in us, but only to take it to ourselves, and use it in our holy Practice, as
made ready to our hands. Thus we have fellowship with Christ in recovering that
holy frame of Spirit that was originally in him: for fellowship is when several
Persons have the same things in common, 1 Jo. 1. This Mystery is so great, that
notwithstanding all the Light of the Gospel, we commonly think that we must get
an holy frame by producing it a new in ourselves, and by forming and working it
out of our own Hearts. Therefore many that are seriously devout, take a great
deal of pains to mortify their corrupted Nature, and beget an holy frame of
Heart in themselves, by striving earnestly to master their sinful lusts, and by
pressing vehemently upon their Hearts many motives to Godliness, laboring
importunately to squeeze good qualifications out of them, as Oil out of a
Flint. They account that though they be justified by a righteousness wrought out
by Christ, yet they must be sanctified by a holiness wrought out by themselves.
And tho out of humility they are willing to call it infused Grace, yet they
think they must get the infusion of it by the same manner of working, as if it
were wholly acquired by their endeavors. On this account they acknowledge the
entrance into a Godly Life to be harsh and unpleasing, because it costs so much
struggling with their own Hearts and Affections to new frame them, if they knew
that this way of entrance is not only harsh and unpleasant, but altogether
impossible, and that the true way of mortifying sin, and quickening themselves
to holiness, is by receiving a new nature out of the fullness of Christ, and
that we do no more to the production of a new nature, than of original sin,
though we do more to the reception of it. If they knew this, they might save
themselves many a bitter agony, and a great deal of misspent burdensome labor,
and employ their endeavors to enter in at the strait Gate, in such a way as
would be more pleasant and successful.

Another greater mystery in the way of Sanctification, is the glorious manner
of our Fellowship with Christ in receiving an holy frame of heart from him. It
is by our being in Christ, and having Christ himself in us, and that not merely
by his universal presence, as he is God, but by such a close union as that we
are one spirit, and one flesh with him, which is a privilege peculiar to those
that are truly sanctified. I may well call this a mystical union, because the
Apostle calls it a great mystery, in an Epistle full of Mysteries, Ephesians. 5.20.
intimating, that it is great, eminently above many other Mysteries; it is one
of the three Mystical Unions that are the chief Mysteries in Religion: the
other two are the Union of the Trinity of Persons in One Godhead, and the Union
of the Divine and Human Natures in One Person, Jesus Christ, God and Man.
Though we cannot frame an exact Idea of the manner of any of these Three Unions
in our Imaginations, because the depth of these Mysteries is beyond our
Comprehension, yet we have cause to believe them all, because they are clearly
revealed in Scripture, and are a necessary Foundation for other Points of
Christian Doctrine, particularly this Union betwixt Christ and Believers, is
plainly in several places of Scripture, affirming that Christ is, and dwells
in believers, and they in him, Joh. 6.56. and 14.20. And that they are so
joined together as to become one Spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17. And that Believers are
Members of Christ's Body, of his Flesh, and of his Bones; and they two, Christ
and the Church, are one flesh, Ephesians. 5.30, 31. Furthermore, this Union is
illustrated in Scripture by various resemblances, which would be very much
unlike the things which they are made use of to resemble, and would rather seem
to beguile us by obscuring the Truth, than instruct us by illustrating of it,
if there were no true proper Union betwixt Christ and Believers. It is
resembled by the Union betwixt God the Father and Christ, Jo. 14.20. and 17.21,
22, 23. betwixt the Vine and its Branches, Joh. 15.4, 5. betwixt the Head and
Body, Ephesians. 1.22.23. betwixt Bread and the Eater, Joh. 6.51, 53, 54. It is not
only resembled but sealed in the Lords Supper, where neither the Popish
Transubstantiation, nor the Lutherans Consubstantiation, nor the Protestants
spiritual Presence of Christ's Body and Blood to the true Receivers can stand
without it, and if we can imagine that Christ's Body and Blood are not truly
eaten and drunk by Believers either spiritually or corporally, we shall make
the Bread and Wine joined with the Words of Institution, not only naked Signs,
but such Signs as are much more apt to breed false Notions in us, than to
establish us in the Truth. And there is nothing in this Union so impossible or
repugnant to Reason, as may force us to depart from the plain and familiar
sense of those Scriptures that express and illustrate it. Though Christ be in
Heaven and we on Earth, yet he can join our Souls and Bodies to his at such a
distance, without any substantial Change of either, by the same insinite Spirit
dwelling in him and us, and so our Flesh will become his, when it is quickened
by his Spirit, and his Flesh ours as truly as if we did eat his Flesh, and
drink his Blood, and he will be in us himself by his Spirit who is one with
him, and who can unite more closely to Christ than any material Substance can
do, or who can make a more close and intimate Union betwixt Christ and us. And
it will not follow from hence that a Believer is one Person with Christ, any
more than that Christ is one Person with the Father by that greater mystical
Union. Neither will a Believer be hereby made God's, but only the Temple of
God, as Christ's Body and Soul is, and the Spirits lively Instrument, rather
than the principal Cause? Neither will a Believer be necessarily perfectin
Holiness here by, or Christ made a Sinner, for Christ knows how to dwell in a
Believer by certain measures and degrees, and to make them holy so far only as
he dwells in them. And though this Union seem too high a Preferment for such
unworthy Creatures as we are, yet considering the preciousness of the Blood of
God whereby we are redeemed, we should dishonor God if we should not expect a
miraculous Advancement to the highest Dignity that Creatures are capable of
through the Merits of that Blood. Neither is there any thing in this Union
contrary to the Judgment of Sense, because the Bond of the Union being
Spiritual, falls not at all under the Judgment of Sense.

Several learned Men of late acknowledge no other Union betwixt Christ and
Believers, than such as persons or things wholly separated, may have by their
mutual relations each to other, and accordingly they interpret the places of
Scripture that speak of this Union. When Christ is called the Head of the
Church, they account that a Political Head or Governor is the thing meant when
Christ is said to be in his People, and they in him, they think that the proper
meaning is, that Christ's Law, Doctrine, Grace, Salvation, or that Godliness is
in them, and embraced by them; so that Christ here must not be taken for Christ
himself, but for some other thing wrought in them by Christ. When Christ and
Believers are said to be one Spirit and one Flesh, they understand it of the
Agreement of their Minds and Affections, as if the greatness of the Mystery of
this Union mentioned, Ephesians. 5.32. consisted rather in a harsh Hope, or a dark
improper Expression, than in the depth and abstruceness of the thing it self,
and as if Christ and his Apostles had affected obscure intricate Expressions,
when they speak to this Church of things very plain and easy to be understood.
Thus that great Mystery the Union of Believers with Christ himself, which is
the Glory of the Church, and has been highly owned formerly both by the
ancient Fathers, and many eminent Protestant Divines, particular Writers
concerning the Doctrine of the Lord's Supper, and by a very general Consent of
the Church in many Ages, is now exploded out of the new Model of Divinity. The
Reason of exploding it, as I judge in Charity, is not because our late learned
Refiners of Divinity think themselves less able to defend it than the other two
mysterious Unions, and to silence the Objections of those proud Sophisters that
will not believe what they cannot comprehend; but rather because they account
it to be one of the Sinnews of Antinomianism that lay unobserved in the former
usual Doctrine; that it tends to puff up Men with a Persuasion that they are
justified, and have eternal Life in them already, and that they need not depend
any longer upon their uncertain Performances of the Condition of sincere
Obedience for Salvation, whereby they account the very Foundation of a holy
Practice to be subverted. But the Wisdom of God has laid another manner of
Foundation for an holy Practice than they imagine, of which this Union, (which
the Builders refuse) is a principal stone next to the head of the corner. And
in opposition to their corrupt Glosses upon the Scriptures that prove it, I
assert that our Union with Christ is the cause of our Subjection to Christ as a
Political Head in all things, and of the abiding of his Law, Doctrine, Grace,
Salvation, and all Godliness in us, and of our Agreement with him in our Minds
and Affections, and therefore it cannot be altogether the same thing with them.
And this Assertion is useful for a better Understanding of the Excellency of
this Union. It is not a Privilege procured by our sincere Obedience and
Holiness, as some may imagine, or a reward of good works reserved for us in
another World; but it is a Privilege bestowed upon Believers in their very
first entrance into an holy state, on which all ability to do good works does
depend, and all sincere Obedience to the Law does follow after it as Fruit
produced by it.

Having thus far explained the Direction, I shall now show, that though the
Truth contained in it be above the Search of Natural Reason, yet it is
evidently discovered to those that have their Understandings opened to discern
that supernatural Revelation of the mysterious way of Sanctification which God
has given to us in the holy Scriptures.

First, There are several Places in Scripture that do plainly express it; some
Texts show th^^ all things pertaining to our salvation, are treasured (...) for
us in Christ, and comprehended in his fullness, (...) that we must have them
thence, or (...) at all Col. 1.19. It pleased the Father that in him should all
fullness dwell. And in the same Epistle, Col. 2.11, 12, 13. The Apostle shows
that the holy Nature whereby we live to God, was first produced in him by his
death and resurrection, in whom also ye are circumcised in putting off the body
of the sins of the flesh, buried with him, quickened together with him when you
were dead in your sins, Ephesians. 1.3. Who has blessed us with all spiritual
blessings in heavenly places in Christ. An holy Frame of Spirit with all its
necessary Qualifications, must needs be comprehended here in all spiritual
Blessings, and these are given us in Christ's Person in heavenly places, as
prepared and treasured up in him for us while we are upon Earth, and therefore
we must have our holy Endowments out of him, or not at all. In this Text some
choose rather to read heavenly things, as in the Margent, because neither places
nor things are expressed in the Original; but the former textual reading is to
be preferred before the Marginals as being the proper Sense of the Original
Greek Phrase, which is, and must necessarily be so rendered in two other Places
of this same Epistle, Chap. 3.10. and 6.12. Another Text is 1 Cor. 1.30. which
shows that Christ is of God made unto us Sanctification, by which we are able
to walk holily as well as wisely, by the Wisdom of which we are savingly wise,
and Righteousness by the Imputation of which we are justified, and Redemption
whereby we are redeemed from all Misery, to the Enjoyment of his Glory, as our
Happiness in the heavenly Kingdom. Other Texts of Scripture show plainly that
we receive our Holiness out of his fullness by Fellowship with him, Joh. 1.16,
17. Of his fullness have we all received, and grace for grace. And it is
understood of Grace answerable to the Law given by Moses, which must needs
include the Grace of Sanctification, 1 John 1.3, 5, 6, 7. Truly our fellowship
is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. God is Light, if we walk in
the light, as he is in the light we have fellowship one with another. Hence we
may infer that our Fellowship with God and Christ does include particularly our
having Light, and walking in it holily and righteously. There are other Texts
that reach the Proof of the whole Direction fully, showing not only that our
holy Endowments are made ready first in Christ for us, and received from, but
that we receive them by Union with Christ, Col. 3.10, 11. Ye have put on the
new man, which is renewed after the image of him that created him, where Christ
is all and in all, 1 Cor. 6.17. He that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit,
Gal. 2.20. I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, 1 John 5.11, 12. This is
the recerd that God has given to us eternal life, and this life is in his Son.
He that has the Son has life, and he that has not the Son has not life. Can
we desire that God should more clearly teach us, that all the fullness of the
New Man is in Christ, and all that spiritual nature and Life whereby we live to
God in Holiness, and that they are fixed in him so inseparably, that we can not
have them except we be joined to him, and have himself abiding in us? Take heed
lest through Prejudice and Hardness of Heart, you be guilty of making God a
Liar in not believing this eminent Record that God has given to us of his Son.

Secondly, God is pleased to illustrate this mysterious manner of our
Sanctification by such variety of Similitudes and Resemblances, as may put us
out of doubt that it is Truth, and such a Truth as we are highly concerned to
know and believe. I shall endeavor to contract the chief of these
Resemblances, and the force of them, briefly into one Sentence, leaving it to
those that are Spiritual to enlarge their Meditations upon them. We receive
from Christ a new holy frame and nature, whereby we are enabled for an holy
Practice by union and fellowship with him, in like manner as Christ lived in
our nature by the Father, Joh. 6.57. As we receive original sin and death
propagated to us from the first Adam, Romans 5.12, 14, 16, 17. as the natural
Body receives Sense, Motion, Nourishment from the Head, Col. 2.19. As the
Branch receives its Sap, Juiceand fructifying Virtue from the Vine, Jo. 15.4,
5 As the Wife brings forth Fruit by Virtue of her Conjugal Union with her
Husband, Romans 7.4. As Stones become an holy Temple by being built upon the
Foundation and joined with the chief cornerstone, 1 Pet. 2. 4, 5, 6. As we
receive the nourishing Virtue of Bread by eating it, and of Wine by drinking
it, Joh. 6.51, 55, 57. Which last Resemblance is used to seal to us our
Communion with Christ in the Lords Supper. Hear are seven Resemblances
instanced whereof some do illustrate the Mystery spoken of more fully than
others, all of them do some way intimate that our New Life and Holy Nature is
first in Christ, and then in us, by a true proper Union and Fellowship with
him. If any should urge that the Similitude of Adam and his Seed, and of
married Couples, do make rather for a Relative, than a real Union betwixt
Christ and us; let them consider that all Nations are really made of one Blood
which was first in Adam, Acts 17.26. and that the first Woman was made out of
the Body of Adam, and was really bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh, and
by this first married Couple the mystical Union of Christ and his Church is
eminently resembled, Genesis 2.22, 23, 24. with Ephesians. 5.30, 31, 32. And yet it
supposes both these Resemblances in the nearness and fullness of it, because
those that are joined to the Lord are not only one Flesh, but one Spirit with
him.

Thirdly, The end of Christ's Incarnation, Death and Resurrection, was to
prepare and form an holy Nature and Frame for us in himself, to be communicated
to us by Union and Fellowship with him; and not to enable us to produce in our
selves the first Original of such an holy Nature by our own Endeavors. By his
Incarnation there was a Man created in a new holy Frame, after the Holiness of
the first Adam's Frame had been marred and abolished by the first
Transgression, and this new Frame was far more excellent than ever the first
Adam's was; because Man was really joined to God by a close inseparable Union
of the divine and humane Nature in one Person of Christ, so that these Natures
had Communion each with other in their Actings, and Christ was able to act in
his humane Nature, by Power proper to the divine Nature, wherein he was one God
with the Father. The words that he spoke while he was upon Earth, he spoke not
of himself by any mere humane Power, but the Father that dwelt in him, he did
the Works, Joh. 14.10. Why was it that Christ set up the fallen Nature of Man
in such a wonderful Frame of Holiness, in bringing of it to live and act by
Communion with God living and acting in it? One great End was, that he might
communicate this excellent Frame to his Seed that should be born of him and in
him, by his Spirit as the last Adam, the quickening Spirit, that as we have born
the Image of the earthly Man, so we might also bear the Image of the heavenly,
1 Cor. 15.45, 49. in Holiness here, and in Glory hereafter. Thus he was born
Emanuel God with us, because the fullness of the Godhead with all Holiness did
first dwell in him bodily, even in his humane Nature, that we might be filled
up with that fullness in him, Mat. 1.23. Col. 2.9, 10. Thus he came down from
Heaven as living Bread, that as he lives by the Father, so those that eat him
may live by him, Joh. 6.51, 56. By the same Life of God in them that was first
in him.

By his Death he freed himself from the Guilt of our Sins imputed to him, and
from all that innocent Weakness of his humane Nature, which he has born for a
time for our sakes. And by freeing himself he prepared a Freedom for us from
our whole natural Condition, which is both weak as his was, and also polluted
with our Guilt and sinful Corruption. Thus the corrupt natural State, which is
called in Scripture the Old Man, was crucified together with Christ, that the
Body of Sin might be destroyed. And it is destroyed in us, not by any Wounds
that we our selves can give to it, but by our partaking of that Freedom from it
and Death unto it, that is already wrought out for us by the Death of Christ,
as is signified by our Baptism, wherein we are buried with Christ by the
Application of his Death to us, Romans 6.2, 3, 4, 10, 11. God sending his own Son
in the likeness of sinful Flesh for Sin, (or by a Sacrifice for Sin, as in the
Margent) condemned Sin in the Flesh, that the Righteousness of the Law might be
fulfilled in us that walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit, Romans 8.3,
4. Observe here that though Christ died that we might be justified by the
Righteousness of God and of Faith, not by our own Righteousness which is of the
Law, Romans 10.4, 5, 6. Phil. 3.9. yet he died also that the Righteousness of the
Law might be fulfilled in us, and that by walking after his Spirit, as those
that are in Christ, Romans ibid. He is resembled in his Death to a Corn of Wheat
dying in the Earth, that it may propagate its own nature, by bringing forth
much Fruit, Joh. 12.24. to the Passover that was slain, that a Feast might be
kept upon it, and to Bread broken, that it may be Nourishment to those that eat
it, 1 Cor. 5.7, 8. and 11.24. To the Rock smitten that Water may gush out of it
for us to drink, 1 Cor. 10.4. He died that he might make of Jew and Gentile one
New Man in himself, Ephesians. 2.15. and that he might see his seed, i. e. such as
derive their holy Nature from him, Is. 53.10. Let these Scriptures be well
observed, and they will sufficiently evidence that Christ died, not that we
might be able to form an holy Nature in our selves, but that we might receive
one ready prepared and formed in Christ for us by Union and Fellowship with him.

By his Resurrection he took Possession of Spiritual life for us, as now fully
procured for us, and made to be our Right and Property, by the Merit of his
Death, and therefore we are said to be quickened together with Christ, even when
we were dead in sins, and to be raised up together, yea, and to be made to sit
together in heavenly Places in Christ Jesus as our Head, while we continue upon
Earth in our own Persons, Ephesians. 2.5, 6. His Resurrection was our Resurrection
to the Life of Holiness, as Adam's Fall was our Fall into spiritual Death; and
we are not our selves the first makers and formers of our new holy Nature any
more than of our Original Corruption, but both are formed ready for us to
partake of them. And by Union with Christ we partake of that spiritual Life
that he took Possession of for us at his Resurrection, and thereby we are
enabled to bring forth the Fruits of it, as the Scripture shows by the
Similitude of a Marriage Union, Romans 7.4. We are married to him that is risen
from the Dead, that we might bring forth Fruit unto God. Baptism signifies the
Application of Christ's Resurrection to us as well as his Death; we are raised
up with him in it to newness of Life, as well as buried with him, and we are
taught thereby that because he died unto sin once and lives unto God, we
should likewise reckon our selves to be dead indeed unto Sin, and alive unto
God through Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 6.4, 5, 10, 11.

Fourthly, Our Sanctification is by the Holy Ghost, by whom we live and walk
holily, Romans 15.16. Gal. 5.25. Now the Holy Ghost first rested on Christ in all
fullness that he might be communicated from him to us, as was signified to John
the Baptist by the Similitude of the descending of a Dove from the opened
Heavens resting on Christ at his Baptism, Joh. 1.32.33. And when he sanctifies
us he baptizeth us into Christ, and joyneth us to Christ by himself, as the
great Bond of Union, 1 Cor. 12.13. So that according to the Scriptural Phrase,
it is all one to have Christ himself and to have the Spirit of Christ in us,
Romans 8.9, 10. He glorifieth Christ, for he receives those things that are
Christ's, and shows them to us, Joh. 16.14, 15. He gives us an experimental
Knowledge of those spiritual Blessings which he himself prepared for us by the
Incarnation, Death and Resurrection of Christ.

Fifthly, The effectual Causes of those four principal Endowments, which in the
foregoing Direction were asserted, necessary to furnish us for the immediate
Practice of Holiness, are comprehended in the fullness of Christ, and treasured
up for us in him; and the Endowment themselves, together with their Causes, are
attained richly by Union and Fellowship with Christ. If we be joined to Christ,
our Hearts will be no longer left under the Power of sinful Inclinations, or in
a mere indifferency of Inclination to good or evil, but they will be powerfully
endued, with a Power, Bent, and Propensity to the Practice of Holiness by the
Spirit of Christ dwelling in us, and inclining us to mind spiritual things, and
to lust against the Flesh, Romans 8.1, 4, 5. Gal. 5.17. And we have in Christ a
full Reconciliation with God, and an Advancement into higher Favor with him
than the first Adam had in the State of Innocence, because the Righteousness
that Christ wrought out for us by his Obedience unto Death, is imputed to us
for our Justification, which is called the Righteousness of God, because it was
wrought by one that is God as well as Man, and therefore it is of an infinite
value to satisfy the Justice of God for all our sins, and to procure his
Pardon and highest Favor for us, 2 Cor. 5.21. Romans 1.19. And that we may be
persuaded of this Reconciliation, we receive the Spirit of Adoption through
Christ, whereby we cry, Abba, Father, Romans 8.15. Hereby also we are persuaded
of our future Enjoyment, of the everlasting heavenly Happiness, and of
sufficient Strength both to will and to perform our Duty acceptably, until we
come to that Enjoyment. For the Spirit of Adoption teaches us to conclude,
that if we be the Children of God, then we are heirs of God, joynt-heirs with
Christ. And that the Law of the Spirit of Life that is in Christ Jesus, makes
us free from the Law of Sin and Death, and that nothing shall be against us,
nothing shall separate us from the Love of God in Christ, but in all opposition
and difficulties that we meet with, we shall be at last more than conquerours
through him that loved us, Romans 8.17.23, 35, 37, 39. Furthermore this
comfortable Persuasion of our Justification and future Happiness, and all
saving Privileges cannot tend to licentiousness, as it is given only in this
way of Union with Christ, because it is joined inseparably with the Gift of
Sanctification, by the Spirit of Christ, so that we cannot have Justication, or
any saving Privilege in Christ, except we receive Christ himself, and his
Holiness, as well as any other Benefit, as the Scripture testifies that there
is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the
flesh but after the Spirit, Romans 8.1.

Sixthly, Whereas it may be doubted, whether the Saints that lived before the
coming of Christ in the Flesh, could possibly be one Flesh with him, and
receive a new Nature by Union and Fellowship with him, as prepared for them in
his fullness, we are to know that the same Christ that took our Flesh was before
Abraham, Joh. 8.58. and was foreordained before the Foundation of the World,
to be sacrificed as a Lamb without blemish, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity by his precious Blood, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19, 20. and he had the same
Spirit, then which filled his humane Nature with all its fullness afterward,
and raised it from the dead, and he gave that Spirit then to the Church, 1 Pet.
1.11. and 3.18, 19. Now this Spirit was able and effectual to unite those
Saints to that Flesh which Christ was to take to himself in the fullness of
Time, because he was the same in both, and to give out to them, that Grace with
which Christ would afterward fill his Flesh for their Salvation, as well as
ours. Therefore David accounted Christ's Flesh to be his, and spoke of Christ's
Death and Resurrection, as his own before hand, as fully as any of us can do
since their Accomplishment. Psalm. 16.9, 10, 11. My flesh also shall rest in
hope, for thou will not leave my soul in hell, neither will thou suffer thine
holy one to see corruption, thou will show me the path of life. Yea, and Saints
before David's time, did all eat of the same spiritual meat, and drink of the
same spiritual drink, even of the same Christ as we do, and therefore were
Partakers of the same Privilege of Union and Fellowship with Christ, 1 Cor.
10.3, 4. And when Christ was manifested in the Flesh, in the fullness of time,
all things in Heaven and on Earth, all the Saints departed whose Spirits were
then made perfect in Heaven, as well as the Saints that then were, or should
afterward be on Earth, were gathered together in one, and comprehended in
Christ, as their Head, Ephesians. 1.10. And he was the chief cornerstone in whom
the building of the whole Church upon the foundation of the Prophets before,
and the Apostles after his coming being fitly fromed together, grows unto an
holy temple in the Lord, Ephesians. 2.20, 21. Jesus Christ is the same yesterday,
and to day, and for ever, Heb. 13.8. His incarnation, death, and resurrection
were the cause of all the Holiness that ever was, or shall be given to Man,
from the Fall of Adam to the end of the World, and that by the mighty Power of
his Spirit whereby all Saints that ever were or shall be, are joined together,
to be Members of that one mystical Body whereof he is the Head.

DIRECT. IV.
The Means or Instruments whereby the Spirit of God accomplisheth our Union
with Christ, and our Fellowship with him in all Holiness, are, the Gospel
whereby Christ enters into our Hearts to work Faith in us, and Faith whereby
we actually receive Christ himself, with all his Fullness, into our Hearts. And
this Faith is a Grace of the Spirit, whereby we heartily believe the Gospel,
and also believe on Christ, as he is revealed and freely promised to us
therein, for all his Salvation.

EXPLICATION.
THAT which I asserted in the foregoing Direction, concerning the necessity of
our being in Christ, and having Christ in us, by a mystical Union, to enable us
for an holy Practice, might put us to a stand in our Endeavors for Holiness,
because we cannot imagine how we should be able to raise our selves above our
natural Sphere, to his glorious Union and Fellowship, until God be pleased to
make known to us, by supernatural revelation, the means whereby his Spirit
makes us Partakers of so high a Privilege. But God is pleased to help us at a
stand to go on forward, by revealing two Means or Instruments, whereby his
Spirit accomplisheth the mystical Union and Fellowship betwixt Christ and us,
and whereby rational Creatures are capable of attaining thereunto, by his
Spirit working in them. One of these Means is the Gospel of the Grace of God,
wherein God does make known to us the unsearchable Riches of Christ, and Christ
in us the hope of Glory, Ephesians. 3.8. Col. 1.27. and does also invite us, and
command us to believe on Christ for his Salvation, and does encourage us by a
free Promise of that Salvation, to all that believe on him, Acts 16.31. Romans
10.9, 11. This is God's own Instrument of Conveyance, wherein he sends Christ
to us, to bless us with his Salvation, Acts 3.26. It is the ministration of the
spirit, and of righteousness, 2 Cor. 3.6, 8, 9. Faith comes by the hearing of
it, and therefore it is a great instrument whereby we are begotten in Christ,
and Christ is formed in us, Romans 10.16, 17. 1 Cor. 4.15. Gal. 4.19. There is no
need for us to say in our Hearts, Who shall ascend into Heaven, to bring Christ
down from above? Or, who shall descend into the deep, to bring up Christ from
the dead, that we may be united, and have fellowship with him in his death and
resurrection? For the word is nigh to us, the Gospel, the word of Faith, in
which Christ himself graciously condescendeth to be nigh to us; so that we may
come at him there, without going any further, if we desire to be joined to him,
Romans 10.6, 7, 8.

The other of these means is Faith, that is wrought in us by the Gospel: This
is our Instrument of Reception, whereby the Union betwixt Christ and us is
accomplished on our part by our actual receiving of Christ himself, with all
his Fullness, into our Hearts; which is the principal Subject of the present
Explanation.

The Faith which Philosophers commonly treat of, is only an Habit of the
Understanding, whereby we assent to a Testimony upon the Authority of the
Testifier: Accordingly some would have Faith in Christ to be no more than a
believing the truth of things in Religion, upon the authority of Christ
testifying them; but the Apostle shows, that the Faith whereby we are
justified, is Faith in Christ's Blood, Romans 3.24, 25. not only in his Authority
as a Testifier. And though a mere assent to a Testimony were sufficient Faith for
knowledge of things, which the Philosophers aimed at, yet we are to consider,
that the Design of Saving Faith is not only to know the Truth of Christ and his
Salvation, testified and promised in the Gospel, but also to apprehend and
receive Christ and his Salvation, as given by and with the Promise. Therefore
Saving Faith must necessarily contain two Acts, believing the Truth of the
Gospel, and believing on Christ, as promised freely to us in the Gospel for all
Salvation. By the one it receives the Means wherein Christ is conveyed to us;
by the other it receives Christ himself and his Salvation in the Means. As
it is one act to receive the Breast or Cup wherein Milk or Wine are conveyed,
and another act to suck the Milk in the Breast, and to drink the Wine in the
Cup, and both these acts must be performed heartily with an unfeigned love to
the Truth, and a desire of Christ and his Salvation above all things; this is
our spiritual Appetite, which is necessary for our eating and drinking Christ,
the Food of Life, as a natural Appetite is for Bodily Nourishment. Our
assenting unto, or believing the Gospel, must not be forced by mere conviction
of the Truth, such as wicked Men and Devils may be brought to, when they had
rather it were false: Neither must our believing on Christ be only constrained
for fear of Damnation without any hearty Love and Desire toward the enjoyment
of him, but we must receive the Love of the Truth, by relishing the Goodness
and Excellency of it; and we must account all things loss for the excellency of
the knowledge of Christ Jesus our Lord, and count them but dung, that we may
win Christ, and be found in him, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10. Phil. 3.8, 9. esteeming Christ
to be all our Salvation and Happiness, Col. 3.11. in whom all fullness does
dwell, Col. 1.19. And this Love must be to every part of Christ's Salvation, to
Holiness as well as Forgiveness of Sins. We must desire earnestly, that God
would create in us a clean Heart, and right Spirit, as well as hide his face
from our sins, Psalm. 51.9, 10. not like many, that care for nothing in Christ
but only Deliverance from Hell. Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after
righteousness, for they shall be filled, Mat. 5.6. The former of these Acts
does not immediately unite us to Christ, because it is terminated only on the
means of Conveyance, the Gospel, yet it is a saving Act, if it be rightly
performed, because it enclineth and disposes the Soul to the latter Act,
whereby Christ himself is immediately received into the Heart. He that
believes the Gospel with hearty love and liking, as the most Excellent Truth,
will certainly with the like heartiness believe on Christ for his Salvation.
They that know the name of the Lord, will certainly put their trust in him,
Psalm. 9.10. Therefore in Scripture, Saving-Faith is sometimes described by the
former of these Acts, as if it were a mere believing the Gospel; sometimes by
the latter, as a believing on Christ or in Christ. Romans 10.9. If thou believe
in thine heart that God raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved. 11, the
Scripture says, Whosoever believes on him shall not be ashamed. 1 John 5.1.
Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ is born of God. 13, These things
have I written unto you that believe on the name of the Son of God, that you
may know ye have eternal life, and that ye may believe on the name of the Son
of God.

For the better understanding of the nature of Faith, let it be further
observed, that the Second and Principal of it, believing on Christ, includes
believing on God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, because they are one and the
same infinite God, and they all concur in our Salvation by Christ, as the only
Mediator betwixt God and us, in whom all the promises of God are yea and amen,
2 Cor. 1.20. By him, as mediator, we believe on God that raised him from the
dead, and gave him glory, that our faith and hope might be in God, 1 Pet. 1.21.
And it is the same thing with trusting on God or on the Lord, which is so
highly commended in the whole Scripture, especially in the Old Testament, as
may easily appear by considering that it has the same Causes, Effects,
Objects, Adjuncts, Opposites, and all the same Circumstances, excepting only
that it had a respect to Christ, as promised before his Coming, and now it
respects him, as already come in the Flesh. Believing in the Lord, and
trusting on his Salvation, are equivalent terms, that explain one another,
Psalm. 78.22. I confess, that trusting on things seen or known by the mere Light
of Reason, as on our own Wisdom, Power, Riches, on Princes, or any Arm of
Flesh, may not so properly be called believing on them, but trusting on a
Savior, as discovered by a Testimony is properly believing on him. It is also
the same thing that is expressed by the terms of resting, relying, leaning,
staying our selves on the Lord, because it is the Ground of that Expectation
that is the proper Act of Hope, though our Believing and Trusting be for the
present as well as future benefit of this Salvation. The reason why it is so
commonly expressed in the Scriptures of the New Testament, by the terms of
believing on Christ, might be probably because when that part of Scripture was
written, there was cause in a special manner to urge believing the Testimony
that was then newly revealed by the Gospel.

Having thus explained the nature of Faith, I come now to assert its proper Use
and Office in our Salvation, That it is the Means and Instrument whereby we
receive Christ, and all his Fullness, actually into our Hearts. This excellent
Use and Office of Faith is encountered by a multitude of Errors; men naturally
esteem, that it is too small and slight a thing to produce so great effects; as
Naaman thought washing in Jordan too small a matter for the cure of his
Leprosy. They contemn the true means of entering in at the straight Gate,
because they seem too easy for such purpose, and thereby they make the
Entrance not only difficult, but impossible to themselves. Some will allow,
that Faith is the sole Condition of our Justification, and the Instrument to
receive it, according to the Doctrine maintained formerly by the Protestants
against the Papists, but they account, that it is not sufficient or effectual
to Sanctification, but that it rather tends to Licentiousness, if it be not
joined with some other means, that may be powerful and effectual to procure an
holy Practice. They commend this great Doctrine of Protestants as a comfortable
Cordial for Persons upon their Deathbeds, or in Agonies under Terrors of
Conscience, but they account, that it is not good for ordinary Food, and that
it is Wisdom in Ministers to preach it seldom and sparingly, and not without
some Antidote or Corrective to prevent the licentiousness to which it tends.
Their common Antidote or Corrective is, That Sanctification is necessary to
Salvation as well as Justification, and that though we be justified by Faith,
yet we are sanctified by our own performance of the Law; and so they set up
Salvation by works, and make the Grace of Justification to be of none effect,
and not at all comfortable. If it had indeed such a malignant influence upon
Practice, it could not be owned as a Doctrine proceeding from the most holy
God, and all the Comfort that it affords must needs be ungrounded and
deceitful. This Consequence is well understood by some late Refiners of the
Protestant Religion, and therefore they have thought fit to new-model this
Doctrine, and to make Saving-Faith to be only a Condition to procure a Right
and Title to our Justification by the Righteousness of Christ, which must be
performed before we can lay any good claim to the enjoyment of it, and before
we have any right to the actual receiving of it; and this they call an
accepting of, or receiving Christ. And that they may the better secure the
practice of Holiness by their Conditional Faith, they will not have trusting on
God or Christ for Salvation to be accounted the principal Saving-act of it,
because as it seems to them, many loose wicked People trust on God and Christ
for their Salvation, as much as others, and are by their Confidence hardened
the more in their Wickedness: But they had rather it should be Obedience to all
Christ's Laws, at least, in their Resolution, or a Consent that Christ should
be their Lord, accepting of his terms of Salvation, and a resignation of
themselves to his Government in all things. It is a sign that the
Scripture-form of Teaching is grown into disesteem with our great Masters of
Reason, when trusting in the Lord, so much commended in Scripture, is accounted
a mean and ordinary thing. They endeavor to affright us from owning Faith to
be an Instrument of Justification, by telling us, that thereby we that use the
Instrument are made our own principal Justifiers to the dishonor of God;
though it might be easily answered, that we are made thereby only the principal
receivers of our own Justification from God, the Giver of it, to whom all the
Glory does belong.

All these Errors will fall, if it can be proved, that such a Faith as I have
described is an Instrument whereby we actually receive Christ himself into our
Hearts, and Holiness of Heart and Life, as well as Justification by Union and
Fellowship with him. For the proof of it, I shall offer the following Arguments.

First, By Faith we have the actual enjoyment and possession of Christ himself,
and not only of Remission of Sins, but of Life, and so of Holiness: Christ
dwells in our hearts by faith, Ephesians. 3.17. We live to God, and yet not we,
but Christ lives in us by the Faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2.19. 20. He that
believes on the Son of God, has the Son and everlasting life that is in him,
1 John 5.12, 13. John 3.36. He that hears Christ's word, and believes on him
that sent Christ, has everlasting life, and is passed from death unto life.
These Texts express clearly such a Faith as I have described; therefore the
efficiency or operation of Faith, in order to the enjoyment of Christ and his
Fullness, cannot be the procurement of a bare Right or Title to this Enjoyment,
but rather it must be an entrance into it, and taking possession of it. We have
our acc^ss and entrance by faith into that Grace of Christ wherein we stand,
Romans 5.2.

Secondly, The Scripture plainly ascribes this effect to Faith, that by it we
receive Christ, put him on, are rooted and grounded in him, and also that we
receive the Spirit, remission of sins, and an inheritance among them which are
sanctified, John 1.2. Gal. 3.26, 27. Col. 2.6, 7. Gal. 3.14. Acts 26.18. And
the Scripture illustrateth this Receiving by the Similitude of Eating and
Drinking; He that believes on Christ, drinks the living water of his spirit,
John 7.37, 38, 39. Christ is the bread of life, his flesh is meat indeed, and
his blood drink indeed; and the way to eat and drink it, is to believe in
Christ, and by so doing we dwell in Christ, and Christ in us, and have
everlasting Life, John 6.35, 47, 48, 54, 55, 56. How can it be taught more
clearly, that we receive Christ himself properly into our Souls by Faith, as we
do receive Food into our Bodies by eating and drinking, and that Christ is as
truly united to us thereby as our Food when we eat or drink it? So that Faith
cannot be a Condition to procure a mere Right or Title to Christ, no more than
Eating or Drinking procures a mere Right or Title to our Food, but it is
rather an Instrument to receive it, as the Mouth that eats and drinks the
Food.

Thirdly, Christ with all his Salvation is freely given by the Grace of God, to
all that believe on him; for we are saved by Grace through Faith, and that not
of our selves, it is the Gist of God, Ephesians. 2.8, 9. We are justified freely by
his Grace, through Faith in his blood, Romans 8.24. The Holy Ghost, who is the
Bond of Union betwixt Christ and us, is a Gift, Acts 2.38. Now that which is a
Gift of Grace must not be at all earned, purchased, or procured by any Work or
Works performed as a Condition to get a right Title to it; and therefore Faith
it self must not be accounted such a Condition. If it be by Grace, it is no
more of Works, otherwise Grace is no more Grace, Romans 11.1. The Condition of a
free Gift is only take and have; and in this sense we will readily acknowledge
Faith to be a Condition, allowing a Liberty in Terms where we agree in the
thing; but if you give a Peppercorn to purchase a Title to it, then you spoil
the freeness of the Gift. The free Offer of Christ to you is sufficient to
conferr upon you a Right, yea, to make it your Duty to receive Christ and his
Salvation as yours; and because we receive Christ by Faith as a free Gift,
therefore we may account Faith to be the Instrument, and as it were the Hand
whereby we receive him.

Fourthly, It has been already proved, that all spiritual Life and Holiness is
treasured up in the Fullness of Christ, and communicated to us by Union with
him; therefore the accomplishing of Union with Christ is the first work of
Saving Grace in our Hearts, and Faith itself, being an holy Grace, and part of
spiritual Life, cannot be in us before the beginning of it, but rather it is
given to us, and wrought in the very working of the Union. And the way wherein
it conduces to the Union, cannot be by procuring a mere Title to Christ as a
Condition, because then it should be performed before the uniting Work
begins; but rather by being an Instrument, whereby we may actively receive
and embrace Christ, who is already come into the Soul to take possession of it
his own Habitation.

True Saving-Faith, such as I have described, has in its nature and manner of
Operation a peculiar aptitude or fitness to receive Christ and his Salvation,
and to unite our Souls unto him, and to furnish the Soul with a new holy
Nature, and to bring forth an holy Practice by Union and Fellowship with him.
God has fitted natural Instruments for their Office, as the Hands, Feet, etc.
so that we may know by their nature and natural manner of operation, for what
use they are designed. In like manner we may know, that Faith is an Instrument
formed on purpose for our Union with Christ, and Sanctification, if we consider
what a peculiar fitness it has for the Work. The discovery of this is of great
use for the understanding of the mysterious manner of our receiving and
practicing all Holiness by Union and Fellowship with Christ. By this precions
Grace of Faith, and to make you as it were to see with your Eyes, that it is
such an Instrument as I have asserted it to be, I shall present it to your view
in three particulars.

1st. The Grace of Faith is as well fitted for the Souls receiving of Christ
and Union with him, as any Instrument of the Body is for receiving and closing
with things needful for it. By the very act of hearty trusting or believing on
Christ for all Salvation and Happiness, the Soul heaveth and puts away from
itself every thing that keeps it at a distance from Christ, as all confidence
in our own Strength, Endeavors, Works, Privileges, or in any Worldly
Pleasures, Profits, Honors, or in any humane Helps and Succors for our
Happiness and Salvation. Because such Confidences are inconsistent with our
Confidence in Christ for all Salvation, Paul by his Confidence in Christ was
taken off from all Considence in the Flesh; he suffered the loss of glorying in
his Privileges, legal Righteousness, and counted all other Enjoyments in
matters of the World or of Religion, to be but Dung, that he might win Christ,
and be found in him, Phil. 3.3, 6, 7, 8, 9. the voice of Faith is, Ashur shall
not save us, neither will we ride upon Horses, neither will we say any more to
the work of our hands, ye are our God; for in thee the Fatherless find mercy,
Hos. 14.3. We have no might against this great company of our spiritual
Enemies; neither know we what to do, but our eyes are upon thee, 2 Chronicles.
20.12. I might multiply places of Scripture, to show what a self emptying Grace
Faith is, and how it casts other Considences out of the Soul, by getting
above them to Christ, as the only Happiness and Salvation. The same act of
trusting or believing on Christ, or on God, is the very manner of our Souls
coming to Christ, Joh. 6.35. drawing near to the Lord, Psalm. 73.28. fleeing
unto the Lord to hide us, Psalm. 143.9. making our resuge in the shadow of his
wings, Psalm. 57.1. staying our selves and our minds upon the Lord, Isa. 50.10.
and 26.3. laying hold of eternal life, 1 Timothy 6.12. lifting up our selves to
the Lord, Psalm. 51.1, 2. rolling our way, and casting our burden upon the Lord,
Psalm. 37.5. and 55.22. and of our eating and drinking Christ, as has already
appeared. Let us consider, that Christ and his Salvation cannot be seen, or
handled, or attained to by any bodily motion, but are revealed and promised to
us in the Word. Now let any invent if they can, any way for the Soul to
exercise any motion or activeness, in receiving of this unseen promised
Salvation, besides believing the Word, and trusting on Christ for the Benefit
promised. If Christ were to be earned by Works, or any other kind of
Conditional Faith than this, yet a Faith must be instrumental to receive him.
Some think Love as sit to be the uniting Grace, but I have showed, that Love to
Christ's Salvation is an Ingredient into Faith: And though Love be an Appetite
unto Union, yet we have no other likely way to fill this Appetite, while we are
in this World, besides trust on Christ for all his Benefits as he is promised
in the Gospel.

2dly, There is in this Saving-Faith a natural Tendency, to furnish the Soul
with an holy Frame and Nature, and all Endowments necessary thereunto, out of
the Fullness of Christ. An hearty affectionate trussing on Christ for all his
Salvation, as freely promised to us, has naturally enough to work in our Souls
a rational bent, and inclination to, and ability for the Practice of all
Holiness, because it comprehends in it a trusting that through Christ we are
dead to sin and alive to God, and that our old man is crucified, Romans 6.2, 6,
4. and that we live by the spirit, Gal. 5.25. and that we have forgiveness of
sin; and that God is our God, Psalm. 31.14. and that we have in the Lord
righteousness and strength, whereby we are able to do all things, Isa. 45.24.
Phil. 4.13. and that we shall be glortensly happy in the anjoyment of Christ to
all eternity, Phil. 3.20, 21. When the Saints in Scripture speak so highly of
such glorious spiritual Privileges as I have here named, they acquaint us with
the familiar fence and language of their Faith, trusting on God and Christ, and
they give us but an Explication of the nature and contents of it; and they
speak of nothing more than what they receive out of the Fullness of Christ. And
how can we otherwise judge, but that those that have an hearty Love to Christ,
and can upon a good ground think and speak such high things concerning
themselves, must needs be heartily disposed and mightily strengthened for the
practice of Holiness?

3dly, Because Faith has such a natural tendency to dispose and strengthen the
Soul for the practice of Holiness, we have cause to judge it a meet Instrument
to accomplish every part of that Practice in an acceptable manner. Those that
with a due affection believe steadfastly on Christ, for the free Gift of all his
Salvation, may find by experience, that they are carried forth by that Faith,
according to the measure of its Strength or Weakness, to love God heartily,
because God has loved them; first, 1 John 4.19. to praise him, to pray unto
him in the name of Christ, Ephesians. 5.26. John 16.26, 27. to be patient with
cheerfulness under all afflictions, giving thanks to the Father, that has
called them to his heavenly inheritance, Col. 1.11, 12. to love all the
children of God, out of love to their heavenly Father, 1 John 5.1. to walk as
Christ walked, 1 John 2.6. and to give themselves up to live to Christ in all
things, as constrained by his love in dying for them, 2 Cor. 5.14. We have a
Cloud of Witnesses concerning the excellent works that were produced by Faith,
Heb. 11. And though trusting on Christ be accounted such a slight and
contemptible thing, yet I know no Work of Obedience which it is not able to
produce. And note the excellent manner of working by Faith; by it we live and
act in all good Works, as People in Christ, as raised above our selves and our
natural state, by partaking of him and his Salvation; and we do all in his
name, and on his account. This is the Practice of that mysterious manner of
living to God in Holiness, which is peculiar to the Christian Religion, wherein
we live, and yet not we, but Christ lives in us, Gal. 2.20. And who can
imagine any other way but this for such a Practice, while Christ and his
Salvation is known to us only by the Gospel?

The explanation that I have made of the Nature and Office of true Faith, and
of its Aptitude for its Office, is sufficient to evidence, that it is a most
holy Faith, as it is called Jude 20. and that such a trusting on Christ, as I
have described, in its own nature, cannot have any tendency to Licentiousness,
but only to Holiness; and that it rooteth and groundeth us in Holiness more
than the mere accepting of any terms of Salvation, and consenting to have
Christ for our Lord can do, and is more powerful to secure an holy Practice,
than any of those Resolutions of Obedience or resignating Acts, that some would
have to be the great conditions of our salvation, which are indeed no better
than hypocritical Acts, if they be not produced by this Faith. There is indeed
a counterfeit dead Faith, such as wicked men may have, and if that tend to
Licentiousness, let not true Faith be blamed, but rather mark the Description
of it which I have given, that you may not be deceived with a counterfeit Faith
instead of it. I shall add something concerning the efficient cause of this
excellent Grace, and of our Union with Christ by it, whereby it may appear,
that it is not so slight and easy a way of Salvation as some may imagine. The
Author and Finisher of our Faith and of our Union and Fellowship with Christ by
Faith, is no less than the infinite Spirit of God, and God and Christ himself
by the Spirit; for, by one Spirit we are all baptized into one body of Christ,
and are all made to drink into one Spirit, 1 Cor, 12.12, 13. God grants us,
according to the Riches of his glory, to be strengthened with all might by his
spirit, in the inner man, that Christ may dwell in our hearts by Faith, Ephesians.
3.16, 17. If we do but consider the great effect of Faith, that by it we are
raised to live above our natural condition, by Christ and his Spirit living in
us, we cannot rationally conceive that it should be within the power of Nature
to do any thing that advances us so high. If God had done no more for us in
our Sanctification, than to restore us to our first natural Holiness, yet this
could not have been done without putting forth his own Almighty Power to
quicken those that are dead in Sin. How much more is this Almighty Power
needful to advance us to this wonderful new kind of Frame, wherein we live and
act above all the power of Nature, by an higher Principle of Life than was
given to Adam in Innocence, even by Christ and his Spirit, living and acting in
us? The natural man brings forth his Offspring according to his Image, by
that natural Power of multiplying, with which God blessed him at his first
Creation; but the second Adam brings forth his Offspring new born, according
to his Image only by the Spirit, Joh. 3.5. As many as receive him, even those
that believe on his name, are born not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh,
nor of the will of man, but of God, Joh. 1.12, 13. Christ took his own Humane
Nature into personal Union with himself, in the Womb of the Virgin Mary by the
Holy Ghost coming upon her, and the power of the Highest overshadowing her, the
same Power whereby the World was created, Luke 1.35. So He takes us into
mystical Union and Fellowship with himself, by no less than an Infinite
Creating Power, For we are the workmanship of God, created in Christ Jesus unto
good works, Ephesians. 2.10. And if any man be in Christ he is a new creature, 2
Cor. 5.17.

For the accomplishing of this great Work of our new Creation in Christ, the
Spirit of God does first work upon our Hearts by and with the Gospel, to
produce in us the Grace of Faith; for, if the Gospel should come to us in Word
only, and not in Power and in the Holy Ghost, Paul might labor to plant, and
Apollos to water without any success, because we cannot receive the things of
the Spirit of God; yea, we shall account them foolishness, until the Spirit of
God enable us to discern them; 1 Thessalonians. 1.5. 1 Cor. 3.6. and 2.14. We shall
never come to Christ by any teaching of Man, except we also hear and learn of
the Father, and be drawn to Christ by his spirit, John 6.44, 45. And when
Saving Faith is wrought in us, the same Spirit gives us fast hold of Christ by
it: As he opens the Mouth of Faith to receive Christ, so he fills it with
Christ, or else the acting of Faith would be like a Dream of one that thinks
that he eats and drinks, and when he awaketh he finds himself empty. The
same Spirit of God did both give that Faith whereby Miracles were wrought, and
did work also the Miracles by it: So also the same Spirit of Christ does work
Saving Faith in us, and does answer the aim and end of that Faith, by giving us
Union and Fellowship with Christ by it: So that none of the Glory of this Work
belongs to Faith, but only to Christ and his Spirit. And indeed, Faith is of
such an humble self-denying nature, that it ascribes nothing that it receives
to itself, but all to the Grace of God; and therefore God saves us by Faith,
that all the Glory may be ascribed to his Free Grace, Romans 4.16. If Adam had
Strength enough in Innocence to perform the Duty of Faith as well as we, yet it
will not follow, that he had Strength enough to raise himself above his natural
state, into Union with Christ, because Faith does not unite us to Christ by its
own Virtue, but by the Power of the Spirit working by it and with it. Thus we
are first passive and then active in this great work of mystical Union; we are
first apprehended of Christ, and then we apprehend Christ; Christ enters
first into the Soul, to join himself to it, by giving it the Spirit of Faith,
and so the Soul receives Christ and his Spirit by their own Power. As the Sun
first enlighteneth our Eyes, and then we can see it by its own light. We may
note further, to the Glory of the Grace of God, that this Union is fully
accomplished by Christ, giving the Spirit of Faith to us, even before we act
that Faith in the reception of him, because by this Grace or Spirit of Faith
the Soul is inclined and disposed to an active receiving of Christ. And, no
doubt, Christ is thus united to many Infants, who have the Spirit of Faith, and
yet cannot act Faith, because they are not come to the use of their
Understandings; but those of riper years, that are joined passively to Christ
by the Spirit of Faith, will also join themselves with him actively, by the Act
of Faith, and until they act this Faith, they cannot know or enjoy their Union
with Christ, and the Comfort of it, or make use of it in acting any other
Duties of Holiness acceptably in this Life.

DIRECT. V.
We cannot attain to the Practice of true Holiness by any of our Endeavors
while we continue in our natural State, and are not Partakers of a new State by
Union and Fellowship with Christ through Faith.

EXPLICATION.
IT it evident all have not that precious Faith, whereby Christ dwells in our
Hearts, yea, the number of those that have it is small, comparatively to the
whole World that lies in Wickedness, 1 John 5.19, 20. and many of those that
at length attain unto it, do continue without it for some considerable time.
Ephesians. 2.12. And though some may have the Spirit of Faith given to them from
their Mothers Womb, (as John the Baptist, Luke, 1.15.44.) yet even in them
there is a natural Being by Generation before there can be a Spiritual Being by
Regeneration, 1 Cor. 15.46. Hence arises the Consideration of two States or
Conditions of the Children of Men, in Matters that appertain to God and
Godliness, the one of which is vastly different from the other. Those that have
the Happiness of a New Birth and Creation in Christ by Faith are thereby placed
in a very excellent State, consisting in the Enjoyment of the Righteousness of
Christ, for their Justification, and of the Spirit of Christ to live by, in
Holiness here, and Glory for ever, as has already appeared. Those that are not
in Christ by Faith, cannot be in a better State than that which they received
together with their Nature from the first Adam, by being once born and created
in him, or than they can attain to by the Power of that Nature, with any such
help as God is pleased to afford to it. This latter I call a Natural State,
because it consists in such things as we have either received by natural
Generation, or can attain to by natural Power through Divine Assistance; as the
Scripture calls Man in this State the natural Man. 1. Cor. 2.14. The former I
call a new State, because we enter into it by a new Birth in Christ, and I may
call it a Spiritual State, according to the Scripture, because it received from
Christ the quickening Spirit, and the Natural and Spiritual Man are opposed, 1
Cor. 2.14, 15. though some call both these States Spiritual, because the
everlasting Weal or Woe of the Soul or Spirit of Man, is chiefly concerned in
them. It is a common Error of those that are in a corrupt natural State that
they seek to reform their Lives according to the Law, without any thoughts that
their State must be changed before their Lives can be changed from Sin to
Righteousness. The Heathen that knew nothing of a new State in Christ, were
urged by their own Consciences to practice several Duties of the Law according
to the Knowledge they had by the Light of Nature, Romans 2.14, 15. Israel
according to the Flesh, had a Zeal of God and Godliness, and endeavored to
practice the written Law, at least in external Performances, while they were
Enemies to the Faith of Christ, and Paul attainted so far, that he was
blameless in these external Performances of the Righteousness of the Law, while
he persecuted the Church of Christ, Phil. 3.6. Some are so near the Kingdom of
God, while they continue in a Natural State, that they are convinced of the
Spirituality of the Law, that it binds us principally to love God with all
our Heart, Soul, Mind and Strength, and to love our Neighbor as our selves,
and to perform universal Obedience to God, in all our inward Thoughts and
Affections, as well as in all our outward Actions, and to do all the Duties
that we owe to our Neighbor, out of this hearty Love, Mark 12, 33, 34 And they
struggle and labor with great earnestness to subdue their inward Thoughts and
Affections, to the Law of God, and to abstain not only from some Sins, but from
all known Sins, and to perform every known Duty of the Law, with their whole
Heart and Soul as they think, and are so active and intent in their devout
Practice, that they overwork their natural Strength, and so servent in their
Zeal, that they are ready even to kill their Bodies with Fastings and other
Macerations, that they may kill their sinful Lusts. They are strongly
convinced, that Holiness is absolutely necessary to Salvation, and deeply
affected with the Terrors of Damnation, and yet they were never so much
enlightened in the Mystery of the Gospel, as to know that a new State in Christ
is necessary to a new Life, therefore they labor in vain to reform their
natural State instead of getting above it in Christ. And some of these, when
they have misspent many Years in striving against the Stream of their Lusts
without any Success, do at last fall miserably into Despair of ever attaining
to Holiness, and turn to wallowing in the mire of their Lusts, or are fearfully
swallowed up with horror of Conscience. There are several false Opinions
whereby such ignorant Zealots encourage themselves in their fruitless
Endeavors. Some of them judge that they are able to practice Holiness, because
they are not compelled to sin, and may abstain from it if they will. To this
they add, That Christ by the Merit of his Death, has restored that Freedom of
Will to good, which was lost by the Fall, and has set Nature upon its Legs
again, and that if they endeavor to do what lies in them, Christ will do the
rest, by assisting them with the Supplies of his saving Grace; so they trust
upon the Grace of Christ to help them in their Endeavors. They plead further,
That it would not consist with the Justice of God to punish them for Sin, if
they could not avoid it, and that it would be in vain for the Ministers of the
Gospel to preach to them, and exhort them to any saving Duty, if they cannot
perform it. They produce Examples of I leathens, and of such as had the name of
Christians without any acquaintance with the Faith that I have described, who
have attained to a great Excellency in religious Words and Works.

My Work at present is, to deliver those ignorant Zealots from their fruitless
tormenting Labors, by bringing them to despair of the Attainment of Holiness
in a natural State, that they may seek it only in a new State by Faith in
Christ, where they may certainly find it without such tormenting Labor and
Anxiety of Spirit. For this end I shall confirm the Truth asserted in the
Direction, and fortify it against the forementioned false Opinions by the
ensuing Considerations.

First, The Foundation of this Assertion is firmly laid in the Directions
already explained, and confirmed by many Places of Scripture: For if all
Endowments necessary to enable us for an holy Practice, be to be had only in a
State of Union and Fellowship with Christ by Faith, and Faith it self not by
the natural Power of Free Will, but by the Power of Christ, coming into the
Soul by his Spirit, to unite us with himself, who seeeth not that the
Attainment of true Holiness by any of our most vigorous Endeavors, while we
continue in our natural Condition, is altogether hopeless? I need add no more
were it not to show more sully what abundance of Light the Scripture affords
to guide us aright in this part of our way, that those that wander out of it,
by following any false light of their own, or others corrupted Judgments, may
find themselves the more inexcusable.

Secondly, It is evident that we cannot practice true Holiness, while we
continue in a natural State, because we must be born again of water and of the
Spirit, or else we cannot enter into the kingdom of God, Joh. 3.3, 5. And we
are created in Christ Jesus unto good Works, which God has before ordained
that we should walk in them. If we could love God and our Neighbor as the Law
requires, without a New Birth and Creation, we might live without them; for
Christ has said, This do and thou shall live, Luke 10.28. Now a New Birth and
Creation, is more than a mere reforming and repairing our Natural State. If we
were put into a certain State and Condition by the first Birth and Greation,
much more by the second: For the first produces the Substance of a Man as well
as a State, the second has nothing to produce, but a new State of the same
Person. And note that we were first created and born in Adam the Natural Man,
but our New Birth and Creation is in Christ the Spiritual Man; and if any man
be in Christ, he is in a new-state, far different from the State of Adam before
the Fall, he is wholly a new creature, as it is written, old things are past
away, behold all things are become new, 2. Cor. 5.17.

Thirdly, It is positively asserted by the Apostle Paul, that those that are in
the flesh cannot please God, Romans 8.8. Many are too overly and negligent in
considering the Sense of this Gospel-phrase what it is to be in the flesh. They
understand no more by it than to be sinful, or to be addicted inordinately to
please the sensitive Appetite. They should consider that the Apostle speaks
here of being in the flesh, as the cause of Sinfulness, as in the next verse,
he speaks of being in the Spirit, as the cause of Holiness, and whatever
cause it be, it must needs be distinct from its Effect. Sin is a Property of
the Flesh, or something that dwells in the Flesh, Romans 7.18. and therefore it
is not the Flesh it self. The Flesh is that which lusts against the Spirit,
Gal. 5.17. and therefore it is not merely sinful Lust. The true Interpretation,
is, That by flesh is meant the Nature of Man, as it is corrupted by the Fall of
Adam, and propagated from him to us, in that corrupt State by natural
Generation, and to be in the flesh, is to be in a Natural State, as to be in
the Spirit, is to be in a new State, by the Spirit of Christ dwelling in us,
Romans 8.9. The corrupt Nature is called Flesh, because it is received by carnal
Generation, and the new Nature is called Spirit, because it is received by
Spiritual Regeneration. That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that
which is born of the spirit is spirit, John 3.6. So the Apostle, if he be
rightly understood, has said enough to make us despair utterly of attaining to
true Holiness, while we continue in a Natural Sat.

Fourthly, The Apostle testifies that those that have been taught as the truth
is in Jesus, have learned to avoid the former sinful Conversation, by putting
off the old man, which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts, and by
putting on the new-man, which after God is created in righteousness and true
holiness, Ephesians. 4.21.22, 24. Putting on the Old Man, and putting on the
New-man is the same thing with not being in the Flesh, but in the Spirit, in
the foregoing Testimony, that is putting off our natural State, and putting on
a new State, by Union and Fellowship with Christ. The Apostle himself shows
that by the new Man, is meant that excellent State where Christ is all and in
all, Col. 3.11. Therefore by the old Man, must needs be meant the natural State
of Man, wherein he is without the saving Enjoyment of Christ, which is called
Old, because of the new State to which Believers are brought by their
Regeneration in Christ. This is a manner of Expression peculiar to the Gospel
as well as the former, and as slightly considered by those that think that the
Apostles Meaning is only that they should put off Sinfulness, and put on
Holiness in their Conversation, and so they think to become new Men, by turning
a new Leaf in their Practice, and leading a new Life. Let them learn here, that
the old and new Man, are two contrary States containing in them, not only Sin
and Holiness, but all other things that dispose and incline us to the Practice
of them; and that the old Man must be put off, as orucified with Christ, before
we can be freed from the Practice of Sin, Romans 6.6, 7. And therefore we cannot
lead a new Life, until we have first gotten a new State by Faith in Christ. Let
me add here, that the meaning of the Apostle is the same, Romans 13.12, 13, 14.
where he directs us to put on the Lord Jesus Christ, as the means whereby we
may cast off the deeds of darkness, and walk honestly as in the day time, not
fulfilling the lusts of the flesh.

Fifthly, Our natural State has several Properties that wholly disable us for
the Practice of Holiness, and inslaves us to the Practice of Sin, while we
continue in it. Here I shall show, that the old Man, the Flesh, or natural
State, is not only Sin as some would have it, but it contains in it several
things which I shall name, that make it to be sinful, besides several other
things that make it miserable. I have showed that in Christ we have all
Endowments necessary to frame us for Godliness; so in our fleshly State we have
all things contrary to that holy Frame. One thing belonging to our natural
State, is the Guilt of Sin, even of Adam's first Sin, and of the sinful
Depravation of our Nature, and of all our own actual Transgressions, and
therefore we are by nature the children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. Under the Curse
of God, the Benefit of Remission of our Sins and Freedom from Condemnation, is
not given to us in the Flesh, or in a natural State, but only in Christ, Romans
8.1. Ephesians. 1.7. And can we imagine that a Man should be able to prevail
against Sin, while God is against him and curses him? Another Property
inseparable from the former, is an evil Conscience, which denounces the Wrath
of God against us for Sin, and inclines us to abhor him as our Enemy, rather
than to love him, as has been showed; or if it be a blind Conscience, it
hardens us the more in our Sins. A third Property is an evil Inclination
tending only to Sin, which therefore is called Sin that dwells in us, and the
law of sin in our members that powerfully subdueth and captivateth us to the
service of sin, Rom, 7.20, 23. It has a fixed Propensity to lust against the
Law without any Deliberation, and therefore its Lustings are not to be
prevented by any Diligence or Watchfulness. The Mind of the Flesh is enmity
against the Law of God, or it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed
can it be. How vain then is it to plead that they can do good if they will,
when their Minds and Will it self is enslaved to Sin. A fourth Property is
Subjection to the power of the Devil, who is the God of this world, that has
blinded the minds of all that believe not, 2. Cor. 4.4. And will certainly
conquer all that he sighteth with upon his own Dunghill, that is in a natural
State. And from all these Properties we may well conclude that it has the
Property never to be good, to be stark dead in Sin, Ephesians. 2.1. according to
the Sentence denounced against the first Sin of Mankind in Adam, in the day
that thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die, Genesis 2.17. For you can no more
bring it to Holiness by any the most vehement Motives and Endeavors, then you
can bring a dead Carcass to Life, by chafing and rubbing it. You can stir up no
strength or fortifying Grace in the natural Man by such Motives and Endeavors,
because there is no Strength in him to be stirred up, Romans 5.6. Though you do all
that lies in you to the utmost, while you are in this Flesh you can do nothing
but sin; for there is no good lying in you, as the Apostle Paul shows by his
own Experience, I know that in me, (that is in my flesh) dwells no good
thing, Romans 7.18.

Sixthly, We have no good ground to trust on Christ, to help us to will or to
do that which is acceptable to him, while we continue in our natural State, or
to imagine that Freedom of Will to Holiness, is restored to us by the Merit of
his Death. For as it has been already showed, Christ aimed at an higher end in
his Incarnation, Death and Resurrection, than the restoring the Decay and Ruins
of our natural State: He aimed to advance us to a new State more excellent than
the State of Nature ever was, by Union and Fellowship with himself, that we
might live to God, not by the Power of a natural Free Will, but by the Power of
his Spirit living and acting in us. So we may conclude, that our natural State
is irrecoverable and desperate, because Christ the only Savior did not aim at
the Recovery of it. It is neither holy nor happy, but subject to Sin, and to
all Miseries as long as it remains. Even those that are in a new State in
Christ, and do serve the Law of God with their Mind, do yet with their Flesh
serve the Law of Sin, Romans 7.25. As far as it remains in them it lusts
against the spirit, Gal. 5.17. And it remains dead because of sin, even when
the spirit is life to them because of righteousness, Romans 8.10. And must be
wholly abolished by Death, before we can be perfected in that Holiness and
Happiness that is by Faith in Christ. After God had promised Salvation by
Christ, the Seed of the Woman, he placed Cherubims and a flaming Sword to keep
Man out of Paradise, thereby teaching. him that his first State was lost
without Hope, and that the Happiness intended for him was wholly new. Our old
natural Man was not revived and reformed by the Death of Christ, but crucified
together with him, and therefore to be abolished and destroyed out of us by
virtue of his Death, Romans 6.6. It is like the part of a Garment infected with
the Plague of Leprosy, which was to be rent off as incurable, that the Garment
might be clean, Levit. 13.56. If Christ be not in us we are reprobates, 2 Cor.
13.5. i. e. we are in a State which God has rejected from partaking of his
Salvation, so that we are not to expect any Assistance from God to make us holy
in it, but rather to deliver us from it.

Seventhly, This does not at all discharge those that are in a natural State
from Obligation to Holiness of Life, nor render them excusable for their Sins,
at the Tribunal of God's Justice. For God has made man upright, but they
sought many inventions, Eccles. 7.29. Observe well the Words of this Text, and
you will find that all they who have sought out many Inventions rather than
upright walking, are comprehended in Man that was at first made upright. And
Man in the Text signifies all Mankind, the first Adam was all Mankind, as
Jacob and Esau were two nations in the womb of Rebecca, Genesis 25.23. God made us
all in our first Parents according to his own Image, able and inclined to do
his Law, and in that pure Nature our Obligation to Obedience was first laid
upon us, and the first wilful Transgression, whereby our first Parents bereaved
themselves of the Image of God, and brought upon themselves the Sentence of
Death, was our Sin as well as theirs, For in one man Adam, all have sinned, and
so death is passed upon all, Romans 5.12. Because all Mankind were in Adam's
Loins, when the first Sin was committed, even as Levi may be said to have paid
Tithes in Abraham before he was born, because when his Father Abraham paid
Tithes to Melchizedeck, he was yet in his Loins, Heb. 7.9, 10. That Promise of
God that he will not charge the Iniquities of Parents upon their Children, is a
Promise belonging to the New Covenant confirmed in the Blood of Christ, and it
is Yea and Amen to us only in Christ, in whom we have another Nature than that
which our Parents conveyed to us, so that we cannot justly claim the Benefit of
it in our old natural State, Jer. 31.29, 30, 31. and 2 Cor. 1.20. Those that
account their Impotency a sufficient Plea to excuse them or others, show that
they were never truly humbled for that great wilful Transgression of all
Mankind in the Loins of Adam. Inability to pay Debts excuses not a Debtor that
has lavished away his Estate; neither does Drunkenness excuse the mad Actings
of a Drunkard, but rather aggravates his Sin. And our Impotency consists not
in a mere want of an executive Power, but in the want of a willing Mind to
practice true Holiness and Righteousness. Naturally we love it not, we like it
not, but lust against it, Gal. 5.17. and hate the light, John 3.20. If Men in a
natural State had an hearty Love and Likeing to true Holiness, and a desire and
serious endeavor to practice it out of hearty Love, and yet failed in the
event, then they might under some pretense plead for their Excuse (as some do
for them) that they were compelled to sin by an inevitable Fate. But none have
just cause to plead any such thing for their excuse, because none endeavor to
practice true Holiness out of hearty Love to it, until the good Work be begun
in their Souls, and when God has begun he will perfect it, Phil. 1.6. And will
in the mean time accept their ready Mind, though they fall short in
Performance, 2 Cor. 8.12. How abominable then and filthy is man that drinks
up iniquity us water, Job. 15.16. That cannot practice Holiness, because he
will not. This is their just Condemnation, that they love darkness rather
light. They deserve to be Partakers with the Devils in Torments, as they
partake with them in evil Lusts, and their Inability to do Good will no more
excuse them, than it excuses the Divils.

Eighthly, Neither will this Assertion make it a vain thing to preach the
Gospel to natural People, and to exhort them to true Repentance and Faith in
Christ, for their Conversion and Salvation. For the Design of our Preaching is
not to bring them to Holiness in their natural State, but to raise them above
it, and to present them perfect in Christ, in the Performance of those Duties,
Col. 1.28. And though they cannot perform those Duties by their natural
Strength, yet the Gospel is made effectual for their Conversion and Salvation,
by the Power of the Holy Ghost, which accompanies the Preaching of it, to
quicken those that are dead in Sin, and to create them a new in Christ, by
giving to them Repentance unto Life, and a lively Faith in Christ. The Gospel
comes to the Elect of God, not only in word, but also in power and in the Holy
Ghost, and in such Assurance, that they receive it with joy of the Holy Ghost,
1 Thessalonians. 5.6. The Gospel is the ministration of the Spirit that gives life, 2.
Cor. 3.6, 8. It is mighty through God, 2 Cor. 10.4. It depends not at all
upon the Power of our Free Will to make it successful for our Conversion; but
it conveyeth into the Soul that Life and Power, whereby they receive and obey
it, Christ can make those that are dead in Sin to hear his voice and live, John
5.25. Therefore he can speak to them by his Gospel, and Command them to repent
and believe with good Success, as well as he could say to dead Carcases,
Tabitha cumi, Mark 5.41. Lazarus come forth, John 11, 43, 44. And to the Sick
of the Palsy, Arise, take up thy bed and go unto thine house, Matthew. 9.6.

Ninthly, There is no reason that the Examples of Heathen Philosophers or any
Jews or Christians by outward Profession, that have lived without the saving
Knowledge of God in Christ, should move us by their wise Sayings and renouned
Seize in the Practice of Devotion and Morality, to recede from this Truth
that has been so fully confirmed out of the holy Scriptures. Have we not cause
to judge that the Apostle Paul, while he was a zealous Pharisee, and at least
some few of the great. Multitude of the Jews in his time, that were zealous of
the Law, and had the Instruction of the holy Scriptures, attained as near to
that true Holiness, as the Heathen Philosophers, or any others in their natural
State. Yet Paul, after he was enlightened with the saving Knowledge of Christ,
judged himself the chief of sinners, in his highest former Seize, though
in the Judgment of others he was blameless touching the Righteousness which is
in the Law, and he found it necessary to begin to live to God in a new way by
Faith in Christ, and to suffer the loss of all his former Seize, and to
count them but dung that he might win Christ, 1 Timothy 1.15. Phil. 3.6, 7, 8.

And none of the great Multitude of Jews that followed after the Law of
Righteousness did ever attain unto it, while they sought it not by faith in
Christ, Romans 9.31, 32. What Performances are greater in outward Appearance than
for a Man to give all his goods to the poor, and to give his body to be burnt,
and yet the Scripture allows us to suppose that this may be done without true
Charity, and therefore without any true holiness of the heart and life, 1 Cor.
13.3. Men in a natural State may have strong Convictions of the infinite Power,
Wisdom, Justice and Goodness of God, and of the Judgment to come, and the
everlasting Happiness of the Godly, and Torments of the Wicked; and these
Convictions may stir them up, not only to make an high Profession, and to utter
rare Sayings concerning God and Godliness, but also to labor with great
earnestness to avoid all known Sin, to subdue their Lusts, to perform universal
Obedience to God in all known Duties, and to serve him with their Lives and
Estates to the utmost, and to extort out of their Hearts some kind of Love to
God and Godliness, that if possible they may escape the terrible Torments of
Hell, and procure everlasting Happiness by their Endeavors. Yet all their Love
to God is but forced and feigned, they have no hearty liking to God or his
Service, they account him an hard Master, and his Commandments grievous, and
they repine and fret inwardly at the burden of them, and were it not for fear
of everlasting Fire, they would little regard the Enjoyment of God in Heaven,
and they would be glad if they might have the Liberty to enjoy their Lusts
without danger of Damnation. The highest Preferment of those that are born only
after the Flesh in Abraham's Family, is but to be children of the bondwoman,
Gal. 4.23. And though they do more in God's Service than many of his dear
Children, yet God accepts not their Service, because their best Performances
are slavish without any Child-like Affections toward God, and no better than
glistering Sins, and yet these natural Men are not at all beholden to the
goodness of their Natures for these counterfeit Shows of Holiness, or for the
least abstaining from the grossest Sin. If God should leave Men fully to their
own natural Corruptions and to the Power of Satan (as they deserve) all Show of
Religion and Morality would be quickly banished out of the World, and we should
grow past feeling in Wickedness, and like to the Canibals, who are as good by
Nature as our selves. But God that can restrain the Burning of the siery
Furnace without quenching it, and the flowing of Water without changing its
nature, does also restrain the working of natural Corruption without mortifying
it, and through the greatness of his Wisdom and Power, he makes his enemies to
yield feigned obedience to him, Psalm. 66.3. And to do many things good for the
matter of them, though they can do nothing in a right holy manner. He has
appointed several means to restrain our Corruptions as the Law, Terrors of
Conscience, terrible Judgments, and Rewards in this Life, Magistrates, humane
Laws, Labor for Necessaries, Food and Raiment, and those Gospel means, that
are effectual for Sanctification, serve also for Restraint of Sin. God has
gracious ends in this Restraint of Sin, that his Church may be preserved, and
his Gospel preached in the World, and that these Natural Men may be in a better
Capacity to receive the Instruction of the Gospel, and that such of them that
are chosen, may in due time be converted, and that those of them that are not
truly converted may enjoy more of the Goodness of God here, and suffer the less
Torments hereafter. As vile and wicked as the World is, we have cause to praise
and to magnify the Free Goodness of God that it is no worse.

DIRECT. VI.
Those that endeavor to perform sincere Obedience to all the Commands of
Christ, as the Condition whereby they are to procure for themselves a Right and
Title to Salvation, and a good ground to trust on him for the same, do seek
their Salvation by the Works of the Law, and not by the Faith of Christ, as he
is revealed in the Gospel: And they shall never be able to perform sincerely
any true holy Obedience by all such Endeavors.

EXPLICATION.
FOR the understanding the terms of this Direction, note here, that I take
Salvation as comprehending Justification, as well as other Saving Benefits, and
sincere Obedience, as comprehending holy Resolutions, as well as the fulfilling
of them. The worst of Men that have any Sense of Religion are prone to imagine,
that the sure way to establish the Practice of Holiness and Righteousness, is
to make it the Procuring Condition of the Favor of God, and all Happiness.
This may appear by the various false Religions that have prevailed most in the
World. In this way the Heathens were brought to their best Devotion and
Morality, by the knowledge of the Judgment of God, that those that violate
several of the great Duties to God and their Neighbor are worthy of Death; and
by their Consciences accusing or excusing them, according to the Practice of
them, Romans 1.32. and 2.14, 15. Our Consciences are informed by the common Light
of Natural Reason, that it is just with God to require us to perform these
Duties, that we may avoid his Wrath, and enjoy his Favor; and we cannot find
any better way than this, to obtain Happiness, or to stir up our selves to Duty
without divine Revelation. Yet because our own Consciences testify, that we
often fail in the performance of these Duties, we are inclined by Self-Love to
persuade our selves, that our sincere Endeavors to do the best we can, shall
be sufficient to procure the Favor of God, and Pardon for all our Failings.
Thus we see, that the Persuasion of Salvation, by the Condition of sincere
Obedience, has its original from our corrupt Natural Reason, and is part of
the Wisdom of this World; it is none of the Wisdom of God in a Mystery, that
hidden Wisdom, God ordained before the World to our Glory; it is none of those
things of the Spirit of God, which have not entered into the Heart of Man, and
which the Natural man cannot receive, for they are foolishness to him, neither
can he know them, for they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.6, 7, 9, 14. It
is none of the foolishness of Preaching, whereby it pleased God to save them
that believe, 1 Cor. 10.21. And though we have a better way revealed to us in
the Gospel, for the enjoyment of the Favor of God, and Holiness it self, and
all Salvation, without any procuring Condition of Works, by the free Gift of
God's Grace through Faith in Christ; yet it is very difficult to persuade men
out of a way that they are naturally addicted to, and that has forestalled and
captivated their Judgments, and is bred in their Bone, and therefore cannot
easily be gotten out of the Flesh. Most of those that live under the hearing
and profession of the Gospel, are not brought to hate Sin as Sin, and to love
Godliness for itself, though they be convinced of the necessity of it to
Salvation, and therefore they cannot love it heartily. The only means that they
can take to bring themselves to it, is to stir up themselves to an Hypocritical
Practice in their old natural way, that they may avoid Hell and get Heaven by
their Works. And their own Consciences witness, that the Zeal and Love that
they have for God and Godliness, their Self-denial, Sorrow for Sin, strictness
of Life, are in a manner forced and extorted from them by slavish Fear and
mercenary Hope; so that they are afraid, that if they should trust on Christ,
for Salvation by Free Grace without Works, the fire of their Zeal and Devotion
would be quickly extinguished, and they should grow careless in Religion, and
let loose the Reins to their Lusts, and bring certain Damnation upon
themselves. This moves them to account them the only Boanerges and powerful
Preachers that preach little or none of the Doctrine of Free Grace, but rather
spend their Pains in rebuking Sin and urging People to get Christ and his
Salvation by their Works, and thundering Hell and Damnation against Sinners. It
has been farther observed, that some that have contended much for Salvation by
Free Grace, without any Condition of Works, have fallen into Antinomian
Opinions and licentious Practices. The Experience of these things has much
prevailed with some learned and zealous men of late amongst our selves, to
recede from the Doctrine of Justification by Faith, without Works, formerly
professed unanimously, and strongly defended by the Protestants, against the
Papists, as a principal Article of true Religion. They have persuaded
themselves, that such a way of Justification is ineffectual, yea, destructive
to Sanctification, and that the practice of sincere Obedience cannot be
established against Antinomian Dotages and prevailing Lusts, except it be made
the necessary Condition of our Justification, and so of our eternal Salvation.
Therefore they conclude, that God has certainly made sincere Obedience to be
the Condition of our Salvation. And they have endeavored to new-model the
Protestant Doctrine, and to interpret the holy Scriptures in a way agreeable
and subservient to this their only sure Foundation of Holiness.

But I hope to show, that this their imagined sure Foundation of Holiness was
never laid by the Holy God, but that it is rather an Error in the Foundation,
pernicious to the true Faith, and to Holiness of Life. I account it an Error
especially to be abhorred and detested, because we are so prone to be seduced
by it, and because it is an Error whereby Satan transforming himself into an
Angel of Light, and a Patron of Holiness, has greatly withstood the Gospel in
the Apostles times, and stirred up men to persecute it, out of zeal for the
Law, and has since prevailed to set up and maintain Popery, whereby the
Mystery of Iniquity works apace in these days, to corrupt the Purity of the
Gospel amongst the Protestants, and to heal the deadly wound that was given to
Popery by preaching the Doctrine of Justification by Faith without Works.

One thing asserted in the Direction against this fundamental Error, is, that
it is a way of Salvation by the Works of the Law, and not by the Faith of
Christ, as revealed in the Gospel. Though the maintainers of it would have us
believe, that it is the only way of the Gospel, that so we may not doubt of its
Power and Efficacy for our Justification, Sanctification, and our whole
Salvation. Their Reasons are, because the Law, as a Covenant of Works,
requires us to do all its Commandments perfectly, that we may live; whereas
they plead only for a milder Condition of sincere doing, that we may live. And
they plead not for doing of Duties, as obliged thereunto by the Authority of
the Law given of God by Moses, but only in obedience to the Commands of Christ
in the Gospel. Neither do they plead for Salvation by sincere Obedience without
Christ, but only by Christ, and through his Merit and Righteousness; and they
acknowledge, that both Salvation itself and sincere Obedience, are given to
them freely, by the Grace of Christ, so that all is of Grace. They acknowledge
also, that their Salvation is by Faith, because sincere Obedience is wrought in
them by believing the Gospel, and is included in he nature of that Faith, which
is the entire Condition of our Salvation: And some call it the resignating Act
of Faith; but all these Reasons are but a fallacious Vizard upon a legal way of
Salvation, to make it look like pure Gospel; as I shall evince by the following
particulars.

First, All that seek Salvation by the sincere performance of good Works, as
the procuring Condition, are condemned by the Apostle Paul, for seeking
Righteousness by the Works of the Law, and not by Faith, Romans 9.32. and for
seeking to be justified by the Law, and falling from the Grace of Christ, Gal.
5.4. This one Assertion, if it can be proved, is enough to pluck off the
fallacious Vizard from the Condition of sincere Obedience, and to make men
abhor it as a damning legal Doctrine, that bereaveth its Followers of all
Salvation by Christ. And the proof of it is not difficult to persons that
warily consider a point of so great moment for their Salvation. The Jews and
Judaizing Christians, against whom the Apostle chiefly disputes in this whole
Controversy, did not profess any hope of being justified by perfect Obedience,
according to the rigor of the Law, but only by such Obedience as they
accounted to be sincere, and not hypocritical. And we have no cause to doubt,
but that the Judaizing Galatians had learned by the Gospel to distinguish
sincere Obedience from Hypocrisy. The Jewish Religion bound all that professed
it, to acknowledge themselves to be Sinners, as appears by their anniversary
Humiliation at the day of atonement, and several other Rights of the Law, and
many clear Testimonies in the Oracles of God, that were committed to them,
Psalm. 143.2. Prove. 10.9. Eccles. 7.20. Yet they knew they were bound to turn to
the Lord with all their Hearts, in Sincerity and Uprightness, and that God
would accept of sincere Obedience, for which Cause they might better put it for
the Condition of the Law, than we can of the Gospel, Psalm. 51.6, 10. Deuteronomy. 6.5.
Deuteronomy. 30.10. So that if the Apostle had disputed against those that held only
perfect Obedience to be the Condition of Justification, he had contended with
his own shadow. And they might as readily judge sincere obedience to be the
condition of Justification under the Law, as we can judge it to be the
condition under the Gospel. Neither does the Apostle condemn them merely for
accounting sincere Obedience to the Law as given by Moses, to be the Condition
of their Justification, but more generally for seeking Salvation by their own
Works. And he alleges against them, That Abrabam, who lived before the Law of
Moses, was not justified by any of his Works, though he did perform sincere
Obedience; and that David, who lived under the Law of Moses, was not justified
by his Works, though he performed sincere Obedience, and was as much bound to
obey the Law given by Moses, as we are to obey any Commands of Christ in the
Gospel, Romans 4.2, 3, 5, 6. Neither does he condemn them for seeking their
Salvation only by Works, without respecting at all the Grace and Salvation that
is by Christ; for the Judaizing Galatians were yet Professors of the Grace and
Salvation of Christ, though they thought Obedience to the Law a necessary
Condition for the partaking of it, as also many other Judaising Believers did:
And doubtless they accounted themselves obliged thereunto, not only by the
Authority of Moses, but of Christ also, whom they owned as their Lord and
Savior. And we may be sure it was no damning Error, to account Moses's Law
obliging at that time, for many thousands of the Jews, that were sound
Believers, held the Ceremonies of Moses to be in force at that time, and Paul
was tender toward them in it, Acts 20.20, 21. Acts 15.5. And other Jews sought
Justification not only by their sincere Works, but also by trusting on the
Promise made to Abraham, and on their Priesthood and Sacrifices, which were
Types of Christ. And the most legal Pharisees would thank God for their good
Works, as proceeding from his Grace, Luke 18.11. And they could as well
acknowledge their Salvation to be by Faith, as the Assertors of Salvation by
sincere Obedience can in these days; for they accounted, that their sincere
Obedience was wrought in them by believing the Word of God, which contained
Gospel as well as legal Doctrine in it; and therefore that it must be included
in the nature of Faith, if Faith were taken for the Condition of their whole
Salvation. Let the Assertors of the Condition of sincere Obedience learn from
hence, that they are building again that Judaism which the Apostle Paul
destroyed, whereby the Jews stumbled at Christ, Romans 9.32. And the Galatians
were in danger of falling from Christ and Grace, Gal. 5.2, 4. And let them
beware of falling under that Curse which he has denounced on this very
occasion, against any Man or Angel, that shall preach any other Gospel than
that which he has preached, Gal. 1.8, 9.

Secondly, The difference betwixt the Law and Gospel does not at all consist in
this, that the one requires perfect doing, the other only sincere doing; but
in this, that the one requires doing, the other no doing, but believing for
Life and Salvation. Their terms are different not only in degree, but in their
whole nature.

The Apostle Paul opposes the Believing required in the Gospel to all doing
for Life, as the Condition proper to the Law, Gal. 3.12. The Law is not of
Faith, but the man that does them shall live in them. Romans 4.5. To him that
works not, but believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his Faith is
counted for righteousness. If we seek Salvation by never so easy and mild a
Condition of Works, we do thereby bring our selves under the Terms of the Law,
and do become Debtors to fulfill the whole Law in perfection, though we
intended to engage our selves only to fulsill it in part, Gal. 5.3. for the Law
is a complete Declaration of the only Terms whereby God will judge all that are
not brought to despair of procuring Salvation by any of their own Works, and to
receive it as a Gift freely given to them by the Grace of God in Christ. So
that all that seek Salvation right or wrong, knowingly or ignorantly, by any
works, less or more, whether invented by their own Superstition, or commanded
of God in the Old or New Testament, shall at last stand or fall, according to
those Terms.

Thirdly, Sincere Obedience cannot be performed to all the Commands of Christ
in the Gospel, except it be also performed to the Moral Law, as given by Moses,
and as obliging us by that authority. Some Assertors of the Condition of
Salvation by sincere Obedience to the Commands of Christ, would fain be free
from the authority of the Law of Moses, because that justifies none, but
thundereth out a Curse against all those that seek Salvation by the Works of
it, Gal. 3.10, 11. But if they were at all justified by sincere Works, their
respect to Moses's Authority would not hinder their Success, for many that were
good Christians accounted themselves bound to obey not only the moral but the
ceremonial Law; and if they had sought Justification by any Works, they would
have sought it by those Acts 20: 20, 21. They knew not of any Justification by
sincere Works, as commanded only in the Gospel; yet if they had erred in any
thing absolutely necessary to Salvation, the Apostles would not have tolerated
their weakness. And whether they will or no, they must seek their Salvation by
the Works of the moral Law, as given by Moses, or else they can never get it by
sincere Obedience to the Commands of Christ, Christ never loved their new
Condition so well, as to abolish the Mosaical Authority of the moral Law, for
the establishment of it; he came not to destroy the Law and the Prophets, but
to fulfill them in the Practice required by them, and has declared, that those
that break one of the least of these Commandments, and teach men so, shall be
called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven: but whosoever shall do and teach
them, the same shall be called great in the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 5.17, 19.
He commands us, to do to men whatsoever we would they should do to us,
because this is the Law and the Prophets; which is sufficient to prove, that He
would have us to account the Law authoritative to oblige us in this matter. He
requires his Disciples to observe and do whatsoever the Scribes and Pharisees
bid them, because they sat in Moses's Seat, Mat. 23.23.

And to come to the point in hand, when Christ had occasion to answer the
Questions of those that were guilty of the same Error that I am now dealing
with, in seeking their Salvation by their own Works, He showed them, that they
must obey the Commands as they were already established by the Mosaical
Authority in the Scripture of the Old Testament. What is written in the Law?
how read thou? This do, and thou shall live, Luke 10.26. If thou will enter
into life, keep the Commandments, which are, Thou shall do no Murder, Thou
shall not commit Adultery, etc.

In like manner the Apostles of Christ urged the performance of moral Duties
upon Believers, by the authority of the Law given by Moses. The Apostle Paul
exhorts to love one another, because He that loves another has fulfilled
the Law, Romans 13.8. and to honor our Father and Mother, which is the first
Commandment with Promise, Ephesians. 6.2. The Apostle John exhorts to love others
as no new, but an old Commandment. The Apostle James exhorts to fulfill the
royal law according to the Scripture, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy
self, and to keep all the Commands of the Law, one as well as another, because
He that said, Do not commit Adultery, said also Do not kill, Jam. 2.8, 10, 11.
Sound Protestants have accounted the denial of the Authority of the moral Law
of Moses to be an Antinomian Error; though our late Prevaricators against
Antinomianism maintain this Error, yet they establish a worse Error of
Justification by their sincere Gospel-works. I think the denomination of the
Antinomians arose from this Error. The Law of Moses had its Authority at first
from Christ, for Christ was the Lord God of Israel, that ordained the Law by
Angels on Mount Sinai, in the hand of Moses a Mediator for the Israelites, who
were then his only Church, and with whom we believing Gentiles are now joined,
as Fellow Members of one and the same Body, Ephesians. 3.6. And though Christ has
since abrogated some of the Commandments then given by Moses, concerning
figurative Ceremonies and judicial Proceedings, yet he has not anulled the
obligative Authority of the moral Law, but has left it in its full force, to
oblige us in moral Duties, that are still to be practiced; as, when some Acts
of any Parliament are repealed, the Authority of the same Parliament remains
inviolable in other Acts that are not repealed. I know they object, that the
Ten Commandments of the Moral Law, the Ministration of Death, written and
engraven on Stones, are also done away by Christ, 2 Cor. 3.7. but this makes
altogether against their Conditional Covenant, for they are the ministration of
Death, and done not as they commanded perfect Obedience, for even Christ
himself commands us to be perfect, Mat. 5.48. but as they were Conditions for
procuring Life and avoiding Death, established by promise of Life to the Doers,
and a Curse to the Breakers of them, Gal. 3.10, 12. The Covenant made with
Israel on Mount Sinai, is abolished by Christ the Mediator of the new Covenant,
Heb. 8.8, 9, 13. And the Ten Commandments bind us not as they were words of
that Covenant, Exodus 34.28. I mean, they bind us not as Conditions of that
Covenant, except we seek to be justified by Works; for the Law, as a Covenant,
does still stand in force enough to curse those that seek Salvation by their
own Works, Gal. 3.10. and if abolished, it is only to those that are in Christ
by Faith, Gal. 2.19, 20. and 15.15. But the Ten Commandments bind us still, as
they were then given to a People that were at that time under the Covenant of
Grace made with Abraham, to show them what Duties are holy, just, and good,
well pleasing to God, and to be a Rule for their Conversation. The result of
all is, that we must still practice moral Duties, as commanded by Moses, but we
must not seek to be justified by our Practice. If we use them as a Rule of
Life, not as Conditions of Justification, they can be no ministration of Death,
or killing Letter unto us; their Perfection indeed makes them to be harder
Terms to procure Life by, but a better Rule to discover all Imperfections, and
to guide us to that Perfection which we should aim at. And it will be our
Wisdom not to part with the Authority of the Decalogue of Moses, until our new
Divines can furnish us with another System of Morality as complete as that, and
as excellently composed and ordered by the Wisdom of God, and more authentic
than that is.

4ly, Those that endeavor to procure Christ's Salvation by their sincere
Obedience to all the Commands of Christ, do act contrary to that way of
Salvation by Christ's Free Grace, and Faith discovered in the Gospel, though
they own it in Profession never so highly. They act contrary to the way of
Salvation by Christ, for they would heal themselves, and save themselves from
the Power and Pollution of Sin, and prooure God's Favor by performing sincere
Obedience before they are come to Christ the only Physician and Savior. They
lay their own Obedience lowest in the Foundation of their Salvation, and build
the Enjoyment of Christ upon it, who ought to be the only Foundation. They
would sanctify themselves before they have a sure Interest in Christ, and
going about to establish their own Righteousness, they do not submit themselves
to the Righteousness of God in Christ, Romans 10.3,4. Sometimes they will call
the Righteousness of Christ, their Legal Righteousness, that they may make room
for an Evangelical Righteousness of their own Works, to be the immediate
procuring cause of their Justification by Christ, whereas the Apostle Paul knew
no Evangelical Righteousness, but that of Christ, which he calls the
righteousness of faith without the law, Romans 3.21, 22. and not of the law,
Phil. 3.9. Thus they make void Christ's Salvation, while they pretend to own
it, and Christ profits them nothing, Christ is become of none effect to them,
while they would be justified by the Law, Gal. 5.2, 4. If we would be saved by
Christ, we must own our selves dead, lost Sinners, that can have no
Righteousness for Justification but his, no life or ability to do Good until
God bring us to Union and Fellowship with him. They do also act contrary to
Salvation by Grace, according to the true meaning of the Gospel. For we are not
saved by Grace, as the supreme Cause of Salvation by the Intervention of Works
given and accepted by Grace as the procuring Cause, in which sense we might be
saved by Grace, though by a Covenant of Works. As a Servant that has Moneys
given him by his Master to purchase an Annuity of his Master at a low rate, may
profess that he had an Annuity, given him freely, and yet that he has
purchased it and may claim it as a due Debt. But we are saved by Grace, as the
immediate and complete cause of our whole Salvation, excluding procurement of
our Salvation by the condition of Works and claiming it by any Law as a due
Debt. The Scripture teaches us, that there is a perfect Opposition and utter
Irreconcileableness betwixt Salvation by Grace and Works: If by grace, then it
is no more of works, otherwise grace is no more grace; but if it be of works,
then it is no more of grace, otherwise work is no more work, Romans 11.6. So also
there is an Opposition betwixt a Reward reckoned of grace, and of debt, Romans
4.4. Betwixt a Promise of Happiness by the law and by grace, Romans 4.13.16. God
is so jealous of the Glory of his Free Grace, that he will not save us by any
Works though of his own working in us, lest any man should boast, Ephesians. 2.9.
He knows that when he heals Men by Physic or maintains them by the
Labor of their hands, they are prone to attribute the Glory, rather to the
means they use, than to his sole Bounty and Goodness.

3dly, They do also act contrary to the way of Salvation by Faith: For, as I
have showed already, the Faith which is required for our Salvation in the
Gospel is to be understood in a sense contrary to doing good Works, as a
Condition to procure our Salvation, that so the true difference between the
Terms of the Law and of the Gospel may be maintained. Believing is opposed to
all working for Salvation, and the Law of Works to the Law of Faith, Romans 4.5,
and 3.27. (...) against Antinomian Errors, by making it the procuring
Condition of their Salvation, when after all this ado, the Remedy is found to
be as bad as the Disease, equally unserviceable and destructive to that great
end for which they designed it, and that it has an Antimonian Effect and
Operation contrary to the Power of Godliness. Much more might be said for the
Confutation of this novel Doctrine, but if this one thing be well proved it may
be sufficient to make the zealous Contrivers of it to be ashamed of their
Crast, and angry with themselves, and sorry that they have taken so much Pains
and stretched their Wits to maintain such an unprofitable unsanctifying
Opinion. It will be sufficient for the Proof of it, if I show, that the
practice of true holiness cannot possibly be attained unto by seeking to be
saved by the Works of the Law, because I have already proved that this Doctrine
of Salvation by sincere Obedience, is according to the Terms of the Law, and
not of the Gospel. And hereby those also may see their Error that ascribe
Justification only to the Gospel, and Sanctification to the Law. Yet because
those Assertors of the Condition of sincere Obedience, will hardly be persuaded
by what has been said, that it is the way of the Law of Works. I shall for
their more full Conviction sufficiently manifest, that it is of no other nature
and operation than any other Doctrine that is proper to the Law, and has no
better Fruit, as I proceed to prove by the following Arguments, that holiness
cannot be attained by seeking it by the Law of Works, that so it may appear not
worthy to be called Gospel Doctrine.

First, The way of Salvation by the Works of the Law is contrary and
destructive to those necessary means of an holy Practice, that have been laid
down in the foregoing Directions, and manifestly proved out of the holy
Scripture. I have made it appear, that a hearty Propensity to an holy Practice
cannot be attained without some good Persuasion of our Reconciliation with God
by Justification, and of our everlasting Happiness, and of sufficient strength
both to will and to perform our Duty; and that these, and all other Endowments
necessary to the same end, are to be had only in Christ, by Union and
Fellowship with him, and that Christ himself with all his Fullness is united to
us by Faith, which is not a Condition to procure a Right or Title to Christ,
but an Instrument whereby we receive him actually into our Hearts by trusting
on him for all Salvation freely promised to us in the Gospel. All these means
of an holy Practice are things wherein our spiritual Life and Happiness does
consist, so that if we have them, everlasting Life is begun in us already, and
because they are the necessary means of an holy Practice, therefore the
beginning of everlasting Life in us, must not be placed after such a Practice,
as the fruit and consequent of it, but must go before it, as the Cause before
the Effect. Now the Terms of the Law are directly contrary to this Method; they
place the Practice of Holiness before Life, and make it to be the means and
procuring cause of Life, as Moses describes them, Romans 10.5. The man that
does these things shall live by them. By these Terms you are first to do the
holy Duties commanded before you have any Interest in the Life promised, or any
Right to lay hold of it as yours by Faith, and you must practice Holiness
without the forementioned means, or else you can never attain to them. Thus the
true means are turned out of their Office, and instead of being Causes, they
are made to be Effects and Fruits of an holy Practice. And it will be in vain
ever to expect such Effects and Fruits; for Holiness it self with all its
Effects must needs be destroyed when its necessary Causes are taken away.
Therefore the Apostle Paul testifies, that the way of salvation by the works
of the law makes faith void, and promises of none effect. And frustrateth the
grace of God, as if Christ died in vain, and makes Christ to be of no profit
and of none effect to us, as those that are fallen from grace, Romans 4.14. Gal.
2.21. and 5.2, 4. Let us now examine the modern Doctrine of Salvation by the
Condition of sincere Obedience to all the Commands of Christ, and we shall
quickly find it to be a chip of the same block, with the former legal way of
Salvation in the same manner destructive to the means of Holiness, and to
Holiness it self. It requires of us the Performance of sincere Obedience
before we have the means necessary to produce it, by making it antecedent to
our Justification and Persuasion of eternal Happiness, and our actual Enjoyment
of Union and Fellowship with Christ and of that new Nature, which is to be had
only in him by Faith. It destroys the nature of that saving Faith whereby we
actually receive and enjoy Christ and all his Benefits, and knocks off our
Hands from laying hold of Christ and his Salvation, by telling us still, as
Christ told the Legalworker after all his Labor, that yet we lack something,
Mat. 10.21. That it is Presumption to take him as our own until we have
performed the Condition for our Right and Title to him, which is another kind
of saving Faith, otherwise called sincere Obedience. By this devised
conditional Faith Satan keeps many poor Souls at a bay poreing upon their own
Hearts for many years together, to find whether they have performed the
Condition, and whether they have as yet any Right to Christ for their
Salvation, not daring to venture to take him as their own. It is a strong
Partition Wall that will certainly hinder the Soul from coming to Christ, until
it be thrown down by the Knowledge of Salvation by grace, without any procuring
Condition of Works. And though it be accounted but as the Payment of a
Peppercorn for a great Estate, yet it is enough to break the ablest Man in the
World, because it debarreth him from laying hold of the only effectual means of
Holiness, whereby that Pepper-corn may be obtained.

2dly, Those that seek Salvation by the Works of the Law, do therein act
according to their natural State, they live and walk according to the Flesh, or
Old Man, not according to the New-state by Christ living in them. I doubt not
but several of them that live under the light of the Gospel are Partakers of a
new State in Christ, and do walk holily in it; but the best in this World have
in them Flesh as well as Spirit, and may act according to either State in some
measure, and in this matter they do act only according to their carnal natural
State. When the believing Galatians were seduced to a Legal way of Salvation,
the Apostle Paul charge it upon them as their Folly, that having begun in the
spirit, they would now be made perfect in the flesh, Gal. 3.3. And he
resembles those that desire to be under the Law, to Abraham's Son born of
Hagar the Bondwoman, to show that such do walk as those that are born after the
flesh not after the spirit, Gal. 4.19, 23, 29. The Law was first given to Adam
in his pure natural State to prescribe Terms for his continuance in Happiness
which he then enjoyed, and ever since that time, the Flesh or Natural-man is
married to the Law, and the Law has Dominion over a Man as long as he lives,
i. e. until he be dead to his fleshly State by the Body of Christ, and married
to him that is risen from the dead, Romans 7.1, 4. We are not at all under the
Law as a Covenant of Works according to our new State in Christ, as the Apostle
testifies, Romans 6.14. Ye are not under the law, but under grace. And Gal.
3.18. If ye be led by the spirit ye are not under the law. From hence we may
firmly conclude that none can possibly attain to true Godliness by acting
according to Legal-terms, because I have fully proved already, that it is
impossible to be godly while we are in the flesh or in a natural State, and
that as far as we act according to it, we can do nothing but sin. The Law is
weak through the Flesh, that it cannot bring us to fulfill its own
Righteousness, Romans 8.3, 4. It is married to a cross piece of flesh that is
Enmity to it, and can never be subject to it, Romans 8.8. It sueth the
Natural-man for an old Debt of Obedience that he is utterly unable to pay,
since the Fall and the Success is according to the Proverb, Sue a beggar and
catch a louse. Neither do those take a better Course that would bring
themselves to Holiness by making sincere Obedience to Christ's Commands, the
Condition of their Salvation. Their way is the same for Substance with that of
the Calatians before mentioned, who would be made perfect in the Flesh, not by
perfect Obedience, but sincere, as has been showed before. Their Eudeavours to
procure an Interest in Christ by their sincere Obedience, do testify against
themselves, that they do not act as People that are in Christ, but rather as
People that judge themselves to be without an Interest in Christ, and to be yet
to seek for it. And sincere Obedience is as impossible to be attained unto as
perfect Obedience, if we act according to our dead natural State.

3dly, As the Law bereaveth of all strengthening means, that are to be had by
Faith in Christ, and finds us without strength in our natural State; so of it
self it affords us no Strength to fulfill its own Commandments. If there had
been a law given that could have given life, verily righteousness should have
been by the law, Gal. 3.21. It does not so much as promise us life until we
have performed the Obedience required by it, The man that does these things
shall live by them, Romans 6.5. It is well called a voice of words, Heb. 12.19.
because its high and big words are not acompanied with any enlivening Power;
and the Doctrine of Life and Salvation by sincere Obedience is not better
natured or more bountiful to us: For it exacteth of us the Performance of the
Condition, before it allows us any Life or Salvation by Christ. Can any Man
rationally expect strength to obey sincerely, by following a Doctrine that does
not so much as promise it. The true Gospel is of a more benign Nature, For it
promises that God would pour out of his spirit upon all flesh, Acts 2.17. And
will put his law in our mind, and write them in our bearts, Heb. 8.10. And will
cause us to walk in his statutes that we shall keep his judgments, and do them,
Ezeck. 36.27. This word of God's Grace, that requires not Holiness of us as a
Condition, but promises it to us as a Free-gift, must needs be the only
Doctrine that is able to build us up, and to give us an inheritance amongst
them that are sanctified, Acts 20.32. Seeing it pleases God to bring us to
Holiness by believing a Doctrine we may reasonably expect that God should work
upon us suitably to the nature of the Doctrine which we believe, that he should
give by a giving Doctrine, and exact by an exacting Doctrine.

4thly, The way of procuring Life and Happiness by the condition of perfect or
sincere Works, is not a rational method for the Recovery of fallen Man, though
it were good for the preserving of Life before the Fall, it prescribes the
immediate Practice of Holiness to recover a Man dead in Sin. As if one should
say to the sick of the Palsy, Arise up and walk, and then you shall be whole
and able to walk. We sometimes say jestingly to a Child that is fallen on the
ground, Come hither, and I will help thee up; but if we should say to one that
is cast on his Bed by a dead Palsy, we should be guilty of mocking and cruel
insulting over the Afflicted. Those that are humbled and made sensible of their
original Sin and natural Deadness, know that they must first live by the
Spirit, before they can act holily, Gal, 5.25. They will enquire, How shall we
have strength to perform the Duty required? If you answer that they must trust
in God and Christ to help them, they may readily reply, They have no sure
Ground to trust on God or Christ for any saving Grace, according to this
Doctrine, before they have performed this Condition, at least in a sincere
Resolution of Obedience, and that they are as unable to bring their Hearts to
such a Resolution, as a dead Man is to raise himself out of the Grave. Take
another Instance, the method of the Doctrine of Works is, you must love God
first, and then on that Condition he will love you again; whereas on the
contrary, we love God because he loved us first, 1 John 4.19. and if God
suspend his Love to us upon any condition, our Love to him will not be
absolute, but suspended upon the same condition, and no way contrary to an
actual hating of him.

5thly, The Law is so far from healing our sinful Corruption, that it proves
rather an Occasion of sinful motions and actings in those that seek Salvation
by the Works of it. This comes to pass by reason of the Power of our natural
Corruption, which is stirred up and rages the more, when the holy and just Law
of God is set in opposition against it, so that the fault is not in the Law,
but in our own hearts. Those that find not this by their own Experience should
believe the Apostle Paul, who teaches it plainly, and that from his own
Experience, Romans 7.5. to the 14. He affirms that there are motions of Sin by
the Law in a fleshly State, and that Sin takes occasion by the Commandment,
Thou shall not covet, wrought in him all manner of Concupiscence, deceived him,
flew him, became exceeding sinful, and that without the Law he was alive and
sin dead, but when the Commandment came, Sin revived and he died. He shows
that the cause of this irreconcilable enmity and contrariety betwixt his
sinful Nature and the Law; the law is spiritual, but I am carnal sold under
sin. Take notice here that the Reason given by the Apostle that the Doctrine of
Salvation by sincere Obedience will have the same event. Corrupt Nature is
contrary to sincere Obedience as well as perfect, and if we make it the
condition of our Salvation, Sin will take the same occasion by it to become
exceeding sinful in its motions and actings. The Success of legal Doctrine upon
the natural Man is according to the Proverb, Reprove not a scorner lest he hate
thee, Prove. 9.8. Rebuking a mad Man is the way to enrage him, and such is the
natural Man in spiritual things since he fell out of his right Mind by the Sin
of Adam. We find by manifold Experience, that though Men be generally addicted
to the Principle of Salvation by Works, yet multitudes of of them hate all
strict Preachers and Professors of true Holiness, because they are a Torment to
their Consciences. They endeavor to shelter themselves in Ignorance of the
Law, accounting that the less they know, the less they shall answer for, and
therefore they would not have right things prophesied unto them, Is. 30.10. And
they have prevailed generally in the World to darken the natural knowledge of
moral Duties in such a Degree that there is a necessity of learning them by
divine Revelation out of the Scriptures. We may find how prone Legal-writers
are to corrupt the Sense of the Law, that they may leave starting holes for
their Corruptions, by the corrupt Glosses of the Scribes and Pharisees from
which Christ did vindicate it, Matthew. 5. And as far as I have observed, none
more endeavor to discover the Purity and Perfection of the Law, than those
that seek Holiness and Salvation, without any Legal Condition by the mere Free
grace of God in Christ. The Doctrine of Salvation by sincere Obedience, is but
a mincing of the Perfection required in the Law, and yet how is this Doctrine
minced again and again until it be come so small, that the Substance of all
true Obedience is lost, without any farther Practice of Holiness. A willingness
to be saved according to Christ's terms, or a Consent that Christ should be our
Lord, or a Resolution to obey his Commandments (which is little more than
ignorant men trust on, when they say that they hope God will save them, because
they have a good meaning, though they live in the neglect of all Religion) shall
pass with many for enough sincere Obedience both to enter them into a State of
Salvation, and to continue them in it, so that they shall never be accounted
Breakers of the Gospelcovenant while so much can be pretended. The most that is
made necessary for Salvation, shall be only to endeavor to do what we can to
obey Christ's Commands, though all that the most can do is nothing that is truly
good. Those that have a little more Zeal for their Salvation by Works, are
prone to spend it in superstitious Observances, because they suit better with
their carnal Nature than the spiritual Commands of God and Christ. I doubt not
but this has been one occasion of the prevailing of Heathenish, Jewish, and
Popish Superslitions in the World. We find by experience how Popery fell in
several Nations in late years when the great Pillar of it, the Doctrine of
Justification by Works, was overthrown by the Protestant Doctrine of
Justification by Faith alone. If these Legal Zealots be forced by strong
Conviction to endeavor the Practice of spiritual Duties for the quieting of
their guilty Consciences, they may be brought to strive and labor earnestly,
and even to macerate their Bodies with Fasting, that they may kill their Lusts,
but still their Lusts are alive and as strong as ever they were, and do show
forth their Enmity against the Law of God by inward fretting, repining and
grudging at it as a grievous Task-mastertho' a slavish Fear restrain their
gross outward actings. And if once these Zealots be enlightened with the
Knowledge of the Spiritual nature of the Law, to discern that God rejects all
their slavish Service, and will not own it for sincere Obedience, then they
fall into Despair of their Salvation, because they see they have failed in
their highest attempts to perform the Condition, and then they can easily
discover themselves that their Hearts swell in Anger and manifest Hatred
against the Law, yea, and against God and Christ for prescribing such hard
Conditions of Salvation, which they cannot keep, and yet expect to be damned
eternally for breaking of them. This fills them with blasphemous thoughts
against God and Christ, and they can hardly refrain from blaspheming with their
tongues; and when they are brought to this horrible Condition, if God does not
in mercy discover to them the way of Salvation by Free Grace, through Faith
alone, they will endeavor if they can to sear their Consciences past feeling
of Sin, and fully to abandon all Religion, which have proved such an
unsufferable Torment to them, or if they cannot sear their Consciences, some of
them are easily prevailed over by Satan, rather to murder themselves than to
live longer in the Hatred of God, the Spirit of Blasphemy and continual horror
of Conscience. This is the pestilent effect of Legal-Doctrine upon a carnal
heart, that does but rouse up and terribly enrage the sleeping Lion, our sinful
Gorruption instead of killing of it, as is too evident by the sad Experience of
many that have endeavored with all their might to practice it, and by the
Scripture that shows a sufficient cause why it cannot be otherwise. Therefore
the Doctrine of Salvation by sincere Obedience, that was invented against
Antinomianism, may well be ranked amongst the worst Antinomian Errors. For my
part I hate it with perfect Hatred and count it mine Enemy, as I have found it
to be, and I have found by some good Experience the Truth of the Lesson taught
by the Apostle, that the way to be freed from the Mastery and Dominion of Sin,
is not to be under the law, but under grace, Romans 6.15.

6thly, The way of Salvation by works was blasted by the Curse denounced
against the first Adam's Sin, so that now it cannot work Life in us or
Holiness, but only Death: For the Law which requires both sincere and perfect
Obedience to God in all things, was made known to Adam at his first Creation,
as the means of continuing the happy Life that was then bestowed upon him; and
it would have been effectual for this end if he had not transgressed in the
forbidden fruit, but when he had once brought himself and his Posterity under
the terrible Sentence, Thou shall surely die, Genesis 2.17. all that Knowledge of
God or his Law that before wrought for continuance of Life, was turned by that
cursing Sentence the contrary way to work for his death, even for the death of
his Soul in sin, as well as for the death of his Body, and therefore it quickly
moved him to hide himself from God as an enemy. It was as if God should say,
All the light and knowledge that thou have, shall not be able to continue thy
life or restore it, but it shall rather tend to thy death. Therefore while we
continue in our Natural state under the first Adam's Guilt and Curse, the
knowledge of the Law, yea, and all such knowledge of God and his Attributes as
natural Men may attain to, must needs be in like manner accursed to us; and
seeing Man did not use his natural Knowledge and Wisdom aright, God is resolved
to revenge the abuse of it by giving us Salvation in a way contrary to it, that
seems foolishness to the Natural man and wholly to abolish the way of living
by any of our works, or by any Wisdom or Knowledge that the Natural-man can
attain unto; for it is written, I will destrey the wisdom of the wise, and will
bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent. Has not God made foolish
the wisdom of the world: For after that in the wisdom of God, the world by
wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save
them that believe, 1 Cor. 1.19, 20, 21. Hence we may conclude, that no Truth
known by the light of Nature can be an effectual Principle or Motive to work
Holiness in us, and Gospel-principles and Motives are but abused, when they are
applied to a Legal-way of Salvation.

7thly, The end which God aimed at in giving the Law by Moses, was not that any
should ever attain to Holiness or Salvation by the condition of perfect or
sincere Obedience to it, though if there had been any such way of Salvation at
that time, it must have consisted in the Performance of that Law which was then
given to the Church to be a Rule of Life as well as a Covenant. There was
another Covenant made before that time with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, a
Covenant of Grace promising all Blessings freely through Christ, the promised
Seed, by which only they were to be saved, and the Covenant of the Law was
added that they might-see their sinfulness and subjection to death and wrath,
and the impossibility of attaining to life or holiness by their works, and be
forced to trust on the free Promise only for all their Salvation, and that Sin
might be restrained by the Spirit of Bondage, until the coming of that promised
Seed Jesus Christ, and the more plentiful pouring out of the sanctifying Spirit
by him. This the Apostle Paul shows largely, Gal. 3.15 to 24. Romans 5.20, 21.
and Romans 10.3, 4. None of the Israelites under the Old Testament were ever
saved by the Sinai-Covenant, neither did any of them ever attain to Holiness by
the terms of it. Some of them did indeed perform the Commandments of it
sincerely, though imperfectly, but those were first justified and made Partakers
of Life and Holiness by virtue of that better Covenant made with Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob, which was the same in substance with the New Covenant or Testament,
established by the Blood of Christ. Had it not been for that better Covenant,
the Sinai-covenant would have proved to them an occasion of no Happiness, but
only of sin, Despair and Destruction. Of it self it was only a killing Letter,
the ministration of death and condemnation, and therefore it is now abolished,
2 Cor. 3.6, 8, 9, 11. We have cause to praise God for delivering his Church by
the Blood of Christ from this Yoke of Bondage, and we have cause to abhor the
Device of those that would lay upon us a more grievous and terrible Yoke, by
turning our very New covenant into a Covenant of sincere works, and leaving us
no such better Covenant as the Israelites had under their Yoke, to relieve us
in our Extremity.

DIRECTION VII
We are not to imagine that our hearts and lives must be changed from Sin to
Holiness in any measure, before we may safely venture to trust on Christ for
the sure Enjoyment of himself and his Salvation..

EXPLICATION.
WE are naturally so prone to ground our Salvation upon our own works, that if
we cannot make them procuring Conditions and Causes of our Salvation by Christ,
yet we shall endeavor at least to make them necessary Preparatives to fit us
for receiving Christ and his Salvation by Faith. And Men are easily persuaded
that this is not at all contrary to Salvation by Free Grace, because all that
is hereby ascribed to our works or good Qualifications, is only that they put
usin a sit posture to receive a Free gift. If we were to go to a Prince for a
Free gist, good Manners and due Reverence would teach us to trim our selves
first and to change our slovenly Clothes as Joseph did when he came out of the
Dungeon into the presence of Pharaoh. It seems to be an impudent slighting
and contemning the Justice and Holiness of God and Christ, and an insufferable
affront and indignity offered to the divine Majesty, when any dare presume to
approach into his Presence in the nasty pickle of his Sins, covered all over
with putrefying Sores not at all clo'sd, boundeup or cleansed; much more when
they endeavor to receive the most holy One into such an abominable stinking
Kennel, as a Sinners heart is before it be at all reformed. The Parable
concerning the Man that was to be bound hand and foot and cast into outer
Darkness for coming to the Royal Wedding without a Wedding garment, seems to
be intended as a Warning against all such Presumption, Mat. 22.11, 13. Many
that behold with terror the abominable Filth of their own hearts are kept off
from coming immediately to Christ by such Imaginations which Satan strongly
maintains and increases in them by his Suggestions, so that they can by no
means be persuaded out of them, until God teaches them inwardly by the
powerful Illumination of his Spirit; they delay the saving act of Faith,
because they account that they are not yet duly prepared and qualified for it.
On the same Account many weak Believers delay coming to the Lord's Supper for
many Years together, even as long as they live in this World, and would be as
likely to delay their Baptism, if they had not been baptized in Infancy.
Against all such Imaginations I shall propose the following Considerations.

First, This Error is pernicious to the Practice of Holiness, and to our whole
Salvation, in the same manner with that treated of in the foregoing Direction,
and may be confuted by the same Arguments, which are there produced; whether
Holiness be made a procuring Condition of our Salvation through Christ, or only
a Condition necessary to qualify us for the Reception of Christ, we are
equally brought under those Legal terms of doing first the Duties required in
the Law, that so we may live. Therefore we are equally bereaved of the
Assistance of those means of Holiness mentioned in the foregoing Directions, as
Union and Fellowship with Christ, and the Enjoyment of all his sanctifying
Endowments by Faith, which should go before the Practice of Holiness, that they
may enable us for it, and we are equally left to labor in vain for Holiness
while we are in our cursed natural State, whereby our sinsul Corruption will be
rather exasperated than mortified, so that we shall never be duly prepared for
the reception of Christ, as long as we live in the world. Thus while we
endeavor to prepare our way to Christ by holy Qualifications, we do rather
fill it with stumblingblocks and deep pits, whereby our Souls are hindered from
ever attaining to the Salvation of Christ.

2dly, Any the least change of our hearts and lives from Sin to Holiness before
our receiving of Christ and his Salvation by Faith, is not at all necessary
according to the Terms of the Gospel, nor required by any one Syllable in the
Word of God. Christ would have the vilest Sinners come to him for Salvation
immediately without delaying the time to prepare themselves for him. When the
wicked Jailer enquired, what he must do to be saved, Paul directed him
forthwith to believe on Christ, with a Promise that in so doing he should be
saved, and straitway he and all his were baptized, Acts 16.30, 33. Paul does
not tell him that he must reform his heart and life first, though he was in a
very nasty pickle at that time, having but a little before fastened Paul and
Silas in the Stocks, and newly attempted an horrid wilful selfmurder. Those
three thousand Jews that were converted by Peter's Preaching, and added the
same day to the Church by Baptism, Acts 2.41. seemed to have as much need of
some considerable time to prepare themselves for receiving of Christ as others,
because they had but lately polluted themselves with the Murder of Christ
himself, v. 23. Christ commands his Servants to go out quickly into the Streets
and Lanes of the City and to bring in to his Feast, the poor and the maimed,
and the halt and the blind, yea to go out into the high ways and to compel them
to come in, without allowing them to tarry away until they had cleansed the
sores and shifted off their filthy rags and swarms of lice. Christ would have
us to believe on him that justifies the ungodly, and therefore he does not
require us to be godly before we believe, Romans 4.5. He came as a Physician for
the Sick, and does not expect that they should recover their Health in the
least degree before they come to him, Mat. 9.12. The vilest Sinners are fitly
prepared and qualified for this Design, which is to show forth the exceeding
riches of Grace, pardoning our sins and saving us freely, Ephesians. 2.5. 7. For this
end the Law of Moses entered, that the offense might abound, that so where sin
abounded grace might much more abound, Romans 5.20. He loved us in our most
loathsome sinful Pollution, so as to die for us, and much more will he love us
in it, so as to receive us when we come to him for the purchased Salvation. He
has given full satisfaction to the Justice of God for sinners, that they might
have all Righteousness, and Holiness, and all Salvation only by Fellowship with
him through Faith; therefore it is no affront to Christ, or slighting and
contemning of the Justice and Holiness of God to come to Christ, while we are
polluted sinners; but rather it is an affronting and contemning of the
Saving-grace, Merit and Fullness of Christ, if we endeavor to make our selves
righteous and holy before we receive Christ himself, and all Righteousness and
Holiness in him by Faith. Christ loathed not to touch a Leper, and condescended
to wash the feet of his Disciples, and did not expect that they should be
washed and perfumed before hand, as some great ones of the World are said to
do, when they wash the feet of Poor-men in imitating of Christ.

Thirdly, Those that receive Christ with an unfeigned Faith, shall never want a
wedding garment to adorn them in the sight of God. Faith it self is very
precious in the sight of God and most holy, 2 Pet. 1.1. Jude 20. God loves it
because it gives the glory of our Salvation only to the Free Grace of God in
Christ, Romans 4.16. and renounceth all dependence on any conditions that we can
perform to procure a Right to Christ, or to make our selves acceptable to him.
It contains in it an hearty Love to Christ as Savior, and an hungring and
thirsting Appetite for his Salvation: and it is the Mouth whereby the Soul
feeds hungrily upon him. What Wedding garment can sinners bring with them
more delightful than this to their bountiful God, whose great Design is to
manifest the abundant riches of his glorious Grace and Bounty in this Wedding
feast? The Father himself loves them, because they love Christ, and believe
that he came out from God, Jo. 16.27. But yet we see that the Excellency of
Faith lies in this that it accounts not it self or any other work of ours, a
sufficient Ornament to make us acceptable in the sight of God. It will not be
our Wedding Garment it self, but it buyeth of Christ white raiment that we may
be clothed, and that the shame of our nakedness may not appear, Rev. 3.18. Though
it loves and desires the Free-gift of Holiness, yet it abandons all thoughts
of practicing Holiness immediately before we come to Christ for an holy nature.
It puts on Christ himself, and in him all things that pertain to life and
godliness. Thus every true Believer is clothed with the Sun, Rev. 12.1. even
with the Sun of Righteousness the Lord Jesus, who is pleased to be himself both
our Wedding Garment and Feast, and all our spiritual and eternal Happiness. For
the more full Satisfaction and Consolation of those distressed Souls that lie
under the terrible apprehensions of their own sinfulness and the wrath of God,
and dare not venture to trust steadfastly on Christ, for their Salvation, until
they can find in themselves some change from Sin to Holiness. I shall mention
particularly several of those things that such would find in themselves, and I
shall show that if some of them be not partly comprehended in Faith it self,
they are fruits and consequences of Faith, and therefore they cannot be
rationally expected before we trust on Christ for our Salvation.

First, They think it necessary to repent before they believe on Christ for
their Salvation, because Repentance is absolutely necessary to Salvation, Luke
13.3. Except ye repent ye shall all likewise perish; and Christ places the
Duty of Repentance before Faith, Mar. 1.15. Repent and believe the Gospel; but
we are to know that Christ requires Repentance first as the end to be aimed
at, and Faith in the next place, as the only means of attaining to it; and though
the end be first in intention, yet the means are first in Practice and
Execution, though both be absolutely necessary to Salvation. For what is
Repentance, but an hearty turning from sin to God and his Service? and what way
is there to turn to God, but through Christ? who is the way, the truth and the
life, without whom none comes to the Father, Joh. 14.6. And what way is there
of coming to Christ, but by Faith? therefore if we would turn to God in the
right way, we must first come to Christ by Faith, and Faith must go before
Repentance, as the great Instrument afforded us by the Grace of God for the
effectual Performance of it. Repentance is indeed a Duty which sinners owe
naturally to God; but the great Question is, how shall sinners be able to
perform it? This Question is resolved only by the Gospel of Christ, Repent and
believe. The way to repent is to begin with believing. Therefore the great
Doctrine of John in his Baptism of Repentance was, That they should believe on
him that should come after him, that is, on Christ Jesus, Acts 19.4.

2dly Regeneration also is necessary to Salvation, Joh. 3 3. and therefore many
would find it wrought in themselves, before they trust on Christ for Salvation;
but consider what Regeneration is, It is a new begetting or creating us in
Christ, 1 Cor. 4.15. Ephesians. 2.10. in whom we are Partakers of a divine nature far
different from that which we received from the first Adam. Now Faith is the
uniting Grace whereby Christ dwells in us, and we in him, as has been
showed, and therefore it is the first Grace wrought in our Regeneration and the
means of all the rest; when you truly believe, you are regenerated and not till
then. Those that receive Christ by believing, and those only are the Sons of
God, which are born not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will
of man, but of God, Joh. 1.12, 13.

3dly, They account it necessary to receive Christ as Lord and Lawgiver by a
sincere Resignation of themselves to his Government, and a Resolution to obey
his Law, before they receive him as their Savior. This is one principal Lesson
of the new Divinity, and such a receiving Christ as Lord is made to be the
great act of saving Faith, without which such Faith as I have described,
whereby we trust on Christ for Salvation, is reckoned no better than gross
Presumption. They teach that Christ will not bestow his Salvation on those that
do not first yield their subjection to his Kingly Authority, but he calls
them his enemies, because they would not that he should reign over them, and
requires that they be brought and slain before him, Luke 19.27. And I own it
as a certain truth, that Christ will save none but those that are brought to
resign up themselves sincerely to the Obedience of his royal Authority and
Laws. But yet we must observe that they are not brought to this holy
Resignation, or to any sincere purpose and resolution of Obedience before they
receive his Salvation, but rather by receiving it. Men that were never
thoroughly sensible of their natural death in sin, do easily bring themselves to
resolve universal Obedience to God when they are on their Deathbeds, or in any
eminent danger, or when they would prepare themselves for the Lords Supper,
that so they may make their Peace with God, and trust securely on Christ for
his Salvation, but all Resolutions of that kind are vain and hypocritical,
sooner broken than made. Those that know the Plague of their own hearts, do
find that their mind is enmity unto the Law of God and Christ and cannot be
subject unto it, Romans 8.7. and that they can as soon remove a mountain as give
up themselves sincerely to Obedience before they trust on Christ for his
Salvation, and for the gift of a new heart, whereby they may be enabled both to
will and to do any thing that is acceptable to God. We should have been
sufficiently obliged to all obedient purposes, resolutions and resignations, if
Christ had never come into the World to save us, but he knew that we could
perform nothing holily, except he made us first Partakers of Salvation, and
that we shall never obey him as Lawgiver, until we receive him as Savior. He
is a saving Lord, trust on him first to save you from the guilt and power of
sin^ and dominion of Satan, and to give you a new spiritual Disposition, then
and not till then, the Love of Christ will constrain you to resign up your self
heartily to live to him that died for you, 2 Cor. 5.14. and you will be able to
say with an unfeigned Resolution, O Lord, truly I am thy servant, I am thy
servant and the son of thy handmaid, thou have loosed my bonds, Psalm. 116.16.

4thly, It seems to them evident, that some good works are necessary before
we can trust on Christ safely for the forgiveness of sins; because our Savior
teaches us, that if we forgive not men their Trespasses, neither will our
heavenly Father forgive our Trespasses, and directs us to pray, Forgive us
our debts, as we forgive our debtors, Mat. 6.12, 15. Restitution also was to be
made of things wrongfully gotten from others, before the Sacramental Atonement
was made by the Trespass offering, Lev. 6.5, 7. This is sufficient to prove,
that forgiving others, and Restitution according to our ability, or at least a
sincere desire and purpose so to do, are very closely joined with the
forgiveness of our sins, and are very necessary to fit us for Prayer and for
Sacramental Applications of pardoning Grace to our selves. A lively Faith
cannot be without these Fruits, and therefore we cannot pray or partake of
Sacraments in Faith without them, but yet if we strive to do either of these
before we trust on Christ for our Pardon and Salvation, we shall do them
slavishly and hypocritically, not in any holy acceptable manner. Our forgiving
others will not be accompanied with any hearty Love to them as to our selves
for the sake of God; and our Restitution will be but a forced act, like
Pharaoh's letting the Children of Israel go, or like Judas restoring the thirty
pieces of Silver being compelled thereunto by terror of Spirit, and when the
terror that forced us is removed, we shall be as ready to recall our Forgiveness
and to wrong others again, as Pharaoh was to bring the Israelites again into
bondage after he had let them go, Exodus 14.5. If you would forgive others
heartily so as to love them again, you must first apprehend the love and mercy
of God toward your selves by Faith in Christ, and then you will be able
according to the Apostle's Instruction, to be kind, tender hearted, forgiving
one another, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you, Ephesians. 4.32. The
readiness of Zaccheus to make Restitution, followed upon a discovery of
Christ's love to him, and his joyful receiving Christ into his house, was fruit
whereby he did evidence the Truth of that Faith that was already wrought in his
heart.

5thly, I shall reckon up together several other Qualifications, that
distressed Souls would find in themselves, that they may be duly prepared to
trust on Christ for their Salvation, and when they have labored anxiously a
long time and cannot get them, at last they lie down in sorrowful Despondence,
not daring to apply the Consolations of the grace of God in Christ to their
wounded Consciences. Let perplexed Souls mark the particulars and observe
whether the condition of their own Souls be reached in any of them, O thou
afflicted, tossed with tempests, and not comforted, what good Qualifications is
it that thou would have, that thou may be encouraged to lay hold on
Christ for Salvation? It is likely thou will answer in the bitterness of thy
Soul, O let me have first some love to God and Godliness in mine heart, and
freedom from mine hateful heart-risings against him and his Service. Let me
have some good thoughts of God, his Justice, Mercy, Holiness, that I may be
able to justify him though he damn me, and that I may not be filled with
murmuring and hellish Blasphemies in my mind against him, let the raging of my
lusts be abated, and the stinking kennel of my wicked heart a little cleansed,
let me have some holy reverential Fear of God, and not only a pannick
tormenting horror. I would be more affected with the wrath of God, and not be
of a slighting heedless Spirit. I would be more humbled for Sin, loath it and
be ashamed of it, and be sorry for it with a godly Sorrow, not merely because
of the Punishment, but because it grieveth and vexes the holy Spirit of God, I
would be able to make a willing and ingenious Confession of sin, and to pour
out my Soul to the Lord in lively affectionate Prayer for Forgiveness, and to
praise and glorify him heartily, and not to be like a lifeless stone in the
duty of Prayer as I am. Are these the things thou desire, O poor distressed
Soul? The best Reply I can make for thy speedy comfort, is to inform thee, that
the things are good but thy desires are not well timed, it is unreasonable for
thee to expect these holy Qualifications whilst thou art in thy natural State
under the guilt of Sin and the apprehension of the Wrath of God, before thou
have received the Atonement, and the new Spiritual Life that is by Christ
through Faith in his Name, thou do but exasperate thy Corruptions, and harden
thy Heart, and make thy wounds to stink the more because of thy foolishness;
such good Qualifications are included in the Nature of Faith, and for the most
part they follow after it, so that they cannot possibly be obtained before thou
trustest in Christ for thy Salvation, as I shall show concerning them
particularly in their Order. A love to the Salvation of God, and to the free
Gift of Holiness is included in the Nature of Faith, so that it cannot be
hearty without it. Act Faith first with this kind of Love, and the Apprehension
of God's Love to thy Soul will sweetly allure and constrain thee to love God
and his Service universally: We love him because he loved us first, 1 John
4.19. We cannot be beforehand with God in love, and we must perceive it to
make us love him, for if we look upon him as a God contrary to us that hates
us and will damn us, our own innate Self-love will breed hatred and
heart-risings against him, in spite of our Hearts, that love which is the end
of the Law must flow from Faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1.5. And if Hatred work in
thee more than Love, how can thou expect good thoughts of God, or any other
than blaspheming, or at least murmuring thoughts of him, in this condition,
ill will never speaks or thinks well. The first right holy Thoughts thou
can have of God are thoughts of his Grace and Mercy to thy Soul in Christ,
which are included in the Grace of Faith. Get these thoughts first by believing
in Christ, and they will breed in thee love to God, and all good thoughts of
him, and free thee from blasphemous and murmuring Thoughts by degrees, for love
thinks no evil, 1 Cor. 13.9. Then will thou be able to account God just and
merciful if he had damned thee and extended his Grace to others; and thou will
be able to think well of his Holiness, and of his Decrees which many cannot
endure to hear of. The way to get rid of thy raging Lusts is by Faith, that
purifieth the Heart and works by Love, Act. 15.9. Gal. 5.6. The Soul must be
brought to take pleasure in God and Christ by Faith, or else it will lust after
fleshly and worldly Pleasures; and the more you strive against Lusts without
Faith, the more they are stirred up, though you prevail so far as to restrain
the fulfilling of them: beg a holy Fear of God, with fear of coming short of
the promised Rest through unbelief, Heb. 4.1. Such a Fear is an Ingredient of
Faith, and it will breed in us a reverential, yea, a Child-like fear of God and
his Goodness, Heb. 12.28. Hos. 3.5. We must have Grace whereby we may serve God
with Reverence, etc. It is in the Margent we must have or hold fast Grace, and
there is no other way to hold fast Grace but by Faith, and this will quickly
calm all pannick and tormenting Horror. And if you would be free from
carelessness and slightning the Wrath of God, your way is first to avoid
dispairing by believing; for People grow careless by dispairing, and for their
own quiet they will endeavor to slight Evils which they have no hope to
prevent, according to the Proverb, Let us eat and drink for to morrow we shall
die, 1 Cor. 15.32. True Humiliation for Sin is either a part or fruit of Faith,
for on our believing we shall remember our own evil ways and doings that were
not good, and shall loath our selves in our own sight for all our Abominations,
Ezekiel. 36.31. We shall also then willingly renounce our own Righteousness, and
account it but dung, that we may win Christ by Faith, Phil. 3.7, 8. But Beggars
will make the most of all their nasty Rags, till they be furnished with better
Clothes; and Cripples will not cast away their Crutches until they have a
better support to lean on. Godly Sorrow for Sin is wrought in us by believing
the pardoning Grace of God, as it is found by experience, that a Pardon from a
Prince will sometimes sooner draw tears from a stubborn Malefactor than the
fear of a Halter will; thus the sinful Woman was brought to wash Christ's Feet
with her Tears, Luke 7.37, 38. We are not like to be sorry for grieving God
with our Sins while we look upon him, as an enemy that will ease himself well
enough of his burden, and right himself upon us by our everlasting
destruction. The belief of God's pardoning and accepting Grace is a necessary
means to bring us to an ingenuous Confession of Sins. The People freely
confessed their sins when they were baptized of John in Jordan for the
remission of sins, Mark 1.4, 5. The Confession of Despairers is forced, like
the extorted Confessions and Cryings out of Malefactors upon the Rack. A Pardon
sooner opens the Mouth to an ingenuous Confession, than confess and be
hanged, or confess and be damned; therefore if you would freely confess your
sins, believe first that God is faithful and just to forgive your sins through
Christ, 1 John 1.9. And if you would pray to God, or praise him with lively
Affections, you must first believe that God will hear you, and give you what is
best for you for Christ's sake, Joh. 16.23, 24. otherwise your praying will be
only from the Teeth outward, for how shall you call on him on whom you have not
believed, Romans 10.14. You must come first to Christ, the Altar by Faith, that
by him you may offer the Sacrifice of Praise to God continually, Heb. 13.10, 15.

Finally, to pass from Particulars to the general Assertion laid down in the
Direction, if you ask, What shall we do that we may work the Works of God, or
get any saving Qualifications? I must direct you first to Faith, as the Work of
Works, and the great saving Preparatory to all good Qualifications, by
answering in our Savior's words, This is the Work of God, that ye believe in
him whom he has sent, Joh. 6.28, 29.

DIRECT. VIII.
Be sure to seek for Holiness of Heart, and Life only in its due order, where
God has placed it, after Union with Christ, Justification and the Gift of the
Holy Ghost, and in that order seek it earnestly by Faith, as a very necessary
part of your Salvation.

EXPLICATION.
I Hope the Reader will observe warily in all these Directions, that the
Holiness aimed at as the great End in the whole Discourse, consists not in
the Grace or Act of Faith required peculiarly by the Gospel, which though it be
a saving Gift of Christ, yet is here considered rather as a means precedent to
the Reception of Christ and all his Salvation, then a part of his Salvation
received. But the Holiness aimed at, consists in Conformity to the whole
Moral Law, to which we are naturally obliged if their had never been any
Gospel, or any such Duty as believing in Christ for Salvation.

Now in this Direction, three Things are contained that are very necessary to
guide us to the attainment of this great End, and therefore worthy of our
serious Consideration.

First, It is a Matter of high concern, to be acquainted with the due Place and
Order, wherein God has settled this holy Practice in the Mystery of our
Salvation, and a great Point of Christian Wisdom to seek it only in that order;
we know that God is the God of Order, and that his infinite Wisdom has
appeared in appointing the Order of his Creatures, which we are forced to
observe for attainment of our ends in worldly things; so also in Spiritual
things God has made an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things and sure, 2 Samuel 23.5. the Benefits of it have an orderly dependence each upon other, as
Links of the same golden Chain, though several of them, and a Title to them all
are given to us at one and the same time; and I think enough has been said
already, to show in what order God brings us to the Practice of the Moral Law,
he makes us first to be in Christ by Faith as Branches in the Vine, that we
may bring forth much fruit, Joh. 15.5. He first purges our Consciences from
dead Works by Justification, that we may serve the living God, Heb. 9.14. He
makes us first to live in the Spirit, and then to walk in the Spirit, Gal.
5.25. This is the Order prescribed in the Gospel, which is the Power of God
unto Salvation; though the Law prescribes a quite contrary Method, that we
should first perform its Commandments, that so we may be justified and live,
and thereby it proves a killing Letter to us: Now mark well the great
Advantages you have for the Attainment of Holiness, by seeking it in a right
Gospel Order, you will have the Advantage of the Love of God manifested toward
you in forgiving your Sins, receiving you into Favor, and giving you the
Spirit of Adoption, and the Hope of his Glory freely through Christ, to
persuade and constrain you by sweet allurements to love God again that has so
dearly loved you, and to love others for his sake, and to give up your selves
to the Obedience of all his Commandments out of hearty love to him, you will
also enjoy the Help of the Spirit of God to incline you powerfully unto
Obedience, and to strengthen you for the Performance of it against all your
Corruptions, and the Temptations of Satan, so that you will have both Wind and
Tide to forward your Voyage in the Practice of Holiness; contrariwise if you
rush upon the immediate performance of the Law, without taking Christ's
Righteousness and his Spirit in the way to it, you will find both Wind Tide
against you. Your guilty Conscience and corrupt dead Natures shall certainly
defeat and frustrate all your Enterprises and Attempts to love God, and serve
him in Love, and you will but stir up sinful Lusts instead of stirring up your
selves to true Obedience, or at best you will but attain to some slavish
hypocritical Performances; Oh, that People would be persuaded to consider the
due place of Holiness in the Mystery of Salvation, and to seek it only there
where they have all the Advantage of Gospel Grace to find it. Many miscarry in
their zealous Enterprises for Godliness, and after they have spent much Labor
in vain; God makes a Breach upon them, even to their everlasting Destruction,
as he did upon Uzzah to a Temporal destruction, because they sought him not
after a due order, 2 Chronicles.

Secondly, We are to look upon Holiness as a very necessary part of that
Salvation that is received by Faith in Christ; some are so drenched with a
Covenant of Works, that they accuse us for making good Works needless to
Salvation, if we will not acknowledge them to be necessary either as Conditions
to procure an Interest in Christ, or as Preparatives to fit us for the
receiving of him by Faith; and others when they are taught by the Scriptures
that we are saved by Faith, through Faith without Works, do begin to disregard
all Obedience to the Law, as not at all necessary to Salvation, and do account
themselves obliged to it only in point of Gratitude; if it be wholly neglected,
they doubt not but Free Grace will save them harmless; yea, some are given up
to such strong Antinomian Delusions, that they account it a part of the Liberty
from the Bondage of the Law purchased by the Blood of Christ, to make no
Conscience of breaking the Law in their Conversation: One cause of these Errors
that are so contrary one to the other is, that many are prone to imagine
nothing else to be meant by Salvation, but to be delivered from Hell, and in
heavenly Happiness and Glory; hence they conclude, that if good Works be a
means of Glorification, and precedent to it, they must also be a precedent
Means of our whole Salvation, and that if they be not a necessary Means of our
whole Salvation, they are not at all necessary to Glorification. But though
Salvation be often taken in Scripture by way of Eminency, for its perfection in
the State of heavenly Glory, yet according to its full and proper
Signification, we are to understand by it all that freedom from the Evil of our
Natural corrupt State, and all those holy and happy Enjoyments that we receive
from Christ our Savior, either in this World by Faith, or in the World to come
by Glorification. Thus Justification, the Gift of the Spirit to dwell in us,
the Privileges of Adoption are parts of our Salvation which we partake of in
this Life: Thus also the Conformity of our Hearts to the Law of God, and the
Fruit of our Righteousness with which we are filled by Jesus Christ in this
Life, are a necessary part of our Salvation; God saves us from our finful
uncleanness here by the washing of Regeneration and renewing of the Holy Ghost,
as well as from Hell hereafter, Ezekiel. 36.29. Tit. 3.5. Christ was called Jesus,
i.e. A Savior, because he saved his People from their Sins, Mat. 1.21.
therefore it is part of our Salvation to deliver us from our Sins, which is
begun in this Life by Justification and Sanctification, and perfected by
Glorification in the Life to come. Can we rationally doubt whither it be any
proper part of our Salvation by Christ to be quickened to live to God, when we
were by nature dead in Trespasses and Sins, and to have the Image of God in
Holiness and Righteousness restored to us which we lost by the Fall, and to be
freed from a vile dishonorable Slavery to Satan and our own Lusts, and made
the Servants of God, and to be honored so highly as to walk by the Spirit, and
bring forth the Fruits of the Spirit: And what is all this but holiness in
Heart and Life? Conclude we then that Holiness in this Life is absolutely
necessary to Salvation, not only as a Means to the end, but by a nobler kind of
Necessity, as part of the end it self. Though we are not saved by good Works as
procuring Causes, yet we are saved to good Works as fruits and effects of
Saving-grace, which God has prepared that we should walk in them, Ephesians. 2.10.
It is indeed one part of our Salvation to be delivered from the Bondage of the
Covenant of Works, but the end of this is, not that we may have liberty to sin
(which is the worst of Slavery) but that we may fulfill the royal Law of
Liberty, and that we may serve in newness of Spirit, and not in the oldness of
the Letter, Gal. 3.13, 14. Romans 7.6. Yea Holiness in this Life is such a part
of our Salvation, as is a necessary Means to make us meet to be partakers of
the Inheritance of the Saints in heavenly Light and Glory, without Holiness we
can never see God, Heb. 12.14. and are as unfit for the glorious Presence, as
Swine for the Presence Chamber of an Earthly Prince. I confess some may be
converted when they are so near the point of Death, that they may have little
time to practice Holiness in this World, but the Grace of the Spirit is active
like fire, Mat. 3.11. And as soon as it is given it will immediately produce
good inward Workings of Love to God, and Christ, and his People, which will be
sufficient to manifest the righteous Judgment of God in saving them at the
great Day, when he shall judge every Man according to his Work, though some
possibly may not have so much Time to discover their inward Grace in any
outward good Works, as the Thief upon the Cross, Luke 23.40.43.

The third and last thing to be noted in this Direction, is that Holiness of
heart and life is to be sought for earnestly by Faith, as a very necessary part
of our Salvation. Great multitudes of ignorant People that live under the
Gospel harden their hearts in sin, and ruin their Souls for ever by trusting
on Christ, for such an imaginary Salvation as consists not at all in
Holiness, but only in Forgiveness of Sin and Deliverance from everlasting
Torments. They would be free from the Punishments due to Sin, but they love
their Lusts so well that they hate Holiness, and would not be saved from the
Service of Sin. The way to oppose this pernicious Delusion, is not to deny, as
some do, That trusting on Christ for Salvation is a saving Act of Faith, but
rather to show that none do or can trust on Christ for true Salvation, except
they trust on him for Holiness, neither do they heartily desire true Salvation,
if they do not desire to be made holy and righteous in their Hearts and Lives:
if ever God and Christ, give you Salvation, Holiness will be one part of it, if
Christ wash you not from the filth of your Sins, you have no part in him, Joh.
13.8. What a strange kind of Salvation do they desire, that care not for
Holiness? They would be saved and yet be altogether dead in Sin, Aliens from
the Life of God, bereft of the Image of God, deformed by the Image of Satan,
his Slaves and Vassals to their own filthy Lusts, utterly unmeet for the
Enjoyment of God in Glory. Such a Salvation as that was never purchased by the
Blood of Christ, and those that seek it, abuse the Grace of God in Christ, and
turn it into Lasciviousness. They would be saved by Christ, and yet out of
Christ in a fleshly state, whereas God does free none from Condemnation, but
those that are in Christ, that walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit;
or else they would divide Christ, and take a part of his Salvation, and leave
out the rest, but Christ is not divided, 1 Cor. 1.13. They would have their
Sins forgiven, not that they may walk with God, in Love in time to come, but
that they may practice their Enmity against him, without any Fear of
Punishment; but let them not be deceived, God is not mocked, they understand
not what true Salvation is, neither were they ever yet thoroughly sensible of
their lost Estate, and of the great evil of Sin, and that which they trust on
Christ for, is but an Imagination of their own Brains, and therefore their
Trusting is gross Presumption. True Gospel Faith makes us to come to Christ
with a thirsty Appetite, that we may drink of living Water, even of his
sanctifying Spirit, John 7.37, 38. And to cry out earnestly to save us not only
from Hell, but from Sin; saying, Teach us to do thy will, thy spirit is good,
Psalm. 143.10. Turn thou me, and I shall be turned, Jer. 31.18. Create in me a
clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me, Psalm. 51.10. This is
the way whereby the Doctrine of Salvation by Grace, does necessitate us to
Holiness of Life, by constraining us to seek for it by Faith in Christ, as a
substantial part of that Salvation, which is freely given to us through Christ.

DIRECT. IX.
We must first receive the Comforts of the Gospel, that we may be able to
perform sincerely the Duties of the Law.

EXPLICATION.
SInce Man fell from Obedience to God, which he was enabled and engaged to
perform by the Comforts of his first happy state in Paradise, God might have
justly refused ever to give Man again any Comforts beforehand to encourage him
to his Duty; that the way to Holiness being hedged up against him with the
Thorns and Briars of Fear, Grief and Despair, he might never be able to escape
the Sentence of Death, which was denounced against his first Transgression.
This Justice of God is manifest in the Method of the Legal Covenant, wherein
God promises us no Life, Comfort or Happiness until we have thoroughly
performed his Law, and may be seen in the Mount Sinai Promulgation explicated
Levit. 26. throughout, and we are by Nature so strongly addicted to this Legal
Method of Salvation, that it is a hard matter to dissuade those that live under
the Light of the Gospel, from placing the Duties of the Law before the Comforts
of the Gospel; if they cannot make Salvation it self, yet they will be sure to
make all the Comforts of it to depend upon their own Works. They think it as
unreasonable to expect. Comfort before Duty, as Wages before Work, or the
Fruits of the Earth before the Husband Man's Labor, 2 Timothy 2.6. They account
the only effectual way to secure the Obedience we owe to the Law of God, is to
ground all our Comforts on the Performance of it, and that the contrary
Doctrine strengthens the Hands of the Wicked by prophesying Peace to them where
there is no Peace, Ezekiel. 13.16, 22. And opens the Floodgates to all
Licentiousness, therefore some Preachers will advise Men not to be sollicitous
and hasty of getting of Comfort, but that they should rather exercise
themselves diligently in the Performance of their Duty, and they tell them that
in so doing, their Condition will be safe and happy at last, though they never
enjoy any Comfort of their Salvation, as long as they live in this World.

That you may rightly understand what I have asserted in the Direction against
such vulgar Errors, take notice. That I do not make the only place of
Gospel-comfort to be before the Duties of the Law, I acknowledge that God
comfort his People on every side, Psalm. 71.21. both before and after the
Performance of their Duty, and that the greatest Consolations do follow after
Duty, yet some Comforts God gives to his People before hand, as Advance-money
to furnish them for his Service, though most of the Pay comes in afterward.
Neither do I hereby speak any Peace to those that continue in their sinful
natural state, for the Comforts that I speak of cannot be received without
rejecting those false Confidences, whereby natural Men harden themselves in
Sin, and without that effectual working of the Spirit, whereby we are made good
Trees that we may bring forth good Fruit. Though they are given before the
sincere Practice of the Law, yet they are not given to us in our corrupt,
sinful Nature, but in and with the new, holy Nature, which immediately
produces a holy Practice, though it must necessarily go before, as the Cause
before the Effect, and they are no other than Comforts of those spiritual
Benefits by which our new Estate and Nature is produced, and of which it is
constituted and made up, as the Comforts of Redemption, Justification,
Adoption, the Gift of the Spirit, and the like. Neither do I intend here any
Transport or Ravishment of Joy and Delight, but only such manner of Comfort as
rationally strengthens in some measure against the Oppression of Fear, Grief
and Despair which we are liable unto, by reason of our natural Sinfulness and
Misery.

This Explanation of the Sense of my Assertion, is sufficient to answer some
common Objections against it, and I hope the Truth of it will be fully
evidenced by the following Arguments.

First, This Truth is a clear Consectary from those Principles of Holiness that
have been already confirmed. I have showed that we must have a good Persuasion
of our Reconciliation with God, and of our Happiness in Heaven, and of our
sufficient Strength both to will and to do that which is acceptable to God
through Jesus Christ, that we may be rationally inclined and bent to the
Practice of Holiness, and that these Endowments must be had, by receiving of
Christ himself, with his Spirit and all his Fullness, by trusting on him for all
his Salvation as he is freely promised to us in the Gospel; and that by this
Faith we do as really receive Christ, as our Food by eating and drinking. Now
let right Reason judge, can we be persuaded of the Love of God, of our
everlasting Happiness, and our Strength to serve God, and yet be without any
Comforts: Can the glad Tidings of the Gospel of Peace be believed, and Christ
and his Spirit actually believed into the Heart, without any Relief to the Soul
from oppressing Fear, Grief Despair? Can the Salvation of Christ be
comfortless, or the Bread and Water of Life, without any sweet Relish to those
that feed on him with hungring and thirsting Appetites; God will not give such
Benefits as these to those that do not desire and esteem them above the World,
and certainly the very receiving of them will be comfortable to such, except
they receive them blindfold, which they cannot do, when the very giving and
bestowing of them opens the Eyes of a Sinner, and turns him from Darkness to
Light, whereby he does, at least in some measure, see and perceive Spiritually
the things that concern his present and future Peace, and reap some encouraging
and strengthening Comfort thereby to the Practice of Holiness.

Secondly, Peace, Joy, Hope, are recommended to us in Scripture, as the Spring
of other holy Duties, and Fear and oppressing Grief forbidden, as Hindrances
to true Religion, The peace of God keeps our hearts and minds through Christ
Jesus, Phil. 4.7. Be ye not sorry for the joy of the Lord is your strength,
Nehem. 8.10. Every man that has this hope in him, purifieth himself, even as
he is pure, 1 John 3.3. Fear has torment, he that fears is not made perfect
in Love, 1 John 4.18. This is the Reason why the Apostle doubleth his
Exhortation, to rejoice in the Lord always, as a Duty of exceeding weight and
necessity, Phil. 4.4. What are such Duties but Comfort it self, and can we
think that these Duties are necessary to our continuance in an holy Practice,
and yet not to the beginning of it where the Work is most difficult and
Encouragement most needful? Therefore we must make haste in the first place to
get a comfortable Frame of Spirit, if we would make hast^ and not delay to keep
Gods holy Commandments.

Thirdly, The usual Method of Gospel-Doctrine as it is delivered to us in the
holy Scriptures, is first to comfort our Hearts, and thereby to establish us in
every good Word and Work, 2 Thessalonians. 2.17. And it appears how clearly this method
is adjusted in several Epistles written by the Apostles, wherein they first
acquaint the Churches with the rich Grace of God toward; them in Christ, and
the spiritual Blessings which they are made Partakers of, for their strong
Consolation, and then they exhort them to an holy Conversation answerable to
such Privileges, and it is not only the Method of whole Epistles, but of many
particular Exhortations to Duty, wherein the comfortable Benefits of the Grace
of God in Christ, are made use of as Arguments and Motives to stir up the
Saints to a holy Practice; which comfortable Benefits must be first believed,
and the Comfort of them applied to our own Souls, or else they will not be
forcible to engage us to the Practice for which they are intended. To give you
a few Instances out of a Multitude that might be alleged, we are exhorted to
practice holy Duties, because we are dead to sin, and alive to God through
Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 6.11. And because sin shall not have dominion over
us, for we are not under the law but under grace, Romans 6.14. Because we are not
in the flesh, but in the spirit, and God will quicken our mortal bodies by his
spirit dwelling in us, Romans 8.9.11, 12. Because our bodies are the members of
Christ and the temples of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6.15, 19. Because God has
made him sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be the righteousness of God
in him, 2 Cor. 5.20, 21. And has promised that he will dwell in us, and walk
in us, and be to us a Father, and we shall be to him sons and daughters, 2 Cor.
7.1. Because God has forgiven us for Ghrist's sake, and accounts us his dear
children, and Christ has loved us and given himself for us, and we that were
sometimes darkened are now lightened in the Lord, Ephesians. 4.32. and 5.1, 2, 8.
Because we are risen with Christ, and when Christ who is our Life shall appear,
then we shall also appear with him in glory, Col. 3.1.4. Because God has said,
I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee, Heb. 13.5. Because of the many
promises made to us, 2 Cor. 7.1. Search the Scriptures and you may with delight
see that is this the Vein that runs through Gospel Exhortations, and you may
find the like Vein of Comfort running through the Prophetical Exhortations in
the Old Testament.

Some may object that the Apostles used this Method in their Writings to
Saints, that had practiced Holiness already, that so they might continue and
increase therein. But to that I may easily reply, If it be a Method needful for
grown Saints, much more then for Beginners that find the Work of Obedience most
difficult, and have most need of strong Consolation; and I hope to show how we
may be able to lay hold of these Consolations by Faith in the very first
Beginning of a holy Life. Besides the Gospel proposes Peace and Comfort freely
to those that are not yet brought to Holiness, yet if they have Hearts to
receive it, they may be converted from Sin to Righteness. When the Apostles
entered into an House, they were first to say, Peace be to the house, Luke 10.5.
At their very first Preaching to Sinners, they acquainted them with the glad
Tidings of Salvation by Christ, for every one that would receive it as a
Free-gift by Faith, Acts 3.26. and 13.26, 32, 38. and 16.30, 31. They assured
them if they would but trust heartily on Christ for all his Salvation, they
should have it although they were at present the chief of Sinners which was
Comfort sufficient for all that duly esteem Spiritual Comfort, hungring and
thirsting after it. And this is a Method agreeable to the Design of the Gospel,
which is to advance the Riches of the Grace of God in all our Spiritual
Enjoyments, God will give us his Consolations before our good Works as well as
after them, that we may know that he gives us everlasting consolation and good
hope through grace, and not through the Procurement of our Works. 2 Thessalonians. 2.16.

Fourthly, The Nature of the Duties of the Law requires a comfortable state of
the Soul for the Performance of them. I have before proved sufficiently, that
they require a Persuasion of our Reconciliation with God, and of our future
Happiness, and Strength, whereby we may be able to walk in holy Obedience;
Joshuah must be strong and very courageous, that he might observe to do
according to the Law that Moses the Servant of the Lord commanded him, Josh.
1.7. I shall instance briefly in the Comforts, without which several great
Duties cannot be sincerely performed. Can we love God and delight in him above
all, while we look upon him as our everlasting Enemy, and apprehend no Love and
Mercy in him toward us, that may render him a suitable Good for us, and lovely
in our Eyes? What doleful Melody will the Heart make in the Duty of Praise, if
we account that all those Perfections, for which we praise him, will rather
aggravate our Misery, than make us happy? What a heartless Work will it be to
pray to him, and to offer up our selves to his Service, if we have no
comfortable Hope that he will accept us? Is it possible for us to free our
selves from carking Cares, by casting our Care upon the Lord, if we do not
apprehend that he cares for us? Can we be patient in Affliction with
Cheerfulness, and under Persecutions, except we have peace with God, and
rejoice in the hope of the glory of God, Romans 5.1, 2, 3. What Reason can
persuade us to submit willingly according to our Duty, to the Stroke of present
Death, if God be pleased to lay it upon us, when we have no Comforts to relieve
us against the horrible Fear of intolerable Torments in Hell for ever.

If we should be called to suffer Martyrdom for the Protestant Religion, as our
Ancestors in this Nation have done, we should find it necessary to abandon the
late upstart Notions that have been bred in a time of Ease, and to embrace the
comfortable Doctrine of former Protestants, which through the Grace of God made
so many courageous and joyful Martyrs.

Fifthly, The state of those that are to be brought from Sin to Godliness,
requires necessarily, that after they be convinced of the Vnnity of their
former false Confidences, and of their Deadness in Original-sin, and Subjection
to the Wrath of God, they should have a Supply of new Gospel Comforts afforded
to encourage their fainting Souls to holy Practices. How little do many
Physicians of Souls consider the Condition of their unconverted Patients, that
are altogether without Spiritual Life and Strength, and are or must be
convinced. He that prescribes bodily Exercise to a Man lying Bed-ridden under
a dead Palsy, before any effectual means be used to strengthen him, deserves
the name of a merciless insulting Tormentor, rather than of a wise and
tenderhearted Physician. How unreasonable is it to prescribe the immediate
Practice of Love to God, and universal Obedience to him out of Love, as the
means of Cure; for those that see nothing but Wrath and Enmity in God toward
them in their present Condition, what is it but to require a Man to work
without Strength, promising him that he shall have Strength when his Work is
done; for Comfort and Fortitude is so called, because it comfort and
strengthens. True it is, That the Law which is the Ministration of
Condemnation, obliges them to Obedience; but our merciful God expects no
sincere Performance of his Law, from such impotent miserable Wretches in order
to their Salvation by Christ, till he has first delivered them in some measure
from those Discomforts, slavish Fears and Despondencies, that hold them captive
under the Law of Sin and Death. We may require a strong healthy Person, first
to work and then to expect Meat, Drink and Wages, but a fainting, famished
Person, must first have Food, or a reviving Cordial to strengthen his Heart
before he can work.

Sixthly, Both Scripture and Experience show, That this is the Method whereby
God brings his People from Sin to Holiness, though some of them are brought
under Terrors for a while, that Sin may be the more imbittered, and the
Salvation of Christ rendered more precious and acceptable to them, yet such are
again delivered from their Terrors by the Comfort of God's Salvation, that they
may be fitted for Holiness; and generally a holy Life begins with Comfort,
and is maintained by it. God gave to Adam at his first Creation the Comfort of
his Love and Favor, and the Happiness of Paradise to encourage him to
Obedience, and when he had left those Comforts by the Fall, he was no longer
able to obey until he was restored by new Comfort of the promised Seed. Christ
the Second Adam set God always before his face, and he knew that because God
was at his right hand, he should not be moved, therefore his heart was glad,
and his glory rejoiced, Psalm. 16.8, 9. This made him willing to bear his Agony
and bloody Sweat, and to be obedient unto Death, even the death of the Cross.
God drew the Israelites to Obedience with the Cords of a Man, with the Bonds of
Love, by taking off the Yoke on their Jaws, and laying Meat before them, Hos.
11.4. David tells us for our Instruction, how he was brought to an holy
Conversation, Thy loving kindness is before mine eyes, and I have walked in thy
truth, Psalm. 26.3. Lord, I have hoped for thy salvation, and done thy
Commandments, Psalm. 119.166. We have several Examples in the New Testament of
the Joy that Sinners had in the first receiving of Christ, Acts 2.41. And when
the Gospel first came to the Thessalonians, they received the Word in much
affliction with joy in the Holy Ghost, 1 Thessalonians. 1.4, 5. When the Gentiles heard
the Word of God they were glad, and as many as were ordained to eternal Life
believed. The Apostle Paul was constrained by the Love of Christ to give up
himself to live to Christ, 2 Cor. 4.14, 15. I dare appeal to the Experience of
any that obey God out of hearty Love, let them examine themselves, and consider
whither they were brought to give up themselves to serve God in love, without
comfortable apprehensions of the Love of God toward them, I dare say there are
no such Prodigies in the new Birth.

Seventhly, What comfortless Religion do those make that allow People no
comfort before hand to strengthen them for holy Performances that are very
cross, displeasing and grievous to their natural Inclinations, as the plucking
out of a right Eye, cutting off of a right Hand, but would have them first to
do such things with love and delight under all their present Fears,
Despondencies, and corrupt Inclinations, and to hope that by doing the Work
thoroughly and sincerely they shall at last attain to a more comfortable State.
All true spiritual Comfort as well as Salvation is indeed quite banished out of
the World if it be suspended upon the Condition of our good Works, which has
already appeared to be the Condition of the Law that works no Comfort but
Wrath, Romans 4.15. This makes the ways of Godliness odious to many, they think
they shall never enjoy a pleasant hour in this World, if they walk in them, and
they had rather comfort themselves with sinful Pleasures then have no Comfort
at all. Others labor a while in such a comfortless Religion with inward
fretting and repining at the Bondage of it, and at last grow wearry and throw
of all Religion, because they know none better. They that bind such heavy
burdens upon Men and grievous to be born will plead, that they are not to be
blamed because they do but preach the Gospel of God and Christ, whereas indeed
they preach a Gospel of Man's own forging contrary to the nature of the true
Gospel of Christ, which is glad tidings of great joy to all People, Luke 2.10.
An uncomfortable Gospel cannot proceed from God the Father, who is the Father
of Mercies and the God of all Comfort, 2 Cor. 1.3. Nor from Christ who is the
Consolation of Israel, Luke 2.25. nor from the Spirit who is the Comforter,
Joh. 14.16, 17. God meets him that rejoices and works Righteousness, Isa.
64.5. He will be served with gladness and singing, as he showed by the Type of
variety of Music, and great numbers of Musicians in the Temple, Christ speaks
to us by his Gospel, that his joy may abide in us, and that our joy may be
full, Job. 15.11. No sorrow is approved of by God, except Godly sorrow which
can never be in us without some comfort of the Love of God toward us. They
that are offended at the Uncomfortableness of a Religious Life, never yet knew
the true way of Religion, else they would find that the ways of Wisdom ar^ ways
of pleasantness, and all her Paths peace, Prove 3.17.

DIRECT. X.
That we may be prepared by the Comforts of the Gospel to perform sincerely the
Duties of the Law, we must get some assurance of our Salvation in that very
Faith whereby Christ himself is received into our Hearts; Therefore me must
endeavoar to believe on Christ confidently, persuading and assuring our selves
in the Act of believing, that God freely gives to us an Interest in Christ and
his Salvation according to his gracious Promise.

EXPLICATION.
IT is evident that these Comforts of the Gospel, that are necessary to an Holy
Practice, cannot be truly received without some assurance of our Interest in
Christ and his Salvation; for some of those Comforts consist in a good
Persuasion of our reconciliation with God, and of our future Heavenly
Happiness, and of Strength both to will and to do that which is acceptable to
God through Christ, as has been before showed: Hence it will clearly follow,
that this assurance is very necessary to enable us for the Practice of
Holiness, as those Comforts that must go before the Duties of the Law in order
of nature, as the Cause goes before the Effect, though not in any distance of
time. My present work is to show, what this assurance is that is so necessary
unto Holiness, and which I have here asserted, that we must act in that very
Faith whereby we receive Christ himself into our Hearts, even in justifying
saving Faith. This Doctrine seems strange to many that profess themselves
Protestants a late days, whereas it was formerly highly owned by the chief
Protestants whom God made use of to restore the Purity of the Gospel, and to
maintain it against the Papists for many Years, they commonly taught that Faith
was a Persuasion or Considence of our own Salvation by Christ, and that we must
be sure to apply Christ and his Salvation to our selves in believing; And this
Doctrine was one of the great Engines whereby they prevailed to overthrow the
Popish Superstition, whereto doubtfulness of Salvation is one of the principal
Pillars. But many of the Successors of those Protestants have deserted them,
and left their Writings to be shamefully insulted over by the Papists, and this
innovation has been of longer standing amongst us than several other parts of
our new Divinity, and maintained by those that profess to abhor that corrupt
Doctrine which the Papist have built upon such Principles. Modern Divines may
think they stand upon the Shoulders of their Predecessors, whose Labors they
enjoy, and that they can see farther than they, as the Schoolmen might have
like thoughts of the ancient Fathers; but for all this they may not be able to
see so far, if the eyes of their Predecessors were better enlightened by the
Spirit of God to understand the Mystery of the Gospel, and why may we not judge
that it is so in the present Case? The Eyes of Men in these late Years have
been blinded in this point of Assurance by many false Imaginations. They think
that because Salvation is not promised to us absolutely, but upon condition of
believing on Christ for it; therefore we must first believe directly on Christ
for our Salvation, and after that we must reflect our Minds upon our Faith, and
examine it by several Marks and Signs, especially by the Fruit of sincere
Obedience; and if upon this examination we find out certainly that it is true
saving Faith, then and not before we may believe assuredly that we in
particular shall be saved: On this account they say that our Salvation is by
the direct, and our assurance by the reflect act of Faith, and that many have
true Faith, and shall be saved that never have any assurance of their Salvation
as long as they live in this World, they find by Scripture and Experience, that
many precious Saints of God are frequently troubled with doubtings, whither
they shall be saved, and whither their Faith and Obedience be sincere, so that
they cannot see assurance in themselves; therefore they conclude that Assurance
must not be accounted absolutely necessary to justifying Faith and Salvation,
lest we should make the Hearts of doubting Saints sad and drive them to
despair. They account that former Protestants were guilty of a manifest
Absurdity, in making assurance to be of the Nature and Definition of
Saving-Faith, because all that hear the Gospel are bound to Saving-Faith, and
yet they are not bound absolutely to believe that they themselves shall be
saved, for then many of them would be bound to believe that which is not
declared in the Gospel concerning them in particular, yea that which is a plain
lie, because the Gospel shows that many of those that are called are not
chosen to Salvation, and that perish for ever, Mat. 20.16. No wonder if the
appearance of so great an Absurdity move many to imagine that Saving-Faith is a
trusting or resting on Christ as the only sufficient means of Salvation without
any assurance; or that it is a desiring and venturing to trust, or rely upon
him in a mere State of Suspense and Uncertainty concerning our Salvation, or
with a probable Opinion or conjectural Hope of it at best.

Another Objection against this Doctrine of Assurance is, that it destroys
Self-examination, brings forth the evil Fruits of Pride and Arrogance, as if
they knew their places in Heaven already before the Day of Judgment, causes
carelessness of Duty, carnal Security, all manner of Licentiousness. And this
makes them commend doubtfulness of our Salvation, as necessary to maintain in
us Humility, Religious Fear, Watchfulness, much searching and trying our
spiritual State and Ways, diligence in good Works and all Deyotion.

Against all those contrary Imaginations, I shall endeavor to maintain this
ancient Protestant Doctrine of assurance, as I have expressed in the Direction;
and first I shall lay down some Observations for the right understanding of it,
which will be sufficient to turn the edge of the strongest Objections that can
be made against it.

First, Observe diligently that the Assurance directed unto, is not a
Persuasion that we have already received Christ and his Salvation, or that we
have been already brought in to a State of Grace, but only that God is pleased
graciously to give Christ and his Salvation unto us, and to bring us into a
State of Grace, though we have been altogether in a State of Sin and Death
until this present time; so that this Doctrine does not at all tend to breed
Presumption in wicked and unregenerate Men, that their state is good already,
but only encourages them to come to Christ confidently for a good State. I
acknowledge that we may, yea many must be taught to doubt whether their present
State be good; and that it is Humility so to do, and that we must find out the
Certainty and Sincerity of our Faith and Obedience by Self-examination, before
we can have a well-grounded Assurance that we are in a State of Grace and
Salvation already, and that such an assurance belongs to that which they call
the reflect Act of Faith (if any act of Faith can be made of, it being
spiritual Sense or feeling of what is in my self) and is not of the Essence of
that Faith whereby we are justified and saved, and that many precious Saints
are without it, and subject to many Doubts that are contrary to it, so that
they may not know at all that it shall go well with them at the Day of
Judgment; and that it may be sometimes intermitted, if not wholly lost after it
is gotten, and that we should strive to walk holily, that we may attain to it;
because it is very useful for our growth and increase in Faith, and in all
Holiness. Most Protestants amongst us, when they speak or write of Assurance,
mean only, that which is by Reflection, and I have said enough briefly, to show
that what I assert, is consistent with the Doctrine which is commonly received
concerning it, and destructive to none of the good Fruits of it, therefore not
guilty of those Evils that some falsely charge it with. This kind of Assurance
which I speak of, answers not the Question, Whither I am already in a state
of Grace and Salvation? There is another great Question that the Soul must
answer, that it may get into a state of Grace. Whether God be graciously
pleased now to bestow Christ and his Salvation upon me, though I have been
hitherto a very wicked Creature? We must be sure to resolve this Question
comfortably, by another kind of Assurance in the direct act of Faith, wherein
we are to persuade our selves without reflecting upon any good Qualifications
in our selves: That God is ready graciously to receive us into the Arms of his
saving Mercy in Christ, notwithstanding all our former Wickedness, according to
the gracious Promise, I will call them my people, which were not my people, and
her beloved, which was not beloved, and it shall come to pass, that in the
place where it was said unto them, Ye are not my people, there shall they be
called the children of the living God, Romans 9.25, 26.

Secondly, The Assurance directed unto, is not a Persuasion of our Salvation,
whatever we do, or however we live and walk; but only in a limited way through
mere Free Grace in Christ, by partaking of Holiness as well as Forgiveness, and
by walking in the way of Holiness to the Enjoyment of the Glory of God. We
shall not heartily desire or endeavor to assure our selves of such a Salvation
as this, if we be not brought first to see our own Sinfulness, and Misery, and
to despair of our own Righteousness and Strength, and to hunger and thirst for
the sanctifying as well as justifying Grace of God in Christ, that so we may
walk in the ways of Holiness to the Enjoyment of Heavenly Glory. The Faith
whereby we receive Christ must have in it not only a Persuasion of Happiness,
but these and the like good Qualifications that will make it a most holy Faith.
Certainly an Assurance thus qualified will not beget any Pride in us, but
rather Humility and self-loathing, except any account it Pride to rejoice and
glory in Christ, when we have no Confidence in the Flesh, Phil. 3.3. It will
not destroy religious Fear, and breed carnal Security; but rather it will make
us fear going aside from Christ our only Resuge and Security, and walking after
the Flesh. Noah had cause to enter into the Ark, and to abide there with
Assurance of his Preservation, yet he might well be afraid to venture out of
the Ark, because he was persuaded that Continuance in the Ark was his only
Safery from perishing in the Flood. And how can a Persuasion of Salvation in a
way of Holiness, breed Sloathfulness in Duty, Carelessness and Licentiousness?
It does rather mightily allure us and stir us up to be always abounding in the
Work of the Lord, for as much as we know that our labor is not in vain in the
Lord, 1 Cor. 15.5. They that are persuaded of the Free Grace of God toward them
in Christ, are not indeed sollicitous about earning their Salvation by their
own legal Works, and Satan is ready to suggest to them, that this is a sinful
Carelessness, and tends to Licenciousness; but they that will believe this
false Suggestion of Satan, show plainly, that they do not yet know what it is
to serve God in Love, and that they are held in to all their Obedience by the
Bit and Bridle of slavish Fear, as the horse and mule that have no
understanding, Psalm. 32.9.

Thirdly, Beware of thinking so highly of this Assurance, as if it were
inconsistent with any doubting in the same Soul. A great Reason why many
Protestants have receded from the Doctrine of their Ancestors in this Point, is
because they think, there can be no true Assurance of Salvation in any that are
troubled with Doubtings, as they find many be, whom they cannot but own as true
Believers and precious Saints of God. True indeed, this Assurance must be
contrary to Doubtings in the nature of it, and so if it be perfect in the
highest Degree it would exclude all Doubting out of the Soul, and it does now
exclude in some Degree. But is there not Flesh as well as Spirit in the best
Saints on Earth, Gal. 5.17. Is there not a law in their members warring against
the law of their minds? Romans 7.23. May not one that truly believes, say, Lord,
help my unbelief, Mark 9.24. Can any on Earth say, they have received any Grace
in the highest Degree, and that they are wholly free from the contrary
Corruption? Why then should we think that Assurance cannot be true, except it
be perfect, and free the Soul from all Doubtings? The Apostle accounts it a
great Blessing to the Thessalonians that they had much Assurance, intimating
that some true Assurance might be in a less Degree, 1 Thessalonians. 1.5. Peter had
some good Assurance of Christ's Help when he walked on the Water at Christ's
Command, and yet he had some Doubtfulness in him, as his Fear showed when he
saw the Wind boisterous. He had some Faith contrary to doubting, though it were
but little, as Christ's Words to him show, O thou of little faith, wherefore
did thou doubt? Matthew. 14.29, 30, 31. It is strange if the Flesh and the
Devil should never oppose a true Assurance and assault it with Doubtings. A
Believer may be sometimes so overwhelmed with Doubtings, that he may not be
able to perceive an Assurance in himself, he is so far from knowing his Place
in Heaven already, (as some scoffingly object) that he will say that he knows
not any Assurance that he has of being there, and needs diligent
self-examination to find it out; yet if at that time he can blame his Soul for
doubting, Why art thou cast down, O my soul, why art thou disquieted within me?
hope thou in God for I shall yet praise him, Psalm. 42.11. If he can condemn his
Doubtings as sinful, and say with himself, This is mine infirmity Psalm. 77.10.
These Doubtings are of the Flesh, and of the Devil; if he still endeavor to
call God Father, and complain to him that he doubts whether he be his Father,
and pray that God will give him the Assurance of his Fatherly Love which he is
not sensible of, and dispel those Fears and Doubtings: I say that such an one
has some true Assurance, though he must strive to grow to a higher Degree; for
if he were not persuaded of the Truth of the Love of God toward him, he could
not rationally condemn his Fears and Doubts concerning it as sinful, neither
could he rationally pray to God as his Father, or that God would assure him of
that Love that he does not think to be true.

Do but grant that it is the Nature of saving Faith, thus to resist and
struggle with slavish Fears of Wrath, and doubting of our own Salvation, and
you grant in effect, that there is, and must be something of Assurance of our
Salvation in Saving faith, whereby it resists Doubtings, and you are in
effect of the same Judgment with me in the Assertion, however strange my
Expressions seem to you. If this that I have said concerning our Imperfection
in Assurance, as well as in other Graces, were well considered, this ancient
Protestant Doctrine would be freed much from Prejudice, and gain more Esteem
among us.

Fourthly, In the last place, let it be well observed, that the Reason why we
are to assure our selves in our Faith, that God freely gives Christ and his
Salvation to us particularly is, not because it is a Truth before we believe
it, but because it becomes a certain Truth when we believe it, and because it
will never be true, except we do in some measure persuade and assure our selves
that it is so. We have no absolute Promise or Declaration in Scripture, that
God certainly will or does, give Christ and his Salvation to any one of us in
particular, neither do we know it to be true already by Scripture, or Sense, or
Reason, before we assure our selves absolutely of it, yea, we are without
Christ's Salvation at present in a state of Sin and Misery under the Curse and
Wrath of God. Only I shall prove that we are bound by the Command of God, thus
to assure our selves, and the Scripture does sufficiently warrant us that we
shall not deceive our selves in believing a Lie, but according to our Faith so
it shall be to us, Matthew. 9.29. This is a strange kind of Assurance far
different from other Ordinary kinds, and therefore no Wonder, if it be found
weak and imperfect, and difficult to be obtained, and it be assaulted with many
Doubtings. We are constrained to believe other things on the clear Evidence we
have that they are true, and would remain true, whether we believe them or no,
so that we cannot deny our Assent without rebelling against the Light of our
Senses, Reason or Conscience; but here our Assurance is not impressed on our
Thoughts by any Evidence of the thing, but we must work it out in our selves by
the Assistance of the Spirit of God, and thereby we bring our own Thoughts into
Captivity to the Obedience of Christ. None but God can justly require of us
this kind of Assurance, because he only calls those things that are not as
tho they were, Romans 4.17. He only can give Existence to things that yet are
not, and make a thing to be true upon our believing it, that was not true
before. He only can make good that Promise, What things soever ye desire when
ye pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye shall have them, Mark 11.24. Who
is he that says, and it comes to pass, when the Lord commands it not,
Lament. 3.37. Therefore this Faith is due to God only, and greatly redowndeth
to his Glory. Men will often require a Believing something like it, as when one
says, I will forgive your Offense and be your Friend, if I can find that you
believe it, and that you take me for a Friend; but their fallible Word is not
sufficient ground to make us persuade our selves absolutely that we shall have
their promised favor. The Faith of Miracles gives us some light in this
matter; Christ assured them on whom they were wrought, and who had Power given
them of working them, that the Miracles should be wrought, if they believed
without doubting of the Event, Mark 11. And there is a Reason for this
Resemblance because the end of working Miracles was to confirm the Doctrine of
the Gospel of Salvation by Faith in Christ's Name, as the Scriptures clearly
show, and indeed the Salvation of a Sinner is a very great Miracle. It is
reported that Wizards do often require those that come to them that they should
believe that they shall obtain what they desire of them, or at least that they
are able to fulfill their Desires, whereby the Devil, the Master of those
Wizards shows himself to be God's Ape, and that he would fain have that
Honor and Glory ascribed to himself that is due to God alone.

Having thus explained the Nature of that Assurance which I have directed unto,
I shall now produce several Arguments to prove, that there is, and must
necessarily be such an Assurance or Persuasion of our Salvation in Saving-Faith
it self.

First, This Assurance of Salvation is employed in the Description before given
of that Faith whereby we receive Christ and his Salvation into our Hearts. I
described Faith to be a Grace of the Spirit, whereby we heartily believe the
Gospel, and also believe on Christ as he is revealed and freely promised to us
therein for all his Salvation, and I showed in the Explanation, that believing
on Christ, is the same with resting, relying, leaning, staying our selves on
Christ, or God through Christ, for our Salvation. It may be some will like that
Description the better, because Faith was there described by Terms that are
ordinarily used, even by those that deny the necessity of Assurance; but those
ordinary Terms do sufficiently include Assurance in the nature of Faith, and
they cannot stand without it, and this shows that many hold the Doctrine of
Assurance implicitly, and profess it, though they think the contrary. Believing
on Christ for Salvation as freely promised to us, must needs include a
Dependence on Christ with a Persuasion, that Salvation shall be freely given,
as it is freely promised to us. Believing with a divine Faith grounded on the
infallible Truth of the Free-promise, if it did not in some measure exclude a
mere Suspense and wavering Opinion or Conjecture, were not worthy to be so
called. Some may be so absurd as to say, that Faith is only a believing that we
shall be saved by Christ if we perform such Conditions as he requires, and
then indeed it will leave us where it found us as to any certainty of Salvation
until those Conditions be performed; but I have already prevented such an
Absurdity, by showing that this believing on Christ, is it self not only the
Condition of our Salvation, but also the Instrument whereby we actually receive
it. Believing being the proper Act of Faith, must needs have the same
contraries to it, as staggering, Romans 4.20. Wavering, Heb. 10.29. Doubting,
Matthew. 14.31. Fear, Mark 5.36. These contraries do much illustrate the nature
of Faith, and do show that believing must have some Confidence in it, else it
would have doubting in the very nature of it: for what Man that understands
the Preciousness of his immortal Soul, and his Danger of loosing it, can ever
avoid Fear, Doubting and Trouble of Heart, by any believing whereby he does not
at all assure himself of his Salvation? The other Terms of trusting and resting
on Jesus Christ, etc. whereby Faith is often described by orthodox Teachers,
must include Assurance of Salvation, because they signify the same thing with
believing on Christ; the Soul must have its sufficient Support to beat it up
against Oppressing Fears, Troubles, Cares, Despair, that it may thus trust and
rest. The right manner of trusting and hoping in the Lord is by assuring our
selves against all Fears and Doubtings, That the Lord is our God, and he is
become our Salvation. I trusted on thee, O Lord, I said thou art my God, Psalm.
31.14. The Lord is my rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer, my strength, in
whom I will trust, Psalm. 18.2. Behold, God is my salvation, I will trust and
not be afraid, Isa. 12.2. O my soul hope thou in God, who is the health of my
countenance and my God, Psalm. 42.16. True hope is grounded on God only, that he
will bless us, that it may be an anchor for the soul, sure and steadfast, Heb.
6.17.18, 19. If you trust, rely, and stay your selves on Christ, or hope in
him, without assuring your selves at all of Salvation by him, you make no
better use of him, than if he were a broken reed; and if you would stay your
selves on the Lord, you must look on him as your God, as the Prophet teaches,
Let him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God, Isai. 50. 10. If
you will rest in the Lord you must believe that he deals bountifully with
you, Psalm. 116.7. or else for ought you know you make your Bed in Hell; and you
will show little regard of Christ and of your own Soul, if you dare to rest
under the Wrath of God without any Persuasion of a sure Interest in Christ.
People may please themselves with such a trusting or resting, etc. when they
are at ease, but in time of Temptation it vanishes away, and appears to be
no true Faith, but is turned into Shame. The Soul that lives in such wavering
and doubting concerning Salvation, does not stay it self nor rest at all, but
is like a Wave of the Sea driven with the Wind, and tossed, he is a double
minded man, unstable in all his ways, Jam. 1.6. If you continue in mere
Suspense and Doubtfulness of Salvation by Christ; your Desire to trust, is but
a lazy woulding without any fixed Resolution, and you dare not yet venture to
trust on him steadfastly. If you call it only your desire to trust and rely on
Jesus Christ, I may answer that you cannot do thus much in a right manner
except you desire and venture to persuade and assure your selves of your
Salvation by Christ, notwithstanding all the Causes that you have to doubt and
fear the contrary. If it be objected that we may trust on Christ only as a
sufficient means of Salvation, without any Assurance of the Effect. I shall
acknowledge that the sufficiency of God and Christ is a good ground for us to
rest on, but we must understand by it, not only a sufficiency of Power, but
also of Good Will and Mercy toward us: For what have we to do more with the
Sufficiency of God's and Christ's Power than fallen Angels, without his
Good Will toward us? and if this be truly believed, it will exclude
Doubtfulness concerning your Salvation.

Secondly, Several places of Scripture declare positively and expressly, that we
are to be assured of our Salvation in that Faith, whereby we are justified and
saved. I shall produce some Instances. We are exhorted, to draw near to God
with full assurance of faith, Heb. 10.22. Many apply this Text to that which
they call, the reflect Act of Faith, because they imagine that all Assurance
must needs be by Reflection; but the Words of the Text do clearly teach us to
understand it of that Act of Faith, whereby we draw near to God, that is the
direct Act, and it is that very Faith whereby the Just do live, even
justifying, saving Faith, verse 38. And this Assurance must be full, at least
in the true and proper Nature of it, in Opposition unto mere Doubtfulness and
Uncertainty, though we are yet further to labor for that which is full in the
highest Degree of Perfection. And the same Faith whereby we are exhorted to
draw nigh unto God, and whereby the Just lives, is a little after, Chap. 11.1.
affirmed to be the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things
not seen. Why should saving Faith have these high Titles and Attributes given
to it, if it did not contain in it a sure Persuasion of the great things of our
Salvation hoped for, which makes them to be evident to the Eyes of our Mind,
as if they were already present in their Substance, though yet not visible to
our bodily Eyes; that Faith whereby we are made Partakers of Christ, and to be
Christ's House, must be worthy to be called Confidence, and accompanied with
rejoicing Hope, Whose house are we if we hold fast the confidence and rejoicing
of the hope, firm unto the end, Heb. 3.6.14. What is Confidence concerning any
thing, but trusting concerning it with a firm Persuasion of the Truth of it? If
we have only a strong Opinion concerning a thing, without any absolute
certainty, we use to say that we are not altogether confident of it. The Faith
whereby we are justified, must be in a measure like to the Faith whereby
Abraham against Hope believed in Hope, that his Seed should certainly; be
multiplied according to the Promise of God, though by reason of the Deadness of
his own Body; and of Sarah's Womb, he could have no Evidence from his own
Qualifications to assure himself of it, but all Appearances were rather to the
contrary, as the Apostle teaches clearly Romans 4.18, 19, 23.24. As absolute as
this Promise was thus made Abraham, yet it was not to be fulfilled without this
Assurance of Faith, and by the like Faith the free Promises of Salvation by
Christ, will be absolutely fulfilled to us. The Apostle James expressly
requires that we should ask good things of God in Faith, nothing doubting,
which includes Assurance manifestly; and he tells us plainly, that without
it a Man ought not to think that he shall receive any thing of the Lord;
therefore we may firmly conclude, that without it we shall not receive the
Salvation of Christ, James 1.6. 7. And that which the Apostle James requires
us not to doubt of is, the obtaining the things that we ask, as we may learn
from an Instruction to the same purpose given to us by Christ himself, What
things soever ye desire when ye pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye
shall have them, Mark 11.24. More places of Scripture might be alleged to the
same purpose; but these are sufficient to evince that we are bound to assure
our selves of our Salvation in Faith it self, or else we are never likely to
enjoy it, and that it is not Humility, but rather proud Disobedience to live in
a state of mere Suspense and Doubtfulness concerning our Salvation; and that
this Assurance must be in the direct Act of Faith whereby we are justified and
saved: For as for that which is called the Reflect Act of Faith, it is a
certain Truth and generally owned, that it is not absolutely necessary to
Salvation to any, and that it is sinful and pernicious to many to believe that
they are already entered into a state of Grace and Salvation.

Thirdly, God gives us sufficient ground in Scripture to come to Christ with
confident Faith, at the very first, trusting assuredly that Christ and his
Salvation shall be given to us without any Failing and Delay, however vile and
sinful our Condition has been hitherto. The Scripture speaks to the vilest
Sinners in such a manner as if it were framed on purpose to beget Assurance of
Salvation in them immediately, Acts 2.39. Chap. 3.26. This Promise is unversal,
That whosoever believes on Christ shall not be ashamed, without making a
Difference between Jew and Greek, Romans 10.11, 12. And this Promise is confirmed
by the Blood of Christ, who was given for the World, and lifted up upon the
Cross for this very end, that whosoever believes on him should not perish, but
have everlasting life, John 3.14, 15, 16. His Invitation is free to any, If any
man thirst, let him come to me and drink, and this Drink is promised to every
one that believes, John 7.37. 39. The Command of believing is propounded not
only in general, but in particular, and the Promise of Salvation upon
believing, is also applied personally, and that to such as have been hitherto
in a state of Sin and Wrath; as to the wicked persecuting self-murdering
Jailer, Acts 16.31. Believe on the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved and
thine house. God commanded them that walked altogether in Sin hitherto, to call
him their own Father in their very first returning, Jer. 3.4. So Hos. 2.23. God
says, he will say, Thou art my people, and they shall say, Thou art my God,
confidently averring their personal Interest in him. God has joined Confidence
and Salvation inseparably together, In returning and rest ye shall be saved, in
quietness and in confidence shall be your strength, Isai. 30.15. What a poor
slender Use and Improvement do many make of these Discoveries of the rich Grace
of God toward Sinners, who say that if we see that we have performed the
Condition of believing, then we may take Christ confidently as our own; they
skip over the first and principal Use they ought to make of them; the very
Performance of the Condition is to take Christ as our own immediately, and to
eat him and drink him, by believing consiently on him for our Salvation. If an
honest rich Man say to a poor Woman, I promise to be thy Husband if thou will
have me, say but the Word and I am thine; may not she presently answer
confidently, Then thou art my Husband and I claim thee for my Husband; and
should she not rather say so, then say, I believe not what thou say. If an
honest Man say, Do but take this Gift and it is your own, do but eat and drink
and you are freely welcome, may not I take the Gift, and eat and drink at first
without any further ado, and with Assurance that it is mine freely; if I do it
doubtingly, I disparage the Honesty and Credit of the Donor, as if he were not
a Man of his Word. In like manner, if, fearing to be too confident, least we
should believe a lie, we should come to Christ doubtingly, and in mere
Suspense, whether we shall be freely entertained after all Gods free
Invitations and Promises, should we not disparage the Faithfulness of God? and
should we not be guilty of making God a Liar? as the Apostle John teaches,
because of our not believing the Record which God gave of his Son, and this is
the record that God has given to us eternal life and this life is in his Son,
1 John 5.10, 11. And what if the Salvation promised be not absolutely intended
for all to whom the Gospel comes? it is enough that God gives us his faithful
Word, that they that believe, shall have it, and none else, and has absolutely
intended to fulfill his Word, that none shall find it to be a lie to them, and
has joined Believing and Salvation together inseparably. On this ground God
may justly cause the Promise of this Salvation to be published to all, and may
justly require all to believe on him assuredly for their own Salvation, that so
it may appear whether they will give him the Glory of his Truth, and if they
will not, he may justly reject them, and punish them severely for dishonouring
him by their Unbelief: in this Case we must not look to the secret Decrees of
God, but to his revealed Promises and Command. Thus God promised to the
Israelites in the Wilderness, that he would give them the Land of Canaan, and
would fight for them against their Enemies, and required them not to fear or be
discouraged, that so the Promise might be fulfilled to them, yet God never
absolutely decreed or intended that those Israelites should enter in, as the
Event did quickly manifest, Deuteronomy. 1.20, 21, 29.30. Yet were they not bound in
this case to trust confidently in God to give them Victory over their Enemies,
and to give them the Possession of the Land? had they not sufficient ground for
such a Faith? was it not just with God to consume them in the Wilderness for
their Unbelief? Let us therefore fear, least a Promise being made of entering
into this everlasting Rest through Christ, we should come short of it, and fall
after the same Example of Unbelief, Heb. 4.1, 11.

Fourthly, The Professors of true Godliness that we read of through the
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament did commonly profess their Assurance
and Persuasion of their Interest in God and his Salvation, and were directed by
the word of God so to do, and true Saints had still some true Assurance of it,
and we have no cause to judge that this Assurance was grounded on the certainty
of their own good Qualifications, but rather on the Promises of God by the
direct. Act of Faith. We may judge of the ordinary Profession of the Frame of
Spirit that was in Saints, by some Instances. I shall begin with the Profession
that the Church made when it was very corrupt, at its first coming out of
Egypt, when few of them could assure themselves by their own good
Qualifications that they were in a state of Grace already, which many now
imagine to be the only way of Assurance. Even in that corrupt Time the Children
of Israel sung that triuphant Song of Moses, The Lord is my strength and my
song, and he is become my salvation, he is my God, etc. Exodus 15.2. Moses
taught them in this Song to assure themselves of their own personal Interest in
the Salvation, and he guided them to the Practice of their Duty, and they did
not find fault with Moses as some do with Ministers in these Days, for putting
them to express more Confidence in their Song than they could find ground for
in their Qualifications, but they applied themselves to the exercise of their
Faith agreeably to the Song, and doubtless this Faith was unfeigned in some sew
of them, though but feigned in others, for it is testified of them, that then
they believed his Words they sang his Praise, Psalm. 106.12. Several other
Psalms and Songs that were by divine Appointment in common Use under the Old
Testament, are as clear an Evidence as we can desire of that Assurance of Faith
that was commonly professed, and that People were generally bound to, under the
Old Testament, as Psalm. 23. and 27. and 46. Many other Psalms or Expressions in
Psalms might be alleged. The Spirits of few in comparison, could have
thoroughly complied with such Psalms though they were true Believers, if all the
Assurance of the Love of God must altogether depend upon the certain Knowledge
of the sincerity of their own Hearts. We have a great Cloud of Witnesses
gathered out of the whole History of the Old Testament, Heb. 11. who did, and
suffered, and obtained great things by Faith, whose Examples are produced on
purpose that we may follow them in believing to the saving of our Souls, Heb.
10.39. And if we consider these Examples particularly, we shall find that many
of them do evidently guide us to such a saving Faith, as has an Assurance of
the Effect contained in the nature of it. I confess we read several times of
the Fears and Doubtings of the Saints under the Old Testament; but we read also
how their Faith opposed such Fears and Doubts, and how they themselves
condemned them as contrary to Faith, as in the Psalms, Psalm. 42.11. Psalm.
31.22. and 77.7, 10. The most mournful Psalm in Scripture begins with an
Expression of some Assurance, Psalm. 88.1. And we may note that the Doubtings
that we meet with of the Saints of old, were commonly occasioned by some
Extraordinary Affliction, or some heinous Transgression, not by common
Failings, or the common Original Depravation of Nature, or the Uncertainty of
their Election, or any Thought that it is Humility to doubt, and that they were
not bound to be confident of Gods Salvation, because then many might be bound
to believe a Lie. It is hard to find any of these Occasions of doubting under
the Old Testament, though they are grown so rise amongst us now under the New
Testament. In the time of the Apostles we may well expect that the Assurance of
Faith grew higher, because the Salvation of Christ was revealed, and the Spirit
of Adoption poured forth plentifully, and the Church made free from its former
Bondage under the terrifying Legal Covenant. Paul could prove to primitive
Christians, by Appeals to their own Experience, that they were the Children and
Heirs of God, because they had not received the Spirit of Bondage again to
fear, but the Spirit of Adoption, whereby they cry, Abba, father, the Spirit it
self bearing witness with our spirits (or bears our spirits witness as the
Syriaok and vulgar Latin render it, and as the like Greek Phrase is rendered,
Romans 9.1.) That we are the children of God, and if children, then heirs, Romans
8.15, 16. Gal. 4.6. And the Apostle tells the Ephesians, that after they
believed, they were sealed with the Holy Spirit, which was the Earnest of their
Inheritance, Ephesians. 1.13, 14. i. e. They were sealed from the same time that they
believed, for the original Words are in the same Tense. If this Witness, Seal
and Earnest of the Spirit had not been Ordinary to Believers, it would not have
been sufficient to prove that they were the Children of God, and such manner of
arguing might have driven some to despair, that wanted this Witness, Seal and
Earnest. Let us enquire now whether the Spirit bears witness that we are the
Children of God, and enables us to cry Abba, Father, by the direct Act, or by
that which they call the Reflect Act of Faith; for we must not think that it is
done by an Enthusiasm, without any ordinary means; nor can we reasonably
imagine, that no true Believers can call God Father, by the Guidance of the
Spirit, but only those few that are so sure of their own Sincerity, that by
reflecting upon it, they can ground an Act of Faith concerning their own
Interest in Christ; no surely, therefore we may judge rather that the Spirit
works this in us by giving us saving Faith it self, whereby all true
Believers are enabled to trust assuredly on Christ for the Enjoyment of the
Adoption of Children and all his Salvation, according to the Free Promise of
God, and to call God Father, without reflecting on any good Qualifications in
our selves, and by the direct Act of it: For the Spirit is received by the
direct Act of Faith, Gal. 3.2. And so he is the Spirit of Adoption, and Comfort
to all that receive him. They that assert that the Spirit witnesses our
Adoption, only by assuring us of the Sincerity of our Faith, Love, and other
gracious Qualifications, and by the reflect Act of Faith, do teach also
commonly, that you must again try whether the Spirit thus witnessing, be the
Spirit of Truth, or of Delusion, by searching narrowly whether our inward Grace
be sincere or counterfeit, so that hereby the Testimony of the Spirit is
rendered so hard to be discerned, that it stands us in no stead, but all our
Assurance is made at last to depend on our own certain Knowledge of our own
Sincerity. There are several other Evidences to show, That Believers generally
were persuaded of their Salvation in the Apostles times, they loved and waited
for the coming of Christ to judge the World, 1 Cor. 1.7. 2 Timothy 4.8. They loved
all the Saints for the Hope that was laid up for them in Heaven, Col. 1.3, 4.
The Corinthians that were very carnal, and but Babes in Christ, were persuaded
that they should judge the World, and Angels, and that their Bodies were
Members of Christ, and the Temples of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6.2, 3, 15, 19.
The very first coming of the Gospel to the Thessalonians, was in the Holy
Ghost, and much Assurance, so that they received it with much Affliction with
Joy of the Holy Ghost, when as yet they had no Considerable time to get
Assurance, by reflecting on their good Qualifications, 1 Thessalonians. 1.5, 6.
Likewise the believing Hebrews when they were illuminated at their first
Conversion, took joyfully the spoiling of their Goods, knowing that they had in
Heaven, a better and more enduring Substance, and this was their Confidence,
which they were not to cast off, because the Just lives by Faith, and
therefore it appears that this Confidence belonged necessarily to justifying,
saving Faith, Heb. 10, 32, 34, 35, 38. Now let those that allege the Examples
or Experiences of many modern Christians to disprove all that I have asserted,
and consider well whether these are fit to be laid in the Balance against all
the Scripture Examples and Experiences that I have produced out of the Old and
New Testament. I confess that Assurance of Salvation is more rarely professed
by Christians in these times than formerly, and we may thank some Teachers for
it, that have deserted the Doctrine of former Protestants in this Point, and
vented against it several Errors, such as have been already named, and now
would take Advantage to confirm the Truth of their Doctrines from those
Doubtings in Christians, that have been chiefly occasioned by it. But however
the nature of saving Faith is still the same, and I assert that in these Days
as well as formerly, it always has in it some Assurance of Salvation by
Christ, which does and will appear, at least in resisting and condemning all
Doubtings, and praying against them, and endeavoring to trust assuredly, and
to call God Father, except in extraordinary Desertions, by which our Gase must
not be tried. We are not to trust the Judgment of many concerning themselves,
they will judge falsely, that they have no Assurance at all, because they know
not yet by Marks and Signs that they are in a state of Grace already, or
because they think that there is no Assurance when there are many Doubtings,
and because it is so weak and so much oppressed with Doubting, that it can
hardly be discerned, as Life in a fainting Fit; but if their Judgments be
better informed, they may be brought to discern some Assurance in themselves:
We are also to take heed of mistaking those for true Believers that are not so,
and of judging this Point by their Experiences, which is a vulgar Error. The
blind Charity of some moves them to take all for true Believers, which are
full of Doubts and Troubles concerning their Salvation, though it may be they
only be convinced of Sin, and brought to some Zeal of God that is not according
to the Knowledge of the way of Salvation by Christ, and they think it Duty to
comfort such Ignorant Persons, by persuading of them that their state is good,
and their Faith right, though they have no Assurance of Salvation. Thus they
are brought to judge falsely concerning the nature of Faith, out of their blind
Charity to such as are yet in Ignorance and Unbelief, and instead of comforting
such, they rather take the direct way to harden them in their natural state,
and to divert them from seeking Consolation by Saving Faith in Christ, and to
ruin their Souls for ever.

Fifthly, The chief Office of this Faith in its direct saving Act, is to
receive Christ and his Salvation actually into our Hearts, as has been proved,
which Office cannot be rationally performed, except we do in some measure
persuade our Hearts, and assure our selves of the Enjoyment of him, as the Body
receives things into it self by the Hands and Mouth: So the Soul receives
these things to it self, and lays actual Hold on them by the Faculty of the
Will, making choice of them and embracing them in a way of present Enjoyment
and Possession, as it does by the Faculty of the Understanding see and
apprehend them; thus the Soul receives Comfort from outward things. As a
righteous Person cannot receive inward Comfort from outward things, as from
worldly Estate, Wife, Husband, Friends, etc. except it choose them as good and
count them his own by a Right and Title. This is the only rational way whereby
the Soul can actively lay hold on Christ, and take actual Possession of him and
his Salvation, as he is freely offered and promised to us in the Gospel, by the
Grace of Faith, which God has appointed to be our great Instrument for the
receiving of him, and closing with him. If we do not make choice of Christ as
our only Salvation, and Happiness, or if we be altogether in a slate of
Suspense, and doubting whether God will be pleased to give Christ to us or no,
it is evident that our Souls are quite loose from Christ, and have no Holdfast
or Enjoyment of him. They do not so much as pretend to any actual receiving or
laying hold or choosing of him, neither are they fully satisfied that it is
lawful for them so to do, but rather they are yet to seek whether they have any
good Ground and Right to lay hold on him or no. Let any rational; Man judge,
whether the Soul does, or can put forth any sufficient Act for the Reception
and Enjoyment of Christ as our Savior, Head, or Husband, while it is yet in
Doubt, whether it be the Will of Christ to be joined with us in such a near
Relation; can a Woman honestly receive any one as her Husband without being
assured that he is fully willing to be her Husband? The same may be said
concerning the several Parts of Christ's Salvation which are to be received by
Faith. It is evident that we do not aright receive the Benefit of Remission of
Sins, for the purging of our Consciences from that Guilt that lies upon them,
unless we have an assured Persuasion of God's forgiving them; we do not
actually receive into our Hearts our Reconciliation with God, and Adoption of
Children, and the Title to an everlasting Inheritance, until we can assure our
selves that God is graciously pleased to be our God and Father, and take us to
be his Children and Heirs. We do not actually receive any sufficient Strength
to encourage our Hearts to Holiness in all Difficulties, until we can
steadfastly believe that God is with us, and will not fail nor forsake us.

Hence then we may firmly conclude, that whosoever seeks to be saved by Faith,
and does not seek to have Assurance or Confidence of his own Salvation does but
deceive himself, and delude his Soul with a mere Fancy instead of saving
Faith, and does in effect seek to be saved in his corrupt Natural state,
without receiving and laying actual hold of the Lord Jesus Christ and his
Salvation.

Sixthly, It is also a great and necessary Office of Saving Faith, to purify
the Heart, and to enable us to live and walk in the Practice of all holy
Duties, by the Grace of Christ, and by Christ himself living in us, as has
been showed before, which Office Faith is not able to perform, except some
Assurance of our own Interest in Christ and his Salvation be comprehended in
the nature of it. If we would live to God, not our selves, but by Christ living
in us, according to Paul*s Example, we must be able to assure our selves as he
did, Christ loved me and gave himself for me, Gal. 2.20. We are taught, that if
we live in the Spirit, we shall walk in the Spirit, Gal. 5.25. It would be high
Presumption if we should endeavor to walk above our natural Strength and Power
by the Spirit, before we have made sure of our living by the Spirit. I have
showed that we cannot make Use of the comfortable Benefits of the Saving Grace
of Christ, whereby the Gospel does engage and encourage us to an holy Practice,
except we have some Confidence of our own Interest in those saving Benefits. If
we do not assuredly believe that we are dead to Sin, and alive to God through
Christ, and risen with Christ, and not under the Law, but under Grace, and
Members of Christ's Body, the Temple of his Spirit, the dear Children of God,
it would be Hypocrisy to serve God upon the Account of such Privileges as if
we reckoned our selves to be Partakers of them; he that thinks he should doubt
of his Salvation is not a fit Disciple for this manner of Doctrine, and he may
reply to the Preachers of the Gospel, if you would bring me to Holiness, you
must make Use of other more essectual Arguments, for I cannot practice upon
these Principles, because I have not Faith enough to believe that I have any
Interest in them: some Arguments taken from the Justice and Wrath of God
against Sinners, and his Mercy toward those that perform the Condition of
sincere Obedience, would work more powerfully upon me. O what a miserable
worthless kind of saving Faith is this? that cannot fit a Believer to practice
in a Gospel manner upon the most pure and powerful Principles of Grace, but
rather leaves him to work upon Legal Principles, which can never bring him to
serve God acceptably out of Love, and as such a Faith fails wholly in the
right manner of obeying upon Gospel Principles, so it fails also in the very
matter of some great Duties, which are of such a nature that they include
Assurance of God's Love in the right Performance of them, such are those great
Duties of Peace with God, rejoicing in the Lord always, Hope that makes not
ashamed, owning the Lord as our God and our Savior, praying to him as our
Father in Heaven, offering up Body and Soul as an acceptable Sacrifice to him,
casting all our Cares of Body and Soul upon him, Contentment and hearty
Thanksgiving in every Condition, making our Boast in the Lord, triumphing in
his Praise, rejoicing in Tribulation, putting on Christ in our Baptism,
receiving Christ's Body as broken for us, and his Blood as shed for us in the
Lord's Supper, committing our Souls willingly to God as our Redeemer when ever
he shall be pleased to call for us, loving Christ's Second Appearance, and
looking for it as that blessed Hope: when we fall into any sudden Doubting
whether we are in a state of Grace already when we are called to any present
Undertaking, as to partake of the Lord's Supper, or any Duty that requires
Assurance, to the right Performance of chem; we must relieve our selves by
trusting confidently in Christ for the present Gift of his Salvation, or else
we shall be driven to omit the Duty, or not to perform it rightly or sincerely;
can we judge our selves already in a state of Grace by the reflect Act of
Faith, if we do not find that we perform these Duties, at least several of them
sincerely, or if we do not find that we have such a holy Faith as does enable
or incline us to the Performance of them? And can we be thus enabled and
inclined by any Faith that is without some true Assurance of our Salvation?
Therefore I conclude, that we must necessarily have some Assurance of our
Salvation in the direct Act of Faith, whereby we are justified, sanctified, and
saved, before we can upon any good ground assure our selves that we are already
in a state of Salvation by that which they call the Reflect Act. Give me such a
saving Faith as will produce such Fruits as these. No other Faith will work by
Love, and therefore will not avail to Salvation in Christ, Gal. 5.6. The
Apostle James puts thee upon showing thy Faith by thy Works, James 2.18. And
in this Trial this Faith of Assurance comes off with high Praise and Honor:
When God calls his People to work outward Miracles by it, all things have
been possible to them, and it has frequently brought forth such Works of
Righteousness, as may be deservedly esteemed great Spiritual Miracles; from
hence has proceeded that Heroic Fortitude of the People of God, whereby their
absolute Obedience to God has shined forth in doing and suffering those great
things which are recorded in the holy Scriptures and in the Histories of the
Church. And if we be ever called to the fiery Trial as Protestants formerly
were, we shall find their Doctrine of Assurance, to encourage us in suffering
for the sake of Christ.

Seventhly, The contrary Doctrine which excludes Assurance out of the Nature
of Saving Faith brings forth many evil Fruits; it tends to bereave our
Souls of all Assurance of our Salvation and solid Comfort which is the Life of
Religion, by placing it after sincere universal Obedience, whereas if we have
them not first, we can never attain to this Obedience and to any Assurance that
depends on it, as has been proved, and this as far as it prevails makes us
subject to continual Doubtings concerning our Salvation, and to tormenting
Fears of Wrath, which casts out true Love to God, and can produce no better
than slavish hypocritical Service. It is one of the principal Pillars whereby
manifold Superstitions in Popery are supported, as their Monkish Orders, their
Satisfactions for Sin by Works, of Penance, Bodily Macerations, Whippings,
Pilgrimages, Indulgences, trusting on the Merits of Saints, etc. When once Men
have lost the Knowledge of the right way to assure themselves of Salvation,
they will catch at any Straw to avoid Drowning in the Gulf of Despair.

There is no way to administer any solid Comfort to the wounded Spirits of
those that see themselves void of all Holiness, under the Wrath and Curse of
God, dead in Sin, not able so much as to think a good Thought; you do but
increase their Terror and Anguish if you tell them they must first get Faith
and Obedience, and when they find they have done that, they may persuade
themselves, that God will receive them into his Grace and Favor. Alas they
know that they cannot believe nor obey, except God prevent them with his Grace
and Favor, and what if they be even at the Point of Death, struggling with
Death's Pangs, so that they have no time or leisure to get good Qualifications,
and examine the Goodness of them, you must have a more speedy way to comfort
such by discovering to them the Free-Promises of Salvation to the worst of
Sinners by Faith in Christ, and by exhorting them to apply those Promises and
trust on Christ confidently for Remission of Sins, Holiness and Glory, assuring
them also that God will help them to believe sincerely on Christ, if they
desire it with all their Hearts, and that it is their Duty to believe, because
God commands it.

Several other Evils are occasioned by the same Doctrine, Men are unwilling to
know the worst of themselves, and prone to think their Qualifications better
than they are, that they may avoid Despair; others please and content
themselves without any Assurance of their Interest in Christ, because they
think that is not necessary to Salvation, and that but few attain to it, and in
this they show little Love to Christ, or to their own Souls, some foster
Doubtings of Salvation as Signs of Humility, though they will hypocritically
complain of them; many mispend their time in poring upon their own Hearts, to
find out some Evidence of their Interest in Christ, when they should rather be
employed in receiving Christ, and walking in him by a confident Faith.

Some are troubled with Doubts whether they should call God Father, and what
Apprehensions they should have of him in Prayer, and are offended at Ministers,
that in their Public Prayers use any Expressions that the People cannot join
in, as if they do own God as their God and Father, and Christ as their Savior;
and upon the same Account they are offended at the Public singing of many of
David's Psalms, and avoid partaking of the Lord's Supper, because they are not
satisfied about their Interest in Christ.

Though true Believers have some Assurance of Salvation in Saving Faith it
self, yet it is much weakened in many by this contrary Doctrine, and assaulted
with many Doubtings, and then other good Qualifications must needs be low and
weak together with it, and so obscure that it is very hard to discern them; how
hard a thing then will it be for true Believers to assure themselves, by the
certain Knowledge of their own Sincerity, that they are in a state of Grace
already, which is the only Assurance of Faith? Some prescribe Marks and Signs
to distinguish Sincerity from Hypocrisy, that Believers cannot sufficiently
try themselves by them, except they have more Knowledge and Experience than
Ordinary.

Thus many Believers walk heavily in the Bitterness of their Souls, conflicting
with Fears and Doubtings all their Days, and this is the Cause that they have
so little Courage and Fervency of Spirit in the ways of God, and that they so
much mind earthly things, and are so afraid of Sufferings and Death. And if
they get some Assurance by the Reflect Act of Faith, they often soon lose it
again by Sins and Temptations. The way to avoid these Evils is to get your
Assurance, and to maintain it, and renew it upon all Occasions by the direct
Act of Faith, by trusting assuredly on the Name of the Lord, and staying your
self upon your God, when you walk in Darkness and see no light in any of your
own Qualifications, Isa. 50.10. I doubt not but the Experience of many choice
Christians will bear witness to this Truth.

DIRECT. XI.
Endeavor diligently to perform the great work of believing on Christ in a
right manner without any delay, and then also to continue and increase in your
most holy Faith, that so your enjoyment of Christ, Union and Fellowship with
him, and all holiness by him, may be begun, continued, and increased in you.

EXPLICATION.
HAving already discovered to you the powerful and effectual means of an holy
practice, my remaining work is to lead you to the actual Exercise and
Improvement of them, for the immediate attainment of the End; and I think it
may be clearly perceived by the foregoing Directions, That Faith in Christ is
the Duty with which a holy Life is to begin, and by which the Foundation of all
other holy Duties is laid in the Soul. It is before sufficiently proved, That
Christ himself, with all Endowments necessary to enable us to an holy practice,
is received actually into our hearts by Faith. This is the uniting Grace,
whereby the Spirit of God knitteth the knot of mystical Marriage betwixt Christ
and us, and makes us Branches of that noble Vine, Members of that Body joined
to that excellent Head, living Stones of the spiritual Temple, built upon the
precious living Cornerstone and sure Foundation, partakers of the Bread and
Drink that came down from Heaven and gives Life to the World. This is the
Grace whereby we pass from our corrupt natural State, to a new holy State in
Christ, also from Death in Sin to Life in Righteousness, and whereby we are
comforted, that so we may be established in every good Word and Work. If we put
the Question, what must we do that we may work the works of God? Christ
resolves it, That we believe on him whom he has sent, Joh. 6.28, 29. He
puts us first upon the work of believing, which is the work of God by way of
eminence, the work of works, because all other good works proceed from it. The
scope of the present Direction, is to put you upon the performance of this
great work of believing on Christ, and to guide you therein; for which end, you
are to consider distinctly, four things contained in it.

1. The first is, you are to make it your diligent endeavor to perform the
great work of Believing on Christ. Many make little Conscience of this Duty. It
is not known by Natural Light, as many moral Duties are, but only by
supernatural Revelation in the Gospel, and it is foolishness to the natural
Man. These are sometimes terrified with apprehensions of other sins, and will
examine themselves concerning them; and it may be, will write them down to help
their Memories and Devotion; but the great sin of not believing on Christ, is
seldom thought of in their self-examinations, or registered in the large
Catalogues of their sins; and even those who are convinced that Believing on
Christ is a Duty necessary to Salvation, do neglect all diligent endeavors to
perform it. Either because they account, that it is a motion of the heart which
may be easily performed at any time without any labor or diligent endeavor;
or on the contrary, because they account it as difficult as all the works of
the Law, and utterly impossible for them to perform by their most diligent
endeavors, except the Spirit of God work it in them by its mighty power. And
that therefore it is in vain for them to work, until they feel this working of
the Spirit in their Hearts: Or because they account it a Duty so peculiar to
the Elect, that it would be presumption for them to endeavor the performance
of it, until they know themselves to be elected to Eternal Life through Christ.
I shall urge you to a diligent performance of this Duty, notwithstanding all
these Impediments, by the following consideration: It is worthy of our best
endeavors, as appears by the preciousness, excellency, and necessity of it
already discovered.

If the Light of Nature were not darkened in the matters of Salvation, then it
would show us, that we cannot of our selves find out the way of Salvation, and
would condemn those that despise that Revelation of the way of Salvation that
God has given us in the Gospel, declared in all the holy Scriptures. The great
end of Preaching the Gospel, is for the Obedience of Faith, Romans 1.5. that so
we may be brought to Christ, and all other Obedience; yea, the great end of all
revealed Doctrines in the whole Scriptures, is to make us wise to Salvation by
Faith that is in Christ Jesus, 2 Cor. 3.15. The end of the Law given by Moses,
was for Righteousness to every one that believes, Romans 10.4. and Christ was
that end for Righteousness. The moral Law it self was revealed in order to our
Salvation, by believing on Christ, or else the knowledge of it had nothing
availed fallen Man, that was unable to perform it. Therefore they that slight
the Duty of Believing, and count it foolishness, do thereby slight, despise,
and villisie the whole Counsel of God revealed in the Scripture: The Law and
the Gospel, and Christ himself, are become of none effect to the Salvation of
such; the only fruit that such an one can attain to, of all the saving
Doctrines of the Scripture, is only some hypocritical moral Duties and slavish
performances, which will be as filthy rags in the sight of God in the great
day. However, many mind not the sin of unbelief in their self-examinations, and
write it not in their Scrouls, yet let them know, that this is the most
pernicious sin of all: All the sins in their Scrouls would not prevail to their
Condemnation, yea, they would not prevail in their Conversation, were it not
for their unbelief. This one sin prevailing, makes it impossible for them to
please God in any. Duty whatsoever, Heb. 11.6. If you will not mind this one
main sin now, God will at last mind you of it with a Vengeance: For, He that
believes not on the Son shall not see Life, but the wrath of God abides on
him, Joh. 3.36. The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven in flaming fire,
taking Vengeance on those that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2
These. 1.5.

2. Believing on Christ, is a work that will require diligent endeavor and
labor for the performance of it; we must labor to enter into that rest, lest
any man fall by unbelief, Heb. 4.11. we must show diligence to the full
assurance of hope to the end, that we may be followers of them who through
Faith and Patience inherited the promises, Heb. 6.11, 12. It is a work that
requires the exercise of Might and Power, and therefore we have need to be
strengthened with might by the Spirit in the inward Man, that Christ may dwell
in our hearts by Faith, Ephesians. 3.16, 17. I confess it is easy, pleasant and
delicious in its own nature, because it is a motion of the heart without any
cumbersome bodily Labor; and it is a taking Christ and his Salvation as our
own, which is very comfortable and delightful; and the Soul is carried forth in
this by Love to Christ and his happiness, which is an Affection which makes
even hard works easy and pleasant; yet it is made difficult to us, by reason
of the opposition that it meets withal from our own inward Corruptions, and
from Satan's temptations. It is no easy matter to receive Christ as our
happiness and true Salvation, with true confidence and lively affection, when
the guilt of sin lies heavily upon the Conscience, and the wrath of God
manifested by the Word, and terrible Judgments, especially when we have been
long accustomed to seek Salvation by the procurement of our own works; and to
account the way of Salvation by Free Grace, foolish and pernicious, when our
Lusts incline us strongly to the things of the flesh and the World, when Satan
does his utmost by his own suggestions, and by false Teachers, and by worldly
Allurements and Terrors to hinder the sincere performance of this Duty. Many
works that are easy in their own nature, prove difficult for us to perform in
our Circumstances: To forgive our enemies, and to love them as our selves, is
but a motion of the mind, easy to be performed in its own nature; and yet many
that are convinced of their Duty, find it a hard matter to bring their hearts
to the performance of it. It is but a motion of the mind to cast our Care upon
God for worldly things, and rich Men may think that they can do it easily; but
poor Men that have great Families, find it a hard matter. That easy
comfortable Duty which Moses exhorted the Israelites to, when Pharaoh with his
Chariot and Horsemen overtook them at the Red Sea, Be ye not afraid, stand
still and see the Salvation of the Lord, which he will show you this day, Exodus
14.13. was not easily performed. The very easiness of some Duties makes their
performance difficult, as Naaman the Assyrian was hardly brought, to wash and
be clean, because he thought it to be too slight and easy a Remedy for the
Cure of his Leprosy, 2 Kings 5.12, 13. even in this very case, people are
offended at the Duty of Believing on Christ, as too slight and easy a remedy
to Cure the Leprosy of the Soul, they would have some harder thing enjoined
them to the attainment of so great an end as this everlasting Salvation. The
performance of all the moral Law, is not accounted work enough for this end,
Mat. 19.17, 20. However easy the work of Believing seems to many, yet common
Experience has showed, that Men are more easily brought to the most
burdensome, unreasonable, and inhumane Observations, as the Jows and Christian
Galatians were more easily brought to take upon their Necks the Yoke of Moses's
La w, which none were able to bear, Acts 15.10. The Heathens were more easily
brought to burn their Sons and their Daughters in the Fire to their Gods, Deuteronomy.
12.31. The Papists are brought more easily to the Vows of Chastity and Poverty,
and Obedience to the most rigorous rules of Monastic Discipline, to macerate
and torture their Bodies with Fastings, Scourgings, and Pilgrimages, and to
bear all the excessive Tyranny of the Papal Hierarchy, in a multitude of
burdensome superstitious and ridiculous Devotions. They that slight the work of
Faith for its easiness, show that they were never yet made sensible of
innumerable sins, and terrible Curse of the Law, and Wrath of God that they lie
under; and of the darkness and vanity of their Minds, the corruption and
hardness of their Hearts, and their bondage under the power of Sin and Satan,
and have not bin truly humbled, without which they cannot Believe in a right
manner. Many sound Believers have found by experience, that it has bin a very
hard matter to bring their Hearts to the Duty of Believing; it has cost them
vigorous struggles, and sharp conflicts with their own Corruptions, and Satan's
Temptations. It is so difficult a work, that we cannot perform it without the
mighty working of the Spirit of God in our Hearts, who only can make it to be
absolutely easy to us, and does make it easy, or suffer it to be difficult,
according as he is pleased to communicate his Grace in various degrees unto our
Souls.

3. Tho we cannot possibly perform this great work in a right manner, until the
Spirit of God work Faith in our Hearts by his mighty Power, yet it is necessary
that we should endeavor. And that before we can find the Spirit of God working
Faith effectually in us, or giving strength to Believe. We can perform no holy
Duty acceptably, except the Spirit of God work it in us; and yet we are not
hereby excused from working our selves, but we are the rather stirred up to the
greater diligence; Work out your Salvation with fear and trembling, for it is
God that works in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure, Phil.
2.12, 13. The way whereby the Spirit works Faith in the Elect, is by stirring
them up to endeavor to Believe, and this is a way suitable to the means that
the Spirit uses, i. e. The Exhortations, Commands and Invitations of the
Gospel, which would be of no force, if we were not to obey them, until we find
Faith already wrought in us. Neither can we possibly find, that the Spirit of
God does effectually work Faith, or give strength to Believe, until we Act it;
for all inward Graces, as well as all other inward Habits, are discerned by
their Acts, as Seed in the Ground by its Springing. We cannot see any such
thing as Love to God or Man in our Hearts before we Act it: Children know not
their Ability to stand upon their Feet, until they have made trial, by
endeavoring so to do; so we know not our spiritual Strength, until we have
learned by Experience from the use and exercise of it; neither can we know, or
assure our seives absolutely, that the Spirit of God will give us Strength to
Believe before we Act Faith; for such a Knowledge and Assurance if it be right,
is saving Faith it self in part; and whosoever trusts on Christ assuredly for
strength to believe by his Spirit, does in effect trust on Christ for his own
Salvation, which is inseparably joined with the Grace of saving Faith. Tho the
Spirit works other Duties in us by Faith, yet he works Faith in us
immediately by hearing, knowing and understanding the Word; Faith comes by
Hearing, and Hearing by the Word of God, Romans 10.13. And in the Word he makes
no absolute Promise or Declaration, that he will work Faith in this or that
unbelieving Heart, or that he will give strength to Believe to any one in
particular, or begin the work of Believing in Christ. for Faith it self is the
first Grace whereby we have a particular Interest in any saving Promise. It is
a thing hidden in the secret Counsel and Purpose of God concerning us, whether
he will give us his Spirit and saving Faith, until our Election be discovered
by our Believing actually. Therefore as soon as we know the Duty of Believing,
we are to apply our selves immediately to the vigorous performance of the Duty,
and in so doing, we shall find that the Spirit of Christ has strengthened us to
Believe, tho we knew not certainly that it would do it beforehand. The Spirit
comes undiscernably upon the Elect, to work Faith within them, like the Wind
that blows where it lists, and none knows whence it comes, and whither it
goes, but only we hear the sound of it, and thereby know it when it is past
and gone, Joh. 3.8. we must therefore begin the work, before we know that the
Spirit does or will work in us savingly: And we shall be willing to set upon
the work if we Believe; for thy People shall be willing in the day of thy
Power, Psalm. 110.3. It is enough that God discovers to us beforehand in the
Gospel, what Faith is, and the ground we have to Believe on Christ for our own
Salvation; and that God requires this Duty of us, and will help us in the
performance of it, if we apply our selves heartily thereunto: Fear not, I
command thee to be strong, and of good courage, Josh. 1. Arise and be doing,
and the Lord will be with thee, 1 Chronicles. 22.16. Therefore whosoever receives this
Gospel-discovery as the Word of God in hearty Love, is taught by the Spirit,
and will certainly come to Christ by Believing, Joh. 6.45. Every one that
receives it not despises God, makes him a liar, and deserves justly to
perish for his Unbelief.

4. Tho the Spirit works saving Faith only in the Elect, and others believe
not, because they are not of Christ's Sheep, Joh. 10.26. and on that account
its called the Faith of Gods Elect, Tit. 1.1. yet all that hear the Gospel are
obliged to the Duty of Believing, as well as to all the Duties of the moral
Law, and that before they know their own particular Election; and they are
liable to Condemnation for Unbelief, as well as for any other sin: He that
believes not is condemned already, because he has not believed on the Navy
of the only begotten Son of God, Joh. 3.18. The Apostle Paul shows, That the
Elect Israelites obtained Salvation, and the rest that were not Elected were
blinded, and yet even these were broken off from the good Olive Tree because of
their Unbelief, Romans 11.7, 20. We cannot have a certain knowledge of our
Election to Eternal Life before we do Believe; it is a thing hidden in the
unsearchable Counsel of God, until it be manifest by our effectual Calling and
Believing on Christ. The Apostle knew the Election of the Thessalonians, by
sinding the evidence of their Faith, that the Gospel came to them, not in Word
only, but also in Power, and in the Holy Ghost, and in much Assurance; and that
they had received the Word in much affliction, with joy in the Holy Ghost, 1
These. 1.4, 5, 6. We are to see our Calling, if we would find out that God has
chosen us, 1 Cor. 1.26, 27. therefore we must Believe on Christ before we know
our Election, or else we shall never know it, and shall never Believe; and it
is no presumption for us to trust confidently on Christ for Everlasting Life,
before we have any good evidence of our Election, because God that cannot Lie,
has made a general promise, That whosoever believes on him shall not be
ashamed, without making the least difference among them that perform this Duty,
Romans 10.11, 12. The Promise is as firm and sure to be fulfilled, as any of Gods
Decrees and Purposes; and therefore it is a good and sufficient ground for our
Confidence. It is certain, that all that the Father has given to Christ by the
Decrees of Eternal Election, shall come to Christ. And it is as really certain,
that Christ will in no wise cast out any that comes to him, whosoever he be,
Joh. 6.37. And we need not fear that we shall infringe God's Decree of
Election, by Believing on Christ confidently for our Salvation, before we know
what God has decreed concerning us. For if we Believe, we shall at last be
found among the number of the Elect. And if we refuse to Believe, we shall
thereby wilfully sort our selves among the Reprobates, that stumble at the
Word, being disobedient, whereunto also they are appointed, 1 Pet. 2.8. I shall
add further, that tho we have no Evidence of our particular Election, before we
Believe, yet we are to trust on Christ assuredly, to make it evident to us, by
giving us that Salvation which is the peculiar Portion of the Elect only: All
spiritual saving Blessings wherewith God blesses his People in Christ, are the
peculiar Portion of them whom God has chosen in Christ before the foundation
of the World, Ephesians. 1.3, 4. yet we must necessarily trust on Christ for those
saving Blessings, or have none at all: We are to pray in Faith nothing
doubting, that God will remember us with the favor that he bears to his
People, that we may see the good of his Chosen, and glory with his Inheritance,
Psalm. 106.4, 5. therefore we are to trust assuredly on God, that he will deal
with us as his Chosen People. Thus it appears, that it is not presumption,
but your bounden Duty, to apply your selves to the great work of Believing on
Christ for Salvation, without questioning at all beforehand, whether you are
Elected or no: Secret things belong to God, but those things that are revealed
belong unto us, that we may do them, Deuteronomy. 29.29.

The second thing directed to, is, that you should endeavor for a right manner
of performing this Duty. This is a point of great concernment, because the want
of it will render your Faith ineffectual to Sanctification and Salvation. The
great Duty of Love, which is the end of the Law, and the principal fruit of
Sanctification must flow from Faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1.5. There is a feigned
Faith, that does not really receive Christ into the Heart, and will not produce
Love, or any true Obedience; such as Simon Magus had Acts 8.13.23. for
notwithstanding his Faith, he was in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of
iniquity. And such as those Jews had, to whom Christ would not commit himself,
who did not confess him, lest they should be put out of the Synagogue, Joh.
2.23. and 12.42. and such as the Apostle James speak of, What does it profit
you, my Brethren, if a man say he have Faith, and have not Works? Can that
Faith save him? The Devils also believe and tremble, Jam. 2.14, 19. Take heed
therefore lest you deceive your Souls with a counterfeit Faith, instead of the
precious Faith of God's Elect. The way to distinguish the one from the other,
is by considering well what is the right manner of that Believing which is
effectaal to Salvation: Hypocrites may perform the same Works for the matter,
with true Saints; but they are defective in the manner of performance, wherein
the excellency of the Work does chiefly consist. One great reason why many
strive to enter in at the strait Gate, and are not able, is because they are
ignorant and defective in the right manner of Acting this Faith whereby they
are to enter. Now I confess, that God only is able to guide us effectually in
the right way of Believing; and we have this great Consolation, when we see our
own folly and proneness to mistake our way, that if we heartily desire and
endeavor to Believe on Christ aright, we may considently trust on Christ to
guide us. God has promised that the wayfaring Men, tho Fools, shall not err in
the way of Holiness; and that he will teach sinners in the way; the Meek will
he guide in Judgment, and the Meek will he teach his way, Psalm. 25.8, 9. and he
commands them that lack Wisdom, to ask it of God in Faith, nothing doubting,
Jam. 1.5, 6. But however, we are to know, that God guides us only according to
the rule of his Word; and we must endeavor to learn the right way of Believing
out of the Word, or else we are not able so much as to trust rightly on God for
guidance and direction in this great Work. To help you herein, I have given you
before in this Treatise, a Description of saving Faith; and have showed that it
contains two Acts in it; the one is Believing the Truth of the Gospel; the
other is Believing on Christ as revealed, and freely promised to us in the
Gospel for all his Salvation. Now your great endeavor must be, to perform both
these Acts in a right manner, as I shall show concerning each of them in
particular.

In the first place, you are highly concerned to endeavor for a right belief
of the Truth of the Gospel of Christ, that so you may be well furnished,
disposed and encouraged to Believe on Christ as revealed and promised in the
Gospel; hereby you are to remove all discomfortable thoughts and objections of
Satan and your own Conscience, and to overcome all corrupt Inclinations that
hinder a cheerful embracing of Christ and his Salvation. It is found by
experience, that when any fail in the second Act of Faith, the reason of the
failing is commonly some defect in this first Act. There is some false
imagination or other in them, contrary to the belief of the Truth of the
Gospel; which is a strong hold of Sin and Satan, that must be pulled down
before they can receive Christ into their Hearts by Believing on him. If they
knew the Name of Christ as he is discovered in the Gospel, and judged aright of
the Truth and Excellency of it, they would not fail to put their Trust in him.
And we are in great danger of entertaining such false Imaginations, and to
account many Truths of the Gospel strange Paradoxes, yea foolish and
pernicious, because of our Ignorance, Self-conceitedness, guilty Consciences,
corrupt Affections, and manifold Errors wherewith our Judgments are
prepossessed in matters of Salvation; and because Satan labors to beguil us,
as he did Eve, through his subtilty to corrupt our minds from the simplicity of
the Gospel that is in Christ, 2 Cor. 11.3. I shall therefore give you some
particular Instructions, that are of greatest moment to prevent such defects as
we are most liable to in the first Act of our Faith.

1. You must Believe with a full persuasion, that you are a Child of Wrath by
Nature, as well as others, fallen from God by the sin of the first Adam; dead
in Trespasses and Sins, subject to the Curse of the Law of God, and to the
power of Satan, and to insupportable misery to all Eternity: And that you
cannot possibly procure your reconciliation with God, or any spiritual Life and
Strength to do any good work, by any endeavoring to get Salvation according to
the terms of the Legal Covenant, and that you cannot find any way to escape out
of this sinful and miserable Condition by your own Reason and Understanding,
without supernatural Revelation, nor be freed from it, except by that infinite
power that raises the Dead. We must not be afraid as some are, to know our own
vileness and sinfulness, neither must we be willing to think our selves better
than we are, but must be heartily desirous and glad to know the worst of our
own Condition; yea, when we have found out the worst that we can of our selves.
Yea, we must be willing to believe that our Hearts are deceitful, and
desperately wicked, beyond all that we can know and find out, Jer. 17.9. This
is all necessary to work in us true Humiliation, Self-despair, and
Self-loathing, that we may highly esteem, and earnestly seek the Salvation of
Christ, as the one thing necessary. It makes us sick of sin, and sensible of
our need of the great Physician, and willing to be ordered according to any of
his prescriptions, whatsoever we suffer, rather than to follow our own Wisdom,
Mat. 9.12. It was for want of this Humiliation that the Scribes and Pharisees
were not so forward to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, as the Publicans and
Harlots, Mat. 21.31.

2. You are to believe assuredly, That there is no way to be saved without
receiving all the saving benesits of Christ, his Spirit as well as his Merits,
Sanctification as well as remission of sins by Faith. It is the ruin of many
Souls, that they trust on Christ for remission of sins without any regard to
Holiness, whenas these two Benefits are inseparably joined in Christ. So that
none are freed from Condemnation by Christ, but those that are enabled to walk
holily, i. e. not after the flesh, but after the spirit, Romans 8.1. It is also
the ruin of Souls to seek only remission of sins by Faith in Christ, and
Holiness by our endeavors, according to the terms of the Law, whereas we can
never live to God in Holiness, except we be dead to the Law, and live only by
Christ living in us by Faith: That Faith that receives not holiness as well as
remission of sins from Christ, will never sanctify us, and therefore it will
never bring us to heavenly Glory, Heb. 12.14.

3. You are to be fully persuaded of the Allsufficiency of Christ for the
Salvation of your self, and of all that believe on him, that his blood
cleanses from all sin, 1 John 1.7. tho our sins be never so great and
horrible, and continued in never so long, yet he is able to deliver us from the
body of Death, and mortify our Corruptions be they never so strong: We find in
Scripture, that abominable wicked persons have bin saved by him, Idolaters,
Adulterers, Effeminate, Covetous, Drunkards, Extortioners, etc. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10.
Such as have sinned against the Light of Nature, as the Heathen, and the Light
of Scripture, as the Jews; such as have denied Christ, as Peter, and persecuted
and blasphamed him, as Paul; many that have fallen into great sins are ruined
for ever, because they do not account the Grace of Christ sufficient for their
Pardon and Sanctification; when they think they are gone and past all hope of
recovery, that their sins are upon them, and they pine away in them, and how
shall they live, Ezekiel. 33.10. This despair works secretly in many Souls,
without much trouble and horror, and makes them careless of their Souls, and
true Religion. The Devil sills some with horrid, filthy, blasphemous thoughts,
on purpose that they may think their sins too great to be forgiven, tho
commonly such thoughts are the least of the sins of those that are pestered
with them, and rather the Devils sin than theirs, because they are hurried into
them sore against their wills; but if their Hearts be somewhat polluted with
them, Christ testifies, that all manner of sin and blasphemy shall be
forgiven, besides blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, Mat. 10.31. And as for
those that are guilty of Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, the reason why they
are never forgiven, is not because of any want of sufficiency in the Blood of
Christ, or in the pardoning mercy of God, but because they never repent of that
sin, and never seek to God for mercy through Christ, but continue obstinate
until Death; for the Scripture testifies, that it is impossible to renew them
again by Repentance, Heb. 6.5, 6. So that the Merits of Christ are sufficient
for all that seek to him for mercy by Believing: There are others that despair
of ever getting any Victory over their Lusts, because they have formerly made
many Vows and Resolutions, and have used many vigorous Endeavors against them
in vain: such are to persuade themselves, that the Grace of Christ is
sufficient for them, when all other means have failed; as the Woman that had
the Issue of Blood, and was nothing bettered, but rather grew worse by any
Remedies that Physicians could prescribe; yet persuadeth her self, that if she
might but touch the Cloths of Christ, she should be whole, Mar. 5.25, 28. Those
that despair by reason of the greatness of their Guilt and Corruption, do
greatly dishonor and undervalue the Grace of God, his infinite mercy, and the
infinite merits of Christ's Blood, and power of his Spirit, and deserve to
perish with Cain and Judas: Abundance of People that give up themselves to all
Licentiousness in this wicked Generation, lie under secret Despair, which
makes them so desperate in Swearing, Blaspheming, Whoring, Drunkenness, and
all manner of Wickedness. How horrid and heinous soever our sins and
corruptions have bin, we should learn to account them a small matter in
comparison to the Grace of Christ, who is God as well as Man, and offered
himself, by the Eternal Spirit, as a Sacrifice of an infinite Value, for our
Salvation; and can create anew as easily as he created the World, by a word
speaking.

4. You are to be fully persuaded of the Truth of the General Free Promise in
your own particular case, that if you believe on Christ sincerely, you shall
have everlasting Life, as well as any other in the World, without performing
any condition of Works to procure an Interest in Christ: For the Promise is
Universal, Whosoever believes on him shall not be ashanted, Romans 9.32. without
any Exception, and if God exclude you not, you must not exclude your selves,
but rather conclude peremptorily, that how Vile, Wicked and Unworthy soever you
be; yet if you come you shall be accepted as well as any other in the World;
you are to believe the great Article of the Creed, the Remission of Sins in
your own case, when you are principally concerned, or else it will little
profit you to believe it in the case of others. This is that which hinders many
broken wounded Spirits from coming to the great Physician, when they are
convinced of the abominable Filthiness of their Hearts, that they are dead in
Sin without the least spark of true Grace and Holiness in them, they think that
it is in vain for such as they are, to trust on Christ for Salvation, and that
Christ will never save such as they are; why so? They can be but lost Creatures
at worst, and Christ came to seek and save those that are lost. If they that
are Dead in Sin cannot be saved, then all must Despair and Perish, for none
have any Spiritual Life, until they receive it by Believing on Christ. Some
think themselves to be worse than any others, and that none have such wicked
Hearts as they; and tho others be accepted, yet they shall be rejected; but
they should know that Christ came to save the Chiefest of Sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15.
and that the design of God is to show the exceeding Riches of his Grace in our
Salvation, Ephesians. 2.7. which is most glorified by pardoning the greatest Sinners,
and it is but our ignorance to think our selves like no Body; for all others,
as well as we, are naturally Dead in Trespasses and Sins, their Mind is Enmity
to God, and is not subject to his Law, nor can be, Romans 8.8. and every
Imagination of the Thoughts of their Hearts are only evil and continually so,
Genesis 6.5. they have all the same corrupt Fountain of all Abominations in their
Hearts, tho we may have exceeded many others in several actual Sins. Others
think that they have out-staid their time, and therefore now they should find
no place for Repentance, tho they should seek it carefully with Tears, Heb. 12.
but Behold, now is (...) accepted time; now the day of Salvation, 2 Cor. 6.^.
even as long as God calls upon you by the Gospel* And although Esau was
rejected, that sought rather the Earthly than Spiritual Blessings of the
Birthright, yet they shall not be rejected that seek the Enjoyment of Christ
and his Salvation, as their only Happiness. If you come into Christ's Vinyard
at the eleventh Hour of the day, you shall have your Penny as well as those
that come early in the Morning, because the Reward is of Grace and not of
Merit, Matt. 20.9, 10. and here you must be sure to believe steadfastly, that
Christ and all his Salvation is bestowed as a Free Gift upon those that do not
work to procure any Right or Title to him, or meetness or worthiness to receive
him, but only believe on him that justifies the ungodly, Romans 4.5. if you put
any condition of Works or good Qualifications betwixt your selves and Christ,
it will be a Partition wall that you can never climb over.

5. You are to believe assuredly, that it is the Will of God that you should
Believe in Christ, and have Eternal Life by him as well as any other; and that
your Believing is a Duty very acceptable to God, and that he will help you as
well as any other in this work, because he calls and commands you by the
Gospel to Believe in Christ. This makes us to set carefully upon the work of
Believing; as when Jesus commanded the blind Man to be called, they said unto
him, Be of good comfort and rise, he calls thee, Mat. 10.29. A Command of
Christ made Peter to walk upon the Water, Mat. 14.29. And here we are not to
meddle with Gods secret of Predestination, or the purpose of his Will to give
the Grace of Faith to some rather than others; but only with his revealed Will
in his gracious Invitations and Commands, by which we are required to Believe
on Christ. This Will of God is confirmed by his Oath, As I live says the Lord
God, I have no pleasure in the death of a sinner, but that the wicked turn from
his way and live: Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways, for why will ye die, O
house of Israel, Ezekiel. 33.11. Christ testifies, that he would often have
gathered the Children of Jerusalem as a hen, etc. and they would not, Mat.
23.37. And the Apostle Paul testifies, that God will have all men to be saved,
etc. 1 Timothy 1.4. you are to reject and abandon all thoughts that are contrary
to this persuasion. What if few be saved? Thy Salvation will not make the
number too great; for few will follow thee in the Duty of Believing. What if
the Wrath of God be revealed from Heaven against thee in many terrible
Judgments, and the Word and thine own Conscience condemn thee, and Christ seem
to reckon thee no better than a Dog, as he did the Woman of Canaan, Mat. 15.26.
Thou art to make a good interpretation of all these things, that the end of
them is, to drive thee to Christ, as this was the End of the Curses of the Law,
and all the terrible Dispensations of them, Romans 10.4. If a Prophet, or Angel
from Heaven sent of God on purpose to declare, that the Sentence of Everlasting
Damnation is declared against thee, it would be thy Duty to believe, that God
sent him to give thee timely warning, for this very end, that thou might
Believe, and turn to God by Faith and Repentance. Jeremiah prophesied against
the Jews, that God would pluck them up, pull them down, and destroy them for
their sins; yet he himself taught them, If they turned from their evil ways,
God would repent of the evil, Jer. 18.7, 8, 11. Jonah preached nothing but
certain Destruction of Nineveh, to be executed upon them within 40 days, Chap.
3.4. yet the intent of that terrible message was, that those Heathenish People
might escape Destruction by Repentance. The most absolute and peremptory
denunciations of Divine Vengeance against us while we are in this World, must
be always understood with a secret reserve of Salvation for us, upon our Faith
and Repentance. And we are to account, that the reason why God does so terribly
denounce his Judgments against us by his Word is, that we may escape them, by
flying for Refuge to his free Mercy in Christ* Take heed of fostering any
thoughts, that God has absolutely decreed to show no saving Mercy to you, or
that you have already committed the unpardonable sin; or that it is in vain for
you to attempt the work of Believing, because God will not help you in it. If
such thoughts prevail in your hearts, they will do you more hurt than the worst
blasphemous thoughts that terrify you, or any of the grossest Abominations
that ever you were guilty of; because they obstruct your Believing on Christ
for Salvation. The Spirit and the Bride say, Come; Christ says, Whosoever
will, let him take of the water of Life freely, Rev. 22.17. Therefore we are to
abandon all thoughts that hinder our coming to Christ, as very sinful and
pernicious, arising in us from our own Corruptions, and Satan's Delusions, and
utterly opposite to the mind of Christ, and teachings of the Spirit; and what
ground can we have to entertain such unbelieving thoughts? Has God made us of
his Privy Council, that we should be able to know that God has decreed us to
Damnation, before it be manifest by our final unbelief and impenitence? As for
the unpardonable sin, it consists in renouncing the way of Salvation by
Christ with the whole heart, after we have attained to the knowledge of it, and
are convinced of the Truth of it by the Gospel. Its the sin that the Christian
Hebrews would have bin guilty of, if they had revolted from Christianity to the
Religion of the unbelieving Jews, that accounted Christ to be an Impostor, and
were most rancorous persecutors of him and his ways, Heb. 6.4, 5. They that
have committed that sin continue implacable, malicious Enemies to Christ and
his ways to the end, without any repentance: Therefore if you can but find,
that you desire seriously to get an interest in Christ, and to be better
Christians than you are; if you be troubled and grieved that your Hearts and
Lives are so wicked, and that you want Faith, Love, and true Obedience; yea, if
your Hearts be not maliciously bent to persecute the Gospel, and prefer
Atheism, Licentiousness, or any false Religion before it, you have no cause to
suspect your selves to be guilty of this unpardonable sin.

6. Add to all these, a full persuasion of the incomparable glorious Excellency
of Christ, and of the way of Salvation by him. You are to esteem the enjoyment
of Christ as the only Salvation and true happiness, and such an happiness as
has in it unsearchable Riches of Glory, and will make our Cup to run over with
exceeding abundance of Peace and Joy, and full of Glory to all Eternity. We
must account all things but loss, for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ
Jesus our Lord, etc. Phil. 3.8. Incline your Wills and Affections to choose and
embrace Christ as the Chief Good, and never to rest satisfied without the
Enjoyment of him; and to reject every thing that stands in Competition with
him, or the Enjoyment of him. Christ is precious in the esteem of all true
Believers, 1 Pet. 2.7. Their high esteem of his incomparable preciousness and
excellency, induces them to sell all, that they may buy this Pearl of great
price, Mat. 13.46. this makes them to say, Lord evermore give us of this
Bread, that comes down from Heaven and gives Life to the World: Lord, to whom
shall we go; thou have the Words of Eternal Life, Joh. 6.32, 33, 68. because of
the savor of his good Ointments, his Name is as Ointment poured forth,
therefore do the Virgins love him, Cant. 1.3. They are sick of love to him,
because he is in their Eyes the chiefest of ten thousand, Cant. 5.8, 10. As the
Glory of God that appeared in the wonderful Beauty of the Temple, and in the
Wisdom and Glory of Solomon, drew Worshipers to God from the utmost parts of
the Earth, so the unparalled excellency of Christ which was prefigured by the
Glory of Solomon and the Temple, does more powerfully draw Believers in these
Gospel-days. The Devil, who is the God of this World, knows how necessary it is
for our Salvation, to discern all the Glory and Excellency of Christ; and
therefore where the Gospel is preached, he makes it his great work, to Eclypse
the Glory of Christ in the Ministry, and to blind the minds of the People, lest
the Light of the glorious Gospel of Christ should shine into them, 2 Cor. 4.4.
One that is convinced of the truth of the Gospel may be averse to the embracing
of it, until he see also the goodness of it, that Christ is altogether lovely
and excellent.

I come now to the second principal Act of Faith, whereby Christ himself, and
his Spirit, and all his saving Benefits are actually received into the Heart;
which is, Believing on Christ as revealed, and freely promised to us in the
Gospel for all his Salvation. The Spirit of God does habitually dispose and
incline our Hearts to a right performance of this act, by enabling us to
perform the first Act according to the former instructions, by believing
assuredly those great things of the Gospel, whereby we are delivered into a
form of doctrine, Romans 6.17. which we are to obey from our hearts, and to
follow as our pattern in the manner of our Acting Faith in Christ for
Salvation. Therefore I need only to exhort you briefly to Act your Faith in
Christ, according to that form and pattern in which you have bin already so
largely instructed. You are to believe in Christ as alone sufficient, and
all-sufficient for your Happiness and Salvation; despairing altogether of any
attainment of Happiness by your own Wisdom, Strength, works of Righteousness,
or any fleshly worldly Confidences whatsoever: We must be as dead People to all
other Confidences, and account them to be loss for Christ, according to the
example of the blessed Apostle, Phil. 3.3, 7, 8. We must not be grieved that we
have nothing to trust upon besides Christ, for our Salvation, but rather, we
are to rejoice that we need nothing else, and that we have a sure foundation to
rely upon, incomparably better than any other that can be imagined: And we must
resolve to cast the burden of our Souls wholly on Christ, and to seek Salvation
no other way, whatsoever becomes of us. If the Cripple lay not the whole weight
of his Body upon a strong Staff, but part of it on a rotten one, he is like to
receive a fall. If the Swimmer will not commit his Body wholly to the Water to
bear him up, but catch at Weeds, or struggle to feel out Ground, he may sink to
the bottom. Christ will be all our Salvation, or nothing; if we seek to be
saved by any other ways, as the Galatians did by Circumcision, Christ will
profit us nothing, Gal. 5.2. You are also to receive Christ merely as a
free-gift, given to the Chief of sinners, resolving that you will not perform
any Conditions to procure your selves a right and title to him: But that you
will come to him as a lost sinner, an ungodly Creature, trusting on him that
Justifies the ungodly; and that you will buy him without money, and without any
price whatsoever, Romans 4.5. Isa. 55.2. Look not on your own Faith or Love, or
any good Qualifications in your selves, as the ground of your trusting in
Christ, but only to the free Grace and loving kindness of God in Christ. How
excellent is thy loving kindness O God! therefore the Children of men put their
trust under the shadow of thy Wings, Psalm. 30.7. For if you make your Faith,
Love, or good Qualifications to be your first and principal Foundation, and you
build Christ upon them, instead of building all upon Christ, you invert the
order of the Gospel, and Christ will profit you nothing.

Another thing to be observed diligently is, that you must come to Christ for a
new holy Heart and Life, and all things necessary thereunto, as well as for
deliverance from the wrath of God, and the torments of Hell. You must also come
to him with an ardent Love and Affection to him, and esteem him better than a
thousand Worlds, and the only excellent Portion, loathing and abhorring your
self as a vile, sinful, and miserable Creature, and accounting all things Dung
in comparison of his Excellency, that you may be able to say from the bottom of
your Heart, Whom have I in Heaven but thee? etc. Psalm. 73.23.

Lastly, You must endeavor to draw near with full assurance of Faith, Heb.
10.22. trusting on Christ confidently for your own particular Salvation, upon
the account of that general promise, That whosoever believes on Christ shall
not be ashamed, Romans 9.33. You must check your selves for all doubtings, fears,
staggerings concerning your own Salvation by Christ, saying with the Psalmist,
Why art thou cast down O my Soul, etc. Psalm. 42.11.

The third thing contained in the direction is; The avoiding of all delay in
the performance of this great work of Believing in Christ. Until we have
performed it, we continue under the power of Sin and Satan, and under the wrath
of God, and there is nothing betwixt Hell and us, besides the Breath of our
Nostrils. Its dangerous for Lot to linger in Sodom, lest Fire and Brimstone
come down from Heaven upon him. The Manslayer must flee with all haste to the
City of refuge, lest the avenger of blood pursue him while his Heart is hot,
and slay him, Deuteronomy. 19.5, 6. We should make haste, and not delay, to keep Gods
Commandments, Psalm. 119.60. and flee for refuge to the hope set before us, Heb.
6.18. And God commands us to flee thus by Faith, without which it is
impossible to please God in other Duties. The work is of such a nature, that it
may be performed as soon as you hear the Gospel. As soon as they hear of me,
they shall obey me, Psalm, 18.44. As soon as Zion travailed she brought forth
her Children, Isa. 66.8. We have many examples of those that received the Word
by Faith at the first hearing of it. Three Thousand were added to the Church on
the very same day wherein Peter first published the Gospel in Jerusalem, Acts
2.41. so, many Jews and Gentiles were converted at the first hearing of the
Apostle Paul at Antioch, Acts 13.43. The Jailer, with all his house believed,
and were baptized the same Night wherein Paul first preached to them, Acts
16.33, 34. The Gospel came at first to the Thessalonians, not in Word only, but
in Power, and in the Holy Ghost, 1 These. 1.5, 6. If God open the Hearts of his
People to attend diligently, they may be instructed in the knowledge of the
Gospel by one brief Sermon, sufficiently to begin the practice of saving Faith;
and when they know their Duty, God requires immediate performance, without
allowing us the least respit in the state of Unbelief. When Satan cannot
prevail with People, to reject wholly the Duty of Believing, his next attempt
for the ruin of their Souls is, to prevail with them at least, to delay and
shift off the performance of it from time to time, by several false reasonings
and imaginations which he puts into their minds; the most ignorant and
sensual are easily prevailed with to defer this Duty, until they have taken
their fill of the pleasures, profits, and honors of this World; and are
summoned to prepare for another World, by Infirmities, Age, Sickness* praying
and hoping, that a large time of Repentance will be granted unto them before
they dye. But such delays show, that they are really unwilling to Repent and
Believe, until they are forced by necessity; and that they prefer the
pleasures, prosits and honors of the World, above God and Christ, and their
own Souls. Thus they unfit themselves more and more for this great Duty, by
their customary walking in sin, and by misspending the precious time of their
Health and Strength, which is most meet for the performance of this great Work.
They highly provoke God never to give them Time, or Grace to Repent hereafter.
Others imagine, that after they have heard the Gospel of Salvation by Christ,
they may lawfully defer the Believing of it, until they have sufficiently
examined the Truth of some other different Doctrine, or until God be pleased to
afford them some other means, to assure them fully of the Truth of the Gospel.
Thus they that are called Seekers, mis-spend the day of Grace, ever learning,
but never coming to the knowledge of the Truth, 2 Timothy 3.7. But the Truth of the
Gospel does so clearly evidence its self by its own Light, That if People do
not wilfully shut their Eyes, or blind themselves by their own Pride, and love
of their Lusts, they would easily perceive that it is the Truth of God, because
the Image of his Grace, Mercy, Power, Justice and Holiness, appears manifestly
engraven upon it. It is a sign People are Proud, when they consent not to the
words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the Doctrine which is according to
Godliness, 1 Timothy 6.3. If they were humble, and sincerely inclined to do the
Will of God, they would know whether the Doctrine be of God or no, Joh. 7.17.
They would quickly be persuaded of the Truth (by Moses and the Prophets, Christ
and the Apostles) spoken to them in the Scripture; and if they will not hear
them, neither will they not be persuaded tho one rose from the dead; or
whatever other Miracle be wrought to confirm the Divine Authority of the
Gospel, Luke 16.31. Another sort of People there are, that delay the great work
of Believing, to the ruin of their Souls, upon the outward means of Grace and
Salvation, instead of any endeavors to receive Christ by Faith, tho they be
convinced of the Truth of the Gospel: This they call waiting upon God at the
doors of his Grace and Salvation, in the use of Means appointed by him, and
sitting under the droppings of the Sanctuary. But let them know, that this is
not the right waiting on God required in Scripture; it is rather disobedience
to God, and to the Name of his appointment, which requires, that we should be
doers of the Word, and not hearers only, deceiving our selves, Jam. 1.22. and
that we should come in to the spiritual Feast, Luke 14.23. and not only stand
at the door, or sit under the droppings of the House of God, lest Christ repute
us no better than eve-droppers. That holy waiting on the Lord commended to us
in Scripture, is ever accompanied with Believing and Hoping in the Lord, and
depends thereon. I had fainted, unless I had believed to see the goodness of
the Lord in the Land of the Living, Psalm. 23.13, 14. It is good that a Man
should both hope, and quietly wait for the Salvation of the Lord, Lam. 3.26.
What is it that these deluded ones wait for, before they perform the Duty of
Believing? Is it for more knowledge of the Gospel? The way to increase thy
Knowledge as well as any other Talent, is to make use of what thou have
received already; Believe heartily on Christ for all thy Salvation, according
to that little knowledge of the Gospel which thou have, and thou will have an
interest in the promise of knowledge contained in the New Covenant, They shall
all know me from the least to the greatest of them, says the Lord, Jer. 31.34.
Is it for the appointed time of thy Conversion that thou waitest? then thou
waitest as those impotent folk lay at the Pool of Bethesda, waiting for the
Season when the Angel would come down and move the Water; know then that if
thou enter into Christ now by Faith, thou shall find in him Waters of Life, and
the Spirit moving them for the Healing and Quickening of thy Soul. God has
appointed by his Word, that it shall be thy Duty to endeavor that the present
time should be the time of thy Conversion, as the Holy Ghost says, To day if
thou will hear his Voice, harden not thy Heart, Heb. 3.7, 8. and thou shall
never know at what time God has purposed in his Secret Counsel to give Faith
to thee, until thou do actually believe. Do thou wait for any
Manifestations or Flowings in of Gods saving Love to thy Soul? Then the way to
obtain it is, to believe that the God of Peace may sill thee with all Joy and
Peace in Believing, Romans 15.13. Thou have sufficient Manifestation of Gods Love
to thy Soul, by the free Promises of Life and Salvation by Christ; do but trust
on the Name of the Lord, and stay upon thy God, when thou walk in Darkness
and see no Light of sensible Comforts any other way. Otherwise thou waitest
for Comfort in vain, and this thou shall have at the Lords hand, thou shall lie
down in Sorrow, Isa. 50.10, 11. Do thou wait for any Qualifications to
prepare thee for the work of Believing? If they be good and Holy
Qualifications, thou can not have them before Faith; but they are either
included in the Nature of Faith, or they are Fruits of it, as has been largely
proved. If they be bad and Sinful, it is strange that any should wait for them,
and yet no more strange than true: Some foolishly wait to be terrified with the
Sense of Gods Wrath, and despairing Thoughts; and these they call the Pangs of
the New Birth, tho in their own Nature they are rather the Pangs of the
Spiritual Death, and bring forth Hatred to God rather than Holiness, and
therefore we should strive to prevent them, by believing Gods Love in Christ,
rather than to wait for them: It is true that God makes these despairing
Thoughts as well as other Sins, work for good to them that are delivered from
them by Faith in Christ, they are moved thereby to hate Sin, and to prize
Christ the more, and the Comforts of his Gospel, and to loath and abhor
themselves, yet many are brought to Christ without them, by Gods giving them
the knowledge of their own Sins, and of Christ's Salvation together; several
Examples of these were above mentioned, who received the Word with Joy at the
first hearing of it: And we must not desire or wait for any evil of Sin, such
as these despairing thoughts are, that good may come of it: Neither should we
expect to be worse before we be better, when we may and ought to be better
presently by believing on Christ.

4. In the direction it is, that we should continue and increase in the most
Holy Faith; and that we may, we must not think that when we have once attained
to the Grace of saving Faith, and thereby are begotten anew in Christ, our
Names are up in Heaven and perfect, we may lie in Bed till Noon; but as long as
we continue in this Life, we must endeavor to continue in the Faith grounded
and settled, not moved away from the hope of the Gospel, Col. 1.23. and to hold
the beginning of our Confidence, and the rejoicing of hope steadfast to the end,
Heb. 6.14. and build up our selves in the most Holy Faith, Jude 20. abounding
therein with Thanksgiving, Col. 2.7. Tho we receive Christ freely by Faith, yet
we are but Babes in Christ, 1 Cor. 3.1. and we must not account, that we have
already attained or are made perfect, Phil. 3.12, 13. but we must strive to be
more rooted and built up in him, until we come to the perfect Man, to the
measure of the Stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4.13. If the new Nature
be really in us by Regeneration, it will have an Appetite to its own
continuance and Increase, until it come to Perfection as the New Born Babe, 1
Pet. 2.2. And we are not only to receive Christ and a new Holy Nature by Faith,
but also to live and walk by it, and to resist the Devil, and to quench all his
fiery Darts by it, and also to grow in Grace and to perfect Holiness in the
fear of God, for we are kept by the mighty Power of God through Faith unto
Salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. as all our Christian Warfare is the good Fight of Faith.
1 Timothy 6.12. All Spiritual Life and Holiness continue, grow or decay in us,
according as Faith continues, grows or decays in Vigor; but when this
Faith begins to sink by Fears and Doubtings, the Man himself begins to
sink together with it, Matt. 14.29, 31. Faith is like the Hand of Moses, while
it is held up Israel prevails, when it is let down Amaleck prevails, Exodus
17.11. this continuance and growth in Faith will require our Labor and
Industry as well as the beginning, tho we ^^e to ascribe the Glory of all to
the Grace of God in Christ, who is the Finisher as well as the Author of it,
Heb. 12.2. The Church meets with great Difficulties in her marching through
the Wilderness of this World to the Heavenly Canaan, as well as in her first
Deliverance from Egyptian Bondage; yea, we often meet with greater Difficulties
in going to Perfection, than we did in the beginning of the Good Work. The
Wisdom and Mercy of God so ordering it, that we shall be exercised with the
sharpest Dispensations of Providence, and the fiercest Assaults of our own
Corruptions and Satan's Temptations, after we have Grace given us to stand in
the Evil Day. You must therefore endeavor to continue and go on in the same
^ight manner as I have taught you, to begin this great Work of Believing in
Christ, that your Faith may be of the same Nature from the Beginning to the
End, though it increase in Degrees; for our Faith is imperfect and joined with
much Unbelief in this World, and we had need to pray still, Lord I believe,
help my Unbelief, Mar. 9.24. and therefore we have need to strive for more
Faith, that we may receive Christ in greater Perfection. If you find your Faith
has produced good Works, you should thereby increase your Confidence in Christ
for Salvation by his mere Grace: But take heed of changing the nature of your
Faith, from trusting on the Grace and Merits of Christ, to trusting on your own
Works, according to the Popish Doctrine, that our first Justification is by
Grace and Faith only, but our second Justification is also by Works. Beware
also of trusting on Faith it self as a work of Righteousness, instead of
trusting on Christ by Faith: If you do not find that your Believing in such a
right manner as I have described, does produce such Fruits of Holiness as you
desire, you ought not to diminish, but rather to increase your Confidence in
Christ, knowing that the weakness of your Faith hinders its Fruitfulness; and
the greater your Confidence is concerning the Love of God to you in Christ, the
greater will be your Love to God and to his Service. If you fall into any gross
Sin after the work is begun in you, as David and Peter did, think not that you
must cast away your Confidence and expect nothing but Wrath from God and
Christ, and that you must refuse to be comforted by the Grace of Christ, at
least for some time; for thus you would be the more weak and prone to fall into
other Sins; but rather strivo to believe more confidently that you have an
Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous; and that he is the
Propitiation for our Sins, 1 John 2.1, 2. and let not the guilt of Sin stay at
all upon your Conscience, but wash it away with all speed, in the Fountain of
Christ's Blood which is opened for us, that it may be ready for our use on all
such incident Occasions; that so you may be humbled for your Sins in a Gospel
way, and may hate your own Sinfulness, and be sorry for it with Godly Sorrow
out of Love to God. Peter might have been ruined for ever by denying of Christ,
as Judas was by betraying him, if Peter's Faith had not been upheld by the
Prayer of Christ, Luke 22.32. If a Clould be cast over all your inward
Qualifications, so that you can see no Grace at all in your selves, yet still
trust on him that justifyeth the Ungodly, and came to seek and to save them
that are lost. If God seem to deal with you as an Enemy, by bringing on you
some horrible Affliction, as he did upon Job, beware of demning your Faith and
its Fruits, as if they were not acceptable to God, but rather say with holy
Job, Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him, but I will maintain mine own
ways before him. Strive to keep and to increase Faith by Faith; i. e. by acting
Faith frequently, by trusting on God to keep and increase it, being confident
that he that has begun a good work in you, will perform it until the day of
Jesus Christ, Phil. 1.6.

DIRECT. XII.
Make diligent use of your most holy Faith for the immediate Performance of the
Duties of the Law, by walking no longer according to your old natural State, or
any Principles or Means of Practice that belong unto it, but only according to
that New State which you receive by Faith, and the Principles and Means of
Practice that properly belong thereunto; and strive to continue and increase in
such manner of Practice: This is the only way to attain to an acceptable
Performance of those Holy, and Righteous Duties, as far as it is possible in
this present Life.

EXPLICATION.
HEre I am guiding you to the manner of Practice, wherein you are to make use
of Faith and of all other effectual means of Holiness before treated of, which
Faith lays hold on, for the immediate Performance of the Law, which is the
great end aimed at in this whole Treatise: And therefore this deserves to be
diligently considered as the principal Direction, to which all the foregoing
and following, are subservient. As for the meaning of it, I have already showed
that our old natural State, is that which we derive from the first Adam by
natural Generation, and it is called in the Scripture the Old Man, and while we
be in it, we are said to be in the Flesh; and our new State is that which we
receive from the second Adam Jesus Christ, being new born in Union and
Fellowship with him through Faith: And it is called in Scripture, the New Man,
and when we are in it, we are said to be in the Spirit. The Principles and
Means of Practice belonging to a Natural State, are such as Persons do or may
attain to and make use of, before they are in Christ by Faith. Such as belong
properly to the New-State, are the manifold holy Endowments, Privileges and
Enjoyments which we partake of in Christ by Faith, such as have already
appeared to be the only effectual means of a Holy Life. We are said to walk
according to either of these States, or to the Principles or Means that belong
to either of them, when we are moved and guided by Virtue of them, to such
actings as are agreeable to them. Thus Kings act according to their State, in
commanding Authoritatively, and in magnificicent Bounty; poor Men in the way of
Service and Obedience; and Children indiscreetly, Hester 1.7. Prove. 18.23. 1
Cor. 13.11. So the Manner of Practice here directed to, consists in moving and
guiding our selves in the Performance of the Works of the Law by Gospel
Principles and Means: This is the rare and excellent Art of Godliness, in
which, every Christian should strive to be skilful and expert. The reason why
many come off with shame and Confusion, after they have a long time labored
with much Zeal and Industry for the Attainment of true Godliness, is because
they were never acquainted with this holy Art, and never endeavored to
practice in a right Gospel way. Some worldly Arts are called Mysteries, but
above all, this Spiritual Art of Godliness, is without Controversy a great
Mystery, 1 Timothy 3.16. because the Means that are to be made use of in it, are
deeply Mysterious, as has been showed, and you are not a skilful Artist till
you know them, and can reduce them to Practice. It is a manner of Practice far
above the Sphere of Natural Ability, such as would never have entered into the
Hearts of the Wisest in the World, if it had not been Revealed to us in the
Scriptures; and when it is there most plainly Revealed, continues a dark
Riddle to those that are not inwardly Enlightened and Taught by the Holy Spirit:
Such, as many Godly Persons guided by the Spirit and do in some measure walk
in, yet do but obscurely discern, that they can hardly perceive their own
Knowledge of it, and can hardly give any Account to others of the way wherein
they walk. As the Disciples that walked in Christ the way to the Father, and
yet perceived not that Knowledge in themselves, Lord we know not whether thou
go, and how can we know the way? Joh. 14.5. This is the reason why many poor
Believers are so weak in Christ, and attain to so small a Degree of Holiness
and Righteousness. Therefore that you may the better be acquainted with a
Mystery of so high Concernment, I shall show in the first place, that the Holy
Scriptures do direct you to this manner of Practice, as only effectual for the
Performance of Holy Duties; and then I shall lay before you some necessary
Instructions, that you may understand how to walk aright in it, and continue
and go forward therein, till you be made perfect in Christ.

For the first of these, the Holy Scriptures are very large and clear, in
directing us to this manner of Practice, and to Continuance and Growth therein.
And here it is useful for us to observe the great Variety of peculiar Words and
Phraises, whereby the Holy Ghost teaches this Mystery, which many that
frequently read the Scriptures, yea that pretend to be Preachers of the Gospel,
do little understand or regard, showing thereby that the things of the Spirit
of God are Foolishness to them, and that they are not yet acquainted with the
form of sound Words, and are strangers to the very Language of the Gospel which
they profess and pretend to preach. I shall therefore present to your View
several of those particular Words and Phrases whereby this mysterious manner of
Practice is expressed in the Holy Scriptures, and commended to you as the only
way for the sure Attainment of all Holiness in Heart and Life. I shall rank
such of them together as agree in Sense, that the Multitude of them may not
breed Confusion in your Thoughts.

1. This is the manner of Practice in Scripture, which is expressed by living
by Faith Hab. 2.4. Gal. 2.20. Heb. 10.38. Walking by Faith. 2 Cor. 5.7. Faith
working by Love. Gal. 5.6. Overcoming the World by Faith, 1 John 5.4. Quenching
all the fiery Darts of the Wicked, by the Shield of Faith, Ephesians. 6.19, 20. Some
make no more of living and walking by Faith, than merely a stirring up, and
encouraging our selves to our Duty by such Principles as we believe. Thus the
Jews might account that they believed by Faith, because they professed and
assented unto the Doctrine of Moses and the Prophets, and were moved thereby to
a Zeal of God, though they sought righteousness not by Faith, but as it were,
by the Works of the Law, Romans 3.32. Thus Paul might think he lived by Faith
while he was a zealous Pharisee, but afterward he knew, that the life of Faith
consisted in dying to the Law and living to God; and that not himself, but
Chrish, lived in him, Gal. 2.19. as it is one and the same thing to be
justified by Faith, and Christ believed on, Romans 5.1. so to live, walk and work
by Faith, is all one with living, walking, working by means of Christ and his
saving Endowments which we receive and make use of by Faith, to guide and move
our selves to the Practice of Holiness.

2. The same thing is commended to us by the Terms of walking, rooted and built
up in Christ, Col. 2.6. living to God as not to live to our selves, but to have
Christ living in us, Gal. 2.19, 20. Good Conversation in Christ, 1 Pet. 3.16.
Putting on the Lord Jesus Christ, that we may walk honestly as in the day, Romans
13.13, 14. Being strong in the Lord and the power of his might, Ephesians. 6.10.11.
Doing all things in the name of Christ, Col. 3.17. walking up and down in the
name of the Lord, Zech. 10.12. going in the strength of the Lord, as to make
mention of his Righteousness, even of his only, Psalm. 71.16. These phrases are
frequent, and do sufficiently explain one another; and do show, that we are to
practice Holiness, not only by virtue of Christ's Authority; but also of his
strengthening Endowments moving us and encouraging us thereunto.

3. It is also signified by the phrases of being, strong in the Grace that is
in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 2.1. having your Conversation in the World not with
fleshly Wisdom, but by the Grace of God, 2 Cor. 1.12. having, or holding fast
Grace, that we may serve God acceptably, laboring abundantly in such a manner,
as that the whole work is not performed by us, but by the Grace of God that is
with us, 1 Cor. 15.10. By Grace therefore, we may well understand the
privileges of our new state given to us in Christ, whereby we ought to be
influenced and guided in the performance of holy Duties.

4. It is also signified when we are to put off the old, and put on the new
Man; yea, to continue in so doing, tho we have done it in a measure already,
and that we avoid our former sinful Conversation, Ephesians. 4.21, 22, 24. and to
avoid sin, because we have put off the old, and put on the new Man, Col. 3.9,
10, 11. I have already showed, that by this twofold man, is not meant merely
sin and holiness: but by the former meant our natural Estate, with all its
Endowments, whereby we are furnished only to the practice of sin; and by the
later, or new Estate in Christ, that whereby we are furnished with all means
necessary for the practice of Holiness.

5. We are to understand the same thing, when we are taught, not to walk after
the Flesh, but after the Spirit, that we may be free from the Law of sin, and
that the righteousness of the Law may be fulfilled in us, Romans 8.1, 2, 3. and
through the Spirit to mortify the deeds of the body, and to be led by the
Spirit, because we live by the Spirit, and have crucified the flesh with the
affections and lusts, Gal. 5.24. The Apostle does show by these expressions,
not only that we are to practice holiness, but also by what means we may do it
effectually. By the Flesh is meant, our old Nature derived from the first Adam:
And by the Spirit, is meant the Spirit of Christ, and that new Nature which we
have by him dwelling in us. We are said to walk after either of these Natures,
when we make the Properties or Qualifications of either of them to be the
principles of our Practice. So when we are taught to serve in newness of the
spirit, and not in the oldness of the Letter, that so we may bring forth fruits
unto God: The meaning is, that we must endeavor to bring forth the fruits of
holiness, not by virtue of the Law, that killing Letter, to which the Flesh is
married, and by which the motions of sin are in us; but by virtue of the
Spirit, and his manifold Riches which we partake of in our new state, by a
mystical marriage with Christ, Romans 7.4, 5, 6. and by virtue of such Principles
as belong to the New State, declared in the Gospel, whereby the holy spirit is
ministered to us.

6. This is the manner of walking which the Apostle Paul directs us unto,
when he teaches us by his own Example, That the continual work of our lives
should be to know Christ, and the power of his Resurrection, and the fellowship
of his Sufferings, being made conformable to his Death, if by any means we may
attain to the Resurrection of the dead, and to increase and press forward in
this kind of knowledge, Phil. 3.10, 11, 12, 15. Certainly he means such an
experimental knowledge of Christ, and his Death and Resurrection, as
effectually makes us conformable thereunto in dying to sin, and living to God.
And he would hereby guide us to make use of Christ and his Death and
Resurrection, by Faith, as the powerful means of all Holiness in Heart and
Life; and to increase in this manner of walking, until we attain unto
perfection in Christ.

2. The second thing proposed, was, to lay before you some necessary
Instructions, that your steps may be guided aright, to continue and go forward
in this way of Holiness, until you be made perfect in Christ. And seeing we are
naturally prone to mistake this way, and are utterly unable to find it out, or
discern it by our own Reason and Understanding, we should the more diligently
attend to these Instructions taken out of the Holy Scriptures. And we should
pray earnestly, that God would give unto us the Spirit of Wisdom and
Revelation, that we may discern the way of Holiness thereby, and walk aright in
it, according to that gracious promise, The wayfaring men, tho Fools, shall not
err therein, Isa. 35.8.

1. Observe and consider diligently in our whole Conversation, That tho you are
partakers of a new holy state by Faith in Christ, yet our natural state does
remain, in a measure, with all its corrupt Principles and Properties; as long
as we live in this present World, our apprehension of Christ and his perfection
in this Life is only by Faith, whereas by Sense and Reason we may apprehend
much in our selves contrary to Christ; and this Faith is imperfect: So that
true Believers have cause to pray to God to help their Unbelief, Mar. 9.24.
Therefore, tho we receive perfect Christ by Faith, yet the measure and degree
of enjoying him is imperfect, and we hope still, so long as we are in this
World, to enjoy him in a higher degree of perfection than we have done; we are
yet but weak in Christ, 2 Cor. 13.4. Children in comparison to the perfection
we expect in another World, 1 Cor. 13.10, 11. and we must grow still, till we
come to the perfect man, Ephesians. 4.13. and some are less Babes than others, and
have received Christ in so small a measure, that they may be accounted carnal
rather than spiritual, 1 Cor. 3.1. And because all the Blessings and
Perfections of our new state, as Justification, the gift of the Spirit, and of
the holy Nature, and the Adoption of Children, are seated and treasured up in
Christ, and joined with him inseparably, we can receive them no further than we
receive Christ himself by Faith, which we do in an imperfect measure and degree
in this Life. The Apostle Paul proposes himself as a pattern for all those
that are perfect in the truth of Grace, to imitate. And yet he professes, That
he was not yet made so perfect in the degree or measure of saving Endowments,
but that he did still press forward toward the mark of the prize of the
highcalling of God in Christ Jesus, laboring still to apprehend and win Christ
more perfectly; and to be found in him, not having his own Righteousness, but
that which is of God by Faith; and to gain more experimental knowledge of
Christ, and of the fellowship of his sufferings, and the power of his
Resurrection, being made conformable thereunto, Phil 3.8, 10. Believers are
Justified already, yet wait for the hope of Righteousness by Faith, i. e. for
the full enjoyment of the Righteousness of Christ, Gal. 5.5. They have received
but the first fruits of the spirit, and must wait for a more full enjoyment of
it. The Spirit witnesses now to them, that they are the Children of God; and
yet they groan within themselves, waiting for more full enjoyment of Adoption,
Romans 8.23. Now seeing the degree and measure of our Reception and Enjoyment of
Christ, with all the Blessings of our new state in him in this Life is
imperfect, it follows clearly, that our contrary natural state with its
Properties remains still in us in some degree, and is not perfectly
abolished; so that all Believers in this World, do in some degree partake of
these two contrary states. Believers have indeed put off the old man, and put
on the new man, where Christ is all, and in all, Col. 3.10, 11. yet they are to
put the old Man off, and the new Man on more and more, because the old Man
remains still in a measure. They are said to be, not in the flesh, but in the
spirit; because their being in the Spirit is their best and lasting state, as
denominations are usually taken from the better part, but yet the Flesh is in
them, and they find work enough to mortify the deeds of it, Romans 8.9.13.
Therefore several things which are contrary to each other, are frequently
attributed to Believers in the Scripture, with respect to these two contrary
States, wherein one place seems to contradict another, and yet both are true in
diverse respects: Thus holy Paul says truly of himself, I live, yet not I; Gal.
2.20. because he did live to God by Christ living in him; and yet in another
respect according to his natural State, he did not live to God. Again, he
professes that he was carnal, sold under Sin, and yet on the contrary, that he
allowed not Sin but hated it; he shows how both these were true concerning
himself: In diverse respects he says, in me, that is, in my Flesh dwells no
good thing. And I delight to do the Will of God according to the Inner-Man:
With my Mind I my self serve the Law of God but with my Flesh, the Law of Sin,
Romans 7.14.15. John says, He that says he has no sin, deceives himself and
is a Liar, 1 John 1. and also that it is true that whosoever is born of God does
not commit Sin, for his Seed, i. e. Christ's the new spiritual Nature remains
in him, and he cannot sin because he is born of God, 1 John 3.9. It is true that
we are weak and nothing, and yet strong and able to do all things, 2. Cor.
12.10, 11. Phil. 4.13. It Is true that Believers are dead because of Sin, but
alive because of Righteousness, Romans 8.10. and that when they dye by a natural
Death, they shall never dye, Joh. 11.25, 26. They are Sons that have the
Inheritance by their Birthright, and yet in some respects may differ nothing
from Servants, and so they may be under the Law in a sense, and yet under
Grace, and Heirs according to the free Promise at the same time, Gal 4.1, 2.
They are redeemed from the Curse of the Law, and have forgiveness of Sins, and
a Promise that God will never be wroth with them, nor rebuke them any more,
Gal. 3.13. Ephesians. 1.7. Isa. 54.9. And yet on the contrary, the Curse written in
the Law, is sometimes poured out upon them, Dan. 9, 11. and they have need
still to pray that God would deliver them from their Guiltiness, and forgive
their Debts, Psalm. 51.14. Mat. 6.12. and they may expect that God will punish
them for all there Iniquities, Amos 3.2. These contrary things asserted
concerning Believers in Scripture, do sufficiently manifest that they partake
of two contrary States in this Life; and this is a plain, and easy and ready
way to reconcile these seeming Contradictions, whatever other ways may be used
to reconcile some of them. And what reason is there to question that the old
Sat remains in Believers in some degrees, seeing all sound Protestants
acknowledge that the sinful Depravation and Pollution of our Natures, commonly
called Original Sin, which is one principal part of this old State, does remain
in all as long as they live in this World? Now though some penal Evils may be
said to remain in us, yet we cannot suppose that this original Pollution is
continued in us, and considered in Christ. But as considered in our old State
derived from the first Adam, therefore the first sin of Adam is imputed in some
respect, even to those that are justified by Faith, and they remain in a
measure as aforesaid, under the Punishment and Curse denounced, Genesis 2.17. in
the day thou eatest thereof thou shall surely dye; and on this account the same
original Guilt and Pollution is propagated to the Children of believing
Parents, as well as others by natural Generation; and if such a great and
fundamental part of the natural State continue in Believers as subjection to
the Guilt of the first Sin and original Corruption, which is one great part of
the Punishment and Death threatened, and by which we are prone and inclined to
all actual Sins, why should we not judge that other parts of the same State, do
likewise continue in them as well as the guilt of their own actual Sins, and
subjection to the Wrath of God and the Curses and Punishments denounced against
them in the Law? and why should we not judge that all the Miseries of this
Life, and Death it self, are inslicted upon Believers, at least in some
respect, as Punishments of Sin? It may be objected that this Doctrine of a
twofold State of Believers in this Life, does much derogate from the Perfection
of our Justification by Christ, and from the fullness of all the Grace and
spiritual Blessings of Christ, and from the Merits of his Death and the power
of his Spirit; and that it greatly diminishes the Consolation of Believers in
Christ. But it may be easily vindicated from this Objection, if we understand
it rightly; for notwithstanding this twofold State, it still holds true, that
Believers while they are on Earth, have all Perfection of spiritual Blessings,
Justification, Adoption, the Gift of the Spirit, Holiness, Eternal Life and
Glory, in and with Christ, Ephesians. 1.3. in the person of Christ who is now in
Heaven, the Old Man is perfectly crucified; they are dead to Sin and to the Law
and its Curse, and they are quickened together with him, and raised up with him,
and made to sit in heavenly Places, in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2.6, 7. and Believers
do in their own persons, receive and enjoy by Faith, all these perfect,
spiritual Blessings of Christ, as far as they receive and enjoy Christ himself
dwelling in them, and no further. Thus far they are in a new State free from
the Guilt, Pollution and Punishment of Sin, and so from the Wrath of God and
all Miseries, and Death it self, while they are in this World: Yea, all the
Guilt, Pollution and Punishments of Sin and all Evils whatsoever, which they
are subject to according to their natural State, do them no harm according to
this new State, but work for their good, and are no Evils, but rather
Advantages to them, tending to the Destruction only of the Flesh, and to the
Perfection of the New Man in Christ. Yet it holds true also that our
reception and enjoyment of Christ himself and all his Perfections, is but in an
imperfect measure and degree, until Faith be turned into heavenly Vision and
Fruition of Christ; and therefore our old sinful State with the Evils thereof,
is not perfectly abolished during this Life. The Kingdom of Heaven, or the
Grace of Christ within us, is like leaven in Meal, and does not unite it self
perfectly to the Meal in an Instant, but by degrees, until the whole be
leavened, Mat. 13.35. or like the morning Light that expels Darkness by
degrees, shining more and more unto a perfect day, Prove. 4.18. This cannot be
justly accounted any derogation to the Merits of Christ's Death, or to the
power of his Spirit, seeing Christ never intended to bring to pass by his
Death, or by the power of his Spirit, that we should enjoy his spiritual
Blessings any further than we are in him, and enjoy him by Faith; or that we
should be made holy or happy according to the Flesh, by a Reformation of our
natural State, as has been showed: Neither does this diminish the Consolation
of Believers in Christ, for thereby they may know that they have the Perfection
of Grace and Happiness in Christ, and that they enjoy it in this World, as far
as they enjoy Christ himself by Faith; and that they shall enjoy it in a
perfect measure, and be fully freed from their old Sins and miserable State,
when that frame of Nature which they received from the first Adam, is dissolved
by Death. This Instruction is very useful to frame our Souls aright for the
practicing of Holiness, only by those Gospel Principles and Means that belong
to our new State, which we are Partakers of by Faith in Christ. And thus it is
easily vindicated from another great Objection, wherein the Papists and Quakers
do much Triumph. They appeal to Men's Conscience to answer this Question, which
Doctrine is most likely to bring People to the practice of true Godliness,
theirs which teaches, That perfect Holiness may be attained in this Life, or
ours which teaches, That it is impossible for us to keep the Law perfectly,
and to purge our selves from all Sin as long as we live in this World, though
we use our best Endeavors? They think that common Reason will make the Verdict
pass for them against our Doctrine, as that which discourageth all Endeavors
for Perfection, and hardneth the Hearts of People to allow themselves in Sin
because they cannot avoid it. But on the contrary, the Doctrine of Perfection
hardens People to allow themselves in Sin, and to call Evil Good, as the
Papists account, That the Concupiscence of the Flesh against the Spirit is no
Sin, but rather good matter for the Exercise of their Virtues, because the most
perfect in this Life, are not without it: It also discourageth those that
labor to get Holiness in the right way, by Faith in Christ, and makes them to
think that they labor in vain, because they find themselves still sinful, and
far from Perfection, when they have done their best to attain it. It hinders
our Diligence in seeking Holiness, by these Principles and Means, whereby only
it can be found: For who will be Diligent and Watchful to avoid walking
according to his own carnal Principles, if he think that his own carnal State
with it is Principles, is quite abolished, and is out of him, so that at present
he is in no danger of walking according to them? Whatsoever good works the
Doctrine of the Perfectionists may serve to promote, I am sure it hinders a
great part of that work which Christ would have us to be employed in as long as
we live in this World; we must know that our old State with its evil
Principles, continues still in a measure, or else we shall not be sit for the
great Duties of confesing of Sins, loathing our selves for them, praying
earnestly for the Pardon of them, a just sorrowing for them with a Godly
Sorrow, accepting the Punishment of our Sins, and giving God the glory of his
Justice, and offering to him the Sacrifice of a broken and contrite Spirit,
being poor in Spirit, working out our Salvation with fear and trembling. Some
have doubted how it can consist with our Justification by Christ, that we
should be still liable to be punished for our Sins, and obliged to pray for the
Pardon of them, because they have not well considered the twofold State of
Believers in this Life; and except we know this and keep it in Mind, we shall
never be sit to practice continually the great Duties that tend to the putting
off the Old Man and putting on the New Man, and mortifying the Deeds of the
Body by the Spirit, praying continually that God would renew a right Spirit in
us and sanctify us throughout; pressing forward to Perfection, desiring the
sincere Milk of the Word and the Enjoyment of other Ordinances. Christ has
appointed that his Church on Earth, should be employed in such works; and
Perfectionists either do, or sain would account them needless for them, and
that they have no longer need of Christ himself, to be their spiritual
Physician and Advocate with the Father, and Propitiation for their Sins:
Therefore they are not fit to be Members of the Church on Earth, and are never
likely to be Members of the Church in Heaven, except they can make a Ladder and
climb up thither before their time.

2. Despair of purging the Flesh or Natural Man of its sinful Lusts and
Inclinations, and of practicing Holiness, by your willing and resolving to do
the best that lies in your own Power, and trusting on the Grace of God and
Christ to help you in such Resolutions and Endeavors; rather resolve to trust
on Christ to work in you to will and to do by his own power, according to his
own good Pleasure. They that are convinced of their own Sin and Misery, do
commonly first think to tame the Flesh, and to subdue and root out its Lusts,
and to make their corrupt Nature to be better natured, and inclined to Holiness
by their struggling and wrestling with it: And if they can but bring their
Hearts to a full purpose and resolution to do the best that lies in them, they
hope that by such a Resolution, they shall be able to atchieve great
Enterprises in the Conquest of their Lusts, and performance of the most
difficult Duties. It is the great work of some zealous Divines, in their
Preaching and Writings, to stir up People to this Resolution, wherein they
place the chiefest turning Point from Sin to Godliness. And they think that
this is not contrary to the life of Faith, because they trust on the Grace of
God through Christ, to help them in all such Resolutions and Endeavors. Thus
they endeavor to reform their old State, and to be made perfect in the Flesh,
instead of putting it off, and walking according to the new State in Christ.
They trust on low, carnal things for Holiness, and upon the acts of their own
Will, their Purposes, Resolutions and Endeavors, instead of Christ; and they
trust to Christ to help them in this carnal way, whereas true Faith would teach
them that they are nothing, and that they do but labor in vain. They may as
well wash a Blackamoor white, as purge the Flesh or Natural Man from its evil
Lusts, and make it pure and holy. It is desperately wicked, past all cure: It
will unavoidably lust against the Spirit of God, even in the best Saints on
Earth, Gal. 17. its mind is enmity to the Law of God, and neither is, nor can
be subject to it, Romans 8.7. They that would cure it and make it holy by their
own Resolutions and Endeavors, do act quite contrary to the design of Christ's
Death, for he dyed not that the Flesh, or Old Natural Man might be made holy,
but that it might be crucified and destroyed out of us, Romans 6.6. and that we
might live to God, not to our selves, or by any natural power of our own
Resolutions or Endeavors, but by Christ living in us, and by his Spirit
bringing forth the fruits of Righteousness in us, Gal. 2.20. and 5.24, 25.
Therefore we must be content to leave the Natural Man vile and wicked, as we
found it, until it be utterly abolished by Death, though we must not allow its
Wickedness, but rather groan to be delivered from the Body of this Death,
thanking God that there is a Deliverance through Jesus Christ our Lord. Our way
to mortify sinful Affections and Lusts, must be not by purging them out of the
Flesh, but by putting off the Flesh it self, and geting above into Christ by
Faith, and walking in that new Nature that is by him; thus the way of Life is
above to the Wise, that he may depart from Hell beneath, Prove. 15.24. Our
willing, resolving and endeavoring, must be to do the best, not that lies in
our selves, or in our own power, but that Christ and the power of his Spirit
shall be pleased to work in us, for in us i. e. in our Flesh there dwells no
good thing, Romans 7.18. we have no ground to trust in God and Christ for help in
such Resolutions and Endeavors, as in things that are agreeable to the design
of Christ in our Redemption as to the way of acting and living by Faith. It is
likely that Peter sincerely resolved to dye with Christ, rather than to deny
him, and to do all that he could by his own power for that end; but Christ made
him quickly to see the Weakness and Vanity of such Resolutions, and we see by
Experience, what many Resolutions made in Sickness and other Dangers mostly
come to. It is not enough for us to trust on Christ to help us to act and
endeavor so far only as Creatures, for so the worst of Men are helped; he is
the Jehovah in whom they Live, Move, and have their Being; Act. 17.28. and it is
likely the Pharisee would trust on God to help him in Duty, as he would thank
God for the performance of Duty, Luke 18.11. and this is all the Faith that
many make use of to a holy Practice: But we must trust on Christ to enable us
above the strength of our own natural power, by virtue of the new Nature which
we have in Christ, and by his Spirit dwelling and working in us; or else our
best endeavors will be altogether sinful, and mere Hypocrisy, notwithstanding
all the help for which we trust upon him. We must also take heed of depending
for Holiness upon any Resolutions to walk in Christ, or on any written
Covenants or any Holiness that we have already received; for we must know that
the Virtue of these things, continue no longer than we continue walking in
Christ and Christ in us: They must be kept up by the continual Presence of
Christ in us, as Light is maintained by the presence of the Sun, and cannot
subsist without it.

3. You must not seek to procure forgiveness of sins, the favor of God, a new
holy Nature, Life, and Happiness, by any works of the Moral Law, or by any
Rites and Ceremonies whatever; but rather, you must work as those that have all
these things already according to your new state in Christ; as such who are
only to receive them more and more by Faith, as they are ready prepared and
treasured up for you, and freely given to you by your spiritual head, the Lord
Jesus Christ. If we walk as those that are yet wholly to seek for the
procurement of such enjoyments as these, it is a manifest sign, that at
present, we judge our selves to be without them, and without Christ himself; in
whose fullness they are all contained: And therefore we walk according to our
own Natural State, as those that are yet in the Flesh, and that would get
Salvation in it, and by our carnal Works and Observances, instead of living
altogether on Christ by Faith. This practice is according to the tenor of the
Covenant of Works, as I have before showed. And we have no ground to trust on
Christ and his Spirit to work Holiness in us this way; for we are dead to the
Legal Covenant by the Body of Christ, Romans 7. And if we be led by the Spirit,
we are not under the Law, Gal. 5.18. When the Galatians were seduced by false
Teachers, to seek the procurement of Justification and Life by Circumcision,
and other works of the Mosaical Law, the Apostle Paul rebukes them for seeking
to be made perfect in the flesh, directly contrary to their good beginning in
the Spirit, for rendering Christ of none effect to them, and for falling from
Grace, Gal. 3.3. and 5.4. And when some of the Colossians sought perfection in
the like manner, by observation of Circumcision, holy-meats, holy-times, and
other Rudiments of the World; The same Apostle blames them for not holding the
Head Jesus Christ, and as such as were not dead and risen with Christ, but
living merely in the World, Col. 2.19, 20. and 3.1. He clearly shows, that
those who seek any saving enjoyments in such a way, do walk according to their
own Natural State: And that the true manner of living by Faith in Christ, is to
walk as those that have all fullness and perfection of Spiritual Blessings in
Christ by Faith, and need not seek for them any other way to procure them for
themselves. In this sense it is a true saying, That Believers should not act
for Life, but from Life. They must act as those that are not procuring Life by
their Works, but as such who have already received and derived Life from
Christ, and act from the Power and Virtue received from him. And hereby it
appears, that the Papists, and all others that think to Justify, Purisie,
Sanctify, and save themselves by any of their own Works, Rites or Ceremonies
whatever, do walk in a carnal way, as those that are without any present
interest in Christ, and shall never attain unto Holiness or Happiness, until
they learn a better way of Religion.

4. Think not that you can effectually incline your Heart to the immediate
practice of Holiness, by any such practical Principles, as do only serve to
bind, press and urge you to the performance of holy Duties: But rather let such
Principles stir you up to go to Christ first by Faith, that you may be
effectually inclined to the immediate practice of Holiness in him by Gospel
Principles, that strengthen and enable you, as well as oblige you thereunto.
There are some practical Principles, that do only bind, press, and urge us to
holy Duties, by showing the reasonableness, equity, and necessity of our
Obedience, without showing at all, how we that are by Nature dead in sin, under
the wrath of God, may have any Strength and Ability for the performance of
them. As for Instance, the Authority of God the Lawgiver; our absolute
dependence on him as our Creator, Preserver, Governor, in whose hand is our
Life, Breath, and all our Happiness here and for ever. His All-feeing Eye, that
searches our Heart, discerns our very Thoughts and secret Purposes, his
exact Justice, in rendering to all according to their works; his Almighty and
Eternal Power to reward those that Obey him, and to punish transgressors for
ever, The unspeakable Joy of Heaven, and terrible Damnation of Hell. Such
Principles as these do bind our Consciences very strictly, and do work very
strongly upon the prevalent Affections of Hope and Fear, to pross and urge our
Hearts to the performance of holy Duties, if we believe them assuredly, and
work them earnestly upon our Hearts, by frequent, serious, lively Meditation:
And therefore some account them most forcible and effectual means to form any
Virtue in the Soul, and to bring it to immediate performance of any Duty, tho
never so difficult; and that the Life of Faith consists principally in our
living to God in Holiness, by a constant Belief and Meditation on them. And
they account those things that serve to mind them of such Principles very
effectual for Holiness, as looking on the Picture of Death, or on a
Deaths-head, keeping a Coffin by them ready made, walking about among the
Graves, etc. But this is not that manner of living to God, whereof the Apostle
speaks, when he says, I live, yet not I, but Christ that lives in me; and
the Life that I live in the Flesh, I live by the Faith of the Son of God, who
loved me, and gave himself for me. If a Man make use of these obliging
Principles, to stir him to go to Christ for Strength to Act holily, he walks
like one that has received Christ as his only Life by Faith, otherwise he
walks like other Natural Men. For the Natural Man may be brought to Act by
these Principles, partly by Natural Light, and more fully by Scripture Light,
without any true knowledge of the way of Salvation by Christ, and as if Christ
had never come into the World. And he may be strictly bound by them, and
vehemently urged and pressed to holy Duties; and yet all this while is left to
his own Natural Strength or Weakness, being not assured by any of these
Principles, that God will give him Strength to help him in the performance of
these Duties; and can do nothing aright, until he get new Life and Strength in
Christ by a more precious saving Faith. There would be no need of a new Life
and Strength by Christ, if these Principles were sufficient to bring us to a
holy Conversation. Therefore this manner of practice is no better than walking
after the flesh, according to our corrupt state, and a seeking to be made
perfect in the flesh. No question but Paul was very diligent in it while he was
a blind Pharisee. Yea, the Heathen Philosophers might attain to it in some
measure by the Light of Common Reason. The Devils have such Principles, as they
do believe assuredly, yet they are never the better for them. Its a part of
that Natural Wisdom whereby the world knew not God; not that Wisdom of God in a
Mystery discovered in the Gospel, which is the only sanctifying Wisdom and
Power of God unto Salvation. What can you produce but corruption, by pressing
with Motives to Holiness, one that has no soundness in him, from the sole of
the foot even to the head, only wounds and bruises, and putrified sores. He
that is made truly sensible of his own vileness and deadness by Nature, will
despair of ever bringing himself to Holiness by Principles that afford him no
Life and Strength, but only lay an Obligation upon him, and urge and press him
to Duty. What are mere Obligations to one that is dead in sin? While the Soul
is without spiritual Life, sin is the more moved and enraged, by pressing and
urging upon the Soul the Obligations of the Law, and its Commands. The motions
of sin are by the Law, and sin taking occasion by the Commandment, works in
us all manner of Concupiscence, Romans 7.5, 7, 8. And yet these obliging
Principles are very good and excellent in this right Gospel use of them, as the
Apostle says of the Law, that it is good, if it be used lawfully, 1 Timothy 1.7.
The humbled sinner knows well his Obligations; but it is Life and Strength
that he wants, and despaireth of walking according to such Obligations, until
he get this Life and Strength by Faith in Christ: Therefore these obliging
Principles do move him to go in the first place to Christ, that so he may be
enabled to answer their End, by the strengthening and enlivening Principles of
Gods Grace in Christ. Some there are, that make use of Gospel-Principles only
to oblige and urge to Duty, without affording any Life and Strength for the
performance, as they that think, that Christ dyed and rose again to establish a
New Covenant of Works for our Salvation, and to give us a pattern of Good Works
by his own Obedience, rather than to purchase Life, Obedience, and good Works
for us. Such as these do not understand, and receive the Principles of the
Gospel rightly; but they pervert and abuse them, contrary to their true Nature
and Design; and thereby they render them as ineffectual for their
Sanctification, as any other natural or legal Principles.

5. Stir up and strengthen your self to perform the Duties of Holiness, by a
firm persuasion of your enjoyment of Jesus Christ, and all spiritual and
everlasting Benefits through him. Set not your selves upon the performance of
the Law with any prevailing thoughts or apprehensions, that you are yet without
an Interest in Christ, and the love of God through him, under the Curse of the
Law, the power of Sin and Satan, having no better Portion than this present
World; no better strength, than that which is in the purposes and resolutions
of your own Free Will. While such thoughts as these prevail, and influence your
Actings, its evident that you walk according to the Principles and Practices of
your old natural state; and you will be moved thereby to yield to the Dominion
of Sin and Satan, to withdraw your selves from God and Godliness, as Adam was
moved from the sight of his own Nakedness, to hide himself from God, Genesis 3.10.
Therefore your way to a holy practice, is first to conquer and spoil such
unbelieving thoughts, by trusting confidently on Christ, and persuading your
selves by Faith, that his Righteousness, Spirit, Glory, and all his spiritual
Benefits are yours, and he dwells in you, and you in him. In the might of
this Confidence you should go forth to the performance of the Law; and you will
be strong against Sin and Satan, and able to do all things through Christ that
strengthens you. This consident persuasion is of great necessity to the right
framing and disposing our Hearts to walk according to our new state in Christ.
The Life of Faith principally consists in it. And herein it eminently
appears, that Faith is an Hand not only to receive Christ, but also to work
by him; and that it cannot be effectual for our Sanctification, except it
contain in it some Assurance of our Interest in Christ, as has bin showed.
Thus we act as those that are above the Sphere of Nature, advanced to Union and
Fellowship with Christ. The Apostle maintained in his Heart, a persuasion that
Christ had loved him, and given himself for him; and hereby he was enabled to
live to God in Holiness, through Christ living in him by Faith. He teaches us
also, that we must maintain the like persuasion, if we would walk holily in
Christ. We must know, that our old man is crucified with him; and we must
reckon our selves dead indeed unto sin, and alive unto God through Jesus Christ
our Lord, Romans 6.6. This is the means whereby we may be filled with the Spirit,
strong in the Lord, and the power of his might; which God would not require of
us, if he had not appointed the means, Ephesians. 6. Christ himself walked in a
constant persuasion of his excellent state; he set the Lord always before him,
and was persuaded, that because God was at his right hand, he should not he
moved, Psalm 16.8. How should it be rationally expected, that a Man should Act
according to this new state, without Assurance that he is in it? Its a rule of
Common Prudence in all worldly Callings and Conditions, that every one must
know and consider well his own State, lest he should act proudly above it, or
sordidly below it; and it is a hard thing to bring some to a right estimate of
their own worldly Conditions. If the same rule were observed in Spiritual
things, doubtless the knowledge and persuasion of the Glory and Excellency of
our new state in Christ, would more elevate the hearts of Believers above all
sordid Salvery to their Lusts, and enlarge them to run cheerfully the ways of
Gods Commandments: If Christians knew their own Strength better, they would
enterprise greater things for the Glory of God. This Knowledge is difficultly
attained, it is only by Faith and spiritual Illumination; the best know but in
part, and hence it is that the Conversation of Believers, falls so much below
their holy and heavenly Calling.

6. Consider what Endowments, Privileges or Properties of your new State are
most meet, and forcible to incline and strengthen your Heart to love God above
all, and to renounce all Sin, and to give up your self to Universal Obedience
to his Commands, and strive to walk in the persuasion of them, that you may
attain to the Practice of these great Duties^ I may well join these together,
because to love the Lord with all our Hearts, Might and Soul, is the first and
great Commandment which influenceth us to all Obedience, with a hatred and
detestation of all Sin as it is contrary and hateful to God. The same effectual
means that produces the one, will also produce the other, and Holiness chiefly
consists in these. So the chief Blessings of our holy State are most meet and
forcible to enable us for the immediate performance of them, and are to be made
use of to this end by Faith. Particularly you must believe steadfastly that all
your Sins are blotted out, and that you are reconciled to God, and have access
into his Favor by the Blood of Christ, and that he is your God and Father, and
altogether Love to you, and your all-sufficient everlasting Portion and
Happiness through Christ. Such Apprehensions as these, do present God as a very
lovely Object to our Hearts, and do thereby allure and win our Affections that
cannot be forced by Commands or Threatenings, but must be sweetly won and drawn
by Allurements. We must not harbor any Suspicions that God will prove a
terrible, everlasting Enemy to us, if we would love him; for there is no fear
in Love, but perfect Love casts out Fear, because Fear has Torment; he that
fears is not made perfect in Love, we love him because he first loved us, 1 John 4.18, 19. David loved the Lord because he was persuaded that he was his
Strength, Rock, Fortress, his God and the horn of his salvation, Psalm. 18.1, 2.
Love that causes Obedience unto the Law, must proceed from a good Conscience,
purged from sin; and this good Conscience must proceed from Faith unfeigned,
whereby we apprehend the remission of our sins, our Reconciliation with God by
the merits of the blood of Christ, 1 Timothy 1.5. with Heb. 9.14. For the same end
that your Hearts may be rightly fitted and framed for the performance of these
principal Duties, the Holy Scripture directs you to walk in the persuasion of
other principal Endowments of your new state: As, that you have fellowship with
the Father and the Son, 1 John 1.3. That you are the Temple of the living God,
2 Cor. 6.16. That you live by the Spirit, Gal. 5.25. That you are called to
Holiness, and created in Christ Jesus unto good works: That God will sanctisie
you wholly, and make you perfect in holiness at the last, 1 These. 5.23, 24.
Ephesians. 2.10. That your old man is crucified with Christ; and through him you are
dead unto sin, and alive unto God; and being made free from sin, you are become
the Servants of Righteousness, and have your Fruit unto Holiness, and the End
Everlasting Life, Romans 6.6, 22. You are Dead, and your Life is hid with Christ
in God. When Christ who is your Life shall appear, then shall you also appear
with him in Glory, Col. 3.3, 4. Such persuasions as these, when they are deeply
rooted, and constantly maintained in our Hearts, do strongly Arm and Encourage
us to practice Universal Obedience in opposition to every sinful Lust: Because
we look upon it not only as our Duty, but our great Privilege, to do all
things through Christ strengthening of us; and God does certainly work in us
both to will and to do by these Principles, because they properly belong to the
Gospel, or New Testament, which is the Ministration of the Spirit, and the
Power of God unto Salvation, 2 Cor. 3.6, 8. Romans 1.16.

7. For the performance of other Duties of the Law, you are to consider not
only these Endowments, Privileges and Properties of their new State, which are
meet and forcible, to enable you to the Love of God, and Universal Obedience,
but also those that have a peculiar force and aptitude suitable to the special
Nature of such Duties: And you must endeavor to assure your selves of them by
Faith, that you may be encouraged and strengthened to perform the Duties. I
shall give you some instances of this manner of practice in several Duties,
whereby you may the better understand how to guide your selves in the rest. And
as to the Duties of the first Table, if you would draw near to God in a Duty of
his Worship with a true Heart, you must do it in full assurance of Faith
concerning your enjoyment of Christ, and his Salvation. And would you perform
the great Duty of trusting on the Lord with all your Heart, easting your Care
upon him, and committing the disposal of your self to him in all your Concerns?
Persuade your self through Christ, that God, according to his Promise, will
never fail you, nor forsake you; that he takes a Fatherly Care of you, that he
will withold no good thing from you, and will make all things to work for
your Good: And thus you will be strong and courageous in the practice of this
Duty: Whereas, if you live in a mere suspense concerning your Interest in the
Privileges, you will be subject to carnal fears, carping cares, in despite of
your Heart, and you willbe prone to trust on the Arm of Flesh, tho your
Conscience tell you plainly, that in so doing you incur the heinous guilt of
Idolatry. Would you be strengthened to submit to the hand of God with a cheerful
Patience, in bearing any Affliction, and Death it self? The way to fortify
your selves, is to Believe assuredly, that your Afflictions that are but for a
moment, do work for you a far more exceeding eternal weight of Glory; that
Christ is your gain in death and life; that his Grace is sufficient for you;
and his strength made perfect in your weakness; and that he will not suffer you
to be tempted above that you are able; and will at last make you more than
Conquerours over all evil. Until you attain to such persuasions as these, you
will be prone to fret, and murmur under the burden of Affliction, and to use
indirect means to deliver your selves, notwithstanding the clearest Convictions
to the contrary. Would you limit your selves to the Observation of Gods own
Institutions in his Worship? Believe that you are complete in Christ, and have
all perfection of spiritual Blessings in him; and that God will build you up in
Christ by the Ordinances of his own Appointment. This will make you account his
Ordinances sufficient, and Men's Traditions, and Inventions, needless in the
Worship of God: Whereas if you do not apprehend all fullness in Christ, you will
be like the Papists, prone to catch at every Straw, and to multiply
Superstitious Observations without end, for the supply of your spiritual Wants.
Would you confess your sins to God, pray to him, and praise him heartily for
his Benefits? Would you praise him for Afflictions as well as Prosperity?
Believe assuredly that God is Faithful and Just to forgive your sin through
Christ, that you are made an Holy Priesthood, to offer spiritual Sacrisices of
Prayer and Praises, that are acceptable to God through Christ; and that God
hears your Prayers, and will fulfill them so far as they are good for you;
and that all Gods ways are Mercy and Truth toward you, whether he prosper or
afflict you in this life. If you be altogether in doubt, or otherwise persuaded
concerning these Privileges, all your Confessions, Prayers and Praises, will
be but heartless, Lip-labours, Slavish or Pharisaical Works. In like manner you
will be enabled to hear and receive the Word as the Word of God, and to
meditate on it with delight, and you will be willing to know the strictness and
spirituality of the Commands of God, and to try and examine your ways
impartially by them, if you believe assuredly that the Word is the Power of God
to Salvation; and that Christ is your great Physician, willing and able to heal
you, be the case never so bad: And where your sin abounds, his Grace toward
you does so much the more abound: Whereas, without these Comfortable
Apprehensions, all the works of Hearing, Meditation, Self-examination, will be
but uncouth heartless Works, and they will be performed negligently, and by
halves, or hypocritically, and out of slavish Fear, with much reluctance,
without any good will, or readiness of mind. So also for the right receiving of
the Sacraments, you will find your selves much strengthened by Believing, that
you may have Communion with God and Christ in them, and that you have a great
High Priest to bear the Iniquity of your holy things, and to make you for ever
accepted before the Lord. In the same way you are to apply your selves to all
Duties toward your Neighbor, required in the second Table of the Law, by
Acting in a persuasion of such privileges of your new Estate, as have a
peculiar force to encourage and strengthen you for the performance of them.
That you may love your Neighbor as your self, and do to him in all things as
you would he should do to you, without partiality and self-seeking; that you
may give him his due Honor, and abstain from injuring him in his Life,
Chastity, worldly Estate, good Name, or from Coveting any thing that is his,
according to the several Commands in the second Table of the Decalogue: You
must walk in a persuasion, not only that these things are just and equitable
toward your Fellow Creatures, and that you are strictly bound to the
performance of them, but that they are the will of your heavenly Father, that
has begotten you according to his own Image in Righteousness and true
Holiness, and has given you his Spirit, that you may be like-minded to him in
all things: And that they are the mind of Christ who dwells in you, and you
in him: That God and Christ are kind, tenderhearted, long-suffering, full of
goodness to Men, whether good or bad, Friends or Enemies, Poor or Rich; and
that Christ came into the World, not to destroy, but to save; and that you are
of the same Spirit; that the Injuries done to you by your Neighbors can do you
no harm: And you need not seek any good for your selves by injuring them,
because you have all desirable happiness in Christ; and all things, tho
intended by your Enemies for your hurt, certainly work for your good through
Christ: Such apprehensions as these, wrought in us by the Spirit of Faith, do
certainly beget in us a right frame of Spirit, thoroughly furnished for every
good work toward our Neighbor. Likewise, your Hearts will be purified to
unfeigned love of the Brethren in Christ, and you will walk toward them with
all lowliness, meekness, long-suffering, forbearing one another in Love, if you
maintain a steadfast belief and persuasion of those manifold Bonds of Love
whereby you are inseparably joined with them through Christ; as particularly,
that there is one Body, and one Spirit, one hope of your Calling, one Lord, one
Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all, who is above all, and through
all, and in you all. Finally, you will be able to abstain from all fleshly and
worldly Lusts, that war against the Soul, and hinder all Godliness, by an
assured persuasion; not merely that Gluttony, Drunkenness, Letchery, are filthy
Swinish Abominations; And that the pleasures, profits, and honors of the World
are vain, empty things; but that you are Crucified to the Flesh, and the World,
and quickened, raised and set in heavenly places through Christ; and that you
have pleasures, profits, honors in Christ, to which the best things in the
World are not worthy to be compared: And that you are Members of Christ, the
Temple of his Spirit, Citizens of Heaven, Children of the Day, not of the
Night, nor of Darkness. So that it is below your State and Dignity to practice
deeds of darkness, and mind fleshly worldly things. Thus I have given Instances
enough to stir you up to acquaint your selves with the manifold endowments,
privileges, properties of your New State in Christ, as they are discovered in
the Gospel of your Salvation, whereby the new Nature is fitted for holy
Operations; as the common Nature of Man is furnished with the Endowments
necessary for those Functions and Operations to which it is designed; and also
to stir you up to make use of them by Faith, as they serve to strengthen you
either for Universal Obedience, or for particular Duties: And by this manner of
Walking, your Hearts will be comforted and established in every good Word and
Work, and you will grow in Holiness, until you attain to Perfection in Jesus
Christ.

8. If you endeavor to grow in Grace and in all Holiness, trust assuredly that
God will enable you by this manner of Walking, to do every thing that is
necessary for his Glory and your own everlasting Salvation, and that he will
graciously accept of that Obedience through Christ, which you are enabled to
perform according to the measure of your Faith, and pardon your Failings,
though you offend in many things, and fall short of many others, as to degrees
of Holiness and high Acts of Obedience. And therefore attempt not the
performance of Duty in any other way, though you cannot yet attain to do so
much as you would in this way. This is a necessary Instruction to establish us
in the life of Faith, that the sense of our manifold Failings and Defects, may
not move us eitheir to Despair, or to return to the use of carnal Principles
and Means, for help against our Corruptions, as accounting this way of living
and acting by Faith, to be in-sufficient for our Sanctification and Salvation.
The Apostle Paul, exhorts the Galatians to walk in the Spirit; though the flesh
lusts against the spirit, so that they cannot do the things that they would,
Gal. 5 10, 17. We are to know that though the Law requires of us the utmost
perfection of Holiness, yet the Gospel makes an allowance for our Weakness,
and Christ is so meek and lowly in heart, that he accepts of that which our
weak Faith can attain to by his Grace, and does not exact or expect any more of
us for his Glory and our Salvation, until we grow stronger in Grace. God showed
his great Indulgence to his People under the Old Testament, that Moses the
Lawgiver suffered them, because of the hardness of their hearts to put away
their Wives: Though from the beginning it was not so, Mat. 19.8. and also in
tolerating the customary practice of Polygamy; tho Christ will not tolerate the
continuance of such Practices in his Church, since his Spirit is more
plentifully poured forth under the Gospel: Yet he is as forward as ever, to
bear with the Failings of his weak Saints that desire to obey him sincerely. We
have another Instance of God's Indulgence, more full to our present purpose, in
his commanding that the fearful and faint-hearted, should not be forced to
enter into the Battle against their Enemies, but suffered to return home to
their Houses: Though sighting in Battle against Enemies, without Fear and
Faint-heartedness, was a Duty that God did much exercise his People in, at that
time, Deuteronomy. 20.3, 8. So under the Gospel, though it be an eminent part of
Christ's Service, to endure the greatest Fight of Afflictions and Death it
self, courageously for his Name sake, yet if any be so weak in Faith that they
have not sufficient Courage to venture into the Battle, no doubt but Christ
allows them to make use of any honest means, whereby they may escape the
hands of Persecutors with safety to their holy Profession: He will accept them
in this weaker kind of Service, and will approve of them better than if they
should hazard a denial of his Name, by venturing themselves upon the Trial of
Martyrdom, when they might have escaped it. Peter came off with Sin and Shame,
by venturing beyond the measure of his Faith, into the hands of his
Persecutors, when he went after Christ to the High Priest's Hall; whereas he
should rather have made use of that indulgent Dismission that Christ gave to
him and the rest of his Disciples: Let these go their way, Joh. 18.8. Christ
deals with his People as a good careful Shepherd, that will not over-drive
his Sheep: He gathers his Lambs with his Arms, and carries them in his
Bosom, and will gently lead those that are with young, Isa. 40.11. He would not
have his Disciples urged rigorously upon the Duty of Fasting, when their
Spirits were unfit for it, because he knew that imposing Duties above their
Strength, is like putting a piece of new Cloth into an old Garment, and new
Wine into old Bottles; which spoyleth all at last, Mat. 9.14, 17. That Precept
of Solomon, Be not righteous overmuch, Prove. 7.10. is very useful and
necessary, if rightly understood. We are to beware of being too rigorous in
exacting Righteousness, of our selves and others beyond the measure of Faith
and Grace. Overdoing commonly proves undoing. Children that venture on their
Feet beyond their Strength, have many a Fall; and so have Babes in Christ, when
they venture unnecessarily upon such Duties as are beyond the strength of their
Faith. We should be content at present to do the best that we can according to
the measure of the gift of Christ, though we know that others are enabled to do
much better; and we are not to despise the day of small things, but to praise
God that he works in us any thing that is well-pleasing in his sight, hoping
that he will sanctify us throughout, and bring us at last to perfection of
Holiness through Jesus Christ our Lord. And we should carefully observe in all
things, that good Lesson of the Apostle, not to think of our selves more highly
than we ought to think, but to think soberly, according as God has dealt to
every Man the measure of Faith, Romans 12.3.

DIRECT. XIII.
Endeavor diligently to make the right use of all meansappointed in the word
of God, for the obtaining and practicing of Holiness, only in this way of
believing in Christ and walking in him, according to your new State by Faith.

EXPLICATION.
THis might have been added to the Instructions in the Explication of the
former Direction, because its Use is the same to guide us in the mysterious
manner of practicing Holiness in Christ, by the life of Faith; but the weight
and comprehensiveness of it, makes it worthy to be treated of by it self, as a
distinct Direction. Two things are observable in it: First, That though all
Holiness be effectually attained unto by the life of Faith in Christ, yet the
use of any means appointed in the Word for attaining and promoting Holiness, is
not hereby made void, but rather established. This is needful to be observed
against the Pride and Ignorance of some carnal Gospellers, that being puffed up
with a Conceit of their feigned Faith, imagine themselves to be in such a state
of Perfection, that they are above all Ordinances, except singing Halelujahs:
And also against the Papists that run into the contrary Extreme, by heaping
together a multiude of means of Holiness which God never commanded, neither
ever came they into his Heart; and that Slander the Protestant Doctrine of Faith
and Free Grace, as if it tended to destroy all diligent use of the means of
Holiness and Salvation, and to breed up a company of lazy Solifidians. We do
indeed assert and profess that a true and lively Faith in Christ, is alone
sufficient and effectual through the Grace of God, to receive Christ and all
his Fullness, so far as is necessary in this Life for our Justification,
Sanctification and eternal Salvation: But yet we also assert and profess, that
several means are appointed of God, for the Begetting, Maintaining and
Increasing of this Faith, and the Acting and Exercising of it, in order to the
attainment of its End; and that these means are to be used diligently which are
mentioned in the Sequel. True Believers find by Experience, that their Faith
needs such Helps, and they that think themselves above any need of them, do
reject the Counsel of God against themselves, like to those Prond Pharisees and
Lawyers, that thought it a thing beneath them, and refused to be baptized of
John, Luke 7.30. yet we account no means necessary or lawful to be used for the
attainment of Holiness, besides they that are appointed by God in his Word. We
know that Holiness is a Part of our Salvation, and therefore they that think
that Men may, or can invent any means effectual for the attainment of it, do
ascribe their Salvation partly to Men, and rob God of his Glory, in being our
only Savior; and they do thereby plainly show, That though they draw nigh unto
God with their mouth and honor him with their lips, yet their hearts are far
from him; and in vain do they worship him, teaching for Doctrins, the
commandments of men, Mat. 15.7, 8, 9.

The Second thing observable and principally designed in this Direction, is the
right manner of using all the means of Holiness, for the obtaining and
practicing of it in no other way, besides that of believing in Christ, and
walking in him according to our new State by Faith, which has been already
demonstrated to be the only way whereby we may effectually attain to this great
End. We must use them as helps to the life of Faith, in its Beginning,
Continuance and Growth; and as Instruments subservient to Faith, the principal
Instrument in all its Acts and Exercises whereby the Soul receives Christ, and
walks in all Holiness, by him. We must beware lest we use them rather in
Opposition, than in Subordination to the way of Sanctification and Salvation by
Free Grace in Christ, through Faith; and lest by our Abuse of them, they be
made rather Hindrances, than Helps to our Faith. We must not Idolize any of the
means, and put them into the place of Christ, as the Papists do by trusting in
them; as if they were effectual to conferr Grace to the Soul, by the work that
is done in the use of them. Neither may we use them as works of Righteousness,
to be performed as Conditions for the procuring of the Favor of God, and the
Salvation of Christ: Neither must they be accounted so absolutely necessary to
Salvation, as if a true Faith were void and of none effect, when we are
debarred from the Enjoyment of several of them. The holy Scriptures with all
the means of Grace appointed therein, are able to make us wise unto Salvation,
no other way than by faith in Jesus Christ, 2 Timothy 3.18. and therefore our wise
Endeavor must be, not to use them in any opposition to the Grace of God in
Christ. For God's Ordinances are like the Cherubims of Glory, made with their
Faces looking toward the Mercy-Seat: They are made to guide us to Christ for
Salvation by Faith alone. If any turn them to another use, it is a great
Violation of divine Institutions, as if any Sacrilegious Person had presumed to
turn the Faces of the Cherubims from the Mercy-Seat some other way. This right
use of the means of Grace, is a Point wherein many are Ignorant, that use them
with great Zeal and Diligence, and thereby they do not only lose their Labor
and the benefit of the means, but also they wrest and pervert them to their own
Destruction. The Jews under the Law of Moses, enjoyed many more Ordinances of
divine Worship than we do under the Gospel; but their Table became their Snare,
and they fell miserably from God and Christ, because the Veil of Ignorance was
upon their Hearts that they could not look to the end of those Ordinances, even
to the Lord Jesus Christ; And they sought not salvation by faith, but by the
ordinances as works of righteousness, and by other works of the law; for they
stumbled at the stumbling stone, Romans 9.31, 32; and 10.4, 5. 2 Cor. 3.13, 14.
That you may not stumble and fall by the same pernicious Error, I shall show
particularly, how several of the principal means of Holiness appointed in the
Word of God, are to be made use of in that right manner expressed in the
Direction.

1. We must endeavor diligently to know the Word of God contained in the Holy
Scripture, and to improve it to this end, That we may be made wise unto
Salvation through says, which is in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 3.15. Other means of
Salvation are necessary to the more abundant well-being of our Faith, and of
our new State in Christ; but this is absolutely necessary to the very being
there of; because Faith comes by hearing the Word of God, and receives Christ
as manifested by the Word, as I have before proved. Raab the Canaanite was
justified by Faith, before she had any visible Commuion with the Church in any
of God's Ordinances; yet not without the Word of God, even the same Word for
Substance, which was written in the Scriptures, and was then extant in the
Books of Moses: Though that Word was not brought to her by any Book of Holy
Scripture, nor by the Preaching of any Holy Minister, but by the Report of the
Heathens, Josh. 2.9, 11. But here our great work must be to get such a
Knowledge of the Word, as is necessary and sufficient to guide us in receiving
of Christ, and walking in him by Faith. You must not be of their Minds that
think the Knowledge of the Ten Commandments, to be sufficient to Salvation, or
that would have Mysteries to remain hidden from the Understanding of the
Vulgar, and nothing to be Preached to them but that they can readily assent to,
and receive by the Light that is in all Men; of which Mind it may be some
Ministers are, who unwitingly agree with the Quakers in a Fundamental of their
Heresy. But you must endeavor chiefly to know the Mystery of the Father and
the Son, as it is discovered in the Gospel, Wherein are hid all the treasures
of wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2.2, 3. Which to know is life eternal, and the
ignorance of it, is death eternal, Joh. 17.3. 2 Cor. 4.3. You must know that
Christ is the end of the law, Romans 10.4. and therefore you must endeavor to
know the Commands of the Law, not that you may be enabled by that Knowledge to
practife them immediately, and so to procure Salvation by your Works; but
rather by your Knowledge of them, you may be made sensible of your Inablility
to perform them, and of the Enmity that is in your Heart against them, and the
Wrath that you are under for breaking of them, and the Impossibility of being
saved by your own Works, that so you may flee to Christ for Refuge, and trust
only to the Free Grace of God for Justification and Strength, to fulfill the
Law acceptably through Christ in your Conversation. And for this end you must
endeavor to learn the utmost Strictness of the Commands, the exact Perfection
and spiritual Purity which they require, that you may be the more convinced of
Sin, and stired up to seek unto Christ for Remission of Sin, for Purity of
Heart, and spiritual Obedience, and be brought nearer to the Enjoyment of him.
As Christ testified that the Scribel, who understood the greatness of that
Command of Loving the Lord with all the Heart and Soul, was not far from the
Kingdom of God, Mar. 12.34. the most effectual Knowledge for your Salvation, is
to understand these Two Points. The desperate Sinfulness and Misery of your own
natural Condition, and the alone Sufficiency of the Grace of God in Christ for
your Salvation, that you may be abased as to the Flesh, and exalted in Christ
alone. And for the better understanding of these Two main Points, you should
learn how the first Adam was the figure of the second, Romans 5.14. How Sin and
Death came upon all the natural Seed of the first Adam, by his Disobedience in
eating the forbidden Fruit, and how Righteousness and Everlasting Life come
upon all the spiritual Seed of the second Adam, Jesus Christ, by his Obedience
unto Death, even the death of the Cross. You also should learn the true
difference betwixt the Two Covenants, the Old and the New, or the Law and the
Gospel; that the former shuts us up under the Guilt and Power of Sin, and
the Wrath of God and his Curse, by its rigorons Terms, Do all the Commandments
and live, and cursed are you if you do them not, and fail in the least Point.
The latter opens the gates of righteousness, and life to all Believers, (i.
e. the New Covenant) by its gracious Terms, Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ
and live, i. e. All your Sins shall be forgiven, and Holiness and Glory shall
be given to you freely by his Merit and Spirit. Furthermore, you should learn
the Gospel Principles that you are to walk by, for the attainment of Holiness
in Christ. And here I shall mind you particularly that you would be a good
Proficient in Christian Learning, if you get a good Understanding of the 6th.
and 7th. Chapters of the Apostle Paul to the Romans, where the powerful
Principles of Sanctification are purposely treated of, and differenced from
those weak and ineffectual Principles, which we are most naturally prone to
walk by: I need not particularly commend any other Points of Religion to your
Learning; for if you get the Knowledge of these principal Points which I have
mentioned, and improve it to a right end, which is to Live and Walk by Faith in
Christ, your own renewed Mind will covet the Knowledge of all other things that
appertain to Life and Godliness; And if in any thing you be otherwise minded
than is according to saving Truth, God shall reveal even this unto you, Phil.
3.15. Yet let me caution you, lest instead of gaining Christ by your Knowledge,
you rather lose him by putting your Knowledge in the place of Christ, and
trusting on it for your Salvation. One cause of the Jews perishing was, that
they rested in a form of knowledge, and of the truth in the law, Romans 2.20. and
doubtless, all that many Christians will gain by their Knowledge in the end,
will only be to be beaten with more Stripes, because they place their Religion
and Salvation, chiefly in the Knowledge of their Lords Will, and in their
Ability to Talk and Dispute of it, though it may be for the most part, at the
Tavern or Ale-Bench, without preparing themselves to do according thereunto,
Luke 12.47. much less are you to place your Religion and hope of Salvation, in
a daily Task of reading Chapters, or repeating Sermons, without understanding
more than the Papists do their Lessons in the Latin Mass, and Canonical Hours;
as sad Experience shows that many seemingly Devout and frequent Hearers of
the Word, do notwithstanding remain in lamentable and wonderful Ignorance of
the saving Truth; and in them is fulfilled the Prophecy of Isaias, That in
hearing they shall hear and not understand, and in seeing they shall see, etc.
Mat. 13.14, 15.

2. Another means to be used diligently for the promoting of the Life of Faith,
is Examination of our State and Ways according to the Word, whether we be at
present in a State of Sin and Wrath, or of Grace and Salvation; that if we be
in a State of Sin, we may know our Sickness, and come to the great Physician,
while it is called to day: And if we be in a State of Grace, ws may know that
we are of the truth, and assure our hearts before God, with the greater
confidence, by the testimony of a good conscience, 1 John 3.19, 21. that so our
Hearts may be more strongly comforted by Faith, and established in every good
work; and that if our ways be evil, we may turn from them to the Lord our God
through Christ, without whom none comes to the Father, Lam. 3.40. Joh. 14.6.
But your great care in this work of Self-examination, must be to perform it in
such a manner, that it may not hinder and destroy the Life of Faith, as it does
in many, instead of promoting it. Therefore beware lest you trust upon your
Self-examination, rather than upon Christ: As some do that think they have made
their Peace with God, merely because they have examined themselves upon their
Sickbed, or before the Receiving of the Lords Supper, though they have found
themselves Stark Naught, and do not depend on Christ to make them better; but
on their own deceitful Purposes and Resolutions. Think not that you must begin
this Work with doubting whether God will extend Mercy to you, and save you, and
that you must leave this, a Question wholly under debate until you have found
out how to resolve it by Self-examination. This is a common and very pernicious
Error in the very foundation of this Work, which is hereby laid in the great
Sin of Unbelief, which as soon as it prevails, does by its great Influence,
Dash and Obscure all inward gracious Qualifications of Peace, Hope, Joy, Love
to God and his People, before they be at all tried whether they can give any
good Evidence for their Salvation. And it makes People willing to think their
own Qualifications better than they are, lest they should fall into an utter
Despair of their Salvation; and thus it wholly marreth the good work of
Self-examination, and makes it destructive to our Souls; For to them that are
defiled and unbelieving, there is nothing pure, Tit. 1.15. You should rather
begin the work with much assurance of Faith, that though you find your Heart
never so wicked and reprobate at present, (as many of God's choicest Servants
do often find) yet the Door of Mercy is open for you, and that God will
certainly save you for ever, if you put your trust in his Grace through Christ.
I have formerly showed that this confident Persuasion, is of the nature of
saving Faith, and that we have sufficient Ground for it in the Free Promises of
the Gospel; when we walk in Darkness and can see no Light shining forth in our
gracious Qualifications. If we begin the work with this Confidence, it will
make us impartial and not afraid to find out the worst by our selves, and
willing to judge that our hearts are deceitful above all things, and
desperately wicked beyond what we can find out, Jer. 17.9. And if we have any
holy Qualifications, this Confidence will preserve them in their Vigor and
Brightness, that they may be able to give clear Evidence, that we are at
present in a State of Grace. Mark well the difference betwixt these Two
Questions, whether God will graciously accept and save me, though a vile Sinner
through Christ, as before was said, and whether I am already brought into a
State of Salvation? The former of these I say, is to be resolved affirmatively
by a confident Faith in Christ; the latter only is to be inquired into by
Self-examination. Mis-spend not your time as many do, in poring upon your
Hearts, to find whether you be good enough to trust on Christ for your
Salvation, nor to find whether you have any Faith, before you dare be so bold
as to act Faith in Christ. But know that though you cannot find that you have
any Faith or Holiness, yet if you will now believe-on him that justifyeth the
ungodly, it shall be accounted to you for righteousness, Romans 4.5. And if you
love Christ and your own Soul, mis-spend not your time in examining whether you
have committed the unpardonable Sin against the Holy Ghost, except it be with a
full Purpose to assure your self more and more, that you are not guilty
thereof; for any Doubtfulness in this Point, will but harden you in Unbelief.
Remember well that the Question to be resolved, is, Whether you be at present
in a state of Grace? and to resolve it, you must be willing to know the best by
your self as well as the worst: And you must not think that Humility binds
you to overlook your good Qualifications, and to take notice only of your
Corruptions. But your great work must be, to find whether there be not some
Drop of saving Grace in the Ocean of your Corruption? And it will consist well
with Humility to take notice of, and own any Spark of true Holiness that is in
you, because the Praise and Glory of it belongs not to you, but to God, Phil.
1.11. And you must try inherent Grace by the Touchstone, not by the Measure;
by its Nature, not its Degree; not denying any Lustings of the Spirit in you,
because of the strong Lustings of the Flesh against the Spirit; nor denying
that you are Spiritual in some degree, and Babes in Christ; because you find
your selves carnal in a more prevailing degree, and the old man bigger than the
new, Gal. 5.17. 1 Cor. 3.1. Especially you are to examine and prove whether you
be in the Faith; for if you make sure of this, you make sure of all the things
that pertain to Life and Godliness; and if you doubt of this, you will
certainly doubt of the Truth of any other Qualifications, and will suspect them
to be merely Carnal and Counterfeit; because it is a known Truth, that to the
Unbelieving there is nothing pure, and that all that have not truly received
Christ by Faith, are at present in an unregenerate State, though they seem
never so Pure and Godly, 2 Cor. 13.5. Tit. 1.15. And let not the Issue of this
Trial depend at all upon your Knowledge of the time when, or of the Sermon,
Conference, or Place of Scripture, by which you were first converted to the
Faith; though that is good to know too, if it may be. And some who have
formerly lived in gross Ignorance, or in a manifest Opposition to true Faith
and Holiness, may know such Circumstances of their Conversion, and may reflect
upon them comfortably, as the Apostle Paul did, who was turned of a sudden
from his Persecuting Rage, to be a Disciple and an Apostle of Christ; yet
others, sincere Believers, may be wholly Ignorant of them, as John the Baptist,
who was filled with the Holy Ghost from his mothers Womb, Luke 1.15. and they
that have been trained up religiously, and known the Holy Scripture from their
Childhood, as Timothy, 2. Tim. 3.15. Yea, and many that are first turned from
gross Ignorance and Profaneness, to some external Reformation, and then in
process of time, brought nearer to the Kingdom of Heaven, by insensible
Degrees, before they be really new begotten by the Spirit of Faith. There are
also some that deceive their Souls, by imagining that they know at what time,
and by what Text of Scripture they were converted; and can make large
Discourses of the workings of God upon their Hearts, and are prone to talk
unseasonably with Vain-glorying of their own Experiences, when at last, all
their Experiences are not sufficient to evidence that they ever attained to the
least measure of true saving Faith. Therefore that we may not unjustly condemn
or justify our Faith, by proceeding on in-sufficient Evidences in its Trial,
our best way, is to examine it by the inseparable Properties of a true saving
Faith, by putting to our selves such Questions as these; Are we made thoroughly
sensible of our Sinfulness, and of the Deadness and Misery of our natural
State, so as to despair absolutely of ever attaining to any Righteousness,
Holiness or true Happiness while we continue in it? Are the Eyes of our
Understandings enlightened to see the Excellency of Christ, and the alone
Sufficiency and All Sufficiency of his Grace for our Salvation? Do we prefer
the Enjoyment of him above all things, and desire it with our whole Heart, as
our only Happiness, whatsoever we may suffer for his sake? Do we desire with
our whole Heart to be delivered from the Power and Practice of Sin, as well as
from the Wrath of God and the Pains of Hell? Do our Hearts come to Christ and
lay hold on him for Salvation, by trusting him only, and endeavoring to trust
on him confidently notwithstanding all Fears and Doubts that assault us? If you
find in your self a Faith that has these Properties, though as small as a
Grain of Mustard Seed, and opposed with much Unbelief and manifold Corruptions
in your Soul, you may conclude that you are in a state of Salvation at present,
and that your remaining work is to continue and grow in it more and more, and
to walk worthy of it; you should also examine the Fruits of your Faith, and try
whether you can show your Faith by your works, as you are taught, Jam. 2.18.
that you may be sure not to be deceived in your Judgment concerning it. And
though it be true as I have noted, that Doubts concerning your Faith will breed
doubting concerning the Sincerity of other Qualifications that are Fruits
thereof, yet possibly you may get such clear Evidences of your Sincerity, as
may overcome and expel all your Doubts. And here you are not only to enquire
whether your Inclinations, Purposes, Affections and Actions be materially good
and holy, but also by what Principles they are bred and influenced? Whether it
be by slavish fears of Hell, and mercenary hopes of getting Heaven by your
Works, which are legal and carnal Principles, that can never breed true
Holiness; or by Gospel Principles as by love to God, because God has loved you
first, and to Christ, because he has dyed; and by the hope of eternal Life, as
the free Gift of God through Christ, and dependence on God to sanctify you by
his Spirit according to his Promises. Remember that the New Testament is the
ministration of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.6. and the Spirit will sanctify us, not by
legal, but by Gospel Principles. Take notice further, that you need not trouble
your self to find out a multitude of Marks and Signs of true Grace, if you can
find a few good ones: Particularly you may know, That you are passed from death
to life, if you love the brethren, 1 John 3.14. i. e. if you love all whom you
can in Charity, judge to be true Believers, and that because they are true
Believers, and for the Truth Sake that dwells in them. As Solomon discerned
the true Mother of the Child, by her Affection toward her Child; so the Mother
Grace of Faith, may be discerned by the Love that it breeds in us, toward all
true Believers. To conclude this Point, Happy are you if you can find so much
Evidence of the Fruits of your Faith, as may enable you to express your
Sincerity in these moderate Terms, Pray for us, for we trust we have a good
conscience in all things, willing to live honestly, Heb. 13.18.

3. Meditation on the Word of God is of very great use and advantage, for the
attainment and practice of Holiness through Faith in Christ. It is a Duty
whereby the Soul does Feed and Ruminate upon the Word as its Spiritual Food,
and digesteth it, and turns it into Nourishment, whereby we are strengthened
for every good Work. Our Souls are satisfied therewith, as with marrow and
fatness: When we remember God upon our Beds, and meditate on him in the
Nightwatches, Psalm. 68.5, 6. The new Nature may well be called the Mind, Romans
7.25. because it lives and acts, by minding of, and meditating on spiritual
things. Therefore it is a Duty to be practiced, not only at some limited times,
but all the day, Psalm. 119.97. yea, day and night, Psalm. 1.2. even in our
ordinary Employments at home and abroad. An habitual knowledge of the Word will
not profit us, without an active minding it by frequent Meditation. Some think,
that much Preaching of the Word is not needful, where a People are already
brought to the knowledge of those things that are necessary to Salvation. But
they that are regenerated by the Word, find by Experience; that their Spiritual
Life is maintained and increased by often minding the same Word: And therefore
as new born Babes, they desire the sincere milk of the Word, that they may grow
thereby, 1 Pet. 2.2. and would by the Preachers, be put often in remembrance of
the same things, that they may feed upon them by Meditation, tho they know them
already, and are established in the present Truth, 2 Pet. 1.12. But here our
greatest Skill, and chiefest Concernment lies, in practicing this Duty in such
a manner, as that it may be subservient, and not at all opposite to the Life of
Faith. We must not rely upon the performance of a daily task of Meditation; as
a work of Righteousness for the procurement of the Favor of God, instead of
relying on the Righteousness of Christ, as indeed we are prone to do, to catch
at any Straw rather than to trust only on the Free Grace of God in Christ for
our Salvation. And the end of our Meditation must not be mere Speculation and
Knowledge of the Truth, but rather the vigorous pressing it upon our
Consciences, and the stirring up our Hearts and Affections to the Practice of
it: And in stirring up our selves to holy Practice, we must warily observe how
far the several parts of the Truth of God are powerful and effectual for the
attainment of this End, that we may make use of them accordingly. We must not
imagine as too many do, yea, and some great Masters in the Art of Meditation,
that we can bring our Hearts effectually to the Love of God and Holiness, and
can work strange Metamorphoses, and work or frame in our Hearts any holy
Qualifications or Virtue, merely by working in our selves strong Apprehensions
of God's eternal Power and Godhead, his sovereign Authority, Omniscience,
perfect Holiness, exact Justice, the equity of his Law, and reasonableness of
our Obedience to it; the unspeakable Happiness prepared for the Godly, and
Misery for the Wicked to all Eternity. Meditation on such things as these, is
indeed very useful to press upon our Consciences the Strictness of our
Obligation to holy Duties, and to move us to go by Faith to Christ, for Life
and Strength to perform them. But that we may receive this Life and Strength
whereby we are enabled for immediate performance, we must meditate believingly
on Christ's saving Benefits, as they are discovered in the Gospel, which is the
only Doctrine which is the Power of God to our Salvation, and whereby the
quickening Spirit is ministered to us, and that is able to build us up, and give
us an inheritance among all them which are sanctified, Romans 1.16. 2 Cor. 3.6.
Act. 20.32. You must take special care to act Faith in your Meditation, mix the
Word of God's Grace with it, or else it will not profit you, Heb. 4.2. and if
you set the loving kindness of God frequently before your eyes, by meditating
on it believingly, you will be strengthened to walk in the truth, Psalm. 26.2.
and by beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, you will be changed into
the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor.
3.18. This kind of Meditation is sweet and delightful to those that are guided
to it by the Spirit of Faith, and it needs not the help of such
artificial-Methods as the Vulgar cannot easily learn: You may let your Thoughts
run in it at liberty, without confining them to any rules of Method; you will
find your Souls much enlivened by it, and enriched with the Grace of God, which
cannot be effected by any other kind of Meditation, though it be never so
methodical, and curiously framed according to the Rules of Art.

4. The Sacrament of Baptism must needs be of great use to promote the Life of
Faith, if it be made use of according to its Nature and Institution, because it
is a seal of the righteousness of faith, as circumcision was formerly, Romans
4.11. But then we must take heed of making it a Seal of the contrary
Righteousness of Works, as the carnal Jews did, that sought to be justified by
the Law of Moses, and as many Christians do, that transform the New Covenant
into a Covenant of Works, requiring sincere Obedience to all the Laws of
Christ, as the condition of our Justification; into which new devised Covenant,
they think themselves to be entered by their Baptism. I may say of Baptism thus
perverted and abused, as the Apostle says of Circumcision. Baptism verily
profits if thou keep the Law, but if thou be a Breaker of the Law, thy
Baptism is made no Baptism, Romans 2.26. If thou be Baptized, so long as thou
continuest in the abuse of that holy Ordinance, Christ shall profit you
nothing; Christ is become of no effect to you; Ye are all fallen from grace,
Gal. 3.2.4. Beware also of making an Idol of Baptism, and putting it in the
place of Christ, as the Papists do, who hold that it conferreth Grace by the
very work that is performed in the Administration of it. And as many Ignorant
People do, that trust rather on their Baptism, than on Christ; like to the
Pharisees, who placed their Confidence on Circumcision, and other external
Privileges, Phil. 3.4, 5. We are to know that God is not well pleased with many
that are Baptized, 1 Cor. 10.2, 5. and the time will come when he will punish
the Baptized with the Unbaptised, as well as the circumcised with the
uncircumcised, Jer. 9.25. Beware also of advancing Baptism to an equal
Partnership with Faith in your Salvation, as some do, who account all Baptism
null and void, besides that which is administered to persons grown up to years
of Discretion, and they that refuse to be rebaptized at those years, are to be
accounted Aliens from the true Church, from Christ and his Salvation,
notwithstanding all their Faith in Christ. If the Baptism of Infants were null
and void, yet the want of true Baptism would be no Damning matter to those that
are otherwise persuaded. Circumcision was as necessary as Baptism in its time,
and yet the Israelites omitted it for the space of forty years in the
Wilderness, without fearing that any would fall short of Salvation for want of
it, John 5.6, 7. Many precious Saints in the Primitive times of Persecution,
have gone to Heaven through a Baptism of Suffering for the Name of Christ,
before they had opportunity to be Baptized with Water: And in those ancient
Times, when the Custom of deferring Baptism too much prevailed, we are not to
think, that none were in a state of Salvation by Faith in Christ, that deferred
that Ordinance, or neglected it. Take notice further, that it is not sufficient
to avoid the pernicious Errors of those that pervert Baptism, contrary to its
Institution; but you must be also diligent in the improving of it to the ends
for which it was instituted. And here let me desire you to put the Question
seriously to your Souls, What good use you do make of your Baptism? How often,
or seldom do you think upon it? The vulgar sort of Christians, yea it may be
feared, many sincere Converts, do so little think upon their own Baptism, and
study to make a due improvement of it, that its of no more profit to their
Souls, than if they never had bin Baptized; yea, their sin is the more
aggravated by rendering such an Ordinance of none effect to their Souls, through
their own gross neglect. Tho Baptism be administered to us but once in our
Lives, yet we ought frequently to reflect upon it, and upon all Occasions to
put the Question to our selves, Into what were we Baptized? Acts 19.2. What
this Ordinance Seals? What did it engage us to? And accordingly, we must stir
up and strengthen our selves by our Baptism, to lay hold on the Grace which it
seals to us, and to fulfill its Engagements. We should often remember, that we
are made Christ's Disciples by Baptism, and engaged to hear him rather than
Moses, and to Believe on him for our Salvation; as John baptized with the
Baptism of Repentance, saying to the People, That they should believe on him
that should come after him, i. e. on Christ Jesus. We should remember, that our
Baptism sealed our putting on of Christ, and our being the Children of God by
Faith in Christ, and our being no longer under the former Schoolmaster the Law,
Gal. 3.25, 26, 27. And that it sealed to us the putting off the body of sin,
and our Burial and Resurrection with Christ by Faith, and the forgiving of our
trespasses, Col. 2.12, 13. Our being made Members of one Body of Christ, and to
drink into one Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.12, 13. We may find by such things as these
which are more fully discovered in the Gospel, that it is the proper nature and
tendency of Baptism, to guide us to Faith in Christ alone for remission of
Sins, Holiness, and all Salvation, by Union and Fellowship with him, and that a
diligent improvement of this Ordinance, must needs be of great advantage to the
Life of Faith.

5. The Sacrament of the Lords Supper is as a spiritual Feast to nourish our
Faith, and to strengthen us to walk in all Holiness by Christ living and
working in us; if it be used according to the Pattern which Christ gave us in
its first Institution, recorded by Three Evangelists, Mat. 26.26. Mar. 14.22,
24. Luke 22.19, 20. and was extrordinarily revealed from Heaven by Christ
himself to the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 11.23, 25. that we might be the more
obliged and stirred up to the exact Observation of it. Its end is not only that
we may remember Christ's Death in the History, but in the Mystery of it; as that
his Body was broken for us, that his Blood is the Blood of the New Testament or
Covenant, shed for us and for many for the remission of Sins, that so we may
receive and enjoy all the Promises of the New Covenant which are recorded, Heb.
8.12. Its end is to mind us that Christ's Body and Blood are Bread and Drink,
even allsufficient Food to nourish our Souls to everlasting Life, and that we
ought to take, and eat, and drink him by Faith, and to assure us that when we
truly believe on him, he is as really and closely united to us by his Spirit,
as the Food which we eat and drink is united to our Bodies. Christ himself Joh.
6. does more fully explain this Mystery. Furthermore, this Sacrament does not
only put us in mind of the spiritual Blessings, wherewith we are Blessed in
Christ and our Enjoyment of them by Faith, but also it is a Mean and
Instrument, whereby God does really exhibit and give forth Christ and his
Salvation to true Believers, and whereby he does stir up, and strengthen
Believers to receive and feed upon Christ by present actings of Faith, while
they partake of the outward Elements. When Christ says eat, drink, this is my
body, this is my blood, no less can be meant, than that Christ does as truly
give his Body and Blood to true Believers in that Ordinance, as the Bread and
Cup; and they do as truly receive it by Faith. As if a Prince invest a Subject
in some Honorable Office, by delivering to him a Staff, Sword or Signet, and
say to him, take this Staff, Sword or Signet, this is such an Office or
Preferment; or if a Father should deliver a Deed for Conveyance of Land to his
Son, and say, take it as thine own, this is such a Farm or Manor, how can such
Expressions import any less in common Senfe and Reason, than a Present, Gift
and Conveyance of the Offices, Preferments and Lands, by, and with those
outward Signs. Therefore the Apostle Paul asserteth, that the bread in the
Lords supper, is the communion of the body of Christ, and the cup is the
communion of his blood, 1 Cor. 10.16. which shows that Christ's Body and
Blood, are really communicated to us, and we do really partake of them, as well
as of the Bread and Cup. The chief Excellency and Advantage of this Ordinance
is, That it is not only a Figure and Resemblance of our living upon a crucified
Savior, but also a precious Instrument, whereby Christ the Bread and Drink of
Life, is really conveyed to us, and received by us through Faith. This makes it
to be a Love-Token, worthy of that ardent Affection toward us, which filled
Christ's Heart at the time when he instituted it, when he was on the point of
finishing of his greatest work of Love, by laying down his Life for us, 1 Cor.
11.23. And this is diligently to be observed, that we may make a right
improvement of this Ordinance, and receive the saving Benesits of it. One
reason why many do little esteem, and seldom or never partake of this
Ordinance, and do find little benefit by it is, because they falsely imagine,
that God in it only holds forth naked signs and resemblances of Christ and his
Salvation, which they account to be held forth so plainly in Scripture, that
they need not the help of such a sign: Whereas, if they understood, that God
does really give Christ himself to their Faith, by and with those Signs and
Resemblances, they would prize it as the most delicious Feast, and be desirous
to partake of it on all opportunities, Acts 2.42. and 20.7. Another reason why
many partake seldom or never of this Ordinance, and know little of the benefit
of it, is, because they think themselves brought by it into great danger of
eating and drinking their own Damnation, according to those terrifying words of
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.29. therefore they account it the safest way wholly to
abstain from such a dangerous Ordinance; or at least, that once a year is
enough to run so great a Hazard. And if they be brought to it sometimes by
constraint of Conscience, their slavish Fears bereave them of all comfortable
Fruit of it. So that instead of striving to receive Christ and his Salvation
therein, they account themselves to have succeeded well, if they come off
without the Sentence of Damnation. As the Jewish Rabbis write, that the
Highpriests Life was so eminently hazarded by his entering once a year into the
Holy of Holies, that he stayed there as little time as he could, lest the
People should think him to be struck dead by the Hand of God: And when he was
come forth alive, he usually made a Feast of Thanksgiving for Joy of so great a
Deliverance. But there is no reason why we should be so much terrified by those
words of the Apostle, for they were darted against such a gross profanation of
the Lords Supper amongst the Corinthians as we may easily avoid, by observing
the Institution of it, which the Apostle proposes to them as a sufficient
remedy against the gross abuse, in not discerning or differencing the Lords
Body from other bodily Food, and partaking of it as their own Supper, with such
disorder, that one was Hungry, and another Drunken. Besides, that terrifying
word Damnation, may be rendered more mildly Judgment, as it is in the Margent;
yea the Apostle himself, Ver. 32. does interpret it of a merciful, temporal
Judgment, whereby we are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be condemned
with the World. We are indeed prone to sin in receiving this Ordinance
unworthily, and so we are also to pollute more or less, all other holy things
that we meddle with. So that the consideration of our danger might sill us with
slavish fear in the use of all other means of Grace as well as of this, were it
not that we have a great High Priest, to bear this Iniquity of our holy things,
Exodus 28.38. under the Covert of whose Righteousness we are to draw near unto
God, without slavish fear in the full assurance of Faith, in this as well as in
other holy Ordinances; and we are to rejoice in the Lord in this spiritual
Feast, as the Jews were bound to do in their solemn Feasts, Deuteronomy. 16.14, 15.
There are other Abuses of this Ordinance like to those of Baptism
forementioned, whereby it is rendered opposite, rather than subservient to the
Life of Faith. Some put it in the place of Christ by trusting on it as a work
of Righteousness, for the procuring of Gods Favor, or an Ordinance sufficient
to confer Grace to the Soul by the very work wrought. Others make it so
necessary, that they account that Faith is not sufficient without it; and
therefore they will partake of it if they can possibly, tho it be in a
disorderly manner upon their sick-Beds, when they are in fear of Death, as
their Viaticum. The Papists do horribly Idolize it by their figment of
Transubstantiation, and the Adoration of their Breaden God, and their Sacrifice
of the Mass for the sins of the Quick and the Dead. We ought warily to
conceive, that the true Body and Blood of Christ are given to us, with the
Bread and Wine, in a spiritual mysterious manner, by the unsearchable Operation
of the Holy Spirit, uniting Christ and us together by Faith, without any
Transubstantiation in the outward Elements.

6. Prayer is to be made use of, as a means of living by Faith in Christ,
according to the New Man. And it is the making our Requests with Supplication
and Thankfgiving: That it is to be used so, as an eminent Means appears,
because God requires it, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. Romans 12.12. It is our priestly Work, 1
Pet. 2.5. compared with Psalm. 141.2. and the property of Saints, 1 Cor. 1.2.
and God is a God, hearing Prayer, Psalm. 65.2. God will be prayed to by his
People for the benefit that he is minded to bestow upon them when once he has
enabled them to pray; though at first he is found of them that seek him not,
Ezekiel. 36.27, 37. Phil. 1.19, 20. that he may prepare them for Thanksgiving, and
make Benefits double Benefits to them, Psalm. 66.16, 18, 19. and 50.15. 2 Cor.
1.10. 11. Though his Will be not changed by this means; yet it is accomplished
ordinarily, and his Purpose is to accomplish it this way. And therefore
trusting assuredly should not make us neglect, but rather perform this Duty, 2 Samuel 7.27. Christ the Mediator of the new Covenant by which Justification and
Sanctification are promised, is also the Mediator for Acceptance of our
Prayers, Heb. 4.15, 16. The Spirit that sanctifies us, begette^h us in Chist,
shows the things of Christ to us, is a Spirit of Prayer, Zech. 12.10. Gal.
4.6. He is as Fire inslaming the Soul, and making it to mount upward in Prayer
to God. Prayerless People are dead to God. If they are Children of Sion; yet
they are but still-born, dead Children that cry not, Acts 9.11. not written
among the living in Jerusalem: Heathens in Nature, though Christians in Name,
Jer. 10.25. It is a Duty so great, that it is put for all the Service of God,
as a fundamental Duty, which if it be done, the rest will be done well, and not
without it; and other Ordinances of Worship are Helps to it, Isa. 56.7. It is
the great means whereby Faith does expert it self to perform its whole Work,
and pours it self forth in all holy Desires and Affections, Psalm: 62, 8. and
so yields a sweet savor as Mary's Box of precious Spicknard, Mark 14.3. John
12.3. And so the same Promises are made to Faith and Prayer, Romans 10.11, 12,
13. It is our continual Incense and Sacrifice, whereby we offer our selves,
Hearts, Assections and Lives to God, Psalm. 141.2. We act all Grace in it, and
must act it this way, or else we are not likely to act it any other way. And as
we act Grace so we obtain Grace by it, and all Holiness, Psalm. 138.3. Luke
11.13. Heb. 4.16. Psalm. 81.10. Our Riches come in by it. Israel prevails while
Moses holds up his Hands, Exodus 17. By Prayer Hannah is strengthened against
her Sorrows, 1 Samuel 1.15, 18. Peace is continued, Phil. 4.6, 7. the disordered
Soul set in order by it as Hannah, 1 Samuel 1. Psalm. 32.1, 5. Incense was still
burnt while the Lamps were dressed, Exodus 30.7, 8. It is added to the Spiritual
Armoury, not as a particular piece of it, but as a means of putting on all, and
making use of all aright, that we may stand in the evil Day, Ephesians. 6.18. It is a
means of transfiguring us into the likeness of Christ in Holiness, and making
our spiritual Faces to shine, as Christ was transfigured bodily whilst he
prayed, Luke 9.29. and Moses his Face shone whilst he talked with God, Exodus
34.29. Hence the frequent use of this Duty is commended to us, Ephesians. 6.18. (...)
on all Seasons and Opportunities, and by the example of the Saints in public
with the Congregation, Acts 2.42. and 10.30, 31. Solemn continued Acts of
Prayer should be, Mat. 6.1. Yea, several times, as Morning and Evening
Sacrifice, Dan. 6.10. Psalm. 92.2. or Thrice, Psalm. 55.17. besides special
Occasions, Jam. 5.13. and brief Ejaculations, that hinder not other business,
Psalm. 129.8. 2 Samuel 15.31. Nch. 2.4. Prayers should be solemn in our Closets,
Mat. 6.6. in Families, Acts 10.30, 31. And as Sacrifices were multiplied on the
Sabbath Days, and days of Atonement, and at other appointed seasons, Numb (...)
the continual burnt-offering, so ought (...) In a word, a Christian ought to
give up himself eminently to this Duty, Psalm. 109.4. without limits, Psalm.
119.164. But the great work is, to practice this Duty rightly for Holiness,
only by Faith in Christ. Here we had need say, Lord teach us to pray, Luke
11.1. and that not only as to the matter, but as to the manner, both which are
taught by Christ in some measure, in that brief pattern of Prayer which he
taught his Disciples. But for the understanding of it, we must consult the
whole Word, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. And we have need of the Spirit of Christ to guide
us in the Duty; and therefore we are taught to pray by the Spirit, i. e. the
Holy Ghost, Jude 20. Ephesians. 2.18. the Spirit of God only guides and enableth our
Souls to Pray aright; and that you may do so, take these Rules:

1. You must pray with your Hearts and Spirits, Isa. 26.9. Joh. 4.24. where the
Spirit of Christ, and of Prayer, principally resides, Gal. 4.6. Ephesians. 1.17. with
Understanding, 1 Cor. 14.15, 16. for we are renewed in Knowledge, Col. 3.10. 2
Pet. 1.3. so that praying in Ignorance cannot Sanctify. And it must be with
sincere hearty desire of the good things we ask in Prayer: For God sees the
Heart, Psalm. 62.8. Prayer is chiefly a heart-work, Psalm. 27.8. God hears the
Heart without the Mouth, but never hears the Mouth acceptably without the
Heart, 1 Samuel 1.13. Your Prayer is odious Hypocrisy, mocking of God, and
taking his Name in vain, when you utter Petitions for the coming of his
Kingdom, and doing of his Will, and yet hate Godliness in your Heart. This is
Lying to God, and slattering with your Lips, but no true Prayer; and so God
takes it, Psalm. 78.36. and you must have a sense of your wants and necessities,
and that God only can supply, 2 Chronicles. 20.12. And fervency in those desires is
required, Jam. 5.16. And you must pray with attention, minding your selves what
you pray, or else you cannot expect that God should mind it, 1 Pet. 4.7. Watch
to it, Dan. 9.3. Set your selves to this Duty intently. God sees where your
Heart is wandering, when you pray without attention, Ezekiel. 33.31. When you say
never so many prayers without Understanding, Attention, Affection, it is not
praying at all, but sinning and playing the Hypocrite, as Papists mumble over
their Latin Prayers upon the Beads by Tale, prating like Parrots, what they
cannot understand. And thus ignorant People say over their Forms of English
Prayers, and account they have well-discharged their Duty, tho their Heart
prayed not at all, and were minding other things. This is a mere Lip-labor and
bodily Exercise, offering a dead Carcass to God, plain deceit, Mal. 1.13, 14. a
form of Godliness, with denying the Power, 2 Timothy 3.5. whereby Popery has
cheated the World of the Power of this, and all other Holy Ordinances. They
say, God minds and knows what they speak, and approves it. I answer, He does so
as to Judge them for Hypocrites and profane persons, for not knowing, minding
and approving what they utter themselves: He has no pleasure in Fools, Eccles.
5.1, 2. They would not deal so with an Earthly Prince.

2. You must pray in the Name of Christ; for the Spirit glorifies Christ, Joh.
16. and leads us to God through Christ, Ephesians. 2.18. As I have showed that
walking in the Spirit and walking in Christ, is all one, so praying in the
Spirit, and by, and through Christ: And as we are to walk in the Name of the
Lord, and to do all things in his Name, as is commanded, Joh. 14.13, 14. It is
not enough to conclude our Prayers, through Jesus Christ our Lord, but we must
come for Blessings in the Garments of our elder Brother, and must depend upon
his Worthyness and Strength for all. So also we must praise God for all things
in his Name, as things received for his sake, and by him, Ephesians. 5.20. We must
lay hold on his Strength only, and plead nothing, and own nothing for our
Acceptance but him. We must not plead our own works arrogantly, like the proud
Pharisee, Luke 18.11.12. except only as Fruits of Grace, and Rewards of Grace,
Isa. 38.1, 2. Praying in the Spirit is upon Gospel, not legal Principles, Romans
7.6. with 2 Cor. 6.3. with great Humiliation, and sense of Unworthyness, Psalm.
51. with a broken Spirit, with Despair of Acceptance, otherwise than upon
Christ's Account, Dan. 9.18. If your Enlargements, Struglings, Meltings, have
been never so great, yet without this, all is Abominable.

3. Hence you must not think to be accepted for the Goodness of your Prayers,
and trust on them as works of Righteousness, which is making Idols of your
Prayers, and putting them into the place of Christ, quite contrary to praying
in the Name of Christ. Thus Papists hope to be saved by saying their Tale of
Prayers upon their Bead-Rows; and they have Indulgences granted upon their
saying so many Prayers, and of such a sort. Yea, some ignorant Protestants,
trust on their Prayer as Duties of Righteousness; and they think one Prayer to
be more acceptable than another, by reason of the Holiness of the Form, if it
were made by Holy Men; especially the Lords Prayer, which they use to help them
in any Exigence or Danger; how little soever they can apply it to their own
Case, they make an Idol of it. And some use it and other places of Scriptures,
as a Spell or Charm, to drive away the Devil: And others think their Prayers
more acceptable in one place than in another, by reason of the Holiness of the
place, Joh. 4.21, 24.1 Tim. 2.8. Others trust on their much speaking, Mat. 6.
which they call the enlarging of their Hearts. They think to put off God, and
stop the Mouth of Conscience with a few Prayers, and so to live as they list.

4. Pray to God as your Father, through Christ as your Savior, in Faith of
Remission of Sins, and your acceptance with God, and the obtaing of all other
things which you desire of him, as far as is necessary for your Salvation, Jam.
1.5, 6, 7. chapter 5.15. 1 John 5.14, 15. Mar. 11.24. Heb. 10.24. and Psalm. 62.8.
and 86.7. and 55.16. and 57.1, 2. and 17.6. This is praying in Christ, Ephesians.
3.12. and by the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of Adoption, Romans 8.16. Gal. 4.6.
Without this, Prayer is Lifeless and Heartless, and but a dead Carcass, Romans
10.14. Psalm. 77.4. By this you may judge whether you have prayed rightly, more
than by your melting Affection, or largeness in Expression. Though you be not
assured that you shall have every thing that you ask, yet every thing that is
good. This Faith you must endeavor to act; and therefore if any Sin lie on
Conscience, you must strive first to get the Pardon of it, Psalm. 32.1.5. and
51.14, 15. and Purisication from it by Faith, that you may lift up holy hands
without wrath and doubting, 1 Timothy 2.8. The sin of wrath there is especially
mentioned, because that is contrary to Love and forgiving others. Here lies the
Strength, Life and Powerfulness of Prayer: Set Faith on work, and you will be
powerful and prevail.

5. You must strive in Prayer to stir up, and act every other sanctifying Grace
through Faith, moving you thereunto. Thus your Spikenards will yield their
Smell, as godly sorrow, Psalm. 38.18. peace, Isa. 27.8. joy, Psalm. 105.3. hope,
Psalm. 71.5. desire and love to God, Psalm. 4.6. and love to all his commands,
Psalm. 119.4, 5. and to his people out of love to him, Psalm. 122. you must seek
the Spirit it self in the first place, Luke 11.13. Psalm. 37.5. and all
spiritual things, Mat. 6.33. Praying only for carnal things, shows a carnal
Heart, and leaves it carnal, Pray for faith, Mar. 9.24. and for such things as
may serve most for the glorifying God, 2 Chronicles. 1.11, 12. and for outward
things, you must act in submission to his Will; and thus Prayer sets you in a
holy frame, Mat. 26.42. Luke 22.42, 43. Hallowing Gods Name, must be your aim,
Mat. 6. not your Lusts, Jam. 4.3.

6. Strive to bring your Soul into order by this Duty, however disordered by
Guilt, Anguish, inordinate Cares or Fears, Psalm. 32.1, 5. and 55.16, 17, 20,
22. and 69.32. Phil. 4.6, 7.1 Sam. 1. A Watch must be often wound up; you must
wrestle in Prayer against your Unbelief, Doubting, Fears, Cares, Reluctance of
the Flesh, to that which is good, against all Evil, Lusts and Desires; Coldness
of Affection, Impatience, trouble of Spirit, every thing that is contrary to an
Holy Life, and the Graces and holy Desires to be acted for your selves or
others, Col. 4.12. Romans 15.30. Stir up your selves to the Duty, Col. 2.1, 2.
Isa. 64.7. Though the Flesh be cross and reluctant, we must not yield, but
resist by the Spirit, Mat. 26.41. And thus we shall find the Spirit helping our
Infirmities, Romans 8.26, 27. Though God seem to defer long, we must not faint or
be discouraged, Luke 18.1, 7. The greater our Agonies be, the more earnestly we
are to pray, Psalm. 22.1, 2. Luke 22.42. This is (...) Romans 12.12. Ephesians. 6.18.
Thus you will find Prayer a great Heart-work, and not such a thing as may be
done while you think on other things, and that it requires all the Strength of
Faith and Affection, that you can possibly stir up: Thus you may get a holy
Frame.

7. You must make a good use of the whole matter, and all the manner of Prayer,
as ordinary and extraordinary Exigencies may require to stir up Grace in you,
by wrestling, and to bring your Hearts into a holy Frame. As in Confession, you
must condemn your self according to the Flesh, but not as you are in Christ.
You must not deny that Grace that you have, as if you were only wicked
hitherto, and now to begin again, which hinders Praise for Grace received in
those that are already converted. In Supplication you must endeavor to work up
your Heart to a godly Sorrow, Psalm. 38.18. and a holy sense of your own Sin and
Misery, and lay before you the Aggravations thereof, Psalm. 51.3. Psalm. 102.
Complaint and Lamentation are one great part of Prayer, as Lamentations of
Jeremiah. And you must add pleading to your Petitions, with such Arguments as
may serve to strengthen Faith, and to stir up, and kindle Affection, Job 23.4.
which pleadings are taken from Attributes, Number. 14.17, 18. Promises, 2 Samuel
7.27, 28, etc. Genesis 32.9, 12. the equity of our cause, Psalm. 17.2, 3. the
advantage and benefit of the thing to the glory of God and our comfort, Psalm.
115.1, 2. Psalm. 79.9.10, 13. Naked Petitions are not sufficient, when the Soul
finds special cause of struggling and wrestling against Corruptions and
Dangers, and for Mercies. Christ's large Prayer is made up, Joh. 17. of
pleading, and very few Petitions. And we must make use also of Praise and
Thanksgiving, for to stir up Peace, Joy, Love, etc. Genesis 33.10. Psalm. 18.1, 2,
3. and 33.1. and 74.14. and 104.34. Especially be much in praising God for
Mercies of the new State in Christ, Ephesians. 1.3. and then you will the better give
thanks for all benefits on his account, Ephesians. 5.20. 1 Thessalonians. 5.18. and plead
those Benefits to stir up to Faith and Duty. That brief Ejaculation, Lord have
mercy on me, is very good to be used; but it will not answer the end and use of
the whole Duty of Prayer, as some lazy carnal People would have it, and so
harden themselves in the neglect of the Duty. Though the large Improvement and
use of all the matter of Prayer at all times, is not required, but only as
ordinary, or extraordinary Occasions may require.

8. You must not confine and limit your Prayers by any prescribed Form, seeing
it is impossible that any such Forms should be contrived, as should answer and
fit, all the various Conditions and Necessities of the Soul at all times: I do
not condemn all Forms, as that made by Christ, the Lords Prayer; though it were
easy to show that Christ never intended it for a Form of Prayer, so as to bind
any to the precise Form of Words; and it is plain the Spirit of God has
expressed it in different Words, Mat. 6. Luke 11. But better to pray by that
Form or other Forms, than not at all. It is uncharitable to take away Crutches,
or Wooden Legs from lame People, yet none will look upon them but as dead
helps. I say it is utterly unlawful to bind our selves to any Form, because
none can answer the Duty fitly, and suitably to particular occasions, Ephesians.
6.18. Phil. 4.6. Joh. 15.7. 1 Thessalonians. 5.18. Ephesians. 5.20. You must make the whole
Scripture your Common Prayer Book, as the Primitive Church did, being the
Language of the Spirit reaching all Occasions and Conditions, and sit to
speak to God in. And if you use a Form, you must follow it by the Spirit,
further than the Form goes, according as he shall guide you by the Word, or
else you quench the Spirit, 1 Thessalonians. 5.19. If you know the Principles of
Prayer, and have a lively sense of your Necessities, and hearty Desires of Gods
Grace and Mercies, you will be able to pray without Forms, and your Affections
will bring forth words out of the fullness of your Heart. And you need not be
over-solicitous and timorous about words; for doubtless, the Spirit who is the
help to us in speaking to Men, will also much more help us to speak to God, if
we desire it, 1 Cor. 1.5. Mar. 13.11. Luke 12.12. And God regards not eloquent
Words, nor artificial Composure, neither need we regard it in private Prayer,
Isa. 38.14. If you limit your self to Forms, you will thereby grow formal, and
limit the Spirit.

7. Another means appointed of God, is Singing of Psalms, i. e. Songs of any
sacred Subject composed to a Tune, are Hymns or Songs of Praise, and spiritual
Songs, of any sublime spiritual Matter, as Psalm. 45. and the Song of Solomon.
God has commanded it, Col. 3.16. Ephesians. 5.19. in the New Testament. Though now
in these days, many question whether it be an Ordinance or no; and there were
many Commands for it under the Old Testament, Psalm. 149.2, 3. and 96.1. and
100. Moses and the Children of Israel sang before David's time, Exodus 15. David
composed Psalms by the Spirit to be sung publicly, 2 Samuel 23.1, 2. yea,
privately too, Psalm. 40.3. 2 Chronicles. 29.30. Psalm. 105.2. Other Songs also were
made upon several Occasions, and used whether they were parts of the Scripture
or no; as Solomon made, 1005. 1 King. 4.32. And they made Songs upon occasion,
which teaches that it is lawful for us to do so, so they be according to the
Word, Isa. 38.9, 14. The matter of Scripture may be sung, Psalm. 119.54. Christ
and his Disciples sang a Hymn, Mat. 26.30. supposed to be one of David's
Psalms; and they were written for our Instruction, as well as other parts of
Scripture, Romans 15. and so to be used now in singing. They speak of the things
of the New Testament, either figuratively or clearly; and we may understand
them better now, than the Jews could under the Old Testament, 2 Cor. 3.16. Col.
2.7. Christians heretofore practiced this Duty as well as Jews, Act. 16.25.
Hence their Antelucani Hymni were noted by Pliny a Heathen. These Songs or
Hymns may be used at all times, especially for holy Mirth or Rejoicing, Jam.
5.13. But is not to be taken exclusively in Singing, any more than in Prayer,
Psalm. 38.18. 2 Chronicles. 35.25.

But the right manner of this Duty is chiefly to be noted, and here 1. Trust
not upon the Melody of the Voice, as if that pleased God, who delights only
in the Melody of the Heart, Col. 3.16. Neither let the recreating your Senses
be your end, which is but a carnal work, Non Musica Chordula, sed Cor. This
spiritual Music was typifyed by musical Instruments of old. 2. You must use it
for the same end as Meditation and Prayer, according to the nature of what is
sung, i. e. to quicken Faith, 2 Chronicles. 20.21, 22. Act. 16.25, 26. and joy and
delight in the Lord, glorying in him, Psalm. 104.33, 34. and 105.3. and 149.1,
2. and 33.1, 2, 3. You are never right until you can be heartily merry in the
Lord, to act Joy and Mirth holily, Jam. 5.13. Ephesians. 5.19. and also to get more
Knowledge and Instruction in heavenly Mysteries, and in your Duty, teaching and
admonishing, Col. 3.16. Many Psalms are Maschills (as their Title is) i. e.
Psalms of Instruction; thus we are to sing such Psalms as speak in the first
Person, though we cannot apply them to our selves as words uttered by our
selves concerning our selves: And in this we do not lie. David speaks of Christ
as of himself, as a Pattern of Affliction and Virtue to instruct others; and we
sing such Psalms not as our words, but words for our Instruction; and therein
we do not lie an^ more, than the Levites, the Sons of Corah, or J^duthun, or
other Musicians bound to sing the^ Psalm. 5. and 39. and 42. Though it be good
personate all good that we can, yet we have much liberty in the use of Psalms,
that tho^ we cannot apply all to our selves, as speaking and thinking the same,
yet we shall answer the end, if we sing for our Instruction, as in Psalm. 6. and
26. and 46. and 101. and 131. And Psalms have a peculiar fitness for teaching
and instructing, because the pleasantness of Meter said or sung, is very
helpful to the memory. See Deuteronomy. 31.19, 21. And there is a Variety of curious
Artifice in the placing of words in the Psalms upon this Account; and there are
some Alphabetical Psalms, as Psalm. 25. and 34. and 37. and 111. and 112. and
119. and 145. And by the Melody of the Sound, the Instruction comes in with
delight, as a Physical Dose sugared; and Sorrow is naturally allayed, to fit
the mind for spiritual Joy, and distempered Passions appeased, 2 Kings 3.15. 1 Samuel 16.14, 15, 16. So that Orpheus, Amphion and others, were famous for
Civilizing rude barbarous People by Music.

8. Fasting is also an Ordinance of God to be used for the same purpose and
end, and is commended to us under the New Testament, Mat. 9.15. and 17.21. 1
Cor. 7.5. And we have Examples of it, Acts 13.2, 3. and 14.23. Under the Old
Testament, there were frequent Commands for it, and Examples, chiefly upon
occasion of extraordinary Afflictions, 1 Samuel 7.6. Neh. 9.1. Dan. 9.3. and
10.2, 3. 2 Samuel 12.16. Psalm. 35.13. 2 Samuel 3.31. Joel 2.13. beside the
Anniversary great day of Atonement, Lev. 16.29, 31. when every one was to Fast
on pain of cutting off. There is a Prophecy of the same for the times of the
New Testament, Zech. 12.12. It was used most on extraordinary occasions, and it
is a help to Holiness by Faith, because it is a meet help for extraordinary
Prayer and Humiliation, Joel 1.14. and 2.12.

But the great matter is, to use it rightly as follows.

1. Trust not in it as Meriting or Satisfying, as Papists and Pharisees do,
Luke 18.11. putting it in the place of Christ; or as a means of its self
conferring Grace, and mortifying Lusts, as many do, who may sooner kill their
Bodies than their Lusts, or any purifying Rite; yea, or in or for it self
acceptable to God, 1 Timothy 4.8. Heb. 12.9. Col. 2.16, 17, 20, 23. Imagine not
that Prayer is not acceptable without it, for this is against Faith. Fasts as
well as Feasts are no substantial parts of Worship, because not Spiritual, but
Bodily. Tho under the Old Testament they were parts as instituted Rites,
figurative and teaching; but that Use is now ceased; as that on the day of
Atonement, and so many significative Rites adjoined to Fasting, as Sackcloth,
Ashes, Rending Garments, pouring out Water, lying on the Earth; the Kingdom of
God consists not in these things, Romans 14. the Soul is hardened by trusting in
them, Isa. 58.3, 6. Zech. 7.5, 10.

2. Use them as helps to extraordinary Prayer and Humiliation, that the
mind-may not be unsuited for it, by Eating, Drinking, or bodily Pleasures, Joel
2.13. Isa. 22.12-13. Zech. 12.10, 14. It is good only as a help to the Soul,
removing Impediments. The best Fast is, when the Mind is taken off from
delights, as in John the Baptists Case, Mat. 3.4. when Heaven and Godly Sorrow
takes off the Soul, Zach. 12.10, 14.

3. Use it in such a measure as may be proper for its End, without which its
worth nothing. If Abstinence divert your mind, by reason of a gnawing Appetite,
then you had better eat sparingly, as Daniel in his great Fast, chapter 10. Some
have not enough of spiritual-mindedness to give up themselves to Fasting and
Prayer, without greater distraction; and such had better eat, than go beyond
their strength in a thing not absolutely necessary, which produces only a
slavish Act, as in the Case of Virginity, 1 Cor. 7.7, 8, 9, 34, 35, 36. Christ
would not have his weak Disciples necessitated to the Duty, Mat. 9.14, 15. In
the mean time, such should strive to be sensible of the weakness and carnality
that hinders their use of this excellent Help.

4. You may expect here something to be spoken of Vows, but I shall only say
this of them, Think not to bring your selves to good by Vows and Promises, as
if the strength of your own Law could do it, when the strength of Gods Law does
it not. We bring Children to make promises of amendment, but we know how well
they keep them. The Devil will urge to Vow, and then to break, that he may
perplex your Conscience the more.

8ly. Another great means is Fellowship and Communion with the Saints, Acts
2.42.

1. This means must be used diligently: Whomsoever God saves should be added
to some Visible Church, and come into Communion of other Saints; and if they
have not opportunity for it, their Heart should be bent toward it. Sometimes
the Church is in the Wilderness, and hindered from Visible Communion and
Ordinances: But they that Believe in Christ are always willing and desirous so
to add and join themselves, Acts 2.41, 44, 47. and they continued steadfastly in
fellowship, 1 John 2.19. And God binds his People to leave the Fellowship and
Society of the wicked as much as may be, 2 Cor. 6.17. And so far as we are
necessitated to accompany with them, we ought to show Charity to their Souls
and Bodies, 1 Cor. 5.9. This Communion with Saints is to be exercised in
private Converse, Psalm. 101.4, 5, 6, 7. and in public Assemblies, Heb. 10.25.
Zach. 14.16, 17.

And doubtless it ought to be used for the Attainment of Holiness, as may be
proved First in General:

Because God communicates all Salvation to a People ordinarily by, or in a
Church, either by taking them into Fellowship, or holding forth the Light of
Truth by his Churches to the World. A Church is the Temple of God, where God
dwells, 1 Timothy 3.15. He has placed his Name and Salvation there, as in
Jerusalem of old, Joel 2.32. 2 Chronicles. 6.5, 6. He has given to his Churches
those Officers and Ordinances whereby he Converts others, 1 Cor. 12.28. His
Springs are there, Psalm. 87. He makes the several Members of a Church,
Instruments for the Conveyance of his Grace and Fullness from one to another, as
the Members of the Natural Body convey to each other the fullness of the Head,
Ephesians. 4.16. All the Newborn are brought forth and nourished by the Church, Isa.
66.8, 10. chapter 49.20. and 60.4. And therefore all that would be saved should
join to a Church: They shall prosper that love the Church, so as to stand in
its Gates, and unite as Members, Brethren and Companions, Psalm. 122.2, 4, 6.
And wrath is denounced against those that are not Members of it, at least of
the mystical Body; They cannot have God for their Father, that have not That
for their Mother, Can. 1.7, 8. This makes those that desire Fellowship with
God, to take hold of the Skirts of his People, Zech. 8.23.

2. In particular, Fellowship with the Saints, conduces to Holiness many ways.

1. By manifold helps to Holiness which are received thereby. As 1. The Word
and Sacraments, Act. 2.42. Isa. 2.3. Mat. 28.19, 20. And all the Ministerial
Office and Labor in watching over Souls, Heb. 13.17. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13. Isa.
25.6. None of these Helps can be enjoyed without Fellowship of Saints, each
with other; and if Believers had been to have stood single by themselves, and
not maintained Fellowship with each other, for mutual Assistance and common
Good, none of these things could have continued, neither could any Believer
been extant at this day, in an ordinary way, but even the very Name of
Believers had been Abolished.

2. Mutual Prayer, which is the more forcible when all pray together, Mat.
18.19, 20. 2 Cor. 1.10, 11. Jam. 5.16. Romans 15.30.

3. Mutual Admonition, Instruction, Consolation to help each other when they
are ready to fall, and to promote the good work in each other, 1 Thessalonians. 5.14.
He that walks with the wise shall be wise, Prove. 13.20. Woe to him that is
alone when he falls. See Eccl. 4.9, 12. In Church Fellowship there are many
Helpers, many to watch: Soldiers have their Security in Company, and the Church
is compared to an Army with Banners, Cant. 6.10. So for quickening Affections,
Iron sharpneth Iron, Prove. 27.17. Likewise the counsel of a friend, like
ointment and perfume, rejoices the heart, Prove. 27.9. Yea, the Wounds and
Reproofs of the Righteous, are as precious Balm, Psalm. 141.5.

4. External Supports which mitigate Afflictions, and are to be communicated
mutually, Ephesians. 4.28. 1 Pet. 4.9, 10. The Affliction is increased, when none
cares for our Souls, Psalm. 142.4.

5. Excommunication when Offenses are exceeding heinous, or Men obstinate in
sin. This Ordinance is appointed for the destruction of the Flesh, that the
Spirit may be saved, 1 Cor. 5.5. Better and more hopeful it is, to be cast out
by the Church for a persons amendment, than to be wholly without the Church at
all times; and better to be a lost Sheep, than a Goat or Swine. For
Excommunication cuts off Actual Communion only, until Repentance be evident,
and not absolutely abolisheth the Title and Relation of a Brother and
Churchmember, tho it judges one to be an unnatural Brother, and a pernicious
rotten Member at present, not fit for Acts of Communion. Besides, Admonition,
which is still to be afforded, 2 These. 3.15. and any means is to be used, that
may serve to Cure and restore him; the Church reaches forth a Hand to help
such a person, tho they do not join Hands in Fellowship with him; or it
communicates to him, not with him. Yet if he have not so much Grace as to
Repent, it were better he had never known the way of Righteousness, 2 Pet. 2.21.

6. The lively Examples of Saints are before our Eyes in Church Fellowship, to
teach and encourage, Phil. 3.17. chapter 4.9. 2 Timothy 3.10, 11. 2 Cor. 9.2.

2ly. By those holy Duties that are required, and do appertain to this
Fellowship and Communion; all Acts that belong to this Fellowship are Holy, as
Hearing, receiving the Sacraments, Prayer, mutual Admonitions, etc. I shall
consider some such holy Acts, whereby we are rather doers than receivers, and
which we perform toward others. As 1. Godly Discourse, Teaching, Admonishing,
Comforting others in Christ; which we cannot so perform toward others, as
toward those we have strict Fellowship with in Christ. Others like Swine,
trample these Jewels under Foot; and Saints therefore are forced to refrain
from Godly Discourse in their Company, Amos 5.10, 13, 16. and 6.10. But holy
Discourse is most acceptable to the Saints, and to be practiced with them, Mal.
3.16. and is greatly to the advantage of Holiness, Prove. 11.25.

2. In helping, succouring, and conversing with Christ in his Members, we do
good to Christ in his Members in Church Fellowship; and we our selves as
Members of Christ, Act as well from Christ as toward Christ; whereas if we do
good to others without, we do good only for Christ's sake, but not to Christ,
Mat. 25.35, 49. Psalm. 16.2, 3. We have advantage in general, to do all Duties
that belong to us as Members of Christ to Fellow Members, which we cannot do if
separate from them; as a Natural Member cannot perform its Office to other
Members if separate from them.

2ly. The means must be used rightly, for the attaining of Holiness only in
Christ.

1. One Rule is, Do not trust on Church Membership, or on Churches, as if this
or that relation in Fellowship, commended you to God of it self; whereas, a
Church Way is but a help to Fellowship with Christ, and walking in the Duties
of that Fellowship. The Israelites stumbled at Christ by trusting on their
Carnal Privileges, and set them in opposition to Christ; whereas they should
have only made them subservient to Christ: Confidence in them should have bin
abandoned, as Paul's example teaches, Phil. 3.3, 4, 5. etc. We must not Glory
in Paul, Apollos, Cephas, but in Christ, else we Glory in the Flesh, and in
Men, 1 Cor. 1.12, 13. and 3.21. Trusting on Church Priviledges, is an inlett to
Formality and Licentiousness, Jer. 7.4, 8, 9, 10. and thence the Corruption of
Churches, Isa. 1.10. 2 Timothy 2.20.

2. Follow no Church any further than you may follow it in the way of Christ;
and keep Fellowship with it only upon the Account of Christ, because it follows
Christ, and has Fellowship with Christ, 1 John 1.3. Zech. 8.23. If a Church
revolt from Christ, we must not follow it how ancient soever it be, as the
Israelitish Church was not to be followed when it persecuted Christ and his
Apostles; and many by adhering to that Church fell from Christ, Phil. 3.6. Acts
6.13, 14. and 21.28. We are indeed to hear the Church, but not every one that
calls it self so, nor none, any surther than it speaks as a true Church,
according to the Voice of the Shepherd, Joh. 10.27. We must subject our selves
to Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of his Mysteries, 1 Cor. 4.1. But must
give up your selves first to Christ absolutely, and to the Church according to
the Will of Christ, 2 Cor. 8.5. Our Fear must not be taught by the Precepts of
Men, Mat. 15. The Doctrins of any Men are to be tried by Scripture, whatever
Authority they pretend to, Acts 17.11. An unlimited following Church-guides,
brought the Church into Babylon, and into all manner of spiritual Whoredoms and
Abominations. You are not Baptized into the Name of the Church, but into the
Name of Christ, 1 Cor. 1.13.

3. Do not think that you must attain this or that Degree of Grace, before you
join your self in full Communion with a Church of Christ in all Ordinances; but
when you have given up your self to Christ and learned the Duty of Communion,
give up your self unto a Church of Christ, though you find much Weakness and
Inability. For Church Ordinances of special Communion, serve to strengthen you,
and how can you get Heat being alone? The Disciples as soon as converted,
embraced all Fellowship, Act. 2.42. And Churches, that they may forward
Holiness in themselves and others, must be willing to receive Christ's weak
ones, and to feed his Lambs as well as better grown Sheep, and bear them on
their sides, Isa. 66.12. how else shall Christ's weak ones grow strong by that
Nourishment that other parts supply? They are very unreasonable that expect
that Christians should grow out of Church Fellowship, to as high a Degree of
Grace, as those that are in those Pastures of tender Grass, and are unwilling
to receive any that they are like to have occasion to bear with; whereas
bearing and longsuffering, are great Duties of Church Fellowship, Ephesians. 4.2, 3.
Romans 14.1. The Weakest have most need to be strengthened by Church Communion;
and we are bound to receive them, as Christ has received us, Romans 15.7. We do
not reject or separate the weaker parts of the Body, 1 Cor. 12.23, 24. but put
more Honor and Comeliness on them. Admission into the Churches in the
Apostolic times, was gained upon Profession, with a show of Seriousness,
though Tares got in amongst the Wheat, and many Scandals arose to the Reproach
of the ways of Christ, and the greatest Strictness will not keep out all
Hypocrites; yet the best care must be taken so far, as not to hinder any that
have the least truth of Grace.

4. Keep Communion with a Church, for the sake of Communion with Christ, 1 John
1.3. Zech. 8.23. Therefore you must keep Communion in Christ's pure ways only,
and in them seek Christ by Faith, that in the Enjoyment of those Advantages,
you may receive, and act the Godliness and Holiness formentioned, and aim at
spiritual Flourishing and Growth in Grace: Choose therefore Fellowship with the
most spiritual Churches; judge of Churches and Men, according to the rule of
the new creature, 2 Cor. 5.16, 17. and try them, Rev. 2.2. and 3.9. otherwise a
Church may corrupt ye. See that thy Communion answer its end, tend to thy
Edification, not to Destruction; which you ought to take all the Advantages of,
not only in the Church where you are a Member, but by Communion with other
Churches, as occasionally Providence casts you among them. For your Communion
with a particular Church, obliges to Communion with all Churches of Christ in
his ways, as you are called thereto, 1 Cor. 10.17. And it is an Abuse to say we
are Members of a Church in London, and therefore refuse Fellowship with a
Church in the Country; seeing if we are Members of Christ, we are Members of
one another, whether single Persons or Churches. And endeavor to join in
Fellowship with the Godly of the place where you live, that you may have the
more sequent and constant Communion. Onesimus, though converted at Rome, must
be one of the Church of the Colossians, because he lived there, Col. 4.9.
compare with Philemon, 10. The Union of the Saints together in distinct
Societies, according to the places where they lived, was the Apostolic
Practice, and cannot be violated without Sin. Such can best Watch over one
another, Admonish, Comfort, and Edify each other, which is the benefit of
Communion; and they indeed destroy Communion, that seek a Communion where they
cannot have this Benefit. I only add to this Head, That Church Fellowship
without practicing the ways of Christ, is but a Conspiracy to take his Name in
vain, and a counterfeit Church Fellowship of Hypocrites; it is Impudency for
such to invite others to their Communion, Tyranny to compel them. Every
Christian is bound to seek a better Church Fellowship by Reformation; and those
that do so, are the best Sons of Christ's Church, who enquire, Is this the way
to enjoy Christ, a Church Way being appointed to enjoy Christ therein.

5. Especially leave not the Church in Persecution, when you need its Help
most, and are then most tried whether you will cleave to it: This is a sign of
Apostasy, Heb. 10.25, 26. Mat. 24.9.10, 12, 13. We should cleave to one
another as one Flesh, even to Prisons and Death; or else we deny Christ in his
Members, Mat. 25.43.

DIRECT. XIV.
That you may seek Holiness and Righteousness, only by believing in Christ, and
walking in him by Faith, according to the former Directions, take Encouragement
from the great Advantages of this way, and excellent Properties of it.

EXPLANATION.
THis Direction may serve as an Epilogue or Conclusion, by stirring us up unto
a lively and cheerful Embracing these Gospel Rules forementioned by several
weighty Motives. As many are kept from seeking Godliness because they know not
the way to it, or the way that they think of, seems Uncouth, Unpleasant,
Disadvantageous and full of Discouragement; like the way through the Wilderness
to Canaan, which wearied the Isralites, and occasioned their many murmurings,
Number. 21.4.

But this is a way so good and excellent, that those that have the true
Knowledge of it, and desire heartily to be Godly, cannot dislike it. I shall
show the Excellency of it in several Particulars; but you should first call to
mind what is the way that I have taught, viz. Union and Fellowship with Christ,
and by Faith in Christ, as discovered in the Gospel; not by the Law, or in a
natural Condition, or by thinking to get it before we come to Christ, to
procure Christ by it, which is striving against the Stream: But that we must
first apply Christ and his Salvation to our selves for our Comfort, and that by
confident Faith, and then walk by that Faith according to the New Man in
Christ, and not as in a natural Condition, and use all means of Holiness
rightly for this end. Now that this is an excellent advantageous way, appears
by the following desirable Properties of it.

1. It has this Property, that it tends to the Abasement of all Flesh, and
Exaltation of God only in his Grace and Power through Christ; and so it is
agreeable to Gods design in all his Works, and the end that he aims at, Romans
11.6. Isa. 2.17. Ezekiel. 36.21, 22.31.32. Psalm. 145.4. and a fit means for the
attaining the end that we ought to aim at in the first place, which is the
Hallowing, Sanctifying and Glorifying Gods Name in all things; and is the first
and chief Petition, Mat. 6. and is the end of all our Actings, 1 Cor. 10.31.
was the end of giving the Law, Romans 3.19, 20. God made all things for Christ,
and would have him have the Pre-eminence in all, Col. 1.17, 18. That the Father
may be glorified in the Son, Joh. 14.13. And this Property of it, is a great
Argument to prove that it is the way of God, and has the Character of his
Image stamped upon it; we may say that it is like him, and a way according to
his Heart, as Christ proves his Doctrine to be of God by this Argument, Joh.
7.18. And Paul proves the Doctrine of Justification, and of Sanctification, and
Salvation by Grace through Faith to be of God, because it excludes all
boastings of the Creature, Romans 3.27, 28. 1 Cor. 1.29.30, 31. Ephesians. 3.8, 9. This
Property appears evidently in the Mystery of Sanctification by Christ in us
through Faith. For first, It shows that we can do nothing by our natural
Will, or any Power of the Flesh; and that God will not enable us to do any
thing that way, Romans 7.18. however Nature be stirred up by the Law or natural
Helps, Col. 3.21. And so it serves to work Self-loathing and Abasement, and to
make us look upon Nature, as desperately wicked and past cure, and to be put
off; not reformed by putting on Christ: It remains wicked, and only wicked,
after we have put on Christ.

2. It shows that all our good Works and living to God, are not by our own
Power and Strength at all; but by the Power of Christ, living in us by Faith,
and that God enableth us to act, not merely according to our natural Power, as
he enableth carnal Men and all other Creatures, but above our own Power by
Christ united to us and in us through the Spirit: All Men live, move, and have
their Being in him, and by his universal Support and Maintenance of Nature; in
its Being and Activity they act, Heb. 1.3. So that the Glory of their Acting as
Creatures belongs to God, but God acts more immediately in his People, who are
one Flesh and Spirit with Christ, and act not by their own Power, but by the
Power of the Spirit of Christ in them, as closely united to him, and being the
living Temple of his Spirit; so that Christ is the immediate principal Agent of
all their good Works, and they are Christ's Works properly, who works all our
Works in us and for us, and yet they are the Saints Works by Fellowship with
Christ, by whose Light and Power the Faculties of the Saints do act and are
acted, Gal. 2.20. Ephesians. 3.16, 17. Colos. 1.1. so we are to ascribe all our works
to God in Christ, and thank him for them as free Gifts, 1 Cor. 15.10. Phil.
1.11. God inableth us to act not by our selves, as he does others but by
himself. The Wicked are supported in acting only according to their own Nature;
so they act wickedly: Thus all are said to live, move, and have their being in
God, Acts 17.27. But God enableth us to conquer Sin, not by our selves, but by
himself, Hos. 1.7. and the Glory of inabling us, does not only belong to him
which the Pharisee could not but ascribe to him, Luke 18.11. but also the Glory
of doing all in us; and yet we work as one with Christ, even as he works as one
with the Father, by the Father working in him: We act as Branches by the Juice
of the Vine, as members by the animal Spirits of the Head, and bring forth
Fruit by Marriage to him as our Husband, and Work in the Strength of him as the
living Bread that we feed on, he is all in the new Man, Colos. 3.11. and all
the Promises are made good in him, 2 Cor. 1.20.

2. It has this Property, that it consists well with other Doctrins of the
Gospel, which contrary Errors do not, and hence this is the way to confirm us
in many other Points of the Gospel, and therefore appears to be true by its
Harmony with other truths, and sit linking with them in the same golden Chain
of the mystery of Godliness, and evidenceth them to be true by their Harmony
with it. I have showed that men's mistaking the true Way of Sanctification, is
the cause of perverting the Scripture in other Points of Faith, and of
declining from the Truth to Popish Socinian and Arminian Tenants: Because Men
cannot seriously take that for truth, which they judge not to be according to
Godliness. But this Way of Holiness will evidence that those Gospel Doctrins
which they refuse, are according to Godliness, and that those Tenants which a
blind Zeal for Holiness moves them to embrace, are indeed contrary to
Holiness. However Satan appears to their natural Understandings as an Angel
of light in such Tenants: Whatever Men say, its certain that Legalists are
indeed the Antinomians.

I shall instance in some Truths confirmed by it.

1. The Doctrine of original Sin, viz. Not only the Guilt of Adam's Sin, and a
corrupt Nature, but utter Impotency to do spiritual good, and Proneness to Sin,
which is Death to God in all People according to nature, Psalm. 51.5. Romans 5.12.
There is an utter Inability to keep the Law truly in any Point. Many deny this
Doctrine because they think that if People believe this, they will excuse their
Sins by it, and be apt to despair of all striving to do good Works, and leave
off all Endeavors, and grow licentious; and they think it will be more
conducing to Godliness, to hold and teach either, that there is no original Sin
or Corruption derived from Adam, or at least it is done away, either in the
World, by universal Redemption; or in the Church by Baptism; and that there is
free will restored, whereby People are able to incline themselves to do good,
that Men may be more encouraged to set upon good Works, and their Neglect made
inexcusable. All this is indeed forcible against seeking and endeavoring for
Holiness, by the free will and power of Nature, which is the way of
endeavoring, which I directed you to avoid, and if there were no new Way to
Holiness since the fall, original Sin might make us despair; but there is a new
Birth, a new Heart, a new Creature, and therefore we have directed to seeking
of Holiness by the Spirit of Christ, and willing good freely by a spiritual
Power as new Creatures, partakers of a divine Nature in Christ. Yea, its
necessary to know the first Adam, that we may know the second, Romans 5.12. To
believe the fall and original Sin, that we may be stirred up to fly to Christ
by Faith for Holiness by free Gift, knowing that we cannot attain it by our own
Power and Free Will, 2 Cor. 1.9. Mat. 9.12, 13. Romans 7.24, 25. 2 Cor. 3.5. Ephesians.
5.14. There were no need of a new Man or a new Creation, if the old were not
without strength and Life, Joh 3.5, 6, Ephesians. 2.8. But original Deadness cannot
hinder Gods working Faith and Hungrings and Thirstings after Christ, by the
Spirit, through the Gospel, in those that God chooses to walk holily and
blamelessly before him in Love, 1 These. 1.4, 5. Act. 26.18. And so we are made
alive in a new Head, and become Branches of another Vine, living to God by the
Spirit, not by Nature.

2. It confirms us in the Doctrine of Predestination, which many deny, because
they say it takes Men off from Endeavors as fruitless, by telling Men that all
Events are predetermined. This Argument would be more forcible against
Endeavors, by the power of our own Free Will, but not at all against
Endeavors for Holiness, by the Operation of God, giving us Faith and all
Holiness by his own Spirit, working in us through Christ, we are to trust on
Christ for the Grace of the Elect, and Gods good Will toward Men, Matt. 3.17.
Luke 2.14. Psalm. 106.4, 5. Election by Grace destroys seeking by Works, but not
by Grace, Romans 11.5, 6. And we are here taught to seek for Salvation only in
the way of the Elect; and we may conclude that Holiness is to be had by Gods
Will, and not by our own; and it may move us to desire Holiness by the Will of
God, Romans 9.16. Psalm. 109.32. And seeing it appears by this Doctrine of
Sanctification through Christ, that we are Gods Workmanship as to all the good
wrought in us, Phil. 2.12, 13. Ephesians. 2.10. We may well admit that he has
appointed his Pleasure from Eternity, without infringing the Natural Liberty of
our corrupt Wills, which reaches not unto good Works, Acts 15.18. compare with
30. Man's Natural Free Will may well consist with Gods Decree as in Paradise,
Decretum radii contingentia.

3. It confirms us in the true Doctrine of Justification and Reconciliation with
God by Faith, relying on the Merits of Christ's Blood, without any Works of our
own, and without considering Faith as a Work to procure Favor by the
Righteousness of the Act, but only as a Hand to receive the Gift, or rather as
the very Eating and Drinking of Christ actually, than any kind of Condition
intitling us to him as our Food. This great Doctrine of the Gospel many hate, as
breaking the strongest Bonds of Holiness, and opening a way to all
Licentiousness; for they reckon that the Conditionality of Works, to attain
Gods Favor, and avoid his Wrath, and the necessity of them to Salvation, are
the most necessary and effectual Impulsives to all Holiness; and they account
that the other Doctrine opens the Floodgates to Licentiousness. And truly this
Consideration would be of some weight, if People were to be brought to Holiness
by Moral Suasion, and their natural Endeavors stirred up by the Terms of the
Law, and by slavish Fears, and Mercenary Hopes; for the Force of these Motives
would be altogether enervated by the Doctrine of Justification by Free Grace;
but I have already showed, that a Man being a guilty dead Creature, cannot be
brought to serve God out of love, by force of any of these Motives, and that we
are not sanctified by any of our own Endeavors, to work Holiness in our
selves, but rather by Faith in Christ's Death and Resurrection, even the same
whereby we are justified; and that the urging of the Law stirs up Sin; and that
Freedom from it is necessary to all Holiness, as the Apostle teaches, Romans
6.11, 14. and 7.4, 5. And this way of Sanctification confirms the Doctrine of
Justification by Faith, as the Apostle informs, Romans 8.1. For if we are
Sanctified, and so restored to the Image of God and Life by the Spirit through
Faith, it is evident that God has taken us into his Favor, and pardoned our
Sins by the same Faith, without the Law, or else we should not have the Fruits
and Effects of his Favor thereby to our eternal Salvation, Romans 8.2. Yea, his
Justice would not admit his giving Life without Works, if we were not made
Righteous in Christ by the same Faith. And we cannot trust to have Holiness
freely given us by Christ upon any rational Ground; except we can also trust on
the same Christ for free Reconciliation, and Forgiveness of Sins for our
Justification. Neither can guilty cursed Creatures, that cannot work by reason
of their Deadness under the Curse, be brought to a rational love of God, except
they apprehend his loving them first freely without Works, 1 John 4.19. The
great Objection and Reason of so many Controversies and Books written about it
is, because they think that Men will trust to be saved however they live: But
Sanctification is an Effect of Justification, and flows from the same Grace;
and we trust for them both by the same Faith, and for the former in order to
the latter: And such a Faith, be it never so confident, tends not to
Licentiousness, but Holiness. And we grant that Justification by Grace destroys
Holiness by legal Endeavors, but not by Grace: So that there is no need to
live a Papist and die an Antinomian.

4. It confirms us in the Doctrine of Real Union with Christ, so plentifully
held forth in Scripture, which Doctrine some count a vain Notion, and cannot
endure it, because they think it works not Holiness, but Presumption; whereas
I have showed that it is absolutely necessary for the Enjoyment of Spiritual
Life and Holiness, which is treasured up in Christ, and that so inseparably,
that we cannot have it without a real Union with him, 2 Cor. 13.5. 1 John 5.12.
John 6.53. chapter 15.5. 1 Cor. 1.30. Col. 3.11. The Members and Branches cannot
live without Union with the Vine and Head; nor the Stones be part of the living
Temple, except they be really joined mediately or immediately to the
Cornerstone.

5. In the Doctrine of certain final Perseverance of the Saints, John 3.36. c.
6.37. and 5.24. 1 John 3.9. 1 Thessalonians. 5.24. Phil. 1.6. John 10.23, 29. c. 4.14.
They think this Doctrine makes People careless of good Works. I answer, It
makes People careless of seeking them by their own Natural Strength, and in a
way of slavish Fear; but careful and courageous in trusting on the Grace of God
for them, when they are brought by Regeneration heartily to desire them, Romans
6.14. Numb. 13.30. setting upon the doing of them in that Grace, 1 Thessalonians. 5.8,
11. And I have showed that all fears of Damnation will never bring Persons to
work out of love; and that nothing will do it, but a comfortable Doctrine.

3ly. It has this excellent Property, that it is a Never-failing, effectually
powerful, alone Sufficient, and sure way to attain to true Holiness: They that
have the Truth in them, find it, and the truly humbled find it: People strive
in vain, when they seek it any other way; therefore venture with the Lepers,
else you die, 2 Kings 7. Isa. 55.2, 3, 7. All other ways either stir up Sin, or
increase Despair in you; as seeking Holiness by the Law, and working under the
Curse does; and breeds but Slavish and Hypocritical Obedience at best, and
restrains Sin only instead of mortifying it, Gal. 4.25. The Jews sought another
way and could not attain it, Romans 9. And all that seek it another way shall lie
down in Sorrow, Isa. 50.11. And that 1. Because as we are under the Law in our
Natural Estate, we are Dead and Children of Wrath, Ephesians. 2.1, 3. And the Law
curses us instead of helping us, Gal. 3.10. and gives no Life by its
Obligation, Gal. 3.21. And we cannot work Holiness in our selves, Romans 5.6. So
that an humbled Person finds it in vain, to seek Holiness by the Law or his own
Strength; for the Law is weak through our Flesh; seeking a pure Life, without a
pure Nature, is building without a Foundation; and no seeking a new Nature from
the Law, for it bids make Brick without Straw; and says to the Cripple Walk,
without giving any Strength. 2. In this way only God is reconciled to us, even
in Christ, 2 Cor. 5.19. Ephesians. 1.7. And so he loves us, and is a fit Object of
our Love, 1 John 4.19. And so in this way only we have a new and Divine Nature
by the Spirit of Christ in us, effectually carrying us forth to Holiness with
Life and Love, Romans 8.5. Gal. 5.17. 2 Pet. 1.3, 4 and have new Hearts according
to the Law, so that we serve God heartily according to the new Nature, and
cannot but serve him, 1 John 3.9. So that here is a sure Foundation for
Godliness and love to God, with all our Heart, Might and Soul; and Sin is not
only restrained but mortified; and not only the outside made clean, but the
inside, and the Image of God renewed, and Holy Actings surely follow: We Sin
not according to the new Nature, though we are not perfect in degree, because
of the old Nature.

4ly. It is a most pleasant way to those that are in it, Prove. 3.17. and that
in several respects.

1. It is a most plain way, easy to be found, to one that sees his own
Deadness under the Law, and is so renewed in the Spirit of his Mind, as to know
and be persuaded of the Truth of the Gospel; though such may be troubled and
pestered with many legal Thoughts and Workings; yet when they seriously
consider things, the way is so plain, that they think it Folly and Madness to
go any other way: So that the wayfaring Man, though a Fool, does do not err
therein, Isa. 35.8. Prove. 8.9. The enlightened Soul cannot think of another way
when truly humbled, Prove. 1.8. And when we are in Christ, we have his Spirit to
be our Guide in this way, 1 John 2.27. John 16.13. So that we need not be
filled with such distracting Thoughts about knowledge of our way, as legal
Spirits are about Thousands of Cases of Conscience, which do so multiply upon
them, that they despair of finding out the way of Religion, by reason of so
various Doubts and manifold Intricacies. Here we may be sure that God will so
far teach us our Duties, as that we shall not be misled with Error, so as to
continue in it to Destruction, Psalm 25.8, 9, 14. What a trouble is it to a
Traveller to be doubtful of his way, and without a Guide, when his Business is
of great Importance, upon Life and Death, it is even an Heartbreaking: But
those that are in this way, may be sure, that though they sometime err, yet
they shall not err destructively, but shall discern their way again, Gal. 4.7,
10.

2. It is easy to those that walk in it by the Spirit, though it be difficult
to get into it by reason of the Opposition of the Flesh or Devil scaring us, or
seducing us from it. Here you have Holiness as a Free Gift received by Faith,
an Act of the Mind and Soul; whosoever will, may come, take it and drink
freely, and nothing is required but a willing mind, Joh. 7.38. Isa. 55. 1. Rev.
22.17. But the Law is an intolerable Burden, Mat. 23.4. Acts 15.10. if Duty be
laid on by its Terms. We are not left in this way to conquer Lusts by our
Endeavors, which is a successless Work, but what is Duty is given, and the Law
is turned into Promises, Heb. 8. Ezekiel. 36.25, 26. Jer. 31.33. and 32.40. We
have all now in Christ, Col. 3.11. and 2.9, 10, 15.17. This is a Catholic
Medicine instead of a Thousand. How pleasant would this Free-gift Holiness be
to us, if we knew our own Wants, and Inabilities and Sinfulness? How ready are
some to Toil continually, and macerate their Bodies in a melancholy legal way,
to get Holiness rather than perish for ever? and therefore how ready should we
be, when it is only Take and Have, Believe and be Sanctified and Saved, 2 Kings
5.13. Christ's burden is light by his Spirit bearing, Mat. 11.30. No weariness,
but renewing of strength, Isa. 40 31.

3. It is a way of Peace, Prove. 3.17. free from Fears and Terrors of
Conscience, that those meet with unavoidably that seek Salvation by Works; for
the Law works wrath, Romans 4.15. It is not the way of Mount Sinai, but of
Jerusalem, Heb. 12.18, 22. The Doubts of Salvation that People meet with, arise
from putting some condition of Works betwixt Christ and themselves, as has
appeared in this Discourse; but our walking in this way, is by Ftith, which
rejects such Fears and Doubtings, Joh. 14.1. Mar. 5.36. Heb. 10.19, 22. It Is
free from Fears of Satan or any Evil, Romans 8.31, 32. And free from slavish
Fears of perishing by our Sins, 1 John 2.1, 2. Phil. 4.6, 7. it laying hold on
infinite Grace, Mercy and Power to secure us: The Lord is the Keeper and Shade
on the right hand, Psalm. 121.5. Free and powerful Grace answers all Objections.

4. It is a way that is paved with Love, like Solomon's Chariot, Cant. 3.10. We
are to set Gods loving kindness, and all the gifts of his Love, still before
our eyes, Psalm. 26.2. Christ's Death, Resurrection, Intercession before our
eyes; which breed Peace, Joy, Hope, Love, Romans 15.13. Isa. 35.10. You must
Believe for your Justification, Adoption, the Gift of the Spirit, and a future
Inheritance; your Death and Resurrection with Christ: In Believing for these
things, your whole way is adorned with Flowers, and has these Fruits growing
on each side; so that it is through the Garden of Eden, rather than the
Wilderness of Sinai, Act. 9.31. It is the Office of the Spirit our Guide, to be
our Comforter, and not a Spirit of bondage, Romans 8.15. Peace and Joy are great
Duties in this way, Phil. 4.4, 5, 6. God does not drive us on with Whips and
Terrors, and by the Rod of the Schoolmaster of the Law; but leads us and wins
us to walk in his ways, by Allurements, Cant. 1.3. Hos. 11.4. See such
Alurements, 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. c. 7.1. Romans 12.1.

5. Our very Moving, Acting, Walking in this way, is a Pleasure and Delight;
every good Work is done with Pleasure, the very Labor of the way is pleasant.
Carnal Men wish Duties were not necessary, and they are burdensome to them;
but they are pleasant to us, because we do not gain Holiness by our own carnal
Wrestling with our Lusts, and crossing them out of carnal Fear, with Regret and
Grief, and setting Conscience and the Law against them, to hinder their
Actings, but we act naturally, according to the New Nature, and perform our own
New spiritual Desires and Lusts, by walking in the ways of God through Christ:
And our Lusts and Pleasures in Sin, are not only restrained, but taken away in
Christ; and Pleasures in Holiness, freely given us and implanted in us, Romans
8.5. Gal. 5.17, 24. Joh. 4.34. Psalm. 40.8. Psalm. 119.14, 16, 20. We have a new
Taste and Savor, Love, Lust and Liking by the Spirit of Christ, and look on
the Law, not as a Burden, but as our Privilege in Christ.

6. It is a high exalted way above all other ways: Unto this way the Prophet
Habbakuk is exalted, when upon the Failure of all visible Helps and Supports,
he resolves to rejoice in the Lord, and joy in the God of his Salvation; and
making God his Strength by Faith, his Feet should be as Hinds Feet, and should
walk upon his high places, Hab. 3.18, 19. These are the heavenly places in
Christ Jesus, that God has set us in, being quickened and raised up together
with him, Ephesians. 2.5, 6.

1. We live high here, for we live not by the flesh, but by the Spirit, and
Christ in us, with all his fullness, Romans 8.1, 2. Gal. 2.20. c. 5.25. We walk
in Fellowship with God, dwelling in us, and walking about in us, 2 Cor. 6.18.
And therefore our Works are of higher Price and Excellency, than the Works of
others, because they are wrought in God, Joh. 3.21. And are the Fruits of Gods
Spirit, Gal. 5. Phil. 1.11. And we may know that they are accepted and good, by
our Gospel Principles which others have not, Romans 7.6.

2. We are enabled to the most difficult Duties, Phil. 4.1, 3. and nothing is
too hard for us. See the great Works done by Faith, Heb. 11. Mar. 9.23. Works
that carnal Men think! Folly and Madness to venture upon, (they are so great)
and honorable Achievements, in doing and suffering for Christ.

3. We walk in an honorable State with God, and on honorable Terms; not as
guilty Creatures to get our Pardon by Works, nor as Bond-Servants, to earn our
Meat and Drink; but as Sons and Heirs, walking toward the full Possession of
that Happiness to which we have a Title, and so we have much boldness in Gods
Presence, Gal. 4.6, 7. We can approach nearer to God than others, and walk
before him considently without slavish Fear; not as Strangers, but as such who
are of his own Family, Ephesians. 2.19, 20. And this prompts us to doing greater
things than others; walking as free Men, Romans 6.17, 18. Joh. 8.35, 36. It is a
Kingly way; the Law to us, is a Royal Law, a Law of Liberty and our Privilege,
not a Bond and Yoke of Compulsion.

4. It is the way only of those that are Honorable and Precious in the eyes of
the Lord, even his Elect and Redeemed ones, whose special Privilege it is, to
walk therein; No unclean Beast goes there, Jer. 35.8, 9. No carnal Man can
walk in this way, but only those that are taught of God, Joh. 6.44, 45, 46. Nor
would it have come into our Hearts, without Divine Revelation.

5. The preparing this way, cost Christ very dear; it is a costly way, Heb.
10.19, 20. 1 Pet. 3.18.

6. It is a good old way, wherein thou may follow the Footsteps of all the
Flock.

7. It Is the way to Perfection, it leads to such Holiness, which shall in a
while, be absolutely perfect: It differs only in the degree and manner of
Manifestation from the Holiness of Heaven; there the Saints live by the same
Spirit, and the same God in all, 1 Cor. 15.28. Joh. 4.14. And have the Image of
the same spiritual Man, 1 Cor. 15.49. Only here we have but the first fruits of
the Spirit, Romans 8.23. And live by faith and not by sight, 2 Cor. 5.7. And are
not full grown in Christ, Ephesians. 4.13. Sanctification in Christ, is Glorification
begun, as Glorification is Sanctification perfected.

ERRATA.
PAge 6. l. 18. r. works. p. 7. l. 5. a fine, for not r. yet. p. 23. l. 6. a
fi. for that r. there. p. 27. l. 18. for either, rather. p. 33. l. 9. for an r.
in. p. 36. l. 5. a fi. r. yet for that. p. 41. l. 9. a fi. r. receiving for
recovering. p. 42. after them r. it were better if. p. 42. l. 2. for God r.
Gods. p. 46. l. 7. for hope r. Trope. ibid. l. 11. for this r. the. p. 46. l.
17. for particulars r. particularly. p. 48. l. 4. a fi. r. for wisely, etc. r.
wisdom, by the knowledge of which, etc. p. 49. l. 19. r. from Christ. p. 52. l.
3. a fi. for has r. had. p. 63. l. 19. r. principal act. p. 64. l. 13. add,
after Lord. called, hoping in the Lord because, etc. p. 65. l. 12. for procure
r. secure. p. 66. l. 5. after right, r. to use any Instrument for the actual,
etc. p. 68. l. 4. a fi. for right title r. right or title. Ib. l. 2. a fi. for
condition r. conditional work. p. 69. l. 2. a fi. r. 5ly. true, etc. p. 73. l.
19. put that, after first. p. 80. l. 21. r. it is. p. 85. l. 6. a fi. for on r.
off. p. 87. l. 7. a fi. for it has r. it is. p. 88. l. 22. for lying r. thing.
p. 95. l. 1. for do r. toil more. p. 97. l. 5. a fi. r. for the worst. p. 108.
l. 12. a fi. r. done away. p. 114. l. 8. a fi. for ways r. wages. Ib. l. 16.
for which r. what. p. 122. l. 18. r. for it, prescribes, etc. p. 125. l. 6.
these words, without any farther practice of Holiness, add them after the () l.
14. p. 160. l. 6. r. this is. p. 171. l. 10. de. that p. 172. l. 3. a fi. r. of
it, it etc. p. 194. l. 7. r. to the life of, etc. p. 196. l. 12. r. by all the,
etc. p. 197. l. 20. free Salvation. p. 201. l. 7. for believe, r. Christ's
People. p. 203. l. 18. r. decree. p. 207. l. 3. a fi. de. yea. p. 213. l. 14.
for carefully r. cheerfully. p. 216. l. 12. a fi. r. such a persuasion as this,
will allure and incline, etc. p. 222. l. 3. a fi. r. resting in an attendance
upon the, etc. p. 223. l. 8. r. means of his, etc. p. 225. l. 6. a fi. for and
perfect, r. therefore we may. p. 230. l. 14. r. by being. p. 233. l. 8. for
believed r. lived. p. 232. l. 11. a fi. for particular r. peculiar. p. 242. l.
4. a fi. for old sins r. sinful. p. 243. l. 16. a fi. r. Perfectionists. p.
247. l. 10. r. we have great ground, etc. l. 11. r. endeavors after Holiness,
as in, etc. l. 13. r. and to the way of living by Faith. l. 29. r. in order to
a holy, etc. p. 248. l. 16. a fi. for by r. in. p. 249. l. 19. for own r. old.
p. 251. l. 6. a fi. for or r. rather. p. 254. l. 10. for spoil r. expel. p.
255. l. 8. a fi. r. but this, etc. p. 258. l. 7. for their r. your. p. 292. l.
9. a fi. r. exert it self. r. reflex, for reflect act. Sermon p. 12. l. 1. for
Righteousness r. Redemption.

The Reader is desired to mend the Erratas, many of them very much altering the
Sense of the Author.

Books Printed and Sold by Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheap Side near Mercers Chapel.
Folio's.
RIchard Baxter's Catholic Theology, Plain, Pure, Peaceable, for Pacification
of Dogmatical Wordwarriers: In three Books.

Sixty one Sermons preached mostly on public Occasions. By Dr. Littleton
Rector of Chelsey in Middlesex, etc.

One Hundred select Sermons upon several Texts, Fifty upon the Old Testament,
and Fifty on the New.

Choice and Practical Expositions on four select Psalms. These two by the
Reverend and Learned Tho. Horton, D. D.

A Third Volume of Sermons preached by the late Reverend and Learned Tho.
Manton, D. D. In two Parts. The first containing Sixty six Sermons on the
Eleventh Chapter of the Hebrews, with a Treatise of the Life of Faith. Part the
Second, A Treatise of Self-denial: With several Sermons on the Sacrament of the
Lord-Supper, and other Occasions. With an Alphabetical Table to the whole.

The Christian in Complete Armor: Or a Treatise of the Saints War against the
Devil. By William Gurnall, A. M. of Emanuel College: Now Pastor of a Church of
Christ in Lavenham, Suffolk.

Synodicon in Gallia Reformat a: Or the Acts, Decisions, Decrees and Canons of
these Famous National Councils of the Reformed Churches in France: Being first,
A most Faithful and Impartial History of the Rise, Growth, Perfection and Decay
of the Reformation in that Kingdom: With its Fatal Catastrophe upon the
Revocation of the Edict of Nants, in the Year 1685, etc. The whole collected
and composed out of the Original Manuscript Acts of those renowned Synods. A
Work never before extant in any Language. In 2 Vol. Fol. By John Quick Minister
of the Gospel.

The Works of the Reverend Tho. Lightfoot, D.D. late Master of Katharine Hall
in Cambridge. In 2 vol.

An Historical Political Discourse, of the Laws and Government of England, from
the first Time to the end of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. With a Vindication
of the Ancient way of Parliaments in England. By Nath. Bacon of Greys-Inn Esquire

The True Prophecies and Prognostications of Michael Nostradamus.

Forty nine Sermons on the whole Epistle of St. Paul to the Colossians: By the
Famous Minister of the Reformed Churches of Paris, Mr. John Daille.

Quarto's.
A Treatise of Episcopacy, confuting by Scripture, Reason, and the Churches
Testimony: That sort of Diocesan Churches, Prelacy and Government, which
casts out the Primitive Church-Species, Episcopacy, Ministry and Discipline,
etc.

Church History of the Government of Bishops and their Councils, abbreviated,
etc.

The English Nonconformity under K. Charles II. and K. James II. truly stated
and argued, etc.

The Life of Faith in three Parts, etc.

A Treatise of Knowledge and Love compared, in two Parts: 1. Of Falsely
Pretended: 2. Of true saving Knowledge and Love.

History of Councils enlarged and defended, etc.

Saints Everlasting Rest.

Church Concord: Containing 1. a Dissuasive from unnecessary Divisions and
Separations, etc. 2. The Terms necessary for Concord among all true Churches,
etc.

National Churches, their Description, Institution, Use, etc. partly applied to
England, etc.

The Glorious Kingdom of Christ described and clearly vindicared, against the
Bold Assertors of a future Calling and Reign of the Jews, answering Mr. Tho.
Beverly, etc.

A Reply to Mr. Tho. Beverly's Answer.

His Farewel-Sermon preached to his Hearers at Kidderminster.

His Penitent Confession; And his necessary Vindication; in answer to a Book
called, The second part of the Mischiefs of Separation, etc.

An Answer to Mr. Dodwe^ and Dr. Sherlock, confuting an Universal Humane
Church-Supremacy, Aristocratical and Monarchical, as Church-Tyranny and Popery,
and defending Dr. Isaac Barrows Treatise against it.

Catholic Communion defended against both Extremes, and unnecessary Divisions
confuted, by Reasons against both the Active and Passive ways of Separating,
occasioned by the Racks and Reproaches of one sort, and the Impatience and
Censoriousness of the other, and the Erroneous, though Confident Writings of
both, etc. In five parts.

Which is the True Church: The whole Christian World, as Headed only by Christ
(of which the Reformed are the soundest part) or the Pope of Rome and his
Subjects as such. In three parts. All these by Mr. Richard Baxter.

Claude's History of the Reformation.

Dr. Charleton's Enquiries into Humane Nature.

Burrough's Rare Jewel of Christian Contentment.

-- His Four Useful Discourses.

Several Discourses concerning the Actual Providence of God: Divided into three
Parts.

Intercourses of Divine Love betwixt Christ and his Church: Or the Particular
Believing Soul Metaphorically expressed by Solomon, in the First and Second
Chapters of Canticles: In two Vol. All these three by John Collinges, D. D.

Jacksons Annotations on Isaiah.

Essays on Natural Experiments made in the Academy Del Cimento, under the
Protection of the most Serene Prince Leopold of Tuscany. Written in Italian by
the Secretary of that Academy. Englished by Richard Waller Fellow of the Royal
Society.

The Ark of the Covenant: Or a Treatise of the Covenant of Redemption between
God and Christ, as the Foundation of the Covenant of Grace. By Geo. Gillespie.

Clarkson of Diocesan Bishops. In two Parts.

Morning Exercise against Popery.

Grews Parable of the Prodigal. In two Parts. Complete.

An Exposition on the Commandments. By the Right Reverend Father in God Ezekiel
late Lord Bishop of Londonderry.

Clarkson's Practical Divinity of the Papists, proved to be Destructive to
Christianity and Men's Souls.

Froycell's Sermons of Grace and Temptation.

The Union of the Wheel, seen by the Prophet Ezekiel, opened and applied, etc.

The Doctrine of JUSTIFICATION Opened and Applied.
ROMANS 3.23, 24, 25, 26. 23, For all have sinned and come short of the Glory of
God.

24, Being justified freely by his Grace through the Redemption that is in
Jesus Christ.

25, Whom God has set forth for a Propitiation through Faith in his Blood, to
declare his Righteousness for the remission of Sins that are past through the
forbearance of God.

26, To declare I say at this time his righteousness, that he might be just and
the justifier of him who believes in Jesus.


THE Apostle having confuted and overthrown all Justification of either Jew or
Gentile by Works, in the foregoing Discourse, is now proving what he Asserted,
ver. 21, 22. viz. that the righteousness of God without the law is manifested,
being witnessed by the law and the Prophets, even the righteousness of God,
which is by faith of Jesus Christ, unto all and upon all them that believe, for
there is no difference. Showing that now in the Gospel times there is no
difference between Jew and Gentile, but that in the justification of both, the
Righteousness of God without the Law is manifested. This he proves by showing
what the Gospel teaches concerning the way of Justification; for the Gospel
only reveals the Righteousness of God, Romans 1.16, 17. I am not ashamed of the
Gospel of Christ. ver. 17. For therein is the Righteousness of God revealed
from faith to faith.

So the Words are a declaration of the Gospel way of Justification, by the
Righteousness of God; and that so clearly and fully, and the benefit spoken of
so great, and glorious, being the first benefit that we receive by Union with
Christ and the foundation of all other benefits; that my Text is accounted to
be Evangelium Evangelii, a principal part of the written Gospel, as briefly and
yet fully expressing this excellent point more then any other Text.

Note in the words particularly,

1. The Subject declared and explained, viz. Justification of Persons, or their
being justified; and the meaning of it here is to be cleared and freed from all
Ambiguities and Misunderstanding. Justification signifies making just, as
Sanctification is making holy, Glorification making glorious. But not making
just by infusion of grace and holiness into a Person, as the Papists teach
consounding Justification and Sanctification together; but making just in trial
and judgment, by a judicial Sentence discharging of guilt, freeing from blame
and accusation; approving, judging, owning and pronouncing a person to be
righteous. Use alters the signification from the Notation. It is a Juridical
word or Law Term, and has reference to Trial and Judgment, 1. Cor. 4.3, 4. It
is with me a very small thing that I should be judged of you, or of man's
judgment: Yea I judge not mine own self. For I know nothing of my self, yet am
I not hereby justified; but he that judges me is the Lord. And its so opposed
to condemnation in Judgment, Deuteronomy. 25.1. If there be a controversy between
men, and they come unto judgment, that the Judges may judge them, then they
shall justify the Righteous, and condemn the wicked. And Mat. 12.37. By thy
words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou shall be condemned. And
it is opposed both to Accusation and Condemnation, Romans 8 33, 34. Who shall lay
any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? ver. 34. Who is he that condemns? And
so Job 9.20. If I justify my self, mine own mouth shall condemn me. Job 13.15.
I will maintain mine own ways before him. ver. 18. I have ordered my cause, and
I know I shall be justified. ver. 19. Who is he that will plead with me? Here
Justification is plainly opposed unto the Accusation or Fault; and it is as
plainly opposed to the passing Sentence of Condemnation, 1 Kings 8.32. Do, and
judge thy Servants, condemning the wicked to bring his way upon his head, and
justifying the righteous to give him according to his Righteousness. In this
sense it is a sin to justify the Wicked, Isa. 5.23. Prove. 17.15. Job 27.5.
Actions must be existent already, and brought to trial that they may be
justified, Job 33.32. Isa. 43.9, 26.

Justice or Righteousness consists not in the Intrinsic nature of an Action;
but in its agreeableness to a rule of Judgment; So that Actions are called just
and righteous by an Extrinsecal Denomination with relation to Gods rule of
Judging; and this Righteousness appears by trying the Action according to the
rule, and by making an estimate of it; which estimate is either approving or
disproving, justifying or condemning, finding it to be sin or no sin, or breach
of the Law; so we may say of the righteousness of Persons, with reference to
such habits or actings. And because Righteousness of righteous Persons appears
when they are brought to trial and judgment, therefore they are said then to be
in a special manner justified, as if they were then made righteous; Viz. when
their Righteousness is declared, as Christ was said to be begotten the Son of
God at the Resurrection, Acts 13 33. because he was then declared to be the Son
of God, Romans 1.4 and in the same sense we that are adopted at present, are said
to wait for our adoption, i. e. the manifestation of it, Romans 8.23. And thus
even God is said to be justified when we judge of his Actions as we ought to
do, and deem them to be righteous, Job 32.2. Psalm. 51.4. Luke 7.29. though
nothing can be added to the Infinite Righteousness of God. And Wisdom is said
to be justified by her Children, Matthew. 11.19. So Justification is not a real
change of a Sinner in himself, (though a real change is annexed to it) but only
a Relative change with reference to Gods Judgment. And thus the word is used in
the Text, and so also in matters of Judicature throughout the scripture; yea,
some contend against the Papists, that it is no where in Scripture otherwise,
except by a Trope borrowed from this as the proper sense: And in the Text it is
beyond all doubt meant of being deemed and accounted just in the sight of God;
for such a Justification is here only treated of, as appears in the Text, and
before ver. 19, 20. And I have been the longer Explaining the sense of the
word, because the mistaking of it by reason of its composition occasioned that
popish error, whereby the benefit signified by it is obscured, yea, overthrown;
so that we had need contend for the sense of the Word.

2. In the Text we have* First, the Persons justified: 1. Sinners, 2. Such
Sinners of all sorts that shall believe, whether Jews or Gentiles.

2. The Justifier or Efficient Cause, God. 3. The Impulsive Cause, Grace. 4.
The means effecting, or Material Cause, The Redemption of Christ. 5. The Formal
Cause, The Remission of Sins. 6. The Instrumental Cause, Faith. 7. The Time of
declaring, The present Time. 8. The End, That God may appear just.
From hence therefore will arise several useful Observations, all tending to
explain the nature of Justification, which shall be laid down, and cleared out
of the Text, and confirmed particularly, and then I shall make use of them all
together.

Observe. I. They who are justified are Sinners, such who are come short of the
Glory of God, i. e. of God's Approbation, Joh. 5.44. of Gods Image, of
Holiness, 2 Cor. 3.1. Ephesians. 4.24. Eternal Happiness, 1 Thessalonians. 2.12. Romans 5.2. 2
Cor. 4.17.

1. The Law condemns all Sinners and strikes them dead as with a Thunderbolt,
Romans 3.20. and adjudgeth them to Shame, Confusion, and Misery, instead of Glory
and Happiness, by the strict terms of it, Romans 2.6. -- 9.11, 12. which none
fulfils, neither can do, Romans 8.7. neither Jews nor Gentiles; there is no hope
if free Grace restore them not.

2. Christ came only to save Sinners, and died for this end, Romans 5.6. when we
were yet without strength, in due time Christ dyed for the Ungodly; and 1 Timothy
1.15. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus
Christ came into the World to save Sinners, of whom I am the chief. Mat. 9.13.
I am not come to call the Righteous, but Sinners to Repentance. Mat. 18.11. The
Son of man is come to save that which is lost. And God must be believed on to
Salvation, as a God that justifies the Ungodlsy, he must believe as one that
works not, on him that justifies the Ungodly, Romans 4.5.

Observe. II. Sinners of all sorts, without difference, whether Jews, or
Gentiles that believe are the Subjects of this Justification. This is the Scope
of the Apostle to show that whereas Jews and Gentiles were universally
condemned by the Light and Law of Nature, or the Law written; so the
Righteousness of God is upon them all that believe, ver. 21, 22. without
difference. This was a great point to be defended against the Jews in the
Apostles times, who appropriated Justification to themselves, in a legal way,
and such were Proselites to the Law and Circumcision; and therefore the Apostle
Paul vehemently urged it, Romans 10.11, 12. and it was a point newly revealed to
the Apostles, that the Gentiles might be accepted without turning Jews, and
much prized as a very Glorious Revelation, Act. 10.28, 45. Ephesians. 3.4, 5, 18.
Col. 1.25, 26, 27. and it is confirmed

1. Because notwithstanding the Jews privilege of the Law, by reason of
breaking the law, they had as much need of Free Justification as the Gentiles,
and no worthyness above the Gentiles by their works, but rather greater
sinners, Romans 2.23, 24. and when there is equal need and worth, God might
righteously justify one as well as another, Romans 3.9.

2. God is the God of the Gentiles as well as the Jews, Romans 3.29. as he
promised, Romans 13.9, 12. Gal. 3.8. Isa. 19.25. Zach. 14.9.

3. Abraham was justified before he was circumcised, that he might be the
Father of those that believe though uncircumcised, that they might inherit the
same Blessing, Romans 4.10, 11, 12.

4. This will appear further by showing that Justification is only by Faith,
and without dependence upon the Law, merely by the righteousness of another;
and so Jews and Gentiles are alike capable of it.

Observe. III. That the Justifier or efficient cause of Justification is God.
It Is an Act of God, Romans 8.33. It is God that justifies, he only can justify
Authoritatively and Irreversibly.

1. Because he is the Lawgiver. and has power to save and destroy, Jam. 4.12.
this Case concerns God's Law, and can only be tried at his Tribunal, he is the
Judge of the World, Genesis 18.25. It is a small worthless thing to be justified
by Man or by our selves merely, 1 Cor. 4.3, 4.

2. To Him the Debt of suffering for Sin, and acting Righteousness is owed: And
therefore he only can give a discharge for payment, or release of the Debtor,
Psalm. 51.4. Mar. 2.7.

Observe. IV. God Justifies Souls freely by his Graec. (...), freely by his
Grace, one of these Expressions, had been enough, but this redoubling of it
shows the Importance of the truth to quicken our attention the more. Here is
the Impulsive cause of Justification, and his free manner of bestowing it
accordingly. And this signifies Gods free undeserved Favor in opposition to
any works of our Righteousness, whereby it might be challenged as a Debt to us,
Romans 4.4. Now to him that works is the reward not reckoned of grace but of
debt, Chap. 11.6. if by Grace then it is no more of works, otherwise Grace is
no more Grace; but if it be of Works, then it is no more Grace: otherwise Work
is no more Work, Ephesians. 2.8, 9. By Grace are ye saved through Faith; and that not
of your selves: it is the Gift of God: Not of works least any man should boast.
2 Timothy 1.9. Who has saved us, and called us with an Holy Calling, not
according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace which he
has given us in Christ Jesus, before the World began. Ver. 10. But is now made
manifest by the appearing, etc. Grace is mercy and love showed freely out of
Gods proper motion, showing mercy because he will show mercy, and loving us,
because he will love us, Romans 9.15. and this is confirmed

1. Because there was not, nor is any thing in us but what might move God to
condemn us, for we have all sinned, Ephesians. 2.3. Ezekiel. 16.6.

2. Because God would take away boasting, and have his Grace Glorified and
Exalted in our Salvation; He will have all the Praise and Glory, though we have
the Blessedness, Ephesians. 2.7, 9. that in the Ages to come he might show the
exceeding Riches of his Grace, in his kindness toward us through Jesus Christ;
and so Romans 3.27.

Observe. V. God Justifies Sinners through the Redemption that is in Jesus
Christ, whom God has set forth for a Propitiation through Faith in his Blood.
This is the effecting means, or material cause of our Justification, viz.
Redemption and Propitiation through the Blood of Christ which is the
Righteousness of God treasured up in him.

By Redemption is meant properly such a deliverance as is by paying of a Price;
and so the Words Redeem and Redemption are frequently used, Exodus 13.13. Numb.
3.48, 49, 51. Lev. 5.24, 51, 52. Jer. 32.7, 8 Neh. 5.8. from this proper
Signification it is borrowed to signify a deliverance without Price, Luke
21.28. Ephesians. 1.14. Chap 4.30. or rather by a Metonimy of the Cause, put for the
highest effect, the state of Glory; so that state of Glory is called
Redemption, as being the completing and crowning effect of Christ's Redemption,
therefore it is called the purchased Possession.

By a Propitiation is meant that which appeaseth the wrath of God for Sin, and
wins his Favor; and this Propitiation of Christ was two ways typified; First,
in the propitiatory Sacrifices whose Blood was shed, and the Mercy-seat, which
was called the Propitiation, because it covered the Ark wherein was the Law;
and the Blood of the Sacrifices for Atonement was sprinkled by the High Priest
before it; and this Mercy-seat was a sign of God's Favourableness to a sinful
People in residing among them, and was called, (...), Heb. 9.5.

Now this Doctrine appears confirmed for these Reasons.

1. Because Christ by the will of God gave himself a Ransom for us, to redeem
us from Sin and Punishment, Wrath and Curse, Tit. 2.14. He gave himself for us
to redeem us from all iniquity; He gave himself to Death for us, was delivered
for our Offenses, his Death was the Price of our Redemption, that we might be
justified in Gods Sight; God gave him up to Death, he spared him not, that he
might be made Righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.30. and Mat. 20.28. He gave his own life
a Ransom for many. And so 1 Timothy 2.6. He hereby bought us by this Price. 1
Cor. 6.6. He Redeemed us not with Silver and Gold, but with his precious Blood,
as of a Lamb without spot. 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. 2 Pet 2.1. Rev. 5.9. He suffering
the Penalty due to us for Sin. 1 Pet. 2.24. He bare our Sins in his Body on the
Tree. Gal. 3.13. He was made a Curse for us, thereby redeemed us from the Curse
of the Law; and that he might be made a Curse he was made sin for us, 2 Cor.
5.21. Isa. 53.5, 6. He subjected himself to the Law, both in active, as well as
passive Obedience. Gal. 4 4. And obeyed his Father even to Death, doing and
suffering at his Commandment, John 14.31. Heb. 10.7. And his Obedience was for
our Justification. Compare Romans 5.19. with Phil. 2.8. So Christ satisfied both
for our Debt of Righteousness, and Debt of Punishment, for our Faultiness,
taint of Sin, and want of Righteousness, as well as for our guilt and
obnoxiousness to punishment, that we might be free from Wrath and deemed
Righteous in God's Sight; His Suffering was the consummating Act of Redemption,
and so all is attributed to it, Heb. 2.9, 10. Even to his Blood, though other
doings and sufferings concur, 2 Cor. 8.9. We are righteous by him, as we were
guilty by Adam, Romans 5.12.

2 God accepted this Price as a Satisfaction to his Justice, which he showed in
raising Christ from the Dead, and so acquitting him from all our Sins; He was
justified by the Spirit, 1 Timothy 3. ult. for us, Romans 4. ult. raised for our
Justification, see Romans 8.34. It is God that Justifies: Who is he that
condemns? It is Christ that dyed, yea rather that is risen from the Dead. And
Heb. 10.5, 14. By one Offering he has perfected for ever them that are
sanctified. And Ephesians. 5.1, 2. This Sacrifice was a sweet smelling savor unto
God. If Christ had sunk under the weight of our sins, and not been raised, the
Payment had not been finished, and so the Debt not discharged, John 16.10. Of
Righteousness, because I go to my Father.

3. This Righteousness is in Christ as to the benefit of it; So that it cannot
be had, except we be in Christ, and have Christ: So the Text expresses and
shows that he is the Propitiation, and as so he is our Righteousness, 1 Cor.
1.30 We have Redemption and Righteousness in him. Ephesians. 1.7. 2 Cor. 5.21. And
therein our freedom from Condemnation. Romans 5.1. Christ dyed that his Seed
might be justified. Isa. 53.10, 11. Those that are in him by Spiritual
Regeneration, 1 Cor. 4.15.

Observe. VI. The formal cause of Justification, or that wherein it consists is
the Remission of Sin, i. e. not only the Guilt and Punishment is removed, but
fault, because it is a Pardon grounded on Justice, which clears the fault
also. By him we are justified from all things that the Law charge us with,
Act. 13.39.

In Men subject to a Law, there is no middle condition between not Imputing of
Sin and Imputing of Righteousness; and so these terms are used as Equivalent.
Act. 13.36, 39. Through this Man is Preached Forgiveness of sins: And by him
all that believe are justified, etc. Romans 4.6, 8. 2 Cor. 15.19, 21. Rom 5.17.
This is through the Bloodshed of Christ, Ephesians. 1.7. Mat. 26.28.

Observe. VII. God Justifies a Sinner through Faith in Christ's Blood. Faith is
the Instrumental Cause of receiving this Benefit, Faith in the Blood of Christ.

1. This Faith is believing on Christ, that we may be justified by him, Gal.
2.16. Knowing that a Man is not justified by the Works of the Law, but by the
Faith of Jesus Christ; even we have believed in Christ, that we might be
justified by the Faith of Christ, and not by the works of the Law; we believe
in Christ for Justification out of a sense of our inability to obtain
Justification by Works.

2. This Faith does not justify us, as an Act of Righteousness, earning and
procuring our Justification by the work of it, for this would have been
Justification by works, as under the Law, diametrically opposite to Grace, and
free Gift, which excludes all consideration of any works of ours, to be our
Righteousness under any denomination or diminutive terms whatever, whether
you will call it Legal or Evangelical, though you reckon it no more then the
payment of a Peppercorn, Romans 11.6. Faith in this case is counted a Not
working, Romans 4.5. And it is not Faith that stands in stead of the Righteousness
of the Law, but the Righteousness of Christ which satisfies for what we ought
to have done or suffered, as has been showed.

3. God Justifies by Faith, as the Instrument whereby we receive Christ, and
his Righteousness, by which we are Justified properly; and we are justified by
Faith only Metonymically, by reason of the Righteousness received by it; and to
be justified by Faith and Christ is all one, Gal. 3.8. Romans 5.1. By Faith we
receive remission of sins, Act. 26.18. and Chap. 10 43. Its effect is the
reception of Justification, not the working of it; as a man may be said to be
maintained by his hands, or nourished by his mouth, when those do but receive
that which nourishes; his food and drink; the Cup is put for the Liquor in the
Cup, 1 Cor. 11.26, 27. See Romans 1.17. and 13.22. Christ is in us by Faith, Ephesians.
3.17. perceived, eat, drunk, Joh. 1.12. Chap. 9.49, 53.

4. This Faith is to be understood Exclusively, to all our works for
Justification; we defend against the Papists Justification by faith only; and
there is nothing more sully expressed in Scripture Phrase, Romans 3.28. Gal.
2.16. Phil. 3.8, 9. Romans 4.16.

5. We must understand faith in a full sense of receiving Remission of the
sault, as well as of the punishment; we believe that God accounts not the fault
to us of the least sin; and where faith is said to be accounted for
Righteousness, it is because of the object it receives, Romans 4.6, 7, 8. 2 Cor.
5.19, 21. We believe Christ's Righteousness imputed to us, as our sins to him;
or else we receive not remission of Sins by believing, which is contrary to
charging us with sin and condemnation; which charging signifies imputing sin,
Romans 8.33, 34 together with the removal of the charge of sin we receive the
Gift of Righteousness, Romans 5.17. and this we have in the Reception of Christ's
Redemption and Bloodshed, Ephesians. 1.7. Mat. 26.28.

Obs. VIII. That God aimed, in setting forth Christ as a Propitiation through
Faith in his blood, to declare his Righteousness now under the Gospel, in the
remission of sins that are past, as well as present. Of those sins that were
past and committed under the Old Testament, which was Gods time of forbearing,
in pardoning long before his Justice was actually satisfied by Christ's
atonement, Heb. 13.8. Rev. 13.8. Mat. 18.26. The ground of those pardons is now
revealed by Christ's coming, Isa. 51.5, 6. and 56.1. Dan. 9.24. 2 Timothy 1.9, 10.
that this pardon may be no blemish to the Justice of God now satisfied, Exodus
34.7. Psalm. 85.10.

By his Righteousness is meant that Righteousness of God mentioned in the
Proposition; and Ver. 21, 22. of which the Text is but a confirmation, viz. The
Righteousness of God, not his Essential Righteousness; that which is an
Essential property of God, but a Righteousness which is upon all them that
believe, Romans 10.3, 4. Christ's Righteousness which is the end of the Law, and
therefore called God's Righteousness, that which Christ wrought for us, which
is given to us and we receive by Faith; that whereby Christ answered the Law
for us, by which as the price he redeemed us; which is called God's
Righteousness: because it is of God's working, and it only has God's
Acceptance and Approbation. As Christ is called the Lamb of God, because God
provided him and accepts him as an Offering, Joh. 1.29. Upon the like account
Christ's Kingdom is called the Kingdom of God: because God's own hand sets it
up, and maintains it, and rules it, Ephesians. 5.5. Christ that became obedient to
Death, to work this Righteousness, was God as well as Man; Phil. 2.6, 8. and
this is that Righteousness which the Apostle opposes to his own, that which is
in Christ which he had through Faith; and this is the Righteousness of God
here, and in other places, the righteousness which is of God by Faith, Phil.
3.9.

2. God aimed at declaring in Gospel Times his Righteousness in forgiving of
Sins past, in the time of God's forbearance under the Old Testament; and also
in justifying those that believe in Christ at present: For it was by the
Righteousness of the same Christ that Sins were pardoned under the Old
Testament, as well as now, Heb. 13.8. Christ was the Lamb slain from the
foundation of the World, Rev. 13.8. only the Righteousness was not actually
fulfilled and revealed then, but it was shaddowed out then by the Sacrifices,
Ransoms, Redemptions, etc. Heb. 10.1, 2, 3, 9, 10. So this was a time of God's
forbearance, because he pardoned sins, as it were without present payment and
satisfaction. He had patience and did not exact the Debt, until Christ paid
all, Mat. 18.26. but then God promised that he would reveal his Righteousness
in due time, Isa. 56.1. Chap. 51.5, 6. Psalm. 98.2. Dan. 9.24. and this he has
done by the appearance of Christ, 2 Timothy 1.10.

Observe. IX. The end of this Manifestation is, that God may appear just in
forgiving Sins past as well as present, and the Justifier of him that believes
in Jesus. Here the Essential property of God is exalted and appears glorious in
justifying by the forementioned Righteousness of God.

1. As God Justifies freely by Grace, he would appear hereby Just in
Justifying Sinners; for it would be a blemish to Gods Justice to forgive
without a Satisfaction, and Righteousness performed; and therefore though he be
Gracious and Merciful, yet he will not clear the Guilty, Exodus 34.7. Genesis
18.25. Exodus 23.7. And so the Saints of God concluded, that God had a
Righteousness and Redemption whereby he forgave Sin, though it was not then
revealed, Psalm. 5^.14. Psalm. 130.7, 8. and 143. God would have Justice and
Mercy to meet in our Salvation, Psalm. 85.10.

2. God would have it appear that he only is Just, and therefore saves us not
by our own Righteousness, but by his, which is indeed the more exalted by our
Unrighteousness occasionally, though God is not therefore unrighteous in taking
vengeance, Romans 3.5. Dan. 9.7.

3. God would appear to be the only procurer and worker of our Righteousness,
and so our Justifier by way of procurement, as well as by way of judgment, and
so he will justify us by a righteousness of his own, and not by our own, Isa.
54.17. Chapter 45.22, 24, 25. that we may Glory in the Lord only, 1 Cor. 1.30, 31.

Use. II. It serves for Instruction by way of Encouragement and Consolation.
That the great happiness of those that are in Christ, is, I hat their Sins are
forgiven, and they accounted Just in the sight of the Judge of all the World,
through the Redemption that is by the Blood of Christ; and this benefit
contains all Blessedness of Life, and the consequences thereof. Romans 4.6. That
Man, unto whom God imputes righteousness without works, has a blessedness
therein, and such an extensive blessedness, in regard of the Spiritual part, as
Abraham had, comprehending all Spiritual Blessings in Christ, for they that be
of Faith are blessed with faithful Abraham, Gal. 3.9. for this Righteousness
being the fundamental Blessing, is revealed from Faith to Faith, and they that
are by Faith Just and Justified through that Righteousness, do live by Faith,
always receiving it, and receiving nourishment and comfort by it, Romans 1.17.

1. They are delivered from the charge of sin and fault before God, Romans 8.33,
34. (...) who shall lay any thing to their charge, be suffered to bring in at
Gods Tribunal any Indictment, Charge or Accusation against them? it is God that
justifies them, and Christ has dyed and rose again. They are Redeemed from
amongst Men, being the first fruits to God and the Lamb; in their Mouth there
is no Guile, and they are without fault, (...), before the Throne of God, Rev.
14.5. See also Col. 1.2.

2. They are delivered from all Condemnation in Sentence and Execution; the
curse and wrath of God. Gal. 3.13. Christ redeemed us from the curse of the
Law, being made a curse for us. 1 These. 1.10. Jesus who has delivered us from
the wrath to come. Psalm. 85.3. Thou have taken away all thy wrath; thou have
turned thy self from the fierceness of thine anger. See v. 5.6. The wrath of
God is an unsupportable burden, and the foundation of all miseries, which
foundation is razed, and a foundation of blessedness laid, whereby we have
peace with God, and are fully reconciled to God, Romans 5.1. 2 Cor. 5.18, 19.
Col. 1.21, 22. Ye who were sometimes alienated, and enemies in your minds by
wicked works, yet now has he reconciled in the body of his flesh through
death, to present you holy and unblameable, and unreprovable in his fight. Now
where there is no blame before God, there can be no wrath from God.

3. They have no need to seek Salvation by Works of the Law, and so are
delivered from a Yoke that cannot be born, from endless observances that
Pharisees and Papists have heaped up, from the continual frights, doubts, fears
and terrors, by the Law, Act. 15.10. Romans 8.15. from a Wrath-working Law, Romans
4.15. from a Sin irritating Law, Romans 7.5. from a killing Law, a Ministration
of Death and Condemnation, 2 Cor. 3.6, 7, 9. Mount Sinai, which gendreth to
Bondage, Gal 4.24.

4. Hence they are delivered from a condemning Conscience, which otherwise
would still gnaw them as a Worm. Heb. 9.14. If the Blood of Bulls and Goats,
sanctified to the purifying of the flesh, how much more shall the blood of
Christ, who through the eternal spirit, offered himself without spot to God,
purge your conscience from dead works? etc. A guilty conscience is a foul
conscience, and it will make all his services and duties dead works, unfit for
the service of the living God; its the blood of Christ applied by Faith, that
takes off this foulness of guilt from the conscience, therefore the blood of
Christ has the only efficacy this way, to take off the conscience of Sin, Heb.
10.1, 2, 3, 4, etc. Hence they come to have a good conscience, 1 Pet. 3.21.
void of offense toward God, Act. 24.16.

5. It is an everlasting Righteousness by which their standing in Christ is
secured, Heb. 9.12. Its an eternal Redemption that is obtained. So Dan 9.24.
Whereas by the Law those that were justified to day typically, might fall under
condemnation so far as to need another sacrifice for Sin, they had no real
purgation of conscience from sin by those Sacrifices, and therefore could not
have a lasting delivery of their consciences from guilt by them; here it is far
otherwise, here is an effectual, complete and perpetual Redemption, reaching
the conscience of the Sinner, and for the purging away all sins past, present,
and to come, 1 John 1.7.

6. It Is a Righteousness of infinite value, because it is the Righteousness of
one that is God, and his Name is Jehovah, our Righteousness, Jer. 23.6. Heb.
9.14. It is therefore more powerful to save than Adams sin was to destroy or
condemn, Romans 5. Christ is here the power of God, 1 Cor. 1.24. thence we are
powerful, and conquer by Faith: likewise there is a marvelous plenty of Mercy
and Grace, that is brought to us by Jehovah our Righteousness, plenteous
Redemption, Psalm. 130.7. it must be most plentiful because infinite; though no
creature could satisfy for sin, yet Jehovah could do it abundantly, and
therefore in Christ Gods merey prevails high above our sins, Psalm. 103.11, 12.

7. Gods Grace and Justice is both engaged on our behalf in this Righteousness;
Justice is terrible, and seems to be against mercy, and dreadful to Natural
people, but it is otherwise to Believers, it is pacified and appeased through
this Righteousness, it is satisfied in Christ for our sins. Justice becomes our
Friend, joins in with Grace, and instead of pleading against us, it is
altogether for us, and it speaks contrary to what it speaks to sinners out of
Christ, Josh. 24.19, 20. We may also plead Justice for forgiveness through
mercy in Christ, Romans 3.26.

8. We may be sure of Holiness and Glory, of delivery from the power and
dominion of sin, as well as the charge of it before God, and guilt in our own
consciences, for this was the end of Christ's death, Tit. 2.14. Romans 6.6. Romans
8.3, 4. chapter 6.14. c. 8.30. Whom he has justified, them has he glorified: The
Law was the strength of Sin, for sin had its title to rule in us by reason of
the Curse, and thence Satan also rules; but here is our deliverance from Sin
and Satan, yea, from Death too, Heb. 2.14, 15. Hos. 13, 14. And by the same
reason we are raised by this excellent Righteousness, to a better State than we
had in Adam at first, for Christ died that we might receive the Adoption of
Sons and the Spirit, that we might be brought under a new Covenant, and be set
in the right way of Holiness, serving out of Love, Gal. 3.14. 1 John 4.19. Gal.
4.4 Heb. 9.15. Romans 5.11. Mat. 22.37, 38. Col. 2.13.

9. We may be sure hence of a concurrence of all things for our good, all
things shall work for good through Grace to bring us to Glory, because God is
for us, who is the Creator and Governor of all things, Rom 8.28, 31, 33. God
will never be wroth with us, nor rebuke us in anger any more, Isa. 54.9. Romans
5.3.

10. Hence we may come before God without confusion of face, yea, with boldness
to the Throne of Grace in Christ's Name, Joh. 14.13, 14. and expect all good
things of him, Ephesians. 3.12. in whom we have boldness of access with confidence by
says in him. Heb. 10.22, 23. Let us draw nigh with full assurance of faith,
Christ's blood pleads for us in Heaven, Heb. 12.14. and we may, and are to plead
boldly a satisfaction on his account.

11. We live in those times when this righteousness is fully revealed, and Sin
made an end of, Romans 3.21, 22. this is our happiness above those that lived
before Christ's coming, who were under Types and Shadows of this righteousness,
when as we have the substance in its own light, and so we are not under the Law
which they were under, as a Schoolmaster, we are not Servants but Sons, called
to liberty, Gal. 3.23, 26. and 4, 7. and 5, 13. The preaching of the old
Covenant as a Church Ordinance to be urged, now is ceased, the Law is not to be
preached now in the same terms as Moses preached it for Justification, Romans
10.5, 6, 7, 8. 2 Cor. 3.6, 7. Gal. 3.12, 21. its contrary in terms to says,
though it were subservient.

Use II. For Examination whether we be in Christ, and have received this
Justification by faith with all our hearts.

1. Consider whether you be made really sensible of Sin, and your Condemnation
by the Law, this is necessary to make us fly to Christ, and for this, as one
great end, was the Law given, Gal. 3.22, 23, 24. Mat. 9.13. Act. 2.37. without
sense of sin no prizing of Christ, or desire of Holiness, but rather abuse of
Grace to carnal security and licentiousness; those that were stung with the
fiery Serpents, looked up to the brazen Serpent.

2. Do thou trust only upon free mercy for Justification in Gods sight,
renouncing all thy works, whatever in this point, as not able to stand in them
before Gods exact Justice, crying mercy with the poor Publican? Perfectionists
and Self-righteous persons, have no share in this matter, Luke 18.13, 14. and
Paul, notwithstanding all that the World might think he had to plead for
himself, yet he counted all but dung, that he might win Christ, and be found in
him not having his own righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is of
the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith, i. e. the
redeeming and propitiation-righteousness of Christ, whereby he desired only to
be justified, and which he believed in for that end, opposing it to any thing
inherent in himself, which therefore he calls his own righteousness, Phil. 3.6,
8, 9. Romans 4.5.

3. Do thou trust with any confidence in Christ, not continuing in a mere
suspense? In a way of mere doubting we can receive no good thing from God,
James 1 6, 7. mere doubting will not loose the conscience from the guilt of
sin, Heb. 10.22. but leaves the Soul under terrors. Abraham's confidence is the
example and pattern of our justifying says, that we should endeavor to come
up unto believing with a fullness of persuasion in hope against hope, Romans
4.20, 24. though a believing Soul may be assaulted with many doubtings, but it
fights against them, and does not give up it self to the dominion of them,
Psalm. 42.11. Mar^ 9.24. it has always some thing contrary to them, and
striving with them.

4. Do thou come to Christ for Remission of Sins for the right end, namely,
That thou may be freed from the dominion of Sin before the Living God? Heb.
9.14. Psalm. 130. Tit. 2.14. 1 Pet. 2.24. otherwise thou do not receive it for
the right end, and desire not really the favor and enjoyment of God, and to
be in friendship with him.

5. Do thou walk in holiness, and strive to evidence this Justification by
the fruits of faith in good works, otherwise thy faith is but a dead faith, for
a true faith purifieth the heart? Act. 15.9. If Christ be thine, he will be
sanctification as well as righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.30. Romans 8.1.9. Joh. 13.8. If
God has taken thee into his favor he will doubtless cleanse thee; though
faith alone justify without the concurrence of works to the Act of
Justification, yet that faith is not so alone as not to be accompanied with
good works. As the eye alone sees, yet it is not alone without other Members.
So the Apostle James declares faith that is alone to be dead, and bids us
show our faith by our works, which is to be understood not as if works were the
conditions of attaining Justification, but sure evidences of Justification
attained by faith and very necessary, Jam. 2.14, 15. The Gospel is no Covenant
of works, requiring another righteousness for Justification by doing for life,
works justify us from such accusations of men, as will deny us to have
Justification by faith, or that we have a true and lively faith, or are good
Trees, Mat. 12.33, 37. not as being our righteousness themselves, or conditions
of our having Christ's righteousness, or qualifying us for it.

Use III. It serves for Exhortation to several Duties.

1. To the wicked, its dehortation unto them from continuance in sin, under
Gods wrath, running headlong to Damnation, for here is a door of Mercy opened
to them, a Righteousness prepared, that they may be freely accepted of God;
some men are Desperadoes; over Shoes over Boots, they are resolved to run the
risque of it, and please themselves, they shall speed as well as others: And
some men would be justified, but seek for it in some wrong way; some will go to
the Pope to quiet their Consciences by his Deceits, some to their own works and
performances, but you are Exhorted to look out for the true Righteousness.
Christ says in the Gospel, Behold me, behold me, the Kingdom of Heaven is
open, mercy and righteousness are freely offered, Isa. 55.6, 7. Jer. 3.12.
Repentance is preached with Remission of sins, Luke 24.47. Act. 2.38. Beware
you do not neglect this acceptable time, this day of Salvation, Heb. 2.1. For,

1. If you do, you remain under the wrath of God, Joh. 3.36. under the curse of
the Law, which like a Flood sweeps away all that are found out of this Ark, the
Lord Christ, Psalm. 11.5, 6.

2. Your condemnation will be aggravated by refusing so great Salvation, Heb.
2.3. you will have no cloak for your sins when you refuse mercy, Joh. 15.22.
you cannot say you are undone by your past sins beyond recovery, and therefore
it is in vain to strive, for behold Remission of sins is proclaimed unto you,
Ezekiel. 33.10, 11. and what an horrid sin is it to despise the blood of the Son
of God? Joh. 3.11.

Obj. I. If God justify the Ungodly, what need I forsake Ungodliness at all?
Romans 6.1.

A. Thou can not seek Justification truly, except thou have a mind to live to
God in friendship with him, for Justification is Gods way of taking us into
friendship with him, Romans 5.1, 2. and of reconciling us, 2 Cor. 5.19. The use
that thou art to make of it, it is to seek Gods friendship by it, and the
enjoyment of him; why does a Man seek a pardon if he intend to go on in
Rebellion, and stand out in desiance to his Prince? 1 Pet. 2.24. They seek
pardon in a mocking way that intend not to return to obedience, Gal. 6.7, 8.

Obj. II. My sins are so great that I have no encouragement to hope.

A. Christ's Righteousness is for all sorts of Sinners that believe, whether
Jews or Gentiles, and now great sinners were of both sorts, Romans 1.2. and 3.
and even for those that killed and murdered the Lord of glory, Act. 2. for the
chief of sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15. Act. 16. Where sin abounds grace superabounds,
Romans 5.20. your sins are but the sins of a Creature, but his righteousness is
the righteousness of God, Joh. 6.37. Romans 10.11, 13.

Exhort. II. It Exhorts those that have a mind to turn to God, to turn the
right way by faith in Christ for Justification. Let them not seek by Works as
most in the World do, and all are prone to do, Romans 9.31, 32. but this Doctrine
seems very foolish, yea, pernicious to a Natural man. Become a fool that thou
may be wise, 1 Cor. 3.18. otherwise you will labor in the sire, and weary
your selves for very vanity, and be under continual discomforts and
discouragements, for you can do no good work while you are in the flesh under
the Law, and its Curse, before God have received you into favor, for
Justification is in order of Nature before true Holiness of Heart and Life, 1 Timothy 1.5. Heb. 9.14. Faith is the great Work and Mother Duty, Joh. 6.29. Gal.
5.6. Isa. 55.2. therefore while you believe not, you dishonor Christ and his
Death, Gal. 2.21. chapter 5.2, 3, 4. therefore come boldly though a great sinner,
Act. 10.43. and seek Righteousness in Christ with Holiness, Romans 8.1.

Q. But how shall I get Faith?

A. Faith is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8. and by the Gospel, Romans 1.15. and 10,
17. Faith comes by hearing the Gospel preached, and that comes in working of
faith, not in word only, but in power, 1 These. 1.5. beyond what can be done by
natural or humane attainment, Joh. 6.63. therefore If thou have no beginning in
thee of it, thy only way is to attend to the Gospel, and to meditate on thy sin
and misery, and Christ's excellency, that so thou may be inclined in thy
heart to believe, Song. 1.3. Gal. 2.16. Ps. 9.10 for this is the way God uses
to beget faith, Isa. 55.3. But if thou have a desire and inclination to fly
from thy self to Christ in the bent of thy heart, so that thou preferrest
Christ above all, then the spirit has begun, and will carry on the work, so
that now thou may pray confidently for faith, Cant. 1.4. Luke 11.13. Mar.
9.24.

Obj. III. But without holiness no Man shall see God, Heb. 12.14. And how shall
I do to get holiness? And I cannot sanctify my self; and this confidence you
speak of may slacken my diligence.

A. If thou have Righteousness in Christ, God will make thee holy; and this
confidence is the only way to get Holiness because of that Righteousness, Romans
5.21. The new Covenant is confirmed in him which promises a new Heart; if sin
be forgiven, thou shall be delivered from the power, and quickened by the same
Death and Resurrection of Christ whereby thou art Justified, Col. 2.12, 13.

Exhort. III. It Exhorts them that are justified by Faith:

1. To walk humbly, as nothing of themselves, to acknowledge themselves Enemies
to God by Nature, and acknowledge sins in the greatness and heinousness of
them, that they are saved freely by a Righteousness of another, not by their
own, yea, so far fallen, that the Justice of God would have been against them
if it had not been satisfied, Psalm. 71.16. Romans 3.27. but now see that Christ
has satisfied, and his Righteousness is above their Sins, Ezekiel. 26.31.

2. To praise and glorify God through Christ for this Grace. Oh! what abundant
grace and love appears in Gods washing and cleansing us by his Sons blood, Rev.
1.5. Gal. 2.20. and in making his Son Sin and Curse for us, Romans 5.5, 8. 1 John
4.9, 10. Chapter 3.16, 2 Cor. 8.9. and what a glorious excellent Righteousness has
God given us in Christ, Isa. 61.10.

3. To walk comfortably upon the account of this Righteousness, Isa. 40.1, 2.
Triumph over Sin and Affliction, Romans 8.33.39. Be confident in expecting great
things from God, Heb. 10.22. for though you be unworthy, and grace will show
you your own unworthiness, yet you stand upon the Righteousness of Christ,
glory in the hope of Gods glory, for if Christ died to reconcile you when you
were Enemies, much more will he save you by his life now you are reconciled,
Romans 5.3. 10. Ask boldly for what you want, for God is in Christ's Manhood as
the Mercy-seat; when ever Sin stings you, and objections trouble you, look to
the Brazen Serpent, confess Sin and trust for Pardon, meditate on Christ's
Righteousness, and the abundance of grace in him, Romans 8.32. If you find never
so much Ungodliness, no good qualifications, yet Christ is at hand for your
comfort, Isa. 50.10. 2 These. 2.16, 17. In all your Sins apply your selves to
this Fountain. Zach. 13. 1 John 1.7. If Sin lie on conscience, it weakens peace
and spiritual strength; lie not under guilt with a slavish fear, you have a
Righteousness to deliver you from it, applying it by Faith, that you may have
no more conscience of Sin as condemning, Heb. 10.2. Psalm. 32. you have a better
Righteousness than any Perfectionists can have.

Exhort. IV. Hold fast this way of Justification, notwithstanding all the noise
that is made in the World against it, for the Devil will strive to scare you
out of it, or steal it from you, as he did from the Jews, from the Galatians,
the Papists, and many Protestants. Gal. 1.6. And the Apostle reckons it is by a
Spiritual bewitchery he will strive to get you to trust on Works, and tell you
it is for the promoting of Holiness, and to trust on Works to get Christ, and
to lay Works lowest in the foundation: If you lose this Righteousness of Christ
under any color or pretense whatever you lose all. Gal. 5.2, 3. Do not so
dishonor Christ as to think of procuring that by Works which you have fully in
Christ; think not that the Gospel requires another Justification to gain this,
for the Gospel is no legal Covenant, but a Declaration of the Righteousness of
Faith, and we being Justified are Heirs by Adoption and Promise, Gal. 3.25.
This is the Doctrine which glorifieth God and abaseth the Creature, which is a
great mark of its truth: Beware therefore of carnal reason, which will go quite
contrary, and make Christ's righteousness a stumbling Stone to thee, 1 Pet. 2.8.
Romans 9.32, ^3.

V. Walk as one that enjoys the favor of God in Christ: Let him have the
honor of it, walk therefore in Holiness, knowing by what price you are
redeemed, 1 Pet. 1.17, 18. 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. 2 Pet. 1.5, 11. 1 Cor. 6. last.
Love God that has loved you first, 1 John 4.19. Psalm. 116.16. Believe that God
will enable to Holiness, Romans 6.14. Particularly, walk in Love to the Saints,
exercise forgiveness to your Enemies; sense of your own Sins, and Gods
forgiving you, will cause you to pity and forgive others, else you cannot pray
or trust for forgiveness of your own Sins upon reasonable grounds, Ephesians. 4.31,
32. Mat. 6.14, 15. Mat. 18.21. Desire grace may be exalted upon others, and
wait patiently for the full Declaration of Justification at the great day, Gal.
5.5. Act. 3.19. for here your Justification is known only by Faith, but in
outward things you are dealt with as a Sinner; then your Righteousness shall
appear openly, and you shall be dealt with according to it.

FINIS.

