THE WORKS OF MR Stephen Marshall, late Minister of the Gospel at
Finching-Field in Essex. And since at Ipswitch in Suffolk. THE FIRST PART. VIZ.
I. Of Christ's Intercession. And of Sins of Infirmity. II. The High Privilege
of Believers. They are the Sons of God. III. Faith the only means spiritually
to feed on Christ. IV. Of Self-Denial. V. The Saints Duty to keep their Heart
in a Good Frame, etc. VI. The Mystery of Spiritual Life.


Attested By Ralph Venning. Thomas Lie. Thomas Jacomb.


LONDON: Printed by Peter Cole, and Edward Cole, Printers and Booksellers, at
the Sign of the Printing-press in Cornhil near the Royal Exchange. 1661.

BEcause it is usual to abuse Readers in thrusting forth broken Notes under the
Names of Authors that are of Repute: These are to Attest the following fifty
Sermons on several Texts; Were Preached by MR Stephen Marshall; And are now
Published by the most perfect Copy.

Ralph Venning. Thomas Lie. Thomas Jacomb.


Books Printed by Peter Cole, and Edward Cole, Printers and Book sellers of
London, at the Exchange.
Mr. Buroughs* WORKS viz. on Matthew. 11.
1 Chirsts call to all those that are Weary and Heavy Laden to come to him for
Rest. 2 Christ the Great Teacher of Souls that come to him. 3 Christ the Humble
Teacher of those that come to him. 4 The only Easy way to Heaven. 5 The
Excellency of holy Courage. 6 Gospel Reconciliation. 7 The Rare Jewel of
Christian Contentment. 8 Gospel Worship. 9 Gospel-Conversation. 10 A Treatise
of Earthly Mindedness. 11 Exposition of the Prophecy of Hosea. 12 The Evil of
Evils, or the exceeding sinfulness of Sin. 13 Precious Faith. 14 Of Hope. 15 Of
Walking by Faith.
Twenty one several Books of Mr. William Bridge, Collected into two Volumes.
Viz.
1 Scripture Light the most sure Light. 2 Christ in Travel. 3 A Lifting up for
the cast down. 4 Sin against the Holy Ghost. 5 Sins of Infirmity. 6 The false
Apostle tiled and discovered. 7 The good and means of Establishment. 8 The
great things Faith can do 9 The great things Faith can suffer. 10 The Great
Gospel Mystery of the Saints Comfort and Holiness, opened and applied from
Christ's Priestly Office 11 Satan's power to Tempt and Christ's Love to, and Care
of his People under Temptation. 12 Thankfulness required in every Condition. 13
Grace for Grace. 14 The Spiritual Actings of Faith through Natural
Impossibilities. 15 Evangelical Repentance. 16 The Spiritual Life, and in being
of Christ in all Believers. 17 The Woman of Canaan. 18 The Saints Hiding place,
etc 19 Christ Coming etc. 20 A Vindication of Gospel Ordinances. 21 Grace and
Love beyond Gifts.
New Books of Mr. Sydrach Simpson. VIZ.
1 Of Unbelief; or the want of readiness to lay hold on the comfort given by
Christ. 2 Not go^ing to Christ for Life and Salvation is an exceeding great
Sin, yet Pardonable. 3 Of Faith, Or, That believing is receiving Christ; And
receiving Christ is believing. 4 Of Coveteousness.
Mr. Hookers New Books in three Volumes: One in Octavo, and two in Quarto.
These Eleven New Books of Mr. Thomas Hoo^ker made in New-Edgland. Are attested
in an Epistle by Mr. Thomas Goodwin, and Mr. Philip Nigh, To be written with the
Authors own hand: None being written by himself before. One Volum being a
Comment upon Christ's last Prayer on the seventeenth of John. Wherein is
showed. 1 That the end why the Saints receive all glorious Grace, is, That they
may be one, as the Father and Christ are one. 2 That God the Father loves the
Faithful, as he loves Jesus Christ 3 That our Savior desires to have the
Faithful in Heaven with himself. 4 That the happiness of our being in Heaven,
is to see Christ's Glory. 5 That there is much wanting in the knowledge of Gods
Love, in the most able Saints. 6 That the Lord Christ lends daily direction,
according to the daily need of his Servants. 7 That it is the desire and
endeavor of our Savior, that the dearest of Gods Love, which was bestowed on
himself, should be given to his faithful servants, 8 That our Union and
Communion with God in Christ, is the top of our happiness in Heaven.
Ten Books of the Application of Redemption by the Effectual Work of the Word,
and Spirit of Christ, for the bringing home of lost sinners to God. By Thomas
Hooker.
D. Hills WORKS. The Kings Trial at the High Court of Justice. Wise Virgin.
Published by Mr. Thomas Weld, of New England. Mr. Rogers on Naaman the Syrian,
his Disease and Cure: Discovering the Leprosy of Sin and Self-love; with the
Cure; viz. Self-denial and Faith. A Godly and Fruitful Exposition, on the first
Epistle of Peter. By Mr. John Rogers, Minister of the word of God at Dedham in
Essex. Mr. Rogers his Treatise of Marriage. The Wonders of the loadstone. By
Samuel Ward of Ipswitch. An Exposition on the Gospel of the Evangelist St.
Matthew. By Mr. Ward. The Discipline of the Church in New England By the
Churches and Synod there. Mr. Brightman on the Revelation. Christians
Engagement for the Gospel, by John Goodwin. Great Church Ordinance of Baptism.
Mr Loves Case, containing his Petitions, Narrative, and Speech. A
Congregational church is a Catholic Visible Church. By Samuel Stone in
New England. A Treatise of Politic Powers. Dr. Sibbs on the Philippians. Vox
Pacifica, or a Persuasive to Peace. Dr. Prestons Saints submission, and Satan's
Overthrow. Pious Man's Practice in Parliament time. Barriffs Military
Discipline. The Immortality of man's Soul. The Anatomist Anatomized. The Bishop
of Canterbury's Speech. Woodwards Sacred Balance. Dr. Owen against Mr. Baxter.
Abraham's Offer, Gods Offerings: Being a Sermon by Mr. Herle, before the Lord
Major of London. Mr. Spurstows Sermon, being a Pattern of Repentance. Englands
Deliverance. By Peter Sterry. The Way of God with his People in these Nations
By Peter Sterry. Mr. Sympson's sermon at Westminster. Mr. Feaks sermon before
the Lord Major. The best and Worst Magistrate. By Obediah Sedgwick. A sermon. A
Sacred Panegyric. By Stephen Marshal. A sermon. The Craft and Cruelty of the
Churches Adversaries. By Matthew Newcomen of Dedham. A sermon. Clows
Chyrurgery. Marks of Salvation.
Mr. Stephen Marshals New WORKS. VIZ.
1 Of Christ's Intercession, or of sins of Infirmity. 2 The high Privilege of
believers, They are the Sons of God 3 Faith the Means to feed on Christ. 4
Self-denial. 5 The Saints Duty to keep their Hearts, etc. 6 The Mystery of
spiritual Life.
Several Physic Books of Nich. Culpeper Physician and Astrologer; and A. Cole,
etc.
1 Idea of Practical Physic in twelve Books. 2 Sennertus thirteen Books of
Natural Philosophy. 3 Sennertus two Treatises. 1. Of the Pox. 2 Of the Gout.
Sennertus Art of Chyrurgery in six Parts. 1. Of Tumors. 2. Of Ulcers. 3. Of the
Skin Hair and Nails. 4. Of Wounds. 5. Of Fractures. 6. Of Luxations. 4 Twenty
four Books of the Practice of Physic, being the Works of that Learned and
Renowned Doctor, Lazarus Riverius. Physician and Councellor to the late King,
etc, 5 Riolanus Anatomy. 6 Veslingu^ Anatomy of the Body of Man. 7 A
Translation of the New Dispensatory, made by the College of Physicians of
London. Wherein is added. The Key to Galens Method of Physic. 8 The English
Physician Enlarged. 9 A Directory for Midwives, or a Guide for Women. 10 Galens
Art of Physic. 11 New Method both of studying and practicing Physic. 12 A
Treatise of the Rickets. 13 Medicaments for the Poor, Or Physic for the Common
People. 14 Health for the Rich and Poor, by Diet without Physic.
The London Dispensatory in Folio, of a large Character in Latin.

The London Dispensatory in twelves, a small Pocket Book in Latin.

To the Physical Reader.
THe greatest Reason that I could ever observe why the Medicines prescribed in
these Books above mentioned, and in many other Physic Books, do not perform
the Cures promised, is, the unskilfulness of those that make up the Medicines.
I therefore advise all those that have occasion to use any Medicines to go or
send to Mr. Ralph Clarke Apothecary at the sign of the three Crowns on
Ludgate Hill, in London; where they shall be sure to have such as are skilfully
and honestly made.

The Printer to the Reader.
I Have in my hands diverse other works of Mr. Stephen Marshals, which for their
excellency and variety of matter are highly esteemed by all that heard them
preached, Or have read them in writing. I intend to print them in several small
Books, that they may not be above the reach of a poor man's purse. The Subjects
on which they treat are Chiefly these that follow.

VIZ.

1. Of the Covenant of Grace, And the great privileges the Saints have thereby.
2. Formal Professors seldom become sincere. 3. Reformation and turning to God,
the only means to prevent Ruin. 4. Christ the Prince of Peace. 5. The
Excellency of Christ's Kingdom. 6. How Freedom come by Christ. 7. The Union
between Christ and Believers. 8. The Riches of the Saints through the Poverty
of Christ 9. How Christ is the Head of the Church. 10. Christ and his Seed have
sufficient strength to destroy their Enemies. 11. Christ the Bridegroom,
Believers are his Bride. 12. No Participation of Christ but by Faith. 13. Faith
so precious a Grace, that Christ is glad of any thing that may further it. 14.
An Humble Spirit Infinitely acceptable to God. 15. Great Joy to all that Mourn
in Zion. 16. The double Recompense the Godly shall have after their affliction.
17. The Happiness of the Saints under the Cross 18. The untimely Death of good
men a Ground of Great Lamentation. 19. The Magistrates Dignity, Duty and
Usefulness. 20. The Churches Danger, Deliverance and Duty. 21. The Churches
praise unto God for their Deliverance. 22. A great Mercy in God to prevent his
Peoples ingageing one against another in Blood. 23. Gods Chosen Ones are the
Preventors of destruction. 24. Men's Misery is only from themselves, Their
Deliverance is only from the Lord. 25. The Pearl of the Gospel. 26. How the
Gospel is the Power of God to Salvation. 27. It Is impossible for true Believers
totally and finally to fall away. 28. Parents Duty to their Children. 29.
Provision for the Poor. 30. The Great Judgment of Famine. 31. Of the Sacrament.
The CONTENTS of the first Book of Mr. Stephen Marshals Works.
VIZ. Of Christ's Intercession or Sins of Infirmity.
SERMON, I. On 1 John 2.1. And if any man sin, we have an Advocate with the
Father Jesus Christ the Righteous.
THe scope of the Epistle Opened Page 1, 2, 3. The words of the Text explained
Page 3, 4. Doct. That the Lord Jesus Christ's Intercession in Heaven, is the
great daily Relief that all the Saints (...) diligentest, their watchfulest
work in the world to keep their hearts in a good frame when once the Lord in
mercy has put them into a good frame Page 132, 133 Reasons of the Point. Reas.
1. Because the Heart is beyond all comparisons the best part of Man, it is the
Head Quarter Page 142 Reas. 2. Because the Heart is not only the best part of
Man, but it is the Treasury, wherein better things are laid up than it self.
Quest. What are the Treasures laid up in the heart of a gracious Man? Answer 1.
The great God chooses the Heart of every Godly man for his Privy and Presence
Chamber. 2. Christ Jesus dwells there; Emmanuel dwells there, in whom are bid,
all the Treasures of God. 3. The Holy Ghost dwells there too, the Heart of every
Godly man, is his Temple. 4. All the Graces of the Spirit of God are laid up
there. 5. The Word that is the the rule of our life is laid up there

Reas. 3. Because the Lord whom we profess to serve looks only at the Heart in all the Sacrifices we perform to him. Reas. 4. The Devil makes all his Assaults
and Batteries against the Heart, and counts all his labor lost if he get not
into the Heart. Reas. 5. Because the Heart is not to be trusted, but is
deceitful, false, cosening, even the Heart of the best man in the world 139
Reas. 6. Because out of it are the Issues of Life* thy whole Conversation will be
as thy Heart is kept.
Use 1. Serves to reprove thousands with a bitter reproof who would fain go for
Children of God and yet 1, They are exact in keeping their Houses etc, but
neglect their Hearts. Page 143, 144 2. Others are curious about their Bodies,
to Feed, Physic, Adorn them but neglect their Hearts. Others are careful also
of their manners and Conversation to avoid scandal and yet neglect their
Hearts. 4, Others keep indeed their Hearts but slightly, they do not keep them
above all keepings Page 146
Use 2. This is a Doctrine of wonderful consolation (though it carry just
rebuke with it) to al whose Consciences witness that their greatest care is to
purge and keep their Hearts Page 147 Use 3. To exhort all men for the time to
come to make this their study to keep their Hearts. Before this can be done, I.
The Lord must break the Heart to pieces and new mold it And then you must 1.
Keep it pure from Sin. 2. Keep it fit for Duty.


The Life of Christ, or the great Mystery of Spiritual Life. SERMON I.
THe Text Opened, Page 1, 2, 3 Doctrine 1. Every Soul that has Interest in
Christ, while he is in this world, it is in Christ that lives in him. Doctrine
2. The manner of their living this Life in this world it is by Faith. For
Explication consider that There is a twofold life. 1. A Natural life, which we
have from Adam. 2. A Spiritual Life which flows from the second Adam.
Quest.What is this spiritual life. Answ.It is a Participation of Christ's
Righteousness, upon the Souls union with him. Use 1. Shows how necessary it is
that we should all try and examine our Souls whether we are partakers of this
Life or No. Page 20 Considerations to stir up to this examination. 1. That in
Truth this alone is Christianity: there is nothing Christianity but the Life of
Christ. 2 Abundance of things go for this Life which are not this Life.
Quest. How shall we know this Life? Answ. By these two Characters. 1
Wheresoever the Lord gives Life to any Creature in a Natural way, the life is
the Preciousest thing in the world to that Creature: and so among all that live
the life of Christ there is nothing in this world so dear to them, as their
Spiritual Life is. Which valuation of the said Life appears in these three
things. Page 22 1 In a Natural propensity and inclination and appetite toward
those things that are the nourishment of this Life. 2 In a most vehement
declining of what they know to be destructive to this life. 3 In a willingness
to part with any thing to save this spiritual Life. Page 24
The second Character of this Spiritual Life. 2 Consists in some things that
are the proper beatings of the pulse as it were of the Soul. Arguments of this
spiritual Life. A^, 1 The Natural motion of this spiritual Life is to enjoy God
in Jesus Christ as their chiefest good; this is the great thing wherein the
souls pulse beats. 2 There is a Natural making out of the Heart toward
holiness, righteousness, love, kindness mercy, pity. Page 27 3 The Soul that
is alive unto Christ, is guided by the word it is his Card, his compass, his
Square, his Meetwand, his Eye Looking to the word as his only Guide. Who are
strangers to the Life of Christ? 1 All that know not Christ 2 All that live to
their Lusts. 3 All that live to the World. 4 All that live to their Pleasures.


Use, 2. This serves to comfort those that live this life considering that. 1
This is the highest, noblest, most excellent Life that ever any Creature did
partake of. 2 This is the sweetest of all Lives, for in all other lives men
taste but the sweetness of the Creature, but in this the sweetness of God and
Christ. 3 It is the greatest pledge of Gods love he gives to any. 4 Christ
being the fountain of this life you may be bold to rely upon him for the
preservation of it. Page 32
Use, 3. To persuade all men to study and seek after this life.
SERMON, II.
DOCT. 2. That life of Christ which all Gods people live in this world, they
live it by Faith The DOCTRINE is. 1 Demonstrated from scripture that it is so,
that the whole Life of a Christian is led by Faith. 2 It is opened by showing
what the Holy Ghost means by this, and what it is for a Soul to live the life
of Christ by Faith. Page 35
Use, 1. Hence we may safely and sadly conclude, that amongst the great
multitudes of those that challenge the Name of Chrstians, there are very few
that are really Christians. For, 1 Many are Ignorent of Christ. 2 Many never
trouble themselves at the very Doctrine of Faith. 3 Many live to their lusts. 4
Multitudes live to the world. 5 Many live to their own wills.
Use, 2. Real Christians ought to lament nothing so much as their unbelife.
Quest. Do you think that the people of God are so much guilty of it? Judge by
these Signs. 1 Our not studying of the Word 2 Our little Valueing of the Word.
3 Our unevenness in our whole course. 4 Our deviations and use of unlawful means.

SERMON, III.
Use, 3. This shows what kind of Christians they must needs be who can live in
the Flesh above Word and Ordinances, having no use of them, and (as they think)
nothing to do with them, but live in an immediate communion with God and
enjoyment of him. Use, 4. To make this living by Faith better known to the
Lords people and more exactly practiced then it has been hitherto. For
encouragement to study this art of living by Faith, consider. 1 If you will be
Christians you have no other Mystery to maintain your lives but Faith. 2 All
other ways of life that any man pitches, upon will shortly appear to be but a
poor thing, 3 This Mystery of living by Faith is the best Life the most
desirable Life that any Man or Woman can live, til they come to enjoy God
immediately.
The Excellency of this Life opened in Particulars. 1 It is the life which the
Lord has chosen out to be the life of those that he loved from all Eternity. 2
It is most honorable to us. 3 In this world it is the easiest Life. To live by
Faith is the easiest Life under Heaven. 4 It is the best Life because it is the
surest Life. Page 64
Question. How shall we do to live this Life? Answer. 1 The Grace of Faith is
the principal of his Life. 2 If you would live the Life of Faith, labor to be
well acqainted with God, especially with God in Christ. 68 3 Study to be
acquainted with the word. 4 Faithfully and Conscientiously serve the Lord, in
the use of means. Page 73
Two Cautions to be taken in with these directions. When it is said we must use
means, and thus live by Faith, the meaning is. 1 That when we have done we must
not limit God; God limits you and limits me, but Faith must not limit him, as
to the way how, or time when be shall make^ good. Page 74 2 When you are
directed thus to live the life of Faith you must take heed of some other
Principles, viz. your own Reason and your own sense.
The Premises considered it is sad to think. 1 How the common People of the
world live amongst us, being wholly Ignorant of these things, and setting their
Hearts upon wealth and Pleasure and Honor and such perishing things. Page 76 2
It is sad to think how many Souls that are Godly and study the Scriptures and
attend upon the word, yet had rather study nice controversies and things that
engender strife, then this great comprehensive Duty of living to Christ, and
living by Faith. Page 77

FINIS.
CHRIST'S INTERCESSION, OR Sins of Infirmity: Opened in a Sermon at Paul's,
November. 19. 1654
1 John 2.1, 2. My little Children these things write I unto you that you sin
not (now follows my Text) And if any man sin, we have an Advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous; And he is the Propitiation for our sins,
and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world.


THe whole scope of the blessed Apostle in this Letter of his, is, as himself
teaches us, to confirm the people of God, to build them up in that great
Article of their Faith, and their great privilege which is, the Communion of
Saints. He tells you in the beginning, he writes to them that they might have
Communion with himself and the rest of the Apostles, whose Communion is with
God the Father and is Son Jesus Christ; presently he proceeds to show wherein
this Communion stands, which he does express,

First, More generally: It is to walk in the light; when all the world walks in
darkness; they by virtue of their fellowship should walk in the light, And then,

Secondly, Explains this more particularly, in the subsequent discourse; and
shows that by walking in the light he mainly intends walking in holiness, that
is, to abominate and abandon the ways of sin, and to live as becomes those
that are born of God in holiness and righteousness, and this is the plot of the
whole Epistle. And then he begins with the first branch of it, and that is, to
depart from the ways of sin, and sets down this conclusion, That if any man do
pretend Communion with Jesus Christ and walk in sin, he is a mere Dissembler,
he has not one dram of Communion with God and Jesus Christ; That is a certain
rule, no man that has Communion with Jesus Christ can walk in a sinful life,
but every branch of the great things that Christ bestows upon his people, the
purport and intent of them all is, to make them leave sinning, that they wholly
overthrow the very tenor of the Gospel, who talk of believing in Christ and
walk in a Godless life. Now this first Branch the Apostle prosecutes at large,
both in the first Chapter, and in this second Chapter, and begins the second
Chapter thus, Now all these things do I write to you* that you sin not, and
presently at the 3d verse takes it up again, (says he) If any man know him he
must walk as he walks, and so proves it by many Arguments. Now (Brethren) you
shall see the intent of my Text: The Apostle knowing what an uncomfortable
Doctrine this would be if it were not explained, how uncomfortable it would be
even to the best of Gods Saints and people, he prevents the sad objection that
every gracious heart would be ready to make; for when he has set down this for
his Conclusion: He that is in Christ cannot sin, he cannot sin, he deceives
himself if he talks of Christ and sins, Why? A poor Soul would presently come
out and say, Then am I utterly undone, I have then no interest in Christ, for I
sin, I sin daily, I cannot live without it, I cannot perform one Duty but my
corruption is intermingling it self with it; woe be to me if that Doctrine go
for current, that he has nothing to do with Christ that sins. Now by way of
Prolepsis the Apostle anticipates this objection, and cleers the mind of God
about it, and then proceeds further to prosecute his Doctrine, and it is laid
down in these words, But if any man sin, let him know that we have an Advocate
with the Father Jesus Christ the righteous, who is the Propitiation for all our
sins, and not only ours that are Jews, but throughout all the world if they be
Believers: This he lays down to stay the hearts of Gods people in reference to
that sadness, that they would be ready to be overwhelmed with. Now (Brethren)
because there is but one main Doctrine that I intend to insist upon, I will but
briefly explain the words to you, and then I will propound the Doctrine.

First, When the Apostle says, If any man do sin, he thereby plainly implies,
that there are certain sorts of sins, that even Gods Children though they dare
not commit sin nor walk in sin, yet even Gods own Children (for them he speaks
to, my little Children I write this to you, (I say) there are sins that Gods
own people) are overtaken with, even after they have fellowship and Communion
with Jesus Christ; that is the first thing that he takes for granted. Then,

Secondly, To that he adds, But (says he) if any man sin, that is, when we do
thus sin, when Gods people do thus sin, What then? We have an Advocate, (that
you all know the meaning of,) one that pleads our cause, that is the office
of an Advocate, to appear in behalf of another in his cause: We have an
Advocate with the Father above in Heaven at his right hand, that is, Jesus
Christ our Lord who died for us, and loved us, and gave himself for us, he
appears in Heaven for us, yea, he is Jesus Christ the righteous; that is,
though he be so righteous that he will never plead an ill cause, yet this is a
part of his righteousness, to intercede and appear in the behalf of his own
people, even when they sin against him; Jesus Christ the righteous who is the
Propitiation for our sins; that is, who once upon earth offered himself up a
Sacrifice to satisfy for them, and now in Heaven pleads the benefit and virtue
of it for ever in the behalf of his people. And not for ours only; that is, we
that are Jews, but for the sins of the whole world, supposing still he speaks of
the same matter, of those that believe in Christ, that have Communion with him
throughout the world, Rich and Poor, Young and Old, Jew and Gentile, this is a
truth to them all; When Gods people sin, Jesus Christ the righteous, at Gods
right hand makes mediation for them. So the words thus briefly paraphrased
upon do afford us this Doctrine, (which is the only Lesson that I intend to
handle this day,) namely,

Doct. That the Lord Jesus Christ's intercession in Heaven, is the great daily
relief that all the Saints have upon Earth against their daily sins.

A Doctrine which at the very first propounding Promises not only comfort to
Believers, but carnal men they will be ready to promise themselves liberty,
(though I hope without cause (by that time I have done with it,) but Jesus
Christ's mediation in Heaven is the great relief to all Gods Saints upon earth,
against the daily sins that they are overtaken with. Now (Beloved) that I may
handle this Doctrine for your profit, there are two questions which (God
willing) I shall endeavor to clear, (and that will be the sum of all my work, the
discussing of them.) First,

Quest. 1. What sins the Lords Children and People are liable to while they are
in this world, what those sins are that the Children of God may be overtaken
with while they live in this world. Secondly,

Quest. 2. I will show you how the Intercession of Jesus Christ is the great
relief to Gods Children against these sins.

For the first,

First, What are those sins which the Lords people, his own Children are liable
to while they live in this world? And to make you the more attentive to it, be
pleased to note that there are two Conclusions about sin, laid down so clearly
in the Scripture, yea, in this very Epistle, that they almost seem to
contradict one another, and therefore it is of great weight to have that
cleared. First,

1. Nothing clearer then this, That he that is born of God does not sin, nor
cannot sin, and if a man say he has communion with Jesus Christ and walks in
sin, he is a Liar and deceives his own Soul; Nothing clearer then this in this
Epistle; So likewise in Romans, 6. How can we that are dead to sin Live any
longer therein; Sin cannot have dominion over you, you are not under it, you
are under Grace; This is a clear proposition, A Child of God cannot sin.

2. Yet on the other side it is as clear, that if any man that calls himself
the Child of God say he has no sin, he is a Liar, it is rather an Argument he
has no grace; In many things we sin all; Nothing clearer then that the people
of God, his dearest Children do sin. Paul in the name of them all, talks of
being sold under sin, carrying a body of sin about him; now these two must of
necessity have such an interpretation, as to justify the truth of God in it.
Be pleased then to know thus much, that when the Scripture speaks so positivly
and clearly, of the Children of God not sinning, that they cannot commit sin,
the meaning is this, That whereas the way of sin (mark it, the way of sin) is
the only way that al men walk in before they come to Christ, as conceive it
thus, when men first fell from God, while he stood in his integrity God was his
end, God was his portion, God was his rule, but when man fell from God, the whole
corruption of man's nature stood in these two things, That now he was turned
away from God, and fallen into the Creature, and there he continues til a new
life be communicated, let him do what he will, let him pray, let him read, let
him hear, let him walk in works of justice and righteousness, and still he is
but within the compass of enjoying the creature, and living to the creature,
making himself and the good that he can find in the creature his portion, which
is a turning off from God and this is one way of sin, and thus all the men in
the world walk, that although it be true, yet some of their sins are greater
then others, and aggrauated by some circumstances, yet look as it is with a man
that is in prison, though the prison may be very large, and he may sometimes
walk East, West, North, and South, and do some things more clean, and some
things more gross, yet they are al done within that compass of the prison; So
take a man not in the state of Grace, the end he aims at is himself, the rule
he walks by is somewhat that may yield contentment to him from the creature, and
beyond all this no living man goes til God give him a new life. Now when the
Lord vouchsafes to call a man home to Jesus Christ, and planteth in him a new
principle of a new life, then the Soul returns home to God, now for time to
come God is his portion, and the way that may lead him to the enjoyment and
knowledge of God, is his only way to which he resignes up himself, and makes it
his daily study and trade to walk in it: now here is his way, that as to an
unconverted man the creature is his way, and al things that may make him enjoy
the creature, or settled in the creature is his way, but the new man he has no
way but approaching to God, aspiring up to him, drawing nigher to him, being
made more like to him, this is his way, but now while he intends this way,
(mark it) he being converted but in part, he knows his way but in part, and
therefore sometimes misseth it for want of light, he sometimes likewise stumbles
in the right way for want of strength, sometimes a violent temptation takes him
and turns him a little out of the way for want of good take-heed; these kind
of sins Gods Children are liable to while they live in this world; So that the
sum of it is this, no reigning sin, a sin that shall have dominion over him to
carry him from God, and settle him upon the creature can be compatible with the
state of a converted man; but yet frailties and weaknesses for want of strength
those are his sins, and they and no other are the sins that Gods Children are
liable unto. So that the thing I have brought you to is, to show you, that the
Saints while they live in this world are compassed with infirmities, and only
with infirmities; concerning which (because it is a great Doctrine) I intend
(the Lord assisting me) to open these three things, and that will be the sum of
this first Question, What the sins are.

Three things I will open to you about the sins of infirmities wherewith Gods
people are compassed while they live; The first is,

First, I will show you the nature of them, the nature of a sin of infirmity.

Secondly, I will show you the kinds of them, what kinds of sins of infirmities
Gods people may be overtaken with. And Thirdly,

Thirdly, I will show you how these may be known to be such, that no man may
deceive his heart about them and these must needs be opened, because the latter
part of our Question of Christ's being a relief to them, is so full of
Consolation, that I would have no body have it that have not right to it, and
therefore I would not have them flatter themselves about it. For the first,

First, To open to you the nature of an Infirmity: Take it thus, To enable a
Soul to walk in the ways of God, (as all Gods people do in measure, but to
enable a Soul to do it,) there is required a twofold strength, the one is, I.
An habitual strength. The other is, II. An actual strength.


1. The habitual strength that all Gods Saints have, it is nothing but the
inclination and disposition of their hearts to the ways of God, and against
the ways of sin, which is wrought in them by (...) Holy Ghost in the time of
their first conversion (...) which hour the quickening Grace communicate^ ^o the
Soul, does once for ever make the bent of the heart stand to the ways of God,
that now there is a complacency, a delight, a suitableness to them in the ways
of God, and a displacency and aversion in reference to the ways of sin. This
now is habitual strength, once given to Gods people, never taken away from
them. But now though this habitual strength do give them a good will, (as the
Apostle calls it) a good mind to the ways of God, yet,

2. To enable them either to forbear any sin, or to perform any duty, there
must be communicated an actual strength, and that actual strength is nothing
but the immediate assistance of the Holy Ghost, who dwells in them drawing out
their Graces to work, and strengthening them in their working, and when this
actual strength is communicated to them by the Holy Ghost, then if a temptation
to a sin be propounded, the Saint is too strong for it, he overcomes the
temptation, if a holy Duty be propounded to be done, by the help of this God
(if need be) he can leap over a wall. Give a Child of God the inward
inclination of his heart wrought by Grace, and the actual assistance of the
Spirit of God, when he is called out to particulars, then he walks as becomes
a Saint in holiness and righteousness: but when at any time the Spirit of God
(for reasons best known to himself) does withold his immediate assistance from
that Soul, then their habitual inclination is never able to make them do any
thing that is good: If a temptation to a sin be propounded, and a corruption of
their nature be a little excited, and Satan backing it, and the Spirit of God
not joining, down they tumble in every temptation, and sin against God though
never so foully; and if a holy Duty be to be performed, pressed with all the
moral Arguments in the world, if the Lords spirit afford them not assistance
and strength, immediately they are not able, they are unfit and unable to do
that which they are required: and from hence arises all the infirmities of
Gods people; and herein you may see there is a corrupt nature in part
remaining. There are likewise external objects that would stir up this corrupt
nature, temptations from the Devil that would inflame it, when these stir and
Gods spirit does not assist, then are all the Lords people so weak and feeble,
that infallibly they sin against him; and this is the nature of the sins of
infirmity, that is the first; The second thing I would clear is this.

Secondly, What kinds there are of them, (because that will further acquaint
you, for indeed my aim is that all the Saints of God may see the frame of their
own spirits (as it were) in a Glass, that so afterward you may learn how
needful the Lord Jesus Christ is to us, then the second question is,) What
kinds of infirmities are the people of God subject to?

To that I answer, They may all be brought to these two Heads, they are either,

First, Such as are not common to all the Saints, No, nor to any of Gods
Children except upon special desertion; or else,

Secondly, They are such as all Gods people while they live in this world are
daily compassed about with: For the first of them,

I. There are Infirmities (I say) which are not common to all Gods people, No,
nor to any of them unless when very extraordinarily deserted of God, and they
are such as when the Servants of God do seem to pour their hearts out into
wicked ways, and commit those sins that are publicly to the dishonor of the
Lords Gospel, to the wasting of their own Consciences, to the defiling of their
own holy ways, to the scandal of Gods people: as suppose, to live in Adultery,
in Uncleanness, in wantonness, Cursing, Swearing, Drunkenness, false dealing
and the like; Now two things I would say about this.

1. That sometimes Gods own Children for a season are left under such a
condition; David you know even when he was the Child of God, took his neighbors
Wife into his bosom, and most wickedly plotted to take away her Husbands life,
and did take it away; Peter Cursed, and Banned, and Swore and counterfeited
himself to be a profane person, that he might not be thought to be a follower
of Christ: So that such things and many other instances I might give you, that
in the greatest the most flagitious way, wherein a man may seem to be turned
from Christ, and betake himself into the Tents of his enemies, to fight against
him, as if he would be a Ranter against him, such a thing may befall a Child of
God: But then I add,

2. But this is not the Lot of all, No, nor of any but when extraordinarily
deserted, and that is clear by this, because throughout all the tennor of the
Gospel it is sufficiently declared, that these are not the spots of Gods
Children, these are not the ways of the Saints, these are the ways in which
whosoever walks cannot be saved, and therefore what their condition is I shall
tell you by and by, (God willing) when I come to clear it: But that is one sort,
that it is possible the corruption may be so strong, the assistance of Gods
spirit so wholly withdrawn, and the temptation so mighty, as that a Child of
God for want of strength may fall into the foulest mire and filth in the world;
That is one sort.

II. There are other sorts of Infirmities, which all the Saints are compassed
about with every day that they live, and it is rare that any of them spend a
day either without al of them or some of those infirmities, and if you will know
what they are, I answer, There are three kinds of them, and I think all the
infirmities of the Saints will fall under one of them, and I purposely open them
that you might have a Glass to see your faces in.

1. Some and very many of the infirmities of the Saints of God, they are merely
the infirmities of their understandings, that is, sins of ignorance, that they
do the things that are contray to God, contrary to his will, but do not know
Gods mind about them, and from this sort no man upon earth is free; Who knows
the errors of his life? and I think verily under this head falls those sins of
the Patriarchs, of the holiest men that walked with God, whose hearts were
perfect with God, they had their many Wives, they had their Concubins too, not
knowing that this was against the Institution of God. And so likewise in the sin
of omission, as you shall see there was from Joshuah's time to Nehemiah's time,
one of the great solemn Feasts, that is, the Feast of Tabernacles was never
kept, according to Gods institution for a thousand years together, that they
were by Gods institution to keep it not in their own houses, but to go to live
in Booths in the Fields for that time, and it is said expressly from Joshua to
Nehemiah that that Feast had never been so kept, that either they had forgotten
it or the generations were unacquainted: But now when Gods people do any of
them in their speeches or actions, do the things that are indeed contrary to
Gods will, but especially not knowing it to be so, and yet their hearts
prepared, that if the Lord would but discover his mind to them, they would
follow him in all things, and yet this is one sort that all Gods people are
liable to in the world: But I tell you (by the way) that were but this one thing
understood, it would go a great way to make the Servants of God less harsh than
they are one to another: The Lord give them so much light to own it, he sees
such a thing as clear as the Sun to be the institution of God, or the mind of
God, or the way of God, in this or that Duty, of the first or second Table, and
then because he sees it, he is ready to condemn all the world as rebelling
against God, for not being of his practice, because the Lord (it may be) lets
not them see it: But that is one sort, sins in the understanding when Gods will
is not known.

2. Another sort of these infirmities when the thing is known, it is known that
such a thing is contrary to God and I ought not to do it, but yet by a sudden
hurry of temptation, when the violence of temptation surpriseth the Soul, many
times before ever it can recollect it self, it is carried down with the
temptation even against a clear light, yea, carried against it, as if a
Cock-boat should be carried down a strong stream, and they have not so much
time to call themselves to an account, to think whether these things become them
or no; And thus it was with Aaron that Saint of the Lord, he could not but know
that to make a Calf, it was destructive to the Covenant of Grace that God had
made with them, it was a kind of implicit renouncing of God, but a sudden
temptation came, all the people came saying, make us a resemblance of God,
Moses is gone, we will have it, he was surprised before ever he could recollect
himself. And so Moses that holy meek man, when a sudden temptation came, that
the madness of the people had vexed him, that he could not recollect himself,
he speaks so unadvisedly with his lips to Gods dishonor, and this no man is
free from, but some in one part, some in one kind and some in another, all Gods
people before they are aware are many times carried away and surprised before
they can recollect themselves to know what their duty is; But yet there is a
third sort, and that seems to go deeper, and that is,

3. When they do not only know it to be a sin, but deliberatly commit it, I
mean, that the heart is tempted to such a thing, says the soul it is
abominable, it is against God, I will not do it, but betakes it self to prayer,
prays the Lord to assist and strengthen him, the temptation comes again and
gathers upon him, that though he do resist it yet he has not strength enough
to overcome it, and the ground of it was, because the holy Spirit who is a free
agent, communicates so much strength to him as to stir up his graces, and to
draw them out into the Field in Gods Cause, and to oppose the Enemy, and gives
him some strength to resist it, but not strength enough to overcome it, but
leaves him unfit and without sufficient strength against that temptation; and
of this I think the Apostle Paul mainly means in all his discourse in Romans 7.
where in the Person of a Regenerate man he says, The thing I would not do, I
do, and when I would do good, Evil overcomes me, I would not do the Evil, yet
it is too strong for me, and then complains, Wretched man that I am, I am even
sold under it: Now (I think) under one of these three fall all the common
infirmities of all that love Jesus Christ in sincerity, they are either mere
Ignorances that they know not Gods mind, or they are else sudden surprises,
hurried away before they can call their hearts and graces to act, and have
strength to assist them, or else the Lord lets out a greater measure of the
power of the Enemy to assault than he is pleased to communicate to the soul to
resist; and under one of these (I say) do all the infirmities of Gods people
fall in their ordinary course: Now the third thing (which when I have briefly
dispatched then I will go to the next, which is the great question,) is,

Thirdly, How this may be known; and I will speak to it the rather because I
find there is no man in the world that lives, (within the compass of the
Church I mean;) but is wondrous desirous to have all his lusts and corruptions
to be adopted into the name of an infirmity, and when they have brought them
under that Burrow, then they are wonderful safe in their own eyes; the man that
Keeps a harlot, and nourishes his wanton vain glory, or whatsoever it be,
convince him of it, I (says he) God help me it is my infirmity no man lives
without his infirmities, and when they have once got them under that name of an
infirmity then all that you say concerning Jesus Christ's relief against their
daily sins, it is all their own, though God knows they are as far from it, as
the East is from the West: And on the other side, I find many a real Servant of
God, that if their corruption have any thing in it that carries horridness to
the Conscience, any strange distemper that is more than ordinary, and assaults
them, and buffets them, and treads them under foot, Then they are ready to
think that all the world cannot satisfy them that these are but infirmities,
these cannot be the spots of Gods people: And so that neither the Lords own
Servants may be discouraged, nor wicked men get a Cloak, I would a little
discover how you may clearly know, what are the infirmities of the Saints, and
wherein they differ from the rebellions of those that are the Lords Enemies,
and for that I will give you 1. One Rule that is Negative, and, 2. Another that
is Positive.


1. Negative: You must take this, That an infirmity must not be judged of by
the matter of the sin, not one whit judged of by the matter, but only from the
disposition and qualification of the Person that commits it; my meaning plainly
is this, We are ready to think that those sins that are but petty and trivial,
they must all have the names of infirmities, and those sins the matter whereof
are odious, those must not go for infirmities: Now this is a most false Rule,
for a sin that is a very trifle, if it be but an idle word, vain thought, petty
oath, any such thing, as it may be committed, may be a reigning sin, and a path
of the way that leads to eternal damnation, according as the Person is that
commits it, and on the other side even a great sin for the matter of it, should
it be Murder and Adultery, (I instance in them because they both met in David)
possible it is that the things may so fall out that these may be but
infirmities, therefore remember that is a corrupt Rule, and all you that please
your selves with this, that God keeps you from the great abominations, you are
no Whoremasters, you keep not a Harlot, and you are no Cozeners nor Cheaters in
your Trade, though it may be your Oaths are Faith and Troth, and prittle
prattle, and slighting of holy Duties, you will have these things pass for
infirmities, No, you will see this is no Rule. That is one, remember you must
not judge of infirmities from the matter but only from another Rule which I will
give you, and that is this,

2. Whosoever can but rightly judge of an infirmity of the body, has a clear
Rule to direct him to an infirmity of the Soul: Now all infirmities of the body
they have all of them these three things constantly go with them. The first is,

1. They never are our choice, That that is our infirmity never is our Choice,
that I think I shall not need much to discourse of, I have such an infirmity, I
want strength in me, I, strength in my Limbs, in so much as if any body say,
Come pra'y, will you walk, If I walk I must halt every step I go, But would you
have it so? Do you make choice of it to be so? Now there is a man's infirmity,
he never makes any choice of it; Though it is possible in spiritual things
there may be something of the will in temptations, yet no man ever says, Lord,
give me leave to be a Deceiver, or a proud man and the like, No, if it be an
infirmity we never make choice of it. Secondly,

2. If it be an Infirmity, it is perpetually a burden, and according to the
nature of it, so the burden is greater or lesser; And so a man that has an
infirmity in his body, if it be in a noble part his Eye, Oh! it is a great
burden to him, if his infirmity be in a very useful part, in his Foot, every
step he takes goes to the heart of him, if it be an infirmity in his breast
where the Lungs lie, Oh! that is a wonderful burden; According as the part or
faculty is useful, so a weakness there is accordingly a proportionable burden:
So now wheresoever any Child of God has any passions, any corruptions stirring
in him to hinder him in his enjoyment of God, or walking with him, they are his
greatest burdens in the world, no affliction goes so near to a man that has
given up himself to walk in the way to Heaven, as that that keeps him from
walking in the way to Heaven, that interrupts his peace, and disturbs him in
that way: So if it be thy infirmity the Soul chooses it not; Secondly, It is a
burden unto it. And then the third is,

3. That in an infirmity always there is a desire of curing it, that though
beforehand I may know I can never cure it totally, yet if I can but cure it so
as to be less burdensome; if I could cure it wholly whatsoever it cost I would,
yet, if not cure it wholly yet to keep it under: So here every Child of God
whose end is God, whose way is Gods word, he finds his flesh that that hinders
him he cannot walk in it, does he make nothing of it? No, it is his daily
practice to crucify it, to put off the Old man with all the lusts of it; No
Chyrurgion more desirous to mortify a member that must needs be cut off, than
a Saint is to draw out the life blood of every corruption he bears about him:
And truly because I see the time has so prevented me that I shall be hindered I
would else have stopped here, and made some Application of this, but I will only
beg of you (because I am in the next question to open a great deal of comfort
to every Child of God I beg of you) for the Lords sake deceive not your selves
about it, think not that all that shall be spoken of Christ's being a relief
against the corruptions of his people will reach you, you that sell your selves
to unrighteousness, you that would not be made clean, and have no mind that the
Lord should rend your Harlot from you, but your credit and reputation you must
have, whether it will stand with Gods or no: Flatter not your selves to think
that the Blood of Christ will be your Propitiation, and that he appears for you,
No, you have nothing to do with him, you choose your ways of sin, and the Text
has told you a little before, That if any man talk of Communion with God and
with Christ, and walk in darkness, that man is a Liar and has no truth in him:
But if any of you your Consciences bear witness to what I have delivered, that
your heart is in Gods way, Gods word is your way, your aim is at it every day
in every thing, only you are surprised, you want light, and strength, and
ability to stand it out when you are put to it, Now for that come we to the
second Question, and that is,

Secondly, To show you how the Lord Christ's Intercession in Heaven is a
sufficient relief to al his Children, against all their corruptions they bear
about them: And I know (before I enter about it) I may say in so great an
Assembly, all those that are the Lords they will much more desire to have a
relief about their corruptions, than about the greatest afflictions that betide
them in all the world. For I know no such evil that the people of God lie under
as their sins in their own apprehensions. Now then the Question is. How does
the Lord Jesus Christ's being in Heaven serve as a relief to Gods people under
their many infirmities? And to that I shall bring my Answer to two Heads,
according as I laid down two sorts of infirmities, I told you there is one sort
of infirmities that is not common to all, nor to any of Gods people unless when
woefully deserted. Now the Question to that is,

Quest. 1. What is the Intercession of Jesus Christ unto the Saints under such
abominable falls? What Relief is the Intercession of Christ to David when he
lies in Adultery? To Peter when he denies his Master? and to others when they
fall into the like sins, What is the interecession of Christ to them?

Answ. That I shall dispatch very briefly, and I will lay you down what I have
found to be the Lords mind in these two Conclusions. First,

1. That during the time that any of the Lords people do rant, after that manner
against him, fall in that way against him, the intercession of Christ is so far
from affording comfort to them, that it is the greatest aggravation of their
sins, and Christ's being related to them and so their being related to him, does
make their sin beyond al measure sinful* that is the first. Now, a child of God
turning rebel against his Father while he lies under this rebellion, (the
intercession of Jesus Christ indeed our selves know upholds him and grace will
bring him home as I shall speak by and by but during that time) he is
interdicted al communion with God through Jesus Christ. Many are the evidences
I could give you of it in the Scripture, what was Ephraim? God says he is his
dear Child, but if he join himself to Idols, let him alone (says he) let him
alone, he is joined to Idols let him alone, I will meet him as a Bear robbed of
her whelps, I will meet him as a Lion or as a Leopard, I will tear the very Caul
of his heart. And the Prodigal all the while he had run away from his Father,
and wasted his goods amongst his harlots, his Father lets him alone, let him
starve and give up the Ghost, he never inquires at al after him; and had I time
I could show you abundance of particulars to make this good, that the Lords
People when they fall into flagitious scandalous ways, they make them so
abominable, that in regard of Gods glory and the good of the Church, it had bin
better they had never bin born then commit them, they do so harden the wicked,
so dishonor God, so deeply defile their own Consciences, that here is nothing
can be said for any men that they have any part in Christ, while they are given
up to such ways; No, (says God) Know you not that no Whoremonger, nor
Adulterer shall come into the Kingdom of Heaven? they are as it were
interdicted from all right of entering into Heaven, while they are in that
condition, That is the first: But then Secondly,

2. When the Spirit of God awakens them to repentance, that they grow sensible
of their unworthy and unchild-like walking; then the intercession of Christ so
far is for them, that there is a free access to come to the Lord, to be in his
Book, and to enjoy Peace with him, as if never any such thing had been
committed by them at all. Though the sins of Gods people, when they are thus
egregious, are beyond al measure sinful, and do exceeding mischief to others,
notwithstanding all this if once the soul be but humbled, and that they
consider what they have done against God, and how they have provoked him and
injured him, Christ in Heaven prevails that there is no bar in the world
against their acceptance, but the Lords Arms stand open to receive them as
freely, as if the things had never been done by them; and of this you have a
world of Evidences. I will give you but two instances of it, and one is that of
Ephraim, The Lord says to him he was his dear Child, but all the while he
walked after that manner the Lord spit in his face and would not own him, but
you shall read of him in Jer. 31.18. says the Lord, I saw Ephraim bemoaning
himself; mark there, Ephraim was come home by weeping Cross, What did he do?
(says he) I saw him bemoaning himself: Oh! I have been an untamed Heifer, the
Lord has chastised me and I was chastised, but I was like a Bullock that would
not bear the Lords Yoke, Turn thou me, and I shall be turned, for thou art the
Lord my God, surely after that I was turned I repented, and after that I was
instructed, I smote upon my Thigh, I was ashamed yea even confounded because I
did bear the reproach of my youth; When this Spirit had seized upon him, mark
what follows, The Lord stands behind the Curtain and hears his Child thus
bemoaning, and what says he? Ephraim is my dear Child, he is a pleasant Child,
for since I spoke against him I do earnestly remember him still, therefore my
bowels are troubled for him, I will surely have mercy upon him says the Lord;
He breaks out, he can bear no longer, when once he had a Christ and Mediator in
Heaven, and when once he was but sensible of it, the Lords bowels yerned
toward him presently: And that other Instance is the example of the Prodigal
in Luke 15. that the Lord intended to be the Pattern of those Children that
should run away and be brought home again by Grace, all the while that Wretch
ran away and spent his goods, his Father regarded him no more than his elder
brother did when he came home, but when the man was broken, I have a Father
(says he) And I will go to my Father and confess I am not worthy to stand
before him, and when he came tattered and lousie home, the Text says his
Father ran to meet him, as if he should have said, No more of that (Son) come
bring him in, kill the fatted Calf, and put a Ring upon his Finger; and quiets
his Elder Brother, and it is fit it should be so, thy brother is come home
again; I speak this the rather because if there should be any one here to hear
me this day that has run away from God, and the Lord has touched thy heart
and thou beginnest to think how thou have wronged him, the Lord Jesus Christ
has made thy peace, the door is open that thou may come freely to him, as
if there had never any such thing been. As in Hosea 14. the latter end, When
Ephraim shall say, Come take words and say, Father receive us graciously: I will
heal him freely (says he:) There is the first Question answered. I was the
shorter in this because I would gladly hope there are none such here so woefully
deserted of God, as when they have received a new life that they should give up
themselves desperately to walk in ways contrary to him.

Quest. 2. But now for the other question which is the lot of all the Saints of
God, I know there is no man hears me this day that has any thing of the life
of Christ in him, but he carries a body of death about him, whereby he is
surprised one way or other; or for want of sufficient strength he is overcome,
now such an one must know that when it is thus with him he has a great relief
by Christ Jesus his appearing at the right hand of God for him; wherein lies
that, I will open in four or five particulars with a very short application
added. Four conclusions I would set you down about Christ's being a relief to
his Children against their daily corruptions their infirmities, The first is.

1. That Jesus Christ does pity in heaven, he pities his Children under their
sinful infirmities, as much as any Parents pity their Children under their
bodily infirmities; that is the first. That the Lord Christ who is their high
Priest, their surety? he has compassion upon them in their infirmities, and
pitties them under them, as Parents use to pity their Children that lie under
bodily infirmities; no body I hope will mistake me, when I say pity, I mean not
such workings of bowels and passions in Heaven, which we poor men are subject
to upon earth, but somewhat that is like to it, somewhat that carries the thing
in it and that you will find clearly in Scripture, the Psalmist says, in Psalm.
103. when he calls up himself to bless the Lord there for all his goodness,
and tells us the Lord heals his infirmities, surely he means his spiritual
infirmities, and there he blesses God that pities them even as a Father pities
his own Children. And we have an high Priest (says the Apostle) that cannot
but compassionate our infirmities, though he was without sin himself, yet he
has a compassionate heart And there is one passage which if you will but read
when you come at home, it would give you abundance of satisfaction, it is in
Ezekiel 34. in the midst of the Chapter, the Lord there quarrels with the
wretched Shepeard that goared some of his Sheep, and trod others under foot,
and killed some, and fleeced some, and when he comes to reckon with him, he
tells him that he would send the Lord Jesus, and that he was the good Shepeard,
and what he would do, and there he sets down all the infirmities that Sheep are
subject to, I seek them that are lost, some of them wander, I seek them that
are lost, others of them are driven away, by a violent temptation, I will fetch
back that which is driven away (says the Lord,) then others of the Lords Sheep
are wounded, I will heal that that is wounded, wounded in their Consciences
with guilt, the Lord will heal them, others of them their very Limbs are broken,
I will bind up that that is broken; and compare that with another place where
some of them are unable to stir, I will lay them upon mine own Shoulders and
bring them home; Mark, If they wander, be driven away, wounded, broken, lamed
and spoiled, he has a heart sutably compassionate to them all; that is One,
Jesus Christ compassionates us under our sinful infirmities, as we Parents do
our Children under their bodily infirmities, we are far from loving them the
less for them: But if any one (by the way) should ask, If he do so, Why does he
not heal them? Stay but while I come to the last Conclusion and that will
satisfy you; that is the first. Secondly,

2. Jesus Christ at his Fathers right hand prevails that the sinful infirmities
of his People, make no breach in the league of love that is betwixt God and
them; mark what I say, his Intercession prevails for them, he bearing their
names, and pleading their cause, prevails that there is no breach made in Gods
good will toward them: But even as it is with us that have a poor Child that
goes about to do our work, and oftentimes spoils it when he would fain do it,
and sometimes forgets to do it when yet he had a mind to do it, we knowing the
frame of the Child, we kiss it notwithstanding; So God is such a gracious
Father through Jesus Christ to his people, that notwithstanding al our
infirmities the Lord never breaks his league of love, but we may go to him and
pray to him, and call him Father, leave our supplications with him, and make
that use of him as the Covenant of Grace holds him out to all his people, as
freely in the midst of all our infirmities, as if we were quite delivered from
them: Now this the Scripture is wonderful plain in, I could turn you to a great
many, That Speech of Micah is admirable, Who has such a God as we have? Why,
what is our God? He passes by the transgressions of the remnant of his
Inheritance, he never looks after them, or if any one show him them, he casts
them behind his back, drowns them in the depth of the Sea, never lays them to
the charge of them that fear him: Thou art a dead hearted Creature and can
not pray without wandering, and do nothing as becomes thee, but thy own flesh
rangles with it, that al is an abomination in thy own eyes that thou do,
thou have a friend in Heaven that presents all to God as if there were no
blemish in them: Thou art all fair, my Dove there is no spot in thee. Is not
this good news to all those that endeavor to walk with Christ in sincerity? The
first is, He pities them under them; The second is, He prevails that there is
no breach made betwixt God and the Soul because of them; Thirdly, Another which
is a very great one, and that is.

3. Jesus Christ gives his Spirit unto his People to relieve their infirmities;
The Spirit it self helps our infirmities, you have that expression in Romans 8.
That the Lord Christ our Mediator does give his holy Spirit to help us against
our infirmities, What is that? I humbly conceive that Christ helping his Saints
against their infirmities signifies these three things, possibly it may
signify more, but these three (me thinks) are very clear, The one is,

1. The Lords Spirit helps the Lords People so about their infirmities, that
they shall not be quite overrun with them; I, he does as he said to the Sea, the
proud waves of it when they come roaring, hitherto you shall go; there you shall
stop; So the Spirit of God keeps our corruptions in bounds, otherwise he whose
corruption is gotten loose and taints his understanding with a speculation,
that would carry him on to action, and so to an habitualness; No, (says the
spirit of God) here I will stop you, you shall go no further; that is one. It is
through the help of Gods Spirit only, that the strength of every corruption
that assaults us, makes us not act it to the very height of it; As when I walk
with a man that has overthrown me, then I am in his power, he may cut my
Throat if I had not some friends to succor me; Gods Spirit succors us that
Satan and our corruptions should not totally subdue us. Secondly,

2. He raises us up again when corruption has brought us down; for you must
know (Brethren) and that you will easily understand, that the nature of sin is
such that when a man is committing it, that he would roll down to the bottom of
the Hill, and when he is there the weight would lie upon him that he should
never rise again: Now the Spirit of God does like the friend of a Wrastler by
him when he has thrown a man down, he plucks him up again and sets him upon
his feet again: So when any thing has overpoured the Soul, it would never rise
again were it not for the Spirit of Christ, but Christ's Spirit that is sent to
relieve us, sets us again upon our feet; Yea, Thirdly (which is more)

3. The Spirit of Christ so assisteth all his people, that notwithstanding
their corruptions be too strong for them, they shall again oppose it, yea, and
by degrees get strength against it, Crucify it, and Mortify it all. As the
Apostle expresses it in Romans 8. that when our corruptions are most potent, by
the help of the Spirit you shall mortify and crucify the deeds of the Body;
thus does Christ for all his people, he does not only compassionate, and keeps
peace with God for them, but keeps their corruptions in some bounds that they
do not quite over run them, or when they have prevailed in part; sets them up
again, yea, and gives them strength to get up again: And then Fourthly and
Lastly, (and then I draw to a Conclusion,) which is the Mystery of all the
rest, and that is this,

4. The Lord Jesus appearing in Heaven for his People does not only thus succor
them, but like a Heavenly Physician makes Treacle of these Bites, he does his
Children Good by their Corruptions, and helps them more on in their way to
Heaven, even by the opposition of their corrupt natures. This I acknowledge to
flesh and blood is a mystery not to be opened, but you will see it clearly to
be so, only understand me thus, When (I say) the Lord will do his people good by
their sinful infirmities, I mean not that there is any thing in the nature of a
corruption that can contribute to it, No, all that is in a corruption is deadly
and poysonful, and dishonorable to God; but as one of the Fathers said of Adams
fall, Oh! happy fall that did obtain such a Redeemer! So (you will say) happy
are the People of God in the midst of their corruptions, when the Lord Jesus
does them so much good by them: Now if you will know what is the good he does
to them, I acknowledge I want strength and time, and you would want Patience if
I should discourse of them at large, I will name but four Particulars and the
naming of them will confirm you in the truth of them, if you compare them with
the experiences of all Gods people. The first is this,

1. By the Corruptions that the Saints of God carry about them, the Lord keeps
them in a continual self-abhorrency, which is the most excellent frame on this
side Heaven. I know what I speak, that there is no frame of Spirit in this
world so excellent as a self-abhorring Spirit, taken but with the next branch
that you shall hear of presently, now nothing lays all Gods people so low as
their corruptions; I tell you if the Saints of God had all the afflictions in
the world lay upon them, were it not for their own corruptions they would
rather be proud of their afflictions, they are ready oft-times to murmur
against God, as David and Job were tempted to it, I have walked with God in my
integrity and simplicity, and yet I must thus be made worse than others; Oh!
that would be grievous; but now when the Soul is sensible of its own
corruption, dead heart, unprofitable Spirit, and the like, then wretched man
that I am who shall deliver me from it? I say again, nothing in the world keeps
Gods people so low as their corruptions, and that is a great gain; Augustine had
a Speech That God would rather allow Lust to keep his Grace humble, than Grace
to make his heart proud; Oh! nothing so abasing as the relics of corruption,
which exceedingly advantages Gods Children; The Second Advantage is, That as it
makes us very low in our own eyes, so,

2^ It wonderfully magnifies Christ, Oh! it makes Jesus Christ most precious
nothing makes Christ so precious to the Saints of God, as the Corruptions that
they bear about them: Nay, I will add more, that had Jesus Christ forty years
ago done the work, satisfied for sin, and made me stand in Gods favor, and now
I had no more need of him, I should quickly forget him; As suppose a man had
forfeited his estate, and his Life forty years ago, and some dear friend buys
all, and gives him all, and sets him up again, now forty years after he has
traded and grown Rich by his own Wit and strength, surely he cannot but
remember how he was beholding to that friend, forty years ago; I, but he would
never remember him so well, as he would that friend that should do that every
day for him, I live upon his Table and Alms every day, and yet he Loves me
never a whit the less: So when a Soul remembers I was a dead Man, an enemy, and
Christ brought me, and not only so but every day I forfeit all, and grieve God,
and shall bring ruin upon my self, mark how Paul concludes it in Romans 7. when
he said, Oh wretched man! Who shall deliver me from the Body of this Death? I
thank God through Jesus Christ; Oh! Christ Jesus his appearing it was dear to
Paul. Now here is a wonderful gain beyond all the Righteousness of this world,
if the Saints of God had in their course as much Righteousness as the glorified
Saints in Heaven, and the Angels in Heaven have, it were not so glorious to God
in this administration, as a spirit that magnifies Christ and abaseth it self,
and this is wonderfully advanced by the relics of corruption that we bear
about us; Thirdly, Another great benefit is,

3. Hereby does the Lord temper his People, to make them submit quietly, to
every bitter Cup the Lord gives them to drink; Nothing makes the Soul so
Patient under affliction, so quiet in the loss of all other things, nothing
does it like to this, Oh! had I my deserts, should the Lord mark mine
iniquities, it would not be the loss of a Child would serve my turn, it would
not be the clipping off of a piece of my estate, it is mercy I am not
destroyed, nothing makes the Soul lay its hand quietly upon its mouth, and
quietly submit to every dispensation of God though never so bitter, as the
sense of corruption we daily bear about us; And in the last place.

4. Hereby does the Lord, wonderfully make his People long to be dissolved and
get to Heaven, where they may leave sinning against him; for whatsoever carnal
People may think, there is nothing so grievous to the people of God as sinning
against him, and when they shall come to die, when they shall put off mortality
and leave off dishonoring his name it is more welcome to them then to be rid of
afflictions, and that made Paul long to be in Heaven, because I know while I am
in this Body I shall never be with the Lord as I should be, but I long til that
day shall come; Now here is gain, when that corruption, those relics of it
abase thee, and magnify Christ, and fit thee for every dispensation, and make
thee long to be at home with the Lord, and (I might add) in the mean time make
thee attend conscionably upon all the means that may bring thee to him, and is
not here wonderful gain? So that you may see of what use the intercession of
Christ is to all the Saints in the midst of all their sinful infirmities that
they bear about them; I will now dismiss you presently with two short Uses of
it. First,

USE, 1.
This Lesson if truly understood (for I know it will be a hard thing to keep
wicked men from laying hands upon it: but I think Gods mind is, that his own
Servants should have their portion whosoever abuse it, but) here they may have
a constant relief against that which is their greatest burden, I am sure of it,
if thou be the Lords, no burden like thy corruptions, and thy other
afflictions would be easily born by thee if so be corruptions did not aggravate
them in thy own apprehensions; Now if the world were given thee, it would not
be such a succor as this to thee, when thou can say in all thy wanderings, Oh!
I have talked with many a Soul, Oh! never such an unprofitable wretch as I
(says one,) I think no one has such a forgetful head as I (says another,)
and none have such impetuous affections as I (says another,) Oh! but do
thou remember that he is at Gods right hand that gave himself for thee, and in
an acceptable day carries thee home, and carries thee still in his bosom, how he
appears for thee every day in the midst of all thy corruptions, if thou did
know it, it would engage thee to joy, and to every thing that is Holy and Good,
the Lord set it home to the hearts of his people, and teach them to apply it to
their own Souls in secret. And then Secondly,

USE 2.
2. I say to you all from hence: All of you learn what need there is of getting
an interest in Jesus Christ, for that is the end of my Sermon, To persuade you
to see the need that you have of getting an interest in Jesus Christ. Would you
know why? I will tell you, All the sins that you commit (as you will commit sins
every day you live, but all the sins that you commit) are all writ down in Gods
Book, he numbers your steps though you number them not your selves, he has
your iniquities in a Bag, and the day is coming when he will call every one of
you to an account, and now (Friends) what if you have not a Daies-man or a
Mediator to appear for you? I remember Ely said, Oh my Sons! if men sin against
men, men shall speak for them, but who shall speak betwixt the Soul and God? So
you have committed innumerable sins, and your own hearts and Consciences tell
you more than any man can charge you with, How will you do to appear before God?
What if you have not a Mediator, the Lord Jesus that is a Propitiation for our
sins? What a woeful case are you in? Take heed you do not embrace a Cloud, but
study Christ and get found Faith in him, and if Christ be yours, you are
secure: but look to it or your case is dangerous, I dare not stay you any
longer: The Lord give us understanding in all things.

FINIS
THE HIGH PRIVILEGE Of all True BELIEVERS To be the SONS of GOD. Opened in a
Sermon at Suttons Hospital, November. 12. 1654.
John, 1.12, 13. But as many as received Him, to them gave he power to become
the Sons of God, even to them that believe in his Name, Which were Born not of
Blood, Nor of the will of the Flesh, Nor of the will of Man, But of God.


THe dependence of the Words stands thus. First, You have in the beginning of
the Chapter a most glorious Description of Jesus Christ, both of his person,
and of his Natures, and of his Office, under the Name of the Light that
inlighteneth every one that comes into the World. Then,

Secondly, You have a description of his Entertainment in the World, when this
great Lord submitted to this work, and manifested himself: What was his
entertainment? First, He came into the world, and though the world were made by
him, Yet the world would not know him, he came amongst his own, that is, his
own nation and kindred, who had been instructed about a Messiah that was to
come, and had long prayed for him, Oh! that he would bow the Heavens and come
down amongst us; he came amongst them, and they would none of him, they would
not receive him. Truly, this is the ordinary lot of Jesus Christ wheresoever he
comes, but yet there were a remnant that did receive him and shall receive him,
even those that belong to the Covenant of Grace. And what get they by it? That
Remnant, that handful that do receive Christ, make the best bargain that ever
was made in the world: As many as did receive him, to them he gave this
privilege, that they should become the Sons of God; and so here you have the
comprehension of all the happiness that Believers do receive by Jesus Christ,
they are made the Sons of God; so that the Text has two things in it. First,

1. Here is the Means whereby Souls are made partakers of Christ; that is, upon
receiving of him, that is the means and condition or instrument. All that
receive him, which is interpreted in the next words, even they who believed in
him, Believing in Christ, and Receiving Christ is al one; This though it be a
Doctrine of wonderful comfort I shall speak nothing of it, but of the second;
That is,

2. The benefit that they all receive who do partake of Christ, what they get
by him: They all of them have this privilege or Prerogative, That they are made
the Sons of God; and so without any more preparation to the Text, or
explication (for the Doctrine I will explain in the handling of it, I say,)
without any more preface I lay you down this Doctrine,

Doct. That al who believe in Jesus Christ are made the Sons of God, the
Children of God.

And that you may receive this with better attention, I will (to make you the
better understand the Lord's scope) answer a Question, that is this.

Quest. You say it is very clear in the Scriptures that al Believers are made
the Children of God, that is one of their Privileges, but what is the reason
that no more is named but that one? They are Justified, they are Sanctified,
they have the Promises, they are Reconciled, they have a thousand excellencies
in this world, yet here is none named but only this, they are made Sons, Why is
no other named but this?

Answ. I Answer plainly, and it will be of great use to understand it, namely,
that though sometimes in the holy Scriptures our Sonship is but one of our
Privileges, yet very frequently in the Scripture all that Believers do obtain
from Christ in this world and the world to come, here and to eternity, all is
comprehended in this one, That they are made the Children of God. Really you
will see it as clear as the Sun presently, that God comprehends all other
privileges in this one; that he that has this one, he that is made the Son of
God, he has all other that can be imagined, or that you can find any Speech
of, in all the Book of God, so great is this. And I will give you a little light
about it, and then you will receive the Doctrine (I hope) with the more
attention, and with the more desire to see your own Interest in it; You shall
see (and observe it as a general) that very frequently, when the Lord
describes the Covenant of Grace, the new Covenant what he will be to his people
in the new Covenant, he is very frequent in the setting down of this, I will be
their Father (says he) and they shall be my Sons and Daughters; I know not how
often the whole Covenant of Grace is expressed in that word, I will be their
Father, they shall be my Children: but very clearly you shall see it, if you turn
to Ephesians. 1.5. where the Apostle does bless the Lord for all the abundant Grace
that is manifested to us in Christ, there he sets it down in this one
expression, having predestined us to the adoption of Children: What is all that? All the Graces and all the Good that we enjoy from Christ, you have it in
this one Sentence, God predestined us to the adoption of Children; he has
done all when he has done that. And therefore upon that very account it is
that you shall see in Romans 8.23. where the Apostle speaks there of the Groaning
of the Saints, the rest of the Creatures groan, and all the Saints groan for the
glorious coming of Jesus Christ, To what end? (says he) That we might receive
the Adoption; that is, the perfecting of our Sonship. Now we have Heaven it
self when we have but our Sonship made, that is plain; and you will see it still
plainer in the Epistle to the Galatians, Chap. 4 and the beginning, the Apostle
there speaking of Christ's coming as our Surety, When the fullness of time was
come the Lord sent his Son Jesus Christ, made of a Woman, under the Law, and
made him a Curse, To what end? that we might receive the adoption of Children;
there is all. But that the time would prevent me having many things to deliver,
I might go on to show you more Scriptures that fully prove this truth, That to
be made a Son of God is to have the comprehension of all that is obtained by
Jesus Christ; so that this is no small Theme that I am entered upon, and I hope
if the Lord help me but to make it out to you in this hours discourse, you will
before you part, conclude they are happy men that have gotten an interest in
Christ by Faith. This premised now I come to the demonstration of the Doctrine,
That all who have really accepted of Christ for their Savior, they are all of
them made the Sons of God; that is the Doctrine. Now to explain it, You must
know that God is said to have Sons, or to be a Father in the Scripture in many
senses; I may bring them all to these two heads for my purpose.

1. Sometimes the Lord is said in a Metaphorical sense to be a Father in diverse
cases, and yet he is not properly a Father, he neither has the bowels of a
Father, to those whom he calls Sons in that sense, nor have they the bowels of
Children, who call him Father in that sense, for all the whole Creation he is the
Father of them all in that respect, That their being is from him and their
dependence upon him and the like: But then Secondly,

2. God is said to have Sons properly, and I explain when I say properly, I
mean Sons so that really he is a Father to them, has the heart of a Father,
the bowels of a Father, whatsoever is desirable in a Father; and they on the
other side properly are his Children, in being unto him what Children are unto
a Father: Now in this sense God is said in the Scripture to have Sons two
ways, two sorts of Sons. The one is,

1. Natural, Begotten by him, in which begetting or generation his own essence
is communicated, that as we beget a man, so in that begetting God may be said
to beget a God, or a Person that has the essence of God; this is one sense,
and in this sense he has no Son but our Lord Jesus Christ, who was eternally
begotten by him, and is God over all, blessed forever; and it is blasphemy for
any but Christ Jesus to challenge to be the Son of God in that sense; and
therefore the Scribes and Pharisees were right when they told Christ, he did
blaspheme because he called himself the Son of God they were right (I say) thus
far, that had not Christ been the begotten Son of his Father, and so had the
same nature, he had blasphemed in calling himself Gods Son in that sense. But
then Secondly,

2. But God has other Sons to whom he is properly a Father, and those are by
Adoption, which you frequently read of in the Scriptures, especially of the new
Testament, where all Saints and Believers have the Adoption, are the adopted
Sons and Daughters of God; Thus I have brought you to it, that Believers are
the adopted Sons and Daughters of God concerning which I shall (the Lord
assisting me) in the Doctrinal part open these three things to you, and the
other shall be the Application so far as the Lord shall help me in the compass
of the time; Three things in the Doctrinal part: The first is, 1. What this
means, what it is to be an adopted Son of God. Secondly, 2. How this privilege
of being made the Son of God by Adoption is wrought, that you may see it is not
a Fancy, I will show you how it is wrought and brought about, and by it those
that will be willing and Faithful may be able to judge of their own condition,
whether they are the adopted Children of God or not. And then Thirdly, 3. I will
show you, in somewhat a more general way, What this adoption, or being made an
adopted Child of God, what infinite privileges it does comprehend in it. For
the first,


1. What it is to be adopted, What is Adoption?

I Answer, Indeed the word was never used in the old Testament, and the reason
is because that adoption it was not then known, though there was something like
it, but in the Roman Empire which was at the height when Christ and his
Apostles lived, there the thing that we call Adoption was as well known, as
almost any thing that belonged to the government of the Empire, the Nature, the
Laws of it, the Duties of it too, they were all stated, that our Lawyers have
not more clear Evidences how to set out things that belong to our Law now, than
in the Empire of Rome they were acquainted with the whole Laws and Manner and
way of adoption, and so because it is of so exceeding great use to shadow out
the unexpressable benefits that we have by Christ, the Lord was pleased (if I
may so say) to adopt into the Covenant of Grace; And amongst the Romans
Adoption it was after this manner, It was the taking of a Person or Persons,
who had no natural right to any inheritance, a taking them into a Lawful right,
there are various descriptions of it amongst the Romans, but the best of them
is this, A lawful act imitating nature, whereby a Person or Persons who have no
natural right to an inheritance, are taken in, into a lawful right, and it was
done after this manner in a few words, for commonly none but Princes, or
Senators, or great Persons did ever adopt any, but this was the way, When there
was an agreement made betwixt the Persons that did adopt and the Person to be
adopted (for they never adopted those that were unwilling to it, but when there
was an agreement it should be so) the adopter did carry the Person before the
Judges, or into some public and Lawful Assembly, and there before them al
called the Party Son, This is my Son, and from that day forward he was his Son
to all rights and purposes in the Roman Laws, as much as if he had begotten
him; (as you will hear more before I have done my discourse,) thus it was
amongst them. Now accordingly if you will know in the Gospel Sense, what is
Adoption, I describe it thus, It is a gracious Sentence of God the Father, who
calls sinners (if Believers) his Sons for Christ's sake; I give you this short
description: That it is a gracious Sentence of God the Father, whereby he does
call Believers though sinners, yet he calls them his Sons for Christ's sake; the
very Scripture language, We are called Sons: but yet I think a little plainer
take this: It is a gracious work of God, whereby he does take poor sinners who
believe in Christ, into that Glorious Condition of being his own Children: All
this will by and by be more plain, when I come to show you what it comprehends
in it, but the Lord of his free Grace when he has brought home a Soul, to make
it accept of Christ to be its Savior, then does he, how unworthy soever that
Wretch be, he takes him into the condition of his own Children: That is the
first, and I am the shorter in it because the next will explain it more, The
second Question is this,

2. What is this work of Adopting, or how is it done? and therein I humbly
crave your best attention, because I know to you that are the Lords, I am
opening the most glorious Privilege that Christ Jesus has bought with his
blood for you, and it will be well worth your understanding, how we that are
Children of Wrath come to be made the Children of God. I Answer you then, First,

1. In general, The Adopting of a Soul to be a Child of God is so high a work,
that the whole Trinity, the Father, the Son, the Holy Ghost, every one of the
three Persons have their distinct work, in Adopting a poor Sinner to be the
Child of God; nor is any man upon Earth ever made the Child of God, til al
those three works of the Trinity have passed upon him, so great a matter is it
to be made Gods Child: And this will I open to you in the second place,

2. What the several works of the blessed Trinity are, in making a poor
unworthy sinner to become the Child of God. First,

1. The work of the Father. God the Father what is his work in our Adoption? It
stands in two things, you will find them clearly if you do but study the
Scriptures. The first is,

1. From all Eternity the Lord did choose them to be his Children, that when he
did first pitch upon them, (if I may speak of any thing that is first which is
eternal) but when the Lord pitched upon poor Creatures and chose them to life,
he chose them to be his Children; as you have it in Ephesians. 1. verse 5. He has
predestined us to the Adoption of Children, that although he himself had a
naturally and only begotten Son, every way pleasing and delightful to him, yet
besides this only begotten Son would he have other Children, who with that Son
should enjoy him, and serve him, and under that notion he chose to make them
his Children; Not only so, but,

2. When he gave them to Christ, which was likewise a work from all Eternity,
When the Lord gave these to Jesus Christ whom he chose to be Sons, he gave them
to him under the notion of Brethren; These are to be thy Brethren, I give them
to thee to complete the work which I have chosen them to, which is to be my
Sons, and therefore it is said in that place of the Hebrews, That because the
Children were partakers of Flesh and Blood, that is, those that the Lord had
chosen and looked upon as Children, he that was their Surety must partake of
Flesh and Blood: So there is the Fathers work, that from all Eternity he takes
a poor Creature, and says, This shall be my Son, and he gives him to his Son
Christ, These I give as thy Brethren to thee, to bring them to the enjoyment of
me; There is the work of the Father, this I hope is plain. Then Secondly,

2. There is a work of Jesus Christ, What is that? The work and Office of Jesus
Christ in the point of Adoption, that likewise stands in two things. The First
is,

1. He was to purchase their Sonship for them; for though the Father would give
it them freely, it should cost them nothing, yet Christ being made their Surety
he must purchase it for them, so that the Lord although he was the Heir of all
things, yet he condescends by his own Blood, by his own Sufferings, by himself
being made a Curse, He condescends to purchase adoption for those that were
given him to bring to life. This is plain in Gal. 4. where i^ is said, When the
fullness of time was come, God sent his own Son born of a Woman, made under the
Law, that we might receive the adoption of Sons, that our Adoption as it flows
from Christ is the price of his Blood, that is one of the works that Christ
does. The second is this,

2. That when the acceptable hour is come, that the Lord is pleased to bring a
Sinner home to Christ, Christ is applied to him as a Brother, that when they
are brought to Christ by Faith, Christ comes to be applied to them as their
elder Brother, not only as a Redeemer that has satisfied God and purchased for
them, but when he is made over to them, he is made over to them in his Sonship
as well as in the rest of his works; so that as our justification arises from
Christ's righteousness being applied to us, so our Sonship arising from Christ
as the Son, (being the only begotten Son of God and our elder Brother) is
applied to us: Yea, I tell you this application of Christ in his Sonship to the
Saints is so near and so close, that although he be the only begotten Son of
God, the first born, the Heir of all things, yet by virtue of his application
unto Believers, they likewise come to be called by God himself his first born:
These are high things, but the Scripture is clear in them, for so you read it
in the latter end of Heb. 12.23. where it is said, that we are come to the new
Jerusalem, to an innumerable company of Angels, to the general Assembly, and to
the Congregation of the first born whose names are written in Heaven, that all
they that are called home to Christ, by reason of their conjunction to their
elder Brother, they are the first born of God: and the Lord speaks thus of all
his Saints in that place of Exodus in that sense I am speaking, Go (says he) to
Pharaoh, tell him Israel is my Son: What Son? My first born, he is my first born
because Israel was comprehended in Christ, and Christ looked upon as his
Brother, Israel is Gods first born: So here are two of the works of the Trinity
in our Adoption, the work of the Father in choosing us to it, and giving us to
Jesus Christ as his Brethren, the work of the Son is in purchasing this great
privilege by his Blood, and when the time of Application is come, the making
himself over to them in the consideration or notion of an elder Brother, and so
they really by their conjunction with him partake of it. There is the second
work.

3. There is the work of the Holy Ghost, and til that likewise be past over the
Soul, never is any man made the Son of God. The Holy Ghost and his work is so
eminent and apparent, that he is called the Spirit of Adoption, that when the
Lord gives his Spirit unto his Children, he calls it by the Spirit of Adoption,
because it is the great Office of the Spirit to make that great work of
Adoption.

Quest. Now what is the Holy Spirit's work about it?

Answ. I Answer, It stands in three things, and you will see them all clear in
Scripture, (and I hope I shall have some time for the Application, for I go it
over as fast as I can,) the Holy Ghosts work in making us the Sons of God
stands in three things, as it is clear in the Scripture. The one is,

1. When the acceptable time is come, that the Lord means to make a Soul that
is by nature a Child of wrath to become the Child of God, He sends the Spirit
of Jesus Christ into that Soul to be a band of union betwixt Christ and that
soul, that whereas Christ is to be applied to them as a Brother, and they to be
mystically united unto him, the holy Spirit takes this Office upon himself to
come and dwell in the heart, as a band of union betwixt Christ and them, that
Christ and they should never more be separated, and this work of the pouring
out of the Spirit into the Soul, to take possession of him for Christ, and to
give the possession of Christ unto him, the Spirit being the band of it, this
is the first work of the Spirit as he is the Spirit of Adoption: There is one.
The second work of the Spirit is this,

2. That when the holy Spirit comes to make Christ and us one, he as the elder
Brother and we as his Brethren inseparably united to him, whereas he finds us
enemies, hateful, hating, that would rather be united to Harlots, to the
Creature, to any thing, the Spirit of God works a Child-like heart in them,
framing and molding their Spirits, that for the time to come they calling God,
Father (as they have warrant to do) they likewise shall be made Sons, even in
the frame and bent of their spirits, which is very excellently expressed in the
very next words to my Text, wherein it is said, He gave them this Prerogative
that they should become the Sons of God, which were born (says he, mark,) not
of Blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God; Now
no longer shall flesh and blood sway them, but being born of God, the Spirit of
God gives a new birth and a new life, now they come to have the hearts of
Children, that as nature has planted in the heart of a Child toward the
Parent, Honor, and Love, and Reverence, and Obedience, where sin has not
utterly perverted it, this is the natural genius of a Child to his Father. So
the Spirit of God molds and frames the Soul, and this the Scripture signifies
when it says, Because you are Sons, God has sent the Spirit of his Son into
your hearts, whereby now we can cry Abba Father, now the hearts of them shall
stand to God, and be carried to him in Faith and Prayer, as the hearts of
Children are naturally carried to their Parents That is the second thing. And
then the third and last work of the Spirit (and so you have all this indeed as
plain before you as I can set it out, briefly the Third Work) is this,

3. This Holy Spirit even as it is the Spirit of Adoption, does not only unite
them to Christ, and frame a suitable disposition in them toward God and Christ,
But it abides in them upon all need to witness to their Spirits that this is
their condition, to give not only the Seal of it by changing their hearts, but
by giving them the comfort of it as they need it in their necessities; which
the Apostle expresses in those words, it is in Romans 8. And the same Spirit
witnesses to our spirits that we are Gods Children, it carries our hearts to
God, and testifies to the Soul that God is their Father. There is the second.
Now I have been larger in that, because in truth the world does not ponder
these things, nay few of Gods own Children do ever consider what a strange work
it is, that none but the blessed Trinity can undertake, and each of them have
their distant work in it, of bringing a poor Child of Wrath to become the Child
of God. That is the second. You hear now what Adoption is, and how it is
wrought. Now the third thing in the Doctrinal part (and then I hasten to the
Application,) is,

Well, What are the benefits of it? Now what are the benefits of our Adoption?
That when the Lord has took this strange course, and brought about this
strange work, Wherein does the worth of this Privilege stand? I answer, You will
receive a great deal of light of it, at least it will help you to remember it,
and understand it the better, if I do illustrate it, by the practice that was
amongst the Romans: So their Adoption and the Roman Adoption had three things
in it, it carried three things (as all learned men that have read their Stories
and Laws do know) The first is,

1. When a man was Adopted into a Family, the Family of a Caesar, or the great
men, by his Adoption he was cut off from the Family from which he sprung by his
natural birth, cut off from it, not simply, but from whatsoever was base or
unworthy in that Family, that if his Father were a Slave, and himself by his
birth a Slave, it was hereditary to him, or if any blot or infamy stuck upon
his family, whatsoever it was, the Adopting of this Person into another Family,
wholly cut him off from all the base ignominious slavish bondage, and dangers
which belonged to the Family, from which he sprung by his natural birth; That
was the first. The second was,

2. That by his Adoption he was taken as belonging to the Family into which he
was Adopted, as much as if he had been begotten by him, he was to have (by the
Laws of the Empire) the same respect from his adopted Father, the same
provision, the same protection, the same immunities whatsoever, that his own
begotten Son might claim by nature from the Roman Laws, the adopted Child was
instituted in them all. And Thirdly,

3 By his Adoption he had the same right to the inheritance that the begotten
Child had; if there were no other begotten Children, the whole Inheritance sell
to the Adopted Child, if there were another begotten Child though beloved, the
Adopted shared with him in it, Look how the inheritance was to go amongst the
begotten Children by the Laws of the Empire, so by the same Laws it was to go
amongst them that were adopted: Thus it was amongst them, but whether any
Lawyers can except against it or no I will not much dispute it, but I shall make
it clear to you, that it is thus absolutely and fully in our adoption;
Absolutely and fully in the adoption of a Child by Faith, all these three
things meet. First,

1. We are hereby cut off from the Family from which we sprung by nature, I
speak not now of our Civil birth or rights, but of our spiritual standing,
which is to be Children of wrath, Children of Belial, Children of old Adam,
Children of Sin and Death, we are cut off from that Family, no longer to be
reckoned of it, the Bondage, Baseness, Obligations, Curses, whatsoever lay or
does lie upon Adams Family, or upon any that spring from it, as soon as ever the
Lord calls him Son through Christ, he is wholly cut off from all, that is
plainly thus, (and because I cannot possibly open these in a short discourse, I
will commend it to your studies)

1. We are (for example) all of us by nature under the Dominion of sin, that is
our birthright, sin and the curses of it, we are al under it, as soon as ever
the Lord calls a Believer, Child, that he has let his adoption pass upon him,
the bondage of sin, the curse of sin, the dominion of sin, it is wholly removed
from him; ye (...) not under sin, sin cannot have dominion over you* because
you are now brought under Grace; And then likewise,

2. The Law whereby sin is irritated and animated, the Law that in the Rigor of
it, and the Curse of it, that lies upon all the Sons of Adam, we are cut off
from it as soon as ever we are Gods Children; and therefore the Apostle
expresses it thus to the Galatians, that he made his Son born under the Law,
that he might Redeem us that are under the Law, that we might have the Adoption
of Children, I hope no Body will mistake me, for it is most clear in the word,
that the Law remains as a rule to Gods Children, and that is their privilege,
but as for the Rigor and curse of it, they are wholly cut off from that when
they are made the Sons of God by Adoption; That is the First, That the Lord
calling Sons to Jesus Christ, and owning them as his Children for the sake of
Christ, they are delivered from all the Curses and bondage that belongs to
Adams Family, and which all the Rest of the world lie under: But then the
Second is greater then this. And that is,

2. That by our Adoption we are really (I speak of Believers not nominal
Christians, but real Christians, they are all of them) taken into Gods Family
as his Sons and Daughters, that is, he owneth them to be his Children, and has
the Bowels of a Father to them really, that they are now under his care, under
his provision, under his Protection, under his indulgence, and whatsoever he
has commanded the most Holy Parents to exercise toward their own Children
that fear them, he has engaged himself perpetually for ever, to do all these
things unto those whom he is pleased to call his Sons and Daughters by Adoption;
There is nothing so full, no pearl so full of excellency, there is nothing so
full of any thing that is good, as this is full of consolation to the saints of
God, that can but understand it, therefore he must needs bear with them,
therefore he must needs provide for them, therefore if he correct them it must
needs be in Love, with nothing but a Fatherly rod, for we are all taken into
his Family, and may go to him as to a Father in all things wherein we have need
of a Father; that is the Second, A great comprehension of Privileges not to be
uttered; And then the Third branch is as clear.

3. That when God calls us to be his Children, we are thereby made his Heirs,
we are Heirs of God; indeed in the Civil Law inheritance it is by a succession
into the right of the Dead, but now as the Lord is pleased to apply it to his
Children, it signifies a certain inheritance, but certainly the inheritance
that the Lord of Heaven is to give to any, or that he has given to his Son
Jesus Christ, all his Brethren the Brethren of Christ, and the Sons of God have
a share in it; If you will have it a little more fully, I will tell you in a few
words thus, for you have the proof of it in Romans 8.16. That the Spirit
witnesses with our Spirits that we are the Children of God, and if Children
then Heirs, Heirs of God and Coheirs with Christ: But I mean these two things
by it. First,

1. The Heir while he is a Child is Lord of all, he is Lord of al before he
comes to the enjoyment of it, he is the Lord of it, so now while Gods Children
are in their minority, while they are poor ones in this world, they are Heirs
of the world, the Lord has called his Children to be Heirs of the world, that
is, whatsoever is in this world is for their sakes, the Angels, the World the
Devils in Hell, in spite of their Hearts they are al under the Saints, and are
compelled by the Lord, they against their wills, and the Angels with their good
wills, they all of them are subservient to those that are the Sons of God by
Adoption, and whatsoever is in the wide world, and may be enjoyed any ways for
the good of his People, they are the Heirs of all; this is their Portion while
they are in this world; the Scripture says it plain, All is yours, and you are
Christ's, and Christ is Gods, and therefore Paul, and Apollo, or Cephas, or
whatsoever is in the world, all is yours, the Saints of God have a real right
to al by virtue of their Sonship, not in the Law of man but in the spiritual
sense that the Scripture holds out. And then,

2. For the other life, where the prepared possession which was cast by God
from all Eternity, all the Glory of Heaven, such as Eye never saw, nor never
entered into the heart of man to conceive of, it is all kept to be the
everlasting inheritance of all those that are called the Lords Children. Thus
(Brethren) I have as briefly as I could, and yet I have through Gods goodness
plainly opened to you this great privilege of all privileges, that whosoever
does believe in Jesus Christ, really accepts him to be their Savior, they are
upon their believing in Christ made the Sons and Daughters of God: Now let me
make some Application before I dismiss you, and one thing that I would fain
have you think upon alone, is,

USE, 1.
1. To take heed you be not deceived about it (this would require a Sermon
whenever I should treat of it, and therefore I will but commend it now to you
in a few words, be not you deceived about it) I pray do not all of you take
this for granted (now I have opened so glorious a Privilege) that every one of
you because you are called Christians, are all made the Sons and Daughters of
God, take heed you be not deceived, you see it is a mighty work of the whole
Trinity to make it, and therefore your own fancy and conceit will not give you
a share in it, No, it is here as it is in Saintship, many a man is owned as a
Saint, yea, and ought so to be owned by them that converse visibly with him,
and yet God will not own him, but look upon him as a Devil, as he did upon
Judas: So it is with Adoption, there is a visible kind of Adoption that men
partake of, when they visibly own the Covenant, and I think this is the sense
the Apostle speaks of, when they demand what Privileges the Jews had above
others, very much, to them belongs the Adoption, that is, visibly they were
owned as Gods people in the face of the world, and yet I tell you, when many of
them came and pleaded their adoption and said, God is our Father, says Christ
to them, The Devil is your Father, and you do the works of your Father the
Devil; So you may say when you come home after the Sermon, here is a great
privilege indeed, are we Gods Children? I you may say so, but God will say to
you, you are of your Father the Devil; look to your hearts then and examine
very much, whether this be wrought in you, and you shall need no other
direction, if you will be faithful (for this I tell you is not the use I intend
to insist upon) therefore do but ask whether these works of the Trinity be
passed upon you or no, and chiefly that of the Holy Ghost, Is the Holy Ghost
come to dwell in you to unite you to Christ? Does the Holy Ghost work a Child's
heart in you? Can you honor God, and reverence him, and turn to him? And can
you walk before God as obedient Children, at least in the constant bent and
tenure of your Souls? You had best examine that, if you will conclude all is well.
Now many force themselves, How came you a Child of God? By my Baptism (as it is
in the Catechism) because you were once washed, Oh! beware of these things, it
is a hard thing to know that you are the Children of God, therefore be not
deceived in it (but this I say, I purposely wave the entering into this, because
I cannot speak of it in so little a time) but that which I will open to you shall
be but two Instructions that flow from this, but are likewise very full of
consolation to all Gods People.

USE, 2.
Is this the Lot of all the Lords People? all believers in Christ, are they all
made the Sons and Daughters of God? Then I pra'y be informed of these two
things* First,

1. The infinite love of God to poor sinners: Brethren, were I able to speak of
it (though I should borrow half an hour to speak it, you could not grudge the
time, if I could speak of it) as it deserves, it would astonish you, Behold
what love the Father has showed to us, that we should be called the Sons of
God, says the Apostle in 1 John 3. and the beginning, Oh! here is love indeed!
God has showed a kind of Phylanthropia, a love to man in many things, but
could we consider what love the Lord shows to a poor Soul, when he does but call
Child in the Covenant of Grace, I am assured it would make you all be swallowed
up in admiration; I will open it in three things, 1. What is the love that God
the Father shows. 2. The love that God the Son shows. 3. The love that God the
Holy Ghost shows to thee a poor sinner who beleevest, when each of them have
this work upon thee as to make thee his Son.


1. As for God the Father. Was it not a strange love that made him from al
Eternity choose thee to be his Child? especially this love will swallow thee, if
thou would but take in these three Considerations. First,

1. His Majesty, How great and Glorious a Majesty he is, that He should
condescend: This Glorious Majesty could condescend after this manner. And
Secondly,

2. To whom? To thee a Worm, if he looked upon thee at the best, as a thing
made of a piece of Clay, that have a heart full of enmity against him, And
Thirdly,

3. If we could but take in, upon what motives or considerations the Lord has
done it (for if we mark it) Amongst men, when any mortal man has at any time
Adopted one to be his Child, it was because either they had no Child, or no
Child that pleased them, or because they would perpetuate their Name, that
their name might continue after them, or because there was some worth or
excellency in the person that might be an honor to them, some such things as
these have led all mortal men, when they Adopted any to be theirs, but why did
God choose thee? Did he want a Child? Had not he a Son from everlasting? Is his
comfort increased by it? I remember the Romans said, It was an imitating of
Nature, found out for the Solace of the Father, But did thou Solace God? Did
he need any? No, but merely out of his good will to thee; and as for the
perpetuating his Name, thou addest not to it; so that it is mere mercy and mere
Grace to thee and me, and whomsoever he has set his Heart upon, that the
Father would condescend after this manner. And,

2. Is it any less in Christ Jesus the Son of God? That he would die to
purchase Coheirs with him? Amongst men this is not usual, an Heir is seldom
troubled that he has no more Brethren and Sisters to share in his Inheritance,
he is rather afraid that there should be too many to get some of it away from
him, but that the Son of God when this was his Inheritance from all Eternity,
should be come in the form of a Servant, die, undergo the wrath of God to this
end, that he might purchase poor worms to be Coheirs, and a Brother with
himself, and that he would likewise give himself to thee as a Brother, that
thou should be one mistically with him. And in the Third place,

3. The Holy Ghost, That he would condescend to come and dwell in thee, to unite
us to Christ, to alter and frame our cursed natures, and (as need shall require)
to be a constant supplication of comfort and refreshing to us, Oh Brethren!
these things surpass the thoughts of man, utterly surpass them, but could we
ponder them seriously we would say, Oh Lord! Who am I that thou should
remember me? it would make us so settled upon the love of God; and I the rather
press it, because when a Servant of God is but persuaded of Gods love, he will
interpret every thing well that God does to him, and he will then trust him, and
then fear him, when he is but persuaded of his love; and therefore learn this
Lesson, here is love indeed, here is love the like was never heard of, that the
Lord should rear poor Worms, and let such a work pass upon them, to make them
the Sons of God: That is one collection, that therefore the love of God is
wonderful great unto those that do believe in him: And Secondly I have but one
Collection more that I will give you at this time, and that is this,

2. Hence it follows, That they who believe in Jesus Christ are exalted to the
highest dignity that any Creature is capable of, that as here is a magnifyng of
Gods love to them, so here is a magnifying of their State: That I hence
collect, that there are no People under the Heavens, Nay let me ad not in the
Heavens, there are no Creatures so highly exalted as Believers, and why?
Because they are the Sons and Daughters of God, not in a name only, not
metaphorically as all the Creatures are, but really, God has the heart and the
Bowels of a Father to them, and they the hearts of Children, Yea, the State and
Adoption of Children, the greatest exaltation that is in this world. I remember
what David said when some of his Courtiers came to him, and told him of Saul's
good opinion of him, to give him his Daughter, and wished him to be thankful
for it, Oh! but (says he) is it a small thing in your eyes, for a man of so
mean a stock as I am, to be made the Son in law of a King? So if there be any
Believer here, that thy heart tells thee that thou acceptest of Christ to be thy
Savior, and that his Spirit has laid hold upon thee, Is it a small thing in thy
eyes that thou art really the Child of God? Is there any thing in Heaven and
Earth to compare with it? I remember David in 1 Chronicles. 17. when he had Nathan
came to him with a message from God, and told him to this purpose (says he) I
will raise up thy Child after thee and I will set him upon thy Throne* and I will
be his Father and he shall be my Son, and thus I will do to thee, David could not
hold but runs and sits him down reverently before the Lord, Oh Lord! (says he)
who am I? What comparison is there? Will thou be my Father and the Father of my
Child? Is it true Lord? Can this be? Oh! it so amazed him that God should be
his Father, Oh! could we think of it, I beseech you tell me, to which of the
Angels said God at any time, thou art my Son? he says to the poorest Believer
in the world, thou art my Son: It is not only a name that expresses good will,
but a state and condition that the Lord has set him in, so that I dare boldly
say (I will draw to a Conclusion with it, but I would have you study it when
you are at home, I dare boldly affirm) that the meanest Believer though (as we
say in the Country) he go with his Flail, or a Rake, or (as you will say in the
City) he carries the Tankard, the meanest Believer that has Christ for his
Lord and Savior, he is exalted to a higher condition than Ahasuerus was, when
he was made the Emperor of a hundred twenty and seven Provinces; for let them
take all the Pomp, Wealth, and State that is in this world, let them have it
all, if they have not Christ, God looks upon them as Satan's slaves, and over a
few days they will perish among the Dogs, I mean among the Devils, and be base,
and be miserable for ever; whereas the poorest servant of God that believes in
Christ, the Lord tenders him as his first born, O! I would fain (if it were
Gods will) that Gods People would lay this to heart, it would comfort them
against all the Scorns and Reproaches of the world. It is with many of Gods
People as it was with Christ when he was upon Earth, when he was called King,
How was he jeered for it? Art thou a King? (says Pilat) when he had a seamless
Coat on and bound with Halters, belike you are a King: So they are ready to
jeer the Children of God, belike you are the Childrdren of God, I, let them
scorn, I have read of Princes that when for some ends, they could be strangers
from their own Countries a while, they could bear the Scorns and Jeers of
People, but when I am at home I am known what I am: So a poor Child of God may
say, I go in a russet Coat, and have never a penny of Money in my purse, and
undergo many afflictions and troubles, Well, but God is my Father, and the very
thought of the dignity that God has exalted him to, will make him quietly and
contentedly undergo all the afflictions of this world, These are but general
Collections, had I time to enter into the Particulars, to show what Gods
Children by Adoption are delivered from, Sin, and the Law, and what they are
instated into, under his Family, under his Provision, Protection and the like,
truly I might set that before you, that if a man could hold to it by Faith, and
the Lords spirit help him to apply it to his heart, he would live comfortably
here al his days.

FINIS
FAITH THE ONLY MEANS Spiritually to FEED on CHRIST. Opened in a Sermon at Mary
le Bow, November, 12. 1654.
JOHN, 6.53, 54, 55, 56. Then said Jesus unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto
you, Except ye Eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, ye have no
Life in you. Whosoever eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, has eternal Life,
and I will raise him up at the last day. For my Flesh is Meat indeed, and my
Blood is Drink indeed. He that eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, dwells
in me, and I in Him.


I Read all these verses because they all hold out one and the same Doctrine,
though in a little different phrases; That you may the better understand the
scope of our blessed Savior in these words, know that the occasion of it was
this, Christ having the day before fed the Bodies of many thousands who
attended upon his ministry; The rumor of this flying abroad, the next day great
multitudes thronged after him again, and Christ knowing what lay at the bottom
of the heart, told them plainly they sought him for carnal ends, because they
had eat of the Loaves and were filled, but that was not the end of his coming
into the world to, fill their Bellies, No, there was better food that he was
willing to give all that had an appetite after it, and thereupon (that I may
not stay you) falls into a most divine discourse of his own being sent out of
the bosom of his Father, to be the Bread of life to al who did thirst after
him, and would but accept of him, and tells them more particularly that they
must eat and drink his flesh and his blood, as the only Food that would do good
to their Souls; hereupon these carnal People were extremely offended at him and
at his Doctrine, for they interpret all this in a carnal manner, as if Christ
did mean that they must eat his very flesh and drink his very blood, as they
did eat and drink other food, and truly it was ever thus and it will be ever
thus, that nothing can act above its own Sphere, and they who have carnal
minds can never judge right of spiritual things; thereupon our blessed Savior in
the words that I have read, and in many other in this latter end of the Chapter
inculcates this Doctrine further, Assuredly no man could ever live that did not
eat and drink his flesh and blood, and he that did eat him and drink him, eat
his flesh and drink his blood would receive such invaluable nourishment, as he
would think it the best meal that ever he was at: And that is the scope of
these words, which before I come to handle, give me leave very briefly to
vindicate them, from the gross erroneous interpretation that the Papists put
upon them, for you all know that there is a monster in their Doctrine that is
called transubstantiation, which in their conceit is the turning of the Bread
and the Wine in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, into the very Body and Blood
of Jesus Christ, and whosoever does not believe it (in their conceit) is
certainly damned. And this Doctrine of theirs has been the occasion of the
murdering and martyrdom of many thousands of Saints, and among all the
Arguments that they alledg to prove it, this Scripture is the prime of all the
rest, except only that of This is my Body: But in the next place to that comes
this discourse, wherein Christ speaks so Positively and punctually of eating
his flesh and drinking his Blood, and the necessity of it to salvation, that
they think every man out of his wits that is not convinced by these Texts to
grant their transubstantiation; yea, one of them, and one of the learned of
them has left it in Print, that if ever the Lord Christ should say to him at
the day of judgment, Why did thou believe that the Bread and Wine was my very
Body and Blood? he would make no other Answer than this, Thou spakest it so
plain in such a place that it could not be denied, my sense and reason could
not deny it. Now I will a little clear this Text from them, and I hope to such
an understanding Auditory as (I think) I preach to, a very few words will serve
the turn. There are three things which whosoever does but weigh, will be easily
convinced that the eating and drinking that is here spoke of, has no relation
in the world to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. The first is,

1. This Sermon was preached a whole year before there was any word of the
institution of the Sacrament, the Sacrament of the Lords Supper was at the
Passover, immediately before his Death, this was a whole year before it, Now
how can it be imaginable that Christ's speech here should be meant of a
Sacramental eating, when no Sacrament was instituted? Who can imagine such a
thing? Secondly,

2. This Text and all this discourse in John 6. if it should be interpreted
literally, for that is the thing they stand for, the literal sense (I say)
interpret it literally and it is quite against their transubstantiation, for
they say that the Bread and Wine are transubstantiated into the Body and Blood
of Christ, but if here be any transubstantiation at all, it is that the Body
and blood of Christ are transubstantiated into bread and drink, for he does not
say the bread is my body, the drink is my blood, but my body, my flesh is meat,
and my blood is drink, so that if you will have any transsubstantiation it is
quite contrary. And, Thirdly,

3. The eating and drinking of Christ that my Text speaks of, it is very plain
by our Lords words, that whosoever eats him and drinks him as this Text holds
out, shall certainly live another life for ever, and they themselves grant that
you may eat that very Body and Blood of Christ as it is in the Sacrament, and
never partake of his Grace, but go to Hell with the Sacrament in their bellies:
I hope that this is enough to show you that this Text proves it not; I tell you
(in a word) that the eating and drinking that my Text speaks of, is the same
thing that the people of God enjoy in the Sacrament and out of the Sacrament,
for there do we partake of the Body and Blood of Christ spiritually by faith,
whosoever receives it preparedly, but the discourse here is nothing at all to
that; But now I come to the matter, and in the words there are two things which
(the Lord assisting me) I will open to you, the first is,

1. The duty required of every one that would partake of Jesus Christ; and that
is, to eat his flesh and drink his blood; that is the duty pressed over and
over and so heavily, that the Lord says expressly, that whosoever does not do
it, can never live; The duty required, to eat and drink the body and blood of
Jesus Christ; the second is

2 The benefits which every soul does receive who does eat Christ's flesh and
drink Christ's blood, and that is set down in many various expressions, but all
tending to the same thing, that is, they shall live for ever, they shall never
hunger nor thirst, they shall in no wise be cast out, they shall be raised up
at the last day, they shall live to eternity, these are the benefits or rather
the benefit (for all is one) that every soul partakes of, who eats the flesh
of Christ and who drinks his blood: well now for the meaning of it, that I may
make it plain, (for my intent is to preach but a short Sermon) I will (God
willing) open both the parts, that is the duty required and the benefit
received, I will open them distinctly and give you the application of them both
together, for the first.

1. What is meant by our Lord when he does thus positively say, that we must
eat his flesh and drink his blood, his flesh is meat indeed and his blood is
drink indeed, this we must eat, this we must drink, What does he mean? I answer
plainly that his meaning is, we must believe, Believing is eating and drinking,
and eating and drinking in this sense is believing; that is the general
meaning, and that it is so, any of you may prove it your selves, if you will but
read the Scriptures over, for where he says, My flesh is meat indeed in one
place, He that believes in me shall never hunger nor thirst, by and by, He
that eats of this Bread shall live for ever: So that I know not how often in
this one Chapter eating and drinking is interpreted by Believing, and Believing
in a Metaphor is nothing but Eating and Drinking, therefore my work shall be
(God willing) to explain this, know then in general, that this great Grace of
Faith whereby Souls partake of Christ, it is in the true nature of it nothing
but an accepting or receiving of Jesus Christ, to be that unto us which God
sent him to be for poor sinners; the Scripture is most clear, in 1 John 12. As
many as received him, he gave them power to become the Sons God, even they that
believed in him; So that to receive Christ is to believe in him; now the
receiving of Christ being a spiritual act of the soul, wherein the understanding
and the will must both have a share, it has pleased the Lord (I beseech you
mark it, it has pleased the Lord) to set out this one act of Believing by
abundance of Metaphors in the Scripture similitudes taken from the Body, and
every one of them being rightly interpreted will clearly set out the nature of
Faith, and what the Soul does when it believes in Christ, as I will give you
but a taste, because it is but one only that I mean to open, and that is in my
Text Sometimes,

1. Believing it is very often set forth by Coming; Come unto me, He that
comes unto me I will not cast him out, that is to Beleeve^ Now Coming therein
is a figure, an expression taken from an act of our Body, of our Feet, wherein
there are always these three things, 1. There is the place from which we go.
2. There is the place to which we go. 3. There is the way and means in which
and by which we go: Now these interpreted would clearly show you what the Soul
does in Believing: So likewise,


2. To look up to Christ, that as Moses lift up the Serpent in the Wilderness,
that whosoever looked upon it was cured, so Christ is lifted up that we may
look upon him: Now that very act of the eye to look to an Object for such an
end, being rightly interpreted would clearly show you, what the Soul of man
does when it believes in Christ. And so,

3. To stay upon him or to lean upon him, which is a Metaphor taken from the
Body that reposeth it self upon somewhat to uphold it, when it wants strength
of its own; now this being discovered would clearly show you what the Soul of
man does when it believes in Christ.

4. Now among many of these Metaphors, this Text of John's pitcheth upon this
especially, of eating Christ, and drinking, which is the action of our mouth
and stomach, whereby our life comes to be maintained by our Food, and there is
in this of eating and drinking so clear a demonstration what the Soul of man
does when it believes in Christ, and how it may discover whether men do
believe or no, that you cannot desire a cleerer than this is, if God do but
vouchsafe the full understanding of it. That then which I have laid out for a
part of this afternoon's work is, to show you wherein the eating and drinking of
our food does shadow out Believing in Jesus Christ to eternal life, though I
have but now brought you to that which I would endeavor a little more fully to
discover to you, Would you know then wherein the Holy Ghost makes the
comparison to stand? for I dare not go to ad the study of our own brains, but
wherein the Scripture makes these to answer one another, eating and drinking
food for bodily life, and Believing in Christ for spiritual life, wherein do
they answer? I answer in these six things, some of them I shall not need to
stay upon, for if I should stay upon all I should not have time to clear the
rest, but in six things do the eating and drinking of our food answer our
laying hold upon Jesus Christ by Faith, and I will desire you to mark them,
because it is the foundation of a great trial of your spiritual estate. The
first,

1. That the Lord when he first created man with a living Soul, with a life;
this life of man is not able to nourish it self, to preserve it self in being,
nor to strengthen it self when it is any ways impaired, but God has appointed
that which is food, such creatures as have suitable spirits in them to the life
of man, that man's life (under God) lies in these, and cannot be preserved
without them, but it is the meat and drink (as the ordinary expression is) it
is the food and the nourishment, the means whereby the life of man is preserved
in a man, and give him all other things in the world, let Angels attend him,
Princes wait upon him, let all that God has given to the whole Creation be
bestowed upon him, keep food from him and the man dies, he does not live,
though it is true we live not by Bread only, but God can preserve it otherwise,
but in the ordinary proceedings of God, take away food and you take away life,
you need no other weapon, man's life, the nourishment of man's life is food; that
is one. Now answerable to this for our spiritual life, it is laid up and to be
found wholly in the Lord Jesus Christ, in his flesh and his blood, but you must
know it is his flesh and blood prepared, that look as other meat, Bread must be
broken, and ground, and baked, and so made fit for man's use before he partakes
of it, so the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ was ground, was broken by the
passion and sufferings he underwent for our sins, and by virtue of his dying
communicated it to us, his flesh and blood has merited life, satisfied wrath,
and in Christ and Christ alone lies all the spiritual life of his people, and
can be had no where else: Give him all the obedience that ever mortal man had,
give him the righteousness of the Holy Angels in Heaven, give him all that a
man's Tongue can speak of, or his Pen write down, he is a dead man if he have
not the Lord Jesus Christ to be his life it self: Our life is hid in Christ (as
the Apostle says) there is the treasury of it. There is the first, that as our
humane life lies in Gods disposing (I mean by his so ordering it) in our food,
so our spiritual life lies only in Jesus Christ. That is one. Secondly, (these
three first I will be very brief in) The second branch is this,

2. That look as God in nature has planted in every man, (because his life is
the most excellent thing skin for skin, and all that a man has, he will give
for his life, therefore God has planted in man) a more vehement appetite and
desire after food then after any thing else in the world, and if he be put to
it that the choice must be made, it may be he would not part with any thing
that he thinks is suitable to him, but if choice be made all shall go, so he
may have food, the strongest appetite after any thing in the world is after
food; insomuch as therefore the Lord uses ordinarily to express the highest
desires of the soul that man can put out in any kind, he uses to express them
by hungering and thirsting, which is nothing but the appetite that men have
after food, so that living men out of a desire of that which is suitable to
their life, have a vehementer desire after that then they have after any thing
else in the world; So the Lord plants in any soul to whom Christ is life, (for
I speak not of those who are merely dead, though I shall have occasion
afterward to show you that Christ gives life to the dead, but (I say) to those
to whom Christ is life) there is nothing in the world found in them after which
their desires are so mighty, so vehement, so constant, so unsatisfied with any
thing else in the world, no such appetite is in the soul of a man, as the party
that partakes of spiritual life has after Jesus Christ; as the heart after the
rivers of waters, as the hungry man after his food, all kind of such things are
expressed in the longing desires that the soul of a man that has an interest
in Christ has after Jesus Christ; lay up these by you till I come to apply
them, but yet I am not come to the main things, wherein the comparison holds;
thirdly; There is a third thing which is between eating and drinking and
believing, and that is this.

3. That look as it is in our bodily life, our natural life, that as there is
no such vehement appetite after any thing as after food when we want it, so
there is no such satisfaction in any thing, as there is to be had in suitable
things, that when a hungry man is satisfied with food, there is the quiet of
his outward life; then all vehemence, all pains, all angers, all longings till
he has more need does cease, for you know such is our life, that one meals
meat will not serve it but for a little while, but when hunger is raised and
food administered, then is the desire quieted: So now when the Lord Christ has
life prepared in him, and raised up in the soul a desire after him, when that
soul finds him, when he can find that Christ owneth him, or intimates to it
that he accepts it, it is satisfied as with marrow and fatness, no joy, no
delight, no content in the world pleases the Soul so as to say this one thing
I have found Christ Jesus and have an interest in him; All these are main, but
the three last are most full to my purpose, and therefore I hasten to them;
Fourthly then, and that which I think is one of the greatest of all the rest,
thus it is,

4. That look as it is in our food (pray mark it, look as it is in our food)
for the body, let the food be never so excellent, never so well Cooked, never so
freely conferred, we never so freely invited, let al be set out that is
imaginable, that food never nourishes me or any other, until it come to be
incorporated within me, that when a man and his food come to be made one, one
mass, I will not say transubstantiated, but translated and changed into the same
substance with himself, never does it become food to him til then. Take a man,
set him before all the dainties, let him smell to them, put them in his mouth,
nay (if you can imagine it) he may swallow them down, and they pass through
him, if they be not incorporated into him, that the flesh of the beast he
eats turns to his flesh, or to be made fit for his blood, it is no food to
him, though all the delicates of the world be set upon a Table, and say, here
is enough to satisfy a thousand men, not one bit of them is fit for me, except
it be so changed that it becomes one mass with me, this we all know in our
natural food. Now herein lies the answerableness, so it is with Christ, it is
Jesus Christ that is prepared, the Lord has prepared and put the virtue into
him, that it is enough to serve all the world, if the Lord be pleased to bestow
it upon the world, but no man ever comes to have spiritual life from Christ
till Christ become one with him, and he become one with Christ; It is Christ in
you that is the hope of Glory; and this our Savior expresses in the very Text
(says he) He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, I dwell in him and he
dwells in me; that they are made one really, only with this difference it,
remember it, indeed our food for our body, we and our food are made of one
substance, but there the food is turned into our substance, that if it were not
the flesh of a Beast turned into my flesh, if it were not the blood of a Bird
that is turned into my blood, and so it leaves its own nature and is changed
into my nature, but this is different in our spiritual eating, for here instead
of Jesus Christ being changed into our nature, we by feeding upon him are
changed into his nature, made partakers of the divine nature, and there is a
mystica, I spiritual union betwixt the Lord Jesus Christ and us, whereby we
cease to be what we were in regard of our corrupt being, and now come to be
changed into his spiritual being, but notwithstanding a union and conjunction
there must be, or else the Lord Christ never profits: This is so plain that (I
hope) I need say no more about it, that is the fourth. Lay up these, for these
will be for trial before I dismiss you. Then fifthly, the fifth thing wherein
the comparison lies is this,

5. That look as the Lord in his infinite wisdom has in nature given such a
Power to our stomach, our appetite to receive it, and our stomach to digest it,
that all the art in the world has not the power or skill to come and make the
food that is an extraneous thing another thing from it, to fit it so and
prepare it so that it shall be fit to become one with me, no art in the world
can do it like that of the stomach, the power that God has given to nature; we
know if we should take our meat and boil it upon the hottest fire, it can never
prepare it so as the heat of a man's stomach can do it; God has given this
peculiar faculty and power to the stomach, thus to make our meat suitable for
us; so it is with the grace of God, beyond all other graces and works of all
the creatures yea, of the Angels, he has given that power to the souls
acepting of Christ, and consenting to Christ, that power to unite Christ and
the soul together, that is not elsewhere found in all the world; for all Gods
creatures if they should all join together to put out their utmost skill, they
could not make such a conjunction between Christ and the soul as believing
does; but yet I will tell you thus far, not by any virtue that God has put in
faith, but as it is the hand whereby we receive the holy Spirit, for by the
Spirit we receive faith, and this holy Spirit that takes Christ and gives him
to us, and takes us and gives us to Christ, this holy Spirit in a way utterly
unknown to us, and no ways to be understood in this world, makes us one with
Christ. There is the fifth. And then the sixth and last is this,

6. That look as in our food, when the food is prepared, and we have an
appetite to it, and the stomach receives it and works upon it, and it becomes
one with us, then by virtue of that, by the strength of that food are we
enabled to live as men; if we have wasted our spirits, if our healths are
decayed, here is strength to be added, if we have work to do, we are thereby
enabled to do it, to go through what belongs to us, by the power that comes in
Gods way of ordering it, by the power that comes and is added to us; So it is
here in our spiritual life, that when once the Lord brings the Soul to value
Christ as that wherein his life lies, to have a desire after him above all
goods in the world, to come to have Christ incorporated into us by the power of
the Spirit, then do we come from hence by the Covenant of Grace, the operation
of ^he Holy Ghost, according to Gods dispensation to his People, to receive
such a supply of his Spirit, as we are enabled to walk as those that are alive
unto God through Jesus Christ; only add this difference (for I will show you how
the pre-eminence lies in our spiritual eating with this difference) that
whereas our outward food never gives life to those that want it, but by the
blessing of God only repairs it in those that have it, now this spiritual
eating of Christ does not only maintain life in those that are alive, but it
raises them up from the very dead, it gives life, and that moment that the
Lord enables the soul to hunger after him and rest upon him, in that moment is
the life of Jesus Christ conveyed to him. And this is the first part, to let
you see that eating and drinking, it is nothing but believing in Christ, and
the resemblance of them stands in these things, as I have opened to you; and
now the second (which I will be but brief in, because I would not stay you long,
nor be hindered from the Application of it, the second) thing I promised is,

2. A little to discover what the benefit is that we partake of, by eating and
drinking the flesh and the blood of Jesus Christ, What do we get by it? For
answer, We can easily say when men are extolling the good cheer they have been
at, at any Feast or Banquet, where luxury is set out, What get you by it? a
feeding of our Bodies that will return to clay is all that a man gets by it; Now
what is gotten by this eating and drinking of Jesus Christ? Oh! could I but in
a few words open to you what our Lord has said of it, (says he)

1. He that eats and drinks my flesh and blood he shall have everlasting
life: There is the first benefit. What means he by that life? That is not this
poor frail momentary life that we live, though this be the purchase of Christ
to Believers, but he shall have, First,

1. The life of pardon, that whereas all of us are dead under the guilt of sin,
dead in Law, liable to wrath, they are pardoned men if once they believe in
Christ.

2. Whereas they were dead likewise under the dominion of sin, and were
strangers to the life of God, the Lord Jesus infuseth a principle of a new
spiritual life into them, and such inward qualities and holiness, that enables
them to live the life of God, that life that is of the same kind that Christ
himself lives, his life, a holy spiritual life, that alas! if I could open it
to you and you understand it, it would make you conclude, that there is no such
life in any creature to be found, as the life that every soul lives that lays
hold upon Christ; I, and then he adds,

3. This life is an everlasting life, that is as our Savior expresses it,
(says he) Your Fathers did eat Manna, that is (as the Scripture says) Angels
Food, not that Angels eat any meat, but if they did eat any food it would be
Manna, Your Fathers did eat Manna and are dead, but he that eats upon me
lives for ever; It is not such a poor momentary life as this is, but a life
that will last to all eternity; this is the Benefit: Nay, mark some other
expressions that come in here together,

2. He shall never hunger nor thirst more: That will explain well what the Lord
means by saying an everlasting life, they shall never hunger nor thirst, What is
that? He means not that they shall never desire more of Christ, No, there is a
two fold hunger and thirst.

1. There is such a hunger and thirst as rises out of sweetness, that because
the honey is good they would have more of it, because the Wine is good,
therefore the Drunkard says, I will sip again, where the content of it makes
them desire more of it: This hunger all the People of God have, because they
find contentment in Christ, therefore they desire more of him: But then,

2. There is another hunger and thirst which is deadly, which will kill a man
unless it be supplied, which our Savior explains in his discourse with the
Woman of Samaria, He that drinks of that Water shall thirst again, that is,
if he have not a supply he will be in as dead a condition as he was in before,
if he be not supplied: But now he that eats and drinks of the meat and
drink that he prepares, though there will be a sweet hunger to make him desire
more, yet there will be such a life and stock of life within, that til eternity
have end they shall never be destitute of meat: So here is a benefit, a life
everlasting, that they shall never hunger nor thirst; Nay, he explains it yet a
little higher in the words I have read, the one is (says he)

3. Whosoever does thus eat and drink, and thus comes to me, I will in no wise
cast off; What is that? though (it may be) he may think himself the most
unworthy, and say, Lord! here is meat indeed, Lord! ever more give us of this
meat, But who am I that I should come? I am the unworthiest, wretchedest,
vilest of all; Nay, let him be never so unworthy in himself, never so vile, I
will in no wise cast him out, if he come to me, for God my Fathers will is, and
he gave it me in commission when I came from him, not to deny food to any one
that comes after me; Nay, (says he) last of all,

4. This is the Command I have from the Father, That I should raise them up all
at the last day: Though it is true, the bodily life ends and fails, and they
shall turn to dust as others do, yet when I come to make good the life that my
People must have in abundance, when I come in the last day to make it good to
them, I must raise al up that ever did partake of me to life: you see here is
the benefit which is laid down in the Text: I have only a little paraphrased
upon it, thus I have opened the Doctrinal part, That whosoever would live
happy, Eating and Drinking of Jesus Christ is the Duty required of him, and
they that do it are happy abundantly; Let me now a little apply this to you,
but three Uses I will briefly make of it, or rather the Lord makes them, for it
is out of man's power to do it, three things I would observe. First,

USE, 1.
If you be but willing you may clearly discern whether you are partakers of
Jesus Christ yea or no; Oh! that the Lord that is the Father of spirits would
work upon your spirits while I am speaking, Friends! Shall I speak a little
freely and examine this great Assembly, where does your eternal happiness lie?
tell me in your own hearts, what you would answer to it if God did examine it,
where does your hope of happiness lie? Would not this be your Answer? Only in
Jesus Christ the Son of God that became a Savior for poor sinners, I disclaim
all other things, and I look for my happiness only in Christ, Would not this be
the Answer of you all? It may be some Pharisaical self justifiers, they can
pitch presently upon their own honest and innocent life, but I pitch upon that
which I think every one of you would answer, It is Christ (you say) but what
Christ is it that you make account is your life? What Christ is it? Is it
Christ the Son of Mary and the Son of God, Christ that died upon the Cross,
that rose again and ascended into Heaven, and sits at Gods right hand in the
Glory of his Father, and that shall come again in the end of the world to judge
the quick and the dead? Jesus Christ is preached to you in the several meetings
in the ministry of the word, Is it this Christ you look for? I, let me add
this, If there be no more for thee or me than this, this Christ that sits at
the right hand of God, if thou can not ad, this Christ fed upon by me; It is
Christ in you the hope of Glory, it is not Christ in Heaven the hope of Glory,
therefore I must needs beg of you that you would be true to your own souls, for
(through mercy) I have a little converse amongst men, and a little experience
of them, but the want of the knowledge of this point undoeth many men, they have
heard so much of Christ that unless they be the arrantest sots and debauched
persons, they can tell you all the story of Christ, but if you come to examine
how I pra'y came this Christ into your hearts? I know how he was prepared for
Bread, how the Father has ground him, and baked him, (pardon the expression) I
know how the Father has prepared his flesh and blood to be meat and drink, But
how came he to be your food? and how got you your interest in him? if you did
eat his flesh and drink his blood in a carnal way, it would do you no good, for
though you go for Church members, yet if the Lord have not done these things in
thee, which I have spoke of, thou will be utterly lost when thou come to seek
for salvation; Does it not trouble thee to think how thou can answer these
four or five Questions? I will but name them. First,

1. Has the Lord convinced thy Soul really and clearly that there is no
salvation to such a wretch as thou art, further than Christ Jesus will vouchsafe
it unto thee; art thou set down under that? that is well, for believe it til
this work of Christ come upon our hearts, we never see the necessity of that
work. Secondly,

2. Has he raised up in thee that amongst all the contents thou find in
other things, though God makes thy Wife comfortable, or thy Husband
comfortable, and al things suitable, yet still thy heart is unsatisfied, if I
have not Christ I am undone, What will my riches do me good, if I have not
Christ? What will all the talk of others do me good if I have not Christ? Has
he raised up in thee such a desire after him What say thou? Thirdly,

3. If at any time the Lord smile upon thee though no body be by, but he smiles
upon thee in secret, thou have gotten some clear Evidence that Christ is thine,
and he will own thee before the Father, Can thou turn back and even laugh
before the Lord and say, Oh Lord! is it so? Is Christ mine? Is this to thee
(...) the honey and the honey comb?

4. Do thou find likewise in a way that thou know not, how it is brought
about, but thou find somewhat settled upon thy heart that has changed the
frame of thy heart? thou that art by nature proud, lascivious, and naught,
there is somewhat that is wrought in thee, and there comes some strength, that
though thou can not walk as thou should do, yet the Lord is dear, and his
Children are dear, and his ways are dear, some strength God affords, that thou
art not pleased in the world, but thy soul finds that God has enabled thee to
make him the end of thy life, and his word the rule of thy life, Has he done
this for thee? then there is eating and drinking of Christ's flesh and blood,
then in the name of God thou do partake of Christ: But (good Friends) be not
deceived, I tell you in many places not one of a hundred that hears such a
Doctrine as this, have any part in Christ, or their feeding upon him, or
relying upon him, therefore I pray try your selves; That is the first Use I will
make of it. Then in the second place,

USE, 2.
Oh! what a comfort may this be if the Lord would enable me to speak of it, I
could pour down even showers of Consolation, upon those souls that have gone
along with me in the trial: All you that the Lord has showed this mercy to
you, that you feed thus upon Christ: I tell thee this, Carry it home, thou have
eat a meal's meat that will keep thee as a man while God lives, he has given
thee one bit, Oh! one mouthful of Christ to get into Christ: I read of the
Widows Oil, truly it was a delicate portion that God laid out for her, that for
a great while together she had a little Oil in the bottom of a Cruse, and a
handful of meal in the bottom of a Barrel, and she and her Son did live upon it
for as many years as the Famine lasted; I warrant you that poor Woman would not
have taken a hundred pound for it: So that poor soul that can say, I bless God
he has raised me up from my low condition, and I have abundance of the world
about me, but I know Christ is more dear to me than all the world, I know my
prayers are to him for life, and I hang upon him as well as I can for life, and
look for it no where else, and I daily apply my heart to him in that poor
measure his Spirit enables me, I tell thee (poor soul) he has given thee
Jehoiakims portion and the richest food, for manna was Angels meat this the
Angels, nay, pardon me, God never created any creature in the world to taste of
this, but every poor soul how wretched soever that lives upon Christ feeds upon
^t; I pray meditate upon this at home, and the Lord help you to ruminate upon
this in secret. Is it so Lord that the poor soul that casts himself upon Christ
is thus made one with him? Surely I will never take care how it is in the world
with me, God has provided well for me, my Lot is fallen in a very good place.
And Lastly,

USE, 3.
For Exhortation: I shall make but one Use and that shall be in the very words of
our blessed Savior, when he begins this Doctrine in this John 6. ver. 27. when
they came and flocked after him for the Loaves, says Christ to them, Labor not
for the meat that perishes but for the meat that endures to eternal life: This
Counsel of Christ I would a little press to you, though I borrow half a quarter
of an hour, forgive me, for it is for your good. First, (says Christ)

1. You seek me for the loaves, labor not for that* Friends, we are all
cumbred, as our Savior said to Martha in Luke 10. the latter end, Martha,
Martha, thou art careful and cumbred about many things, So we are cumbred all
of us about many things, some of us are cumbred how to get more wealth, some of
us cumbred how to dispose of the wealth we have got, we are cumbred about our
places, offices, and these worldly things hurry us up and down, we can hardly
come into any place but all the peoples talk is, no body is at leisure but full
of business, and what is it for? the meat that perishes, all that thou
laborest for is perishing, perishing money, pershing wealth, perishing honor,
perishing profit, alas Friend! in a very few days all that thou laborest for,
will not be worth one penny, at least to thee, and but over a little time to no
body else, perishing things not worth your seeking, the Lord knows they are
not, they that the world comes in most upon, and all that their hearts can wish
comes in with ease, it is not one hours content, it is but meat that perishes,
but now labor (says he) for the meat that endures to eternal life, here is
meat worth your laboring for, I appeal to all your consciences that have heard
the Sermon, whether this meat be not worth the laboring for, whether to get an
interest in Christ, to hunger after him, to long for him, to rely upon him, Is
not this worth the seeking? Oh! seek it, and to encourage you,

2. I will tell you what our Savior adds in verse 27. Labor for that meat that
endures to everlasting life, (says he) the Son of man he gives it you; that
is, you have no promise if you labor for the things of this world, How many are
those that toil and moyl, and cark and care most for the world, and it will not
come upon them? many a man sits up late, and rises early, and manages his
business discreetly, and yet it will not come, but God has engaged himself by a
Promise, that he that seeks the bread of life shall have it, that if thou can
but pour out thy soul, Lord! leave me not destitute of Christ, he will not deny
the Son of man to thee: But lest somebody should further add, Give it me! Why
should he give it me? What is there in me that the Son of man should be given
me? Why should I think the Lord Christ would give me this food? If I ask that,
he ads, For him has God the Father Sealed, that is, I came into the world
under a sealed Office to do the will of my Father, and the work that my Father
has sealed to me, made my work to do, is, To give eternal life to those that
seek it: He can as well deny himself, and deny that he is sent from God, and his
Office, as to deny the bread of life to a soul that unfainedly labors for it:
Will not this do it? The Lord bless it, and give you to consider what I have
said, and win all our hearts to study that Jesus Christ may be more in our
thoughts.

FINIS
SELF-DENIAL Opened in a SERMON At St. Mary Spittal, March, 26. 1649.
Matthew. 16* 14, and so forward. Then said Jesus unto his Disciples, if any Man
will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross and follow me,
For whosoever will save his Life shall lose it, And whosever will lose his Life
for my sake shall find it, For what is a Man profited if he shall gain the
whole World and lose his own Soul? Or what shall a Man give in Exchange for his
Soul?


THe occasion of this speech of our Savior was this, he had a little before
told his Disciples, what great things he was shortly to suffer at Jerusalem,
whereupon Simon Peter begins to rebuke his Master for admitting of such a
Melancholy thought, Far be it from thee to imagine, that God will ever suffer
thee to undergo such sad things as these are, Master pity thy self, if there
be any danger take a course to avoid it; Our Savior therefore replies to Peter,
get thee behind me Satan, thou art an offense to me, this is nothing but the
savor of the things of the world, that makes thee give me this wicked counsel;
having rebuked Peter, he turns to al his Disciples and utters this speech that
I have read, wherein our Lord strikes at the Root of that, which made Peter
give him that carnal counsel, for the Lord knew it was nothing but unmortified
self in Peter, and he well saw that it would bring the like bitter fruits in all
in whom it was not Crucified, and thereupon gives them that counsel, that is
contained in those three verses that I have read to you, wherein there are
these two things. First,

1. Here is a Lesson necessarily to be practiced by all Christ's Disciples, in
these words, If any man will be my Disciple, Let him deny himself, Take up his
Cross And follow me; that is the Lesson. Secondly,

2. Here is an Argument to persuade to the learning of this lesson, the
Argument is taken from the necessity of it, it is so necessary, that that man
that will not deny himself, even to the denying of his life for Christ's sake,
will undo himselff by his good husbandry, by his providence, if he think to save
himself by following more wary Counsel, he will ruin himself, but if he will
resign up himself to the counsel that Christ gives him, Christ's counsel shall
save him, and Salvation any other way he shall never find: Now lest somebody
might object against this and say, But in probability the following of thee,
and taking up our Cross will be so far from saving of us that it will ruin us,
and the looking a little better to our selves may save our state, save our
credit, save our liberty, save our life: Well, to that says Christ, do but cast
up the gain that will be got by this way, I deny not but a man may by that
providence that you speak of save his estate, and save his credit, he may
possibly gain the world, a great state in it, but he will lose his soul by it,
and that man that should purchase all the world, that should be able to say this
Kingdom is mine, the other Kindom is mine, all the Kingdoms of the earth are
mine, But what did they cost you? nothing but my soul, I gave my soul for them,
that man has made a miserable bargain of it, he will gain nothing that will
venture the loss of his soul for the purchasing of the whole world: The worth of
a soul is invaluable, and besides when a soul is once lost, the loss of a soul
is irrecoverable, what shall a man ever give in exchange for his soul? Therefore
set this down for your Conclusion, The man that will not follow my counsel, upon
the best account that can be made, is certainly an undone man. This is the
scope of Christ in these words, Now I come to the Doctrinal part, (which I shall
only insist upon at this time) and in it there are these two things. First,

1. Here is the Lesson that Christ teaches and imposes on his Disciples, in
these words, Let him that will be my Disciple, Deny himself, Take up his Cross
and follow me. Those are the three things that Christ imposes upon all his
Disciples, Deny themselves, Take up their Cross, Follow him. Secondly,

2. Here is the Condition upon which this Duty is imposed; If any man will be my
Disciple: Christ will compel no body to be his Disciple, and if they have not a
mind to be his Disciples, he will not impose upon them denial of themselves, and
taking up of their Cross, and following him, if they like other ways better,
let them take them, and see what will come of them in the end, but if any man
will pretend to be a follower of Christ, if he be resolved to be listed amongst
Christ's Soldiers, or admitted into Christ's School, or into Christ's Family;
then this is the ABC, this is the first Lesson that he must learn, He must deny
himself, Take up his Cross and follow him, and that is all that I will say to
the Condition of it, that it may be as a watch word to all you that hear me
this day, I shall by and by (by the Lords assistance) handle a Doctrine that I
know is very hard to flesh and blood, that which possibly many of you never yet
learned, nor have any purpose to learn, but only now remember this: You shall
not be compelled to learn it, if you have not a mind to the Doctrine that shall
be opened, you are at freedom to take another way, provided you will not lay
claim to be the followers of Christ: Run your hazards and enjoy your good
things in this world, and see what will come of it, but if you have a purpose
(as I know you have) and would be glad to be thought followers of Christ, then
be you high or low, Lords or Ladies, Gentle or Simple, Learned or Ignorant,
know you that this is enjoined to every one whom Christ will own, that they
must deny themselves, take up their Cross, and follow him. It is only the first
of them that I purpose to treat upon at this time, Deny himself, and the
Doctrine which (by the Lords assistance) I shall handle is this, the very words
of the Text.

DOCT. That whosoever will be a Disciple or Follower of Christ, he must deny
himself.

And for the explication of the words, there is nothing hard but this: The
word, He shall deny himself, does signify a total abrenunciation, he must
wholly deny himself, (as I shall make good out of the Scripture) it must be a
total work.

Now for the proof of it that it must be so, it were easy to turn you to a
great many Scriptures, where the very same words are used, and upon the like
occasion, you shall find it in Mark 8. and also in Luke 9. but for fear I be
prevented, I will content my self with a Text that I will turn you to, and that
is in Luke 14. from verse 28. to the end of the Chapter, and it will abundantly
demonstrate the necessity of this Doctrine: If Christ may be believed, you shall
find there, that there were a great many came in to Christ to be his Disciples,
great multitudes, they were taken with his Miracles, and his Sermons, and the
Conversation of the whole world began to run after him, and gave in their names
as fast as they could be admitted: but mark what Christ says to them, about
verse 26. says he, If any man come after me, and do not hate Father and
Mother, and Wife and Children, and Lands, and his own Life, he cannot be my
Disciple, mark what he says, he cannot, he does not say, I will not own him,
but positively, because there is an impossibility of being Christ's Disciple,
unless that a man do so far deny himself, as to renounce and and forsake
whatsoever may be called himself: And lest he should not be believed, he does
prosecute this by three parables that follow there in order, and they are to
this purpose, in the two first parables he does plainly tell them.

1. That if any man pretend to be Christ's Disciple, and do not learn this
lesson of self-denial, that man if ever he be put to it will prove an Apostate,
if ever times of trial come, that man that enters into Christ's School not
having learned the Lesson of self-denial, will prove an Apostate. or Secondly,

2. If he be never put to it in a way of persecution, then he will live all his
days but in a mere form of Godliness, and an unsavory general profession he
may make, he will never have any power in it; and this (I say) the Lord shows in
three Parables, the two first of them you will find they are taken, one from a
man that goes about a building, to errect a House, before he have thoroughly
cast whether he have money enough to go through with the building, and then when
he has gone as far as he can, and spent all that he has, the building is
unfinished, and himself is laughed at; Or a King that goes to war-fare, and
does not cast up what the War will cost him, and whether he have strength enough
to go through with it, when he is engaged in it, then he is fain to make
shameful conditions, and come off dishonorably and basely, because he thrust
himself into a War that he was not able to go through with: So (says Christ)
will it prove with you, if any man undertake the work of being my Disciple, and
has not brought his heart to this resolution, to deny himself in whatsoever
may be called himself, that man will never hold out if a storm come, or if it he
be ever put to it: Then the next Parable tells you, that he will live but an
unsavory profession, he may be Salt without any savor that is good for nothing,
not so much as good to be cast to a dunghill; and that will be the upshot of all:
the Christians in the world that list themselves under Christ Jesus, and have
not learned this lesson of self-denial: That one Text is proof enough of it,
but the main thing that I aim at in the Doctrinal part is, to try if (by the
Lords assistance) I may make you understand what this same self denial is, and
wherein it stands, and so there are two things that I shall bestow the best part
of an hour upon. First,

1. In showing you what is meant by self, what is that self that must be
denied. Secondly,

2. What is this denial of a man's self, or when does a man do that which Christ
Jesus calls denying of himself. First,

1. We will enquire what is meant by self, and the rather you must enquire into
it, because there is a self that a man must not deny, there is a self that we
must bring with us to Christ, we must not leave that behind us, we must give
our selves to the Lord: The Apostle says in Romans 6. We must save our selves:
in Acts 2. Peter exhorted his hearers, Save your selves: there is a self that
we must watch over and attend to, Attend to your selves: So that if there be a
self that must be saved, and brought to Christ and preserved, it is necessary
to enquire what the Lord means by that same self that must be denied: Now that
I may make this plain to you, I must carry you a little further back; Then the
present condition that we are all now in, in our sinful state, and I beseech
you bend your best attention for a while, while I endeavor to clear this to
you. Know therefore thus, That when the Lord did at first make man, he gave
unto man a Soul and a Body and excellent endowments and accomplishments to both
of them, he gave man likewise the Creatures, all the works of his hands, but
though man had all these things to use, yet man had no portion but God, God
alone was the Portion of man's Soul, he might use his Understanding, use his
Will, his Wit, his Reason, his Parts, his Wife, his Estate, use them all, but
enjoyed nothing at all, but God, God was the whole portion of man, as man stood
in the state of integrity: But now as soon as man fell off from God by sin, when
(I say) he sinned against God, man did immediately leave God for his portion,
cease to make God his portion, and having forsaken God as his portion, now he
made himself his own portion, and the greatest good that he hoped for or looked
for was himself for the time to come, and therein indeed fulfilled the Devil's
speech, that if you eat of such a Tree you shall be as Gods, so we became Gods
to our selves immediately upon our fall, and ever since that, man did come to
fall into himself, to settle (as it were) upon his own bottom, and to rest upon
his own Center, and now since that time all other things good or bad, that
might be any ways conducible to man, to nourish that self-sufficiency that he
had conceived in himself, and expected in himself, presently man makes use of
all these, but though he uses them all as means, he rests in none of them as
his end, but himself is the end of all: This is the true state of man; so that
by self is meant that self-sufficiency, that portion that lost man did find
after he had departed from God: But to make you understand this a little more
fully, be pleased to know that every man in the world, though he have but one
comprehensive self, yet this self has four branches, and (if you will) you may
call them so many selves, though indeed they are but one, yet there is a
quaternity in it. First, 1. There is a sinful self. 2. There is a natural self.
3. There is a worldly self. 4. There is a religious self.


Give me leave to explain all these to you. I say First,

1. There is that that we call a sinful self, not that the other selves are not
sinful, but we call this sinful, because it is materially sinful, this is not
only sinful, the others are sinful in the use: but this (that I mean by the
first) it is materially sinful, and that is the body of corruption, the body of
lusts and corruption which every man in the world has in him from his Mothers
womb. You shall find that to be called our Self in many places of Scripture, in
Collos. 2.5. says the Apostle there, Mortify your earthly members; mark you,
they are our members, And what are they? Fornication, Uncleanness, evil
Concupiscence, Covetousness, Anger, Wrath, Malice, Lying, all these Cursed
lusts does he call our members, and in the next verse, calls it the old man; and
our Savior Christ calls our beloved lusts, our right Eye, or our right Hand, or
our right Foot. There is one branch of Self, the body of corruption. Secondly,

2. There is another Self that is called natural Self, and by it I understand
the Soul and the Body, and all the endowments, and Ornaments of them, our
wisdom, our Learning, our Will, our Love, our Joy, our Fear, our Strength, our
Beauty, all these that make up the Person that you or I do bear, with all the
natural endowments or accomplishments; that you al know to be Self, and that
the world commonly understands by Self. Thirdly,

3. Every man has in him likewise that that is called a worldly Self; by that
I mean all the relations that man stands in to the Creature, and all the
interest that he has in the Creature; as for example our Wife, our Children
our Estates, our Trades, our Lands, our Revenues, our Offices: Now that this is
called a man's self the Text is plain for it, in this Text where Christ speaks
of denying a man's self, he makes the world a piece of a man's self, and in Luke
14. where he would have a man forsake himself, there he reckons up Father, and
Mother, and Wife, and Children, and Lands, and all that he has. This is a
third Branch of Self. Fourthly,

4. There is another that is as much Self as any of these; and that is that
that we call religious Self; and by that you are to understand our performance
of holy Duties, our Virtues, our Righteousness, any thing that seems to be
spiritual, and good, and moral in us; this you shall find a notable passage
about, in Phillip. 3. where the Apostle there says of true Believers (says
he) We are the Circumcision that do worship God in the spirit, but we put no
confidence in the flesh, we regard nothing of the flesh, and (says he) if
there be any man that might have any confidence in the flesh, I as much as any,
mark his words, I much more than any, What flesh does he mean? mark what
follows, I was an Hebrew of the Hebrews, of the Tribe of Benjamin, by my
Religion a Pharisee, touching the righteousness of the Law I was altogether
unblameable, here was his self: Now, this was his flesh; so that the Religion,
the Honesty, the Conversation agreeable to the Law, that Paul makes a part of
himself, and calls it his flesh: Now concerning these four, (for yet I have not
done explaining this first part, what I mean by Self, concerning all these
four) both our Lusts, and our natural endowments, and our worldly interest, and
our Religion, you must take these three corrollaries to understand them all,
three things that I would add, The first is,

1. That al these are but one and the same self; pray mark me, all these are
but one self only, As the Sea which is but one, yet it is called the British
Sea as it touches upon England or Scotland, It is called the German Sea as it
washes the German shore, and a great way off it is called the Ethiopique Sea
as it washes there, but all is but one Sea, so all is but one wretched self,
though we call it a sinful self: as self applies it self to Lusts, call it
worldly self, as self applies it self to wealth or riches or honor: and call it
religious self, as self applies it self to the Law of God or to God, in any
such like, but all is but one self, all is but one and the same man in all
these. And Secondly, Another thing that I would have you know about them all
four is this.

2. That though all these are in every natural man, yet commonly there is but
one of them that is predominant, and all the other are subordinate unto it, As
for example, Some men make their Lusts, their known Lusts their predominant
self, and unto that Reason and Will, and Father and Mother, and Children, and
Law, and Duties, and all shall be subordinate, because this is the Lord
paramount: In some others it may be the world is the paramount, Oh! and then
unto that all their other Lusts, and all their Religion likewise shall be
subordinate; It may be in another his Religion is the predominant, his Honesty,
his righteousness, his holy performances, that is his great predominant, and
then unto that all the other shall be subordinate; Commonly there is but some
one of them that carries the Chair, that sits upon the Throne, and all the rest
are underlings to that. Thirdly, and that which I most of all would have you
mark, and weigh, concerning them all is this, and I beseech you weigh my words.

3. That in all these the heart is equally wicked, in every one of them the
heart is as bad, and as far from God in the one as it is in the other, I mean
plainly thus, That man that sets up his Lusts, suppose his Whore, suppose his
Pride, suppose any known wickedness, sets up that to be the great good that
pleases him, that man is no more wicked, his heart is no more wicked in that
than another man that makes Mammon his God, the gathering of wealth, or the
maintaining of his honor, and neither of these are more wicked than he that
makes his righteousness, his own religious performances his God, because for
(though these may seem strange, yet if you will wait you will find it to be good
Divinity) though in all these self is the end, and all these are used but as
means, in the one of them I make use of the Devil to serve my self, in another
I make use of the world to serve my self, in another I make use of God to serve
my Self: but whosoever I make use of, it is my self that I set in the Throne,
my own Ease, my own Will, my own Good, my own Happiness: Now then here is the
result, whatsoever a poor lost sinner does make his portion, before he come to
be reconciled to God in Christ, whatsoever it is that he makes his portion, or
places his happiness in, that our Lord means by self; and there you have the
first thing explained that I intended to handle, What is meant by our Self that
must be denied? all that we make our portion, be it our Lusts, be they our
natural abilities, be they our worldly interests, be they our religious
Virtues, Duties, Righteousnesses, they are all alike when the heart sodders
with them, or rests in them, all these make up that self that must be denied.
That is the first. Secondly, The second thing that is to be explained, is,

2. What it is to deny a man's self; he that will follow Christ must deny
himself, What is that? I answer, First,

1. In general, (as I hinted before) it must be a total denial, it is such a
denial of a man's self, as must be a total abrenunciation, it must not be to put
off the skin, the Serpents skin, and leave the Body, or to cut off a Joint and
leave the Trunk, but the whole man, all the comprehension of this must be
abhominated and renounced, by that self-denial that the Lord here means.

But what is it? (you will say) Wherein stands it? That I shall labor to clear to
you as well as I can.

1. Negatively, I will show what it is not. And then, 2. Positively, I will show
you what it is.
1. What it is not. First,

1. By denying a man's self the Lord means not, that we should counterfeit our
selves to be other than we are, as Jeroboam's Wife denied her self to be
Jeroboam's Wife, by faining her self to be another Woman than she was; The Lord
means not that he that is a proud man should say I am not a proud man, or he
that is a rich man should say, I am not a rich man, or he that is a proper man
should say I am not a proper man, or he whose name is John or Thomas, should
say I am not that man that is not the meaning, that he should counterfeit or
feign himself to be another than he is: Nor Secondly, (which it may be you
think most probable) by denying a man's self is this meant.

2. That a man must wholly be rid of al these things, that that man that denies
himself must wholly part with all his corruptions, and part with the powers and
faculties of his soul, or the accomplishments of them, or part with all his
Estate, his Wife and Children, or part with his morral Duties and Religion,
that is not the meaning neither, and that that is not the meaning I prove thus
to you First,

1. Some of these things are things we must not part with, the Lord forbids us
to part with them: If God have bestowed upon any man a good Wife, or Children,
or Memory, Understanding, Learning, Wealth, Honor or Abilities, or Honesty and
Righteousness, the Lord commands them not to part with these, these are things
that God may be served with, and must be served with, therefore that cannot be
the meaning. Nay,

2. The worst of them, none of them can be parted with while we live in this
world, though we would never so fain part with them, totally no man upon earth
can part with all his corruptions: If there be any man can say, he has no sin
in him, that man rather has no Grace in him: St. John says that man that
says he has no sin in him lies, and the truth of God is not in him;
therefore that cannot be the meaning, What is it then? I answer, and I humbly
crave your attendance and weighing of these things, because your everlasting
welfare must be measured out by this, you will know your spiritual interest in
Christ by it. I answer then,

2. That this same denial of our selves, this total renunciation of our selves,
it comprehends these four things in it, and these four things do constantly
meet in every soul that does deny it self. First of all,

1. All these things that I have spoken of, we do totally and absolutely
renounce them all from being any part of our portion, that whereas before all
our good lay in some of these things, that if you would ask any man what he is
worth, What are you? and what are you worth? he must tell you, I am worth a
thousand pound a year, or I am worth as much as my Wife and Children, my Wit,
my Parts, my Learning, my Education, my good name, my honest Conversation, Look
what worth there is in all these so much I am worth; and this was all his
portion: but now when the soul comes to Christ, it totally renounceth all
these, to be nothing at all to him in the point of a portion, if he be the
Lords; and I shall show you good reason for it by and by God willing; I will show
you a notable instance of it in the Apostle Paul, in that forenamed Phillip. 3.
where he says, I think if any man might Glory in the flesh, I might Glory as
much as any, and there he reckons up his Religion, his Birth, his Education,
his Learning, his Righteousness, and the like, and (says he) these things were
gain to me, they were my portion, that if you had asked Paul, Paul what are
you? What am I? as good a man as you I hope, Wherein lies your goodness? I am a
Jew, an Hebrew, a Benjamite, a Pharisee, a Scholar, an honest man, one that is
unblameable in my whole conversation, This was my gain (says Paul) but after
that Paul was called to Christ, he did profess all that was his gain before, it
was now Dogs meat to him, shipwracked; his Learning abided with him still, and
his wealth, and his wit, or any thing, he had it still: but it was all rubbish
now, he did lay no worth in the world upon it, he had no portion now but the
favor of God in Christ Jesus, that was his wealth, but now for all these things
what use soever he might make of them, they were nothing, not one penny to him
in the point of a portion; This is the first thing that is an ingredient into
this same self-denial, that when the soul comes to Christ, it is unloosed and
set loose from all these things, as they gave any support to the soul, to breed
a good esteem in it of its own happiness. That is the first. The Second thing
that makes up this self-denial is,

2 That as the Soul does renounce all these from being a portion, so as in any
of these there is any thing found that stands in opposition to Christ, or has
any enmity against Christ, so far the soul totally does not only throw it aside
as a worthless thing, but opposes it as a deadly thing, it casts it aside as
an enemy: Before in the other it throws it aside as a useless thing: but here
it throws it aside as an enemy, when it has any opposition or enmity against
Christ Jesus, or the ways that Christ would have his people walk in; that is
plain both by many Scriptures, that you shall see the Servants of God when they
come to deny themselves, they say to their Lusts, get you hence, to their
Idolatry, to their wicked ways, they throw them out to the Moles and the Bats,
they mortify them, they crucify them, they put off the old man, with all the
Lusts that are contrary to Christ, and their carnal reason that stands in
enmity against Christ; According (I say) as there is any thing in them that
bears opposition to Christ Jesus, and the ways of holiness, so far the soul
renounceth them as an enemy, if ever they deny themselves, because (as you shall
hear in the Reason) Christ Jesus alone is the great good of that soul that
denies it self. A Third thing that makes up this self-denial is,

3. That all these four, or any thing that may fall under any one of them, so
far as they ever stand in competition with Christ, and the things of Christ, so
far the soul totally abandons them likewise, totally abandons them all
according as they stand in competition with Christ Jesus; and that our Lord
means when he says, That a man must hate his Father, and Mother, and Wife, and
Children, Certainly the Lord does not mean that we should hate them simply, No,
but when they come to stand in competition with Christ's excellence, or
providence, or things fall out so, that I must either renounce these, or I must
withdraw from Christ, I cannot serve Christ, and enjoy them too, therein I
totally renounce them all; and this you shall understand thus: Our Savior
Christ says a man then denies Christ, though he have never so good an opinion
of Christ, if yet when he comes to that exigent, that either he must leave
Christ, or leave the world, or leave his wealth, if he leave Christ for his
wealth sake then he denies Christ, so Christ says, by the same reason when I
leave my life, leave my wealth, leave my Wife, my Children, my Name, my Credit,
my will, my Duties, when these stand in competition with Christ, then I deny
them all, then that soul may truly be said to deny them; as I pray take an
instance or two of it, that you may see what I mean: Take that that is reported
of a famous Lady in the primitive Church, I think her name was called Julida or
Juletta, that having a Suit before a Heathen Magistrate, in somewhat that
concerned her estate, her cause was good, and it was like to go of her side,
but some body whispers the Judge in the Ear, and tells the Judge that she was a
Christian, the Judge tells her; Lady, your cause is good (says he) and it is
like to go with you, but here is an information come that you are a Christian,
and if so, you will not only lose this cause, and this part of your estate, but
al your estate, and your honor, and your life, all is gone: Is it come to that?
(says she) farewell my lands, farewell my honor, farewell my life, Nay, I am a
Christian when these come to stand in competition with Christ once: Or as
Gallatius Carixialdus a famous Italian Marquess, that had a Lady and delicate
Children, and a fair Estate, but when he could not enjoy Christ and these
together, he left them all and went to Geneva to live with Mr. Calvin: And
there is a speech of Chrysostom that he said, when he thought he should go to
banishment, or martyrdom for Christ's sake, he said, If my Father should stand
in my way, I would throw him down, if my Mother should meet me, I would tread
upon her belly, meaning plainly, that if any of these should be hindrances to
him in Christ's cause, and stand in competition, he would trample them under
his feet: And this the Lord plainly means by a man's denying himself, my Life is
dear, my Learning is dear, my Children are dear, my Credit is dear, al are
good, I value them, I love them, I would keep them, but if either my peace with
Christ must go or these, if my Conscience must go or these, if the Glory of
Christ must go or these, all pack away, they are all renounced as they stand in
competition with Christ. This is the third thing in self-denial. Fourthly there
is another, (and I pray lay up these things in your hearts, against I come to
apply them by and by) and that is,

4. That the soul that does deny it self does totally forsake all these so far,
as from claiming his interest or propriety in them; they do not only not make
them their wealth, but now they resign them all up unto Christ, give them up to
Christ, and themselves turn Baylifs or Stewards to Christ, to use them all
according to the will and pleasure of Christ Jesus alone: Pray understand this,
because though you be never called to some of the other, yet for this last this
is that vein of self denial, that must run through the whole course of a man's
life, and he has use of it every day he lives if he be a servant of Christ;
Pray understand my meaning thus: Suppose a man had a small Farm upon which he
totally lived, it was the inheritance he received from his Father, and it is all that he and his Wife and Children have to subsist on, and he uses it according
to his own will for his best advantage, builds, plucks down, plows, lays down
his plowed ground, turns it into pastures, sels it, keeps it, changes it, does
what he will, it is all the wealth he has, suppose this man had a fair estate
that is ten thousand times better, settled upon him by some great man, that
gives it him freely, only ties him to this condition, that this Farm that was
his own before, he shall now surrender it up to the hands of the Lord, to him
that is his Lord, and for time to come though he shall dwell upon it still, yet
now he shall occupy it only as his Baylif, shall not cut down a Tree but what he
appoints, not pluck down a house nor alter a room but as he orders him, and all
the fruits he shall lay them where he would have them, and dispose of them as he
commands him, be but his Baylif and Steward as to that: the other now is his
own portion that he shall live upon: Just now here is the case, while we are in
our natural estate, all we have to live upon is our self, I have so many
corruptions that (it may be) are very pleasurable, and honorable some of them,
I have such parts, such strength of Body, I have such a wit, or such an estate,
or such a good name, it is al I have to live upon, and I will improve it to the
best I can, and as it may best serve my turn I use it, but now when I take
Christ Jesus to be my portion, when I come to take the Lord Christ to be my
portion, I surrender all these up into Christ's hands, and while he is pleased
to put them back again into mine, I am only his Baylif, his Steward, my wit is
his, my Honor is his, my Wealth is his, my Lands are his, and a man that has
denied himself does occupy all these things, just as the Jews were to occupy
the Land of Canaan, of whom you may read in Levit. 25. that the Lord told them,
This Land (says he) is all mine, and you are but sojourners with me, you shall
plow it thus many years, and then you shall plow it no longer than such a time,
and of the fruits of it you shall bring the first fruits to such a place, and
pay the Tithes to such a place, and to the poor give such a thing, and gives
this Reason, For the land is mine and you are but sojourners with me, so that
all that a man has in this world, all that is comprehended under the name self,
when once the Soul closes with Christ, it is but a sojourner with him to use
these things, and to use them according to the Lords pleasure; and these four
do make up self-denial; when a Soul (in a word) is come thus far, that he does
abhominate all that is in it so as for making it a portion, when he hates and
labors to crucify whatsoever in it is an enemy to Christ and the ways of
Christ, when he parts with all, with any thing as they stand in competition
with Christ, when they labor to use all according to the rules of Christ, so as
to make Christ the Proprietor, and themselves to be but Stewards or Tennants at
will to him. This is the self-denial that the Lord says must be in every Soul
that will be his Disciple. Now before I come to the Application of this, I have
but one thing more and that is to show you,

3. Why it must be thus, what reason there is, that so the thing may be
demonstrated to you, that so when I come to the Application your hearts may
have nothing to oppose against it; and understand me, the question is not why
it is comely to do thus, why it is requisite it should be so: but why there is
such an absolute necessity of it, that a man cannot so much as pretend to be a
Disciple of Christ that will not submit to it. What Reason for it? I answer
first,

1. Because wheresoever the Lord Christ is received by any soul, he will be
received as the All of that Soul, mark my words, Christ will be all or he will be
nothing, what the Father has sent him to do he will be all to do it, he will
never undertake a piece of it, and the Lord has sent him to be all that a poor
lost sinner can need. Now I pray conceive my meaning thus, Take a Maid that a
Man will be a Husband to her, when she marries to this man he will be all in the
place of a Husband, and she must renounce all the men in the world in matters
that belong to conjugal Relations, the marriage state will admit no rivalty; I
but for all that, though the Husband must be all in the relation of a Husband,
yet he is not all that the Wife needs, and she may lawfully have application to
other Creatures, and to other men for some things wherein her Husband cannot be
all to her; if she be sick, she must have a Physician; if she be wounded, she
must have a Chyrurgeon; if she be sad, it may be she must have another to
comfort her: neither can her Husband be her Bread, and her Clothes, she must
have another must make them, and prepare them. But now Christ Jesus is All that
the soul needs, he is their Father, their Husband, their Brother, their Friend,
their Companion, their Bread, their Drink, their Cloth, their Gold, their
Silver, their Honor, he is All in All; Christ Jesus is so, and he will be so, or
he will be nothing; and there is this natural reason for it, Because every man's
heart shares out both its prayers, and its confidence, and its love, and its
praises (I say it shares it out) according as it needs, or finds supply any
where. If one man be my Patron, and give me a great deal of my maintenance, I
share out my expectations, my prayers, my love, my service most to that man;
but another helps me with some of these, and he has part of my good wishes,
and part of my prayers, and part of my praises, according to the proportion of
good I receive from him, so is my heart shared out to him in dependence, or
thankfulness, or love. But Christ Jesus will have no sharing, he will have all
thy heart, all thy prayers, all thy love, all thy affections, all thy
obedience; Christ Jesus expects all, which he cannot have until he be all, and
he never can be all, til al other be renounced, til I have no God but Christ,
til I have no Father but Christ, til I have no Wisdom but Christ, til I have no
Righteousness but Christ, I shall never share out al my prayers, and confidence,
and love, and the like, to Christ for all; and therefore will Christ have al
renounced that he may be all. That is one Ground, and the great Ground. There
is another (which I will briefly touch) and that is this:

2. Because al these things that we are to renounce, even the best of them al
in those notions wherein we are to renounce them, they are al of them, and will
be adversaries and hindrances to us, in the way that Christ Jesus expects we
should walk before him, and therefore until our souls do totally renounce them,
we are in perpetual danger of being undone by them; as I pray conceive my
meaning thus in a familiar comparison: Suppose in a Civil War wherein a Nation
is divided, and one Faction engaged against the other; if a man that has been
engaged on the one Party, do leave that Party, and come over to serve that side
against which he did oppose before, this man must renounce all the other Party,
though his Brethren were there, though his Estate lay in those Quarters, he
must renounce them all, or otherwise he will never be trusted by them, to whom
now he pretends to join; or be sure (which is the thing I alledg it for) if he
hold correspondence with them, they will ever be dropping destructive principles
into him, against the way that he now engages for. So al these things, not
only our Drunkenness, and Whoredom, and Lust, and Lying, and stealing, and
slandering; but our Reason, our Wills, our Affections, our Wealth, our Honor,
our Children, our Friends, our Duties, our Performances, will lie as blocks in
the way to hinder us from some of the things that the religion of Christ will
put upon us; there is nothing cleerer, Saint John has an excellent speech in 1
John 2.16. says he) All that is in the world (mark his words, All that is in
the world) the Lusts of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of life,
it is not of the Father: It is not of the Father all that is in the world, What
means he by all that is in the world? that that he had said before, Little
Children love not the world, nor any thing in the world, his meaning is, love
not Life, love not Wife, love not Children, Estate, Honor, Wealth, love them
not, Why? They all serve but to nourish the Lusts of the Flesh, the Lust of the
Eye, or the pride of Life, and that is not of the Father, they will draw you
away from God, therefore take heed of them; and look what John says of the
things of the world, the same may be carried to all the other; Love not your
Duties, love not your Righteousness, love not your Performances, love not your
Honesty, love none of these as you in your natural estate cleave to them, they
al of them tend but only to advance your self, and to pull down Christ, and will
be hindrances to you in the way wherein Christ will have you walk; And thus I
have endeavored (Beloved) to make plain unto you this great Doctrine of
Christianity, that is the very first door that we pass through when we come
into Christ's School to deny our selves: Now it remains that I make some
Application of it, and that I shall do as briefly and as clearly as the Lord
shall please to enable me, and among many other things there are but two or
three that I intend to insist upon. The one is,

USE, 1.
Hence from all this discourse it clearly follows, that among the great
multitude of those that are called Christians, there are but very few who are
Christians indeed (for Gods sake mark this that I say to you, I say) If this
discourse of mine be true (as I hope I have made it clear out of Gods word to
you) that a man cannot be Christ's Disciple, that has not learned this lesson
of self-denial, certainly there are very few Christians to be found in
Christendom, and truly I have often thought and am persuaded it is true, that
the not understanding of this lesson, or the not coming to Christ upon the
terms of this Lesson, is the great cause of all the formalities, and
hypocrisies, and the unbelief, and apostasy that is sound amongst Christians. I
observe (and it is an observation that many have made) that in the primitive
times of the Church, when death and ruin was visibly to be expected by any one
that would embrace Christ, then it would be hard for any man to enter upon
Christianity, until he had resolved upon this lesson, because they took it for
granted, I go to poverty, I go to hanging, I go to stoning, I go to beggary if
I go to Christ, and therefore they had need see so much in Christ, that they
might be willing to part with all for him, and yet even then our Savior Christ
noted, that a great many came in upon false grounds: but now after the name of
Christian Religion has obtained in the world, and men are made Christians from
their mothers womb, I mean in an outward form, that as soon as we have a Child
born we say it is born a Christian, and then we go and Baptize it as a
Christian, and then when it comes to Church it hears Sermons as a Christian,
and then as it grows up and gets a little more knowledge it comes to the Lords
Table as a Christian, and so men are made Christians by piece-meals, and they
know not how, but the Lord knows mavelous few amongst them ever understood any
thing at all of this Point of self-denial, that if amongst such a great
Assembly as here is, if a man in Gods name should come but to enquire and say,
Are you a Christian? Yes: Do you follow Christ? I: And are you his Disciples in
truth? I hope so: Pray have you denied your self? Have you learned the Lesson
of self-denial? God he knows they know nothing of the meaning of it (as they
say) it is heathen Greek to them, they are unacquainted with it: Well (Friends)
know you for certain, that you may be bred Christians, bear the name of Christ,
make a profession of Christ, hear Sermons of Christ, partake of the Sacraments
of Christ, and do a thousand things that may outwardly speak you to be the
Servants of Christ, and in the midst of all these you may be as far from being
his Disciples in truth, as they were that crucified him, and if ever the Lord
come but to dispose of you, and come to call for that same beloved Self of thine
whatsoever it be, that thou must turn it out of door, the world shall quickly
know that thou never did receive Jesus Christ in sincerity, I am persuaded
that so many of you as have but ordinary understandings in the Book of God will
be able to Judge, if you compare my Doctrine with the lives of most men. You will
say, Either this that you have preached is not Gospel, or we are not
Christians, there are very few of us that ever learned this Lesson, therefore I
desire you (before I go any further) every one a little to try his own soul,
what evidence he has of this Lesson wrought in him, you call your selves the
servants of Christ, I beseech you examine, Have you ever denied your selves? I
do not ask now whether you have learned a particular Lesson, to deny your
Credit, or your Will at this time or the other time, but this same putting off
this old Self, this renouncing of thy self, have thou ever learned that? and
among a great many trials I will pray you (at the present) but to weigh these
two Considerations. First,

1. In the presence of God tell me, what do thou weigh in the Balance? This
is somewhat a blunt question, but it is that that will mightily determine the
case, Tell me in the sight of God, what do thou weigh in the balance? my
meaning is this, I know thou know what thou art, and what thou have, thou
know thy self (it may be) to be a Scholar, a well bred man, it may be a
great Magistrate, it may be of a great estate, it may be a great name, it may
be an honest man, it may be an unblameable conversation, it may be cried up as
one of the eminentest men in the City where thou live, looked upon by all the
City, and neighborhood as a rare man, and it may be all this is true: But tell me
what do thou weigh in Gods sight? That God that knows how thou esteemest thy
self can determine this question: Well thus plainly, Art thou one that carriest
such thoughts as these? there is such and such and such they are great
Professors, I thank God I am as good a man as any of them all, I am sure I have
a better estate than they, I am sure I have more honesty and as good a wit as
they* and I can set out my foot by any man, let any man detect me, I thank God
I am not as a great many others are, and thus thou judge of thy self; Alas
poor soul! thou art very far from Christ Jesus: But now if God will bear witness
with thy soul, that in the midst of al these thou say, I am (indeed I am)
it may be a learned man, or a great man, or a rich man, or a Scholar and the
like, and I have lived honestly, and God has kept me from many notorious
wicked ways that others have walked in, but alas what am I for all this? a poor
undone Creature, a worthless Craature, not only my lusts but my Prayers, my
Sermons that I preach, or hear, my duties that I perform, God help me I am a
base Creature, if God look not upon me in Christ Jesus, I have no one thing to
commend me to God, nothing that ever I had, nothing that ever I did is of any
worth, I loath it all, Oh! if God would give me Christ I am well, but for other
things I have nothing, there is the man, the soul that weighs nothing in the
balance, is nothing has denied himself, he has sold himself, he says indeed
I am worth nothing, Why? Is not this house yours? It was but I have sold it and
spent the money too, God help me, so I had these things, but (alas) they are not
worth a Groat, they are wotrh nothing, my worth is this, if I have hope in
Christ I am well, if not I am lost. Ask but thy soul that. Secondly,

2. Tell me (for that fourth branch that I named, because I know if thou have
but any face of Christianity, thou dare not own those that are known Lusts,
known Corruptions, thou endeavorest to mortify them, but I will insist only
upon that fourth branch) Do thou with all that thou have, look upon thy self
as one that is Christ's Baylif and Steward, he has laid up thy portion for
thee, he measures out thy wealth for thee, and for him thou live, and for him
thou give that that thou have, and that that thou art, and that that thou
do, thy honor, thy estate, thy life, thy wealth, if Christ may have any
service from them, by them, through them, here they are, thou tenderest them to
him with all thy soul, if the Lord have subdued thy heart to that, I tell thee
for thy comfort (and so I pass from this first use, if the Lord have subdued
thy heart to that) he has taught thee that lesson which though it be the first
in order to Christianity, yet it is the hardest Nut thou have to crack, it is a
lesson that nothing but Gods Spirit dwelling in thee ever subdued thy heart
too, and it is assure a token that the Lord is thine, as any thing that ever
can be found in thee, when thou have renounced all, that Christ may be all to
thee: but if this be a stranger to thee and thou to it, do not flatter thy self
with thy carnal confidence, thou may be very religious and honest in outward
show, but thou servest thy Self and not the Lord, and that self of thine will
ruin thee and never save thee, and therefore in the next place (which is the
use which I most of all intend, and which when I have done with I have done my
Sermon)

USE, 2.
I would labor to teach this Lesson, this great Lesson of self-denial, I would
be a help to those that are willing to learn this hard Lesson, how it may be
attained that we may follow the Lord, and truly (Honorable and Beloved) if I
should look upon my self only in this work, my weakness to think that I should
persuade you to deny your selves, I profess I would as soon expect that I might
persuade you to go out of this Assembly, and lay violent hands upon your
selves, and cut your own Throats, as soon as by any Rhetoric or Arguments of
mine, I should ever look to persuade you to this great lesson of self-denial,
but when I consider that in this work I am the Minister of Christ, and that his
Spirit goes along with his word, I may hope through his Grace that I may teach
that, and leave that upon many of your souls, that may make you contented to
forsake all, and follow Christ all the rest of your days; I say again, looking
upon humane persuasions it is nothing: I remember the Story that is told of
Luther, When Luther first came out to preach against the Popes indulgences, and
to reform the corruptions of the Church of Rome, went about that vast Task,
there was one Albertus that liked Luthers projects very well, but despaired that
ever he would make any thing of it, he wrote to him, Frater abi in cellam, die
miserere mei Deus; Friar (says he) go to thy bed, go into thy Cel, thou will
never do any good at this work: So to come to persuade men to forsake
themselves, to renounce themselves, to come and deal with Lord Majors, and
Aldermen, and Sheriffs, and Ladies, and great Citizens, and learned men, to
come and turn them out of all that ever they have, that they should renounce al,
and deny al, and not be worth one Groat but the favor of God in Christ, Abi in
Cellam, Go to thy Bed, there is no hope of it, but if God strike in, there will
be hopes of it, and therefore to persuade you to it, be pleased to take these
three motives^

1. Three Considerations I would give you, to make you willing to learn this
lesson of self-denial, and then,

2. I will show you the means that you must use to attain it.

1. To provoke you to it, Consider in the first place.

1. That this self, this cursed self that I am preaching against, it is
absolutely the greatest Idol in the world, the greatest Idol and false God that
is to be found in all the world: Since man left the true God from being his
portion, there have been found out a hundred thousand other Gods, but all those
hundred thousand and hundred thousand demy-gods, they are all of them but
underlings to this same God that is called Self, Self invented them, Self set
them up, Self changes them, Self produced them, and they all bow before it, as
Dagon did before the Ark, so all the other Idols in the world bow before Self:
I know I speak Gods truth, my meaning is, All false religions, all policies,
all injustice, all oppressions, all underminings, all villainies that are acted
in the world, and from one end of the world to the other, they all are but the
fruit of self-love, self-preservation, self-interest, self-content,
self-respect, somewhat about Self has set them up, and were they all banished
out of the world, while we have a Self in us, an unmortified Self, that self in
mankind would invent all those again that ever were, or as bad as they: This is
the Abaddon, the Apollion, the abomination that was all desolation, and
certainly this ruins Kingdoms, ruins Commonwealths, overthrows Churches, it
is the great waster that destroies all, and you set against all other things
without any purpose, til you go against this; I hope I speak to wise men, but I
am sure if you will search you will find this to be true, that it is only self is
the ruin of al men, and til you turn that off, you do but crop the bud; and as
if a man should say, that I have almost undone my self by a Whore, but I will
give her over, I will follow her no more; and another say, I have undone my self
by a pack of Cards, but I will use them no more, but if self remains
Covetousness will undo thee with Religion and with Honesty, it will carry thee to
Hell by thy Prayers, by thy Tears, by thy reformations, til the Lord turn self
out you do nothing. That is one. Secondly, Consider this,

2. There is an absolute impossibility (the Lord help you to weigh what I am
now saying to you, I say there is an absolute impossibility) that ever the soul
should cordially close with Christ until it do totally renounce it self, never
can Christ be cordially closed with til then: There are a thousand things may
make a man make an external profession of Christ, or keep a fair quarter with
him, but cordially to close with him it is impossible, til the Lord teach us to
renounce our selves: I will give you the reason, because Christ's interest and
self-interest are diametrically opposite one to the other, directly opposite
one to another, and therefore it is not possible that ever we should close with
Christ until we renounce that other; that is that our Savior means in Math. 6.
No man can serve two Masters, he does not mean that a poor man cannot serve two
or three or ten Masters, he may serve twenty Masters, so as all those Masters
have but one interest, if they have all one common and joint stock he may serve
them al, but if their interests be opposite one to another, the man can never
serve them both; Now Christ's interest what is that? it is only to lay the
Creature low, to make man, and all that is of man vile and nothing, and to
exalt free Grace only, that is Christ's interest, but now self-interst is
nothing in the world but to exalt it self, whosoever goes down, to tread upon
the Devils shoulders to exalt it self, to tread upon the world to exalt it
self, to tread upon Gods shoulders to exalt it self, any thing that may exalt
it self, they are so opposite that it is impossible they should both close:
Thus far indeed a man that has made Self and self-interest his portion, that
man may keep a marveilous fair quarter with Religion, as a learned man handling
this very Doctrine I am preaching of, uses this comparison, says he; Those
men whose interest is to maintain their own greatness, they will entertain
those that are called the wits of the time, the pleasant Companions, the Drols,
they will entertain them, bid them welcome, be glad of them: though it be some
cost to them, it is a part of their grandour, it maintains their greatness to
have such, and they are as welcome to them as any body in the world, but if any
of these wits or pleasant Companions shall come to engage this man, and say,
pray (Sir) be you bound with me for ten thousand pound: Sir you are welcome to
my house, and your Horse is welcome, but (Sir) you must pardon me, he will throw
him off rather than do so: So a man may entertain Christ, while hearing of
Sermons and discoursing of Religion is only an Ornament to a man, a man that is
of a selvish spirit may cordially entertain him so far, but so as to hazard
their own undoing for Religions sake, for Christ's sake to bring me to beggary,
it may be to hang me upon a Gallows, to throw me out of my Office, to overthrow
my Trade, wholly to throw these away no man living can entertain Christ so far.
It was a notable speech of the King of Navarre, that afterward was Henry the
fourth of France, The King of Navarre was a Protestant, and owned the
Protestant cause, but his eye was upon the Crown of France, to which he knew he
was Heir, and hoped to come to it, and when Beza and the other Protestants did
press the King of Navarre, to appear cordially in the cause of God, says he, I
am yours, I will go with you, but I promise you I will go no further to Sea,
than I may come to Land if a storm rises, his meaning was, he would never
hazard the loss of the Crown of France for the Protestant Religion, and so he
fared accordingly; and truly so may it be now, Thou may tell Christ after a
complemental manner, Lord, thou art mine, it is my honor to be thy servant, I
delight to hear thy word preached, and worship thee in my Family, I rejoice in
it: all this fair quarter may thou keep, but believe it, if the Lord have
not taught thee to renounce thy self, when Christ shall come to try thee
thoroughly, thou will honor him just as you shall find in the Story, and it is
worth your observation, in 1 Kings 20. you have such a Story as this is,
Benhadad the King of Syria sends to Ahab King of Israel such a Letter as
this, says he, Thus says Benhadad, All that thou have is mine, thy Wives and
thy Children are mine, thy Gold and thy Silver is mine; and al is mine, Ahab
very loath to quarrel with him returns him a very fine complement, My Lord
(says he) all that I have is at your service, all is thine; Well, Benhadad
sends next day, Well, (says he) whereas I sent to thee that all is mine that
thou have, I will send my Servant for to seize upon it: while he only talked of
it, Ahab would own it, my Lord all is thine: But when to morrow I will send my
servants, and they shall seize upon it, then he calls his Counselors, See you
how this man picks a quarrel with me, what a fair answer I sent to him, and now
he would seize upon all: So if Christ come to thee, til thou have learned
self-denial, and say, here I will lay thee down, here thou shall lose thy
credit, or thy Conscience, peace with me, or peace with men, thou can never
close with Christ cordially till thou have learned this lesson. And then
Thirdly and Lastly for my Motives.

3. Know for certain, If the Lord have but once taught thee this Lesson, there
is nothing in all Christianity will be difficult to thee, all the ways of
Christ will be as plain as a Bowling-Alley, whatsoever thou art called too; I
know I speak a great word, but I bless God I speak not unpreparedly in it, all
the ways of Christ will be as plain as a Bowling-Alley to thee, if the Lord
have but once taught thee to turn Self out of doors, thy work will be brought
only to these two Heads.

1. One part of it to learn to know what Gods will is concerning thee, what he
would have thee do, or what he would have thee suffer. And,

2. The other will be but to seek strength of him, that thou may not in thy
own power go about it, but be supported by him; but otherwise all objections
and difficulties are removed, if Self be but once turned out of doors; Why?
Because all the difficulties in the ways of Christ arises from Arguments
taken from Self only, either this will be against my honor, or here I must part
with such a pleasure, or here my estate may hap to be cracked, or here this may
hazard my life, or this may deprive me of my Children, or this may cut me off
from my Friends, or this may expose me to scorn, some such thing or other comes
in, but otherwise when a man has no such thing to take care for, I have no
honor, nor credit, nor wife, nor Children, nor friends I regard, the Lord is my
portion, I live upon him, I drink water out of that Cisterne, and I care for no
other, when the soul has but once learned that, it is but with him as it was
with Paul, says he, I go bound in the spirit to Jerusalem, and I profess I
know not what I shall meet withal, says one, then I will tell you what you shall
meet withal, the Holy Ghost says the Jews shall bind you, and Scourge you, and
Whip you, and send you to Rome, and what then? they all fall a Weeping for, and
about him, says he, why break you my Heart? What care I to die at Jerusalem
when it is the work of the Lord; he had no self to regard, he had turned self
out of doors, and all the ways of Christ were easy to him, and God knows this
passage was one of the motives that made me choose this Theme before this grave
Auditory; Truly our times are extreme Ticklish and dangerous, and the wisest
man under Heaven knows not what will betide him, whether it falls back or edge,
no man can tell what will become of him, nor what to meet withal, and a great
many wise men are perplexed to know what to do, now I tell you, if the Lord do
but teach you to deny your selves, to lay aside all that may be called self,
you will have no great difficulty not in these difficult times, but only to
know what God would have you do, that you may not go out of the right way for
want of light that you may not engage in sinful actions for want of council,
you will pray to God to make your way plain, but as for other difficulties
whether you shall stand or fall, Live or Die, it would be no great trouble to
you, if God had but once taught you to deny your selves; Nay, you will not only
be prepared for the worst times to come, but for all services you shall be
called to, It is a good observation of a learned man, That all the men that
ever have been eminently serviceable, either in matters of the Gospel, I mean,
in Duties of Religion, or eminent if it have been in a Christian way, in
matters of Charity, or Justice, or in being faithful Patriots, they have been
men that have little regarded themselves, that have not greatly regarded what
they were talked of, how they were valued or esteemed, or what was like to
betide them, but only men that were willing to be public sacrifices if need
were, and those men have done the best service if any other; So in the greatest
Services, you may be possibly called to suffer, turn but Sarah aside now, when
Abraham must go to Sacrifice his Son, Sarah shall not know of it, and then
Abraham can do it well enough, for he had learned to follow Gods will, but
Sarah would have Rung him another Peal; So turn but self out of the way, and
you will be fit for any thing God shall call you to; But you will say.

Quest. How shall a man attain this Lesson? What Arguments or what Rethorick
can you use, that you can expect ever to prevail with men, to turn them off
thus from themselves?

I will tell you,

Answ. Not by any Humane Oratory in the world is this to be effected, but it is
the Lord, it is the spirit of the Lord that does it; no man can come to me
(says Christ) except my Father draw him; now in every coming, there is a
Terminus a quo, and a Terminus ad quem, the term that you must go from, that is
Self, the term that you must come to, that is Christ, Now no man comes from
himself, or comes unto Christ, til God Almighty draw him: But what (think you)
is Gods drawing? It is nothing but the spirits persuading, Gods spirit
persuades them, And what do you think the Spirit of God persuades them too?
that I now come to, and afford me but one quarter of an hour for that, and then
(God willing) I shall have done. The Spirit of God when it does enable a soul
thus to deny it self, it does persuade them of these two things, which two
things I would commend to you as your study. The one is,

1. The Spirit of God makes him see what Self is, and no man under Heaven
longer cleaves to himself, than he is deceived in himself, for let him but once
have but a true information of himself, and he abominates himself presently.
That is one. And then the second is,

2. To make him see the excellency that is to be found in Christ, the
All Sufficiency that the soul may find in Christ, and when they see their
present portion worth nothing, and that that is offered to them to be every way
satisfrctory, then does the soul readily renounce the one, and close with the
other; so that then if you would get out of your self, and renounce your self.

1. Study to know thy self, study but to know who thou art, in any of all these
things that I have spoke of, know but thy self; I confess it will not be a short
study, but I commend it to you, and the Lord help you that you may study it (I
say) know who thou art. First,

1. What thy Lusts are; for I tell you while a man is in his natural estate, his
Lusts are very excellent Ornaments to him, it is a brave thing to many a man to
think what a proud spirit he has, how he can rant it, and tread all his
Neighbors under foot, and that he can go from one filthy pleasure to another,
that pleases him: Study to know what thy sins are, and who thou art that art a
sinner.

2. Study to know what the World is, thy Wife, Honor, Estate, Friends,
Liberties, Study to know them.

3. Study to know thy Righteousness, thy Honesty, thy Prayers, thy Duties that
thou art so prone to magnify thy self for, and to make a bottom to stand upon,
labor to know them, and thou will have enough of them, as I beseech you
conceive me thus: Suppose a deluded young man were in love with some beautiful
Woman (as he takes her to be) he takes her to be the paragon of beauty of all
the Country, and of good behavior, and therefore he sacrifices his State, his
Life, his Parts, his Wit, and all to be her Servant, imagine now that this
Woman were some ugly, deformed, abominable strumpet that has only painted her
self, and take her paint off, she has the horridest visage that a man can look
upon, and is all eaten up with loathsome Diseases, show this Man but this Woman
in her own colors, let him see her deformity, he has quickly enough, then he
loatheth himself for loving her: Would the Lord therefore teach you but to take
any of al these things, and but to weigh them and study them, and see what
shadows, what baubles, what dreans, what fancies the best of them all are, I
speak not now of your Swearing, and Drunkenness, and Whoring, but I speak of
your Pomp, your Honor, your Wealth, your great Estates, your Revenues, your
good Clothes, Nay (I will go higher) your Prayers, your Mercies, your hearing of
Sermons, your Righteousness, your Honesty, if God would show you what guilt,
what filth cleaves to them, what venom is in them how little they will stand
your soul in stead in the day of trial, if God would teach you but to study
these things aright, certainly you would say, Lord, draw me from my self,
deliver me from my self, that am the veriest monster that lives. But especially.

4. Study to know Christ: Christ says, Let him forsake himself and follow me,
(said his Disciples to him) Lord, we will follow thee, but what shall we have? I
will tell you, (says he) you shall have a hundred fold more in this world,
besides in the world to come you shall have life everlasting, that is, (in a
word) Thou shall find in Christ all that that will abundantly satisfy thy soul,
there is righteousness enough, there is wisdom enough, there is mercy enough,
there is goodness enough, there is counsel enough, there is honor enough, thou
can not need so much as thou shall find in Christ, Rivers, Seas, Oceans of
happiness in Christ, study to know Christ and thou will follow him. These
things I thought good to press, and purposed indeed to have pressed them
larger, but I know not how the time is gone, nor how burdensome I may be to you,
and although this was all the use I intended, when I prepared this Sermon for
this place, yet since I finished it, there is brought somewhat to my hands, that
does enable me to make another use of it, at least of one branch of it, and I
beseech you give attention to it, and I have done. I am informed that it is one
of the ends of this grave, honorable and solemn meeting of the Magistracy of
the City, and of this holy service, to promote a work of Mercy, and Charity,
toward the poor of the several Hospitals, to let the well affected be
acquainted how things are, and what may be expected or desired from them, and
that I may do it in a few words, have patience but while I read this short
paper to you, and then I shall spend a little more of my Theme about it, and
then I have done. Here is a true report etc Thus (Beloved) I have read over
this paper, and I think I shall not need to tell you how it falls within my
Theme, I told you that one special branch of Self denial is, to resign up all
that we have of Wealth, Lands, Money, Trades, Parts, Abilities, to resign them
up to Christ, to serve him with them, to lay them out in the way that he will
appoint: Now your hearts could not wish for a way more clear and evident, for
the testifying your being good Stewards for Christ, than in owning the present
business that has been read to you, and to make it good, I will say but these
two things in a few words. First,

1. That of all the Services, of al kind of Services that ever we can do for
Christ, next to the saving our souls, the work of Mercy and Compassion to
People is most accepted with him, that that himself will most own in the great
day, when there shall not a cup of cold water go unrewarded that ever has been
given for his sake. I am confident you so frequently hear of the excellency of
the work of mercy and bounty to the poor, that I shall not need to spend any
more time to commend it to you, only I pray you to think of it.

2. But the other thing that I would commend to you is this, (and I beseech you
believe I would not willingly flatter, but according to the best information
that ever I could obtain) There is no such Treasury in the Christian world, no
such Banck where a man might promise what he does to be faithfully, and wisely,
and most advantagiously laid out, as in this Treasury of the honorable City of
London, and the Governors of these Hospitals, I have often heard (for I am but
an ignorant man my self in the affairs of this City) Godly men and wise men
often say, that had they any Hospitals to erect, any sums of money, were it a
hundred thousand pounds, that they would promise themselves to be laid out so,
that it should not go into private men's purses, or be given to Vagrants and
Knaves, but to the halt, and the lame that have need of it, they have professed
they would put it into the hands of those that are the Governors of the
Hospitals about London, where things are done in such a way, that setting aside
such frailties as al humane affairs are suhject to in the generality, they are
above making personal gains, but desire only to be faithful Stewards, and
therefore if God do put it in any of your hearts, that you would show your
self-denial, and would indeed make Christ beholding to you (as he will be
pleased to call himself your Debtor) know that such things as these are very fit
objects for your thoughts. And the Lord of Heaven direct you about it. I dare
stay you no longer.

FINIS
THE SAINTS DUTY To keep their HEARTS In a GOOD FRAME. Opened in a Sermon at
Olaves Silverstreet, November, 9. 1654.
PROVERBS, 4.23. Keep thy Heart with all Diligence, ( or as it is chiefly
read, Keep thy Heart with all keepings) for out of it are the Issues of Life.


IN most of the Chapters of this Book of the Proverbs, there is no connection
of one verse with another, that one should give light or help to clear the
other, but they are as a multitude of excellent Pearls put into a large Box,
whereof every one singly is of a very great price, and it is thought by many
that they were but so many sentences, that King Solomon did utter usually when
he sat in judicature, according as the cause or condition was that was heard
before him, so there was a divine sentence in the Lips of the King, and the
Lord in his good providence and love to his Church has recorded them, to be
for instruction for his People to the end of the world, and amongst them al if
you go from one end of the book to the other, if it be lawful to make
comparisons, I may freely say, there is not one Pearl of greater price, one
sentence of more divine use than this that I have read to you, and shall
endeavor (God willing) to open as far as I can within the compass of an hour
and in it there are these two things plainly laid down. Here is first,

1. A Duty enjoined to all the Lords Children, in these words, Keep thy heart
above al keeings. Secondly,

2. Here is an Argument to enforce to this Duty, in these words, for out of it
are the issues of life.

1. And in the Duty there are likewise two things. First,

1. Here is the subject matter, the thing that is to be done, and that is, Keep
thy heart. Secondly,

2. Here is the manner how it must be done, and that is, (as we translate it)
with all diligence; Keep thy heart with all diligence, or, above all keepings
keep thy heart.

Now give me leave briefly to interpret the meaning of the words, and then I
will put it all into one instruction, which I will endeavor to handle in this
hour. First, 1. What is meant by the heart, And, 2. Keeping the heart, And, 3.
Keeping it above all Keepings. And so, 4. Of the issues of life that flow from
it. Let me give you a brief interpretation of each of them.


1. What does Solomon mean by the heart here that must be kept?

No doubt it is not meant of the heart made of flesh, that is in the midst of
our bodies, it is spiritually meant that no man doubts of: Now take the heart
spiritually, and sometimes in the holy Scripture the heart is put for the whole
soul; sometimes it is put for the understanding faculty; sometimes it is put for
the memory; sometimes it is put for the Conscience; sometimes it is put for the
Will; sometimes for one or two Affections; it were endless to give you the
instances of all these; but here is a Key in the Text which will tell you what
is meant here; for without question that is meant by the Heart here, that is
the spring of life, from whence the issues of life do flow. Keep thy heart for
out of it are the issues of life, (now as I shall show you by and by) the issues
of life are nothing but our whole conversation, so that what is within is the
Fountain of our conversation without, that is meant by the Heart here; and so
consequently it must be meant chiefly of the Will and Affections. not excluding
the understanding: by the Heart then is meant the understanding faculty,
especially the Will and the Affections. Then,

2. Keep thy heart, Keep it, What is that? The word that is here translated
Keep, I find it in other Texts of Scripture variously applied, sometimes it is
applied unto those that are the Keepers of a Prison, where dangerous Fellons or
Malefactors are to be looked to, that they do not break away; Joseph was made
the Keeper of the Prison. The same word that is here; sometimes it is applied to
keeping the Sanctuary of God, and all the holy things that belonged to Gods
Temple, so it is several times used in Ezekiel. Sometimes it is used to signify
the keeping of Treasures, Jewels, etc. so that it is such a keeping as does
argue a great deal of care and watchfulness and diligence etc. All this is
meant by Keep thy heart, keep it as thou would keep a dangerous Fellon, a
Traitor; keep it as thou would keep a holy Sanctuary and Temple of the Holy
Ghost, keep it as you would keep the richest Treasures, keep thy heart. And
then,

3 Keep it above al keepings, with all diligence or above all keepings, that
plainly needs the least interpretation of all, because that it is clear that
there are abundance of things that God gives men in charge to keep, that if God
commit to any man a Flock he must take heed to his Flock, if he bestow any
Talent upon him of outward goods, he must keep it and occupy it for Gods Glory,
every thing that is received from God must be kept according to the rules he
has given, but above all thy keepings, when you have put them all together,
all the keepings that must be kept for Wife, Children, Estate, Name or
whatsoever is dear,, let thy heart be kept above all keepings, beyond them al,
above al keepings keep thy heart. And then,

4. Here is added thy Heart, keep thy heart, that signifies these two things.
The one is,

1. That Solomon who was a Son of wisdom, for it is judged by many that these
were not Solomon's own words, but they were a part of the Catechism that his
Father taught him, for so in the beginning of the Chapter he tells you that he
was his Fathers dearly beloved Son, and he taught him and instructed him and
said so and so to him, and so they think that all these were David's words to
Solomon, but if it be not, if you take them for Solomon's words it is all one,
for a little before he says, My Son, that is, when he says my Son he means
one that is a Son of wisdom, a Child of God, Keep thy heart, that is a good
heart, that is a reformed heart that has Grace planted in it, yet he that has
it so, must be careful to keep it so. And then it signifies further,

2. Thy heart, that is, above al other men's hearts look to the hearts of thy
Children, if thou be a Pastor look to the frame of thy People, so far as thy
relation and duty reaches look to them all, and get what good may be, but let
thy heart be looked to above them all. That is the meaning of the first branch,
Keep thy heart above all keepings.

2. Now a word of the other, For out of it are the Issues of life. Here are two
things to be interpreted. First,

1. The Issues of life, What is that? The word that is translated Issue, it
sometimes signifies a Bud that grows out from a Tree, sometimes a Child that is
born of a Father, sometimes and very often the waters that spring or issue out
of a Fountain, and so by the issues of life he plainly means all that comes out
in our Conversation, that is the fruit of the heart, Words, Actions, Relations,
Duties, Sufferings, whatsoever you will, they are all the issues of life, Al
these are issues of life. And then,

2. All these are out of it, What is that? out of it, may signify two things,
and both come to the same purpose, Out of it, that is,

1. Out of the heart, it is out of our heart that comes all the issues of
life, or (I think life must be added) out of it, that is,

2. Out of keeping of thy heart though it be a good one, though it be reformed,
yet when I exhort thee to keep it diligently, I would have thee to know that
according as thou keep thy heart, so will the issues of thy life be; Now out
of these words thus opened, I observe this Instruction.

Doct. 1. That the greatest Duty that lies upon all the Sons of God, the Sons
of wisdom in this world is, to keep their hearts.

To explain it a little more before I come to a further proof of it, be pleased
to know that there are two great works about our hearts in this spiritual
sense. The one is,

1. To get it into a good spiritual Frame, which no man's heart in the world is,
til the Lord break it in pieces and make it new.

The other work is,

2. When God has put this Instrument into tune, that we keep it so, that when
God has put it into a good frame, our work must be to keep it in a good frame.
The second of these is the Duty of this Text, for this is here applied unto the
Sons of wisdom in whom Grace is planted, and so my Doctrine then is this.

Doct. 2. That all the Servants of God must make it their busiest, their
diligentest, their watchfullest work in the world to keep their hearts in a
good frame when once the Lord in mercy has put them into a good frame.

Now to make this good to you, I will not (because an hour will quickly be gone,
and I have many things that I would fain give you) turn you to many Texts that
should particularly prove it, I think any of you that do but read the
Scriptures, where the Lord Christ enjoyneth us to look to our hearts, because
out of the heart and out of the treasury of the heart comes every thing out,
but to convince you of it I would open six grounds to you, and all of them out
of the Scripture which may satisfy you, that the greatest work that all the
servants of God have to do in this world as to themselves is, To keep their
hearts in a good frame; and I hope I shall show it you clearly that the things
are so, and then I will make some Application of it, as the Lord shall enable me
within the compass of the time. I say, there are six Conclusions that I would
set you down, any one of them may be sufficient to convince, but al of them
together may and (I hope) will abundantly satisfy you, that we have no such
Duty lies upon us as to our selves in this world, as the looking to our hearts.
The first is,

1. Because the heart, that heart which I have interpreted, it is beyond all
comparisons the best part of man, it is the head quarter. You know in an Army
they have their Sentinel in every corner, they would be loath to have the out
quarters beat up, but the head quarter where the General or chief Officers lie,
there is the strongest and watchfullest guard of all: Now the heart of man, the
will and the affections, and the intellectual faculty, that is beyond all
degrees of comparison better than every thing else that is in man, so much
better than all the rest that our Lord says, that the man makes a very ill
bargain of it, that gains all the world if he lose his soul, Loose thy Heart
and thy Soul is lost; Now then if our Souls, if the heart be ten times more
worth than all things else that we have, surely it should be kept more
diligently than any things else we have: This I think no man can question the
strength of the reason of it, it is the best; Remember our Saviors word in a
lower case, when he did chide men that did take care of meat and drink and
clothing and the like, says he, Is not your life more than your food? Is not
your body more worth than your raiment? I do but allude to that comparison, Now
I may say then, Is not thy Heart better than thy Head? Is not thy heart thy
inward man better than thy outward man? What is the body but merely the shel?
It is the Heart that is the Jewel. That is one. I hope to have a little more
time afterward to show what this includes in it, this keeping (at least to
point at it) but that is one ground. Because the heart it is the best part of
man, it is the Queen, it is the Prince, it is the head quarter, and al others
are nothing when compared with it. Secondly, A second ground that is for the
demonstration of it, is this,

2. Because the heart it is not only the best part of the man, but it is the
treasury wherein better things are laid up than it self. The heart is a very
rich Cabinet, yea, but it is a Treasury or Cabinet of the rarest, the
invaluablest wealth that is in Heaven or Earth. Understand me aright, I speak
not of the heart of a wicked man, of an unconverted man, for Solomon tells us
expressly, the heart of a wicked man is nothing worth, it self is a base thing,
and there is nothing in it but that that is worse than it self, nothing in the
world but the rubhish and the filth of the Devil and the World and Hell lies in
the heart of a wicked man, but a man that is a Child of wisdom, that is Gods
Child, Oh! there is a rich treasury laid up in his heart. You shall read our
Savior speaks of a good man, who out of the good treasury of his heart brings
forth good things, he has a good treasury: Now would you know what are the
treasures that are laid up by God, not of our own getting but of the Lords
depositing.

Quest. What are the treasures that are in the heart of a Gracious man?

Answ. I Answer, the Tongues of men and Angels cannot tell you what; I will name
you a few. The one is,

1. The great God himself has chosen to make the heart of every Godly man, his
own privy and Presence Chamber; himself says it, that though the Heaven be his
Throne, and the Earth his footstool, yet he dwells in in an humble broken
heart, in the heart of one that trembles at his word, and fears his name,
there does he himself dwell. And then,

2. Christ Jesus dwells there: Emmanuel, the Son of God, the Savior of poor
sinners; the Scripture is plain, That Christ may dwell in your hearts by Faith,
Christ dwells in our hearts, Is not there a Jewel? I tell you the Apostle says
of Christ, In him there are hid all the treasures of God; The God of Heaven is
worth no more than is laid up in Christ, and Christ and al he is worth comes to
dwell in the heart, and in him (says the Apostle) they are both of them in
Collos. 2. the one in verse 13. and the other in verse 9. where he tells you,
that the fullness of the Godhead dwells in Jesus Christ essentially or bodily:
Now Jesus Christ dwells in the hearts of Gods people. And then,

3. The Holy Ghost dwells there too, For the Heart of every Godly man is a
Temple of the Holy Ghost; and if you will I might go on to Multiply more.

4. That all the graces of Gods spirit are laid up in our Heart, It is Faith in
the Heart, and love unfeigned in the Heart, and all those excellent things. And,

5. The word that is the Rule of Life, says David, I have laid up thy word in
my Heart, I have hid thy word in my Heart; Now (Brethren) where there is such a
treasury that God is laid up in it, and Jesus Christ is laid up in it, and the
Holy Spirit (pardon the expression) is pleased to dwell in it, and all Gods
Graces, all they that are Gods ordinances are there laid up, his word and the
like, do not you think this should be well watched, and well barred, and well
kept, and well looked to? There is a second ground, that thy Heart it is not
only the best piece that is, but it is the treasury of that that is a great
deal better than it self, the richest treasury, and therefore Heaven has not a
richer treasury in it than the Heart of every Saint has, and therefore it
should be kept above al keepings; Thirdly, A third ground of demonstration is

3. Because that the Lord whom we serve, or pretend to serve, and profess to
serve, and do serve if we be his, The Lord looks only at the Heart in all the
services that we perform to him, All things that we are to do to the Lord as an
homage, and tribute and honor to him, he regards nothing but the heart in
them all, nothing else is of any esteem with the Lord but the Heart. My meaning
is this plainly, that in any services God likes a thing never a whit the
better, for the brave accomplishment or adornment of it with any of our parts
or faculties, Wits, Fancies, Memory, expression, Decorum, fair carriage and
deportment of the Body, the Lord values not this one button in any service
whatsoever, but so much as the heart is in it, so much as the will and
affections are in it, so much does the Lord value it, insomuch that this one
thing will satisfy you about the truth of it: read all the Scriptures over that
speak of the servants of God, and you shall find this, That when all their
infirmities (as many of them had many gross ones and grievous ones, when they)
were all reckoned up, if this were but added, but his heart was with God, his
heart was upright with God, that was a Salvo for all the other, he never broke
with any of them or cast them off, if so be their hearts were but with him in
the midst of al other weaknesses and infirmities, if they could but say as
Hezekiah, Lord, remember that amongst all my weaknesses my heart has been with
thee, there was Gods content. And on the other side, Let the performances be
never so glorious, or in things never so much commended, or never so much
delighted by the Lord, the duties of his Worship and Ordinances, if God did but
say of them, This they did but their hearts were not with God, Nevertheless his
heart was not upright with God, that signified the Lord threw it all away as
rubbish stuf that he took no pleasure in the wnrld in: So then because that it
is the Lord that looks at the heart, and if he have that, he has all, he has
so much as contents him, and never breaks for the want of any thing else, (as
you shall see further anon) because where the heart is, the best they have will
be brought out, therefore above all we should keep that. That is a third
ground. The Lord looks at that above all others, therefore we should keep it
above all others. Then Fourthly, (which I need but name).

4. The Devil who is our Adversary, and the Lords Adversary, and goes about
like a roaring Lion seeking how he may devour, all his assaults and batteries
are at the heart, and he counts all his labor lost if he do not get into the
heart, if he gets that he gets the Citadel that will command all the rest, and
if he be kept out or cast out there, he himself counts he has nothing,
therefore he says he will enter into Judas's heart, he will fill Annanias's heart,
he labors to set up his Throne and his Dominion in the heart of the Children of
disobedience, that is his great endeavor. Now then when we are called home to
the Lord, we give our selves up to him to fight his battles, and where we know
the Enemy will most assault, certainly our care should be most to watch. If the
good man of the house knew at what hour the thief would come he would watch, if
he knew what part of the house he would assault, he would watch that most of
all; Now Satan's whole endeavor though I confess that by his good will, he would
not let the Lord have a good word out of the mouth of any of his People, nor of
any People in the world, nor the bending of a knee if it lay in his power; but
he will afford that, so he may have but the heart, and if he can but any ways
batter the heart, or discompose the heart, or bring it out of frame, he will not
greatly be troubled at all other formalities they give to God: Now because
Satan does so extremely lay his battery there, surely the servants of God
should above all keepings with all diligence keep that. That is a Fourth
ground. Fifthly, Another that is of equal force is this,

5. The Heart even the heart of a Godly man it must be kept above Keepings with
all diligence, because in truth it is not to be trusted, No, not the heart of
the best man living in the world, it is deceitful, it is false, it is cozenig,
it is treacherous, not that the new heart is so, but our heart is renewed but
in part, and though it be made a Garrison for Jesus Christ where our Treasures
are kept, yet that Garrison has a great many false enemies that lodge within it;
It were endless for me to explain this sufficiently, in so short a time as is
fit for me now to speak, you know where the Scripture says, that the heart of
man, of an unconverted man, in Jerem. 17.9. It is deceitful above all things,
it is desperately wicked, so desperately wicked and deceitful that none but the
God of Heaven can search into the bottom of it, the deceitfulness of a man's
heart goes as deep as Hell, that no plum-line will go to the bottom of it; Now
when the Lord plants Grace in any of his Children, and brings in some
integrity, some sincerity, yet there remains a woeful tang of their former
falsehood and treachery, that was in it before any Grace was brought in; and if
it be not well kept and well looked too, the old deceits will quickly so get up
again, that all will be put most woefully out of temper upon a sudden. Should I
but give you the instances that the Scripture has left upon record, of some of
the choycest Servants of God, how they have been lamentably befoyled, when they
have but a little trusted their own hearts, and not had a s^ickt watch and ward
going along with it, you would hardly believe it; That holy Apostle Peter, how
did he trust his heart when our Lord and Savior asked him, whether he would
stick to him when he was in danger? Lord (says he) I will die with thee, and
hang with thee, if thou be in danger, and he believed it, and little knew
what danger lay in the bottom: and David he would not countenance any one that
was wicked, but when he trusted his heart it led him to Murder, and Adultery,
and Dissembling. And abundance of others that when they have but a little
believed their own hearts, the best of Gods Children have found so much, that I
may say of all the Saints living what Solomon says in Prove. 28. He is a Fool
that trusts his heart, he that trusts his heart, that will believe it, No,
if it be not thoroughly searched and thoroughly looked too: as Solomon says of
an enemy, Believe him not though he give the fair words, there are seven
abominations in his heart: So I may say to a Child of God, that has set Christ
and Grace and Gods Glory the highest in his heart, Believe not thy heart, there
are seven abominations lie in it, that if it be not very well looked to it will
lay thee in the ditch, it will bring thee into woeful inconveniences: Now then
as you know in a Garrison, if so be that we would keep a Garrison, if there be
impetuous enemies without, if the Rampires and Walls be strong the Guard may be
a little secure, but when they know there are a hundred false enemies within
their walls, that watch for any opportunity to open some postern Gate or other,
to set fire upon the City, to make way for the enemy to come in, they are mad
that think that it will be kept without al diligence; So that because of the
deceitfulness and treachery of our hearts, we must therefore keep them with all
diligence in the world. Lastly, to give one more and that is that which my Text
holds out, and therefore I will speak a little to it. Keep thy heart with all
diligence, Why?

6. Because out of it are the issues of life, That is plainly, because Thy whole
Conversation will be as thy Heart is kept, that is the plain meaning of it, Thy
heart is the fountain, and if thy heart be well kept, clean, sweet, and pure,
thy Conversation will be such: Now you know that the Conversation of the Lords
People it must be pure, it must be holy, Oh! there is a wonderful deal lies
upon it, that the Servants of the Lord should glorify him in a holy and
unblameable Conversation: Jesus Christ redeemed them that they should in their
Conversation show forth the graces of him that has called them out of darkness
into his marvelous light, and made them Inheritors of better things, that they
should be to the praise and glory of his Grace, and to have the servants of God
walk unworthily, walk in a deformed disordered conversation, this makes the
Lords name stink amongst his enemies, this is the greatest reproach of God that
can be in the world, to see those that are his redeemed people walk otherwise
than as becomes Saints: Now our Conversation will be as we look to our hearts,
look well to thy heart, keep that above all keeping, and then thy Conversation
is secure, then thy words and thy actions may all be trusted, then the Lord
will be secure of his Glory (if I may speak it with reverence) in thy words and
Conversation, if thy heart be but looked to; but if thy heart be disorderly,
and defiled, and polluted, then unclean issues of life will appear: A proud
Heart will bring a proud Conversation; a wanton Heart will bubble out a wanton
Conversation; a worldly Heart that drinks in the love of the Creature, will
dishonor God in a worldly Conversation, be sure of that; I thought to have
named you the Text, but I confess I had not time to look it, but you well know
it an excellent speech of Solomon's to my purpose, let me tell you before hand,
that it is usual in the Proverbs of Solomon, that one part of the sentence
concerns the wicked, and the other part concerns the godly, and commonly they
are one of them ever set contrary one to another, Now he has this speech
toward the latter end of the Proverbs, The Tongue of the Just it is like
refined Silver, (mark that expression, the Tongue of the just it is like
refined Silver) what is that? the language, the savory discourse of Godly men,
of gracious men, it is pure, and it is gain to a whole City where they dwell,
they even scatter refined Silver where they come; Oh! it is delightful to sit
and partake of the language of gracious men, the Tongue of the just is so; now
you will expect the other sentence should be, now the Tongue of the wicked is
rotten, their speech is rotten, No, but he says, The Tongue of the wicked is
nothing worth; as if he should have said, never look for any good in the Tongue
of a wicked man, Why? For his Heart is worth nothing, and therefore never
expect his language should be worth any thing, and though it is true some
wicked men have so much Hypocrisy, that they can express otherwise to men, yet
God that looks at the Heart he looks upon it as rotten and unsavory, but let
thy Heart be Silver, and thy Tongue will be like refined silver, let thy Heart
be rotten and nothing worth, and thy discourse will be as nothing; Now lay
these six things together, let me endeavor to make some use of it, but this is
the sum, therefore should all the Servants of God, all Gods Children look to
their Hearts above all things in the world, because First, It is the best part
of them, Secondly, It is a treasury of that that is better than it self, Heaven
has not a better treasury than is laid up in the Heart of a godly man, and the
Lord looks at it above all other things, and Satan assaults it above all other
things, and even the best men have abundance of corruption and deceit in their
Hearts, and according as their Hearts are kept so will their life be, therefore
above all keepings look to thy Heart; Now the Application of it, I fear I shall
not speak so much as I would have done, but I would willingly (if God help me)
a little warm your Hearts about it, three Uses I would wilingly make of this
Doctrine, that the greatest, the busiest work that the Servants of God have to
do in this world, is to keep their inward Heart in a good frame to Godward.

USE, 1.
Is this so? How lamentably and bitterly does this speak to the reproof of
thousands, who yet fain would go for the children of God, I might say of it as
Ezekiel says in another case, it is a Lamentation and shall be for a
Lamentation to a world of People, truly almost the whole world, many bitter
reproofs may be gathered out of this Doctrine two three or four sorts of
people, (I will give you a touch of it) and they are found in every place where
you come. First,

1. How many are there that are wonderfully exact in keeping the outward things
that belong to them; come into the House which is your Housewives care, those
that are neatly, civilly brought up, that would go for Housewives, how
delilcatly are their things kept? How are their Rooms rubbed? How is every
utensil kept tite and clean? Come into the Shops of your Trades men, How do
they keep al their wares? and if any thing lie out of its place and pile, How
impatient are they with their Servants? if they have received any money, how
wonderfully careful are they to have a Treasury where it may be barred and kept
safe for them? and come into our Country, How do People keep their Cattle?
their very Swine they will keep them as they ought to be, that they may thrive
and be for their gain, and credit, and the like, this you shall find common,
but go amongst these People, and how are their hearts kept all this while? As if
I should come into one of your houses, and find it very neat, and clean, Truly
I con you thanks, surely this cost somebody hot water to keep all this so
neatly; but how do you keep your heart? Pray how do you keep your heart?
Friends, I fear your Houses, your Shops, your Chests, your Garments, I fear
they will all rise up in judgment against you, every one of you: Have you a
Jewel, have you a heart wherein you think such a treasury is laid up? Do you
let it lie open to let every Rogue and Raskal come in, and every thing to
defile it, and can you find time to keep these outward things so? methinks I
hear a Mother say to her Child that she gives a row of Pins to, See you keep
them carefully I will call you to an account for them: But says God to a Soul,
I have given thee a Soul, and (if thou be mine) Graces that one of them are
more worth than all the Kingdoms of the world, and what pains do thou
bestow upon the keeping them? The Lord help you to ask your Souls the question,
whether this will not rise up sadly against you one day.

2. Go to others and rise higher, because the Body is higher than all these
things, Oh! what curiosity shall you find in many about keeping their bodies?
Alas, I must keep my body (says one) I am subject to colds and distempers, and
if once they be but bitten a little you shall hardly make them drink a Cup, it
will hurt their Bodies; yea, they will have their Cordials by them that shall
cheer up their hearts, O! how shall I live if I look not to it, and this care I
condemn not simply, because it is an Utensil we should use for Gods Glory, but
I fear the bodies of most of you will be a sad condemnation to the souls of most
of you: You shall never meet any of you in a Congregation, but the body of you
shall be tricked up as fine as you can, which it ought to be, But what have you
done for your hearts? Have you not left them at home? Nay, to go a little
higher.

3. How many are there that keep their very lives, not only their bodies but
their moral Conversations, that look that they may be Sine crimine, that
nothing may turn as a reproach to them, God forbid that my language should be
otherwise than becomes a Servant of God, God forbid that my Recreations should
be such but what may be honorable to God; and come to them and ask them
seriously, Are you the Servants of God? Pray tell me, Why, can any body detect
me? No, there is your care, the issues of it shall be kept as far as thou can
keep it: but what does thy heart do? Thy Tongue talks righteouly, thy Ears
hear good discourse, thy Eyes are in a comely deportment, and so thy actions
with men, Justice, Honesty, Sobriety, and other things shall not be found
against thee, and perhaps in the mean time, thy very heart left to be a Cage
for unclean Beasts and Birds: The good Lord pity us, these things are very
sad, where did you ever read that the Lord said, Keep your Shops above all
keepings, or your Bodies aabove all keepings, or your Conversations above all
keepings, though I told you how far it is comely, but for you to keep all these
things and never look to your hearts is sad: Nay, there is one more that goes
beyond all these.

4. It is true, you say true, We were Wretches if we should look to our Goods
and Bodies, and not look to our Hearts: I look to that every day, I but Friend,
Do you look to it above all keepings? And bestow more pains about it than about
all things in the World besides? pray deal faithfully in it, for you must give
an account to one that knows all things in the world, but have you more studies
desires and endeavors about that than about all things in the world? No, no,
Alas most of the people I converse with, they do as some poor Tradesmen do,
wretched men that think that they have got a servant that they leave all to,
and now and then because they will not let all run at random, look into the
Shop and ask him, Come, What? Do you keep your Cash right? and is all right?
and so rest in him, when all this while he is a Wretch, and runs out of all,
and so is my heart well? is all well there? I, I, says the heart, and we believe
it, and put our trust in it, and it is the arrantest Liar in all the world. I
remember Solomon has a notable Speech in the latter end of the Prove. Chap. 30.
where he says, There are three things that are wonderful, that I could never
find out the way of them, yea, there are four of them, the one is, The way of
the Ship in the Sea, and that is hard to find for it leaves nothing that you
may say here a Ship has gone, And another is, The way of an Eagle in the Air,
and that has many windings and turnings, And another is, The way of a Serpent
upon a Stone, and that leaves neither slime nor excrement, that you cannot find
which way it goes, And the fourth is, The way of a man with a maid, which he
interprets afterward to be a lascivious maid, who has a wanton heart within
that would deceive a hundred People, you may add the heart of a man too, for
that will tell you, I have been at Prayer, when it never prayed a word, and I
heard the word very well, and his heart was dead and asleep all the while, Oh!
(Brethren) it is hard for you to think with a few words thus to charm this
deceitful wild Beast, and you to have no care about it, but God knows and man
knows that you are real in your other keepings, and slight in this, I fear
there is little in your heart that your self judge worth the keeping, that you
are so extreme slight and loose about it. Well that is one, (I dare not stay
longer upon it) let it be a matter of rebuke, and to help you to try and judge
how things stand between God and you, for if your hearts be as they ought to
be, you will bestow more pains about them than about any thing in this world.
Secondly, Another Use that I will make of it, which is a Use that Gods Children
will rejoice in, and that is.

USE, 2.
It is a Doctrine that affords abundance of Comfort, I, this very Doctrine
though it may seem and does carry just rebuke (I believe) to the best of all
Gods Children, in some degree to be humbled, but withal it is a Doctrine of
wonderful Consolation to all those, whom God witnesses with that their
greatest care and study is to purge their hearts, to have their hearts mended,
to have their hearts guarded, and are most humbled and afflicted when it is not
well with the inward man, though all other things go smooth with them, yet it is
not comfortable with them except they find the heart set right Godward, this
Doctrine speaks a world of Consolation to such poor Souls, I am confident it is
the Lot of the generation of Gods People that hear me at this time, though it
may be under a temptation they may lay all aside, yet otherwise God knows their
daily work, their greatest work, their work of prayer and mourning is most
about their hearts; If you ask them, How does your Body? better than my heart,
How do you perform your Duties? well outwardly, but my heart is wretched, I have
a vile heart, and there they make their study, there they make their search,
there they make the matter of their mourning: Now I would say to such Souls,
and dare affirm it with much boldness, none but the Scholars that are of the
Lords own teaching ever study that Lesson, for as for others they love and like
their hearts well, that when they are convinced of every thing else in the
world, they will boast of their heart that that is right, but when a man can
say, as Hezekiah said to God, Oh Lord! remember I pray thee that I have with an
upright heart sought thee; as if he should have said, If I could have done thee
more service I would, I would have prayed better, and believed better, and been
more active, but thou have had my heart, the Soul that can say so, the Lord
would answer it even as David said to the Lord, in 1 Chronicles. 29. Oh! Lord (says
he) I know that thou love the heart, when he had offered up an Oblation he
and his People, Oh Lord! (says he) I know thou regardest the heart, and have
pleasuere in uprightness, as for me in the uprightness of my heart I have
sought thee; So when thou shall say, Father, my memory is weak, my utterance
bad, my temptations strong, and my corruptions great, I can deny none of these,
but the Lord knows he has my heart, could I get it in a better frame, I had
rather see it in a better frame than have the estate of an Emperor; Where there
is a willing mind (it is an excellent Speech of the Apostle, in 2 Cor. 8. in
the point of Alms, and I will give you an instance in that, that you may make of
it in a hundred other things, when he would stir them up to contribute, he
says, where there is a willing mind) it is accepted according to that a man
has, and not according to that he has not, as if he should have said, The
Lord has given me a heart, I like this cause so well I would willingly give
twenty shillings to this cause, but I am not able to give above a penny, Have
thou a willing mind to give more? thou art accepted according to what thou
have, The liberal gift is but the work of Gods Providence, the willing mind is
the work of Gods Grace, The same will run throughout all duties, go to prayer,
one man has such an utterance, conception, working fancy, can speak admirably
to the affecting of all, but these are but gifts and parts, and if he has an
humble broken heart goes with it there is Spirit too: but it may be another
poor Soul that joyneth in the Duty, that can hardly speak a few words of sense
together, but God knows if they could pray, if they could pour out their souls,
if they could wrestle with God, they had rather do it than any thing else in
the world, that is the work of prayer, the other is but the work of common
gifts, that is for the edification of others, therefore know this all of you,
we poor creatures deal with men, and it is almost impossible but we value men
according to their parts, a man whom God enableth with parts and gifts to
edify others, especially if there be Grace in his Heart too, he is measured by
the value of his parts by all men, God goes not by that value, No, that Soul
that takes most care about his Heart, give me a Woman, a handmaid that wrestles
more in secret, that she may bring her will to Gods will, and may love and hate
nothing but what God loves and hates, find such an one out, they are Gods
choice ones, and his Jewels, therefore be not discouraged for the want of any
thing while you can say, The great God that knows al knows my great study is
about my Heart, I will conclude this use with a speech I have often heard of
one Mr. Banes, a man that was indeed an excellent emminent Man for any thing
that was good, and not long before he died, some friends were with him in his
Library, it was an excellent one, and they fell a commending of it, I (says he)
There they stand but the Lord knows that for many years last past, I have
studied my Heart more then my Books; Oh! There was a study, give me a Scholar
that can say, I study my Heart more then my Book, I study my Heart more then my
Shop-book, I study my Heart more then my Counting House, I study my Heart more
then a Bargain, that it may be pure and Holy, this Man is a blessed Man and
Woman that has but attained this; and then Lastly the last Use that I would
make (and I will but even name it) is this,

USE, 3.
I beseech you therefore for the time to come will you all make this your
study, You have heard it is a dangerous Heart you bear about you, whatsoever
you are that think you may be most secure of your heart, you are but Fools to
trust it, and your Conversation will be as your heart is, remember all the
Arguments I gave you, and let it prevail with you for the time to come, to
enter into this serious study, how you may keep it in a good frame continually,
and this now would have been an Introduction to the second Question, for this
is sufficient to prove that it ought to be so: But now the next is,

Quest. Wherein stands the keeping of the heart in a good frame? It is true, I
confess it is comfortable to hear of the general endeavor of it, but what are
the rules and directions the Servants of God should attend to, when they would
keep their hearts in so good a frame, that it may be such a Temple of the Holy
Ghost for the Lord to delight in?

Answ. That is too great a Question in truth to handle in a little time, only
these two or three things I would say in general before I dismiss you: As First,

1. There is no talking, it is not for any man living ever to talk of keeping
his heart in a good frame, until first the Lord have broken it to pieces and
new molded it, that is for certain, while the heart is as we come into the
world, as we are in a state of nature, the wildest Beast under Heaven will be
easilier tamed, than the heart of a man will ever be ordered; It is just as a
Bell that has a crack throughout, all the Bel-founders in the Town and Country
they may hew it, and chip it, and scurfe it, and I know not what, they will
never make it sound right, til it be choped a pieces and new cast: So (I say)
the heart of man is by nature so forlorn, so full of wickedness, so utterly
destitute of all good, that if all the Teachers and Tutors under Heaven had it
to work, to bring a man up and make him right, til God take away the heart of
stone and regenerate him, and give him a new heart, there is no talking of ever
keeping it in a good frame: Therefore if you be not thoroughly grounded in it,
get your heart knocked in pieces, the first thing you do pray God Almighty to
break it through, break it down, break it up, and then when the Lord has broke
it and new shot it, that he has given you an interest in Christ, and the
Spirit of Christ is become a new life to you, then you are fitted to this Duty,
but til the Lord has wrought that in you, all other talk is to no purpose,
therefore your first work must be, to get such a heart as is capable of this,
for every one is not. Then Secondly,

2. When the Lord has done so, then for the keeping of it in a good frame, all
the directions (though there be very many of them yet) I think they may be all
brought to these two heads. The one is,

1. Keep the heart pure, keep it pure from sin, from the defilement that will
daily grow upon it if it be not well kept, from the stirrings of corruption,
either to keep them down that they do not stir, or when they do stir to get
them daily washed off by the blood of Christ. And then the other is,

2. As to keep it pure from sin, so to keep it fit for Duty, tuned and prepared
for the several Duties, the word is large and through Gods mercy your
instructions are many, and whosoever is willing may have constant directions to
guide him in all these.

FINIS
THE LIFE OF CHRIST: OR THE Great Mystery OF SPIRITUAL LIFE. Opened and applied
in several Sermons, at Olaves Silverstreet, October. 27. 1653.
Gal. 2. part of verse 20. I am crucified with Christ, nevertheless I live, yet
not I, but Christ lives in me, (now follows that which I shall more insist
upon) and the life that I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son
of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me.


THE Dependence of these words with the former, briefly stands thus: The Holy
Ghost having decried the Law as that which is utterly unable to give life, and
set up the justification of a sinner only from Gods Free Grace, in making over
unto him the Righteousness of Christ, having (I say) asserted this great
fundamental Doctrine of our Christian Religion, wherein the Galatians were
begun to be tainted, he then comes to answer the common Cavil, which (not only
the Papists, but) too many among our selves do charge this Doctrine withal,
namely, That it is but a door to al licenciousness, and does take off the rains
from any man, and give him an occasion to be bold in wickedness; for if our
righteousness cannot justify us, nor our unrighteousness condemn us, but the
righteousness of Christ is accepted for us, and in him we are complete without
any thing of our own, who would not take liberty to indulge himself in such
fleshly courses as are agreeable to his nature? Now against this the Apostle
opposes several things, as arguments to prove, that this cannot be a
consequence of this Doctrine to a man that rightly understands it,
Justification by free Grace will never be a temptation to a man to a sinful
life; and one Argument is,

Paul's Ministry tended to beat down a wicked life, and do they think he would
come to build up that which he had pulled down? that were an absurd thing.
Secondly,

the Law, he will be dead as to look for justification, or acceptance that way;
but it is that he might live to God, that is the very end of it that he might
live to God; that is another argument, and that being the very end that God
aims at, it is impossible that the quite contrary of it should flow from the
Lords own appointment. Then Thirdly,

Every man that does but partake of Jesus

Which he brings in by way of Answer to a tacit

Doct. 1.
That every soul that has an Interest in Christ, while he is in this world, it
is Christ that lives in him.

While we live in this flesh, in this world, the life that we live, it is
Christ's life, Christ lives it, we do not, only (when we accept of Christ)
believe in him to be saved by him when we go out of this world, and trust all the days of our life, that when this life ends he has a better life for us
in store, that is not al, but when we accept of Jesus Christ, we so accept him,
that his life is communicated to us, and while we are in this world we live
that life. That is the first Doctrine, That all the Lords people while they
live in this world, they live Christ's life. The Second is,

Doct. 2.
That the modus vivendi, the manner of their living this life in this world, it
is by faith.

We shall live the life of Christ to Eternity, but when that moment of Eternity
comes, faith shall have no hand in it; but the life we now live while we are in
the flesh, it is the grace of faith by which we live it. Just as I may express
my meaning (for I shall not handle that Doctrine) as take it of an Infant, As
soon as ever the body and soul are but joined together, that it is made a
living soul, it is the life of a man that it lives; but while it is in the
mothers womb, the manner of living is by the navel, the navel-string conveyeth
al to it; when it comes into the world, that is cut, there is no more use of
it, and then it lives another way. So while we are in this world, though we
live the life of Christ, yet Faith is (as it were) our navel-string, it draws
and receives al from him, when we are transplanted into another world, that way
of living cease, and we enjoy God in Christ immediately. These two Doctrines
lie in the Text, the first of them (with the Lords assistance) I shall spend one
hour in endeavoring to clear it to you, and to make some use of it.

That all that do receive Jesus Christ, even in this world, Doct. 1.
they live his life. I live, but it is Christ that lives in me, and the life
that I live in this flesh, I live it by the faith of the Son of God. Now to
make a little way to it, That all the Saints live Christ's life, the life of
Christ; I would not have you expect that I would spend any part of my hour in a
Phylosophical Discourse about the Nature of Life in general, No, let this
suffice, That you shall find in the Scripture a two fold Life of man spoke of:
The one is,

This present natural life which we al live, which Adam, I speak not of the
corruption of our Nature, but the first man was a living soul, that is, he was
an animal man, a man endewed with a reasonable soul, and all that come from him
have that life which is nothing but the union of the body and soul together,
and those motions and operations that are in us are acted in us by virtue of
that union, and this the Scripture sometimes calls the natural man, the natural
life, the animal man, as who should say, the man endewed with a soul, the
happiness of whom is to enjoy a soul-life, and this life it is sometimes called
the present life, sometimes called the bodily life, the life of man, and this
life all that proceed from Adam do live in all Ages and parts of the world, and
to the upholding and beautifying and accommodating of this life, are al men's
labors and their studies, and the good things of this world, they are naturally
al subservient to it, every thing parted with, rather than part with it; Skin
for skin, and all that a man has, will he give for this life: Now that there is
such a life, no man doubts of it. But then Secondly,

Adam, that as the first Adam was a living soul, and communicates a living soul
to all that come from him, the second Adam is a quickening spirit, and
communicates a quickening spirit to all that come from him, that is the Life that
my Text leads me to speak of, and this Life (before I come to speak further of
it) the Scripture sometimes calls the new Creature, sometimes calls it the Life of
Christ, as in my Text, sometimes calls it the Life of God, not only because God
is the Author of it (for so he is of the other Life) but because (in a sound
sense) it is the life that he himself lives, their Life being but an Image of
his Life; this is called Eternal Life, this is that that is the end and fruit
of al Christ's undertakings. Now this Life, this Spiritual Life, this Life of
Christ, this new Life, this Eternal Life, it is that that I now come to
endeavor to demonstrate to you, that all the Lords people live this Life while
they are in this world. Now there are Two things that my purpose is to treat
upon in the Doctrinal part of it, before I come to the Application; but before
I come to either of them both, I will crave your leave to set down three or four
Propositions that are but preparatory to it; I will not handle them, for they
would take up too much of the time, but to name them is requisite, it shall be a
kind of inlet or preparation to it. The one is,

That this spiritual Life that the Saints do live,

I premise that men may be in the Church, live Nicodemus who was a Doctor, a
Pharisee, a Ruler, and an honest man according to his principles he had been
trained up under, yet when he comes to Christ to know the way to Heaven, he
tells him al his other righteousness was nothing, if he be not born again, and
have a new life, he could never come into the Kingdom of God; What is this?
(says he) this was as dark to him as if he should enter into his Mothers womb,
and be born again when he is an old man: Therefore still think not, that if you
be Scholars, or wise men, or learned men, you must needs have the capacity of
it though the vulgar cannot; No, if the Lord give you not a share in it, you
will never understand it. Thirdly I premise this:











know nothing perfectly. No man does understand how his own bones were framed
in his mothers womb, and the things that are before our eyes, not a man living
is able to decipher the life of a Pismire or a Butterfly, therefore much less
must you think to be able to comprehend this; for this I note to prevent a
discouragement, if any soul should not be able to go along with a man in every
thing, nor understand every thing, it may be an argument to humble thee, but
not to discourage thee: only I shall ad this in the last place,

They that live this Life, the poorest, weakest,

I will first prove it clearly to you out of the Scripture that there is such a
Life, a spiritual Life,

I will then a little more fully endeavor to discover to you what this Life is,
and wherein it stands,

the like, yet this is but a little chipping and he wing of the life that other
men live, and can live as they do if they had a mind to it; but as for a life
by another principle and Rule, and to have other manner of operations than the
Life of the rest of the world, they abominate the admitting of it into their
understandings; and I am persuaded this is that that hardens abundance of
people, that they never look after, nor suspect their own condition: therefore
(I say) I would now prove to you that there is such a life which the Saints do
live, and instead of turning you to many particular Scriptures to prove it, I
will give you these Four Arguments out of the Scripture, which you shall in
reading the Scripture find frequently proved to your observation; Four
Arguments to prove that there is such a Life, that is a higher degree of
living, and another kind of Life than the rest of the world live. The one is,

The comparison between the two Adams: Jesus Adam was to al to whom he was a
Root: For it is worth your observing, that the Scripture speaks but of two
Adams from the beginning of the world to the end of it, two Men; the First Man,
and the Second Man; because they two only were Roots that others do partake of,
either which they spring from, or are grafted into. Now the first Man Adam, God
made him a living soul, and of a living soul is he the Root of all us, that is,
that natural, rational life that all men in the world have, the first Adam he
was the Root of it which communicates it. Now Jesus Christ is to al us the
Second Adam, and the Lord made him not only the Lord from Heaven to rule all
that should be under him, but to be a quickening spirit, that as the natural men
follow their stock, so all that partake of Jesus Christ must follow their Stock,
and consequently must partake of his Life, as the branches of the first Adam do
of his Life. That is one Argument, and pray weigh it, for if it please God
anon, I shall come to examine whether you have that Life or no. Secondly, The
second Argument I give is this,

I am come that my sheep might have life, that they might have it in abundance;
and herein appeared the love of God, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
we might live by him: He that has the Son, has life; he that has not the
Son, has not life. Now were there no other life than what all natural men
live, this were an absurd argument, and a poor (I may speak it with reverence)
undertaking. Suppose I should go visit, and ride a Journey of many hundred
miles, and lay down my life, and part with my estate; For what end? That the
party for whom I do it, might have have a house, that has a house already; why
should I do this if there were not another house than that which he dwells in?
Or why should I go that he might have health, that is well without my
undertaking, if there were not another health besides that. So, were there not
another life, to what end should Jesus Christ make that the undertaking of his
life, and death, and burial, and communicate life, if there were not another
Life than the rest of the world live? Thirdly,

Clearly you will find this, and very frequent in

Abundantly in the Scripture will you find this They who were dead in sins and
trespasses he has quickened* Read but the ten first verses of the 2d of the
Ephesians, and I know not how many other places there are, Ye were dead, ye
were such, but he has quickened you: and he that believes in me (says Christ
to Martha in John 11.25.) though he were dead, he shall live, and living once
he shall never die: Do thou believe this? Then, Christ being the Root of a
Life, it being the end of his undertaking that his people might have life, and
all men being dead before they come to him, and quickened to life upon the
receiving of him, certainly then there is a life that they who have any
interest in Christ do live, which others are strangers from. And let this
suffice for the first. And (beloved) though I shall not apply this alone, yet I
would count it a great fruit of this days meeting, if the very notion of it
might but stick upon your hearts, it would be of admirable consequence, that if
al of you would go home and say; Certainly whatsoever I may think of my self,
if I be in Christ, there is another life than that which I live yet, and (as
you will hear if it please God) a better life, another manner of life than this
is. But that for the first. The Second (which it may be you will more long for,
for I suspect not that you will doubt the truth of the first) is,

What is this Life? what is it? Now remember it is a participation of Christ's
righteousness upon their union with him, Pray mark it, I shall make this
plainer by and by; (I say) That the Life of Christ that all the Saints partake
of, it is a participation of Christ's righteousness upon the souls union with
him. Where there are these two things a little to be cleared. First,

That all who do receive Christ are united to

That upon their union they partake of his

That they are al united to him, the Scripture is It is Christ in us that is
the hope of glory, and we are one with him, and he with us, and he dwells in us
by his spirit, etc. therefore it is clear that we are united to him, made one;
and this union it is nothing but the Lord Jesus sending his spirit into the
soul, as a band to knit him and them together, that he be made their Root and
Stock. Now that I will not treat of, because the very handling of it, it is not
only a great Mystery, but it would take up more time than is to be allowed for
the Sermon. But Secondly,

Upon their Union with Christ they partake of of Christ's Righteousness that is
our Life: To this purpose, be pleased to observe this one rule, and mark it in
your reading of the Scriptures, of the new Testament especially; How that
Righteousness and Death, are the two things that are opposed one to another;
Death and Righteousness: That look as soon as ever man was a sinner he was a
dead man presently, he was dead under the sentence of Death; In the day thou
eatest thou shall die: and not dead only under the Sentence, but dead as his
sin deprived him of Gods Image. Now as it is sin that is our Death, so it is
Righteousness that is our Life; not our own (which the Scripture disclaims) but
the Righteousness of Christ: and you shall find several times in Romans 5. where
the Apostle compares the Death by Adam, and the Life by Christ, ordinarily he
uses this expression, That, As sin reigned unto Death, so righteousness by
Christ unto Life, still opposing them, our Death is sin, our Life is
righteousness. I know the time will prevent me if I should stay upon that. But
therefore,



Quest.
You will say, What mean you by that?

Answ.
I mean plainly this: That our spiritual Death it has two Branches, that Tree
of Death, that deadly Stock has two Branches; and we are said to be
spiritually dead in a twofold respect. The one is,

We are dead as we are under the sentence of

Our state of death we are in, as being deprived

He has a Righteousness of his Obedience, Col. 2.12, 13. Ye (says he) who
were dead in sins and trespasses has he quickened; How? forgiving you your
trespasses. In that place, the pardoning and removing of our trespasses, is the
chief thing that is the quickening there intended. So there is one, a
righteousness of Christ performed in our name, accepted by God in our stead,
and made over to us in the Covenant of Grace. That is one Righteousness.
Secondly,

Sanctification, and it is that branch of our spiritual Life that this Text
aims at; for he did assert the other, our quickening from the guilt of sin, in all the former part of his discourse. Now that no wretch may abuse it, and say,
that then we may continue vassals to sin, he proves it that Christ's
righteousness is communicated to us, that is, Christ's Grace is infused into our
souls; and that is made up of these three things, and I conceive there is
nothing else in it but these three things. The one is,





This self same spirit that plants in them these Life of Christ, and the Life
of God, which although it be perfect in none in this world, but there are
relics of our old death in us, and of our sinful distempers in us; yet really
and truly these things are found in every soul that is brought home to Jesus
Christ. And let this (I pray) suffice for the Doctrinal part, that without
being burdensome to you, I may make some application of it.

Thus then you see though I have not turned you to many particular Scriptures;
yet I know that if you do but read the Scriptures, you will find that this
Doctrine it lies written upon the foreheads of abundance of Texts, that thus it
is with all Gods people. Now then for the use of it, I intend but three Uses, it
may be I shall but even name the last. First,

Use 1.
You see by all this how necessary it is that you should al try and examine your
souls, Whether you be partakers of this Life or no? And (good friends) be
serious about it, and to make you the more serious, give me leave to stir you
up by these few Considerations, to be willing to have your hearts tried about
it. The one is,

shall find the Lord will never own a soul to be a Christian, that had not the
Life of Christ communicated to him. And Secondly, I tell you to provoke you to
it.

Abundance of things go for this Life which are Does Christ live in you? have
you the life of God in you? The Life you live in this life, is it the Life of
the Son of God? Think what you could answer to it.

Now if you will say, How shall we know it? Quest.


I will briefly discover it to you; Answ.
for I will give you but two Characters of it; many others might be had, but
two I would bestow a little time to clear to you. The one is,

Wheresoever the Lord gives Life to any Creature Skin for skin, and all that a
man has, will he give for his life; and if you would suppose, as the life of a
man it is made up of several lives, that that continues the being of his life,
it is prized above all the others; if he will be impaired in any of them, it shall
not be in that (as near as he can) that concerns the being of his life. Now
accordingly (say I) you shall find it clear, that among al those that live the
life of Christ, there is nothing in this world so dear to them as their
spiritual Life is, it may be they are daily mourning for the weaknesses of it,
but that that they have of it, is dearer to them than any thing they have in
this world besides; and the high valuing of this spiritual Life will appear in
these three things, just as it is in the other life. The one is,

David had learned God had placed it in his Word, O Lord (says he) give me thy
Word, my life lies in it: and new born Christians, if ever you taste how sweet
the Lord is, desire the sincere Milk of the Word that you may grow by it* be
longing after a high and reverent esteem, and an appetite after those things
wherein the Lord has placed thy nourishment, though they be but the channels,
the vessels whereby his spirit is administered to you, the supplies of the
spirit comes in them to you; of al things in the world, these are the most
desired: Others that are painted Christians may for their reputation, and that
others may think well of them, and to get knowledge, etc. and for such carnal
ends; but with an inward savor no man is mightily and eagerly carried out after
the means of spiritual Life, but he that lives it. That is one. A Second thing
that manifests the high value of that spiritual Life is,

A most vehement declining of what they know to be destructive to life. Let a
man that is thirsty,

Esau (and had his Birthright been nothing but a Civil Privilege it would have
been justified) If I die for hunger, what good would my Birthright do me? he
sels his Birthright for to preserve his life; Skin for skin, and all that a man
has, he will part with rather than his life. Take me a man that is alive to
Christ, if he must part with his Christ, or with his wealth, with his Christ,
or with his outward life, though it be the best thing that is to be enjoyed
under the name of all worldly things, yet to a man that lives the life of
Christ, that is a poor thing to him in comparison of his spiritual life, you
shall rather strip him of al. I know when we come to practice, our weaknesses,
ignorances, temptations, relics of corruption often over power us, which may
cause matter of self abhorrence; but no man that has this life of Christ, but
in the bent of his soul does these things, nothing so lovely as that that
preserves his life, nothing so abominable as that that will destroy it, and if
he must part with any, they must go before Christ. Pray lay up these things.
The Second and other Note whereby this Spiritual Life of Christ may be judged
of, is this,

operations that are properly vital, that where they are found you may say and
swear it too, that there is life, and where these are not found there is no
life, or that life is in a swound. As now take the Life of a Tree, we know the
natural operations of it are al those of vegetation, to draw nourishment, to
expel superfluous moisture, to put out their seed in the sap and bark, and seed
and the fruit according to its kind, where you see these things, if the sap
run, if the buds be, if there be vegetation the Tree is alive, if it appear
there be none of these in their season (though they may be dead in Winter) it
is a dead Tree. So likewise in the life of man, the sensual life of a Beast, if
there want the pulse that there be not those beatings, that there are not such
motions of the heart, we conclude there is no life there; if there be a beating
of the pulse, though never so weak, life is there. Now in this Spiritual Life
there are some things (that you shall find in the Scripture) that are the proper
beatings of the pulse; some operations, that though the things, the acting of
them abroad, may be counterfeit as to others, yet to a man's own soul that
studies his own heart, and the motions and operations of his own inward man, he
cannot be cozened in it, and therefore you may by them be able to discern,
whether the pulse of this spiritual life beats. Now they are many, but I
thought but of these three, and I think most of the rest will fall under them.
The one is,

me. Secondly, Another Pulse wherein this Life constantly puts out, is this,

That the things of Holiness they are connatural Peter uses this very
expression, That we were redeemed by Christ that we should live to
righteousness, live to righteousness. Now as a worldly man lives to his money,
another man to his wrath, another man to his lusts, these are the things his
heart runs its circle in: A gracious man, the things of holiness and
righteousness are the things that suit his spirit. And then thirdly, and
lastly, (I will name no more, but bring it a little closer to you) a third thing
is,

That the Lord having made his Will to be the in his Word, that is his Card,
that is his Compass, that is his Square, that is his Meet-wand, his eye looking
to the Word as his only guide. No man (I dare affirm it though other things may
come near it, but I dare affirm it, that whosoever will study it shall find) in
this world does any of these three things, but he that has the Life of Christ,
upon a serious debate to make Christ the good of his life, to make the acts of
holiness the things that his soul naturally makes after, and for the directing
of him in all to live (as the Apostle says) not to the will of man, or the
will of the flesh, but to the will of God, that is, to the Word of God, to make
Gods Word the Rule of all our actions in our bent and purpose; here is the
discovery of the Life of Christ, and this is now to have Christ in you. Now I
beseech you (Brethren) tell me (for I shall by and by dismiss you, when I have
made but one Use more, I will leave the third) what say your souls to these
things? Really leave al self conceitedness, and apprehensions that you may have
out of the Pride of your hearts of your own conditions, what say your souls to
these things I have opened? have you now the Life of Christ? I will tell you
(Brethren) if I had time to press it, I had here a large Field to enter in, and
to show you what worlds of people that go for Christians, are yet utter
strangers to the Life of Christ. I will name you a few that you may enlarge
your thoughts of them when you are alone.

that there should be a making of Christ their chief good, where there is no
knowledge of him. There is no valuing of an unknown thing. All ignorant persons
are strangers to this life, as the Apostle says, the Gentiles were strangers
to the Life of God, because of the ignorance that was in them If you know not
Christ and his Excellencies, you can never live in him.

Then al those that live to their lusts, whose life

All they that live to the world, whose work

All that live to their pleasures, whose viv^re is bibere and the rest, they
eat and drink, and sport and play, and give them these and these are the things
that make a happy life to them. All these and abundance of others (which I fear
I should presume upon your patience, if I should stand to innumerate but al
these) are clearly proved to be destitute of this Life of Christ; think of it
(Brethren) think of it. It is an easy thing (let me tell you) to be Christians
(as we call it) they are cheap things to hear Sermons, cheap things to profess
Religion in our days, wherein I think a long time there have not been fewer
that mind it heartily, yet abundance now pretend to it; but to be alive to
Christ, to be able to say in this Life, I have other business than what I have
here below, I have a Trade, a Wife, a Husband, and Children, but the Lord knows
my Conversation is in Heaven, my life is in Heaven, it is Christ that lives in
me, they are few can say it, and the Lord help you that you are not deceived
about it. And then the other Use that I will make of it, is,

Use 2.
That this Lesson is a most comfortable Lesson, for I do not doubt but the
clearer any man speaks about these things of Gods Kingdom, the more will the
hearts of Gods people be able to join with him. I fear not but many of you can
say it is thus with you, the Lord witnesses that with you, does he not? That
there is nothing you have such an appetite after as the means of Grace and
Salvation, that you might live, and that your hearts dread at the ways of sin,
and that (if God put you to it) you beg of God to be stripped of all, rather
than God should not be set up, and that al your prayer is, let God give me
Christ, God in Christ for my portion, and that reverently, not in a ranting
way, as if a lewd life could honor God (as some rude people pretend to now) but
that I might be holy in this perverse generation, especially in my inward man
where Christ dwells, and the things you look at in buying, selling, and
purchasing, and sporting, and in all the things you may do that are Lawful to
you, observing Gods Rules you take Gods Word to be your Rule, then I tell you
for your comfort these two things. First,

The Lord has communicated to thy soul the

To be thus minded, to be thus molded, thus

It is the noblest; the operations of this Life are

It is the sweetest too (that is another;) for in

The Life God has given thee, is the greatest give a Kingdom to a man he means
to destroy; he gave it to Saul, and cast him away in his wrath; he can give an
Apostleship to one that shall be damned; he gave Judas an Apostleship, and yet
he perished: but to have this Life, to close with Christ, to live to him
according to his Word: had you this Church full of Diamonds given you to do what
you would with, and to raise your posterity to be the greatest men in this part
of the world, it were not such an expression of his love as to give Christ to
you. And thirdly, I tell you,



That because all the people of Christ live this Life, to persuade you all to
study it, Use 3.
and to seek after it, and often compare it with that other life that we so
often weary our selves about with a vain shadow, hazarding every thing for it,
to have our accommodation with as much refreshing as can be.

SERMON II. At Mary Magdalens Milkstreet October. 30. 1653.

Gal. 2. part of verse 20. I am crucified with Christ, nevertheless I live, yet
not I, but Christ lives in me; ( now follows that which I shall more insist
upon) and the life that I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son
of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me.


THe Second Lesson, which is the manner how all the Saints of God live this
Life of Christ while they are in this world. The Life which I now live in the
flesh. By Flesh there he means not his fleshly part, as they are said to live
to the flesh who live sensually and wickedly; but by the Flesh there is meant
our mortal condition while we are here upon Earth, while we live our natural
life, the Life of Christ in us, it is lived by the faith of the Son of God,
that is, the faith wrought in us by the Son of God, which we place upon the Son
of God; but that grace of faith, it is the manner, or the instrument, or the
means of our holy Life while we are in this world. And this Doctrine which
(beloved) is the mystery of Christianity, is the very life, and soul, and
kernel of true Christianity, I shall endeavor (according as the Lord shall enable
me) this day to open to you. This is the Doctrine,

Doct. 2.
That that Life of Christ which all Gods people live in this world, they live it
by faith.

Understand but the scope aright, and I hope the discourse may prove useful to
those that have this Life. My meaning therefore is, That the grace of faith, it
is not only the instrument, or condition required to make us partakers of
Christ and his Life, it is not only one chief grace, or one branch of this
Life, but while the Saints are in this world, the mannagement of their whole
Spiritual Life is the work of faith, Christ indeed is the fountain of it, and
the Spirit of God is the great administration of it, but that which we do while
we live in this world, our whole spiritual Life is through the assistance of God
acted by the grace of faith, and I intend (the Lord willing) to handle it in
this Method:



chiefest work in the Doctrinal part, and then I will come to the application of
it.

For the proof of it, that it is so. First,

Mark how clearly the Scripture holds it out, Habbakkuk 2.4. I will mention
that, you shall see the reason by and by; the Spirit of God there speaks of the
several ways that men had to live in troublesome times; for Habakkuk lived in
very difficult times of the Church, and there in his discourse he shows how
proud men lived by maintaining a good opinion of themselves, and lifting up
their hearts, and how worldly men lived by loading themselves with thick clay,
good store of Gold and Silver, and Houses, and Lands; but (says he) the just
live by faith, every godly man lives by faith. Now this Text of the Prophet
Habakkuk, it is three or four times in the new Testament alleged by the holy
Ghost, to prove the very self same Doctrine: as for example, Romans 1 17. I will
rather name that first, because it proves both these Doctrines I have
propounded, says he in verse 16. I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for
it is the power of God to salvation to every one that believes the Gospel, for
(says he in verse 17.) therein is the righteousness of Christ manifested from
faith to faith: There now is my former Doctrine, that our Life to Salvation, it
is nothing but the righteousness of God manifested to us, and communicated to
us, yea, from one degree of faith to another, according as we get more faith,
so we have more life, and as Righteousness is further revealed, so we have more
faith, and consequently more life, as it is written the just shall live by
faith: mark it, The manifestation and communication of the Righteousness of
Christ, it is held out in the Gospel, but received by Faith, and every Believer
lives by Faith, The just shall live by faith. So in the Epist. Gal. 3.11. the
holy Ghost repeats the very same expression again, speaking of the Life of the
Saints, as it is written, The just shall live by faith. Again the very same
phrase in Heb. 10.38. where the Apostle there is pressing of Believers to a
holy Life, in difficult and troublesome times that are coming upon them, and
shows what will become of Apostates and Back-sliders, but (says he) The just
shall live by faith. The whole life of al holy men while they are going through
the world, and get into Heaven, all their life is transacted by faith, this is
clear. And I will ad but another Text, that which you find in 2 Cor. 5.7. the
Apostle says expressly, We live by faith, we live not by sense; if you will take
sense there for carnal sense, things that are sensible to our outward man, we
live not to sense; or if you will take it in the more elevated interpretation,
spiritual sense, that is, the immediate enjoyment of the light of Gods
countenance to ravish us, though it is a Treasury to be desired rather than ten
thousand worlds, yet we live not by it, but by faith, the Life of Gods people
it lies al in the grace of Faith. But,

you to study, and will give a wonderful conviction to your hearts of the truth
of this Doctrine, That the Life of al Gods people while they are in this world
is lived by Faith. You shall have this demonstration. First,

That the holy Ghost when he compares spiritual life and natural life together,
he uses to to our natural life, that does the grace of faith to our spiritual
life while we are in this world. That is one Conclusion that I think is a
cleared demonstration, that while Gods People live in this world, it is faith
that is their Life. The Second, which is yet more full, is this,

1. To the beginning of it. Or, 2. To the preservation of it, and carrying of
it on. First,




And in Ephesians. 3.17. whether Jesus Christ dwells in our hearts by faith. That
Lord Jesus that remains in us constantly, we have him by faith. Then,

The Spirit of Jesus Christ, who does take from

The Preservation, the Maintenance of it, the are received by Eaith: All
Ordinances are so far effectual to the soul as the grace of Faith puts them
upon you. Faith is not only the means of our Food, but for Physic, the
overcoming of our evil, all the Spiritual enemies of our spiritual life, all
that would destroy it, it is Faith alone must do it.







What the holy Ghost signifies by this, what is

That our Lord Jesus who is our Head, our spiritual resolution unchangeable, to
supply to all his people whatsoever they can need in any condition, til he has
brought them to glory. That is the first thing, no body will doubt this the
Scripture is so full to it. The Second thing is more immediate and closer to my
purpose, and it is this,







will do and expect, the declaration of all this in his Word. These two taken
for granted, now in the third place, which is my Doctrine, and which will make
you understand what the living by faith is,

The Grace of Faith wrought in us by the Spirit Word of Precept for matters of
Duty, the Word of Direction in matters of means and Ordinances; the applying of
the soul to the Word in all these things, the Lord according to his goodness
making these things good to the soul that thus applies it self to the Word,
this is to live by faith. So that now to come a little nearer to the business,
(for I have not yet explained it so far as I hope by and by I shall, but I say)
now to live by faith. First,



of one or other, they are those that are prescribed there; so that be it to
undergo affliction, to conflict with a temptation, to go through my Calling, be
it to comfort my heart against temptations, when the soul looks to the Word of
Christ, and there takes the Word for its guide both for comfort and duty, until
the Lord of his mere grace have accomplished in us all the good that he
intends to us, which will never be til he takes us out of this world, when
faith cease; but in the mean time, this, and this only is that which the
Scripture calls living by faith. But now (because I would yet make it a little
plainer to you) be pleased to know, That although there are acts of faith
applicable to every particular condition we are in, which would require a
Volumn to mention; yet for the present purpose you must know, that there are
five things faith does in this general living by faith, that every one that is
said to live by faith, his faith does five things in his ordinary course, which
are applicable to every thing that you can think upon, which I shall not need
to stand to prove, though I will give a touch as I go along, because I would
spare a little time for the Application before I break off: But there are five
things applicable.

First, The grace of faith looks at the Word as Duties and Directions there
prescribed faith assures the soul they are things the Lord looks for; so that
the Apostle says in Acts 20. when he lived as a Christian, he did exercise
himself to believe all that was spoken by the Lord in his Law, and David says,
Thy Word (Lord) is from everlasting: It makes not any scruple or doubt, but
gives a firm assent to what the Lord has set down in his Word. That is one,
and that indeed is the Basis and Foundation of the rest. The Second,



guide, not a Will of the Wisp (as they call it) and an Ignis fatuus to
miss-lead me; and therefore as I love my life and happiness, I will look to the
Word, by the Word I am guided, by the Word I am directed, as the Apostle
expresses it: It is a thing you do well to take heed to, as to a light that
shines in a dark place until the day dawn, until the day of Heaven come, and
you be brought to glory. The soul looks to the Word as its only card and
compass: as the Mariner at Sea looks at his Card and Compass, they are his
guide; so the Believer he only looks at the Word as his guide. There is the
third. And then the fourth thing that faith does in all that live the life of
faith is this,

That they make the things revealed in the

Doing al these things as well as it can, it stays truly lives by faith: The
Lord has turned the bent of his heart to it, and he is assured his Word is
true, and that there lies his happiness, he looks at it as his only guide, he
makes this the matter of his prayer and endeavors, and when he has done, knows
all his poor endeavors are nothing, but waits upon the Lord to make all good to
him, according to his wisdom and faithfulness Thus you have heard a Christian
ought to live by faith, and I hope now you see what it is. Now one Question
more I must needs briefly speak to, and that is this:

Quest.
But may some say, Do all that live the life of Christ live thus? that this is
excellent I will not dispute, and that this is held out in the Word, I doubt it
not; but will you make true Christianity fall within the compass of this, and
no further? dare you affirm it that none live the life of Christ in this world,
but those that you have spoken of?

Answ.
Now the Answer to this you shall have clearly in these three things. First,

Genius of Christianity works not in them; for we all know that as we live but
in part, so we live by faith but in part, and too much Gods people fail in
this. But Secondly, I answer,

That so far as we are Christians, so far every

That many souls do live thus, really live thus use arguments from them, who
know not that they play the Logicians in all these. So in the great acts of
Faith, there is no man (it is certain) partakes of Christ but believes in him;
but doubtless there are many thousands that believe in Christ, that know not
what that act of faith is, that gives them an interest in Christ, but the
Spirit of God carries them on to it. So the Saints of God though they cannot
speak of these Rules I have showed you til they be opened to them, and then
they can close with them; so that I am far from saying that no man lives the
life of faith, but he that understands that he acts al these things, but he may
understand them really. Well, this laid as the foundation, you will pardon me
though I take a little time to give you a taste of the Application before I
dismiss you: But thus I have endeavored to clear this Doctrine, That all the
Lords people while they are in this world, while they do partake of the
Righteousness of Christ, one part of it for their Justification, the other for
Sanctification, the acting of this while they are in this world, it is the life
of faith. Now the use of it is very large and sweet; I will give you but a taste
of two things before I dismiss you: The one is for Instruction.

Use 1.
Hence therefore you may safely and sadly conclude, That among the great
multitudes of those that challenge the name of Christians, there are (God
knows, and we may know) a very few that are really Christians; if this that I
have opened to you be the Lords truth, which I hope through his mercy I have
demonstrated, but if this be true, you shall see that amongst those great
multitudes of them that are called Christians, there are but a very small number
who really are Christians. Oh! (Beloved) should I (as justly I might, if the
time would give leave) but come to separate the chaff from the wheat, and to
cul out the several sorts of men in this world, who live by clean different
Rules from this I have spoken to you, in what a small number might the names of
real Christians be comprehended, what a little Book would hold them all? As for
Example:

Do all the Saints of Christ live the life of Christ

They that never troubled themselves at the very

All they who live to their lusts (as God knows

Multitudes of others live to the world, Mammon that that takes them up from
the beginning of the morning til the evening comes, when they are awake the
world is in their hearts. And,



Use 2.
Those that are Christians, it has plainly appeared that of al things in the
world, Gods people have most cause to lament and bewail their unbelief. You
hear that faith is your life and livelihood, therefore there is nothing to be
so much lamented by real Christians concerning themselves as their unbelief: I
speak not but there should be something more lamented than our own damnation;
but for our selves of all the evils we lie under in this world, there is none to
be lamented so much as our unbelief. Take my meaning thus: Suppose a poor child
under the care of loving and careful Parents, that would neglect nothing that
may do the child good; but the child cannot eat his meat, it has no appetite,
or the meat is cast up; alas, if he have no stomach the child will languish,
and for this and other distempers, let the Parents weep over it never so much,
or dandle it never so much, the child has an inward root that will destroy it.
I tell you what is true from the Lord, there is nothing can undo you but
unbelief, there is no cross under Heaven can betide you, but faith will carry
you through it, no duty can be preached, but faith will carry you through it;
no Promise so hard in the Word of God, but faith will fetch out the sweetness of
it. Oh! this unbelief of ours undoeth us.

But you will say, Quest.
Do you think the people of God are so much guilty of it?

I will give you a little taste, Answ.
and by that you shall judge. First,

All our not studying the Word, that we are no

When the word is held out to us, that we do no If a mortal man tell me, if I
walk thus and thus, I will fall into many a danger, and thus it will fall upon
me by Law, this makes me careful. That we deal not so with our gracious God is
through our unbelief. Nay, in a word.



David using unlawful means, going over to the King of Gath to gain relief, it
is nothing but unbelief. If you find a man venturing out to take any unlawful
comfort in the Creatures, it is nothing but unbelief, it is a third runs
through the whole course of Gods people, to make them live low lives, and
hinders them from the obtaining of that that would be consolation to their own
souls, therefore I beseech you, you that have made Christ your portion, and
make account that faith must be your livelihood, lay it to heart, mourn under
it, pray the Lord to root out this bitter weed, and make you masters over it,
for certainly it is a great evil; we stand by faith, we fall by unbelief, it is
that that occasions all the disquiets of our lives. The Lord set it to our
hearts, and deliver us from it.

SERMON III. At Mary le Bow. October. 30. 1653. afternoon.

Gal. 2. part of verse 20. I am crucified with Christ, nevertheless I live, yet
not I, but Christ lives in me; (now follows that which I shall more insist
upon) and the life that I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son
of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me.


NOW I proceed, and there is but one great Use that I intend, though I would a
little mention another, and speak a little of it in the first place. Good
Christian Friends, weigh what I have said, and regard it not because I say it;
but because of the evidence I hope goes along with it. But the thing I collect
is,

That you may all hence learn what kind of Christians they must needs be, Use 3.
who can live in the flesh above the Word and Ordinances, having no use of
them, and (as they think) nothing to do with them, but live in an immediate
Communion with God and enjoyment of him. This is one of the wildnesses and
infatuations that the Lord has let out amongst us in this sinful Nation, that
many that have gone for sober, humble, gracious men and women, they look upon
al those that have to do with Ordinances, that study Scriptures, and tend upon
Sermons, they look upon them but in the A B C Form, they are of a low pitch and
rank, themselves are above these things, they have attained to a higher Form:
But this Doctrine that I have opened, will clearly direct al Gods people what
to judge of them; for if they live the Life of Christ (for that they pretend to)
it is either the life of spiritual sense, immediate enjoyment; or the life of
Faith: if they pretend to an immediate enjoyment of God without the
intervention of faith, believe it they are beyond the Apostle Paul, that
professed in his own name, and in the name of all the Saints that then lived,
That the life that they lived in this life, it was by faith, and not by sense;
yet these have learned that they are beyond his Form: I will not say, much good
may do their hearts with it; but poor Creatures their delusion will one day
afflict them.

Object.
But if they say, No, we grant you it is the life of faith we live in this world.

Answ.
Then say I, Unquestionably, and without all dispute, it will appear faith has
its subordinate work, it is the declaration of the Lords mind in his Word, that
faith meddles with, and all the Ordinances, and all tending upon the Word and
Sacraments, etc. are the administrations of Christ's will that is carried on in
Ordinances, and no other way I know; sure I am the Scripture is silent in it:
Therefore Friends (for such as are concerned in it, they will not be here to hear
it, nor any where else, they count it a folly, but) to your sober Christians
that desire to go to Heaven, and to walk with the Lord in his own way, give me
leave to say this: Therefore,

I confess our divisions and subdivisions in other matters of Religion are very
sad, the cutting of the people of God a pieces in the several molds and forms
of Government, and thereby alienating their spirits one from another, it is very
sad, and the Lord in his mercy remove those things. But yet this I must say,
That while these lower conditions are, and as long as each form carries people
to the Word, holds out Christ in his Word, Christ in preaching, Christ in the
Sacrament, there is food for souls; and if we could look aright (it may be) we
would not be so angry with one another about it as we are; for there is but one
Truth, and we pray the Lord to reveal it: but still here is carrying on the life
of Comfort, Duty, Direction, and all that faith meddles with, that the Lords
people may enjoy: but for Gods sake, and as you love the life of your souls,
watch against temptations that would take you off from the Word, that the
Scripture should be nothing; this takes you off from that that your faith
wholly meddles with; for if you can say, I believe God for such a thing, and
Christ for such a thing, unless you find it promised in the Word, it is
presumption. Therefore,

Pity such poor souls, your own experience may God do not withdraw, see whether
the Lord has any other way to convey himself to them, than what he has held
out in his Word; their looseness, folly, pride, and joining in any thing else
that is naught, almost plainly shows that the Lord has withdrawn from them.
And secondly,



Use 4.
To all the Lords people whose Life is Christ, and in whom Christ does live; I
would endeavor in the rest of this hour to give them some help out of the Word,
that this living by faith might be better known to the Lords People, and more
exactly practiced than it has been hitherto, and if the Lord help me to divide
it, and you to receive it, I will not fear but your life will be more honorable
to the Lord, and sweeter to your selves than it has been: and there are but
two things that I intend to treat upon. The one is,



To lay out of the Word the true Directoins, the

For encouragement to provoke you to it, I

First, If you will be Christians, it is our Trade, horrible disgrace will it
be for thee to be found ignorant of it. Secondly,



woman can live, til they come to enjoy God immediately. This I will
demonstrate, and I hope I shall make it plain, that if a man had the comfort of
al other ways of living in any kind, never would the learning or wit of man
find out any life to be compared with the life of faith, for the excellency of
it; and the excellency of the life of faith I would open to you in four or five
Particulars, the Lord persuade you but to study them when you are alone. One is
more general.

It is the Life which the Lord has chosen out, Malachi's argument; it is the
best Conjugal condition for a man to have one wife, and a woman to have one
husband, because else God could have made ten women if he would; but he made
but one, that is Gods choice, therefore that is the best matrimonial life.
Therefore the Lord (say I) who knew what learning, what wisdom, what friends,
what Philosophy, what Policy, what any thing might advance men to, he out of
them al shows the living by faith to be the way how they should live in this
world, who are as dear to him as the apple of his own eye; and to a sober heart
more needs not be said to make him think it an excellent thing. Secondly, as it
is excellent because of Gods choice, so,







In this world it is the easiest life; I will speak it I will be bound to recant
it (as the saying is) at Paul's Cross, whenever you will, if ever man can come
out and say, the life of faith is an uncomfortable life, no, it is the sweetest
life of all: Oh! that God would persuade you to study it, it is the easiest
life. Come into a family, and tell me who lives the easiest life, the Father or
the Child; the Child has food, the Father provides it, the Maid cooks it; he
has clothes, his Father buys him them, the Tailor makes them; and the child
goes to school, and never thinks what will become of him when his clothes are
worn out, and his linen spent, he leaves all to his Father. And then again I
tell you.

I am a God all-sufficient, walk before me, I will be a horn of strength, I
will never leave thee, nor forsake thee; a statute upon his Wisdom, Power,
Goodness, Faithfulness, what God is and has, he has engaged to the soul that
will trust in him. It is an old saying of a Poet, That it is an uncertain Estate
(though it may be great) if it cannot be built upon: It is an uncertain estate
to depend upon Cables and Anchors; if it come home it is well, but it cannot be
built upon; and sometimes they stand in need of an Insuring Office, but how
justly I dispute not. But lastly,

This Art, when once the soul has learned it, it will deliver a man from all
base and unworthy means, it will deliver the soul from all base and unworthy
means in any kind whatsoever, because if he have God in his Word, what need he
shirk and shift, or do any thing that is base, when he has such a rock, such a
livelihood for his soul as faith. As now I will give you but an instance; The
Apostle Paul when he was in prison at Rome, he conceived he might have gone
out, by giving the Captain of the Guard some money, but Paul scorned to give a
penny: when he was at Philippi, put in prison in the stocks, the Magistrates
came and bid him come out, he scorned to go out; some might have said, you may
provoke them; I care not, he had God on his side. Never did any one so much
study to get an Office, or Lordship, or an increase of his Estate, that they
may say there is that boy or girl provided for, let them go where they will
their portion lies by me: this is not so comfortable as to study this Doctrine,
That that life that you live in the flesh, you live by the Son of God; that
this life of faith may be on your part your principal delight. Now then the
Last part of my Sermon which I come to, is,

But how should we do this? Attainable it is, which if you will study you may
much enlarge, and I hope it is the right way. The first is this,





not enable thee to live the life of Christ to his glory, and thy comfort: If a
storm comes little faith shakes; Why are you troubled, O ye of little faith?
but never, why are you troubled, you that have fullness of faith? A little
child's hand will serve to receive a penny, I but a little hand will do but a
little work; there is a great deal of work lies upon faith, drawing comfort
lies upon faith, and quickening to duty lies upon faith, and as is the man, so
is his strength. Gideons Son while he is a child, he will not venture to cut off
the heads of the Princes of Midian, no, he dares not fall upon them: no, a
little faith will get but a little comfort, but you must endeavor (and remember
this is taught you as the first Direction) to be strong in the faith of our
Lord Jesus: Oh! (if my heart deceive me not) I had rather have a strong faith
than any thing that may be called strong in the world: A strong purse, a strong
head, a strong courage, a strong estate, will never do that that a strong faith
will; therefore I entreat you al, if you find your want, I am a poor creature, I
cannot bear afflictions, if God come with a heavy affliction it is hard for me
to bear; strengthen thy faith, and thou will carry any cross in the world, fly
to the Lord. The Lord has given us in our days, many preachers that preach
faith, many excellent Books that treat of Faith, and living by faith, and how
faith may be strengthened, and all that is good about it. No Nation in the
World since the Apostles days (I think) have the like helps that England has;
and therefore study it in the first place, labor to be rooted and grounded in
faith, get a good faith a strong faith. Secondly,

Paul;) a man may believe confidently, but if he have not a full knowledge of the
party he does believe, it may be his comfort will be less. To know how all
sufficient he is, that he can perform Promises easier than any man can, to know
how gracious, how good he is, how unchangeable he is, there is no knowledge of
God but will do thy soul good; but I mean, to know God in Christ, that is, as he
stands related to Believers in a Covenant of grace; and that I rather fix upon,
because my Text has it, and carries it here as the great Basis of Paul's living
by faith, (says he) The Life I live in this Flesh, I live it by the Faith of
this Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me: he knew the dear regard
that Jesus Christ bears to all his people, he loves them like the apple of his
eye. Never Mother tendered her Children as Christ tenders all his Lambs, though
never so weak, though never so feeble, though never so dead, he and his Father
in him, is well pleased when we look upon him in Jesus Christ, that not only I
believe in him, but I believe in that God who in Christ Jesus loved me so, that
he gave his Son to shed his blood that I might not perish. Now to know God in
Christ is the way not to perish. Thirdly, another great Direction to live by
faith is that that I opened at large, and now to speak a little more about it.

Study to be acquainted with the Word: If ever

The Promises of the Word for the comfort of

To get a good understanding of all those excellent exceeding great and
precious Promises. Brethren, the Word has not only the great Promise of the
pardon of sin which is an invaluable thing, and will carry us safe when we die;
but you shall find in the Word Promises for every condition it is possible for
you to fall into; if God should take away al thy children from thee, and thy
wife from thee, and visit thee with sickness, and let men loose upon thee, and
enemies to persecute thee, there are Promises in the Word for every one of
these. Oh! to know the Promises it is an infinite help, especially if you ad
this which I will make a second Branch of the same Direction: When I say
acquainted with the Promises, I mean,







the souls to whom his Promises belong, they signify not only Gods good will,
but nothing in the world that can betide them shall ever hurt them, because they
are all Branches of that Covenant of grace; in which Covenant of grace there is
no evil shall light upon the soul that is under it, therefore God will one day
make thee to know that he intends thy good in it: this is signified for the
present. And,

For the future, A Promise is a certain infallible Martha; He that believes in
me, though he were dead he shall live, and if he live he shall never die; Do
thou believe this? I Lord, I believe it: So say I, Do you believe this? Do you
not think you shall live comfortably? And Secondly, when I said in this third
Direction about being acquainted with the Word, I mean,

Be acquainted with the Duties held out in the required, and they afflict
themselves, and make their lives uncomfortable, in things that God has not
appointed; as not to tell you of many poor creatures in Popery, that would
thrust themselves into Monasteries, God never required it; but my meaning is,
study the Word, you can never study any thing that so much concerns you;
therefore there learn your Duties, the Duties that belong to your relations,
and particular places where God has set you; for to know the will of God
concerning me, argues an honest heart more than to know the will of God
concerning others: but study to know the Word in the Promises, and in the
Duties. That is the Third. Fourthly, which must not be neglected,

Pater noster (as they use to say) for me when I have done this, to neglect the
means the Lord has appointed, this is not good. But look as an Husbandman;
What rational Husbandman is there, especially if he know God, but he knows
that the Corn upon the ground cannot yield him a Crop, unless rain from Heaven
water it? and it cannot fall from Heaven unless God send it; and
notwithstanding all this, unless God give the Corn a new body, but because he
has likewise learned that ploughing, sowing, and harrowing, and dungcarting,
etc. are all duties belonging to Husbandry, he serves the Providence of God,
and God blesses him accordingly. Do thus with your souls; God has given you
Promises for some things, Commandments for other things, serve him diligently
in the use of the means; but remember what I taught you before, that by the use
of the means I mean, means only of his own appointment, for faith dare not go
out of his own line, Lawful means that are agreeable to a particular calling,
to reason, etc. I have often thought (and I speak it to you from the Lord) that
when a people walk with a Word in one hand, and the use of the means in the
other hand, we fairly leave the business at Gods feet, whatsoever the success
shall be, we will be his Servants, when such a thing has betided me, I find
this is my duty by the best Counsel I can get, and so we leave it at his door,
and whatsoever will come, fall back, fall edg, we may have peace and comfort.
These are the great Directions, only with these I must put in two Cautions (and
when I have done them, I think I may have said that, which may be helpful to
them that would walk by Faith) The one is, When I say we must use means, and
thus live by faith, my meaning is, First,

That when you have done, you must never limit is, Do not limit him to the way
how he shall make it good, for he often works by contraries; do not limit him
for time when he shall make it good, for it is good to wait patiently the Lords
leisure, though it be all the days of our appointed season, and we injure God,
and our faith does not work up to its true height, when we will come and say,
do it to day (Lord) or else I will question it to morrow; no, limit him not,
chalk him not out his way; I may Lawfully expect from God that such a thing
shall do me good, but I may not Lawfully tell God which way it shall do me
good; I may Lawfully say, from such a temptation God will deliver me, but I may
not Lawfully say, he will deliver me from it within this week or fortnight, but
quietly wait upon the Lord as one that infallibly will do what he has spoken:
and is not here enough? It may be some will add now by way of Objection.

Object.
But what if my difficulty be such an one that I can find nothing in the Word
about it* What can my Faith do then? Where is your circumscribing Faith within
the compass of the Word? It may be my difficulty is such as I find no Promise
for it in all the Word.

Answ.
I dare confidently then say it is a matter of no great consequence, it may be
in thy fancy some great thing, as the fancy of man can blow up a Molehil to a
Mountain; but believe it, if it be such a trouble as has not a Promise, it is
not worth the taking notice of; for all things that concern the Lords Glory,
and good of his People, there are Promises in abundance. That is my first
Caution. And the other Caution is,

When I direct you in all this to endeavor thus looks like the Moon in
Eclipse: a dark Body, it has no light at all in it; Oh therefore watch
against it, and the rather because we are men, and from our Mothers Womb we are
corrupt men, and therefore these things are bred in the bone, and will not
easily out, but while we carry flesh about us, they will never be subdued. And
therefore one handsomely expresses it, as Abraham did when God called him to
that Duty, it was clear that God made it his Duty when he had called to it; he
never goes to call his Wife, for she would have said, Husband, it is
impossible, this is but a delusion, it is not possible, the Child that must be
the Heir of all Nations, and in him they must all be blessed, What! for you to
kill him! it is not from God, never talk of it. Friends, I the rather desire to
open these things, because in truth, to a great many the Life of Christ is not
known, and many holy souls do want plain Directions, how they should order
their Conversation as becomes Christians, and in our uncertain days, wherein
we are every day looking what new Confusions shall break out, Oh! it were a
sweet thing for a man to be stablished that he might possess his soul in
quietness, in the midst of all the Changes in the World; and really it many
times grieves my heart to think, First,

knows, these things are not worth the while. I will briefly show you one
instance in Dan. 8. you shall read of a Goat that came with one Horn, and he
ran and killed all other Beasts that were in his way; and that Goat was
Alexander, and this same Alexander in ten years space did conquer one of the
greatest Empires, I mean, he brought into his own hands, one of the greatest
Empires that ever were in the World, in all the four Quarters of the World
(except America) had he a great part; within ten years there was an end of him,
and not one of his posterity had one foot of it, and yet he left a Son and
Heir, but al was carried away to others. And so will al Earthly things, we may
struggle and strive, and weary our selves in a vain shadow, and when we have
done, no man knows for whom he have labored; it may be we expose our Posterity
to the greater malice, envy, and hatred, and they will be the sooner ruined:
What a pity is it that such beggarly things as these should be so looked after,
and Faith so little thought of. I, in the Second place.

It grieves me to think how many souls that are more Seraphick vein and Spirit:
and so God suffers us to be gulled of our Religion, which is the sweetest
Portion that can be enjoyed in the world; we make it a matter of brangling, and
little comes of it, either to the Honor of God, or Comfort of our souls: And
upon such thoughts as these, while the Lord shows me that mercy, that I may
preach any thing unto you, I would fain acquaint Gods People with these things,
that they may know wherein their life lies, and how they may lead it to the
glory of God, and comfort of their own souls. I presumed upon your Patience: if
God please to lay these things to your hearts, it will not offend I hope.

FINIS.

