A SERMON OF Simony and Sacrilege.

It Is not to be forgotten, though it be forgotten, that whoever gave any Lands or
Endowments to the Service of God gave it in a formal Writing as now adays
betwixt Man and Man, Sealed and Witnessed; and the tender of the Gift was Super
Altar by the Donor on his Knees, Deo and Ecclesiae.

Bp. Andrew 's Notes upon the Liturgy. By EDWARD MARSTON, an unworthy Priest of
the Church of England, sometime of Whitby in Yorkshire.

Ne diutina injustitiae impunitas amplius inolesceret, accingam me viriliter,
and stabo pro Castris Ecclesiae, Clamare non cessabo; quasi Tuba exaltabo vocem
meam, annunciabo populo scelera eorum, and raptoribus Ecclesiasticarum
Possessionum peccata eorum.

Sanctus Theodardus Episcopus Trajectensis and Martyr, etc. LONDON: Printed for
the Author. 1699.

PROVERBS, XX. Verse XXV. It is a snare to the man who devoureth that which is
holy: and after vows to make enquiry.


MY Author tells me in the Twentyfifth Chapter of this Book and the Eleventh
Verse, That -- A word fitly spoken is like apples of gold in pictures of
silver: That is, as the outside is Beautiful, so the inside is far more
precious, as Gold excels Silver. So are the words of Wisdom every where
glorious, yet being fitted with Time and Season, they have an inward and secret
Operation, far more forceable and effectual, than otherwise they would: They be
apples of gold with pictures of silver. Now as these Silver Pictures, I mean,
the Ornaments of Speech are not to be neglected, so the Golden Substance which
by a secret Opperation is directed to the Heart and Conscience, is every where
to be preferred. Wherefore when I gave all diligence to speak unto you; not
only things profitable for Christians, but seasonable for the Times we live in,
I was directed to this Choice, concerning the Profanation of things Hallowed,
and the dangers thereupon ensuing. -- Toward the unfolding whereof I am
deprived of that usual help which other Scriptures do afford: Namely, that
current of Speech and sequel of Argument, whereby one Sentence does follow upon
another in so good Consequence, that the occasion and premises of the place, do
serve for a Key to open our Text: But these Proverbs be certain Drops of Divine
Wisdom (or Golden Apples you may call them) each making an entire Globe or Ball
within it self, whereof this is one. -- We may divide it in the midst.

First, The one half compasses him in the Snare of Destruction who spoileth
God of his Right in Hallowed things.

The Second Catches him who seeks occasion to unwind himself out of those
Vows which are solemnly made before unto God; wherein the more he struggleth,
the faster he tieth himself: For the first word is indifferently applied unto
both parts, and so make a double snare. Laqueus est devorare sacrum: Laqueus
est post vota inquirere.

This kind of sanctified things intended by Solomon is by consent of all
Expositors taken to be an inferior Degree, whereunto we may descend by these
few steps.

1. That Sacred Majesty of God, which is Holiness it self in the Abstract, is
then profaned by Man (as much as in him lies) and injured in the highest
degree, when it is Blasphemed. This is Destruction in it self with God, who
raineth Snairs upon such for their Portion, and their Arrows shot against
Heaven fall back upon their own pates.

And it were to be wished, that this was also a snare of Destruction amongst
Men. For Nature has so prescribed, and graven it in the Hearts of Men from the
Beginning, that Blasphemy is punishable by Death. That Cursed Speech of Job's
Wife; Curse God and dye ( Job 2.9.) was grounded upon a common received Maxim
in that time of Nature, that a Blasphemer must not live. And that Heathenish
King Nebuchadnezzar, had no sooner acknowledged the Love of God, but made a
Decree, that, whosoever Blasphemed should die a violent Death.

But admit there be no such Law established, and that upon this Charitable
supposition, that a Christian Kingdom, will breed no such Monsters: Shall this
be imputed for a Want? Not until those Monsters appear: For in the Commonwealth
of Israel there was no positive Law against Blasphemy, until such time as a
Blasphemer was discovered ( Levit. 24.14.) and then upon that occasion the Law
was made. So if this wicked Age wherein we live shall bring forth such
Miscreants, and execrable Wretches as shall dare to breath direct Blasphemy
against the God of Heaven to the utter dividing, and deing of him, then I take
it to be a thing not unworthy the highest Consultation, whether that Judicial
Law of God be a Pattern for us in this Kind. For if we add to the Law of God
concerning Theft, for the better preservation of the Public Peace; let us not
diminish the Law of the same God for the preservation of that Sacred Name,
whereupon the Public Good both of Church and State does immediately depend. If
the Civil Magistrate does carry a Sword, and not in vain, not a Rod for
Correction only, but a Sword to punish with Death; then let not that Sin, which
by the general consent of all Divines is of all Sins absolutely the greatest,
escape the edge of the Sword. Thus much is inferred upon neccessary
implication, That it is destruction in the highest degree to Profane Holiness
it self. Yet this is not intended by the direct meaning of this Text.

2. As God is Holiness in himself, so has it pleased him to Communicate the
same to his Church, to make her not only a Catholic, but an Holy Church. To
this end has he Sanctified special Means, that is, separated them, or set them
apart from common use to effect Holiness in the Hearts of the People, whereof
there be Three Degrees.

First, The Word and Prayer, together with the Administration of the Sacraments
have the first place; wherefore the Arch-Ministers of the Gospel, the Twelve
Apostles, leaving all other Business gave themselves to Prayer, and the
Administration of the Word ( Act. 6.4.) To devour these is apparent
Destruction: For where these be wanting the People must needs perish ( Prove.
29.8.) Yet such is the Malice, and subtilty of the Serpent, that rather than
this shall stand entire, he will so work that one shall devour another. The
time was when Prayer being turned into a Mass, and the Mass into an Idol, did
swallow up the Preaching of the Word: The time is that Preaching has well-nigh
swallowed up Prayer, as if there was nothing Holy in the Church but a Sermon.
Such is the Peevishness of our Corrupt Nature, that where God has combined
such a lovely pair of Virtues together, we cannot lean to the one; but we must
despise the other. Whereas indeed there is such a sweet Concord and Harmony
between them, that whosoever despises the one, shall be deprived of the Comfort of
the other. They be the Ascending and Descending Angels of Commerce between God
and us. The Word teaches us to know his Truth. Prayer testifies that we
acknowledge his Goodness to be the only Fountain of all Blessings. Preaching
brings Knowledge, without which Devotion is Blind; Prayer exercises
Devotion, without which Knowledge is Lame and Unprofitable: The own sows the
Seed, the other fetches a shower of Graces from Heaven to make it grow: By
Preaching God does serve us with that Heavenly Manna, the Food of our Souls; by
Prayer we do serve God, which is the End of all our Preaching. Be it far from
us then to make a Divorce between these two, which can so well agree.

Secondly, That these Sacred means might take effect in working Holiness in the
Church of God he has Sanctified and set apart in the second Rank, Time, Place,
and Person for the Ministry of the Word, Prayer, and Sacraments. For Time he
has selected the Lord's Day, for Place the Temple, for Persons the Clergy.

1. The Lord's Day Sanctified, or set apart from common use to God's Service,
is then devoured, when it is Profaned by weekly Business, or lewd Sports. The
Ends why the Lord's Day was Ordained are these. 1. For the Exercise of all
Duties of Piety, in Public especially. 2. For the Practice of all Duties of
Charity and Piety. 3. To remember the great Works of God, especially of the
Creation and Redemption of the World. And if in every Week, or Month, or Year,
we should set some time apart to Commemorate God's Mercy in all his other Acts
of Gracious Providence belonging to our Preservation, it would be no
Superstition, but an Act of Piety in any single Christian, or (if Authority
should think good) in any Public Society of them. So likewise the Birth,
Passion, Ascension of Christ, the Descent of the Spirit, the Birth or Martyrdom
of the Apostles, and Saints of Scripture, and any remarkable temporal
Deliverance, or (by proportion) also any matter of Humiliation, any Sin or
Judgment on a Kingdom, will by the example of God himself, (both in this Fourth
Commandment, and in other Feasts and Fasts of the Church prescribed by him) be
resolved to be fit Seasons and Opportunities to Consecrate some considerable
part of our time to God.

2. The Holiness of the Place is devoured, when the Temple of God is made an
Exchange ( John 2.16.) I mean not only the Temple at Jerusalem, but every
place Consecrated to God's Worship is Holy, and therefore (says the Apostle)
not to be Profaned by common Employments (1 Cor. 11.22.) Have ye not houses to
eat and drink in, or despise ye the Church of God?

3. Sanctified Persons set apart for the Ministry of the Gospel are devoured a
thousand ways: yea rather than fail, we our selves will devour our selves. That
unhappy Faction amongst us about Mint and Annice had brought such a Snare upon
this Church, as if God's especial Providence had not preserved us, the Papist
on the one side, and the profane Atheist on the other had devoured both sides
with open Mouth.

Verily it is a Snare to devour any thing that is Sanctified: But yet I am not
come to the chief part of my Text.

As the Sacred Ordinance of God, the Word and Sacraments cannot be Ministered
without convenient Time, Place, and Person set apart for that purpose: So
neither can Place nor Person be fit for that Ministry without convenient
Maintenance.

Wherefore God of his Goodness out of those Temporal Blessings in abundance
bestowed upon the Sons of Men, has resumed a Portion for this purpose: Which
Portion is said in my Text to be Sanctified, because it is set, apart from
common use to the Maintenance of God's Service. For it is laid down for a
Principle in ( Levit. 27.28.) Every thing separate from common use is holy to
the Lord: So that where the Scripture speaks of this Portion there to be
separate, and to be Holy, be Synonima, diverse Terms expressing one, and the
self-same thing.

These ly open to be devoured by Covetous and Needy Persons; these be alluring
Baits to entice a Man to devour them; but Solomon gives us a Caveat, that
under this Bait there lies an Hook to ensnare the Conscience of the Devourer;
so as he may swallow the Bait, and wound himself: Win the World, and lose his
Soul.

Be it far from me to ensnare the Judgment of the Weak, or any ways to darken
the Truth by Ceremonial or Levitical Shadows. I know where I speak, in the
Presence of God, and of those, who are able to discern, and judge what I say.
Give me leave to enlighten my self in the unfolding of this Text so far only as
the Moral Law of God, which is perpetual, and the Evidence of his Gospel do
second the same.

That Precept of Wisdom to her Son in this Book ( Chap. 3. ver. 9.) Honor God
with thy substance; albeit she had written it in the Hearts of Men by Nature:
Yet she had need to renew it, since many endeavor to blot it out; For it is a
conceit commonly conceived, that for those Temporal Blessings we possess, if we
use them soberly without excess, justly without oppression of others, and
charitably with some portion relieve the Poor, we are thereby discharged, as if
no part thereof was due to God, or did any wise appertain to the first Table.

The Nicodemites were content to become Christians thus far, that they would
give their Hearts unto Christ, so they might dispose of their Bodies as
occasion served. These go a degree farther: They will Worship God in Soul and
Body both, That of the abundance of the heart the Mouth may speak, the Knee
bow, the Hands and Eyes be lifted up: But for Honoring God in their Riches,
they think it is more than needs: They will offer to God the Oblations of their
Hearts, and Calves of their Lips too; but not of their Stalls. We will go with
the Wise Men (says St. Bernard) to seek Christ from the East: yea we will fall
down and worship him: but we be grown too wise to open our Treasuries, that is,
the renting of our Hearts, we cannot endure to be tied unto it. If St. Paul
therefore will make Agrippa a Christian, he must except these Bands too: But
God will not release us.

For as God is the owner and giver of all, Sacrum vectigal Calvin. in Heb. 1.4.
so he will be acknowledged by a Sacred Rent to be Lord of all. He gave
Blessing to Abraham, Abraham repaid part in acknowledgment of that gift. (
Genesis 14.20.) The Land of Canaan was given unto his Posterity, but that Sacred
Tribute was reserved as Holy to the Lord. For want of the payment whereof, God
does often distrain, and re-enter upon his own; restraining the influence of
the Heaven and the sap of the Earth, as ( Mal. 3.10.) Bring ye all the tithes
into the storehouse, that there may be meat in mine house, and prove me now
herewith, says the Lord of hosts, if I will not open you the windows of
heaven, and pour you out a blessing, etc. Therefore the Windows of Heaven were
shut before, because this Duty was kept back. Si Domino Decimam non dederis, tu
ad Decimam revoceris, Sermon. de Temp. 219.
says St. Augustine. When the Tenth is denied to God, he resumeth Nine parts
and leaves us the Tenth, as in many Famines he has done. For the quantity
what portion is due; I aver not precisely, because I have not proved it: Only
thus much arises without question. That as God is the giver of all our Wealth,
and he only who blesses the works of our Hands; so in acknowledgment of his
Universal Dominion, he will have a part thereof set apart for his Honor and
Worship.

Secondly, I hope you will not determine any contemptible Portion for God: as
if it was decent for us to dwell in Houses of Cedar, and the Ark of God to be
wrapped in Goats hair, (2 Samuel 7.2.) or to honor God as we honor the Poor,
with some cold Benevolence. If any be of that Religion, he is not far from
Jeroboam's, for he made the base of the People, the Clergy; these make the
Clergy the bafest and meanest of the People. Is this to give to God that which
is God's, or to Honor him with our Riches? But what tell we you of God? You
profess to honor him with all your Hearts, But does he eat Bull's Flesh, or
drink the Blood of Goats? Does he dwell in Temples made with Hands, or feed of
the Fruit of the Land? Not so, yet he has a Right and Interest in all, and
has taken into his own possession a part to dispose of at his pleasure, (
Levit. 27.30.) And when he has set his Mark upon it. All this is mine. He
after disposes of it, ( Numb. 18.31.) Behold I have given it to the Children
of Levi: For what? For their service in the Tabernacle of the Congregation. To
wht end? To encourage them in the law of the Lord. (2 Chronicles. 31.4.) What is all
this to you? The Levites are gone, and their Law is vanished, it is true: Yet
this Ordinance is in force still ratified in the Church of Christ by St. Paul
(1 Cor. 9.14.) (...), God has so ordained, that they which Preach the Gospel
should live of the Gospel.

That is to say, as that Right, which God then had in his Portion, he conferred
upon the Priests and Levites for their Service at the Altar. So od has
ordained, that, that Right which He now has in your Wealth, that reasonable
Portion now set apart for his Worship, be it what it will be, is conferred upon
the Clergy for their Service in the ospel: Sic Ordinavit Deus, and that upon
the same Moral Considerations as before.

First, God is the owner, and giver of all we Possess still, therefore unless
with some Portion we acknowledge his supreme Dominion, we shall not only
transgress Nature's Law, but in time forget whose Tenants we are.

Secondly, This God has a Clergy still, who be (...) set apart for a more
Excellent Worship than that of the Levites, ( Romans 1.1.)

Thirdly. He keeps the same love and affection toward his Clergy still, ( Mat.
10.40.) He that receives you, receives me; and him that sent me.

Fourthly, There Is a Service to be done in the Tabernacle of the Congregation
still, and a more painful Service than that of the Levites: They served by
turns; we continually labor in that which spends a more precious Humor than
the sweat of our Brows.

Fifthly, We have need to be encouraged in the Law of the Lord still, and as
great need as ever the Levites had, (2 Chronicles, 31.4.) Therefore that Ordinance
of God does stand still upon the same grounds: That we must live (...) (as the
Apostle speaks) of thar Portion which is sanctified by the Temple, or as he
speaks more emphatically of our Times (...) of that which is hallowed, or
sanctified by the Gospel itself.

By this you see, First, that the Right, Property, and Interest in
Church Livings, Decimae sacrum vectigal, qui eas recipit in loco Dei est
subrogatus. Ergo quod Meldhisdec Abraham obtulit Decimas, eo confessus est
honoris gradu supra se excellere. Calvin. in Heb. 1.4.
is originally in God, not in us: Which therefore is said, to be sanctified, in
my Text. Therefore if any shall devour it by Alienation, or Sacrilege, they
stand answerable to God himself, and not to us, in that Day when all Courts
shall be Judged over again.

Secondly, You see, That this Right and Interest in Church Livings which we
have, we have by grant from God, we receive it immediately from Him; so is it
the free Gift of God, notas He is the Author of Nature only, for so are all
other Gifts; but as He Is the Author of Grace. For to this End has He given it,
that by our Ministry, Grace might be wrought in the Hearts of the People. Tract
de Beat. Cathol. Conversionis.
Deus qui dignatus est totum dare, decimam a nobis dignatur repetere, non sibi,
sed nobis sine dubio profuturam. First, God does vouchsafe to give us all
things in abundance. Secondly, He accepts one Portion back again in
acknowledgment that we hold the rest of Him. Thirdly, That Portion He has
bestowed again in behoof of our Souls.

So then with a part of your Temporal Goods you honor God; that part He
Sanctifies, and returns into your Bosoms for your Spiritual and Everlasting
good.

What injury is it then to God that his sacred Portion by Alienation and
Profanation should be devoured? What indignity is it to the Goodness of God,
that this Right we have in things Sanctified, derived from God for his Service,
should be bought and sold? That that Right which is the Gift of God, the free
and gracious Gift of God, given for the perpetual maintenance of the Gospel,
should be obtained with Money? I doubt it does taste of the gall of bitterness
( Acts 8.23.) And sometimes incurreth that Snare of Destruction there
threatened, Pereat pecunia tua tecum. For even that Money does seldom prosper.

Doubtless to spoil God of his Right, is to swallow our own Bane: Yet because
Lucre does blind our Eyes, the danger of this Destruction is not conspicuous.
Wherefore Solomon, does here call it a Snare, Laqueus est devorare sacrum. I
would gladly know some real and material difference betwixt Simon Magus's
Bargain, and some of ours; saving only, that he dealt plainly, and we devise
shifts to ensnare our selves ( Acts 8.19.) Simon offered money, and said, Give
me power, that on whomsoever I lay my Hands, he may receive the Holy Ghost. We
offer Money, and say, Give me, or get me Power, that on whom I lay my Hands, he
may be Sanctified, and set apart for the Word and Sacraments. What difference
betwixt these two Powers? Saving, that that was Extraordinary, and Temporary
for that time; this is Perpetual, and Essential to the Church of Christ, and so
consequently of more worth.

It will be said, Declam. super Reliquimus omnia.
St. Bernard spoke like a Fool in objecting this to the Clergy: There was never
Money given, nor offered for that Sacred Power; but for some Honor, or
Commodity thereunto annexed. It Is true. And shall we think, that Simon Magus
did offer his Money for the Holiness of that Power, which he then desired, or
was it rather for that Honor, and Commodity, which he supposed were annexed?
It was that Honor he ambitiously affected, that he might be accounted (...) v.
9. Assuring himself withal, that though he had offered very largely, yet if he
could bestow such visible Gifts of the Spirit at his pleasure, he would make
himself whole again in a short time.

Yet I make no doubt, but the Sin of Simon was Simony. And who list to open his
Eyes and look about him, he shall find that Simony is not a School Term, or a
Word of Art; but a Snare to entrap the Consciences of corrupt Men.

Ask a Patron who uses to Merchandise his Benefices; and he will protest unto
you, that for that Right of Church Livings derived upon the Clergy together
with their Function, he knows not what it means, neither does he intend any
indignity to God, or Holy Things, he deals only for that which is valuable and
Money worth. And I do verily believe him, for here is the Snare.

Neither do I think, that Ananias or Saphira his Wife did intend any injury to
the Holy Ghost in retaining part of what themselves had given: Only they
thought that a piece of Money was as well saved as not.

I verily persuade my self, that Gehazi meant no disgrace to that sacred Power
of Cleansing the Leprosy: But only perceiving the liberal disposition of
Naaman, he knew, that two Suits of Apparel, and a Talent or two of Silver might
be taken with as great thanks as left. The Scripture puts us out of doubt (
Mal. 3.8.) That when the Jews kept back their Tithes and Offerings, it was the
farthest end of their Thought to spoil God. Wherefore when God expostulateth
with them; you have spoiled me, they Wondered and said, Wherein have we spoiled
Thee? In Tithes and Offerings, says God. We know, we had beguiled certain fat
Priests and Levites, who have enough besides: But we never dreamt of spoiling
thee. Well (says God) you have spoiled me. Sacrilege and Simony are spiritual
Sins, and sensual Men will not conceive them. So much of the first Snare.

Secondly, They who persuade themselves, they can very cunningly and smoothly
wind themselves out of the former Snare, are taken in this second. For having
got an hint from some, that Tithes are not due by Divine Right, they resolve
their Consciences on this manner. Albeit by the Law of Moses, God did bind the
People of the Jews to the precise payment of Tithes, (which was also Zealously
urged by the Prophets) yet in the time of the ospel, it is a thing more
arbitrary and indifferent. So long as they live of the Gospel, and are
partakers of the Altar, it is sufficient. Well: ive they shall; a certain
Pittance they shall have, wherewithal they must be content, and there is an end.
For when Moses, Elias, and Christ men upon Mount Tabor, the first two Vanished.
Moses's Law was very Chargeable, whereby that Tribe of Levi was grown too Rich:
Elias also was an hot urger of Moses's Law, but there came a Cloud, which
carried away Moses and Elias, both together, with their Ceremonials and
Judicials, and Christ was left alone, who was content to be Poor enough, and so
we mind to keep him. Admit all this were true, yet the second part of my Text
makes a sufficient answer to these Replyers: Post vota inquirere.

Our Progenitor and Fore-Father being taught by Nature to Honor God with their
substance, directed by God's Law, what proportion was fittest for that purpose,
animated by the Examples of the Primitive Church in their voluntary Oblations,
did consecrate a certain Portion of their Temporals, by solemn Vow unto God,
delivering up to him their Title and Right from themselves and their Heirs for
ever. Annexing commonly some words of fearful Execration, that if any attempt
to Alienate, or take them away that his Account should be without favor in the
last Day. If after these solemn Vows any shall Enquire, that is, shall devise
colors and shifts to Alien, or take away Things Vowed unto God; to wash, or
clip that sacred Tribute which has God's Mark upon it; he falls inevitably
into Solomon's second Snare of Destruction. Laqueus est post vota inquirere.
For as Levi paid Tithes in the Loins of Abraham; so did we vow Tithes and
Church-Endowments, in the Loins of our Forefathers. They for us, and we in
them have Invested God in that Portion, whereby we stand eternally Bound never
to claim Interest therein again.

Albeit we had liberty before to use Ecclesiastical-Livings as mere Temporals;
yet after these Vows our Case is the very same with that of Ananias ( Act.
5.2.) who for keeping back that which himself had Consecrated to the Church,
and coloring the same with a Lie, was taken in this Snare of Destruction, fell
down at the Apostles Feet, gave up the Ghost. The same Snare falling upon his
Wife, for partaking with him in that Council, that is, for enquiring after the
Vows were past. If you enquire a farther ground of this assertion, let it be
the Rule of common Equity; that no Man having passed his Consent and Deed may
change it to the prejudice of another. That which is given to the Church,
Offerimus Deo, quod Ecclesiae tradimus.
is passed over unto God; therefore he that shall take it again without the
consent of God, whose it is, commits direct Sacrilege against him, and
deals worse with God, than God will suffer any Man to deal with us: Shall not
this bring a Snare upon him? He that will be rich (says the Apostle 1 Timothy
6.9.) not he that would be Rich with honest endeavors; but he that resolves
he will be Rich by Hook, or Crook, though he spoil God himself, shall fall into
Temptations, and Snares, and noisome Lusts which drown Men in perdition, and
destruction. Nemesis Dei aliquando justa est, qui invasionem jurium and
privilegiorum Ecclesiasticorum Bello, Fame, and multis aliis Calamitatibus
saepenumero punit.

Secondly, Admit after the Vows it be none of ours, by Right which is given to
God; yet let us enquire if we can compass the consent of the Ministers
themselves to get, or part away somewhat. Volenti non fit injuria. Alas! our
consent for the Alienation of Ecclesiastical Things from that Religious End, to
which they were given, is nothing, because the Right Originally is in God, and
not in us. For the Act of Ananias in parting his own Donation, was not done
unto Men, but unto God ( Acts 5.4) because after the Donation, Mentitur Ananias
Deo quia Ecclesiae fucum fecerat Apostoli homines sunt non privati, quum Deus
illis vices suas mandaverat.
the Right was not in Men, but in God; and therefore cannot be taken away
without his consent. Let me parallel this with the like. Tell me, what is the
reason that after the Knot of Matrimony is duly tied, by consent of their
Parents and Friends, ratified by the Minister, what is the reason (I say) that
afterward the consent of both the Parties, Calvin in Act. 5.4.
of all their Friends, seconded by the Minister himself, is not able to unty
the fame Knot? Your Answer will be, Because Marriage is not of the Nature of a
Civil Contract, where God himself has an hand. Therefore whom God has joined,
let no Man separate, without God's consent. Neither be Church-Endowments Civil,
where God is a Party. Therefore that which God has received, let no Man take
away without his consent.

Thirdly, If this will not serve their turns after the Vows, Men will enquire
yet farther, Whether God did ever receive them, or no? For the Silver-shrines
of Diana, were never given, because never accepted by God. It Is true: But
extend not this limitation too far, for that is dangerous. First then, let us
not sit Judges upon the Consciences of our Forefathers; it is a Snare after
their Vows to enquire.

Secondly, Admit their purposes were stained with imperfection; shall that make
their Deed void? God forbid. What Act of Man is without imperfection? That
devout Zeal of Jehu was accepted, notwithstanding his Golden-Calves in Bethel.
Look to the other parallel. How many Exceptions might be taken unto Marriages
in these Days? If we should enquire after the Intents and sinister Affections
of the Parties Married, with other by-respects, which make them not so
acceptable unto God, as otherwise without doubt they would be: Yet does the
Bond stand firm before God and Man: For there is more Virtue in the good of an
Act to confirm, than imperfection can dissolve: Else Jacob had missed of his
Blessing, Genesis 27.

Thirdly, If this will not do, Men will enquire yet farther after the Vows, If
God will not in some Cases, give his consent to part with his Right? No doubt,
He that is so ready to convert his own Portion to benefit the Church in saving
Souls, will be as willing for our good to forego, as he ever was to receive.

But these Cases be rare, wherein it is not dark what God does warrant. As in
that other parallel of Matrimony, there is a Case wherein God grants a
dismission ( Mat. 19.9.) So there is a necessity wherein David may eat of the
Shewbread, which, otherwise, is not lawful but for the Priests (Mat. 12.4.)
But to make God speak, where He Is silent, and to extort his consent, where He Is
most unwilling: This is a Snare.

Fourthly, If every way our Consciences be ensnared, the next Inquiry must be,
How we shall be delivered? Admit we have robbed, or beguiled the Church, it is
past, we are sorry for it. Will not God of his mercy break the Snare, that our
Souls may escape in the Day of the Lord? No doubt, He that was ready to break
the Snare of Death, will be ready to break this Snare also. But upon what
Condition? The Prophet Ezekel makes a direct Answer in the 33 Chapter of his
Prophecy, and 15th Verse, If he return from his sin, and do that which is
right, to wit, If he restore the pledge, and give again that which he has
robbed, and commit no iniquity; he shall surely live, and not die. If he
restore.

But may not these Ifs be dispensed withal? No surely. That of St. Augustine
is firmly grounded upon the Book of God. Non remittitur peccatum, nisi
restituatur ablatum. For as in Moses's Law ( Numb. 4.7.) they were bound to
restore the damage with the Principal, besides the Ram for the Atonement, which
was the shadow; so in the truth of the Gospel, besides the Atonement made by
Christ upon the Cross, Restitution must be made by us. Christ has satisfied the
Justice of God for us, which was not in our power to do; but we must satisfy
the Church, and our own Consciences, besides the Atonement. We will amend and
be sorry for that which is past: Will not that satisfy? True. But can we amend
so long as we abide in the Sin? As the taking of it from the Church does begin,
so the keeping of it does continue the Fault. So long as the Spoil is in thine
House, the Sin remains when the Act is past ( Isaiah 3.14.) And where the Sin
remains, there is no amendment.

For the Act we are sorry. Be not deceived: God is not mocked. Thou can not
be sorry for taking of that which thou keep voluntarily. Epist. 54. ad
macedoniam.
Sine restitutione paenitentia nonagitur, sed fingitur, says St. Augustine.
Without Restitution, no Repentance: Without Repentance, no Salvation. Unless we
cast that down at the Apostles Feet which was got by Sacrilege, we are further
from Repentance than Judas, who notwithstanding passed out of this Life in a
double Snare of Soul and Body. Unjust dealing is dangerous against whomsoever:
But beware of Sacrilege. It Is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the
living God (Heb. 10.31) Thy Money may perish with thee, but to save thy self,
together with thy Money it is impossible. A Rich Man cannot pass the Needle's
Eye without a strain; nor a Sacrilegious Person without detriment. It Is Snare
every way to devour that which is Sanctified, and after the Vows to enquire how
to take that from God, which is once given. It Is a Snare to enquire
overstrictly after the Vows, what God did take, and what was given to
Superstitious use. It Is a Snare to enquire colors, and probabilities for God's
consent, where He Is most silent. It Is a Snare after the Sin, to enquire how by
some slight Repentance, we might have our Souls and our Money too.

It Is strange to see what a world of Enquiries the Subtilty of the Serpent has
suggested to entangle poor Souls. We make Queries, and put Cases, and beat our
Brains, and all to ensnare a troubled Conscience against the Day of the Lord. I
assure you, that I have Treated of a Doctrine in this Sermon, which is neither
New, nor to my knowledge Controversal. I have purposely contained my self
within the compass of common, and received Grounds, laying them open according
to my poor Skill. Wherefore in the Name of God; and his Church, let me commend
unto you the Exhortatiom of God himself, ( Malcha the 3d. Chapter and 10th.
Verse) Bring ye all the Tithes into the Storehouse, that there may be meat in
mine house, and prove me now herewith, says the Lord of Hosts, if I will not
open you the windows of Heaven, and pour you out a Blessing without measure.
Bring all the Tithes, that were a bootless Exhortation: Bring some reasonable
protion, and it shall be easier for you in the Day of Judgment. And seeing God
would have us to prove him, let us try him whether he will be as good as his
Word. Prove him if he will not open the windows of Heaven and pour us out a
Blessing without measure. Prove him, if he will not prosper the Nine Parts, Ten
times more than before. Prove him, if He will not send a Learned and Pious
Ministry into this Land, such as shall be able to stand in the Gap against an
Adversary, when Learned Pious and Othordox Divines, shall receive Encouragement
from the Altar. Prove him, if we be honoring him in Soul, and Body, and Goods,
He will not honor us with a Flourishing Gospel to feed our Souls, with Health
and Peace: To preserve our Bodies with Health and Prosperity to our Lives end,
so far as shall advantage our Souls and Bodies to Eternal Life.

Which God grant unto us for his Son's sake Jesus Christ the Righteous; to whom
with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, Three Persons and one Eternal Everliving,
and only wise God, be Glory, Praise and Power, and Thanksgiving, now, and for
ever.
Amen.
POSTSCRIPT, from that Excellent Book called The Snake in the Grass.
OUR Priests (says Thorpe the Quaker) came not of the Lineage of Levi, but of
the Lineage of Judah to which Judah, no Tithes were promised to be given. Thus
Thorpe, as the Quakers have Quoted him. But now, who told Thorpe, or the
Quakers, that our Priests came of the Lineage of Judah? Are they Jews? What
fulsome stuff is this! But our Savior was of Judah. What then! He was not a
Priest after the Order of Judah, of which Tribe Moses spoke nothing concerning
Priesthood, ( Heb, 7.14.) But He was a Priest after the Order of Melchisedec (
Heb. 5.6.) And Tithes were paid to Melchisedec, long before Levi, who paid
Tithes to Melchisedec, being yet in the Loins of his Father Abraham ( Heb.
7.10.)

Now the Evangelical Priesthood is after the Order of Melchisedec: And
therefore they claim Tithes, as being due to that Order of Priesthood: So that
all their Arguments as to the Law, and Levitical Priesthood being superseded,
operate nothing against Priests of a Superior and more excellent Priesthood.
And there being as Ancient mention of Tithes as there is of Priesthood in the
World, I have no manner of doubt, but they are as Ancient as Presthood it self,
that is, as Adam: From whom descended the Knowledge of Tithes, as of
Sacrifices, and of Priesthood which are all the Relatives, the one being the
Maintenance, the other the Office of the Priesthood; and therefore the one,
must be as ancient as the other: And they were all alike received by the
Heathen World, by an immemorial Tradition from the Beginning, without knowing
of their beginning, as they knew not their own Origination, nor of the World,
of Marriage, and other positive Institutions, which by an Universal Tradition
had been conveyed down to them.

God reserved the Tenth part of our Substance, as the Seventh of our Time, to
be paid, as a Tribute and acknowledgement to him, from whom we receive all: And
therefore the Payment of Tithes is a part of God's Worship. The Priests being
made the Receivers (because we cannot pay them to God immediately) is but a
secondary Consideration. They were part of the Offerings to God, under the Law
( Numbers 18.24.) They are called his Inheritance ( Deuteronomy. 18.1.) not as then
Instituted, but then given to the Levites. Nor is Melchisedec's Tithing of
Abraham, mentioned as the beginning or first rise of Tithes; but it is told
occasionally, and as a thing well known and received, even in those early Days.
And being part of the Worship of God, Holy unto the Lord (Levit. 27.32, 33.
they were not Alienable, or to be changed with any thing else.

The Priests could no more excuse Men from the Payment of their Tithes (for
they were paid to God) than they could commute any of the other Offerings, or
Sacrifices, upon the pretense that they were given to the Priests for their
maintenance

No Man says, That the People did offer Sacrifices to the Priest; though the
Priests did live of their Sacrifices; neither are Tithes offered to Priests,
but to God, though they are paid to the Priests, and received by the Priests from
the Hands of the People, as other Offerings to the Lord were.

Therefore the Substraction of the Tithes, as of other Offerings, is called a
Robbing, not of the Priests, but of God ( Mal. 3.8.) It Is invading what God
has reserved peculiar to himself, that we may not touch it; of all the other
Trees of the Garden, we may freely Eat. And this is the same Sacrilege as to
taste of the forbidden Fruit. That was the first Sin. It was Sacrilege. And I
am not afraid to say, that all are guilty of it, who have seized upon the
Tithes of God, and pay them not to his Priests: And that this Sin will not be
forgiven, without a severe Repentance and Restitution.

How far extreme Ignorance, occasioned by the Torrent of the Times, will
Excuse; I will not now dispute: But I Am sure wilful affected Ignorance,
occasioned by Negligence, or Covetousness will not.

And let this be added, to all that I have said, That several Kings of England,
who had then the sole Right and Property in all the Lands of England, have anew
Dedicated, by particular Vows, as Jacob ( Genesis 28.22.) all the whole Tithes of
all the Lands of England to God; and Signed Charters and Grants of the same,
and rendered, them upon their Knees, at the Altar of God, in presence, and with
the approbation of the Lords, and Estates of the Land, with heavy Curses and
Imprecations upon themselves; or any of their Successors, who should Recall the
same, or Incroach in any part, upon the said Tithes of God; and upon all who
should receive such Grants from them, or assit them in such Sacrilege. And the
same has been Confirmed by several Acts of Parliament.

Now if a Man cannot violate his own Vow, how can he annul that of another?
Especially where his Vow was only for the Payment of what God had before
Reserved to himself. I will not launch out any farther upon this Subject; only
tell the Quakers; That it was the Friars and Schoolmen who first set up the
Notion of Tithes being Elemosynary, against their own Canonists, only on
purpose to leave the People at Liberty, to bestow their Tithes upon the
Regulars, and to maintain the Sacrilegious Impropriations, which the Pope had
made of the Tithes of the secular Clergy, to endow their Monasteries: Which
King Henry the 8th. instead of Restoring, did yet the more Sacrilegiously
Impropriate to the Laity.

FINIS.

