THE Near Aproach of CHRIST's KINGDOM, Clearly proved by Scripture.

With a certain Account of the Signs of the present Times relating thereto.

As also, That the Conversion and Restoration of Israel will be after the
Lord's coming.

That after the Lord's coming, most of the great Plagues mentioned in the
Revelations, will be poured out upon the Earth, and the Wicked.

That the Beast and the False Prophet will be then taken alive.

That all the Christians that came in by Christ of the Gentile Race, were
termed Heathens, in the Old Testament. And that the Law and Gospel speaks but
to them that are under it.

That after the Fiery Tempest, the Heavens and Earth will be renewed, and all
things restored as in the beginning. LONDON, Printed for M. M. and are to be
sold by Tho. Fabian, at the lower end of Cheapside, in Mercers Chapel And
diverse other Booksellers about London. 1696.

Advertisement.
The most material points that we are in controversy about, are already
answered, which Books are to be sold at the same Booksellers, and of a small
price, that thereby they may be the easier had by all. There will other Books
come forth in a short time, so as by Gods assistance, all the disputable
places, and most of the figurative speeches will be by the word it self, fully
and clearly explained.

ERRATA.
Page 48. l. 27. from the top, r. 1 Pet. 4.12.

TO THE KING, AND Parliament.
THIS Treatise giving an Account of the Certain Signs of the Times, and the
near approach of the coming of the Lord, is humbly presented, That they may
know what God is going about to do, so as to prepare for the coming of Christ.
It Is therefore most humbly hoped our most Gracious King, with the Great Council
of the Nation, who have so wonderfully appeared for the Defense of the
Protestant Religion, may be further instrumental to the Glory of God, in
encouraging the knowledge of the Truths herein contained. God grant His Majesty
to be a Blessing to the Nations till the Lord comes.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
WHEN I heard of those often repeated Earthquakes, the like whereof the World
never produced; and that it is according to the Word of the Lord that there
should be Earthquakes in diverse places, with distress of Nations, etc. when
these things come to pass; the Lord has bidden such as have an Interest in
him, then to look up, and to lift up their heads, for their Redemption draws
nigh, Luke 21 28. The thoughts of which, set me on a fervent longing desire for
the coming of the Lord, and drew out my heart in more ardent desires after him;
whereupon I took to the Lord's direction, resolving to search the Scriptures
with more diligence than ever I had done; the which I no sooner had performed,
but I found the certainty of the coming of the Lord, and that it was very nigh
at hand; but still I was to seek how, and in what manner; for I could then no
ways make the Old and New Testament agree, neither did I then rightly
understand any of the figurative speeches; and finding it too hard for me, I
was much troubled thereat; but as I had taken to the Lords direction in the
search of the Scripture, whereby I came to the assured knowledge of his coming;
so I also would, according to the advice therein, seek to the Lord for
knowledge to understand the secrets therein contained, as Prove. 2.3, 4, 5, 6.
for he is the wonderful Counselor, and the mighty God, Isa. 9.6. The which,
when I so did, the Lord more and more enlightened my understanding in his Word:
So as I do wholly acknowledge the discovery of these great and hidden Mysteries
was from the Lord, and attained according to the way directed in his Word,
which is by prayer and diligence.

This small Treatise, being an Essay, contains the plain Heads easy to the
apprehension of any, that thereby all these great things might the better be
registered in their memory, so as to sink down upon the heart. The other Book,
being somewhat more difficult for them to understand, that are not well versed
in the Word, and understand not the way of Scripture speaking: For therein is
most of the figurative speeches opened by the Key of the Word; that is, by
joining Scripture to Scripture, and in not leaving any other Scriptures to
contradict what is said; whereby the true meaning of the Word is clearly
explained. But these great Mysteries were to remain a secret to the time of the
end, according to the Word of the Lord in Daniel, chap. 12.4. And in Zech.
14.7. It is said, It shall come to pass, that at evening time it shall be
light. And in that God has made choice of so weak an Instrument, it is that his
power might the more eminently appear therein; and that the Infinite God has
now at this evening time caused the true meaning of his Word to be discovered;
it is an infallible Sign of the certain near approach of the coming of the
Lord; for whose coming, if we prepare, we shall be certainly happy; but if you
will put the day far off, it will then come on you as a snare, Luke chapter 21. v.
34, 35. in which you will be destroyed; but if you will be as earnest with God
for your selves, and so continue, as I have been earnest with the Almighty for
the generality of you all; I make no question but you will be for ever blessed;
for if we will not be wanting to our selves, God will not be wanting to us: Now
that we, and the generality of the Christian World, would seek the Lord, whilst
he is to be found; and that the Warnings he gives us to prepare for his coming,
might so awaken us, as that we may be found with our Lamps trimmed, and our
Lights burning, is the earnest prayer of

Your Friend and Servant in Christ Jesus, M. M.

A certain Account of the Signs of the Last Times. The Coming of the Lord. The
Destruction of Babylon: With the Christians that remain in their Wickedness.
Also the Calling in of the Jews. And the Restoration of all things.
Chap. I. A necessity of being ready prepared for the Lord's Coming; lest that
Day should come upon us unawares, which is very near at hand.
NOW we, not apprehending the dangerous condition that we stand in, by reason
we falsely imagine that the New Everlasting Covenant is made with us; when now
the Believers are but Heirs with Israel of the same Promise; but because Christ
said of them that were given him of his Father, to be his standing Witnesses
through the World, that none should pluck them out of his hand. And the Apostle
speaking of the Churches that first trusted in Christ, which had the abundant
pourings forth of the Spirit upon them to secure their standing, and thereby
they generally stood; which in Scripture, the major part is reckoned for the
whole. And the Spirit was also given to confirm the Gospel to the World, and
the following Generations, as will be abundantly proved; but we having been in
a mistake as to these things, have thought it no concern of ours to know
whether the Lord is coming or not. But we also by misunderstanding the words of
the Lord, when he sent forth his Disciples to teach all Nations, saying, He
that believes shall be saved. That is, they that believed the Doctrine which
Christ sent them forth to teach; in which was included the conditions of man's
salvation, the which, whosoever accordingly believed, should be saved; and they
which believed not, should be damned. Now these words were but of force to them
that believed, and to them that refused believing; for unto whom the Word never
came, they cannot be damned for not believing that which they never heard. And
the Apostle says, That what things soever the Law says, it says to them who
are under the Law, Romans 3.19. Romans 2.12. So likewise what the Gospel says, it
says to them that are under the Gospel, that is, to them that have the Gospel,
and obey, or refuse to obey the same; to them accordingly does the promised
mercies, or otherwise the threatened judgments belong. And though St. John says,
He that has the Son, has life; and he that has not the Son, has not life, 1
John 5.12. Yet these words do not exclude all them which have never heard of
the Son, so as that none of them should ever have life by the Son; for there
will be a Redemption in the World to come, as will be proved. And when Christ
comes to judge the World, and at the last and final Judgment, they are all said
to be judged according to the deeds done in the body, whether they have been
good or evil, Mat. 25.35. Mat. 7.21. Mat. 16.27. Romans 2.6.13. 1 Pet. 1.17.
James 1.22. Rev. 20.12, 13. 1 Timothy 6.18, 19. Rev. 2.23, 26. And though in the
Parable of the Sheep and the Goats, there is but two sorts mentioned, yet there
is a third included, in as much as the Poor, and Children, were not capable to
be made partakers of the Blessing, or the Curse, in their doing, or not doing
good to God's Elect: And therefore the word all, to them on his left hand, is
not mentioned, when he sentenced them to everlasting fire, Matthew. chapter 25. v.
41. And whereas it is said, all Nations, it is but meant all the Nations that
have the Gospel. And St. Paul says, The Lord will come to take vengeance on
them that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
shall be punished with everlasting destruction, 2 These. 1.8. The word all, he
here mentions not, but he chiefly includes them that have the Knowledge of God,
and of the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ: For the Gospel speaks to them that
have the Gospel, yet in works deny it, in that they will not yield obedience to
it. For it is declared in several places of Scripture, too many to be here set
down, that the Jews will be called in, when the Lord again comes, and they do
no ways obey the Gospel, and then according to the word, the Lord he will
gather in others with them, Isa. 56.8. These things being abundantly proved in
a Book that is coming forth, of which I shall here set down some few proofs.

Chap. II. The Restoration of Israel.
THat the Restoration of Israel will be at the time, when the Nations round
about, are judged in the Valley of Jehosaphat; and whereas the Lord says,
Assemble your selves, and come up all ye heathen round about, Joel 3.11, 12.
This is spoken to those that have Israel's Land in their possession, and unto
them that are their Oppressors: And the reason why they are termed Heathen, was
because there was no other then, but Jews and Heathen; and that then not only
the backsliding Christians, which were before prophesied of, were so termed,
but also the best of Saints, that came in by Christ of the Gentile race, are
likewise termed Heathen, as in 2 Esd. 2.34. I say unto you, O ye Heathen, that
hear and understand, look for your Shepherd, he shall give you everlasting
rest. And what the Law and Gospel, says, it says to those that are under the
Law and Gospel, Romans 3.19. Romans 2.13, 14, 15. as Christians and Turks: For the
backsliding Christians, are those that are under the condemning power of the
Law and Gospel; and also the Turks acknowledge the true God, but in Works deny
him, and therefore fall under the condemning power of the Moral Law. And
whereas the Lord says, Come up all ye Heathen, Joel 3.2. now the word all, in
Scripture, does not include the whole, and the Conversion of Israel will also
be, When Saviors come upon Mount Sion, then the Kingdom will be the Lord's,
Obad. v. 21. Then it is Israel shall see him whom they have pierced, and mourn
over him, Zech. 12.10. Rev. 1.7. And after the Lord descends upon Mount Olivet,
Jerusalem will be built, never more to be destroyed, Zech. 14.10, 11. and the
Wicked never more to have a prevailing power against Israel; And the Lord
Christ says, That Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles, until the
times of the Gentiles be fulfilled, Luke 21.24. Which shows the Gentile Power
will be wholly taken away before Jerusalem will be restored.

Accordingly St. Paul, where he speaks of the Conversion of the Jews, turns
them to Isaiah, where the Lord is there declared to come to judge the World,
Romans 11.26. Isa. 59.17, 18, 19, 20. and God by the same Prophet, ordered
Proclamation to the end of this world, Say ye to the daughter of Sion, behold
thy Salvation comes, behold his reward is with him, Isa. 62.11. Which shows,
their Salvation is not to be, till the time of the power of this wicked world
is ended; and therefore it is said, when the Lord comes, that the Beast, and
false Prophet will be taken alive, and cast into a lake of fire burning with
brimstone, so as time for them, and the wicked of this World, shall be no
longer, Rev. 19.20. Therefore St. Paul bids the Church, 1 Timothy 6.18, 19. Do
good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to
communicate, laying up in store for themselves, a good foundation against the
time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life. Thereby showing there is
another time after this time, before Eternity, in which the Saints will be
blessed, and then it is that Israel will be saved with an everlasting
salvation, If. 45.17. the which will be at the time of the restoration of all
things, Acts 3.20, 21, 22. And he shall send Jesus Christ, which before was
preached unto you: Whom the Heaven must receive, until the times of the
restitution of all things, which God has spoken by the mouth of all his
Prophets since the world began. For Moses truly said unto the Fathers, A
Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you, of your Brethren, like unto
me; him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you. And now
is this Scripture ready to be fulfilled.

Chap. III. The Coming of the Lord.
SAint Paul says, 1 These. 4.16, 17. For the Lord himself shall descend from
heaven with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and with the trump of
God; and the dead in Christ shall rise first, then we which are alive, and
remain, shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord
in the air, and so shall we ever be with the Lord. Whereas the Apostle here
says, we which are alive, all know, that in this (we) the wicked are not
included; neither in this (we) are all the righteous then living included, but
by this (we) he comprehends those that were to bear their testimony to the
Gospel, as the first Churches did, and as the standing witness has continued
to do; the which are those who are said to be clothed in Sackcloth, and lie in
the street of the Great City, which is spiritually called Sodom, and Egypt,
etc. Rev. 11.8. and these are those that are said will be caught up in the
clouds to meet the Lord in the Air, and these are the Elect that cry day and
night unto him, Luke 18.7. but the other Believers will be gathered, according
as by the Lord is declared, Luke 17.34, 35. There shall be two men in one bed,
the one shall be taken, and the other shall be left; two women shall be
grinding together, the one shall be taken, and the other shall be left. And the
Lord says, It will be as in the days of Lot. Whereby it does also appear, that
the other Believers will be lifted out of danger by the Angels, as Lot was out
of Sodom, whilst the Wicked will be left, to receive part of their punishment
here. And those that are thus to be taken and gathered, are those that have the
Gospel, and live in obedience thereunto. But as for Israel that now own not the
Gospel, they shall be called in, according as the Lord by the Prophets has
declared to them, (whose testimony they have received) and they likewise shall
be brought to Jerusalem, as it is written, upon Horses, and in Chariots, and in
Litters, and upon Mules, and swift Beasts, Isa. 60.6, 7, 9. Isa. 66.20. And
then it is, that with weeping and supplications, the Lord will lead them, Jer.
31.9. For the Lord will keep to his usual way and method in bringing them home,
by a sense of their own miscarriage, before he gives them the Holy Ghost. And
though the Apostle says of them that were chosen, to bear their testimony to the
truth, that they should at the coming of the Lord be changed in a moment, in
the twinkling of an Eye: Yet the others that are then saved, will not then be
so suddenly changed, neither will their natural body then, be changed into a
spiritual body, but their natural body will be then healed of all infirmities,
and their mind also, 2 Esd. 6.26. And when their time of returning will be,
then will others of the Heathens, of all Languages of the Nations, take hold of
the skirt of a Jew, saying, we will go with you, Zech. 8.23. For as there was a
mixed multitude went out of Egypt with Israel, so again when Israel, which will
then be his Elect, To. 11.28. which will be gathered from the four winds, into
which the Lord has scattered them, then also there will a mixed multitude of
the Heathen go with them, according as it is said. But the poor Christians that
have lost their Day and Season of Grace, will not be so permitted to do.

And though at first the Lord will lead Israel with weeping, and supplications,
yet also their return to Sion, will be with singing, and everlasting joy shall
be upon their heads; they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and
mourning shall flee away, Isa. 58.11. And also it will be after the Lord comes,
that most of those great Plagues mentioned in the Revelations will be poured
forth upon the wicked of the Earth, so that according as it is said, they shall
gnash their teeth and melt away, Psalm. 112.10. after which will come the storm
mentioned in the Psalms, of Hail, Fire, and Brimstone, which will be the
portion of their Cup, Psalm. 11.6. and then, as Isaiah says, The Hail shall
sweep away the refuge of lies, Isa. 28.17. Now this is spoken to them that have
the word, for we are not permitted to judge them that are without, 1 Cor. 5.12.
Now whereas St. Peter says, The heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and
the elements shall melt with fervent heat, 2 Pet. 3.10. These words of the
Apostle have a twofold meaning, first, he has an allusion to the figurative
Heavens and Elements, which by fire will be dissolved or burnt up; secondly,
the Airy Heavens, and Material Earth, will be purged, or purified by the
tempest of fire, so as the outward face of the Earth will be burnt up. And then
again God will make all things new, at which time the raised Saints will be in
the glorious Tabernacle, and the Believers, and Israel, and all the promised
Elect, which the Lord will call in at his coming, will be secured in the Holy
Land, and between Mount Olivet, Zech. 14.4, 5. This is further proved by
Scripture, and explained in the forementioned Book.

Chap. IV. Be ready for the Coming of the Lord.
WOE to the Christians that shall be found in darkness at that day, and though
Christ said, Of that day and hour knows no man, Mark 13.32. But however, he
has left upon record the certain Signs of the times, which when they are seen,
he bids such as have an interest in him, lift up their heads and look up, for
their Redemption draws nigh, Lu. 21.28. thereby showing that all that expect
to have an interest in him, must prepare for him. For it was those that would
not take the warning, both in the Old World, and in the time of Lot, that were
destroyed. And also the Lord said of the Jews, that they were a wicked and
adulterous generation, which could discern the face of the sky, but could not
discern the signs of the times, Matthew. 16.3. The which became destructive to
them; but St. Paul says, Ye are not in darkness, that that day should come
upon you at unawares, 1 These. 5.4. And blessed will they be, that upon the
warning the Lord gives them, will so prepare for him, as to have their Lamps
trimed, and their lights burning. For the Lord compares himself to a man that
took a long journey, and gave to every man his work and commanded the Porter to
watch. And the Lord says, watch ye therefore, lest coming suddenly, I find you
sleeping, Mark 13.34, 35, 36, 37. These places show the dreadful condition
those Christians will be in, that will not take warning by the Signs given by
him; and the Lord also says, If the good man of the house had known what hour
the Thief would have come, he would have watched, and not have suffered his
house to have been broken through, Luke 12.39. For as the Thief comes to
destroy, so the Lord will come to the destruction of them that profess they
know him, yet will not make preparation for him.

Chap. V. The Signs of the Times.
NOW as concerning the Time, and the Signs of the Time; that is, that the time
of the Signs and Wonders, to the time of Christ's coming, and afterward, till
such time as the Wicked are taken off from the Earth, it does clearly appear,
will be forty five years; according to which time Israel lay in the Wilderness,
and were Conquering their Enemies in the Land of Canaan, before they were
peaceably settled there; for in numbers it is said, According to this time, it
shall be said of Jacob and of Israel, what has God wrought? Numb. 23.23. The
like is said in Micah, According to the days of thy coming out of the land of
Egypt, I will show unto him mavelous things, the nations shall be confounded
at all their might, Mich 7.15, 16. And it is said in Zechary, 14.3. Then shall
the Lord go forth and fight against those nations, as when he fought in the day
of battle. And in Daniel there is just forty five days difference in the number
of the days, and he is said to be blessed that comes to the last number, Dan.
12.12. And that we are now far gone in this forty five days of years, is
certain, by the Signs of the Times; and if they began in 1663. when the great
Blazing Star appeared, which the Astronomers said was a Rod to whip the Earth
withal: And since we have had Signs in the Sun, and in the Moon, and often
repeated Blazing Stars, according to the Word of the Lord, Luke 21.25. or
whether the beginning of the limited time was, when the Evil Spirits mentioned
in the Revelations, Chap. 16. 13, 14 came out of the mouth of the dragon, and
out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet, which
has gathered together the Kings of the earth, to the battle of the great day of
God Almighty. And by these the World is now in an uproar, as in, 2 Esdras 9.3,
4. and also the Lord says in Luke, Chap. 21.25, 26, 27. There shall be
distress of nations, with perplexity, the sea and the waves thereof roaring,
men's hearts failing them for fear, and looking after those things which are
coming on the earth, for the powers of heaven shall be shaken. By which is
meant the ruling powers of the earth, which in Scripture, is also called the
Heavens. And then it is the Lord will come, as in ver. 27. And then shall they
see the Son of man coming in a cloud with power and great glory. And it is also
given us as a Sign of the Lord's coming, the often breakings forth of fire out
of the earth; although History gives us an account that the Mountains were fired
before Christ came. The Romans being formerly the afflicters of the natural
Seed of Jacob, as since they have also been of the adopted Seed of Jacob, for
which, with their other abominable sins, the anger of the Lord has been kindled
against them, yet before the coming of the Lord, it is declared by the Angel to
Esdras, There shall be confusion in many places, and fire shall be often sent out
again, 2 Esd. 5.8. which has lately in a wonderful manner been fulfilled.

Now all along in the Scripture, the Afflictions of the Natural, and of the
Adopted Seed are joined together; so here in Isaiah 5. from the beginning to
the 14. verse, in a particular manner treats of the miscarriage, and punishment
of the natural Seed of Jacob. And beginning at the 14th verse to the 24th
treats of the punishment of the adopted Seed of Jacob. For in the 16th verse he
says, The Lord of Hosts shall be exalted in Judgment: At which time the Lambs
shall feed after their manner. Therefore this is to be fulfilled when the Lord
again comes: Against which time it is said, Isa. 5.14. Hell has enlarged her
self, and opened her mouth wide without measure; and their glory, and their
multitude, and their pomp, and he that rejoices shall descend into it. This
does evidently appear, that Hell has enlarged her self by these often torrents
and rivers of Fire, Pitch, and Bitumen, which God has lately sent out thence.
According to the Word of God in Deuteronomy, Chap. 32. 22. For a fire is
kindled in mine anger, and shall burn to the lowest Hell, and shall consume the
Earth with her increase, and set on fire the foundations of the Mountains. By
these words we are to understand, that the fire of Hell and the fire in the
Foundations of these Mountains extends it self from the one, to the other:
This is further treated of in a Book that is to come forth. And it is also said
in Isaiah 30. v. 30. For Tophet is ordained of old; yea for the King it is
prepared, he has made it deep and large; the pile thereof is fire and much
wood, the breath of the Lord, like a stream of Brimstone, does kindle it. This
Tophet here spoken of, is Hell; the King for whom it was prepared, is the
Devil; but Man that is ensnared by him does also fall into it. For the Lord
says, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil
and his Angels, Matthew. 25.41. But all Hell will not be fired, till the last and
final Judgment, when all the dead will be judged, Rev. 20.14. And whereas it is
said, The pile thereof is fire and much wood: That is, much combustible matter
fit for fuel, as Brimstone, Pitch, Sulpher, Bitumen, Coperas, and the like.
These things the Lord has so placed; and by his breath and command, he has
kindled it. And it is said of the Beast, and false Prophet, that after the Lord
comes, they were both taken, and cast alive into a Lake, of fire burning with
Brimstone, Rev 19.20. which Lake is already kindled, into which they shall be
cast, which reaches to the lowest Hell.

Chap. VI. Whirlwinds from the Lord.
NOW are the Whirlwinds of the Lord gone forth according to the Word of the
Lord: Behold, the Whirlwind of the Lord goes forth with fury, a continual
Whirlwind, it shall fall with pain upon the head of the wicked. The fierce
anger of the Lord shall not return until he has done it, and until he have
performed the intents of his heart: in the latter days ye shall consider, Jer.
30.23, 24. These Whirlwinds are the continual afflictions, wars and commotions
which are upon the Earth, which will not cease, till the Lord has performed
the intents of his heart. These things also are set down for them that have the
Scripture, to consider of, that thereby they may know what the Lord is going
about to do, as to understand the time of their visitation. And again it is
said, Come near ye Nations to hear, and hearken ye my people: let the Earth
hear, and all that is therein, the World, and all things that come forth of it.
For the indignation of the Lord is upon all Nations, and his fury upon all
their Armies, Isa. 34.1, 2. And of this time the Lord says in Esdras; For the
Lord knows all them that sin against him, and therefore delivers he them
unto death and destruction. For now are the Plagues come upon the whole Earth,
and ye shall remain in them: for God shall not deliver you, because ye have
sinned against him, 2 Esd. 15.26, 27. This being according to that in Jeremiah,
That these Whirlwinds of trouble shall not cease in the world, until the Lord
have performed the intents of his heart; Which is, in making his Enemies his
Footstool, and in coming to take his own great Power, and Reign, and to restore
his People.

And the Lord says to his people concerning this present time; 2 Esd. 16.39,
40, 41. Even so shall not the Plagues be slack to come upon the earth, and the
world shall mourn, and sorrow shall come upon it on every side. O my people
hear my word: make ye ready to the battle. And in those evils, be even as
Pilgrims upon the Earth: He that sells, let him be as one that flees away:
And he that buyeth, as one that will lose: He that occupies Merchandice, as he
that has no profit by it: And he that builds, as he that shall not dwell
therein, etc. And it is said in the 47. v. And those that occupy their
Merchandice with Robbery, the more they deck their Cities, their Houses, their
own possessions, and their own persons, the more I will be angry with them for
their sins, says the Lord. By this robbery is meant all unjust gain, and
unlawful dealing with one another.

And the Lord says, Isa. 2.11, 12. The lofty looks of man shall be humbled,
and the haughtiness of men shall be bowed down, and the Lord alone shall be
exalted in that day. For the day of the Lord of Hosts shall be upon every one
that is proud and lofty, and upon every one that is lifted up, and he shall be
brought low. And the like the Lord says in Malachy, Chap. 4.1, 2. For, behold,
the day comes that shall burn as an oven, and all the proud, yea, and all that
do wickedly shall be as stubble, and the day that comes shall burn them up,
says the Lord of Hosts, that it shall leave them neither Root nor Branch. But
unto them that fear my Name shall the Sun of Righteousness arise with healing
in his wings, and ye shall go forth and grow up as Calves of the stall. And the
Lord says, Mat 7.19, 21. Every Tree that brings not forth good fruit, is
hewn down and cast into the fire. And he also says, Not every one that says
unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: But he that does
the will of my Father which is in Heaven. For when the Lord comes it will not
serve our turns, to say; that we believed in his Righteousness for Salvation.
But how we have obeyed him, in doing the will of his Father which is in Heaven,
that thereby his Righteousness may be imputed to us. Who is become the Author
of Eternal Salvation to all them that obey him, Heb. 5 9. For now it is not
with us, as it was with the Gentiles at their first Calling in, who had never
heard of Christ, nor what he required of them. But it is with us, as it was
with Israel, from whom God expected an improvement of their day and season of
Grace; the which for their not doing, they were cast off. Therefore St. Paul
says, Romans 11.20, 21. If God spared not the Natural branches, take heed lest
he also spare not thee. Thereby showing, that we stand no surer than Israel
did. Therefore he says, ver. 20. Be not high minded but fear.

Therefore let all that desire to have an interest in him, humble themselves
under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt them in due time. And the Lord
speaking of his second coming, says, 2 Esd. 6.23, 24. The Trumpet shall give a
sound which when every man hears, they shall suddenly be afraid (This every
man here does but signify the greater part, for it will be a time of rejoicing
to Saints) 24 v. At that time shall Friends fight one against another like
Enemies, and the Earth shall stand in fear with those that dwell therein, the
springs of the Fountains shall stand still, and in three hours they shall not
run. Which accordingly has been fulfilled concerning the Fountains of Waters,
they have already stood still, when the great Earthquakes were in Cisily. And
also it was given as a Sign of the Lord's coming, that there should be
monstrous Children brought forth, 2 Esd. 5.8. Which accordingly in these last
years has been in several Nations fulfilled.

CHAP. VII. Signs in England.
AS God has at this time showed forth part of his wrathful indignation in
those Nations that worship the Beast, and false Prophet; So in this limited
time God has showed to us marvelous things, in Token of mercy and kindness,
thereby to awaken us that his coming is just at hand; Whereby we might improve
our Day and Season of Grace, so as to make preparation for his coming; that by
so doing we might not be condemned with them that will not. And God in a
wonderful manner has given us time and space of Repentance, in that he has
given us a King, who has continued to us our liberty and opportunities of
seeking God; which had it been otherwise, we might have been cut off, before
these awakening Judgments came, by which the Lord calls to the Inhabitants of
the Earth to learn Righteousness, Isa. 26.9. So that thereby many might be
awakened, and come out of their gross darkness. And also all of us, from a
vain, and wicked, and loose Coversation. Now as the other Nations have had
awakning providence of God's displeasure, by the Earthquakes, and Fires, that
have broken out of the earth amongst them, so God in a wonderful manner has
appeared amongst us in the miraculous Cure of four women, which the like was
never heard of since Christ's time. Who in thinking and being persuaded the
Lord was able to Heal them, became healed, Two of an extraordinary lameness,
one of eighteen years continuance, using Crutches; the other having her thigh
and anclebone out of joint from her childhood; And another of a Leprosy; and
one of a withered hand from her childhood. These things being publicly known,
and attefted in the City of London. And the Lord having wrought these
miraculous Cures upon these women, it ought to be considered of by us. For as
the Lord came by a Woman, so after he arose, he appeared first to the Women.
And now at the time of his second coming, he has miraculously appeared in
working of miracles on Women. And also another great and evident Sign the Lord
has given us of his coming; and that the great Jubilee is at hand, by the
miraculous springing up of a Field of Corn, without plowing or sowing, and of
that goodness and quantity, the like was never before heard of since the first
Creation, when all things sprang up of themselves; and this wonderful Crop
springing up out of sixteen Acres of fallow Land, which formerly had been sown
with Turnips. This Miracle was near Maidstone in Kent, being generally known,
and accordingly published: This Land belonged to a Man that was very charitable
to the Poor. Thereby the Lord also showing, that in time to come, such will be
abundantly rewarded; For he says, The merciful shall obtain mercy, Matthew. 5.7.
And he that gives to the poor, lends to the Lord, Pro. 19.17. And it is
said, Cast thy bread upon the waters: for thou shall find it after many days,
Eccless. 11.1.

Chap. VIII. Where the Armies are to be gathered together, after the Lord comes.
THE Lord says in Revelations, chapter 16.15, 16. Behold, I come as a Thief;
blessed is he that watches and keeps his garments, lest he walk naked, and
they see his shame. And he gathered them together into a place called in the
Hebrew Tongue Armageddon. Now here in these verses the Lord tells us how he
will come; and they are those that will be blessed, that are found watching for
his coming; and that, when he does come, it is then he will gather together
these great armies or people to the place called Armageddon. And in Joel there
the Lord calls it the Valley of Jehoshaphat; Let the Heathen be wakened, and
come up to the Valley of Jehoshaphat: for there will I sit to judge all the
Heathen round about, Joel 3.12. These words show, it is after they are awakened
by the coming of the Lord, that then they will be gathered together to the
Valley of Jehoshahat; for it is there the Lord will sit to judge the Heathen
round about, that have Isreal's Land in their possession, as in the 3 Chapter 2 ver.
And where this Valley of Jehoshaphat is, is made mention of in 2 Chr. 20.26 And
on the fourth day they assembled themselves in the Valley of Barachah, for
there they blessed the Lord: therefore the name of the same place was called,
the Valley of Berachah unto this day. And in this Valley Jehoshaphat blessed
God for the great deliverance he had given them from their Enemies, which
Enemies were those that were related to Israel; as Ammon, Moab, and Mount Seir.
So those that are again to be there gathered, are those that pretend Relation
to the Christian Israelite; as Pope, and Turk, and the negligent Christian, all
acknowledging the true God, but in works deny him, For all the Christians that
bear the name of Christ of the Gentile race, whether good or bad, are alike
termed Heathen in the Old Testament; 2 Esd. 2.34. For then there being no other
than Jews and Heathen, they could be no otherwise expressed, as I have already
by the word proved. Therefore the Lord here says, Now consider this ye that
forget God, lest I tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver, Psalm.
50.22. And also accordingly the Lord says to Esdras, that when he comes, it is
then they will be gathered together, the which will be to the forementioned
place. For at, or about the time of his coming, there will be fighting together
in their own Land; As in 2 Esd. 13.30, 31, 32, 33, 34. And he shall come to the
astonishment of them that dwell on the Earth. And one shall undertake to fight
against another, one City against another, one place against another, one
people against another, one Realm against another. And the time shall be when
these things shall come to pass. and the signs shall happen which I showed thee
before, and then shall my Son be declared. And when all the people hear his
voice every man shall in their own Land leave the Battle they have one against
another. And an innumerable multitude shall be gathered as thou saw them
willing to come, and to overcome him by fighting. Which fighting here, without
doubt, will be like that of Jacobs wrestling with the Angel, which was by
prayer for a blessing. But they having by their wicked practices (as in the 37
and 38 verses) lost their day and season of Grace, it will with them then be
too late, as it was with Esau, to have the blessing. All these places agree in
one and the same thing, that there will be fighting one against another at or
about the time of the coming the Lord; and that it will be after the Lord comes
that they shall be gathered together to Armegeddon, or otherwise called the
Valley of Jehoshaphat there to be judged.

CHAP. IX. The Everlasting Covenant and Crown of Life.
THE Everlasting Covenant and the Crown of Life, is one and the same thing. And
when the Lord again comes, he will make that new everlasting Covenant with both
the Houses of Jacob; in which Covenant, the true practical believer will be
then included; as coming in by the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, who are now but
Heirs with Israel of the same promise, Gal. 3.29. And then it is, they shall no
more teach every man his Neighbor, and every man his Brother, saying, Know ye
the Lord: For they shall all know me from the least of them, to the greatest of
them, says the Lord; Jer. 31.34, 35, 36. Then it is, His People shall be
willing in the day of his power, in the beauties of holiness, Psalm. 110.3. And
then it is, Israel shall be saved in the Lord, with an everlasting Salvation;
They shall not be ashamed nor confounded world without end, Isa. 45.17. And
then it is, the Lord will rest in his love, Zeph. 3.17. Ezekiel. 37.26, 27, 28.
when Israel is put into a capacity never more to offend him.

And then is life crowned to the Soul, when they are thus secured by him. And
then it is, that sighing and sorrowing will fly away. And then it is, The days
of his People shall be as the days of a Tree, and that his Elect shall long
enjoy the work of their hands, Isa. 65.22. And then it is, The meek shall
inherit the Earth; and shall delight themselves in the abundance of peace Ps.
37.11.

But the forementioned promised new Covenant, will not be made with the rest
of the Nations that then will be called in, as God by the Prophet has
declared, Ezekiel. 16.61. And after the thousand years when Satan is again loosed,
and the eminent glory of the Lord is not so visible among them; then Satan will
again draw off some of them that are spared of those Nations which are not
secured by the everlasting Covenant; and fire shall come down from Heaven and
destroy them. And then the Devil that deceived them, will then be cast into the
lake of Fire and Brimstone, where the Beast and false Prophet are, and shall be
tormented day and night for ever and for ever, Rev. 20.3, 9, 10. From which
words we are to take notice, the Lord here declares the continuance of day and
night, as also in Psa. 89.36, 37. And after the Devil is cast into Hell, we
read of no other than a temporal punishment inflicted on them of the Nations,
that will not go up to worship the King the Lord of Hosts and keep the feast of
Tabernacles, Zec 14.16, 17. And how many thousand years it will be after Satan
is cast into the fire of Hell, before the final judgment, the Lord best
knows; But by the word it is clear, it will be many thousand years. For God
has said, He will keep Covenant and mercy to a thousand Generations, Deuteronomy.
7.9. And from Adam to this time, we cannot well reckon above a hundred
Generations. For where St. Luke counts the Genealogy from Adam to Christ, he
reckons up but about three score Generations, Luke 3.

And this forementioned Kingdom, is the Kingdom of which the Angel told the
blessed Virgin, that Christ should Reign over the House of Jacob for ever, and
of his Kingdom there shall be no end, Luke 1.33. This ever chiefly includes the
ever of the world to come; in which time Christ will have his Reigning Power,
and at the time of the last Judgment, when the Heavens and Earth are said to
fly away, Re. 20.11. The forementioned Book explaineth the meaning thereof;
fully making it appear by the word, there is two sorts of Heavens, and Earth;
whereby it is clearly proved, that the Kingdom of Christ will have no end;
according to the word of the Angel to the Blessed Virgin, and according to the
word of the Lord in Daniel; But the Saints of the most High shall take the
Kingdom, and possess the Kingdom for ever, even for ever and ever, Dan. 7.18.
And God says in Isaiah, For as the New Heavens and the New Earth which I will
make; shall remain before me, says the Lord, so shall your Seed and your Name
remain, Isa. 66.22. For then it is, God will give Israel a place of their own,
so as they shall move no more, 2 Samuel 7.10.

But we not apprehending there is three Evers, three Times, three Generations,
and three Worlds spoken of in Scripture, thereby we have been much in the dark
concerning this world to come. And this world to come being the time that is
chiefly comprehended in Psalm: 89.2. For I have said, mercy shall be built up
for ever, thy faithfulness shall thou establish in the very Heavens. I have
made a Covenant with my Chosen, I have sworn to David my Servant. Thy Seed will
I establish for ever, and build up thy Throne to all Generations.

Chap. X. The Meaning of the Feast of Tabernacles being again kept.
NOw in that the feast of Tabernacles is again to be kept, when all the other
great Feasts are laid aside, Zech. 14.16. it does thereby appear, that when
Israel and those of the Nations which are saved are first gathered, they will
then again for some time dwell in booths, as Israel did when they came out of
Egypt. And therefore this feast to be kept for a remembrance in the ever of
the time to come. But some may say, How can the Nations come up yearly to
Jerusalem, the Journey being so far distant from some? But none need Question
but God will make them of ability to do what he requires of them.

And whereas it is said, That every one that is left of all the Nations. That
is, every one of the Nations that were left should go up yearly to Jerusalem;
but not that it is there meant that every individual person of the Nations will
be required to go up year by year unto Jerusalem, but some of the heads of the
Nations. And therefore said in the 18 verse, If the Family of Egypt go not up,
etc. Then a National punishment is threatened.

Now what we find written in the old and new Testament, and nothing therein to
contradict the plain meaning thereof, that will of certain be fulfilled in the
plain and clear way, as it is expressed. But that is a figurative Speech, and
not to be taken in the letter of the word, where we find other Scriptures in
contradiction to it. There God has a secret veiled in it, which he reserves
until such time as he will have it revealed.

But that God commands to be done; And what God declares he will have done; And
what God has sworn he delights not in; And what God has absolutely promised
to do; And what God has sworn he will do; These things are to be taken as they
are expressed, or we are apostatized from the truth.

And it is at the Restoration of Israel, that the Everlasting Covenant will be
established, as to which time, God has sworn to Israel, That he will not be
wroth with them, nor rebuke them any more, Isa. 54.8, 9, 10, 11, 12. For then
God will put his fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from him,
Jer. 32.39, 40, 41. And concerning that time, The Lord has sworn by his right
hand, and by the arm of his Strength, that he will no more give their Corn to
be meat for their enemies, neither shall the Sons of Strangers drink the Wine
for which they have labored, Isa. 62.8. This promise will be fulfilled when
Jerusalem is made the praise of the earth, as in the 7th ver. Which is at the
time of the Restitution of all things when the Lord again comes, Acts 3.20, 21,
22, 23, 24. And then it is, There shall come out of Zion the Deliverer, and
shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob, Romans 11.26. Isa. 59.20. Then shall the
Lord rore out of Zion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem, and the Heavens and
Earth shall shake, but the Lord will be the hope of his People, and the
Strength of the Children of Israel, Joel 3.16. This Zion, or Jerusalem, is
meant of the glorious Tabernacles spoken of, Heb. 8.2.

But we all coming out of the Darkness of Popery, have lost the right
apprehension of this Kingdom or World to come, whereby we are involved in great
mistakes, so as to think the promised everlasting Covenant is now established,
and that such as belong to it may fall foully, but not finally; but when that
Covenant is established; then it is that God will put his fear into their
hearts, so as they shall never depart from him, Jer. 32.40. But we, not
understanding aright this Kingdom or World to come, which has been the causes
of turning the plain word of God in the old Testament into figurative Speeches,
and thereby made the Oath and Promise of God to Israel void; Of which St. Peter
exhorts the Church to take heed to the sure Word of Prophecy, as unto a light
that shines in a dark place, 2 Peter 1.19.

Chap. XI. Where the Great Glory of the Lord will be, when he comes to deliver
his people.
WHEN the Lord again comes to deliver his People, his infinite glory will then
again be in the Clouds, in which will be those glorious mansions, into which he
will receive his raised Saints, John 14.2, 3. and there will be that Tabernacle
which the Lord shall pitch, and not man, Heb 8.2. which will be over the Land
of Canaan, from whence he will descend to Mount Olivet, and also from the
Tabernacle he will descend upon Mount Zion, and there will he make the place of
his feet glorious, Isa. 60.13. For as the Lord formerly descended down in a
Cloud into the Tabernacle, Exodus 40.34. So the Lord will again descend upon
Mount Zion. And as the Lord was over Israel in the Clouds, when Pharaoh was
drowned in the Sea, Exodus 14.19, 20, 24. So again the Lord will be in the
Clouds when the Beast, and false Prophet shall be taken alive, and cast into a
lake of fire burning with Brimstone, Rev. 19.20.

And as the King of Egypt, and Babylon, with all their Prognosticators and
Diviners, could not by them have any knowledge of their near approaching ruin;
So will it be with those in our days; for they will not foresee the near
approaching ^^essedness or misery; according to the word of the Lord, Isa.
44.25. The Lord frustrateth the Tokens of liars, and makes Diviners mad, that
turns wise men backward, and makes their Knowledge foolishness, This will
again be alike at the time of Jacobs deliverance.

And it is said of Christ in Isa. 64.1. Oh that thou would rent the Heavens,
that thou would come down, that the Mountains might flow down at thy
presence. V. 4. For since the beginning of the World men have not heard,
neither perceived by the Ear, neither has the eye seen, O God! besides thee,
what he has prepared for him that waits for him, 1 Cor. 2 9. Psalm 31.19.
And oh! that there might be many amongst us, and elsewhere found, such as are
true waiters for him, so as thereby to become the blessed of the Lord, and not
found as the fruitless Fig Tree, which of the Lord received the curse.

Chap. XII. The Fruitless Fig Tree.
MARK 11.13. And Jesus seeing a Fig Tree afar off, having leaves, he came, if
happily he might find any thing thereon: and when he came to it, he found nothing
but leaves, for the time of figs was not yet. This Fig Tree was the
representative of the body or generality of Israel, on whom the Lord when he
came, found nothing but leaves only; The which was only an outward show and
Form of Religion, having nothing of real holiness, and of upright walking
amongst them, as in Matthew. 23.23, 24, 25, 26.27, 28. For though the time of ripe
fruit, as Figs, were not yet, yet there might have been green Fruit, as
sincerity, and an upright and holy conversation. But as for Israel's bearing
ripe fruit, it was not to be in this time, but in the time to come, after the
ever of this time is past and gone. Then it is they will be made partakers of
the continual fresh springs of the Spirit of God, which is drinking of the
River of his pleasures, Psalm. 36.8. For then they will have an Inherent perfect
righteousness, and that secured by the establishing of that now-promised
new-everlasting Covenant, which will crown Life to the Soul, Isa. 45.17. But
Israel shall be saved in the Lord, with an everlasting Salvation: ye shall not
be ashamed nor confounded world without end. For the everlasting covenant when
established, and the Crown of Life is one and the same thing, only two ways
worded. And the Believer comes in by Christ as Heir to that promised Covenant,
Gal. 3.28, 29. Ephesians. 2.12. But the Believer in Christ is no longer a Believer,
than he believes Salvation is to be had, according to the tenor of the Gospel
(which is in the way of our love and obedience) no more than a Righteous man is
a Righteous man in the day that he comitteth iniquity, Ezekiel. 33.13.

Chap. XIII. Concerning the Remnant and first Churches; and also the World.
BUT whereas the remnant and first Churches were fore-chosen of God according
to the Counsel of his own will for the purpose he had determined for them,
which was to bear their Testimony to the truth, and for the glory that should
follow. And though they were not thus fore-chosen, for their foreseen willing
and running; yet afterward when they had embraced the Faith, they were to run
for the price, for the hopes sake that was set before them, which is the Crown
of Life, which was to be obtained by their willing and running, by which way it
is to be attained by all that will lay hold on it. For when the Gospel was
established, we that followed after were to take to the way, and keep the Rule
set before us, Heb. 2.2, 3, 4. And the Lord will be with us in his way, and
never forsake any while they keep his way by walking in a holy and upright
Conversation. And all that know the Lord by the Gospel, should go to him for
strength, for he has promised his assistance.

Now after the world was convinced that Christ was the Son of God, they were
put into a capacity of obedience, as man^ as have the call of the word, and the
good motions of the Spirit of God, therefore if afterward they miscarried, it
was through their own negligence, and barrenness of the Soil into which the Seed
of the word was cast, according to the Parable of the Lord, Ma. 13.20, 21.
which brought forth Fruit for a time, and afterward withered away,

For when the Lord had laid the World under a Conviction by the which means it
was part of the world embraced the Faith and brought, forth-Fruit, according as
it did in the Church of Colosse, Col. 1.6. And the Lord laid Israel under a
conviction when he showed them his glory in the Wilderness, and gave to them
his Laws and Statutes Exodus 19.9, 16, 18. And when God would have healed
Babylon, it was by bringing her under a conviction, in pulling her great
Monarch down from his Throne, and making him eat Grass like the Oxen, till his
hairs became like Eagles feathers, and his Nails like Birds Claws, and he made
to acknwledge to all Nations, that the Great God of Heaven rules over the
Children of men, Dan. 4.33. chapter 3.29. Now when God has convinced his
Creatures, he takes delight to see them improve that rational understanding
that he has given them to their Souls advantage, and then it is according to
their willing and running they shall find acceptance with him, and accordingly
be rewarded by him. And the people are condemned, not because they knew not
God, but because they had no will to obey him; as in Prove. 1.30, 31. They would
have none of my counsel: they despised all my reproof. Therefore shall they eat
of the fruit of their own way, and be filled with their own devices. And the
Lord says to the Jews, John 5.40. Ye will not come to me that ye might have
life. Thereby showing, the door of mercy was wider open to them of Israel, than
they were willing to embrace and improve the opportunity. And oh that we would
not, as they were, be found alike guilty, and so be made partakers of the more
severer vengeance. But on the contrary, that we would turn from all our evil
ways, and seek the Lord while he may be found, and call upon him while he is
near, Isa. 55.6, 7. begging his assistance, that we may be able to withstand
all our corrupt affections and inclinations; and if we are sincere therein, God
will not be wanting to us. But if we have no love to his ways, 2 These. 2.10.
nor will not obey him, Prove. 1.30. and will not choose his fear, verse 29. then
for such, there remains no hope: For we shall stand or fall, according as we
choose or refuse obedience to his will. Now, we through the mistaking of some of
the sayings of St. Paul, have made the Oath of God, and the general Call and
Offer of mercy by Christ to all that will, according as it is tendered, lay hold
of it, to be of no effect. Notwithstanding St. Peter fairly warns us, that in
St. Paul's Epistles were some things hard to be understood; which some did
wrest to their own destruction, 2 Pet. 2.16. And could we no otherwise have
understood the meaning of St. Paul, than in the contradiction of the God of
Truth, it had been a far less error to have thought St. Paul might have erred,
than to have made the Oath of God, and the general offer of mercy by Christ,
void, by the misapprehending the words of St. Paul, so as to think that none
but the Elect could be saved. But as the Prophet, for believing the old Prophet
in the contradiction of what God himself had said, therefore was destroyed; for
a Lion met him and slew him, 1 Kings 13.17, 18, 19, 23, 24, This being set down
for a warning to us, that we might not be alike guilty.

Chap. XIV. What the Sign is when God for Sin intends to leave a Nation,
People, or Person. And the Kingdom of God in this time, and the Kingdom of God
in time to come, explained.
When God because of Sin, determines to leave a People, Nation, or Person to
destruction, he then leaves them to delusion, and to blindness of mind, like as
Pharaoh, Exodus 7.13. Ahab, 1 Kings 22.20, 21. and Israel, Psalm. 81.11, 12. And
Christ spoke to Israel in Parables; That by hearing, they should hear, and not
understand; and seeing, they should see, and not perceive, Matthew. 13.14. For
the Jews were then in expectation of the coming of the glorious Kingdom of God,
which was foretold them by the mouth of all the Prophets; and therefore a
Pharisee demanded of Christ, when the Kingdom of God should come. And he
answered him, and said; The Kingdom of God comes not with observation, [but
more rightly expressed, as it is set down in the Margin of your Bibles, not with
shew] neither shall they say, lo here, or lo there, for behold the Kingdom of
God is within you, Luke 17 20, 21. Christ, by these words shows, that in this
time, he was but to have his ruling-power in the hearts of his People. And by
this it is clear, it is those that he rules in that are his. And this being the
only visible Kingdom that God has in the time of this World; which Kingdom or
People, is not in show of this World's greatness and grandeur. This answer of
the Lord, was quite contrary to what the Pharisee expected; for he only
apprehended the Lord was to come to Reign, and restore all things, and not that
he was first to come to suffer; and this proved a stumbling block to Israel.

But the Lord said in the following verses to his Disciples of his second
coming, v. 23, 24, 25. For as the lightning that lightneth out of the one part
under Heaven, shines unto the other part under Heaven, so shall also the Son
of Man be in his day. For the glory of that day will be such, as St. Paul terms
the then time but night, to that approaching day, Romans 13.12, 13.

And Christ concerning the Parable of his second coming and Kingdom, says,
Matthew. c. 13. v. 41, 42, 43. The Son of Man shall send forth his Angels, and
they shall gather out of his Kingdom all things that offend, and them that do
iniquity. And shall cast them into a Furnace of Fire: there shall be wailing,
and gnashing of teeth. Then shall the righteous shine forth as the Sun in the
Kingdom of their Father. Here the Lord declares the time of the end of this
World will be, when he comes, at which time, the Power of this World will be
taken from them, by his coming and sending his Angels to gather out of his
Kingdom all things that offend, and them that do iniquity. By these words,
nothing can be more plain, than that the Kingdom, which will then be Christ's,
is this material World, from which, those that offend, and do iniquity, will
then be cast out. Now from these words also, the Lord leaves himself scope, to
take in those that are given him of his Father at his second coming, the which
also will be his Elect, which is Israel, Romans 11.28. and other Nations
mentioned in the Word, which will then be saved, and then will the way of the
Kings of the East be prepared, Rev. 16.12. And the forementioned Book shows,
whom the Lord has said shall likewise be spared; and all these will be brought
to a sense of their own unworthiness, and so lay hold of mercy, before the
wicked is destroyed, and therefore then they will not be offenders, when the
wicked are cast out; so as the Lord may take in whom he will of the Heathen;
and God will as well keep faithful to his promise at Christ's second coming, in
calling in the Jews and others with them, Isa. 56.8. as he did perform his
promise to Christ when he first came, in calling in, and justifying the sinners
of the Gentiles.

And in that Christ says to his Disciples, in the 43th verse; Then shall the
righteous shine forth as the Sun, in the Kingdom of their Father. Here Christ
does not say, all the righteous; therefore he has his reference to the raised
Saints, and the Witnesses that will be caught up in the clouds into those
glorious Mansions or Tabernacles, which the Lord pitcheth, and not Man, Isa.
4.5, 6. Rev. 21.21. From which, they shall shine forth as the Sun in the
Kingdom of their Father. In this portion, has the Disciples their part; and
when the Kingdoms of this World, are become the Kingdoms of our God, and of his
Christ, Rev. 11.15. Then it is that the Kingdom of this World, is become the
Kingdom of their Father, into which they shall thus gloriously shine forth; and
this is that the Apostle speaks of, 1 Cor. 2.9. likewise Isa. 64.4. and Ephesians.
2.6, 7. and then they shall have their reigning-power on the Earth, Rev. 5.10.
next under Christ their Supreme Head. Now the Lord all along whilst he was upon
the Earth, spoke but in Parables as to his second coming and Kingdom, Matthew.
13.34. by reason Israel being sinful, for which it was determined of God, they
should be left to blindness, and that Christ should suffer by them; for though in
other things they sinned wilfully, yet they ignorantly crucified the Lord of
Life, Acts 3.17.

And the Lord again speaking of his second coming, and of gathering the
Nations; and by the Parable of setting the Sheep on his right hand, and the
Goats on his left; He says to them on his right hand, come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the World,
Matthew. 25.34. Now from the foundation of the material Heavens and Earth, there
was no other Kingdom prepared but this World, which will be again restored. But
the Law and Gospel speaking but to those that are under it, Romans 3.19. and
chap. 2.12, 14. The Lord might therefore have his reference to the foundation
of the World that was laid in Israel, for the World to come; at which
foundation, Christ was figuratively slain in the Paschal Lamb: And then was the
Kingdom of Canaan prepared for Israel, by their Enemies destruction. And the
Gentiles that Christ shall find in obedience amongst the Christian Nations at
his coming, will then be made the Inheritors with Israel of this Kingdom. For
they were not only to be Heirs with Israel of the promised Everlasting
Covenant, whereby Eternal Life is secured to the Soul; but they were also to
have a share with them in their Inheritance: For of Japhet it was prophesied,
that he should dwell in the Tents of Shem; and therefore this Kingdom may
likewise be said to be prepared for them: And also at the restoration of all
things, it is that Israel will be restored to their own Land, Joel 3.16. And
then will God make her Wilderness like Eden, and her Desert like the Garden of
the Lord, Isa. 51.3. And then it is Christ will have his peaceable Kingdom,
Isa. 11.9. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy Mountain: for the
Earth shall be full of the knowledge of the glory of the Lord, as the Waters
cover the Sea, Isa. 65.23, 24, 25. And in that day God will make a Covenant for
them, with the Beast of the Field, and with the Fowls of Heaven, and with the
creeping things of the ground; and he will break the Bow, and the Sword, and
the Battle out of the Earth, and will make them lie down safely, Hosea 2.18,
19. And then will God betroth them unto him for ever in righteousness, and in
judgment, and in loving kindness, and in mercies, v. 19. And then, this is the
Peace the Lord has declared shall be in the time of his Kingdom. But when
Christ first came, he said, he came not to send Peace on Earth, but a Sword,
Matthew. 10.34. For in this time, them that are the true Followers of Christ, the
Devil will be still raising them up Enemies. And Christ says to his Disciples,
That in him, they might have peace; but in the World, they should have
tribulation, John 16.33. And likewise St. Paul says, That after his departure,
shall grievous Wolves enter in among them, not sparing the Flock. And also of
their own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away
Disciples after them, Acts 20.29, 30. which accordingly followed.

Now whereas it is said, Prove. 16.7. When a man's ways please the Lord, he
makes his Enemies to be at peace with him. This King Solomon spoke of the
natural Seed of Israel; which had they continued in the fear of the Lord, they
had then been the Emblem of that peaceable Kingdom that is now to come: And
they in this time should have been the Head, and not the Tail, and above only,
Deuteronomy. 28.13. But there never was any such promise made to the true Churches of
Christ in this time; but on the contrary, they were foretold they should be
afflicted, persecuted, and meet with fiery Trials; neither were they to adorn
themselves, 1 Pet. 3.3.

Chap. XV. The Elect Church discovered. And why God suffered the Beast to arise
to deceive the Nations. Also a twofold being in the Book of Life.
NOW Christ by his Word declares that he would have an Elect Church or People
throughout this World, that should never be deceived by the Beast, or false
Prophet. And that it was to his Disciples which came of the remnant of Israel,
unto whom Christ promised to be with to the end of the World, Matthew. 38.20. And
that none should pluck them out of his hand. And though the first Gentile
Churches that received the Word from the mouth of the Disciples, were likewise
also Elected, and fore-chosen of God, and made partakers of the Holy Ghost; yet
their succeeding Generations, were but raised to that from which Israel fell.
And God foreseeing that the Gentile Nations that embraced the Gospel, would
afterward fall away, by having no love to the Truth, but taking pleasure in
unrighteousness, as Israel, and the People of Old had done, Romans 1.21, 22.
therefore it was determined of God they should be left to strong delusions to
believe a Lie: Because they received not the love of the Truth, that they might
be saved, 2 These. 2.10, 11, 12. For which cause it was the determination of
God, that all that dwell upon the Earth should worship the Beast, whose names
are not written in the Book of Life, of the Lamb slain from the foundation of
the World, Rev. 13.7, 8. That is, all the Kindreds, and Tongues, and Nations
that dwell upon all the Earth, that the Beast had dominion over, should worship
him, except those whose Names were written in the Book of Life; for the Word
speaks to them that received it, and it was those fell into the snare, that had
not a love to it, but took pleasure in unrighteousness. And Luther says, that
the Beast, and false Prophet, are generally comprehended under one head, And
the Lord says, Rev. 17.8. And they that dwell upon the Earth shall wonder,
whose names were not written in the Book of Life from the foundation of the
World, when they behold the Beast. Now, I have already proved by the Word in a
Treatise concerning Election, that there was no Election through the first
World of People, nor till after the miscarriage of Israel in the Wilderness.
Then did the Lord secure a certain remnant of them to himself, at which time
Israel was laid for the foundation of the World to come; for all that come in
as Heirs to that World, come in as the Seed of Abraham, and from that
foundation, Christ was figuratively slain in the Paschal Lamb; and from that
foundation, were the works of those unbelieving Jews finished that fell in the
Wilderness when they refused to go to fight for the Land of Canaan. And because
of Israel's miscarriage, the first Gentile Churches were chosen to partake of
the Holy Ghost, and to bear their Testimony to the Truth; the which are said to
be chosen before the foundation of the World, which foundation was Israel; the
which choice, was not before them as to matter of time, but as to matter of
choice and liking in God, rather to make choice of them that should ignorantly
offend him, ^han them that had wilfully disobeyed him. And I also have proved,
that the Eternal Purpose, has only a relation to the Eternity that lies before
us; that the being chosen from the beginning, was no other, than from the
beginning of the Preaching of the Gospel. And I have also proved, that the
Decree was made, that the Entrances into Life should be made strait, after Adam
fell, and how that straitness does consist: And what is meant, by being of old
ordained to this condemnation. And also I have proved in the Book in which the
Faith of Abraham is explained, that them of the World embraced the Faith, in
the Apostles time, and brought forth fruit, as it did in the Elect Churches.
All these things I have made clear, which hitherto we have not rightly
understood, which makes me the oftener recite them.

These things being proved, it makes it evident, that there was none Elected
from the foundation but the remnant. And also the first Gentile Churches that
were afterward Elected were long departed this life, before the Beast arose, so
as there was none of them then to be deceived by him.

Now there is also a twofold way of being in the Book of Life. First, They that
have their names there. Secondly, Those that have a part therein, and it is
those that have their names there, that are Elected and fore-chosen. And after
the first Gentile Churches were called in, their Children were taken into
Covenant, and a Door of Mercy set open to all such as would take hold of the
offer of Life according as it is tendered by Christ. Now if these have not
their names put into the Book of Life when they are taken into Covenant, yet
they have their part in the Book of Life, in performing the conditions upon
which Life is offered by Christ (for those he will justify by his
Righteousness, Heb. 5.9.) The which name or part in the Book of Life, may not
only be lost through negligence and profaneness, but by adding or diminishing
from the Word, Rev. 22.19. Deuteronomy. 4.2. And there are others also that have a
part in the Book of Life, which will find Redemption in the World to come; for
they were such as received not the Truth in the love of it, but took pleasure
in unrighteousness, that the Apostle says should be damned, 2 These. 2.12. And
they were such as heard the Truth, and would not believe to obey it, that the
Lord gave Sentence against. But those that have had a longing desire after the
Truth, and such as have not taken pleasure in unrighteousness, such will find
Redemption in the World to come. And no young Children can take pleasure in
iniquity: Therefore when all come to be judged according to their works, such
will be cleared, Romans 2.14, 15. Rev. 20.12. But I shall not here insist upon
this Subject, because I intend hereafter fully to prove it. But by what the
Lord says, it is of dangerous consequence to take from the Word, as well as to
add unto it.

Now the Gentile Christians, when they came to have no love to the Truth
whereby they might be saved, but on the contrary, took pleasure in iniquity,
God gave them up to worship the Beast; for when they would not be bound with
the Cords of his Laws, and follow him in Love, Patience, and Humility, in
expectation of the reward of the Crown of Life, when the Lord again shall come;
then it was God permitted the Prince of Darkness to set up his pretended
Kingdom, by which delusion they also lost the apprehension of the glorious
Kingdom of Christ, which is now to come, and is very nigh at hand, which
Kingdom has been foretold by all the Prophets, sworn to by God himself, Psalm.
89.2. declared by the Apostles: And because the Lord Christ spoke but in dark
Sentences and Parables, when he was upon the Earth, because that Israel being
sinful thereby might be blinded: Therefore he declared in Vision to St. John,
how he would come, and of the glory of the New Jerusalem that should come down
from Heaven, and of his reigning Power here upon the Earth, Also annexing those
great threatenings mentioned Rev. 22.18, 19. to any that should add or diminish
to the words of this Prophecy.

Now all the Gentile Christians thus falling into delusion, so as when any of
them come out of that darkness by the knowledge of the Word, it was evident to
them, they could not be of that remnant that should never be deceived, by
reason themselves knew, that they, or their Predecessors had been deceived by
the Beast; but as to that Remnant, Church or People, that the Word does thus
bear witness to, I shall not here speak further of; but hereafter, by God's
assistance, I shall declare who the Two Witnesses are, and then I shall make
appear who this Church, and People, and Remnant are, to whom the Word does thus
bear witness to, and they to the Word: Whilst on the contrary, the Apostate
Church, or great Harlot, bear not witness to the Word, nor the Word to her, any
otherwise than to her condemnation. And our Predecessors being all involved in
that darkness, whereby we have lost the true sentiments of the Word, and so
mistakingly taking all that was said to the first Churches, and to Israel, at
the restitution of all things, as though they now belonged to us, the which is of
dangerous consequence, and whereby many like Ephraim, feed on wind. And the
Ordinances that were to be kept as they were delivered, mentioned 2 Cor. 11.2.
never came to our hands, by reason of which, every one has placed their Faith
and Church Government according to their several Opinions; in which all rest
confident that they are in the right; the which begets in many a hatred one to
the other. And now we are in division, as Israel was when the Lord first came;
and the Christians being raised to that from which Israel fell, and falling
into sin, as Israel did, whereby the second coming of the Lord, has been as
little understood by us, as his first coming was by them. For the Prince of
this World coming, which had no part in Christ, and the Nations of the World
which had embraced the Gospel, again forsaking the Lord, and following after
the Prince of Darkness; was therefore termed by the Lord, The Prince of this
World; which Prince had no part in the Redemption purchased by the Lord, but
the People of the World had, till they forfeited their Blessing, by having no
love to the Truth, and by taking pleasure in unrighteousness, and so lost the
knowledge of the Word by the Beast engrossing of it; by reason of which, the
World again became overspread with Darkness, the Remnant Elected, only
retaining the truth of the Word, or true Light. But the Lord of his mercy,
toward the end of the Reign of the Beast, caused Light to break forth, and so
made choice of Luther for that end, to bring the Gospel again much to Light, so
as the People might, by the call of the Word, lay hold of the tender of Grace
in the offer of Everlasting Life.

And now according to the Promise of God, at the end of the time, the Vision
should speak, Hab. 2.3. has now caused the true meaning of his Word to break
forth, that the great secrets therein contained might be revealed: But before
the end of the time the word that Daniel prophesied of, was from him closed up
and sealed, Dan. 12.9. God said, Go thy way Daniel: for the words are closed up
and sealed till the time of the end. And in verse 4. Thou, O Daniel, shut up
the words, and seal the Book, even to the time of the end: many shall run to
and fro, and knowledge shall be increased; likewise Zech. 14.7. But it shall be
one day which shall be known to the Lord, not day, nor night: but it shall come
to pass that at evening time it shall be light. Now the Lord has wonderfully
caused the true meaning of his Word to break forth, whereby we may prepare for
the coming of the Lord, and come out of all our mistakes, and from a loose and
vain conversation before the severe Vengeance falls, that we may not be made
partakers thereof. And therefore he has given us the knowledge of his coming,
for he is a merciful High Priest, having compassion on them that are
unwillingly out of the way; but them that love their Opinion, Pleasure, or
Profit, more than their God, or took up their Religion for by-ends; it is such
will remain in Darkness, by resisting the Truth. But let all have a care they
fall not into the snare, as Israel did; for when the Lord first came, he coming
not of a Person of Dignity, but of one of no Estate in this World; This proved
a snare to Israel: Let us take warning by them, and not neglect the owning of
the truth; for if we do, we shall be taken in the snare as they were: for the
day of the Lord will come as a snare upon all them that will not prepare for
him, and take the warning given by him, by the signs, and the opening of the
word, as he has declared, and now made them manifest to the world.

CHAP. XVI. The difference between the State of the Elect in this time, and of
that which is to come.
NOW when God does Elect, or fore-chuse any Person, or persons, it is not only
to be an advantage to themselves, but also to carry on the Counsel of the will
of God in the purpose he has determined; As the Remnant for a standing
witness. The first Churches likewise to partake of the Holy Ghost, and to bear
their testimony to the truth of the Gospel. And also they were to withstand the
fury of the enemy, and to meet with fiery trials. These things were so
certainly allotted here their portion, that they were not to think strange of
it; Pet. -- neither are Israel that will be taken in and be the Lords Elect in
time to come, chosen only for themselves, but also to carry on the Counsel of
the will of God, that the other Nations that are spared might be blessed in
them, who are given to Israel for Daughters and Servants; Who in some measure
will partake of the glory: And also in this time, if God does elect or choose
any single person, it is not only for the benefit of that person, but to carry
on the Counsel of the Will of God. As Josiah, he was to break down the Altars
of the false Gods. And Cyrus, to restore Israel to their own Land. And Luther,
to bring the Gospel again to light, that others that would, might take hold of
the offers of mercy.

I hope that His Majesty, and the Great Council of the Nation will take these
things into their consideration, that through their encouraging the Knowledge of
the truth, it may meet with better success than it did in Swedeland. For when
the good Ministers that truly feared God, seeing the Signs the Lord foretold
should be before his coming, and thereby apprehending his near approach, was
willing to acquaint the people, that thereby they might prepare for the coming
of the Lord, so as they might not be found in darkness at that day; and that
day come upon them at unawares. But the greater part withstood the truth, like
the Pharisees of old, and would suppress the Knowledge of it, and presently
sent away to the Ministers in Holland to continue as they were. The certainty
of this came over in the Monthly Mercury.

And I also heard by an Outlandish Minister, that when the good Ministers of
that Country, upon the signs the Lord had given of his coming, and they knowing
there was a great deal of the Scripture unrevealed, therefore desired that they
might join in earnest prayers to the Lord for the right understanding of his
word; and to leave off their Scholastic way of preaching, and more to study
the Word. But those that were in the wrong, being the strongest party would not
yield thereunto.

But I hope our Ministers, and Teachers, of all Parties, will not follow their
Example; since it is made so clearly evident, that the stroke will fall on the
Christians, that shall be found in darkness at that day. And since we have been
all in mistakes, some more, and some less, till God of his mercy, now again
brought the true meaning of his word to light, according to his promise, as we
therefore may the better pity and pray one for the other; and by a speedy
reformation, break off from our sins by working righteousness, and in showing
mercy to the poor who are at this day languishing: And also by our owning the
whole truth, that thereby w^ may unite and serve the Lord with one consent And
that by us the Protestant Churches beyond Sea might be warned; and that by our
and their owning the whole truth, it may give such an alarm to the Christian
World, that many Millions of Souls might come out of Darkness. For the Lord
gives his Creature an opportunity to improve, and this being now the small
time that is given the Christians, whereby to escape the wrath to come, if we
accordingly take hold of it, and do not stand in opposition against the truth.

FINIS.

