A COPY of a LETTER WRITTEN BY T. M. In the Year, 1699.
My LORD,
WAS it ever known, that the Doctrine of a Persecuting Church was True? Did St.
Paul order any Corporal Punishment merely for Opinion in Religion? Did it ever
destroy Truth? And does it not rather establish an Error? A Fallen Brother, (at
first at least) ought to be restored in the Spirit of Meekness: It Is Worldly
interest and blind Zeal, brought in Perfection.

I have received an Answer from Hicks's (...) to my Question of a Definition of
a Sa^^^g Faith, which I proposed to Mr. P -- * Mr. Mr. --, whom, I am informed,
you ^^^er'd to Discourse me, but they flatly de^^d to do it in Writing.

The Ignorance of Natural Men, (or Menot taught of the Holy Ghost) have charged
Three things against my Book, viz.

1st. That it promotes Sin. 2ly. That it is Seditious. 3dly. That it is
Blasphemy.
As to the first, or the Promotion of Sin.
THE very same Consequence that Natural Men drew from St. Paul's Preaching in
those days, you your selves draw now from my Doctrine; for when Paul said, As
Sin had abounded, so Grace did super-abound, they retorted, Let us commit Sin,
that Grace may abound; they not knowing the Mystery of these things: Whereby
they made God's Mercy (ungratefully) the cause of Sin.

Does not Paul also say, Let the Mercies of God, move you to please him the
more. The greater the Mercy then, the greater the Love, and they to whom much
is forgiven, they love much.

Hence the Doctrine of the Salvation of all Men, may be made a means to love
God, which Love rooted in the Heart, is the Fountain of good Works: But the
Doctrine of Hellfire cannot be made a Means to love God; for threatening to Burn
me, cannot make me Love; and Hellfire is often the means of hard thoughts of
God, Despair and Self-Murder. But this might strike the World Dumb, if they did
but seriously consider, that Means signify nothing in themselves, excep^ Grace
apply those Means.

Hence a good Consequence or an ill Consequence may be drawn from the same
Doctrine, as from St. Paul's Doctrine of Mercy before.

Whereby we see ill Consequences drawn from a Doctrine, proves not the Doctrine
to be Erroneous. And what then have I to do with the ill Consequences of this
Doctrine? My Doctrine it self, ought to be proved from Scripture, True or False.

Vain then is that Expression of J. P --, viz. If all Men are Saved, we'll live
as we please. Upon that Consequence he judged my Merciful Doctrine Erroneous
and Seditious.

If Mr. P -- or others, shall bring any Evidence, that my Doctrine is the
promotion of Sin in some to whom Grace is not given, I question not (besides
what I have said before) but to balance that with sufficient proof of such
that have been drawn from Despair and Murdering themselves; and not only so,
but hate Sin through love to God, much more than when they were ignorant of my
Book.

Certainly Self-Murder is accounted one of the worst of Sins; and in this
Particular, that it can admit of no Repentance for it on this side the Grave;
which is never the effect of a Merciful Doctrine.

But if I hold Free Will and Hellfire, and yet by Experience, I find not a
sufficient Free Will to save me, being of a tender Conscience, I fall into
Despair, as Thousands, for ought I know, have done* And many Ministers of such
a Doctrine have Destroyed themselves through Despair.

But we'll suppose* I deny Free Will (as does the Common Prayer Book and
Articles of the Church of England) and yet own a Hellfire, I am in as bad a
condition; for this renders God to me Tyrannical: I don't say such a Doctrine
is Blasphemous, yet it has the same effects as the other, viz. Despair and
Self-Murder.

Pray, My Lord, judge Impartially, whose Doctrine then promotes Sin the most,
yours or mine? Or whose promotes the greatest Sins? Or whose Doctrine then is
most Seditious? When Men of my Judgment, also are as ready (not so much fearing
Death) to venture their Lives cheerfully in his Majesty's Service.

And the more there are of this Judgment* the more and better Subjects his
Majesty will have, in that this Doctrine, as it does not diminish from Loyalty,
so it adds to Valor.

Dr. Tillotson, late Archbishop of Canterbury, his Book comes very little
short of mine, in this Saying, That Hellfire may be Threatened, and not
Intended. So that this Great Prelate being not sure of a Hellfire, is a
sufficient Argument for me to enquire, whether you, (my Lord)* are certain
there is such a Place; which you ought to be sure of, otherwise, another cannot
be safely Persecuted for disowning that which your Church Doubts of*

The next Charge against my Book, is,

SEDITION.
I have said enough to this, in proving, that the ill Consequences Men draw
from a Doctrine, proves it not Erroneous, and so not Seditious. The Doctrine
then itself, ought to be Disputed by the union of the Scriptures.

All Doctrines, we find, are Seditious one to another, but may not be to the
King and Government.

It was not the Doctrine of the Apostles that was Seditious, but the Ignorance
of the People made it so, and said, If we suffer these things, the Romans will
come and take our Land from us.

And, now, how can my Doctrine be proved Seditious, when Men of my Judgment,
own it their Duty, to be obedient to the Powers that are, knowing All Power is
of God. And the more there are of this Judgment, the more and better Subjects
his Majesty will have; in that this Doctrine, as it does not diminish from
Loyalty, so it adds to Valor.

I know Men say, that many commit Sin the more freely because of my Book, but
it may be in their Hearts (if not in Act) they have committed the same Sins, or
at least loved those Sins before, which is Sin, and so cannot be said but to be
guilty of those Sins before; as our Savior said, He that lusts after a
Woman, commits Adultery in his Heart.

If for fear of Punishment only, (as every ^n carries its own Punishment with
it) they have avoided the committing in Act, those Sins, yet it they loved
those Sins, and would commit them but only for fear of Punishment, may be, in
the sight of God, as guilty of them, as he that actually commits them.

It Is not from Love to God, but only from Self-love, that he acts them not, to
avoid Punishment, and such Service is not worth accepting.

It Is Love, or the Heart, the Lord delights in; and what Service proceeds from
that, adopts us to the title of Sons, and not Slaves.

But whilst I thus Argue, my best Plea is, that Means, in themselves, signify
nothing for the avoiding of Sin, except Grace apply the Means: Nor can any
thing be made a Means for the commission of Sin, where Grace preserves; not
forgetting my Doctrine excells others in this, that it cannot be made a means
for Despair and Self-Murder, and its Service is the more acceptable as
proceeding from Love.

Neither does the ill Consequences Men draw from my Doctrine prove it Erroneous.

The Third Charge against my Doctrine, is,

BLASPHEMY.
IT is impossible to unite the Scriptures in Sense one with another, except we
say Sin is Ordained, and that God is the Author of it, but to good Ends and
Purposes; and he that cannot unite the Scriptures in Sense one with another,
cannot be a Minister of them, because besure then he does not understand them.

They who charge another's Doctrine with Blasphemy, need look back to their own.

I do not say, my Lord, that you charge it with Blasphemy, but some have done
it, and I am thereby obliged to clear it from that Aspersion. Predestination,
which is Divinity, the Ministers, in their Pulpits, own they do not understand.
Let that Doctrine be what it will, that shall from Sciptures, or otherwise
endeavor to prove God Tyrannical, and the cause of Sin to bad Ends, is a
Blasphemous Doctrine in my Judgment.

I say no more than what you say, that God is the cause of Sin, not to bad
Ends, but to good Ends, as the Crucifixion of Christ, St. Peter's Denying him,
etc.

And I make Sin Ordained, to set forth God's Hatred to it, (not loving Sin) by
punishing Men with Temporal Punishments for it; which not only sets forth his
hatred to Sin, but also sets forth his other Attributes, and renders Man
Satisfaction through Christ, for this, by Gloryfication: See my Second
Addition, page 21. where you have the full Meaning, or Mystery of Sin Ordained.

Had I said, that God ordained Sin to bad Ends, and that he loved Sin, and
delighted in the destruction of his Creatvres, then I had rendered him
Tyrannical, or Unjust, Unholy, Unmerciful to the highest.

Now, to pass by what I have said as to the Common Prayer Book and Articles of
the Church of England, I will examine a Doctrine that hold a certain number are
ordained, (and that from all Eternity, as I have heard) to Hellfire
unavoidably, and do conclude also, that God is Glorified by this.

But, for my part, I cannot think Tyranny and Injustice, Cruelty, and the worst
of Cruelties, can add Honor and Glory to any Being.

So that you see there are worse Doctrines than mine in the World: And this
Doctrine, which is downright Blasphemy, in my Judgment, is taken little Notice
of, when a Merciful Doctrine is called into Question, which promotes Good, or
at least never so ill Consequences as this has done, viz. Despair and
Self-Murder.

Can that be a Blasphemous Doctrine, where Grace can apply it as a means to
love God and our Neighbor, on which Christ says, Hang or depend, all the Law
and Prophets, in that such a Doctrine is the foundation of all Good flowing
from such Love?

Now, if (as I have proved) that my Merciful Doctrine, through Grace applying
it, promotes love to God, which none can deny; and if I deny Free Will, I
conclude my Neighbor cannot help his Infirmity, and so I am in the greater
Charity toward him.

All which things would far more appear true, if a Discourse were ventured
concerning a Definition of a Saving Faith.

But we'll suppose that which is not, that both Blasphemy and promotion of Sin
were in my Doctrine, was not the Original Copy showed to Dr. Stillingfleet and
others, and I could have no Answer from them? My Clavis Aurea has been Printed
about four Years, and no Divine has Answered it; only Dr. C. a Physician, has
written something against it, which Mr. P. and others, say is Orthodox, but
has left the most material part of my Book Unanswered.

If you allow his Answer true Divinity, and a sufficient Answer to my Book, I
have Printed an Answer to it.

Some say, I ought not to have printed my Judgment in Divinity: I Answer, I
cannot see People in Despair, and not relieve them, and there may be many such I
never heard of, that may see my Book.

If this be against Law, it is not against Reason, which ought to be the
foundation of Law.

Our Laws were made by Christians, and so not intended against Spiritual Men:
But it is Ignorance, (like the Grand Jury) who I suppose never read my Book, so
as to Consider it, which they ought to have done, nor can Discourse it, yet
they found a Bill against me) that Persecuted a Spiritual Man by those Laws:
Therefore Natural Men cannot be Lawful Judges of Spiritual Men.

Until a Definition of a Saving Faith be thoroughly Discoursed, your Preaching
can give no Satisfaction in Salvation, neither can you be a competent Judge
what is Blasphemy in what I have writ.

And truly, I am fully satisfied, that Men would not have had recourse to
Persecution, (disgracing the Church, with such a resemblance to the bloody
Church of Rome) if Ministers were able to Confute me.

How Sin was compelled, by way of a lively Representation, to set forth unto us
the knowledge of Sin the more lively, is a deep Discourse, beyond a Natural
Man's finding out. See my Second Addition, page 21.

And if Sin be an Infirmity, (as the Common Prayer Book allows of) it
consequently follows, there is no Free Will in Man. -- Hence 'twas a Sin for
Joseph's Brethren to Sell him; but Joseph says, It was not you, but God that
sent me hither.

This very Mystery has confounded the Wisdom of World in Divinity, and can
never be thoroughly reached by any, without a Disputation, or Satisfaction in a
Definition of a Saving Faith.

How highly then then it concerns us to search into that Faith and its
Circumstances, I need not farther urge, only to say thus, There Is no
Satisfaction can be had in Preaching without it.

The words of the Common Prayer Book, which make Sin an Infirmity, are these,
Lord, incline our hearts to keep this Law. Hence our very Desires must be moved
in us to Good. Again, Though we be tied and bound with the chain of our Sins,
yet let the pitifulness of thy Mercy losen us, etc.

Hence it is evident, that Men bound in Chains, cannot act as Men at Liberty,
and are forced to betake themselves to God's Mercy to losen them, they not
being able to help themselves.

And in another Place, the Church prays for the continual Dew of God's
Blessing, or Grace. And the Tenth Article of the Church says, that Man cannot
turn and prepare himself to Faith and Prayer, without the Grace of God by
Christ first moving us thereto, that we may have a good Will, and Working with
us when we have that good Will.

Who cannot every day see, that to those who are hardened, or Grace not given
them, it is neither the Mercies of God can allure them, nor the fear of Hell
deter them from Sin.

Now, if we cannot but acknowledge such Power, nor that we can proceed in Good
the least step farther than Grace assists us, it will give us to understand,
that we may wholly and only trust in God, (which is not to lie in a Ditch and
cry God help) for then he will take us into his protection to Govern and Defend
us.

Hence my Doctrine teaches, First, to become Vile in our own Eyes, and to
trust in God wholly and only.

Secondly, To Love him above all things imaginable.

Thirdly, To love our Neighbor as our selves, denying Free Will in him, Which
are the highest Duties in Christianity, and Fountain of good Works: Which
Doctrine then is True and Safe, promoting Good, but not without Grace given to
receive it with Love.

I have done with the false Aspersions cast on my Doctrine. I come now to
caution Men concerning Persecution in matters of Religion.

No Man can be of what Judgment he pleases, as will be lively set forth by an
humble desire to you, to resolve me, whether it lies in your Power to be of my
Judgment or not? So that a right Judgment produces good Actions, and a false
Judgment produces ill Actions.

Hence it is often that the Persecutor and the Persecuted are both satisfied in
Conscience, the one to Persecute, the other to Suffer: As it is Writ, Some of
You they shall Kill, and think they do God good Service.

But who was in the Right, the Apostles, or the Jews?

If the Scripture speaks of a Spiritual Man to come, it will be worth our
Enquiry how to know him, and in the next place, how to avoid the Persecuting of
him.

We are satisfied, in John 10. 41. that John did no Miracle: It was never
known, but that the Doctrine of Spiritual Men, has been esteemed Blasphemy,
promoting Sin and Sedition, and were Murdered for supposed Blasphemy: It Is a
hard matter then, to know such a Man by his Doctrine.

The only way that I can propose is this, First, Let not Passion nor unbelief
of his Doctrine (let it seem never so Blasphemous) domineer over your Reason;
but let former Examples of the Murder of the Apostles, deter you from such
Practices. If his Doctrine cannot be Overthrown by the whole World, or no Man
can be found that can Discourse him, so as to overthrow his Doctrine, you need
not question but such a Man is a Spiritual Man, taught by the Holy Ghost.

In vain have Disputations been amongst Natural Men, because amongst such, none
could be found that understood the Mysteries of the Scriptures, and so
Disputations could have no end.

But when a Spiritual Man is come, he overthrows all Men, and then Disputes in
Divinity will have an end to the Satisfaction* of many.

These things strikes deep with me (though I do not say I am a Spiritual Man)
partly from the Visions I have had, partly from my Doctrine, by Natural Men
esteemed Blasphemy, a promotion of Sin and Sedition, and partly from the Malice
of many, who are for Burning me and my Book, yet cannot Overthrow it.

Its safe for Men, (and God expects no more from them) to rest satisfied with a
Doctrine that cannot be Overthrown, notwithstanding they cannot altogether
believe it. Had the Jews done this, they had not Murdered the Apostles.

But some are for pinning their Opinions on Great and Learned Men's Judgments,
when poor men that are despised, God has chosen to confound the Wisdom of the
World: Even the Great and Learned men who sat in Council, Crucified Christ,
and ordered the Apostles, (some of whom were poor Fishermen) to be Punished.

And now I see the unruly Multitude are for Great and Learned men, and for
Murdering me for that I cannot help, nor they Confute.

I can say little more to this, and enough is said, if well considered; I shall
only Answer one Objection, and so take my Leave of you. Many say, It Is not
worth the Ministers time to Answer me.

I Answer; If my Doctrine be the greatest Truth, or the greatest Error, it
ought to be Answered, either Confuted, or Preached up.

Again, many receive it, and if it be a damnable Doctrine, the Consequence is
easy, it must of necessity then be damnable for those that can Answer it and
will not: Which I think, is a full satisfaction, that it ought to be Answered:
Then if they Answer it not, it must be for want of Ability.

If my Lord, these Arguments affect you not, but still I must suffer for my
Conscience sake, through the Ignorance of those men that cannot Discourse me, I
hope God will strengthen me that I may (since from you I cannot get better
Satisfaction) not draw back, but rather rejoice to Seal what I have writ, though
it be with the Sacrifice of my Life.

Yet, that I may have a clearer Conscience, I must inform you, how that Natural
Man, J. P -- has fore-judged my Book to be Burnt, and my self to be set in the
Pillory: Where if by the maliciousness of the Ignorant (who are generally most
Envious, I am there Murdered, I am clear of it, since I have first informed you
of that Danger.

Mr. P -- and Mr. M --, say I am no Scholar, and cannot write Sense; truly then
I am the easier Answered, and they are Senseless they have not done it. Neither
do I care to puzzle the Vulgar, my Enemies, with obscure words; so that for the
word Praevious, I write Foregoing; for Inevitable, I say Unavoidable, and for
Arcana's, I say Secrets, and c.

And though I do not pretend to much Learning, I am not so Illiterate, but I can
find much Learned Nonsense in the World.

No more at present, but humbly craving your Lordships due consideration of
th^^ Matter, whereby (under God) I shall account my self Obliged to you, who am

Your Lordships Most Humble Servant in Christ, T. M.


