THE WAY of LIFE REVEALED; AND THE WAY of DEATH DISCOVERED.

Wherein is declared, Man's Happy Estate before the Fall, his Miserable Estate
in the Fall, and the Way of Restoration out of the Fall into the Image of God
again, in which man was before the Fall.

Also, the By-Pathes, Crooked Ways, Wiles, Snares and Temptations of the Enemy
of man's Soul discovered, who has and does go about as a Roaring Lion, seeking
how he may ensnare and devour those who are in any measure escaping out of his
Ways of Death, and Destruction.

The utter End and final Destruction of all false Professions Prophesied, which
have had their Rise in the Night of Apostasy, through the Loss of the Ancient
Eternal Power of the Mighty God, by which the Gatherings to the Lord have been
through Ages and Generations.

Also a Call in the tender Bowels of the Love of God shed abroad in this Day,
Age and Generation, to all the scattered Sheep upon the barren Mountains of
Profession, to return to the true Shepherd, Christ Jesus, that so into the One
Fold they may be gathered.

Charles Marshall.

Go through, go through the Gates, prepare ye the Way of the People; cast up,
cast up the High Way, gather out the Stones, lift up a Standard for the People.
Behold the Lord has proclaimed unto the End of the World, say ye to the
Daughter of Sion, Behold thy Salvation comes; behold his Reward is with him,
and his Work before him, Isa. 42.10, 11. Printed in the Year 1674.

To the READER.
BE serious when thou take in hand to read this following Treatise, and have
a single Regard unto the inward Estate of thy Immortal Soul; and let thy Spirit
bow down to the Measure of the Spirit of God given thee to profit withal, that
by it the Eye of thy Understanding may be opened, so will thou see the things
herein contained, which concern thy own Eternal Welfare: and let not thy own
Thoughts and Imaginations in the Wisdom from below (which is sensual and
earthly) be Judge herein; but stand still out of thy own Comprehendings,
Ascendings and Descendings; and let a true and diligent Regard be had to the
Word in thy Heart and Mouth, there placed, that thou may obey it and do it;
so will thy Heart be truly opened to read with Delight the Things herein,
opened by the Spirit of Truth, which searches all things, yea, the deep things
of God; and the Travel in Spirit (which is for the opening the Eyes of the
Blind, and unstopping of the Ears of the Deaf) will be answered, and the Lord
God Almighty will have his Honor from his own Workmanship, and thou the
Benefit; which is the Desire, Travil and Breathings of him, who is a Traveller
for Sion's perfect Deliverance.

Bristol the 7th of the 2d Month, in the Year 1673. C. M.

THE Way of Life REVEALED; AND THE WAY of DEATH DISCOVERED, etc.
IN the beginning God created the Heaven and the Earth; and after he had made
all things on the Earth, he made Man in his own Image, formed him of the Dust
of the Ground, and breathed into him the Breath of Life, and Man became a
Living Soul: and the Lord planted a Garden in Eden, and there he placed the man
whom he had formed; and out of the Ground the Lord God made every Tree pleasant
to the Sight and good for Food, to grow; the Tree of Life also in the midst of
the Garden, and the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil; And he that made man in
this Estate gave him a Law to preserve him therein, as the Scripture of Truth
witnesses, saying, And the Lord God commanded the man, saying, Of every Tree
in the Garden thou may freely eat; but of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and
Evil thou may not eat; for, in the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely
dye. Now God saw every thing that he had made, and behold it was very good; the
Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil was good, but not for Food: And man was
endued with that Divine Wisdom, that when the Lord God brought of every Beast
of the Field and Fowl of the Air to Adam, he gave Names unto them; and
whatsoever Adam called every living Creature, that was the Name thereof: So
here was man's Station in the Image of God, a Living Soul, a Noble Plant,
wholely a Right Seed, filled with Divine Wisdom and Virtue, clothed with
Innocence, covered with Glory, adorned with celestial Beauty in the continual
Enjoyment of the Love and Favor of the Eternal Being of all Beings, having his
daily Conversation with him that made him; no Death, no Darkness, no Sorrow, no
Occasion of Tears, no Transgression, no Knowledge of Evil, dwelling in the
Innocent Life it self, placed in the Garden, into which came the River out of
Eden that watered it. Oh blessed State! Oh happy Condition! Oh unexpressible
Enjoyment, undeclarable Beauty and Glory! It Is beyond the Tongue of Man to
declare fully that blessed, happy Estate of Joy, Peace, Virtue, Purity,
Holiness, Righteousness and Fruition of Life, which man was in before he
transgressed the Royal Law of God, etc.

Man's Miserable Estate in the Fall.
BUt now he, who kept not his first Habitation, neither abode in the Truth,
envied man's Happiness in the Truth, and therefore (as a Serpent, more subtle
then any Beast of the Field which the Lord God had made) came to the Woman (who
out of the Man was made) and said, Yea, has God said, Ye shall not eat of
every Tree of the Garden? The Woman said, We may eat of the Fruits of the Trees
of the Garden, but of the Fruit of the Tree which is in the midst of the
Garden, God has said, Ye shall not eat, neither shall ye touch of it, lest ye
dye. And the Serpent said to the Woman, Ye shall not surely dye; for God does
know, that in the day ye eat thereof then your Eyes shall be opened, and ye
shall be as Gods, knowing Good and Evil: And here the Serpent got an Entrance.
And when the Woman [mark] saw that the Tree was good for Food, and that it was
pleasant to the Eyes, and a Tree to be desired to make one Wise, she took of
the Fruit, and did eat, and gave also to her Husb and with her, and he did eat,
and the Eyes [mark] of them both were opened: Here the God of the World
prevailed, so as to open an Eye that saw Evil pleasant, and to Blind the Eye in
these Children of Disobedience, that they should no longer behold the Glory of
God, etc. And here they became naked, having lost the Robe of Righteousness and
Garment of Innocence, and then made Aprons of Fig leaves to cover their
Nakedness; and they heard the Voice of the Lord God walking in the Cool of the
Day, and Adam and his Wise hid them elves from the Presence of the Lord God;
and the Lord God called unto Adam, saying, Where art thou? And the Man said, I
heard thy Voice in the Garden, and I was afraid, because I was Naked; and I hid
my self: And the Lord God said, Who told thee that thou wast naked? Have thou
eaten of the Tree whereof I commanded thee that thou should not eat? Who
began to excuse himself, saying, The Woman thou gave to be with me, she gave
me to eat, and I did eat: And the Lord God said to the Woman, What is this that
thou have done? And the Woman said, The Serpent beguiled me, and I did eat: And
the Lord God said unto the Serpent, Because thou have done this, cursed art
thou above all Cattle, and above every Beast of the Field; on thy Belly shall
thougo, and Dust shall thou eat, etc. And I will put Enmity between thee and
the Woman, and between thy Seed and her Seed; it shall bruise thy Head, and
thou shall bruise his Heel. So the Lord sent him forth from the Garden, to till
the Ground, etc. and placed at the East of the Garden of Eden Cherubims, and a
Flaming Sword, which turned every way to keep the Way of the Tree of Life.

Oh miserable Change! Oh deplorable Alteration! Oh lamentable State,
undeclarable undone Condition, unexpressible Fall! What! he that was in the
Image of the Incorruptible Being, a Living Soul, inhabiting in the Garden of
the Lord, where the Tree of Life was, and the Splendour of the Glory of the
Divine Being was known and enjoyed; drove from all into the Earth, and not only
so, but the Cherubims and Flaming Sword (that turns every way) placed to keep
the Way of the Tree of Life! Be astonished oh Heavens at this, and be horribly
afraid oh Earth! The Lord God brought up Children, and they Rebelled against
him.

Now what was the Cause and Ground, O ye Sons and Daughters of Adam, that
brought this horrible Change, that brought man into this deplorable State and
Condition? Was it not Disobedience to the Righteous Law of God? Did not Sin
enter into the World through Disobedience, and Death by Sin? And is not Sin
continued in the World through Disobedience? Is there any other Way by which
Sin enters now then it did then, and Death by Sin, which has reigned over all,
and reigns over all who are in the fallen Estate from God, even over them that
have not sinned according to the Similitude of Adam's Transgression? For all
have not sinned according to his Similitude, who was deceived with an
Expectation of an higher Estate then that in which the Lord God had placed him;
But all Iniquity, of what Similitude soever, is one in the Ground, and becomes
a Separator of man from his God: So the Ground of all Iniquity and
Transgression that ever was, is, or shall be, is man's Disobeying the Righteous
Law of God, Disobedience whereunto brings Death.

But what was that which in Adam dyed, and what was the Death; seeing that the
Lord said, In the Day thou eatest of the Tree (before mentioned) thou shall
surely Dye; and yet, though he did eat thereof, he lived outwardly, and had
Children?

It was the Inward Man that dyed, which was so made by the Living Breath of the
Almighty; for man going out of the Counsel of the Lord, by his Disobedience
came to be alienated from the Life of God, and so became insensible of that
primary Life in which he was wholely a right Seed, and a noble Plant: In his
Degeneration he became inwardly dead; the inward Senses of the inward Man were
lost; the inward Ear was stopped; the inward Eye was blinded; the inward Sense
of tasting how good the Lord is; the inward Feeling after the Divine Virtue
(who is all Power, Life, Love and Joy) the inward Sense of Smelling his
Garments (that smell of Myrrh, and of the Spikenard Spiritually) were all lost;
and instead thereof, an Ear opened that hearkened to the Voice of the Stranger,
and an Eye opened that saw the forbidden Fruit pleasant and desirable, the
Heavenly Clothing of Innocence, Meakness and Resignation lost; and thus he
came to be without God in the World: and here in this Estate Man was altogether
out of a Capacity of abiding in the Garden, or partaking of the Heavenly Tree
of Life, that was in the midst thereof; and in this Estate are all the
unconverted Sons and Daughters of men, notwithstanding all Fig-leaf-Coverings
of Professions.

But as the Law of the Spirit of Life breaks forth in its Manifestation, and
the Sons and Daughters of men come with it to be awakened, they will have the
Sight and true Sense of their inward Estate and Condition, which will indeed
cause a Cry to arise in the Soul, Oh wretched Estate! Oh miserable Condition!
And here the Entrance of Sin comes to be seen, which has brought Death; for
the Wages of Sin is Death, which was the Death that came over Adam, and over
all since, that have disobeyed the Righteous Spiritual Law of God, which is
just, holy and good, and was before Transgression, which Law brings to
Christ, the Promised Seed, the Gift of God, which is Eternal Life.

Now man being thus departed out of that Nature, Image and Seed in which man
had his Being before Transgression, is become the degenerate Plant of a strange
Vine before the Lord God that made him: And from the Sons and Daughters of men
(as they stand joined to this Nature and Seed of the Serpent, which has
defiled Man in Soul, Body and Spirit) proceed these Branches and Fruits of
Iniquity, to wit, Pride; Envy; Emulation; Strife; Variance; Debate; Hatred;
Wrath; Anger; Murder; Inordinate Affection; Concupiscence; Lasciviousness;
Wantonness; Vanity; Uncleanness; Fornication; Adulteries; Love to this World;
Drunkenness; Revelling; Idleness; Swearing; Cursings; Cheating; Defrauding;
Double-dealing; Evil-speaking; Backbiting; Covetousness; Idolatry; Witchcraft.

Man being thus fallen from God into this miserable, deplorable State, the
infinite Being in his Endless, Boundless, Fathomless Loving Kindness has
opened a Way, by which Mankind might be restored up to himself again; which Way
is the promised Seed, concerning whom he said to the Serpent, I will put Enmity
between thee and the Woman, and between thy Seed and her Seed; it shall bruise
thy Head, and thou shall bruise his Heel. So herein was the tender Mercy of the
everlasting God extended unto Mankind, in leaving a Seed; else all would have
been as Sodom, and like unto Gomorrah, which God destroyed with Fire in his
Wrath: So this is that one Seed on which he has laid Help, who is mighty to
save, who is the Image of the Invisible God, the Firstborn of every Creature
(in which Image Man was before the Transgression) who was glorified with the
Father before the World began; This is He of whom in the Name of the great
Jehovah I give Testimony, That He is the Way of Life and Salvation; and that
there is no other Name by which any man can be saved, then by him who was, and
is, and is to come; who was from Everlasting to Everlasting, the Rock of Ages,
which followed Israel, and was in the Church in the Wilderness, as Stephen
testified before he was stoned to Death: This is He who is without Beginning of
Days or End of Life; who in the Fullness of Time was manifest, taking on him not
the Nature of Angels, but the Seed of Abraham, for whom there was a Body
prepared to do the Will of his Father; who, after he had accomplished it,
ascended where he was before, far above all Heavens, that he might fill all:
This is the Emanuel, God with us; Jesus, the Savior; Christ, the Anointed, who
has been called by several Names, and spoken of under several Denominations
and Appellations, through the Mouths of his Servants the Prophets and Apostles
in Ages and Generations by past; This is the only Beloved of the Ransomed, and
this is our Friend.

And now he is arisen and arising (who is the Ancient of Days) in the Might of
his Power, and is revealing himself, the Good Old Way and Path of Life, whose
Outgoings have been from Everlasting; in which Way Abel, Seth, Enoch, Noah,
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and all the Servants, Prophets, Apostles and Saints of
the Most High God walked through all Ages and Generations; which Way was before
all the invented Ways and Worships were, which have been set up in the Will and
Time of Man; for all the holy Men of God and Saints of the Most High worshipped
God in the Spirit of Holiness, in which they were accepted of him, who is the
God of the Spirits of all Flesh; And no outward Performance whatever, performed
by any through Ages and Generations, was any farther acceptable unto the Lord,
but as performed in this Spirit.

The Way of Restoration out of the Fall, into the Image of God again, in which
Man was before the Fall, etc.
BUt how Salvation comes to be wrought by him, and how Mankind may be brought
again into him, who is the Way, the Truth and the Life, and brought from under
the Power and Dominion of the Seed of the Serpent (in which by Nature all have
been the Children of Wrath) is indeed the thing that lies on my Spirit
weightily to demonstrate, having obtained Mercy to see this Way of Life and
Salvation revealed and opened; and not only so, but a Necessity has been and
is upon me to preach the Gospel of Christ Jesus, and declare the Way of Life
and Salvation to my Countrymen through this Island of England; and now a
Necessity is also upon my Spirit, to leave a Testimony of the same on Record.

This is generally confessed, that in the first Adam all dyed, and in the
second Man Adam (Christ the Lord) all come to be made alive again: But how
Mankind comes out of this State of Death in the first Man Adam, into this State
of Life, in the second Man Adam, is that which the Wisdom of this World never
knew, never saw, never understood, nor comprehended truly or rightly; Man by
that Wisdom has only imagined and conceived something in the Carnal Mind
concerning this great Mystery, and therein has set up many Inventions of the
Way of Life and Salvation; And into these many Ways of man's Inventions and
Imaginations (set up in the fallen Wisdom of Man) there have been the several
Calls, Lo here, Lo there; but the Day is dawned and appearing, and now breaking
forth more and more (magnified and praised be the Name of the Infinite,
Almighty God) wherein all invented Ways, set up in the Will and Wisdom of Man,
that is Earthly, Sensual and Devilish, shall come to an End.

And now, in the Name of the Mighty God, all the graven Images, the Work of
Men's Hands, and Earthly Wisdoms shall be broken to pieces and ground to
Powder; the Mouth of the Lord of Hosts has spoken it, who will perform it by
the Might of his Arm, and by the Strength of his Power.

And therefore Tremble, Tremble, all ye Image-makers of all sorts, who have
been making and framing Likenesses of the Way of Life and Salvation in your
fallen Wisdoms and corrupt Wills, and have mad Gods thereof, and have fallen,
bowed down to, and worshipped them; so that it may be said of Christendom (so
called) as it was once said of Israel, As are thy Cities, so are thy Gods, O
Israel!

But now is the Fullness of Time come and coming, wherein the ancient Way of
Holiness (in which the Righteous walked through all Ages and Generations) is
cast up, manifest and manifesting; which Way is Christ Jesus (the Gift of the
Father's Love unto the Sons and Daughters of men) who has, as
beforementioned, been preached up and declared of by his Servants, Messengers,
Prophets and Apostles under several Denominations and Appellations, according
as he was pleased to manifest himself in and to them, and as his Spirit gave
them Utterance: Amongst many other Appellations he has been declared a Priest
forever, after the Order of Melchizedeck; the Rock that followed Israel, who
was in the Church in the Wilderness; a King; a Lawgiver; Wonderful
Councellor; Prince of Peace; a Branch; a Light, to lighten the Gentiles; the
Arm of God's Salvation; a Covenant; Messiah; a Leader; a Commander; a Captain;
the Horn of God's Anointed; a Stone of Stumbling; a Foundation laid in Ston;
the Cornerstone; the Word of God; the Word that was in the Beginnning; the
True Light, that lights every man that comes into the World; the Truth; the
Way and the Life; King of Kings; Lord of Lords; Christ; Emanuel; Jesus; the
Beginning of the Creation of God: the Firstborn of every Creature; the
First-begotten from the Dead; the Faithful VVitness; Alpha and Omega; Bright
and Morning Star; the Image of the Invisible God; the Offspring of David:
Under these, I say, and other Names and Denominations has he been spoken and
declared of and by, who still has a Name that no man knows but himself, who
is that One Eternal Fountain of Blessedness, and the One Precious Savior; and
there is no other besides him, although diversely denominated, according as his
Spirit gave Utterance to demonstrate him to those unto whom his Servants spoke,
prophesied and wrote.

And now by the Ancient Power of the Holy Everlasting God, is he preached up
under the Denomination of LIGHT, in this Island of the Gentiles, according as
was prophesied of old, Isaiah chap. 49. verse. 6. who said, Is it a light thing
that thou should be my Servant, to raise up the Tribes of Jacob, and to
preserve the Restored of Israel? I will also give thee for a Light to the
Gentiles, that thou may be my Salvation unto the Ends of the Earth; which is
one with the Testimony of John, chap. 1. saying, In the Beginning was the Word,
and the Word was with God, and the Word was God; the same was in the Beginning
with God; all things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made
that was made; In him was Life, and the Life [mark] was the Light of men; and
the Light shines in the Darkness, and the Darkness comprehends it not. There
was a Man sent from God, whose Name was John; the same came for a Witness, to
bear Witness of the Light, that all through him might believe: He was not that
Light, but was sent to bear Witness of that Light, that was the true Light,
which lightneth every man that comes into the World, etc. And to this agrees
the Testimony of Just Simeon, who came by the Spirit into the Temple, and took
the Child Jesus into his Arms, and said, Lord, now let thou thy Servant
depart in Peace, according to thy Word; for my Eyes have seen thy Salvation,
which thou have prepared before the Face of all People, a Light to lighten the
Gentiles, and the Glory of thy People Israel. This is He of whom we Testify,
whose Light is the Way to Life: And this is the Condemnation, that Light is
come into the World, and men love Darkness rather then Light, because their
Deeds are Evil; For every one [mark] that does Evil hates the Light, neither
comes to the Light, lest his Deeds should be reproved; but he that does Truth
comes to the Light, that his Deeds may be made manifest that they are wrought
in God.

Now this Light, which the Servants of the Most High testified of, is that
which has been spoken of and denominated under several Names; For this
Manifestation of God in man is sometimes called the Word, the Spirit, the Law,
the Grace of God; now the Word, Light, Grace, Law, Spirit, are all one in
Nature, although diversely named: Moses called it the Word, and directed to this
Word in the Heart and in the Mouth, which Paul (that illuminated Man)
rehearsing, says, Say not in thy Heart [mark] Who shall ascend into Heaven
(that is, to bring Christ down from above) or who shall descend into the Deep
(that is, to bring Christ up again from the Dead) But what says it? The Word
is nigh thee, even in thy Mouth, and in thy Heart; that is the Word of Faith
that we preach. This is the sure Word of Prophecy unto which Peter directs to
take heed, as unto a Light that shines in a dark place, until the Day dawn,
and the Day Star arise in the Heart, etc.

This Light is the Law of the Spirit of Life, wherewith Paul was acquainted,
that warred in his Mind against the Law of Sin and Death (which was in his
Members) This Light is the Law in the Heart, and the Spirit in the inward
parts, the New Covenant of God Almighty; This is that which converts the Soul;
which Law Paul delighted in according to the inward Man; This Law is Light, of
which the Scriptures of Truth plentifully testify; This is that Grace that
Paul declared, brings Salvation, which has appeared to all men; which Law,
Light, Spirit, Grace, Gift has in measures, as God's Talents, appeared unto
all men, which teaches all that are lead, taught and guided by it, to deny all
Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts; and not only so, but also, to live Soberly,
Godly and Righteously in this present Evil World: This is that Grace which the
Lord (the Giver thereof) said to Paul, was sufficient for him to deliver him
from the Temptation (the Thorn in the Flesh) of which the same Apostle said
unto the Ephesians, By Grace ye are saved, etc. And this is the Manifestation
of the Spirit (spoken of by Paul) which is given to every man to profit withal:
And this is that good Spirit of the Lord given to Israel, who rebelled against
it, as the old World did, unto whom the Lord said, My Spirit shall not always
strive with Man; of which lord, Law, Light, Grace and Spirit, given to be the
Leader and Guider of Mankind out of Sin, Death and Darkness (into which Man
fell through disobeying the Righteous Law of God, as is before declared) the
holy Scriptures give clear and full Testimony, as has been demonstrated. But
now, that which is ready to arise, is an Objection in some (whose
Understandings are not opened, whose searchings to comprehend, and Inquiries
after the Way of man's Salvation stand in that Wisdom that is from below, and
in the Will and Reason of Man degenerated from the Life of God) which is,
Whether the preaching up this Word, Light, Law, Spirit and Grace of God
manifest within, has not a Tendency to make Christ Jesus his Appearance in the
Flesh, his Sufferings, Death, Resurrection and Ascension to be Invalid? Unto
which I answer, Nay; Forasmuch as no Persons ever did, do, or shall truly see,
discern, know, understand or enjoy the Benefit of Christ Jesus his
Manifestation in the Flesh, but as their Hearts were, are or shall be opened,
and Understanding illuminated by the Light, which is a Measure of the Divine
Fullness that dwelt in him, and is communicated to, and placed in all Immortal
Souls, as the Universal Love of God, extended in the Son of his Love to all the
Families of the Earth, as the Revealer and Discoverer of the Will of him from
whose Divine Fullness it comes, and issues forth it self universally; for the
Scripture thus witnesses, that No man knows the things of a man, save the
spirit of a man which is in him; even so the things of God knows no man but the
Spirit of God.

The Hearts of the Jews not being seasoned with this Grace of God, and ignorant
of the Gift of God, which is Eternal Life, they neither discerned, loved, nor
received Christ Jesus when manifested in that outward bodily Appearance, but
rejected him, notwithstanding they professed Love, Honor and Regard to the
Prophets, and were in Expectation of the Fulfilling their Prophecies of the
Coming of the Messiah, who in due time came, and yet they did not receive him,
but instead thereof set themselves against him, taking Counsel from time to
time how they might slay him, though in Words they professed an earnest waiting
for him: So in this Day, Age and Generation there are many, who by their words
do profess they believe his Coming in the Flesh, and his Sufferings, Death,
Resurrection and Ascension; but yet having their Faith consisting in outward
Notions, and having no inward Experience of the End of his Coming, nor of the
Virtue of his Sufferings, Death, Resurrection, etc. they are Enemies in their
Minds to his second Appearance, and coming without Sin unto Salvation: So there
is a Necessity for all the Sons and Daughters of men to come to, and obey this
Divine Spiritual Principle, which is placed in their Consciences by the Living,
Eternal God, that thereby the Eye which has been blinded through Disobedience
(by the God of the World) may be opened; for until this in some measure be
effected, the Mystery of Godliness (which is great) can neither be seen nor
understood; and therefore Christ said, finding the Woman of Samaria ignorant of
himself (who was and is that great Mystery, and the Gift of the Father's Love)
If thou know the Gift of God, and who it is that says unto thee, Give me to
drink, thou would have asked of him, and he would have given thee Living
Water.

The Travail in Spirit of the Messengers and Servants of the Most High in Ages
past, was the same as now is, viz. To turn People from Darkness unto Light, and
from the Power of Satan to the Power of the Living God; thereby in no wise
invalidating Christ Jesus his Manifestation in that Bodily Appearance, neither
his Sufferings, Death, Resurrection or Ascension; but brings all People guided
thereby, unto that which will open the Eyes of their Understandings, whereby
they all come unto such a Condition and spiritual Understanding, as to see and
know their Benefit by that Appearance of the Savior of the World; for this we
testify, All are perfected by that one Offering that are sanctified. But here
arises another Objection by some, who may come so far as to own and confess,
That there is a Principle or Light in man, that discovers Sin, and teaches
man to do Justly and Equally (which some call Morality) but, That this Light or
Principle in man is of a Saving Property, and of the Nature and Quality of the
Divine Being, many for want of Understanding do deny, and so are found Opposers
of Truth it self, and stumble at the Cornerstone, which indeed in all
Generations has been to many men a Stone of Stumbling and Rock of Offense,
which Thousands (giving themselves up to be guided by their own Wisdoms and
Prudence) reject, yea, those accounted the Wise Master Builders, Professors of
God and Christ, being ignorant of the Root and Offspring of David, have and
yet do reject this Corn ^-Stone.

Now, for the sake of all who do or may desire after the true and saving
Knowledge of Christ Jesus, it is on my Spirit yet further to open and manifest
the Original, Nature a^^ Property of this Principle and Light, whose Original
and Foun^^^n is the Eternal Being and Everlasting Ocean of Divine Fullness, and
its Nature and Quality is one with this Fountain from which it comes: John
testified, In the Beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, etc. In
him was Life, and the Life was the Light of men: He also testified, That he was
not that Light, but came for a Witness, to bear witness, that that was the True
Light, which lights every Man that comes into the World: So the Original of
this Light is Christ Jesus, the Word.

But some may query thus, Is Christ the Light in every man? To which I answer;
Christ does appear by his Light in every man; and the Light (which comes from
Christ) is in every man; as is clearly demonstrated from the Scriptures of
Truth: And, though I account it unnecessary to answer the curious Inquiries of
such, who seeking to know much, do not walk answerable to what they know; yet
for the sake of such, whose Understandings are not opened, and yet are
inquiring the Way to Sion, I add this Similitude: The Natural Sun is placed by
the Creator to lighten the Outward World, and does extend from its Body a
Measure of its Light and Natural Property, shining on the Just and the Unjust,
and so does daily give forth of that Virtue which is inherent in its self: when
the Sun shines on an Object whatsoever, we sometimes say, the Sun there
appears; and other times we say, there is the Sun; the Propriety of either of
which manner of Expressions I suppose none will question; for Light in that
Appearance is seen, and Virtue is felt penetrating to the Refreshment of our
Natural Bodies; and this Light and Heat is inseparable from the Fullness; and
notwithstanding it daily shines and displayeth its Virtuous Life into and over
all the Earth and its Inhabitants, yet its Body is not any way exhausted or
altered through Ages and Generations. And so I say, that Christ, the Universal
Fountain of Life, the Sun of Righteousness, the Ocean and Fullness of Spiritual
Light, Life and Virtue (from whence is communicated a Measure of his Nature,
Property and Quality) is given of the Father to enlighten all the Sons and
Daughters of men, who accordingly are all enlightened with his Spiritual
Appearance; and though this Appearance cannot be called the Fullness, yet being
a Measure of that Fullness, it is one in Nature and Property with, and
inseparable from the Fullness: And though through its Virtue Life is daily
communicated unto the Sons of men (who waiting for the Appearance thereof, as
for the Morning-Light, cannot live unto God without it) yet does he admit of no
Diminution, Alteration or Change; but all Fullness of Divine Light, Life and
Glory does and shall through every Age and Generation remain with him: And
albeit the Vail of Darkness has over-shadowed the Hearts of some, so as when
we give Testimony unto the Universal Appearance of the Sun of Rightcousness in
the Hearts of all the Sons and Daughters of men, they are ready to say, Such a
Testimony leads to the Diminishing of that Glory and Honor which belongs unto
him as he is the Fullness, and sitting at the Right Hand of the Father;
inferring from such our Testimony, as if, whilst we testify to his Appearance
in our Hearts, we exclude his Presence to be elsewhere: which Inference, I
say, is as irrational as it would be for any to conclude, That because we say
of the shining and Appearance of the Sun, there is the Sun, or the Sun there
appears; therefore we exclude the Being of the Sun elsewhere: For its Virtue
is communicated to our Natural Bodies, every one having in measure some
Enjoyment of the Virtue or Light of the Natural Sun, which is Light to the Eye,
even as the Outward Eye is Light to or of the Natural Body; and whosoever they
are, whose invisible Senses are quickened by the influencing Virtue, which
proceeds from the Eternal Sun of Righteousness, do thereby see and discern that
these things are according to the clear Manifestation of Truth in their inward
parts, and from a true Sense thereof can of a Truth give this certain
Testimony, That Christ, the Lord, by his holy quickening Spirit has appeared
in them, to the quickening of their immortal Souls; and that through believing
in the Light, and Obedience to his Appearance, being come out of that State
which is reprobated by the Lord, can of certain experimental Knowledge say,
Christ is in (...) the Hope of Glory.

And so when we direct People to this Word, Light, Law, Grace and Spirit, we do
not thereby intend, that Christ Jesus, the Light of the World and Gift of God,
is not the true Savior, Redeemer and Reconciler of Mankind unto God.

Now this Word, Light, Law, Grace and Spirit (which is one in Nature) does lead
and guide the Souls and Spirits of all such as obey it, up to God, the
Fountain, from whom it comes; and no man comes to see its Nature and Original
but such who are led by it; for in the Light of the Lord alone man comes to
see Light, and to have an Understanding of the Original from whence it springs:
before this be seen or understood the Mind of man must be brought down out of
all its own Willings and Runnings, Comprehendings and Searchings into the
Principle of Light, therein to see a Death to his own Will, and be comprehended
into this Light; and so man comes to have an Understanding to know him that is
true, and to be in him that is true.

Now as any are convinced of and converted by this Heavenly Principle (which is
placed in the Conscience, there given to be a Guide and Leader unto Mankind)
they are led thereby out of Darkness, wherein they have been, while yet the
Light shone in Darkness, in which Darkness no man ever comprehended this Light
or Heavenly Grace, which sometimes moves through the Darkness on the Depth of
man's Understanding, reproving and discovering Darkness, causing man to hear
its small still Voice, moving in man God-wards, and so daily continues without
Change, reproving man whilst he remains in Rebellion and Disobedience all the
time of his Visitation, and approving and giving Peace unto man when he is
Obedient.

This Principle of Light remains entire in its own Purity; and although man may
change, and alter, and go from it, and rebel against it, and thereby become one
of them of whom Job speaks, that rebel against the Light, and thereby knows not
the Way of it; but gives way to the Working of the God of the World, to be
drawn out into the fading perishing things: yet this Principle remains
immutable in it self, being of and from the Immutable Unchangeable Being, and
remains with man until it be taken from him, and he be cast into utter Darkness.

The first Operation of this heavenly Light amongst those who are convinced by
and turned to it, the Gift of the Father (which Christ Jesus in his Parable to
the Jews compared to a Grain of Mustardseed, and to a little Leaven, which a
Woman took and hid in three Measures of Meal until the whole came to be
leavened) is, to show man his in ward State and Condition; and the first Step
in the Way of Life is, to be turned to this holy Principle, that teaches the
Obedient to know God savingly; and when by this Principle man comes to have a
true Sight and Sense of his fallen Estate, and sees how he has transgressed
against that Eternal Being that gave him Life and Breath (who notwithstanding
in his Long-Suffering waits long to be Gracious, and knocks at the Door of
the Heart, and has striven by his Divine Light) the true Sight and Sense
hereof will break the Heart, and tender the Spirit before the Lord; and under
the weighty Sense of the great Burden of Sin and Iniquity, there will be a
crying out, My Sins they are too heavy for me to bean, and mine Iniquities are
gone over my Head, as Paul did, saying, Oh Wretched Man that I am! who shall
deliver me from the Body of this Death? And here comes the Eye to be opened
that sees him, whom man in his Disobedience has pierced afresh, and put to
open Shame: and then there will be Days of Mourning and Wailing because of
him, and this is truly the Day of Jacob's Trouble: And in the Sense of this
Deplorable Fallen Estate, and the Longsuffering of the Lord, and the
Long-striving of his Spirit, thou will see, that in the Justice of God Eternal
Death might be thy Portion; but that which brings into this Sense, begets a
secret Cry in the Immortal Soul after a Deliverer and Savior, and will also
give a true Sense and Sight, that there is no way for thy Soul to be ransomed,
but in and through the tender Mercy of the Lord Jesus Christ; which thou will
see can no other way be effectually begun in thee, but in the Way of the
Judgments of the Lord; For it is through Judgment that Zion is redeemed, and her
Converts with Righteousness: And here also thou will see that the Measure of
the Sufferings of Christ yet behind must be filled up in thee; for no other Way
can any man pass unto Life, Peace and Joy with the Father of Spirits, but the
Way the Captain of Salvation passed, which was through Death; and here thou will begin to arm thy self with the same Mind: For none cease any farther
from Sin, but as they suffer in the Flesh the crucisying of the Affections and
Lusts thereof; and here the End of the Gospel's Preaching comes to be known and
witnessed, which was and is, that all man might be judged as men in the Flesh,
that so they might live according to God in the Spirit; and in this spiritual
inward Sense and Exercise the Lord God Almighty will bow down his Ear, and
Answer the Cries of thy Awakened Soul, and manifest his Word of Power, which
all in this State and Passage will know to be sharper then any Two-edged Sword,
piercing to the dividing asunder of thy Immortal Soul from the Spirit and
Nature of Transgression, and its Working daily (as Subjection and Obedience is
yielded unto it) dividing and making a Separation between Joints and Marrow,
giving thee daily a Discerning of the Thoughts and Intents of thy Heart.

And as the Soul, Mind and Heart gives up in Love to God, freely to follow him
in the Way of his Judgments, and gives up to the Sword of the Lord that which
is for the Sword, and that which is for Destruction to be destroyed; thus will
the precious Work of the Lord prosper. And although this be a Time of Sorrow,
and a Time of Trouble, Travail and Anguish; yet notwithstanding it is a Good
Day: therefore strive not to get from under it, neither to make haste; for the
true godly Sorrow works the true Repentance, which is never to be repented
of; and after the true Repentance follows the true Knowledge of Remission and
Forgiveness; and so thy Inquities by the Judgments of the Lord God Almighty
come to be blotted out; and then the Times of Refreshment come from the
Presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of his Power, etc.

And as there is a faithful abiding in, inward Watchfulness, and continual
Obedience to this Heavenly Light, in which the Beginning of the Work of God was
known, there will be a going on from Step to Step in the Foot steps of the
Flock of Christ Jesus, and a growing from Strength to Strength (over Sin and
the Nature thereof) and from one Degree of Grace to another; and as there is a
faithful Perseverance in this Divine Principle, the Eye of the Understanding
will be single, and here every thing which has or does let will be seen, and
the Soul never start aside from an inward Travil, until that which hinders be
taken out of the Way, and until thou see all the Rule and Authority of the
Enemy to be subdued under the Feet of the Lord's Anointed, and the Government
in the Soul upon his Shoulders, whose Right it is to Reign over all.

And here Salvation, Redemption and Restoration is effectually enjoyed, through
the Effectual Working and Operating of the Almighty Power and Arm of God
Almighty, unto whom be the Glory of his own Work forever; and so here will be a
growing and increasing, until there is a coming into that precious State and
Image in which man was before he fell.

The By Paths, Crooked Ways, Wiles and Snares of the Enemy Discovered.
NOw when the Mind is turned to this Divine Heavenly Principle, and that
therein the Work of the Lord is begun (which before is said, is the bringing
man into a Real Sensible Knowledge of his State and Condition) then will the
same Destroyer that brought man into Bondage at first, and has kept him in
Bondage, begin to work cunningly, and every way endeavor to destroy the Work
of God begun in the Soul; and that he may accomplish his End, he will go about
every way, seeking an Entrance, and will lay his Temptations suitable to the
Propensity or Inclinations of the Creature.

If the Heart and Mind be bowed down under the weighty Sense of Iniquity, the
Sins committed coming in order, and the many Transgressions in sight, through
which the Sorrow and Bitterness is great, here the Enemy will work in his
Transformings, and although in Appearance like the Light, yet in Nature
contrary thereto: For, albeit the Light and Appearance of God gives the certain
Understanding of the inward State, and brings Sorrow because of Sir, and shows
the Mountain of Iniquity, and the exalted Hills of Transgression, yet its
Workings inwardly beget a secret Hope of Overcoming by the Lord's Strength; but
then the Enemy, when he sees the Soul bewed down, as aforesaid, oftentimes
afflicts, and brings down the Mind into Unbelief of ever Overcoming, thereby
endeavoring to sink the Soul down into Despair, knowing, if he overcomes he
still keeps under his Power, although in another Appearance; but all that are
exercised on this kind, waiting on the Lord singly, with the Mind stayed in the
Light, this Snare will be discovered; for, as I said, although the true
Appearance of God's Heavenly Light and Grace brings a Day of Trouble, Sorrow
and Anguish, yet that Sorrow it not a Sorrow without Hope; but the Enemy's
Working is, to bring into a Sorrow, Trouble and Anguish without Hope, and to
draw down the Spirit into the Chambers of Darkness, where there is no order,

But now, when the Enemy of the Soul's Peace is discovered in this his Working,
and the Heart and Soul through the Love and Power of God is comforted,
encouraged and refreshed, and raised up into a Measure of the Living Hope,
Satisfaction and Content; then the old, crooked, subtle Serpent endeavors to
lead from off the inward daily Travail, that so Judgment may not be brought
forth into Victory; and so draw up the Mind into a False Persuasion of
Obedience and Diligeuce, whenas there is not an Abiding in that which gives a
true Sight and Sense of the State and Condition: And as before he would have
destroyed the Hope that is an Anchor sure and steadfast, so now on the other
hand, he would beget a Fasle Hope and Confidence, and so bring out of the Daily
Cross, through which the Nature which has alienated from God should be
destroyed.

And if the Workings of the Enemy be seen and overcome in both these Wiles and
Snares, on the Right Hand and on the Lest, and that the Work prospers even
until much be subjected, and that (through the daily Obedience to the Heavenly
Power) much is slain, and that the Heart and Mind comes in a good measure to be
cleansed, and that in pure Obedience and constant Faithfulness in this Light of
Righteousness, a good Progress is made through the Administration of
Condemnation (that is Glorious in its time) and that something of pure Peace
and heavenly Joy springs and arises in the Heart and Soul; here again the Enemy
will be subtly at work, to betray and lead aside, in persuading to sit down
now, as if all were done; and so lead out from the feeding on the Tree of Life,
to feed on the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil: and so lead out into a
Liberty to break the Commandment of the Lord; and here at first subtly and
cunningly draws the Mind out so far as to take a little Liberty, and draws the
Mind somewhat from that diligent Watchfulness, Dread, Fear and Awe it was in
before in the inward Travail of Spirit: And here if the destroying subtle Enemy
can but prevail a little, he will lead out of the Innocent Harmleis Life, and
so gradually lead a little forth, and so by degrees opens an Eye that may see
something in the outward visible things that may somewhat affect the Mind; and
as here he prevails, and causes his Work to prosper (which he does subtly,
gradually and hiddenly) the Eye that was opened comes again, through
Disobedience, to be in some meature blinded; and here Loss is sustained, even
before the Unwatchful is aware. And so the Working of the Enemy first is, to
cause such to make Shipwreck of Faith in a little measure; that is, not to have
the daily Belief to stand in the Power, the daily Enjoyment of which coming to
be left by degrees, there will then be a Turning from the Power of Godliness,
into the Form thereof: And although at sometimes the Eternal Power of the Lord
God may be felt in this Estate, yet there being not a daily feeling after it,
the Enjoyment thereof (as to true Refreshment and Consolation) comes to be
lost, and an Image comes up in its place; and the Enemy provides and presents
some Object or Objects, so to take up the Mind, as that by degrees he may enter
in, and defile the Mind, and draw it out from its true Guide, so as also to
make Shipwreck of a good Conscience.

And now, if the Enemy be discovered in these his Workings (before he can so
effect his Work, as to bring Death and Darkness over again) and that the Power
of the Lord breaks his Snares, and gives a true weighty Sense thereof (through
which Trouble and Anguish of Spirit comes) here he will again transform and
begin to work, as in the beginning of the Work, like the Condemning Power of
the Lord, endeavoring to lead the Mind down into Despair of ever recovering
again into the Former Condition, and hereby endeavor to draw the Mind to look
at him that has stung, that so the Remedy (the Soul-Ransoming Power of the
Lord) may not be felt after, nor looked at; but here (as there is a true Regard
to the Lord, and a waiting upon him in the Way of his Judgments, having the
Faith and Confidence to stand in his Power) the Backsliding will be hea^ed; and
returning and diligently keeping in the Light, the Power of the Lord God
Almighty will work over that which has Hurt, and endeavored like a Rearing
Lion to destroy, etc. and so leads on the Way again.

But when Deliverance is known again from this deadly Snare, and the Work again
goes on prosperously until the House be swept and garnished, and there is a
Passage known and witnessed from Death unto Life, and the Administration of
Condemnation being passed through, and the Spirit that ruled in the disobedient
Estate cast out, and the Openings of that which does exceed in Glory (the
Administration of the Spirit) being known, here the Enemy will again Transform,
and with all his Power and Strength in the Transformation (as an Angel of
Light) work by his Temptation on the Right Hand and on the Left: For when there
are Openings to the Understanding, and Prophecies, and through the Working of
the Eternal Power Joy springs in the Heart, then will the Enemy work secretly
and cunningly to draw the Mind out of the Valley of Humility, and if he
prevails here to draw out of this Habitation of Safety, then he will
transform to lead the Mind out, eitchr (through the Motions of his transforming
Spirit and Power) into Extremes, thereby endeavoring to destroy the true Birth
which is bringing forth, and so bewilder the Mind, and hurry it forth (through
imaginary Motions) to Dishonor the Name of the Living Eternal God, and to
destroy his work, which through Sorrow and Travil has been brought forth.

And if he cannot prevail here, but the Light of the Lord discovers him, and
the Power of the Lord works over his Appearance herein, then will he be at work
to draw the Mind out of the Watchfulness, out of the daily Awe and Fear, and
out of the Liberty of the Sons of God, which Libeity is (only) to serve the
Lord; for Dominion being selt in some measure, the Morning of Comfort and
Consolation enjoyed, and Praises spring in the Heart to him that vifited and
redeemed, the Enemy will be ready here also to draw the Mind out of the Valley
of Humility, out of the stayed Estate of Meek and Constant Watchfulness in the
Light, thereby causing the Creature prodigally to spend the Portion, and to
lavish out the Enjoyment by running and climing up to sacrifice upon the
Mountains, and run before the Leadings, Guidings and Movings of the Power of
the Lord, into the speaking forth of the Enjoyment (the Prophecyings and
Openings (not being led thereunto by that Eternal Power that first opened the
Heart) and here is the Ground of the Untimely Birth, that has been brought
forth, that has and will wicher and come to nothing.

But now, where the Enemy is seen and discovered in all the aforesaid Workings,
and cannot prevail by these Snares, Trapps, Gins and Ternptations aforesaid, he
will not cease, who goes about on a Roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour,
and how he may again get an Entrance; so that he lays his Temptations
according to the Spirit, Growth, Capacities and Inclinations of every one. Now
after the good Work of God has been begun prosperously, and that the Right Arm
of God's Salvation has been wonderfully revealed, and signally manifest to
bring out of Egypt's Land of Darkness spiritually, and that the Lord has
magnified his Arm spiritually, in giving many signal Deliverances from the
Destroying Enemy, and has often fed with the Heavenly Food, and caused the Rock
to yield Water for the Thirsty, and that the many Turnings aside in the Passage
through the Wilderness have been seen, and the Backslidings and Going out,
from a Sense of the Eternal Power have been discovered, and that there is a
coming through the River of Judgment, and the Mighty Power and Arm of the
Everlasting God drives out the Enemy that has inhabited (where only Abraham's
Seed is to inhabit) and that the War in great measure cease, and part of the
good Land is possessed and enjoyed ( even the Land that flows with Spiritual
Milk and Honey) and the Fruit of the Vine drunk of, here also (as in the
Travils afore-mentioned) will the old, crooked, subtle Enemy be working, as he
did with outward Israel, causing Jesurun to wax fat, and then kick against the
Ancient Power, leading the Mind out (through the Enjoyment of that which in its
place is good) into ease, and so to forget the Lord that made and formed man,
and brought him into the Land of Rest, and lightly to esteem of the very Rock
of Salvation; and so leads into an easeful State, in a Profession, and draws
away the Mind from the inward Enjoyment of Virtue, to set up Idols in the
Heart, and to serve other Gods, even Gods of Gold and Silver, and an Idol, a
Profession without Life and Possession: And into this State and Condition did
the old Enemy prevail to lead a People, who in many Ages had seen the Great and
Mighty Works of the Lord, who saw from time to time the Arm of God Almighty
outstretched, and magnified in the Sight of their Enemies for them; howbeit
(as aforesaid) they departed from the Lord, and from the inward Sense of his
eternal Power. Now here the Spirit that was cast out, and wandered in dry
Places, takes to it Seven worse Spirits, and returns, tempts, prevails and
enters, and here indeed the Latter-end s^ worse then the Beginning; for in the
Beginning, although the Enemy had his Power and Rule, yet there was a Sense
thereof, and the Heart and Mind was humbled, tender, and brought into the true
Poverty, and there was a Mourning before the Lord for want of the Dominion; and
this State of Humiliation, Brokenness of Heart, and Tenderness of Spirit, in
which the Lord took and takes Delight, and therefore in his endless, boundless
Loving Kindness visited and caused his red ^ming saving Power and Arm to be
revealed: But now in this other Estate, the Mind is high, the Heart fat and
full, and at ease, and gotten forth into the Love of the World, and the things
there (...), through which there is an Vamindfulness of the Lord, who in the
beginning was every day sought after, and diligently waited for, and here the
Rock (the Power) is lightly esteemed of; for the Escimation is of another
thing: and here two great Evils are committed even at once, viz. The Fountain
of the former living Mercies forsaken, and a hewing out broken Cisterns (a
Profession) that will hold no Water, no durable Refreshment, no durable Joy, no
durable Peage nor Consolation: And the Enemy has thus prevailed through many
Ages, to bring Thousands from their Enjoyment of God in the pure, tender,
broken, contrite, upright-spirited Estate, which he has and does effect
through his Workings and Subtilty, and that gradually; his first Foot-step
hereunto is, to bring out of the constant, daily, sure Watchfulness, and
causing a little Liberty to be taken to the carnal Mind and to the Flesh, and
that gradually, and (as it were unperceivably) causing such to take down (as it
were) a Taste, a certain Enjoyment of Sweetness therein, and thereby a little
darkning the Sight, and alluring a little into a little more Liberty: sometimes
his Beginnings are to draw out of the Obedience in those things that were
required in the Day of Small things; sometimes into many Words out of
Watchfulness, no more to be as a Doorkeeper in the House of the Lord; and so
the Enemy works to cause suchlike things to seem small and indifferent things,
thereby to cause the Offense of the Cross in those things to cease; and then
the Heart and Mind runs forth to make Provision for the Flesh to fulfill the
Lust thereof, either in Meats, Drinks, Apparel, or such like, which the Truth
in times past has discovered and made manifest, and the Power of God (the
Cross of Christ) has crossed, and in measure lead out of, into Watchfulness, in
pure Fear and holy Awe, not making Provision for the Flesh in any respect to
fulfill the Lufts thereof; but drawing the Creature in Practice, as well as in
Principle, into Plainness, and out of all Superfluities, admitting of the
Creature to refresh Nature, and not feed the Lusts.

But yet the Enemy works by degrees, subtly and covertly to lead out of the
Liberty of the Cross of Christ Jesus (the Power of God unto Salvation) into the
Liberty of the Flesh again, and hereby gets a little farther Entrance; and
though the Enemy be working to draw forth the mind into a wrong Liberty (as
into many Words in Dealings, in Commerce or Converse, and into the Love of the
World, and the Things thereof again, etc.) yet the Profession may remain, and
the Enemy may be contented therewith, yea, and many times the Power of God may
be felt in some measure, which indeed works not in the Approvement, but to draw
out of the Snare; but the God of the World having by this time much blinded the
Eye, and darkened the Heart, and deceived the Understanding, there is not a
Sense nor Knowledge of the Mind of the Power of the Lord in its Workings, nor a
real Sense of the Decay and gradual subtle Workings of the Enemy; for the
outward Profession and Conformity may be in a great measure kept to, which is a
Cover under which the Enemy may work undiscovered by the Unwatchful: And so the
Enemy many times leads cunningly step by step, until he has lead out of the
Power of Godliness, and slain the tender Birth, which in the first days of
tender Visitations was begotten; and so here now there will be a growing high,
fat and thick; and such will call the Operation of God's dividing Power
Extremes and Imaginations, and ( Jesurun like) will kick, and turn against the
dividing Power of the mighty God; for all such are best contented with a
Likeness and Image; for it loves the smooth things in the Wisdom of the gifted
Man, that has lost his Way, through erring from the Power, not waiting
continually on all Occasions to be guided thereby: So here is the itching Ear,
and heaping up Teachers to please Self, to please that, and uphold that; and
here Jezebel is suffered and upheld; which Error crept into the Church of
Thyatira; and in all Ages they that went from the broken, tender Estate, into
the Conditions before discovered, did and do both suffer and nurture this
Jezebel, who must be cast on the Bed of Torments, and all her Children must be
killed with Death: And all the Workings of the Enemy (under every Disguise) is
to slay that which was quickened, and to bring in a Contentedness with an
Outside Profession of the Way of Truth, Light and Life of Christ Jesus (the
Power of God unto Salvation) whilst the Heart is adulterated and gone from the
Lord, and has embraced other Lovers; and so in process of time, where the Enemy
thus prevails, he leads again into the World, from whence the Arm of the Lord
gathered; and the Latter-end of such is indeed worse then the Beginning: For
the Enemy having lead to make Shipwreck of Faith and of a good Conscience, the
second Death comes over, and such become twice dead, and become as Salt which
has lost its Savor, and are good for nothing, but to be cast forth, and trodden
under foot of men. The Preservation out of these Bypath, Crooked Ways, Wiles,
Snares and Temptations of the Enemy, is only in the True Waiting and Sincere
Abiding in the Light, Gift and Grace of God, in which the daily Revelations and
Manifestations of God's Eternal Power, and Right Arm of Salvation, and
Preservation is known in the daily Acquaintance and Experience thereof, which
keeps all Minds truly low, and Hearts sincerely tender, wherein arises an
inward Travail, Longing, Breathing and Panting after the daily and continual
Enjoyment of the Life, Power, and blessed, refreshing, heavenly Virtue, which
alone renews and increases the Strength of the inward Man; in which God
Almighty preserve all the Travelers Zionwards to the End.

The Utter End and Final Destruction Prophesied of all False Professions, who
have had their Rise in the Night of Apostasy.
AFter the Glorious Breakings forth of the Day of God amongst the Apostles,
etc. the Enemy wrought mightily against that Appearance, both in his
Instruments (by and through which he raised up Persecution) and also in those
Apostates in whom he got an Entrance amongst the Churches, and has so prevailed
that great has been that horrible Night of Darkness and Apostasy, that has
been some hundreds of years in and over the Nations of the Earth; in which
times the old subtle Serpent in his many Transformings and Appearances, has
mightily wrought to alienate man from his God: Oh the Ways and Inventions that
have been by him set up (through his workings in the Wisdom which is from
below, which is earthly, sensual and devilish) under Pretense of Religion,
Obedience and Worship of God! What Rending, Tearing, Devouring, Murdering and
Destroying has there bin for these many hundreds of years about Religion?
First the great Red Dragon of Persecution appeared to devour the Man-child and
destroy the Woman, but both were preserved; then he made War with the Remnant
of her Seed, and after came in another Appearance, which John saw rise as a
Beast out of the Sea, who had seven Heads and ten Horns, and on his Horns
Crowns, and upon his Heads the Name of Blasphemy; and one of his Heads had a
deadly Wound by the Sword, but this deadly Wound was again healed; and all the
World wondered after the Beast, saying, Who is like the Beast? and Who is able
to make War with him? And all on the Earth have and do worship the Beast, whose
Names are not written in the Book of the Life of the Lamb slain from the
Foundation of the World: And after this a second Beast appeared, that came out
of the Earth; and this Beast had two Horns like a Lamb, but spoke as a Bragon;
and John saw he exercised all the Power of the first Beast, who received his
Power and Authority from the Dragon, like unto which this second Beast spoke;
and this Beast that had Horns like a Lamb, caused the Earth and them that dwelt
therein to worship the first Beast, whose deadly Wound was healed; and he
caused all both Small and Great, Rich and Poor, Free and Bond to receive a Mark
in their Right Hand or in their Foreheads. And here has been the universal
working of the power and spirit of Darkness, that has exalted himself, sitting
in the, Temple of God as God and Ruler; but (blessed forever be the Name of the
Almighty God) the great Red Dragon, and the Beast that arose out of the Sea,
and the Beast that arose out of the Earth, and Mystery Babylon, are and shall
be manifest; The Wisdom that is pure and peaceable numbers these Appearances:
and the Judgment of the great Whore is come and coming, who rides upon the
first Beast for now the Angel of God's Presence is come down from Heaven,
having great Power, who lightens the Earth with his Glory; and the mighty Cry
is now going over the Earth, uttered with a strong Voice, saying, Babylon the
great is fallen, is fallen, and become the Habitation of Devils, etc. All
Nations have drunk of the Wine of the Wrath of her Fornications, and the Kings
of the Earth have committed Fornication with her, and the Merchants of the
Earth are waxed rich through the abundance of her Delicacies; and the Voice is
now uttering from Heaven, Come out of her my People, that ye be not Partakers
of her Sins, and that ye partake not of her Plagues; for her Sins have reached
unto Heaven, and God has remembered her Iniquities; and now is the one day
dawning over the Earth, wherein her Plagues, Mourning and Famine come, and she
shall be utterly burned with the Fire of God's Jealousy; for strong is the
Lord God who judges her, And now in the Name of the eternal, everliving,
blessed God, the Creator of all things, I prophecy of the perpetual
Destruction and utter Desolation of the Religions, Inventions, Ways, Worships,
Prescriptions, Orders, Decrees and Imitations, that have been setting up this
many hundreds of years, and not by the eternal living Power of the living God,
nor Directions, Leadings and Guidings of his quickening Spirit of Life, that led
and guided the Apostles in their Day, Age and Generation; Root and Branch, Head
and Tail, and the whole Fabric of the Babylonish Building shall be utterly
consumed, razed down and confounded forever; and all the Worshippers of the
Beast and the Image shall drink of the Wine of the Wrath of God, which is
poured forth with out Mixture into the Cup of his Indignation; and these
Worshippers shall be tormented, and have no Rest Night nor Day, who worship
the Beast and his I age, and whosoever receive the Mark of his Name, etc.

A Call in the Tender Bowels of the Love of God shed abroad in this Day, Age
and eneration, unto all the Scattered Sheep, etc.
HEarken and give ear all ye scattered Ones upon the barren Mountains of
Profession, who having lost the living Sense that was on many of your Spirits
years ago, and are now se^king the living amongst the dead Professions, and
your Bread in desolate Places; Remember the days, months and years past; call
to mind the days of your Tenderness, when the Light of God so shined on your
Tabernacle, that by it you saw your selves in Darkness, and in Separation from
the Enjoyment of your Creator; which Sense brought a Day of Mourning and bitter
Lamentation on you, which was the Cause of your Fasting, Praying and earnest
Seeking after the Lord, with multitude of Sighs, Groans and Tears, which caused
you to put many Days and Times apart to meet together to pour forth your Souls
in seeking the living God, for his Appearance and Breaking forth by his eternal
Power, and for the Revealings of his ancient Arm and Horn of Salvation: And in
that Day how did many of you retire your selves into your Closets and secret
Places to mourn before the Lord? And how did your Cries, Breathings and
Pantings after the Lord prevent the Morning Watches: And in that Day was it not
Substance it self that you sought after, even the Revealings of the Son of
God's Love in your Souls? Let me now come near, and expostulate with you in the
Name of the Mighty God, even with you amongst all Professions that have any
Tenderness or Breathings after the Lord remaining in you; What was it that
stirred up your Hearts many years since thus to seek after the Lord? What was
it that gave you the sense of your own inward Conditions? What was it that made
Sin appear exceeding sinful? What was it that you felt in your Minds that war'd
against the Law of Sin and Death in your Members? What was it that in some
mea^ure opened the Eye of your Understanding to see Idolatry and Superstition?
What was it that was drawing your Hearts out of the World, that even made
those things of light esteem in comparison of that which your awakned Souls
sought after? What was it that inwardly upheld you in Sufferings? What was it
that you retired your Minds unto when the Wicked raged as the Waves of the Sea,
when you were mocked for the Plainness of your Apparel, and for your Severity
in your Families? Remember your many signal Deliverances; How did the Lord
answer you in the Day of your Tenderness? What was it that exercised you
inwardly; moving on every one of your particular Souls and Spirits for a
Reformation? was it not the free Grace of God? was it not that Light which
shined on your Tabernacle? Did not this shine in your Hearts, and move on your
Spirits God wards, and began the inward Work of the Lord in you? Why did you
start aside from following on toward the Lord in the Way of his Judgments when
a little Prosperity attended you? Why did you seek to get from under the
Judgment before it was brought forth into Victory? Be awakened, and come back,
you Professors of all sorts, that have thus turned aside for a thing of naught,
which has caused you to wander from one Mountain of Profession to another, and
from one exalted Hill of Imaginations and Conceivings to another, until you
have spent all your Portion, and are in nature returned to Babylon, the City of
Confusion, out of which the Lord God Almighty thus calls you, Hasten, hasten to
come forth, and partake no longer with her in her Sins, lest ye partake with
her of her Plagues, which are now hastening to come upon her, and upon all that
shall be found within her Borders. Open now your Eyes, and behold where you
missed and turned aside, through which your foolish Hearts have been and are
darkened; for the Enemy that goes about as a Roaring Lion, seeking whom he may
devour, wrought in you to turn you from this pure immortal Principle of the
Divine Being (that in the days, months and years by past awakned you, and
began to work the Work of God in you) into a Profession of the Words, States
and Conditions whereof the Saints wrote, and left on record behind them, who
attained thereunto through passing from Death to Life, in Obedience to the
Grace of God, that is given to every man to profit withal, who knew the holy
War, and fought the good Fight, and so obtained the Victory; through the
effectual Workings of God they obtained it, and not through mere Notions upon
the Words of their Brethren the Prophets, of which Victory (through Faith and
Obedience unto and in the eternal Spirit of Holiness) they were made Partakers;
and thus was it that they came to put off the old Man (which indeed is a Work)
and to put on the new Man, which is a real Change and Translation out of
Satan's kingdom, and from under his power, into the Kingdom of the dear Son of
the living God, and so to be under his Power: But the Enemy of your Souls
turned you from this free Grace of God (which was that which stirred in you,
and wrought in you in your day of Tenderness) by drawing your Minds up into an
airy notional Profession of this Grace, and that by it you were saved, not
considering that the immortal Souls of such lie in Bondage, whose Faith stands
in Notions, and not in the Power of God; or whose Faith is no other then a
Belief of what is done for them without, not coming experimentally to know the
Work of God in themselves, and the Obedience of Faith which purifies the
Conscience, and makes alive unto God: And such was the soaring up into
Imaginations of some called Gifted Men for the Ministry, that they presumed to
teach and hold forth the free Grace of God after such a manner, as that the
Understandings of many were confounded, and thereby many were defiled and
corrupted by admitting a Liberty unto the fleshly Nature, and avoiding the
Cross of Christ, contrary to that holy Liberty, which through the Operation of
the Grace of God is known: For though it is true, that (as the Apostle says)
By Grace we are saved; yet whosoever holds forth this Grace so as to creat a
Belief in any, that they are thereby saved from Condemnation, whilst they are
found Transgressors against that Righteous Law of God (of which not one jot nor
title passes away unfulfil'd in them that walk not after the Flesh, but after
the Spirit) such, I say, divide not the Word of God aright, but teach for
Doctrine the Conceptions of their own Brains: for, its not a bare Belief or
Assent of the Mind to the Power of the Grace, which can give Satisfaction to
the immortal Soul, or true Assurance of eternal Peace with God; but there must
be also a Conformity in the inward Man unto the Power thereof; and so man comes
to be created in Christ Jesus unto good works, to be sanctified throughout both
in Body, Soul and Spirit: And indeed I have found, that instead of preaching up
Conformity to the Power of the Grace, they have not only preached up free Grace
(which indeed is an Expression in it self proper enough to be held forth, for
that the Grace of God is freely extended unto all) but also therewith they have
preached up a Justification of sinful and unsanctified Persons by Imputed
Righteousness, even in such a manner as many have from thence concluded
themselves in a State of Salvation, while Sin has had its reign in their
mortal Bodies; which I cannot but testify is as great an Error, and as
contrary to the Gospel-Ministration, and the End for which Christ was manifest
in the Flesh (which was, to save people from their Sins, so as to live no
longer therein) as the Error of the Scribes and Pharisees was, when they were
seeking and believing Justification by the Works of the Law, without the
Righteousness of Faith.

And thus has it been, that many have turned the Grace of God into Wantonness,
or turned from the Grace of God into Wantonness; so that in a little time, how
did many Professors grow light and vain, and ran with the very Profane into
the same excess of Riot, and lifted up in the Flesh, and so came to be much in
Show, but little and light in the Balance? And here you Professors of all
sorts, that have gone from the spiritual Appearance of Christ Jesus within,
into a Profession of the Saints Conditions and Performances without the
Leadings and Guidings of the same Spirit and Power, lost your Way, and went out
from your Guide, which would have lead you up to the Substance, Christ Jesus;
and thousands of ignorant people have been lead here, through the cunning
Sleights of men into an empty Profession; and when the Manifestation of the
Spirit of God ( which is given unto every man to profit withal) has stirred in
the Heart and Soul to draw the Mind out of the Ways, Spirit and Nature of the
World, then the transforming Enemy of Mankind has lain near to betray and
deceive, by pointing and directing people to run into this Profession or the
other, or take up this outward Performance or the other Shadow, under the
specious Pretenses of the Ordinances of God and Christ: And hereby the subtle
Enemy (that will admit of the peoples being in the outward Practice of outward
things, whilst that he can have his Place, Seat and Throne in the Heart of
mankind) has lead thousands aside out of the straight Way of Salvation, through
his drawing them from the true inward Guide (the Grace of God that brings
Saivation, that has appeared unto all men) into the outward Observation; and
here the Fear of thousands toward God is taught by the Precept of men who know
not the Leadings and Guidings of the Spirit and Power of God; and so have
healed the Hurt of the Daughter of Zion deceitfully, and have daubed with the
untemper'd Mortar.

And now all you scattered Ones upon the barren Mountains of Professions, give
ear, hear the Counsel and Call of the Lord: Turn, you Prodigals, who have spent
your Portions, and lost much of your Sincerity and Tenderness, and that secret
Enjoyment you had of the Lord inwardly (years ago) and who for a long season
have endeavored to fill your Bellies with Husks (and the Profession of the
Saints Enjoyments) my Heart earns on you, and for you are my Bowels turned, my
Soul is often bowed down in the Sense of your Estates; yea, often my Heart is
pained within me, when I behold your Wanderings up and down from Mountain to
Mountain, seeking Rest and finding none (but what is polluted) and your Souls
are lean for want of the Fatness of God's House, and you have not the Enjoyment
of it; my Soul is even many times distressed for you; God that made Heaven and
Earth bears me record, whom my Soul cries unto even Night and Day, to visit you
with an Out stretched Arm: Return, return unto that which will show you all
that ever you have done, and that will hasten you to the Father's House, where
Bread of Life is; and no longer spend your Money, protious Time and Labor for
that which is not Bread of Life, but a Profession, a Talk of Bread, which
cannot truly satisfy your Souls.

And now in the Name and Authority, and by the Motion of the Spirit of the
Eternal God, Behold! I sound the Trumpet of the Lord God Almighty in your Ears;
Prepare, prepare to meet the Lord Jehovah in the Valley of Decision; and all
you who have any Tenderness in your Hearts, and Breathings inwardly after the
Lord, amongst all Professions (of what Name or Denomination soever) Come out,
come out of Babylon, and be you separated, touch not any longer the unclean,
that the Lord may receive you, who stands ready to receive all that come in
Truth and Righteousness unto him, who now will mark all that mourn because of
the Sins of the people, which are great, and the measure thereof filling up
apace; and the day and time is hastening of the pouring out of the Vials of the
unmixt Fury and Indignation of God, who lives forever and ever: And therefore
stee, flee for your Lives out of Sodom 's Nature, and stick not in the
Profession of things, neither the one nor the other, whilst the Ground of thy
Profession did not or does not spring from the immediate Work of God, and daily
Operation of his eternal Power in thy Heart; but come down into pure Obedience
to the pure still Voice of the Spirit, and Gift of God in thy own Heart and
Soul, which will (as thy inward Ear is attentive) direct thee in the narrow Way
of Life eternal, in which thou should walk: So coming here, you come to that
which moved in the Hearts of many (years since) God-wards, which was that which
wrought many into the Tenderness before spoken of; herein walk, and be
faithful, and it will ^^ad to the Fountain of Blessedness, from which it came,
and unto the Horn of God's Anointed; and to Shiloh shall be the Gathering of
Thensands through the Nations, Tongues, Languages and People; and the Mountain
of the Lord's House shall be exalted (through this great Day of Trial,
Tribulation and Anguish) upon the top of all the Mountains.

So the Lord God Almighty (by the Arm of Strength) reach all Hearts that have
any breathing, panting Desires after him (amongst all Professions) and pull
many as Brands out of the Fire. So breathes my Soul, who am a Travailer for the
universal Visitation and Deliveraence of the Seed of Jacob, and raised up to
Prophecy of the things which come to pass, and shall be fulfilled in their
Time and Season.

Charles Marshall.

THE END.

