ENTERTAINMENTS OF THE COURSE: OR, ACADEMICAL CONVERSATIONS.

Held upon the Course at Paris, by a Cabal of the Principal Wits of that Court.

Compiled by that eminent and now celebrated Author, Monsieur de Marmet, Lord
of Valcroissant.

And Rendered into English by Thomas Saintserf, Gent.

LONDON, Printed by T. C. and are to be sold at the three Pigeons in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 165 8.

ENTERTIENMENTS of the COVRS at PARIS


TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE JAMES, Marquess of Montrose, Earl of Kincairn, and Lord
Mugdock.
My Lord,
THe World will perceive how hasty I am to throw my self at your Lordships feet
by this poor Dedication: for rather than bring no Offering, I have fetched a
small Present from France to pass through England to arrive at the happiness of
your Lordships Patronage. I confess my Author inscribed it, To the Wits; and I
do so too in sending it to Your Lordship; whose large Soul is so brimful of
knowledge, that the measure is admired when compared with Your years. But our
thoughts are answered as soon as we remember that immortal Hero, Your glorious
Father; whose Spirit was so emminent for Speculation and Practice, that his
Camp was an Academy, admirably replenished with Discourses of the best and
deepest Sciences; whose several Parts were strongly held up, (under Him the
Head) by those knowing Noble Souls, the Earls of Kinoul and Airly, the Lords
Gourdon, Ogilvy, Naper, and Maderty, and the two famous Spottswoods, (Sir
Robert, and his Nephew) whose learned heads were too precious to be cut off by
them who knew not how to understand them. This I am bold to mention, because
such Noble Discourses banished from his Quarters all obscene and scurrilous
language, with all those offensive satirical Reflections, (which now are the
only current Wit among us) and if any such peeped forth in his presence, his
severe looks told the speaker it was unwelcome. Nor did this proceed from a
narrowness in his heart, being (to all who knew him) one of the most
Munificent, as well as Magnificent Personages, in the world: which too well
appeared, when Cities after Victories tendered large sums to be freed from the
present encumbrance of his Army; He satisfied their desires, but refused their
Moneys, still saying, that he could not at once have their Hearts and their
Purses; his work was to vindicate his Masters rights, and restore them to their
wonted happiness. Nay, his unexpressibly malicious Enemies found that his
Mercy transcended their Malice, when those brave Persons (after Quarter given)
were butchered at St. Andrew's, he refusd to retaliate on the Prisoners in his
power, saying, their Barbarity was to Him no example; and if the meanest
Corporal in his Army should give Quarter to their General, it should be
strictly and religiously observd. And after all, when commanded to lay down
Arms, (though he then saw it destructive to his Master) he in mere Passive
obedience submitted, as soon as he obtained Indemnity for them who engaged with
him without paying one farthing Composition, nobly suffering himself to be
banished, which (be it recorded to all Posterity) was put in execution at the
Haven of Montrose, the Third day of September, a day which twice since has
been registered in blood, at Dunbar, and at Worcester.

[All this might seem Flattery to your Lordship, (from me who had the honor of
employment under his Command, both at home and abroad) if it were not known to
the world for Truth; since the Soul of the Great MONTROSE lives eminently in
His SON: which began early to show its vigor, when your Lordship (then not
full twelve years old) After the battle of Kilseioh.
was close Prisoner in Edinborough-Castle, from whence you nobly refused to be
exchanged, lest you cost your great Father the benefit of a Prisoner, wherein
He gladly met Your Resolution, Both so conspiring to this glorious Action, that
neither out-did the other, though all the world besides.

[May both Your Names still live to fill Chronicles, whereof we dare not doubt,
since your hopeful alliance by your incomparable Lady to the illustrious Family
of the renowned DOUGLASSES; for whose Honor here, and Felicity hereafter, may
Your Lordship accept the Duty, and God hear the Prayers of

My Lord, Your Lordships most obedient and most devoted humble Servant, THOMAS
SAINTSERF.

A short Table of the Subjects handled in this Book.
1. HE maintains the honor of Ladies page 4. 2. Of the Country p. 8. 3. Of
Sympathy p. 10. 4. Of Habits, or Habitudes in all their parts p. 13. 5. Of
Quarrels, and Duels p. 25. 6. Of the Palm, and the Laurel p. 33. 7. Of Glory,
the sole reward of Champions, and Conquerers p. 35. 8. Of Sea-sickness p. 42.
9. Of the Turks maxim p. 47. 10. Of Clemency p. 52. 11. The Relation of a
Comedy of the Days Reign of Semiramis p. 61 12. An Invertive against an able
Poet p. 76. 13. For the Country p. 85. 14. Of Eloquence, and the delicate parts
thereof p. 83. 15. An Apology for Monsieur de Balzac p. 94. 16. of the
distinction of Wits p. 100. 17. Of Metoposcopy p. 118. 18. Of the infallibility
of the Horoscopes p. 120. 19. Whence comes the folly of learned men p. 127. 20.
Whether the World be Eternal or no p. 131. 21. Of Academies, and the
differences thereof p. 138. 22. Of the posture men ought to be in at Court p.
151. 23 Of Balls and Masks p. 177
I Humbly desire my worthy Readers, out of their induigence to my necessary
absence from the Press, and the Correctors praeteritions, to mend these
following errors (which as they are many, so are they, I hope, the grossest in
the Book) by reading Anthonomasies for Anchonomasies, page 21. as indifferent,
for an indifferent, p. 24. no where, for no more, p. 31. Cacozelous, for
Carozelous, p. 34. Of the Preface, and of the Work, Intrigo, for Intrique.

Intrigo, for Intrique, Page 2. Cleomica, for Cleomia, p. 6. his time, for
time, p 9. Intrigos, for Intriques, p. 9. reiterated, for resiterated, p. 12.
any, for my, p. 15. all Council, for all the Council, p. 28. nicenes, for
nicens, p. 29. my modesty, for modesty, p. 32. in some kind, for in some sort,
p. 39. Universe, for Diverse, p. 40. Helm, Helmet, p. 44. Topmast, for Top, p.
44. Insolvent, for Insolvable, p. 45. gold, for good, p. 52. a Barbarian, for
Barbarians, p. 54. virtue, for virtues, p. 57. sufficient, for sufficiently. p.
57. in assiduity, for his assiduity, p. 60. Semiramis, for Smn ramis, p. 73.
as, for at, p. 66. Intrigo, for Intrique, p. 66. then it would, for the it
would, p. 67. reduced, for deduc't, p. 70. in the Communions, for in
Communions, p. 70. those, for these, p. 72. a most, for most a, p. 77.
Philoxcnes, for Philonenes, p. 78. Mines, for Mimes, p. 78. his talent, for
this talent, p. 81. Nominizing, for Nounnizing, p. 83. affectations, for
affections, p. 84. That is, for That in, p. 86. Clarity, for Charity, p. 89. I
would not have refused the Challenge, for I would Challenge, p. 100. blinded,
for beblinded, p. 101. we are to hold, for we held, p. 103. pass, for post, p.
104. and that a person, for a person, p. 105. and open a gap, for and a gap, p.
105. to himself in history, for to his in history, p. 105. act not, for are
not, p. 105. a man is of, for a man of, p. 109. a brisk, for and brisk, p. 107.
skatteringly, for skanningly, p. 113. the Climats, for of the Climats, p. 114.
Cellules, for Cellutes, p. 119. perfectly, for perfectively, p. 121. they
spu'd, for they said, p. 126. his glory, for for his glory, 132. Omnipotent,
for Omnitent, p. 132. by the whole, for and by the whole, p. 143. this Academy,
for the Academy, p. 146. but that it, for that but that it, p. 147. knew, for
know, p. 155. in his own, sor in own p. 156. they have caught, for they caught
p. 163. as we live, for as he lives, p. 168. to God, for God, p. 168. near a
forced, for a forced, p. 172. have but ordinary, for have ordinary, p. 174.
taillery, for caillery, p. 176. there were, for thed are, p. 180. upon the
same, for so upon the same, p. 193. conclusion, for copulusion, p. 192. of
this, for of their, p. 192. being tied, for were tied, p. 193. a bowl-dish, for
the bowl-dish, p. 193. shave an egg, for shame an egg-shell, p. 194. attended,
for attend, p. 196. with no, for with, p. 203.

ENTERTAINMENTS OF THE COURSE: OR, ACADEMICAL CONVERSATIONS.

THAT IS, A Miscellanie of Civil, Philosophical, Physical, Metaphysical,
Astrological, Historical, and Politic Discourses; held upon the Course at
Paris, by a Cabal of the Principal Wits of that Court.

Compiled and set forth by that eminent and now celebrated Author, Monsieur de
Marmet, Lord of Valeroissant.

And Translated into English by THOMAS SAINTSERE, Gentleman.

LONDON, Printed by T. C. for Humphrey Robinson, at the three Pigeons in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1658.

THE AUTHOR TO THE WITS.
I Forbear to dedicate my Book to great Persons, who ordinarily take as little
notice of such works as are addressed to them, as they do of the Authors
thereof; and who make but small reckoning of such like Presents; not for that
they are not worthy of them; but because they are now adays too much persecuted
by them, and in regard also that they are often either above their
understanding, or disagreeing from their Genius. For my part, I prefer Wit
before Birth, and Knowledge before Dignity: and consequently, I had rather
direct my works to intelligent and ordinary persons, who will take pleasure to
read them, and of whom I can revenge my self, if they requite my labor with
contempt or detraction.

The conversation of these Walks, (which was not composed for every body, and
which I offer you) is published for no other end then to make your protection
(which you must not refuse it) triumph with the greater pomp and splendour, and
to exalt the force of your reason, and the vigor of your wit above the lowness
of its value, by the favor of your patronage. I produce it not because the
contagious fancy of writing wherewith men's spirits are now a days infected,
has siezed upon me, and made me fond of being reputed and cried up for an
Author; for I am not tickled with that ambition, nor have I any other motive to
make me fall into this disease, but to be favored with your remedy. If my Work
were without blemish, and more happy then the rest of these times are, which
daily pass the censure of the Critics, I would present it you only for the
goodness thereof, to profit you, and divert you from more serious cogitations
in your vacant moments. But in regard that in all Ages there was never any
great man who escapt the rigor of censure, and who has not been in some kind
obscured in History: I have reason to procure it as many Patrons and Readers as
I can, and such also as may be as zealous for my reputation, as they are
necessary for my weakness: Besides that indeed, the bonour I bear you, obliges
me to do it, as much as the advantage I expect from your protection: For were
you to combat none but mean persons, both in judgment and condition, your
victory would be more prejudicial then glorious: But now all the Grandees of
the Kingdom are as much in love with Minerva, as they were wont to be with
Mars; and are as good at the Pen, as they are at the Sword: So that by
sustaining my cause, you will be constrained (if I be reproved) to oppose the
diversity of their opinions who produce most admirable and sublime conceits;
and I shall be the object of the quaintness of your wits; the vigor and
subtility whereof will (I hope) (...) as victoriously forth against a multitude
of illustrious and competent Judges, as against the Cabal of pertinatious and
fastidious Critics. I have recourse therefore to you, both for your interest
and mine, in confidence of your civility and sufficiency, if you read (as I
hope you will) this Letter I send you: For ingenious and prudent men read a
book from the beginning; but fools and dunses conceive that the Liminary
Epistles of all Books are alike, and have not the curiosity to look upon the
soul of an Author; however it be that indeed, by which he discovers what he is,
rather then by all the elegancy and substance of his writings: And though the
number of them who make books be infinite, and their wits but very indifferent,
yet do they write very differently, and by different motions: For, some do it
for their own satisfaction; others, for that of the public; some again, for
profit and subsistence; and most of them all, by a motion of vanity, and desire
of reputation. These last hold themselves to be accomplished wits, and think it
to be the property of sublime intelligences, to communicate and divulge
themselves, thereby to receive the reflection, and procure a testimony that they
live with some credit in men's minds; as if forsooth, the reputation of a true
man of honor were to become a Book, and be exposed to the humor of every
Cock-brain'd Sot, who will despise and deride it, when he ought to cherish and
esteem it. As for me, Readers, none of these motives, but a better design
obliged me to Pen this Conversation; as the love and delight of my Neighbor in
the first place, and in regard that a well regulated affection begins always
at home, I did it both to benefit and divert my self with these reflections. Now
the better to illuminate, and inform you of my subject, know, that I give you
in these Entertainments, a Man of Honor, or a Complete Man, Incognito, and so
much disguised, that my self who masked him, have much a do to know him. It is
but a Fragment and relick of the instructions which I gave my Son; and if you
will vouch safe to make some deliberation upon these little discourses which I
have drawn from thence, (and which make no unpleasant medly) you will find it
to be a perfect model to form a True man of Honor, and that the use and
application thereof will not be wholly unfruitful. But, fearing least I should
fall short of such Authors as have gone before me, both in the production and
dispensation of so necessary a doctrine, as that which treats of a Man of
Honor; I decline the ways wherein they walked, by huddling up things and
matters in an agreeable confusion; and the better to delight you with a
handsome variety, I forbear to present you with raw, rough, and indigested
Precepts, as I did my Son; however it be also true that I followed some kind
of order in the documents I gave him, and that to instruct him with the better
judgment, and facilitate his advantage, I coucht them with regularity, and
dressed them with good language, and not with such gibbridge as I now offer them
to you. I can easily show you how to observe both this order, and the
instructions I gave my Son; the Principal whereof was to call upon God in all
his actions; to worship his Oracles in the mouths of his Anointed, (who are the
gifts of Heaven;) to reverence and submit to the Mysteries of Faith; and not to
scoff at Divine things, as Atheists and Libertines do. I can (I say) make you
touch with your finger all such other documents of gallantry, both in Court and
Camp, as are any way important and necessary to form a Man of Honor, by
directing you in the Margent to the most essential Precepts thereof: But you
will not have so little curiosity and prudence as to pass through this Walk
without observing the rarities; nor will you be so much obstructed with Rheum,
but that you will be able to smell the Roses which are in it, yea and pluck
some of them too. You will peradventure find it strange, that I celebrate not
mine own praises, nor those of my book, according to the custom of some Wits
of the Times: but, besides that you know that it is unhandsome for any man so
to do: Of two important and remarkable Precepts of antiquity, (the one to know
ones self, and the other to make ones self known by speaking,) I prefer the
bumility of the former; (where as others serve themselves of the vanity of the
latter, to publish their pride;) and to make a right use of the latter, I
always consider well both what I say, and what I do: For as on the one side I
should be loath to have men say that my writings are full of vanity; that I am a
fool; or that all my Rules are false; so am I no less glad on the other, to
have ull the falsity fall to the Critics share, (if they make anill judgment
of me) rather then one verity against this opinion should be found, either in
my tongue or Pen; and especially in the latter, if I should chance to be so
weak, as to be taken tripping in the former: For I am not of the humor of the
greatest part of writers, who not hoping to attain an advantageous judgment of
their works, presume to forge Apologiesfor themselves, and put them into their
Prefaces, and (like silly and ill-favor'd women, who kiss the Pensil which
flatters them) either beg or hire some good pen to write in their behalf,
without considering that the honor redounds to the Author, and not to them;
according to those great Artists of antiquity, who wishing that all the
reputation of their work might be ascribed to their ability, employed the best
of their capacity, and the excellency of their Art upon the weakest and meanest
subjects, to make it the more estimable and famous to Posterity. Nor am I of
the humor of them who finding none to praise them so much as they desire,
endeavor to blind the world, by audaciously borrowing the names of their
friends, to set forth the imaginary elegancies of their writings, and the
qualities which they fancy themselves to possess: And I vow to you Readers,
that I cannot but blush for shame when I read such Epistles of this kind, as
are directed to you; nor do I feed my fancy as they do, who often lie beyond
probability, and are as well satisfied therewith, as Lovers are when they have
dreamt that they have lain with their Mistresseses, though there be no such
matter: For as these men enjoy their Loves but in conceit; so those take
Bristol-stones for fine Diamonds; and the first and rough draught, for the
perfection of a Picture; insomuch as that they forfeit the ornaments of
Eloquence, by seeking them with so much violence; for since Nature is against
them, it is in vain for them to labor to purchase the unperceivable address of
Art. Some who conceive themselves to be the greatest Masters of this
Profession, and who think they have found the secret of well writing, and of
pleasing the whole world, are prone to gull and flatter themselves with the
opinion that they are the sovereign Judges of Parnassus, (though without right
or reason;) and so become the Adorers and Panegyrists of their own productions;
but they tire out Rhetoric to no purpose, and unsuccesfully extend themselves,
together with the secrets of the Art, upon the praises they pretend to have
acquired, though the noise of their writings (which is heard by none but
themselves) be no greater then that which they would make by scrunching of a
piece of Pye-crust; and they ground their reputation upon the fine Apologies
they make for themselves, as being sure enough that no body else would
undertake to praise them: And indeed they have reason to do so, since it is
necessary for dubious and improbable things to be thus supported; whereas on
the other side, such as are certain, need no other prop then that which they
have from themselves, and from the truth of their own essence. Therefore the
certainty of this so just and well-grounded discourse, keeps me far enough from
ascribing any esteem to what I do; because fame is better confined to four
words of value, from an impartial and judicious person, then to the amplest and
most elaborate Panegyricks, the most confirmative Elogies, and the most
authentical attestations, which have but the least supposition or savor of
complacency and self-love: For these things are always unfaithful to them who
trust in them, unless they be sustained by the testimony of others, and by the
support of truth; without which two props all reputations must needs be
dissipated and adulterated; they being to them as the Oak to the Ivy, to hold
them up. One only suspetion (though ill grounded) abates the value of the
noblest things; and that is pride, the least itch whereof is always fatal, if
too much stirred. But men will tell me that all gallant persons are infected
with ambition; that reputation is a ticklish thing; and that the love of
Eloquence, which gives this passion of honor to Orators, is very charming and
desirable; I grant it: But who is he, that effectively enjoys that Goddess, as
he conceives he does? And who is he that as truly, and perfectly possesses, as
he easily fancies he does, that touching beauty, whose sweet and potent Empire
reigns with sovereignty, over Rational Souls; and whose charms are so
attractive, that the most barbarous spirit cannot resist them? He who were able
to govern her peacefully alone, might call himself happy, and worthy of great
honor, for his ambition would be fully satisfied, and his reputation
advantagiously established. But we must have Diogenes's Lanthorn to find him,
and cry aloud with the Oblivious, Where is he? For I know but few Writers in
France who can pretend to this advantage, and it may be there are not many
more; I mean Monsieur de Scudery, and Monsieur de Balzac, (both famous for
their merits and their Divine Writings) and some others of their Class; who
have indeed all right to this pretention, and deservedly wear the Laurel for
their praeheminencie therein: But it would be to no purpose to nominate them
all particulary; for their works have illustrated their names, with such
resplendent attributes, and titles (which are called in Rhetoric
Anchonomasies) that they are easy enough to be known. Greece has ever
abounded with fair Women; witness Queen Helen, whose beauty, so much celebrated
by antiquity, and so much admired by all the world in History, set all the
Orient on fire, by the destruction of one City: But let Homer sing as much as
he pleases of the excellency of this beauty, by the revolutions of her effects,
and do what he can, to make us admire and adore her; for my part, I say still,
that there came a much rarer miracle of perfection out of his Country, then
she; I mean Eloquence, which has kindled love and fire in all the Nations upon
earth, and which merited at least, as well as his Helen, a History for her
heauty; where as yet, we have but some pictures, of the tender and lively
passions, of the great Masters thereof. This Grecian Girl, or this Heavenly
Girl, (incomparably more charming then King Priams Daughter-in-Law) which
captivates the most determinate, and most resolute spirits, and inspires them
with a certain kind of love, which understands reason, and guides it self by
it: This fair Girl, I say, came to dwell, and set up an Academy at Parnassus,
where she had a world of Courtiers, and Suitors: But not being satisfied with
these alone, she went to travel up and down the world, and endeavored to
spread her Original, upon all the tongues which had her Copy: For the ancient
Latins, who passionately loved foreign beauties (as their successors still do)
stayed her, as she past through Rome, and became her Amorous Idolaters; and
indeed, by their cares and services, they received great favors, and most
secret carresses from her: But she being of an inconstant and light humor, and
fond of variety, after she had once cloyed her self with them, bid them
farewell, and went on to see, and be seen, in the rest of the world. Wherefore
it is not for any of our Frenchmen to think that they have gotten the virginity
of this fair Lady of pleasure, howbeit some flatterers have endeavored to
chowce, and fool them with that opinion, and have served them, as those women
use to do, who sell their Wenches Maidenheads a hundred times over: For, if
they have any smack of good learning (as I think they have) and any skill in
Languages, they know well enough, (against the sentence of a famous Author, who
says, That it is impossible for an old Woman to be handsome) that Eloquence is
a handsome, and old Curtizan, which has as much of the Sensitive Soul, as of
the Rational; that all the world has had to do with her, and that never any
body enjoyed her alone; that Caefar carried her into the Camp; that Cicero
ushered her throughout the whole Roman Empire; and that before these,
Isocrates, with his swavity; Demosthenes, with his vehemence, and many other
Authors carried her all over Greece. So that these Gallants ought not to
conceive themselves, to have found the Bean in the Cake, and swagger, and
crack, of an imaginary good fortune. For my part, I go a quite contrary way to
work, being far from this presumprion, and instead of praising my self, I
entreat you my Readers, to excuse the faults, which you shall find in my Books;
I mean, as well those, which may be directly imputed to me, as those of the
Correctors of the Press; in regard I have freely and absolutely committed the
Copy to their disposal, in case my friends at Court (who are some of those
famous, and quaint Wits, which composed the Academy, and were the delights of
the greatest man that ever was) should approve, and like of it. But fearing
least all the faults you may find in them, should leave some ill impression
upon you, (as poison does when we have touched it) and to banish the bad opinion
you may retain of them otherwise (without taking notice of these petty
fopperies) I conjure you, to break the bone, when you have picked it, take out
the Marrow, and make your profit of such matters as will divert you. I caused
this first Edition to be Printed in a small volume, for your convenience; to
the end that making it your Pocket-Companion, you might recreate your selves
with it, either in Coach or Chair, and chiefly in Walks, because it has
Entertainments for its Design; and the Course, for its Scaene: And I also willed
it to be done, without the embellishment of great Letters, and Flourishes; to
the end that the vogue, and value of the Work, might be due to nothing but its
own goodness, and merit (if it have any) without the help of superficial dress,
and ornament. I presume not to make you any great present, in the Form; nor
expect any thanks from you, for the Matter, because I appear Anonymous, and
disguised to the world, as being clad in paper: But to let you see, that I
thank you for your Complement, and for your praise, (without receiving either
the one, or the other) I have oppugn'd the desire of some Courtiers of new
Books, and laughed at them, for that they would not only have me qualify this
Work with my Name, but make my self yet more ridiculous, by putting my picture
also in it; in order to which, you shall see how prettily they went to work
with me; for, some of them told me, that I must get my self drawn in Iron,
because I had born Arms, and showed my self in the Field; others, that since I
was now grown a Gown-man, and a Counselor, I should do well to be drawn in a
long Gown, with a Book in my hand, and a Bonnet upon the table, and
consequently insert my Letters of Doctorate, and my reception into Parliament.
But one of my friends (who is a notable Crack indeed) went farther, and showed
me, that the quality of an Author (which I had) was to be preferred before all
that, and that I ought to cause my self to be engraven in brass, in the
Frontispiece of my Book, mantled with certain unknown Characters, (which might
be taken for Prophesies) crowned with Laurel, like a Roman Emperor, or with
Vervain, like Lucians Demy-gods, and barb'd, and caparrison'd stark naked, like
an Hero; (That is, to put a Half-Corslet, and a Coat of Armor upon my bare
body) and that if my Book were carried to the Northern Countries, my Picture
would take cold in its arms, as having them naked a hands-breadth above the
elbow, and that the winds (which are so violent in those parts) would blow off
my Crown from my head. Thus (said this wag) must an Author be set out in his
Works: But I think, he either jeered the Profession, or me, in regard he well
knew, that I was not of the Class, of those illustrious Authors, who are worthy
to be shown in their Books; and it is enough for men to laugh at my Writings,
without laughing at my face. In effect, what benefit is it to the Public, to
know the Authors of Books? For they ought but to draw either profit or pleasure
from such Books as are good, and give them the value and price they deserve,
provided they be able to comprehend them. Suppose this Book merited any esteem,
and could purchase me any honor for having composed it, to what purpose would
it be, to declare my name, to such as know me not, and are never likely to see
me? Certainly this knowledge would be useless to them, and but a kind of
visionary vanity to me; in regard that names do only note, and signify things
plainly, and give no knowledge of them (because they do not represent them
effectively) even though we see them, unless we knew them before. As for such
as know me, I cannot teach them my Name, because they know it already; and it
would be to no purpose likewise, to tell them, that this Book is mine, because
that, by knowing me, they also know the strength, and drift of my wit, and
capacity: And if my Work fall into the misfortune of many other, to be
disparaged, and taken for a foppery, should not I be a very dolt, to publish my
self for the Author? And had I not better hide my self, (like Apelles) behind
the Curtain, and rejoice alone, if they who know not the Author, give it their
favorable vote, and approbation? Or to disown it to my acquaintance, as a
bastard put upon me to Father, if they find it to be simple, disgustful, or
deformed? For what is it to any body, if Marmet Valcroissant the Elder, or any
other whosoever, fumbled up these Entertainments together? And what need any
one care to know, either by my name, or by my Book, whether I be a Citizen of
Paris, or of Apt in Provence? Whether I be a Courtier of ten years standing, or
live three hundred miles from Court? Whether I have true politeness, and
elegancy of speech; and that character, which the Ancients called Urbanity? or
whether I affect new Terms, Phrases, and the Style A la mode? Whether I have
acquired the propriety of language of my self, or whether I learnt it of my
Nurse? And in fine, whether I be fain to study long, to utter my thoughts, or
whether the air of my Birth, or Nature, have inspired me with a good faculty,
and form of writing? All this, my Readers, is an indifferent to you, as it is
useless to the whole world; and let the Work and the Workman be what they will,
it is sufficient to esteem them, as they deserve. That false opinion, that it
is necessary to be at the Court, to write, or speak well, (which you will find
refuted in some part of this Treatise) and which had not the good luck to be
started our Age, (because Antiquity thought, that the purity, and politeness of
speech could be no more but at Rome:) This opinion, I say, would be
disadvantagious to me, if I discovered my name, and men would impose some
original sin of Provence upon my Style, by praeoccupation of Spirit; as they
heretofore found fault, with the excellent Works of those famous Orators of
Lions, and as they reproacht even Titus-Livins himself, that his Style retained
the tincture of the Paduan Tongue; and this for no other reason, but because
they knew well enough, that those illustrious persons wrote not at Rome. Thus
you see, that the Name of an Author is sometimes prejudicial to him, in his
Book; and it is better for him, to have men judge of him by his Work, then of
his Work by opinion: For so many Verses, and so many Prefaces in his behalf, so
many Advertisements to the Reader, so many Dedicatory Epistles to great
Persons, and so many Apologies in form of Prologue, are of small account to
such as read a Book for the Subjects sake; and they are also very hurtful to
the Author, because the greatest part of these persons, read not these things
at all, and are content to speak ill of a Book howsoever; and so the Author
makes himself a laughingstock, by arrogating to himself a false glory. My self
past once through the trial of these dangers; and I confess, my modesty was
never so near shipwreck, as at that time; for though I were far from complying
toward its loss, and from so much as consenting to its deviation; yet could I
heartily wish, that I were able to repeal my Name, and the flatterous praises,
which men were pleased to bestow upon me. But Printed Books are like thrown
stones, and irrevocable acts; and nothing but time can suppress them, how bad
soever they be: Nor have I the vanity to think, that this which I now put
forth, will last long, or that it is either one of the best, or even of the
ordinary sort of Works: And if it were capable of sense, how much would it
grieve, to see it self neglected, forsaken, and despised, by the Booksellers,
and in good Libraries, amongst so many other, which are as so many noble
Pictures, and magnificent Temples of Eloquence, and which the quaint, and
learned Wits cherish, and carry always about them, as their constant and
grateful Companions! Certainly, it would not forbear to weep for sorrow and
shame, as the figure of Solomon heretofore did, (which Constantine the Great
caused to be set up in St. Sophies Church) for rage and spite, and shed tears
with admirable artifice, to see that holy Temple, so rich in Ornaments, so
stately in matter, and so marvailous in structure, outstrip his. In like
manner do I believe, with shame enough, that I have not been able to arive to
that Character of Eloquence, which our famous French Orators have attaind; and
this Present which I make you, is neither to take pride in my cheerfulness, nor
discover my dullness: For I do out of humility, (submitting my self to your
correction) that which so many others have done for want of knowledge and
judgment; and that homage which I render in public, proceeds from the esteem
I have of all the world; and not from the miscognizance of my self. But I take
all the care I can, to avoid the engaging my self insensibly, in the slippery
way of the Court, where Idiots and Novices suffer themselves to fall, and who
are infected with cajolery; and I might be justly chidden for vainglory, if I
did as some Courtiers do, who stand making of Congees, and Cringes, to be
saluted, and who spinning out their Complements, beyond measure, or exception,
cast themselves into contempt and scorn, by speaking of themselves, thereby to
be answered, and praised: and therefore to escape the suspicion of being vain,
I forbear this humiliation, and baseness; though yet I should seem to hunt
after reputation, by vilipending my self, I will not speak of my self at all,
either good or evil, as not meriting (peradventure) either blame, or praise:
And as the former shall not move me to indignation, if men say, I am not a good
Author; so shall not the latter to pride; for neither of these passions shall
disturb the peace of my Soul: So that, resolving neither to trouble my self,
nor thank any body, whatsoever men say to my advantage, shall be very welcome
to me; but knowing my self so well as I do, it shall not persuade me. I
understand the difference which the Schools put, between Philosophers, and
Sophists, and it is no easy matter, to make me take a Paradox, for an Article
of Faith: I am able to distinguish glittering Armor, from Armor of Proof, and
I know, that the former is better for show, then for service. Since the famous
Relicts of Antiquity present us with Panegyricks for Nero, and with Apologies
for Buzirus, and that in times of old, People adored Beasts; I cannot endure to
be deified by Elogies; and consequently, though the Eloquence of a friend
should have all the art, and address of those ancient Declamators, (who would
needs make a Quartan Ague pass for a Goddess, and Poverty for a Good) yet would
it no more move me, then the blame men may cast upon my Writings, which hurts
me not at all, however it looks, at the beginning of this Discourse, as if I
would formalize a little, and as if I vowed revenge: For, I am in my Carreere,
and I find my self obliged to go on, even though I perish: And as people said,
that the design of my Convesation of importance, which treats of dying well,
after having lived ill, was too serious, and austere, for a man of my
profession; that I ought to have kept it within the rules of Morality, without
touching upon devotion; and that to invite the world to read it, I had done
well to handle those so dilucid truths, and so necessary meditations in a
Romantic way; and embellish so grave, and solid a Matter, with rich, and gay
Ornaments of Language: As they did ( I say) gloss, and comment thus upon that;
so let them also say as they please, that my Entertainments are not brisk, and
gallant enough, to be held upon the Course by Courtiers, and that some of the
Subjects thereof are too serious, and Scholastic: Let them say, that I had
done well, to have used a better, and more exact dispensation, both in the
Method, and in the Discourse, and that I should have omitted some matters
therein: Let them reproach me, that my Style is neither good, nor well
digested, and that it is languid, and Carozelous, as well as strong, and
elevated: Let them accuse me, that my Language is not pure, nor my terms
expressive; that my judgment is not well fortified, nor my spirit much
enlightened to write well: Let them twit me, with the imitation of good Authors,
and with the borrowing of conceits from the Ancients: And in fine, let such as
are of a Critical Palate say as much as has been written, by so many good and
famous pens in this last Age; all this (my Readers) shall be indifferent to me;
howbeit, according to custom, and Ceremony, I have desired your protection,
against the Critics: Yea, though not only the Country Gentlemen, (who are but
subalternative Judges) but even the very whole Court it self (which Judges
soverainly, and soverainly well of these things) should condemn my Writings, it
should not at all trouble me, yea, and it should touch me as little, as if the
world had not talked of it at all: For in a word, I care not; and I am as well
content, that you should despise, as value my Works, and that you should not
read them, as read them; for it is not my design to gather pride, but virtue,
from my Books, and to live like a Man of Honor. Farewell.

ENTERTAINMENTS OF THE COURSE AT PARIS: AND Academical Discourses.
The first Walk.
HOld Coachman, hold! cried the Marquess de Bon air, passing one day in his
Coach at the entrance of the Course, by that of the Baron d' Aiguefueil, (in
which was the Count de Rioumayon, a Counselor of Parliament, Monsieur Hydaspe,
Colonel of Horse, and Angelin the Philosopher) and looking upon the Company,
said, Your Servant Gentlemen; have you any room for mein your Coach? I am weary
of being alone in mine own. This charming Baron, who is the Center of all men
of virtue, either for their inclination, or his courtship, and whose curious
and sublime spirit makes a noble acceptance, and a just choice of Geniuses, had
picked out these Gallants as the cream of his elections, and after having
treated them that day, carried them to the Course, where entering (as aforesaid)
to satisfy his own duty, and the Marquesses request, he answered, Come my
Lord, we will find room for you; we are ravished to meet you, and here is no
body, but will most willingly squeeze himself for your sake. Upon this the
Colonel whispered him in the ear, saying, Let him alone, he is never better
accompanied, then by his own phancies; for doubtless, he is now plotting some
journey, some new fashion, some intrique, or some combat. I cannot handsomely
refuse him, replied the Baron; I must answer his desire with some civility; and
to make him a cold complement, would be to slight his merit and acquaintance,
and abuse my own duty. Then leaning half out of the Coach, he bid one of the
Pages open the Boot; which the Marquess perceiving, came out of his, and some
complements past between him and the Baron, about placing him in the body of
the Coach, which the Baron pressed upon him, as both honor and convenience
required.

The Marquess being set, and the Coach going on, the Baron asked him, My Lord,
whither were you going so solitary, and pensive? You are a great Courtier of
Ladies, and certainly you were not alone, without some design: I swear to you,
my Lord, (said the Marquess) I am wholly disengaged; for I have taken my leave
of Cajollery, and hate those Prattleboxes like the plague; and setting that
aversion aside, I have an indifferency for all such objects, as move any
passion; and I came from home, without knowing whither to go; for when my
Coachman asked me whither he should carry me? Even whither thou will, said I;
all parts of Paris are alike to me, and never did I more freely trust my self
in thy hands, then this evening. Certainly, my Lord, (said the Count de
Rioumayon) your Coachman must needs be guided by the good spirit which governs
you, and has some secret intelligence with your fair passion, since he has
brought you unawares, to the place where your inclinations are. Look, there
goes her Coach; you know whom I mean, and you know better then any body else,
the truth of what is said thereof at Court.

Go, you are a wag, said the Marquess! What? Will you submit your thoughts 1.
He maintains the honor of Ladies.
to calumnious reports; and suffer your judgment, to accomplish the ruin, of
a Lady of honor? Indeed, if it be true, that those things which present
themselves to our eyes, make more impression upon our minds then Reason, and
that we are more disposed to prefer detraction, and slander, before the true
relation, of such virtues as are found in a person; I confess, it looks as if I
were dispenst with, for speaking advantagiously, of the merit of her whom you
now hinted; in regard that she gives so clear arguments, to entertain you upon
the misfortune, which is befaln her in my behalf: But I should think my self a
Traitor to so many Virtues as she has, if I let you not know, that she
possesses them without spot, and without defect, and that, after having
vanquished those Monsters which might stir rebellion in her Soul, she has made
them slaves, to her good nature.

The satisfaction of our own Consciences, is the sovereign remedy of
coffeehouse of mind, and the true testimony to justify our actions: It were
a baseness, to saint upon report only; for whilst the calm is coming, the storm
ceases; and when we have innocence for our shield, the sharpest shots of
calumny prove dull, and ineffective. This is the reason, why this Lady has
never much troubled her felf, at whatsoever the whole Court has said
concerning our frequentation; and howbeit some ill interpreters might censure
her of impudence, for showing so little shame thereof; yet are the most settled
judgments sufficiently persuaded to the contrary, and the most cleer-sighted
eyes explicate (to her advantage) that her constancy, and stability, are the
justifications of her innocence, and that good intentions never make any
account at all, of the noises of detraction: Guilt is never without a
character; we may read the fear of punishment, in the faces of offenders; and
though their inward remorse be indeed no great affliction to the body, yet does
it torment, and confound the mind, with horrible thoughts, and dreams, which
plainly appear afterward in their eyes, and express, that the contempt of
virtue has caused an insurrection of Passions.

He who violated and murthred Cleomia, had strange visions after her death:
Apollodorus his dream, that he was flead by the Scythians, was a visible
punishment of the treason he had secretly committed: Deuxis, for having falsely
boasted, that he had enjoyed a certain Roman Lady, had never afterward, the
heart to come into her company, and testified, by the shame of his flight, the
falsity, both of his supposition, and of his slander.

Now if these Heroes, who had invincible spirits, had yet the pictures of shame,
fear, and terror, expressed upon their faces; how, I pray you, can it be
possible, for a woman, whose sex is no less bashful then frail, to have the
confidence to appear at the Course, and show her face, after having blemished her
honor, and especially being published? As there are different Lovers, so are
there different Loves; and although that sympathy, which is (peradventure)
between us, may have produced some frequentation, and that frequentation some
little kindness, yet neither have her desires, nor mine, transcended the
bounds, of an agreeable, and innocent conversation.

He would have gone on, but the Counselor interrupted him, saying, I am sorry,
that the confusion, and rumbling of the Coaches, makes me lose one half of
those fine things which my Lord Marquess has uttered, and that instead of
satisfaction, I receive trouble from his discourse. It is true indeed (said the
Count de Rioumayon) we can hardly hear one another speak here; and if we stay,
we shall lose all the pleasure of our walk, which consists chiefly in
conversation. I think so too, said the Baron; and therefore let us withdraw our
selves out of the crowd, where the best divertisement we can have, is but to
see the going up and down of Coaches, and such persons in them as are
indifferent to us, and where we shall also be deprived, of the charms, and
sweetness of your entertainments. Shall we go out, and walk in some place
apart, where we may have more quiet, and more convenience, to entertain our
selves? They all agreed; and the Baron having commanded a Page to bid the
Coachman drive off from the Course, and carry them gently, to some private walk
by the River side; Our Philosopher (said the Marquess) is highly pleased with
this humor; for he is so much in love with the Country, and solitude, that he
is out of his center, when he is not in his Country House.

It is true (said Angelin) that I am extremely taken with the Country, and 2.
Of the Country.
that I find all my delights there; but you shall never hear me say, that I am
in my Element there, though I enjoy the sweets of my solitude, according to my
wish; for this term, is followed by a temptation of vanity, to which I am not
subject, and I content my self, with the innocent use, of those pleasures it
gives me, without staining them with vainglory. According to the example of an
ancient Grecian, it has been counted the Paradise of the Learned, and the
Element of good wits; but as our sight is shortened, and has its distance
bounded by the objects which limit it, so do persons of an ordinary soul, find
but their equal proportion of contentment, in the employments of the Country;
whereas the most sublime ones have matter enough, to set the strong imagination
they have of good things on work, as not being diftracted, either by the
embarasments of the world, or by the serious divertisements which men receive
in the Towns.

Aristotle's Master said, that his friends were his importuners, and the
thieves of time. Now if he, being a Philosopher, and living as such, were
importuned by his friends, and they were a burden to him; how would you have a
man, who is always in company, to settle himself upon an assiduous study, or
upon weighty reflections? And how is it possible for him to do any thing
perfectly, amongst interruptions? For there is much difference, between the
Active, and the Contemplative life; and the later of these, is much more nice,
and delicate, then the former; and therefore no wonder, if the ancient
Philosophers succeeded better in their Science, then they of later Ages; and if
the old Anchorits found felicity, and the chief degree of perfection, in the
life which they led in the Deserts, which was purely speculative, and where
there was nothing to divert them from the meditation, of the most secret, and
high mysteries. And without this quiet; how is it possible to live, in the
encumbrances, and instability, of the things of this world; amongst the
juglings, and cheateries of the Court; amongst the intriques, and
praevarications in affairs; amongst the ambitions, and dangers of war; and in
fine, amongst the haunts, and conversations of women? Great persons never see
truth, but through the casement of flattery: Treachery and courtships, are
vails for mortal enmities: Interest breeds strife: Partiality makes evil
Unions; and all Conversations, in fine, are now corrupted; and therefore happy
is he, who can say, Like a fugitive, have I absented my self, from the cursed
commerce of men, and have kept my self in the repose of solitude, because I
never found any elsewhere, and for that I have seen much malice, and perpetual
contentions amongst them.

You speak here (said Hydaspe) of 5. Of sympathy.
certain evils which are met with in the world; but you are careful enough, for
your own inclinations sake, not to touch a whit upon the pleasures, and charms
of the Court. I pray Sir, (said the Counselor to Hydaspe) do not interrupt
him; he both cuts, and condemns himself, in his own words; for he said just
now, that he would not grant solitude to be his Element, and yet we see, with
what heat he speaks, and how that passion which overrules him, transports him,
and sinks him into the matter, in favor of what he loves. You shall give me
leave to tell him (said Hydaspe) that all the fine things of the Country are
dead, and dumb, and so by consequence, can give no perfect pleasure to witty
persons, and that when they are seen the second time, they afford no
satisfaction at all; and tell me, Sir, I pray you, (said he to the Philosopher)
without speaking of the various divertisements we have at Court, or in the
Towns, can there be in the most stately houses, and in the most beautiful
places of the Country, any employments, or entertainments, comparable to those
charms which we receive, in the conversation of Lad es?

The Philosopher was going to speak; but the Baron answered; Our going out of
the Course interrupted my Lord Marquess just now, upon this fine subject of the
conversation of Ladies; for he had indeed, begun a very handsome discourse in
their behalf, or at least, in his own defense, when my Lord of Rioumayon
dalli'd with him, about his good fortunes.

These Gentlemen (said the Marquess) think that as soon as a man has any
frequentation, or a little habit with a Lady, all kind of liberty is
infallible, and the conquest inevitable; but they are much mistaken, upon these
false opinions; and howbeit that sex makes show of weakness, yet is it
stronger, and makes more resistance then we think. As for what concerns my
self, I have already protested to you, that however the acquaintance, and
sympathy, which I may have with that Lady whose Coach we met upon the Course,
has given me her frequentation, and that frequentation has produced some
kindness; yet have I never had any particular conversation with her, but always
an innocent, and indifferent affection.

I believe as much, said the Baron, with his ordinary swavity, and complacency,
who (though he comprize in himself all the eloquence and subtilty of the Court,
and all the depth, and height of the Academies, and be able to nourish his mind
with his own aliments) would needs notwithstanding, win that of the Marquess,
and taste the thoughts thereof, by engaging him upon some handsome subject. I
doubt not of it, said he, to comply with his discourse, and I believe, that the
long habits you have had with that Lady, have produced that inclination which
you call sympathy, and that those habits, according to their force and power,
have, by resiterated acts, formed that reciprocal affection, and passion, which
you have for one another.

When you say, that habit forms sympathy, (said the Count) you understand it
not according to the large extent of its significations, but to explicate it,
and restrain it, according to the terms of Courtiers, who interpret it to be an
often-repeated frequentation, and conversation, and conceive that frequentation
may engender sympathy; which, for my part, I cannot avow, however some gloss of
argument, and captious subtility may be brought for it, to gull the mind, but
not to give it rational satisfaction.

There is no great difference, said Angelin, (seeing these Gentlemen engaged in
4 Of habitudes in all their parts.
a fair field, and disposed to enter into these matters) between frequentation,
and habit; and frequentation is as able to beget sympathy, as habit, construe
it how you please; All they can differ in, is, that the former acts, when it is
often near a subject, and in a particular place; and the later looks upon all
things in general, and the application of the means to atchieve them. Pardon
me, if I tell you, that after I shall have showed you what habit is, you will
range your selves on my side, and rationally grant what is due, to my opinion,
and Philosophy. It is true, that in regard I cannot speak home to you hereof,
without using such terms as seem little suitable to the Course, and to
Courtiers, I ought to protest to you, that I will utter nothing but what shall
be pleasing, and acceptable to you; but being to treat with wits, which are
capable of Sciences, and quaintness of speech, and who know, that the
discourses of all things in the world may justly be agitated in a walk, and
that the Ancients did ever practice it in their Licea; I will, without
hampering my self with excuses, tell you plainly, that, Make you habit consist,
as much as you please, in a certain disposition, whereby the subject is either
proper, or improper, in behalf of it self, or any other; for my part, I had
rather take it for a quality scarce moveable, which results from one or more
actions of the vital Power, being afterward made capable, and having a natural
inclination, to produce the like acts; and in this sense it is, that this
quality may be very properly called habit; as also when a man has any thing,
which he has acquired by his own actions, which is, when he gains the
inclination he courts; and this is that, which proves my proposition; besides
that by this mean, the Subject arrives to the highest point of perfection. The
Prince of Philosophers calls Habit a disposition, which has the power to
produce an act in perfect manner, that is to say, easily; and what more easy,
and more efficacious way can a man have to act, then when, by diverse acts, he
entirely wins the person he desires, by gaining first the Will, and then the
Inclination, which are the faculties dependent on, and inseparable from,
Sympathies? Now you see, that since reiterated acts obtain our desires, it is
not hard for Habit to form Sympathy, when we seek it; nor is my human wisdom,
and industry able to hinder the event thereof.

As for the division of Habits, we must leave it to the Sixth Book of Morals,
where it is divided into three Classes, which serve nothing at all to my
purpose upon this subject; for all I should be able to say of it, would make no
impression upon your minds; and the matters being merely Scholastic, and
tedious, I will only let you see the difference which there is, between
Supernatural, and Natural Habits, and how, according to the cause which
produces them, they are either infused, or acquired.

You know that those which are Infused, come immediately from God, by the
Theological Virtues, which we receive in Baptism; and that the Acquired, are
those which we purchase with pains, and trouble, and which are necessary to
facilitate operation.

There are moreover, according to the Subject, four more, in conformity with
the four Powers which possess them, and which are amply deduc't in Philosophy.
But from the whole Treatise of Habits, I draw but this conclusion; that Habit
is a quality, which gives us a disposition, and a great facility, to operate;
and that it differs from the disposition in this, that the disposition may be
easily lost, but the Habit seldom; and that if acts produce it, multiplication
augments it, and makes it more stable in the person which possesses it. So that
if Habit facilitate operation; if Disposition be less efficacious then it; and
if the reiteration of acts strengthen it; can you deny, but that Habit forms
Sympathy; since of what disposition soever a soul be, she is able to change it
at pleasure, by the facility she has to operate, and by the force she gets in
frequentation? Thus much for the Habits of the Philosophers.

As for the Habits of Courtiers, which are long Frequentatians, is there any
thing more powerful to form an inclination? And does not even Nature her self
grow to be changed, by constant Conversations? It is easy to exact what a man
desires of a soul, by the ordinary documents, wherewith we may inspire her by
the ear, and by the apparent examples which we may present before her eyes; for
there slide into the heart, certain divine, and imperceptible Specieses, or
forms, which, when they have once imprinted themselves upon us, we take them to
be properly our own, and think that they are derived from us; though in the
mean while, they come not from our Nature, but from them who are pleased to
frame them, and who often cause us many inward griefs. If Nature, and
Inclination could not be changed, all the ancient Philosophers would not have
given us for a precept, that amongst all frequentations, we should choose the
best, and not only fly the bad, but the unsettled, yea, and even the different
ones; for the bad do certainly corrupt us, and the different, hinder the good
natural Habits we have; and though the embarasment of a Rabble do not change
us, yet it hinders us; and since even violence it self is necessary for us to
follow the good way, we must not doubt, but the least impediment will trouble
us.

Take not these documents for fabulous stories; for all the Fathers, since the
Scripture, are of this opinion; and St. Paul goes much further upon this
subject, when he says, that one crum of leaven, spoils a whole heap of dough.
If St. Paul wrote it, St. John the Apostle put it in practice, when he shunned
the Bath where Cerinth had washed himself, because he was not only an enemy to
the Faith, but a wicked man besides, even in his own Religion.

As the herb Aconitum, kills us by touching it, and the rage of a mad Dog
communicates it self unperceivably, from the person bitten to the bystanders;
so are we perverted by evil company, and so are others also corrupted by us
afterward. In like manner by the Habits which we often repeat with honest
people, we may be able to change a perverse, and corrupt nature, and inspire
good manners afterward, into such as we frequent. Augustus Caesar's Daughters
were of this opinion, when Livia, having wellbehaved, and modest persons about
her, hoped to participate of their virtues; and Julia often seeing some vain,
and loose-lived young fellows, thought by her good example, and frequentation,
to reduce them, or at least, to make her self perfect amongst the wicked; as
those Roses are sweetest, which grow near a bed of Garlic.

However you conclude upon Habits, and Frequentation (said the Marquess) they
never have the power to frame a Sympathy, or Inclination, because they depend
upon the blood, and are graffed upon Nature. All they can do, is only to raise
them, and quicken them, when they are either dead, or faint. Love is a torch
which kindles another, and burns not long alone, and without help: the
experience I have had thereof, in order to this Lady, is certain; and human
prudence, for as much as concerns this oeconomie, or dispensation, has no
other jurisdiction, then only to move, and not to form. I have ever observed in
that adorable person I love, (even in despite of her rigors) a spark of the
fire of Sympathy, which would have been extinguished, if I had not stirred it,
and I never believed, that she was quite deprived of it. And though in the
consideration of her first repulses, (not hoping ever to be able to obtain her
favor) I had read the Remedies of Ovid, Samocratus, and Nigidus, against love;
and though men persuaded me, that it was as easy, to disentangle ones self
from love, as it was to break with a friend when one had a mind to it, (howbeit
there is granted a difference between a Friend, and a Lover, in regard that the
one loves for the good of the object beloved, and the other for himself, and
that the passion of the Friend is lasting, and that of the Lover inconstant)
yet have I found all these rules untrue, in my self, and that they have nothing
in them but false baits, and ill-studied lessons, having spent my spirits in
vain, and fruitlesly endeavored, to produce a virtue by a defect, and to fix
my love upon another, if I could have found a beauty worthy of exchange.

As for the distinction of a Lover from a Friend, I have likewise had the same
motions (to which a compliance to please him might lead me) with those, the
opinion whereof might spur on my hopes, to the achievement of my desires; and
as for the facility of forsaking her, alas! I have found it to be the most
powerful of impossibilities, after having put in practice all the lessons of
those enemies of the Sex, who died at Capua, in the service, and pursuit of the
Ladies they loved, for punishment of their crime of writing against Love. I
have tried all things in vain, as flattered by the opinion, that she had a
leven of Sympathy which I must cultivate, and fearing to die like the rest, for
chastisement of my fault of endeavoring to leave her, and not really to
inspire her with an inclination, as you would needs fancy, and pass for
infallible rules, and definitions, in this point. And hereby you may judge, of
the effect of Sympathy, and of the power of fair eyes; and that the chains of
such as adore them, are so strong, that even the disdain of the persons
themselves who have framed them, has much ado to break them.

In these motions of tenderness, I passionately cried, Pardon, my lovely
Princess, the effects of my levity, and let me depart always from you with joy,
and never by constraint! Judges are often inclined to clemency, by considering
that the Malefactors before them, have more offended God then Man, and that
since the Supreme Goodness has forgiven them their crimes against him, they
have no reason to punish them, for the offenses they have committed against
men, betwixt whom and the Divine Justice there is no comparison. Just so, the
punishment which yourindignation phancies, ought not to be for me, because I
have already received absolution of my fault, from my fidelity, which was first
offended, by the actions of my despair; and therefore you, who are my Judge,
must mitigate your wrath, and receive me into mercy.

In order to these motions, I consider an infallible sign of the absolute
empire, which a beauty enlivened by a good wit has, over all things created,
by that which it possesses over the wills of men, who are the chiefest; and
this power is evident, and known, by the submissions, respects, and
enterprises, which they embrace, to render themselves acceptable, and by what
they put in execution, as a mark of their despair; for, as the Will is the only
part, which God intended to be free, and that his infinite goodness seems to
have no other limits then for his own occasions; I shall not conceive my self
guilty of impiety, if I say, that the love which we bear toward women,
deprives us also of the use of our Free Will, and has a kind of tyrannical
influence upon our liberty. I have ever observed this truth amongst Lovers,
when I have read in Histories, how many have died for their Mistresses; and how
a vehement affection, and an extreme love slights all kinds of dangers
whatsoever; and I had sufficient experience of this power in my self, when I
fought rather for the interests of her whom I worshipped, then for my friends,
yea, and rather for a fancy which concerned her, then for my own particular
quarrels. And yet it is very true withal, (said the Colonel) that such combats
as are made upon such slight grounds, have seldom any good issue; for Cupid,
who is but a baby, and a wanton giddy-brain'd baby, is apt to be pettish
without cause, and comes always home by weeping cross, when he plays with
Bellona; whereas on the other side, if the justice of a cause presides, the
event proves as favorable as can be desired.

I was much pleased (said the Counselor) these days past, that my youngest
Brother fought with a young Spark, Son to a Financier, for a punctillo of
Honor, of small consideration, and almost for nothing, by hearing the Marshal
of France (who took up the business) discourse of quarrels, and of the address
which it is needful to have in them; and indeed that noble Lord, (who has a
high spirit, and a great judgment, (and who is one of our best friends) spoke
thereof with much reason, and with great testification of affection toward my
Brother: for having called him into his Cabinet, where I was, and knowing what
a sputter he makes by his daily squabbling, and fighting; to stop the fury of
his hot and giddy spirit, and instruct him about these mad freeks, he said thus
to him; The love I bear toward your Family, obliges me to give you a sound
check; for it is not the way to get reputation, and esteem, to be such a Ranter
as you are, and to be every day brawling, and scuffling. It is true, that of
all the parts which compose a true man of honor, boldness is the most
remarkable, and volour the most necessary; since without these two august
qualities, a man who pretends to bravery, cannot be in vogue, nor so much as
aspire to it; for the former sets him forth, and makes him considerable in
company, and at Court, and the later gives him good success in War, and Duels;
but with this proviso still, that these fine parts be accompanied with
moderation, and judgment, and that their passion be tempered by prudence,
which is the production of the understanding, and the light of the soul.

I will say nothing of this necessary boldness, and valor, in the Camp, 6. Of
Quarrels, and Duels.
which is both carried on by the fire of honor; and which is as well ushered
up by command, as ballanc't by discipline; but I speak only of that boldness,
and valor, which is necessary in a civil life, and in the disorders which
cause quarrels; for this ought to be ruled by discretion, and judgment (as I
have already said) and rectified by a habit of prudence. A man who will appear
in company, must be bold, so far as to utter his mind freely, and clearly, and
be resolute, both in countenance, posture, and action; but his words must be
composed with modesty, and judgment, and he must consider the place, and
persons present, and what he intends to say, before he speaks. He must not
rant, nor vapor, but look upon the intention, and merit of the person who
pricks him, and bear a deaf ear long before he comes to extremity; and
especially, if he who offends him, be not of high condition, or much esteemed;
for in this case, we ought to suffer more, then from a gallant man, from whom
an ordinary displeasure must pass for a great cause of quarrel, to get
reputation. And herein you erred to day (said he) by meddling with a young
fellow, upon little or no ground, and by exposing your self also (as you daily
do) to hazard, without subject: For, men fight commonly for offenses, that is
to say, for inward satisfaction, and to win honor; the latter of these grounds
depends upon the report, which is made of a combat; and the principal reason
which makes men draw their swords, is to repair themselves, in the hope they
have, that the reputation will be as public as the offense. So that, to fight
(I fay) as you have done, with a young man who has never done any thing yet,
or with a person who is not of high condition; besides, that the action remains
dead, asleep; and that the good, or evil, which comes from it makes no noise, a
man runs great hazard of his life with a common person, and gets no honor, if
he have the better: Whereas, on the other side, the merit of a gallant man,
makes a brave action famous, and renowned. From whence we may draw this
argument, that one must be bold, and as it were rash, with stout, and
quarrelsome men; and courteous, and indolent, to them who are not of high
reputation, either for their courage, or birth. For valor, which is an
impetuous heat, that, for our satisfaction, throws us upon dangers, is hurtful
to a man, unless he deliberate before he executes, and unless it be tempered
with moderation. A Champion is not a Champion, because he has courage, but
brutal, if he join it not with the dexterity of judgment, and with the
circumstance of times, and places; for he cannot exercise his courage, and
bring it to an issue, by any other means, then by conduct, and reason; and
hereby it is, that we must moderate our boiling motions, which might otherwise
make us fall upon a man of honor, in place of respect, and that for slight and
frivolous matters, upon which, before we show any disgust, we must maturely
consider with our selves, whether they be worth our resentment or no, and when
the offense deserves it, to conduct our proceedings with address, that we may
not be worsted; and to be sure to perish, rather then do a base action.

It is principally in the point of combat, that a truly free, and stout Soul,
has need of all the counsel, and judgment, to preserve her honor, and her
life, and to bridle her passion, and judiciously to consult all the
praecautions necessary, as well for the right, and equality of weapons, and
advantage of places, as for the subtle addresses of Vapourers, and Quarrellers.
And as for your part, (said this wise Lord) what fury, or what dullness blinded
you, in the choice of your Pistols, that you had not the patience to charge at
your pleasure, that which was left you, and that, after having cooled the
courage of your adversary, (who could not reach you with his sword) you
received the affront, of giving false fire? Henceforward, be more considerate,
and hazard not your life, without praecaution; for impetuosity never gets any
entire victory in Duels, either with Sword, or Pistol; whereas he who fights
temperately, and coldly, will always be even with his enemy, and seldom
receive disadvantage. To stand upon your fencing postures, and passes, as they
do in the Schools with Foyls, is useless, and very different from fighting in
earnest; and though the heat, and disorder of a desperate fellow, do sometimes
puzzle the stoutest and skilfullest Sword-man, yet the firmness of a good
judgment, either tires him out, or keeps his hands only off, so as afterward,
by promptitude, and activity, he gets the better. Be therefore, I say, better
advised, then you have been hitherto, both about the incense of quarrels, and
the distinction of persons, and husband your life better in the field, then you
have hitherto done.

Then the Marquess interrupted the Counselor, and said, Sir, was there
nothing of love in your Brothers quarrel, and was it not for some Mistress
that he fought? No, my Lord, said the Counselor, Oh! I was afraid of that,
said the Marquesle; for in that case the cause had been good, and had deserved
no reprehension; since the absolute power which love has acquired over Reason,
renders all faults excusable; and that Mistress of Passion, being so much
subject to it as she is, finds all her justification, in the blindness of her
servitude. The one dims the other, by taking too much root in our inclinations,
and gains a superiority of power, to make it undertake any thing with impunity,
and to make inestimable, the meanest actions which concern it; yea, and my
self, being stricken with this blindness, thought my self worthy to be
celebrated in History, for having so briskly squabled, and quarrelled, with a
certain Lord, who was with a Lady of my acquaintance; and that, only because
Love (that blind, and saucy Baby) led me to this frollick.

I was ravished, my Lord, (said the Philosopher to the Marquess) with excess
of joy, at the news of the last Duel you fought upon this subject, with so much
honor, and gallantry, as being certainly informed before, of the cause of your
going into the field, and I only wanted the knowledge, of your Enemies meeting
you, to enable me, to make an infallible judgment, of the advantage you had
upon him; for all the world knows by reputation, the bravery of your heart; but
it is difficult to judge by experience, of your skill, in regard that there is
no living after the trial thereof; for without having a supernatural
subsistence, I do not believe, that they who have felt the point of your sword,
can possibly last long, unless the greatness of your courage vouchsafe to use
some clemency toward them, after having forced them to have recourse to your
pity, and beg their lives. The excess which this joy produced in me, came not
from the news I had of your victory, because I had already foreseen it; but
from the share I take in your exploits, the happiness, and force whereof
(which are the highest degree of valor) diffuse themselves upon all your
friends, and make them also, after a sort, redoubtable.

Indeed, (said the Marquess) I perceived well enough, that my duty obliged me
to interrupt you, and answer your civilities; but you discourst so handsomely,
that I resolved to forbear, till you had done; not that the subject of your
fine words tickled my ears, and made me delight in the form of your
complacencies, more then in the matter; but because I would not deprive these
Gentlemen, of the admiration of your eloquence.

To which Angelin answered with submission and respect; My Lord, when I say any
thing in favor of your reputation, I pay but one part of the homage I owe your
merit; nor is at any production of my complacency; for you are so accomplished a
person, that all the Panegyricks which might be composed of you, would be
beneath the esteem which the whole Court has of you; and I think, that its
esteem is just, and lawful, in your behalf only; in regard that sometimes, it
falsely bestows it upon unworthy persons, and denies it to such as deserve it,
though not so worthily as your Lordship. I confess, (said the Marquess) I
should never consent to the loss of modesty, had any body but you, undertaken
to rob me of it; but your eloquence makes me in a sort, a complice of the
theft, and almost guilty of the sin.

Then the Count, (catching up their complements) said to the Marquess, The
learned Angelin has so many partakers in his belief, that your merit must
needs appear, and your modesty lie hidden. The strength of his wit (replied the
Marquess) at least appears, not borrowing from others, what abounds in
himself; and I am of opinion, that by undertaking to speak of me, he meant to
make a picture of himself.

My Lord, said the Baron, your complements will last till the end of the Course,
and methinks, this is no fit place for them; stay till we be passing some Gate,
or at the top of a pair of stairs, where you may be able to animate them with
gestures and congees; for here you can hardly stir. Let us change our subject;
digressions are delightful, and are the supreme divertisements of conversation.
7. Of the Palm and of the Laurel.
How glorious is that illustrious Conqueror, who is lately come to Town, for
having made so advantageous a conquest for France, and planted our Palms, and
our Laurels, in a Country, where the enemy made his brags, that we every year
sowed Cyprus? That is spoken like Apollo, and very far from the style which the
ancient Greeks called Cacozele, said our Philosopher, retorting the same guilt
upon the rest, which they were wont to throw upon him, for using School-terms,
whereby he drew a kind of undervalue upon himself, because he could hardly
forbear them. He has reason, said the Colonel; the Baron speaks Romansick
language, in Comic terms. But before we go any further in Poetry, it will be
good, to speak of the Symbols, or significations of the Palm, and the Laurel,
and know, why the Romans anciently crowned the Triumphers heads with Laurel,
and honored their hands rather with Palm, then with Oak, or Ivy, Vervain, or
Olive.

To which the Baron (whose spirit is a magazeen of the finest curiosities, and
most lively notions) answered, I will say somewhat thereof, and it is, That in
my opinion, (if my memory do not fail me) besides that the Laurel, and the Palm
have marvailous properties, they are consecrated to Apollo; that Mount
Parnassus is full of them; that the one of them is an enemy to fire, and repels
the Thunderboult; and that the other is the most ancient Symbol of Victory, and
resists all assaults; that the Sacrificers at Rome, to obtain propitious
Augurs, first crowned themselves with Laurel, and then cast the Wreths of
boughs into the Woodpiles, and drew the good Augurs, of the event of the
affairs of the Commonwealth, from the noise of the Laurel in the fire. Besides
all these effects, and these traditions, I say, my argument is, that when the
Emperors returned in Triumph for their Victories, after having conquered some
parts of the world by this example, all the rest of it trembled, and there was
nothing left upon earth, which was not subjected to them, and which stood not
in awe of them. And therefore, they crowned their heads with Laurel, to
signify their independency in the world, and that they feared nothing but the
fire of heaven, which has such violent, and prodigious effects, and from which
the Laurel only, has the priveledge to defend us.

The word Victory, and Palm (said the Philosopher) was anciently all one; and
8. Of glory, the sole reward of Champions and Conquerors.
Claudian calls the Laurel, the Decision of things present, and the Prediction
of things to come; moreover, Ovid, Suetonius, and Pliny assure us, that the
Ancients held these trees as sacred, and never made any profane use of them,
because they had grounded their superstitions, upon an accident which happened to
Augusta Drusilla the Empress; who going one day from Rome to Veictan, sat down
under a Laurel, or Bay Tree, over which there flew an Eagle, which let fall in
her lap a white Chicken, with a Laurel branch in his bill, and a Palm in his
talon. She caused this Chicken to be nursed, and the branch to be planted in a
field of hers, from which there sprung many trees; and so the Emperors
afterward, through a superstitious Religion, when they came to triumph, used
to cause some of those branches to be gathered, to honor their heads, and
hands, and then to be replanted in the same field. Nor is this all; for there
is a prodigy reported, of the said field; and that is, that whenever any one
of them, who had Triumphed, died, the Plant which had been replanted, also
died, after it had served for a Trophy, to the deceast Triumpher; and that as
soon as Nero was dead, (who was the last of the Race of the Caesar's) all the
Trees of the aforesaid Field likewise died. And thus much for the reasons, why
the Romans used Laurels, and Palms in their Triumphs.

Really, (said the Baron) this is full of learning, and curiosity; and
therefore it ought not to be ill taken, that I served my self of those terms,
when I endeavored to speak worthily of the victories which that great Lord
has won upon our Enemies, since he is returned most gloriously from foreign
Countries, and that his Name, at present, fills the whole Court with renown. He
is looked on, as the Angel-Guardian of the Kingdom; the King, and Queen cherish,
and esteem him in his Ministry; all great Employments rely upon him, and
henceforth, he shall have no other title, then that of the Great Statesman.

You say not (answered the Count) that in his Triumphs, he is adored like a
Half-God; and yet, that he is looked on with the eyes of envy, and that there
are some, who would overthrow the Altars which have been decreed him.

Truly, (said the Count) he is come into the Land of Envy, but he is potent 9.
Of Envy.
enough to banish it, whenever he pleases to retire himself from Court; for
that vice removes, as often as virtue, and Fortune fix their habitation;
because, having no other but these great objects, it always follows such as are
owners thereof. Inso much, as that if our Hero, like another Laertes, or
Scipio, fled into Solitude, it would not fail to find him there, in regard of
the huge qualities which are in him; and yet all would still redound to his
honor. If I show, that he is envied, I show that he is Triumphant, and in that
supremacy of felicity, which his valor has acquired him: It is enough to
consider his Employments, and how gloriously he has acquitted himself of them;
and moreover, that the height of his splendour, has bridled the passion of
Monarchs, and Conquerers, (which is glory in quiet, and moderation) and reduced
it to the Laws of swavity, and Reason: And this is as easy to be observed in
his ordinary proceedings, and in all his actions, as in his countenance; and
this true character of the motions of the Soul, has never showed us any
alteration in him; and it has so little of the art of dissimulation, and
duplicity in it, that a man may be able to settle a solid judgment of his
interior, by his looks. This makes the envious burst with rage, to see that he
takes no great notice, of the value due to him, and that he sets light by those
things which trouble others. The services he has done the Crown, as well with
his Counsel, as with his Sword, have caused him to be recompenst as he is, and
purchased him that high point of glory he enjoys.

I wondered not at all, when, being these days past, at the Course, amongst the
favorable applauses which were given him, I observed some melancholy, in the
eyes of a certain great Lord, who seemed to be troubled, to hear his praises;
for I easily imagined, that the cloudiness of his countenance had no other
cause, then the pompous testimony of gratitude, which the other received from
the Queen, and from the incense which every one offered, to his glorious
exploits; since it is true, that it is proper to the envious to lament at the
happiness, and rejoice at the unhappiness of others, and not to torment
themselves for their own evils only, but also for the felicity of their
neighbors. This is a sin which has been ever since the beginning of the
world, and will last till the end; and therefore, it were in vain to wish, that
we had lived in another Age, or to live in those which are to come, to be
exempt from its contagion, and to be free from its malice. The greatest Captain
of Pharamonds time, and who had most gifts of Nature and Wit, had never yet so
many, as to equal the number of his enviers; and the most unhappy Courtier of
the last that shall be, of our Kings, will never suffer so many crosses, as
will parallel the rejoycings, which have been made, for the misfortunes which
have befaln him.

Albeit you sustain (said the Marquess) that they who are envied for their
virtue, are envy-proof, and that that which stains the reputation of others,
refines theirs; yet it is not to be denied, but that the envious are a sort of
people, which dim the splendour of honor, and destroy, in some sort, the
greatness of a high fame; for they disguise the fairest actions, with the
habits of a foolish, and blind Fortune, and by as the uprightness of a Soul,
how frank and generous soever; and therefore their by-ways, and practices are
not to be neglected, in regard they strike in absence, at a distance, and at
unawares; whereas other enemies are not so much to be feared, because they are
known; and because time may have salved the wrongs they have received; and in
fine, because we stand always upon our guard, and with praecaution, to prevent
them. But, this cursed race of Nature is never weary of persecuting us, and does
us more hurt with the tongue, without touching us, then an irreconcilable
enemy would do, if he had us under him, with his sword at our throats.

This is very true indeed, (said Angelin) and therefore was the war of the
Greeks, against the Trojans, less cruel, and shorter, for that it began upon an
injury, then that of the Romans, against the Carthaginians, because both these
Republics had their several design, to conquer the whole world, and disputed
for the decision of the Empire of the Drivers. The great enmity between Caesar
and Pompey, proceeded likewise from nothing but envy; the former envying the
later, for his good conduct, in the government of the Commonwealth, and the
later the former, for the felicity which accompanied him in war: So that we
see, that the decay of that flourishing Republic began from the Civil Wars
raised by envy. And therefore to revenge our selves against these pernicious
hornets, who besiege our bodies a far off, who suborn the clearest Consciences,
and betray the gallantest lives; we must use an advantageous, and estimable
remedy, against obtrectatory, and ill grounded suspicions, which destroy the
reward of virtue, and seem to blot it out of the souls of men. I will be bold
to say, that revenge upon the envious, is as laudible, as it is sweet, and
facil; for it consists, but in continuing to do well, and in striving to excel,
in so good a practice; in regard that the virtue of their Neighbor gnaws, and
consumes them, as rust does Iron.

My dear Lord makes use of this stratagem, and is not moved at all because he
is envied, notwithstanding what you have said; for, besides that he is worthy
of it, he is so well established in virtue, and favor, that he does not believe
that the vices of others can hurt him, or the greatest storm shake him. And
therefore it is as much in vain, for the envious to buz out their detractions,
and dart their private injuries against so firm a Soul, as it was for the
Pigmys, and the Ruffian Thiodamas of Lydia, to presume to wrestle with
Hercules. For before he undertakes any great designs, or causes any of his
orders to be executed, he prepares his spirit for the censure of envy, and
sweetly persuades himself, that the issue will make his blames turn into
praises; and that to desist from the pursuit of brave actions, is the only
means to support detraction. His perseverance in the good opinion he gives of
himself, keeps his person in esteem; as on the other side, desistence, and
wavering might abate the good thoughts, which men have of him. The Court is a
tempestuous Sea, which violently tosses as well great Ships, as small Barks;
and her floating waves shake the most weighty, and solid hearts, without
sincking them. Unless a man have profound wisdom, without weakness, and spot,
and make a perfect harmony thereof with constancy, he cannot preserve himself
there, from shipwreck, and come safe to the Port.

As for the Sea, billows, and waves, 10. Of Seasickness.
(said the Marquess) I will show you a very pleasant, and good Letter, from a
Gentleman, a friend of mine, who is in the Fleet, with a Brother of his, who is
Captain of a Gally, wherein you shall see what he says of Sea-sicknesse,
wherewith he is furiously tormented. This is the Letter, and thus it says.

My Lord,
GOD bless the Cow-stall, and the Devil take the Element wherein a man makes
his grave by falling! Alas! you may easily judge of the sad condition I am in,
by seeing my scribbling, and this Letter so rumpled; but I doubt, whether it
will be received by you, as coming from a person who honors you so much as I
do, because I force my self to write to you, and because I write to you, when I
am stomach-sick; or whether it will draw so much sense of compassion from you,
in regard I am lying straight along, without strength or pulse, and with
insupportable qualms, and faintings. In fine, I am as miserable as the good
King in the Scripture was, in his greatest calamities; save only, that he was
fain to lie upon a Dunghill, and I lie upon a Satin-quilt; but if he were
pestred with vermin, I am so as much as he; if he wanted food, my stomach
(against the order of Nature (which abhors a vacuum) is posting thither; if he
were forsaken by his friends, my Brother, and my friends (as if they were about
a grave) instead of pitying my misfortune, do nothing but laugh and scoff at
it. In a word, it seems all one to me, to be at the bottom of the Sea, or here
in the Gally; and in regard a man's heart is the first which lives, and the last
which die, it is to be believed, that our bodies are deprived of life, when we
feel our hearts a dying. As soon as I shall be able to reach a Port, I will
leave the Moveable, for the Immovable, and the hazard of the Water, to expose
my self to the rigor of all the other Elements; and will remedy the
inconveniences I now suffer, after the manner of poor Madmen. Six foot of Land
will cure me of these evils, and then I will send you the Mercury of all we do
in the liquid Field, and give you as good an account of our affairs, as of my
own restitutions. Just now came a billow and tossed our Gally to the middle
Region of the air; threw me headlong against the Helmet; overturned my
Ink-horn, and blew my paper up to the very top; and now having gathered all
together again, and crawled to my Quilt, I make a hard shift to tell you once
more, God bless the Cow-stall, and that I am, etc.


This Letter, (said the Baron) is very particular, and very excellent in its
kind, and merits to be valued as you value it, who have the fountain of high
Intelligences. But to return to our noble subject of Entertainments, It is a
strange tickling, to the heart of our Conqueror, to hear from the Queens mouth,
in full Course, and amongst the greatest at Court, (as he had already heard from
the Kings, in the Cabinet) that the obligation which France has to him, cannot
be worthily required, but by honor, and glory; and that this acknowledgement
she makes of being insolvable, is the most pompous, and richest payment he can
possibly receive from her. Antiquity (though most potent) never knew so well as
France, how to reward the virtue of her Heroes; for she has never presumed to
offer them any mercenary recognizance; and not being able to recompense them to
the full, she has been content to honor them with Triumphs, Statues, and
illustrious Titles, and to remain always obliged to them.

It is true, (said the Count) that the least achievement a man can make, of
any kind of reputation (however it be a vain, and mere imaginary thing) is
sufficient to satisfy ambition, and more worth then all the true temporal
goods we are able to purchase, after which we run with such an extraordinary
greediness, and for which both Religion and Laws are despised, and the hunger
whereof, like fire, is never stancht.

All this is pretty, said the Colonel; but now a days, men are not paid with
wind; for the world being grown old, and covetous, looks altogether upon
interest; and instead of exalting themselves, and satiating their ambition with
honor, they betake themselves to what is more material, and substantial, and
endeavor to prescribe rules to their Sovereigns, to recompense them profusely
therewith. The Count answered, It is their part however, to appoint what
employments, and honors they please, for their Subjects, as also to dispose of
their acknowledgements, and liberalities; and on the other side, it is the part
of such as are under them, to acquit themselves dexteriously of their duty,
thereby to arrive to a good issue, and require an equal reward from them, with
fame. But it concerns Princes to look to their choice, and Subjects to be
humble, and active; and certainly, both the one, and the other, ought
efficaciously to consider, that virtue must be rewarded; and that all the best
settled States in the world, are founded upon these two Pillars, as upon
immovable foundations; namely, the recompense of good services, and the
punishment of bad actions. The French, who fall short of no Nation upon earth,
in wit, subtilty, and politeness, are content with reputation, and satisfied
with a tickling of honor, for all their labors, sweats, toils, watches, and
loss of blood it self; quite contrary to the Eastern People, and especially the
Turks, who never undertake any great action, but with design, to 11. Of the
Turks maxim.
augment their charge, and their Pay; and the quality of persons, is of no use
to them at all, for the purchasing of great Employments. For confirmation
hereof, (said the Colonel) and of what you may have learnt in History, I have
seen in my travels, that in the Grand Signors Dominions, there is no Hereditary
Nobility, nor difference of birth, acquired by an idle succession from Father
to Son; nor is it their custom, to prefer unworthy persons to any eminency,
above such as are virtuous, and have given testimony thereof: No Inheritances,
and Possessions left to Cowards, and Sluggards, who, without serving either
Prince or People, consume the goods of such as are generous, and stout,
perverting themselves, and their Posterity, and studying all kinds of vices,
and volupties. But there you may see virtue, valor, good judgment,
sufficiency, and gallant exploits (wherein every one strives to excel) raise
men in a trice, from slaves, to be Governors of Provinces; from poor, to be
rich, and powerful; from base, and unknown, to be Noble, and chief of the
State. They are honored for their Charges, that is to say, for their Merits,
because they gain them by their Merits; and for their virtues, and sufficiency,
because these make them subsist with splendour.

They have no disputes, about rank, and precedence, left them by inheritance
from their Ancestors; but every one knows what belongs to him by his merit,
without usurping upon another, and the authority wherein they are placed by
the Prince, regulates all without alteration. The least discovery, or the least
glimps of a grudge, costs them not only their charges, but their heads. There
is no such thing, as frowning, and grumbling, if they obtain not what they
desire; nor is favor, or recommendation any thing worth, unless it be
accompanied with true desert, whereof evident proofs have been formerly given.
Great men's Children, if they be not seconded with some eminent qualities, are
less regarded, then Clowns, and the very meanest of the people, if they be
virtuous. For indeed, suppose a man had business, would he not be well holp up,
to commit (for example) a Suite in Law, of great importance, to an ignorant,
and unskilful Lawyer, though he were the Son of the President, or Chancellor,
rather then to a man of mean, and obscure birth, who were famous, cunning, and
able? And were it not pretty also, in the extremity of sickness, to commit our
lives, to the Son of a Physician, of four descents from Father to Son, who is
young, inexpert, and ill grounded, rather then to a new comer, who is learned,
experienced, and well verst in his profession? Nothing blinds us more, then the
exterior splendor of good birth; and amongst the Turks, (as rough, and coorce
as they are, (from whom all false appearance, and vanity is banished, and where
there is no fraud, nor cheatery) the signs of good wit, and the proofs of
generosity prevail, before nobleness of blood, and ancientnesse of race; and
labors, good services, gallant testimonies, and great exploits, are
incomparably more considered by them then riches, treasures, and large estates.
For Nobility, good parts, and honor, do not spring from pedegrees, as herbs do
from seeds; nor do the virtues of our Ancestors pass in Idea from Father to
Son, for perpetuity; but most certain it is, that wheresoever there is reward,
there will virtue also be.

I perceive (said the Marquess) by your discourse, that you secretly blame an
error, which is lately crept into France, and which is pernicious to her; and
that is, to give Employments, and Honors, rather by favor, and quality, then
according to merit, and virtue; and that you show us that want of experience,
and capacity are often the ruin of the State. The scope of my discourse,
replied Hydasp, is not to make that conclusion; nor did I allege the policy of
the Infidels, for any other reason, then to demonstrate that virtue is every
where valued, and recompenst; and that those Barbarians (being more mercenary
then we) reward it otherwise then we do, and make not their extraction (like
us) from a different source; and therefore their virtues seem to be, in a
manner, but Scaenical, specious, and ostentative, and ours are essential, true,
and grassed upon Nature; for if they prove able to derive any honor from
theirs, they receive it, for the most part, from that of the Christians, whom
they get by the Children of Tribute, and whom they style Azamoglans, in regard
they are the strength of their Militia, and are employed in the highest
offices, in consideration of their good qualifications of Nature, blood, and
birth, rather then of their breeding, which is little looked after, and
un-instructed, for that they are given to all kinds of insolences, and vices,
however they grow afterward to be brave Soldiers. And now you see, I have
said something of what I brought back from my journey to Constantinople, to
show you, that if such a General of an Army, as he is of whom we have spoken,
had made such glorious Conquests in the East, as he has done for us, he would
have past through all the degrees of favor, as of a Janissary, a Sainac, a
Bashaw, and Bellerbeg, and have been made Grand Dizir, yea, and besides, the
Grand Signors daily Pay, he would have obtained all the assignations he had
asked upon the Timar. But amongst us, where an Illustrious Birth, and a Supreme
Offspring is considered, as August as it is, this Lord has had, in favor of
his blood, the Offices, and Employments, that is to say, the means to work the
miracles he has wrought; and in regard all acknowledgements are beneath his
Spirit, and generosity, he is satisfied with a little smoke, and rewarded by
the tongues of fame, much more to his contentment, then he would be by the
hands of the Financiers, and Secretaries of State, with all the good of Peru,
and with all the Brevials, of the highest Dignities of the Kingdom.

Amongst so many illustrious qualities (said the Colonel) as you have observed
12. Of Clomency.
in our Hero; I will not omit the supreme virtue, wherewith he favors his
friends, yea, and even his very enemies too, and which I know by experience,
that he possesses in the highest measure, and that his Irascible part has
never been able to surmount it; wherein I take much more notice of their good
luck, who have the benefit of it, then of their own deserts, and of the
influences which come from him, then of the subject which makes him lay aside
severity, and show himself favorable, and merciful. I mean his Clemency, which
is the judge of vengeance, and the moderatresse of power, when there is
question of lessening the punishments, which a person of authority may inflict
upon such as are under his obedience.

This virtue, (said the Counselor) is a gift of piety, a sweetness of spirit,
and a delenishment of punishments ordered by the Laws; which, after it has
banished the interior distemper, it reduces our souls to quiet, and makes us
spare another blood, as we do our own; for Clemency is of an heroic essence;
and the defection of that active, and unbridled Passion which oppugns it, and
seems to check it, is the most wonderful effect, that they who exercise this
virtue, are able to produce, and the victory gotten over it, is much more
glorious then that which is won by force of arms.

Here the Marquess interrupted him, saying, Sir, you put me in mind of an act
of this virtue, which he exercised some days since at my request, in the behalf
of an Officer of his Army, who had offended him. Therefore it was that I spoke
of it (answered Hydaspe) because I was present when you begged that persons
pardon; and when the address of your Eloquence, easily obtained what you
desired, of a soul already disposed thereto by virtue; and for this cause it
is, that I told you, that Clemency favors as well enemies as friends, and that
we must hold our selves happy, when fortune makes us meet with more necessary
motions to pardon, in them whom we petition, then merit in the offenders. Not
but that your discourse might have wrought the same effect, even upon
Barbarians; because you took him upon a good advantage; but that with another,
you would not have succeeded so soon, nor so easily.

What business was that, my Lord, (said the Baron) which merited your favor;
and what was that insolent person, who presumed to displease his General? you
shall be pleased to dispense with me for naming him, (said the Marquess) and I
will only tell you, that finding my self in his Chamber, with few people about
him, we began to discourse of the repentance of this Officer, (who is a friend
of mine) and in order to the cause of his disgrace; whereupon I observed some
moderation of spirit, and some serenity of countenance in the said Lord; and as
he was going into his Cabinet, to hide his complacency from us, and to refuse
to answer us, some of us offered to follow him, which he courteously suffered;
and then I took my occasion to speak thus to him: My Lord, where the will
governs, and conduct depends upon a capriccio of hatred, Reason is, for the
most part, turned out of door. If the solidity of your judgment, which makes
you accomplish such huge things, did not rather consider the good, or bad end
of actions, then the facility you have to undertake, you would not speed as you
do, and you would be deprived of the general applause. I would have broken off
here, but seeing him look mildely upon me, and hearken peacefully to me, I went
on thus.

Nature, and Merit, my Lord, have furnished you with authority to act, and have
given you much independency. If your will were not ruled by Reason, as it is,
you being so potent as you are, and suffering your self to be carried away by
the persuasions of flatterers, you would certainly precipitate your self, upon
some choleric action, the event whereof would obscure the splendor of the
bravest achievements of your life, as the death of Calistene blotted out the
esteem which men had of the Great Macedonian King. I grant, my Lord, that the
person, whose pardon I crave, deserves it not, but rather the effects of your
resentment, and to be deprived of the chiefest of his felicities, which is, the
hope of appeasing you, and escaping death: but because he is of a condition
unworthy to contest with you, and for you to revenge your self on him in an
honorable way; therefore must the privilege, and power which you have to
exterminate him, serve you for a bridle, to moderate the heat of your
vengeance, which casts him into repentance, and inflicts a thousand deaths upon
his soul. Indeed, my Lord, generous spirits exercise as much clemency toward
them whom they have conquered, as they do glory for their victory; as you have
sufficiently experimented, and practiced in your Triumphs. He who has offended
you, is more submissive to you then a vanquished person; and therefore you ought
to have pity on him, (in regard he acknowledges his fault) and suspect all the
counsels which proceed from your passion, what show soever of pleasure they
promise you, and with what pretext of justice soever they color themselves.

It is a humane accident, to have an advantage over ones enemies; but to pardon
when we have overcome, is a celestial, and divine virtues; Whence it grows,
that we prefer clemency before rigor, and that we more value the attribute of
Mercy in Almighty God, then that of Justice. Pardon therefore my Lord, pardon!
and if you will not grant it, for his sake who has offended you, (who is
wholly unworthy of it;) nor for mine, who deserve not this favor; yet do it
for your own sake, to the end that the loss of his life may not make men think
that you are a Servant to your Passions, and that they overrule your Reason,
and offuscate the luster of your glory. What honor will it be for you, to free
your self from a weak Enemy? Enemy! I style him amiss; for I protest to you,
he has as many good wishes for you, as you can think of ways to destroy him;
and he has already sufficiently punishment from his fault, and from the
terror you have given him. Break therefore the neck of your indignation, and
by forbearing to put him to death, show that your hatred is not immortal.

I shall pass for a Hero, and my glory will not be below that of the Half-Gods
of Antiquity, if I prevail upon your desire; and upon your Spirit, which has
not hitherto been overcome, and which renders your design invincible, in the
resolution you have taken: But the title of magnanimous would not be due to
you, if you would not suffer your self to be vanquished by my just petition, in
regard that by resisting it, you would be guilty of the death of a man, who
begs your pardon, and refuses to defend himself. The world knows, my Lord, that
you hold it to be an heroic thing, not to be transported by your passions; and
though they may chance to assault your Will, yet that judgment which governs
it, will make you relish my reasons; however I presume not to hope, to obtain
the pardon I crave of you from thence, but from your virtue only, which shall
(if it please you) give life to this unhappy man, and accumulate me with
felicities, and obligations, by graciously vouchsafing to hear me.

I was going on, but he suddenly interrupted me, saying, Well my Lord, for
your sake I pardon him: bid him be wiser hereafter; and to let you see that I
do nothing to halves, (howbeit another, after such a fault, would have endured
him no more) let him come freely hither, and welcome, and I will look upon him
as I did before.

According to this act of virtue (said the Count) confirmed by another of
supererogation, we may consider in this generous Lord, an incomparable
greatness of mind; and judge how persons of honor are received by him, since
even his very enemies themselves are welcome to him; and if we should speak out
of the mouths of all those persons of quality, who resort to his Palace (where
they are treated, with more then ordinary courtesies, and civilities) they
would all testify, that when they come from him, they are much more charmed,
and delighted with his sweetness, then with the highest complements they have
heard made him. Monsieur Angelin, in the swarm of duties which the whole Court
pays him, has not been invisible to the eyes of his mind, though he has to
those of his body; for coming yesterday toward me, with his accustomed
complacency, and being mindful of our friendship, he asked me for him, and
showed that he desired to see him. This, Sir, (said the Count to the
Philosopher) ought to give you infinite satisfaction; for it is indeed no small
favor.

If, when he told you, he desired to see me (said Angelin) he did not flatter
me; and if he expressed not that desire for complacencies sake, I am much obliged
to his memory, and my own good fortune; in regard that this testimony of
kindness toward me, is a most high honor, and happiness to me: for I cannot
imagine, but that this desire must needs proceed from that goodness of his,
whereof we have spoken; and you shall give me leave (if you please) to maintain
this truth, against the good opinion he may have of me, and against my own
happiness: But I must have recourse to that good esteem he is pleased to have
of me, to beseech him to believe, that I have not been wanting in my zeal, or
respect toward him, but that, amongst the many cares I have, to render my self
acceptable to him, there always crowds in some fear against my will, because
those cares are inseparable from the fear I have to be trouble some to him: so
that my respect grows to be a fault, and I make a vice of a too great virtue.
But I have followed him in heart, all the Summer in the field, and I have
waited on him often since his return; and in a word, I would not come short in
his assiduity, of the most importunate of his Courtiers, nor in zeal of the
most diligent of his Poets, were it not out of that fear I have mentioned; and
these are the effects, of the passion I have for his service, which in regard I
cannot render him in person, I erect him an Altar in my heart.

For my part, I confess, (said the Counselor) I have not yet seen him, and I
shall hardly be able to justify my want of duty toward him; for I am too
blame, for having so long delayed my complement; and it his goodness do not
temper (as I hope it will) the shame I have thereof, by the judgment he will
vouchsafe to make, that it is rather an effect of my business, then a defect
of my gratitude; I shall not presume to show my face before him, and I will
shun those parts of the Court where he is. I know not (said the Baron) whether
your business detain you so much, or no; but sure I am, that it hinders you
not from playing the Gallant, nor from coming to Court, yea, and very seldom
keeps you from going to the Plays.

To speak the truth (said the Counnsellor) 13. The relation of a Comedy, of the
Days Reign of Sem(...)mis.
besides that History animates, and encourages, and the acts of hostility upon
the Amphitheaters have always moved the Spectators to glorious actions, I have
so great an inclination to see these public Spectacles, that had I lived in
the time of the Old Romans, I had not fallen short of the most ardent Lovers of
the Circle; yea, and pleasure, and zeal might (peradventure) have made me
descend to the Arena (to use the word of Antiquity) and combat the Gladiators,
Lions, and Tygres. And this is to confess to you, that my passion suffers me
not to let many Plays slip; and I swear to you, that the excellency of that New
Piece, set forth by the Players of the Hostel de Bourgogne, deserves a
cessation from all kinds of business, to see it acted.

Good Sir, (said the Baron) cure our curiosity, and tell us something of that
Poem, in regard we yet know nothing thereof, but by the Arguments set up
against the walls. To judge whether it be good or no (said the Counselor) it
is enough for you to know the Author of it, and to say, that he has so well
married Reason, and address with niseness of conceits, Antitheses of terms,
and abundance of Maxims, that the long texture of rich ornaments, the solidity
of judgment, the economy of conduct, and the subject of the History, are in
dispute, for the glory of the Work. I grant you, that the Author was a little
crafty, in taking for his Subject, the One Days Reign of Smniramis, and in
chosing a History, (which frees him from the care of regulating his labor, in
the Drammatical Poem) which is, of the natural Day, of four and twenty hours,
since the matter it self religiously keeps him within the rules, without art,
or aid. Not yet, that the sublimity, and elevation of spirit which he has,
(and which make his Poetry called Divine) or the force, and extent of his
judgment, had any need of this cunning to perfect the Work; but because he
could not find so pompous, and splendid a matter for the Stage as this, and for
that he freely permitted his Spirit, to incline to that which Fortune favored
most.

Now, to say that the beauty of the hand adds also to the Verses; and that the
subtlest judgment, and the exactest ear may be deceived, by a thing which is
spoken with emphasis; the same reason may serve for Plays, which the Stage sets
out, and makes estimable, by the stately dresses, and various changes of the
Scaene, which are not effectively good in the Cabinet, or Closet, where
solitude, silence, and leisure, suffers us more punctually to examine them. But
that whereof I spoke to you, scorns to be reprehended (without calumny) by the
most injurious censurers, either upon the Stage, or in the Closet; for it
convinces the Critics of all the ill opinion they can have of it; it limits
all their contestations, and making them desist from their former errors,
forces them to submit with heart and hand, to what truth requires from their
thoughts. In fine, Gentlemen, this Piece is the honor of the French Stage, and
as there never has been, so never will there be the like of it. That is very
much indeed (said the Marquess) but yet not all, because the company desires a
hint of the story, and prays you to relate it.

I will tell you, Gentlemen, (said the Counselor) this History is taken out of
Bocaccuis; and Semiramis, Daughter to Neptune, was married to Ninus, the Son of
Belus, first King of the Assyrians. This illustrious Queen was not only endued
with a beautiful body, but also with a magnanimous mind; which made her take
the habit, and arms of her husband Ninus upon her, and command the Armies, and
hazard her self in Battails, whilst he lived idely, and sluggishly at home;
for boldness in dangers, (which is very often but vanity, and fury) was in her
a natural magnanimity, which cast her upon the most evident and imminent
dangers, with such ardour, and valor, as cooled the most masculine Spirits of
her State. And this magnanimity it was which startled both the Court, and the
Camp, when she hurried her self, with too much heat, and hazard, upon a
Battle against the AEthiopians, wherein the head of their King was the prize
of her victory, and served for a Trophy to honor her Triumph: and this was
that which made her the first who scaled the walls of a certain strong Town, of
great importance to her authority; at the assault whereof, she forbad the Rams
to be applied to the Gates, and the rest of the Engines to be set on work, to
have the glory of carrying it by storm, and to enter first her self, in the
most perilous assault; And this it was, which made Ninus, of a petty King of
the Assyrians, the Monarch of all Asia; and this, in fine, it was, which for
reward of all the memorable services she had done his Crown, made her ask leave
of him, to govern the Kingdom but one whole Day, as the only, and absolute
Queen, and he to be her Subject: Which he granted her, upon condition that her
power should end with the Day, and he be King again. And this is the Theme
which our Poet has taken for his Poem, where we may see, how this Princess
new moulds her Family, and distributes Offices, and Employments, to her
Creatures, who were the choice persons of the Kingdom: How she gives
Commissions for war, and signs Dispatches of State, how she grants pardons, and
presides in Counsels; how she receives Ambassadors, and disposes her Orders, in
favor of whom she pleases; how she marches like the Goddess Bellona, at the
head of an Army, against the City of Babylon, which was revolted from her; how
she calms the sedition; exemplarily punishes the Factious, and banishes the
accomplices therein, and the assistants thereto. In this Piece, in fine, our
famous Poet demonstrates, in the space of four and twenty hours, many
functions, which a Sovereign, and firmly established Royalty may execute, during
the Regency, of a most puissant, and active King: And all this mingled with so
many several accidents, that at one Scaene ravishes the hearers mind with
admiration, another sweetly recreates, and diverts it. But the intrique which
sways the whole Poem, by the love which Ninus, and Semiramis bore to a certain
Slave, with whom they were both blindly taken, and mistaken, (for he was an
Hermaphrodite) is the most pleasant, and agreeable thing that can be showed
upon the Stage, and was the cause of most of the revolutions of that State.
For, upon the Sedition of Babylon (whereof semiramis received news one morning
whilst she was dressing her self, at one of her Country-Houses, from whence
she went to reduce the said City to obedience, with her head but half tired,
and her hair half done up, and half about her ears, (after having made an oath
not to dress her self quite, till she had quelled the Rebels, and allayed the
tumult, as indeed she did:) Upon this sedition, I say, the grounds of Policy
are so well deduc't, and canvast; Machiavels arguments so well debated,
approved, and refuted in the Counsel; the best Maxims of Aristotle's Policy,
and Plato's Commonwealth so well appropriated by the Poet, that it seems to be
an Epitome of the whole Science of Policy.

You speak so well of it (said the Count) and set it so finely forth, that it
is more pleasure to hear you relate it, the it would be, perhaps, to see it
acted at the Hostel de Bourgogne. Really (said the Philosopher) he jeers us,
and I think he comes abroad on purpose to speak this canting language, thereby
to give the company the pleasure of adjusting, and ranging all the parts of
this Comedy (if they can all come into the Subject) and making a Symmetry, of
the various accidents thereof, which is as hard to do, as it is to make a
justness, and equality of the temperament, and a harmony of all the humors of
the Body; and it seems to my understanding, to be a picture, drawn (in great
part) from his own invention, and capricio, which has never been copied from
the Original. For to speak but of one point only, how is it possible, to find
any part, even of Policy, in this Poem, after having showed us such a world of
various matters as he has endeavored to do, in the Dramaticke? This Science,
is of too great a force, and extent, to be abridged, and for all whatsoever all
the great Masters thereof have left written, to be deduc't, and comprised
therein. The Counselor was about to reply; but the Philosopher hindered him,
going vehemently on thus:

Policy, which is a means to govern, wherein every day produces various changes
in affairs; wherein the reasons of State are so numerous, and so ambiguous, as
to hold the most subtle Ministers in suspense, and wherein there are so many
nice, and abstract precepts, that unless judgment, or experience give the art
to apply them, the event thereof cannot but be pernicious, or fruitless.
Policy, Sir, (I say) is not to be briefly treated: for the Maxims, by-ways, and
practices thereof, are enough to fill many great volumes. For, it is a Civil
Science, which composes the union of men, and we should not know how we lived,
if we were not taught, that it is not only necessary for the conduct of States,
but useful also in such private conversations as ours; and that it is exercised
upon sensible, and particular objects, albeit it be of a great extent, and of
an eminent and spiritual origin. Society is a Character, which God has printed
upon man, and which Nature inspires him with, as being carried toward it, by a
certain instinct, or natural Law, which gives him an internal motion to it, and
this motion is afterward seconded by the imitation of external things, which
are the conveniences, and commerce of this life; the true causes of forming
Societies, in Monarchies, Aristocracies, and Democracies. There are some
speculative persons, who find seven forms of Government; but I know but three
of them; for the rest are mixed, and composed of these.

The object of Policy took its principle from particular Societies, and so by
degrees, in progress of time, from small ones to great ones. The first man, and
the first woman, made the first Society in the world; and afterward, their
Families, and Posterities engrandisht it so much, that of one particular
Society, were made many; and so it necessarily followed, that what was proper
to one generation only, (being augmented by different Families) must grow to be
variously divided; that Houses, Borroughs, Forts, Towns, and whole Provinces
must be built, for lodging, and habitation, and Convoys appointed for the
security of Commerce, and that all must be deduc't in fine, into Kingdoms, and
Commonwealths, and other Forms of Government, that so by the direction of one,
or more, Order, and Policy, might be kept in Communions, which were made by the
world for its safety, and conservation; and consequently, that whatsoever might
prove hurtful, either to the public, or private Interest might be removed, and
avoided: This Order, I say, has always been supernatural, and not of humane
invention; and howbeit it looks, as if the Body acted principally therein, and
that care, vigilance, and labor, wrought most in it, yet does it draw its
origin, and derivation, from a Divine Source.

The Baron (who was pleased with this Discourse) said, There is no doubt, but
Policy comes immediately from God, and from a Motion of Nature; since even
irrational Creatures, without art and study, are more capable of it then we,
and seem to put this Science in practice, to teach us how to guide our selves,
in the management of States, and in the direction of Nations. For, Bees are a
perfect example of Policy, and that Policy of theirs is so well ranged, and so
firmly established, in their Swarms, (which are their Communities) that we must
absolutely conceive, that God gave them this instinct, for the instruction of
our Government, in regard there are, in the conduct of these creatures, so
certain Maxims, and so well regulated an Order. I leave it to your
consideration, whether the Refiners of this Science, and the Doctors of the
Cabinet, would do handsomely, to forge, and counterfeit precepts, and whether
they ought not to follow the natural reasons, of those Creatures, which are
their Authors, and which we find to be as potent, as just. It is judiciously
decided, that Religion is the Principle, and Foundation of Policy, and that
these States are always in disorder, and danger, in which it is not firmly
settled. So that the Bees (which never go out of their Hives, without first
crossing their legs, and kissing them, by an instinct of Religion) show us what
we ought to do in the morning, before we undertake any business, and that we
must of necessity worship God, to be able to subsist.

Pardon me my Lord, (said the Philosopher) if I tell you, that this seems not
very probable, and that the signification of the Greek word (...), (which is
Footless) confirms it not.

I see Sir, (said the Baron) you are still upon the School, and Etymologies;
but experience shows us, that this word is taken from appearance, and not from
truth; and if they look as if they had no feet, it is because they shrink them
up, and hide them by flying; for without them, how should they be able to
sting, creep, and take such infatigable pains as they do? They are never weary
of working, and of working for us (says the Prince of Poets) rather then for
themselves, by making us honey, and whatsoever else we draw from it; to teach
us, that men ought to employ themselves, for their friends, labor for their
Country, and bestir themselves for the good, and peace of the Commonwealth; and
that they ought to be content with what they have, without siezing, or coveting
what belongs to others, as they are with their Hives, without trouble, or
discord, and without taking, or siezing upon those of their Neighbors.

All Politicians have found by their examples, that Peace and Union conserves a
State; that Love and Communication of goods maintains it; that Ambition and
Novelty destroys it; that moderation, and continency banishes hatred, and
quarrels; that swavity, and complacency of great persons causes not envy; that
Vagabonds, and idle persons give ill examples; that seditious persons foment
vice, and destruction; that employment, and exercise makes men prompt to defend
themselves; that war makes them endure labor; that Arts are very advantageous;
that prodigality, and riot impoverishes the Subject; that dearth of provisions,
for want of conduct, makes them rebel; and that, in fine, all States have need
of persons of great experience, and authority, to govern them: And therefore,
in regard the Bees have a King, who sways them, and to whom they pay obedience,
and submission, and who regulates all things, as we have said; it proves, that
of all politic States, Monarchy is the best, and that which God gave them, and
which he likes; and which, in a word, is that which all people should do well
to follow.

For my part (said the Marquess with admiration) as I do not believe, that any
thing can be better said, or more handsome things of Policy, comprised in fewer
words then these Gentlemen have spoken; so do I not also conceive, that any
thing can be more beautiful, more ample, and more recreative, upon the Stage,
then the Tragedy, which the Counselor has related to us; nor that the
acutest, and most supercilius Critics can have ought to object, either against
the Subject, or the Composition thereof. And yet I must let you know, (said the
Counselor) that there are some, and that there was one, the other day, in my
Box, (who would needs be taken for a great Author, and a great Poet) who made
my ears glow with pleading, and commenting, sometimes upon the Subject, and the
Conduct; sometimes upon the Order, and Dress of the Stage; now upon the
cadency of the Verses, and the disposition of the Actors; then, upon the
Discourse, and the Sequel; very often; upon the merit, and reputation of the
Author; afterward, upon the Clothes, and beauty of the Women; from thence, to
the stateliness, or meanness, of some of the Verses; and in fine, which way
soever he directed his importunities, and censures, I still observed, that he
was pricked with envy, and that he fancied not the Author: Insomuch, as that
after I had often desired him to hold his peace, I was fain at last to enjoin
him to silence, that so I might hear the Actors, and taste the pleasure of the
Stage.

Colonel Hydospe, who was also with you (said the Baron) is particularly
acquainted with that Poet, for they have bin often at my house together, and we
will desire him to tell us who he is, that so we may be able to make a perfect
descernment, 15. An Invective against an able Poet.
or distinction of good Wits, and know whether censure, and detraction be signs
thereof or no.

Hydaspe (catching up the word) said: It is true indeed, that I know that
person, of whom you would have me give you my opinion; but it is extremely
against my humor, to judge of men; and I shall hardly be able to satisfy you
in this occasion. For howbeit you may tell me, that I my self pass through the
common judgment of men, and that I may fall into the snares of calumny, (which
traduces, and blemishes the best actions) I am content to suffer this touch,
and can hardly get leave of my self, to retalia^e it; And though I humbly
submit my self to the whole world, yet will I not freely speak what I think of
it. But Monsieur Angelin, who is a competent judge of these things, and who
has a good faculty to discern Wits, will give you better satisfaction
thereupon, then I can, as having more light, and being more particularly
acquainted with the person.

To which the Philosopher replied thus. Man being (according to some of
Aristotle's Disciples) A little World; and (according to some other of a
different Sect) the Picture of the whole Universe; it would be needful to have
most a lively, yea, and even a supernatural intellect, and to be
extraordinarily skilful in portraiture, to discover the defects of so fair a
Piece, and to be able to speak worthily of the bold, and gentle strokes,
whereby it is made perfect; which is above my knowledge: and yet howsoever, in
regard I receive your desires as commandments, I cannot forbear to obey you,
and humbly endeavor, to the utmost of my simple, and common sense, to acquit
my self the best I can, if not so well as I ought.

I tell you therefore, that I find nothing extraordinary in the person; but on
the other side, I take him for a very great Dunse, in whom all the rules of
Logomancy, and Chyromancy are false. Do not laugh at these words; for I
express them literally, because, (to satisfy my curiosity) I have examined
him, and looked very strictly into his particular conversation; and according to
my small understanding, I find him weak in his grounds, and arguments, and of a
low and creeping style. All he has, are some affected words which he has
studied, and which he ordinarily uses; and this gives him a kind of gloss, and
makes him seem to be a gallant man. This is my opinion, touching his
Discourses, and his Entertainments. Now, as for his pen, and his writings,
(some whereof I have seen) I have observed nothing in them, but a mass of mean
conceits, collected out of various Authors, which he appropriates to himself as
his own; and in a word, his Works, (the babes of his wit) are like the Son of
Noe, who discovered the shameful parts of his Father; and are only different in
this, that he laughed himself, and they make others laugh.

Philonenes was condemned to the Mimes, for making good Verses; and Plato was
sold for a Slave in Egina, for making good Prose: but our blade needs not fear
banishment; for his writings will never make him envied, either by Prince, or
People; and yet I must confess to them of his faction, that he has some
rarities; I mean, that good conceits are rare in his mouth, and good actions in
his hand. If they will needs have it, that he has a Courtiers wit, I confirm
it; for indeed, it never reaches beyond the present Object, and is so far from
the accumulation of variety of matters, that it is hardly able to manage, and
maintain a common discourse. In fine, he is very much like them, who have been
at the University, and cannot speak Latin; and I believe, he has been these
ten years at Paris, without seeing the Court, or the University. I am sure, you
will pardon me, if I tell you, that the ablest man in the world could not find
in him, what I have sought in vain; I mean subtility of Spirit, which is the
source of good operations, and whereof you have (peradventure) observed some
tincture by his ability to find fault.

His Wit is like the River of Eridanus, and the Philosophers Stone, which are
both hard to be found, and which have scarce any being, but in men's fancy. His
learning will never raise him above the Vulgar; and had he lived in the time of
Crates, he would infallibly have left him a legacy; for this Misers humor was,
to distribute his goods amongst the ignorant; yea, and that so far, as to
deprive his own Children of any part thereof, if they were witty, and learned.
Now to speak otherwise then I do of this person, would be to deceive you; and
to prove the truth thereof, himself will give you a sufficient testimony,
whenever you shall think it fit to enjoy his sottish conversation; for you
may judge of the Lion by his Claw, and you will think him happy, to have been
born heretofore, since now a days there are no such Noddies gotten. Thus you
see the influence you have upon me, and that I am yours usque ad aras, since
for your sakes, I have broken the oath I had made, never to speak to any bodies
prejudice. A Poet would with good reason be afraid of those Furies, which they
of that profession call Eumenides, and which inflict cruel punishments upon
perjuries; and so a person more religious then I am, would give the title of
sin, to that which I call duty: but perfect friendship has no bounds, and I
might more justly be termed a Lover then a Friend, for slighting (as I do) the
Oath I had made.

I swear to you (said the Baron) that it is as hard to make a sound distinction
of some Wits, which we sometimes hear discourse, and which seem to be
indifferently good, as it is to defend ones self against their persecutions and
impertinencies; and especially, when they circumvent you, and constantly
importune you with their far fetched arguments, and their affected nicities of
the times: for you would say, if you heard them, that all the talk must be for
them; that it were felony to interrupt them; that no body but they knows how to
argue; and that nothing can be said, which can escape their censure: But this
is the common way, for the ignorant to show their ability, and their sottish
vanity; as we see it to be an ordinary thing in disputes, and controversies,
for fundamental reasons to prop error.

I was much taken (said the Counselor) with this out side Poet, by the
studied, and captious entertainments, wherewith he murdered me before the Play
began: but now I am not only unbeguiled by the relation of this talent, but
much more enlightened also by the truth which results from the solid judgment,
of a person who has lively notions, then by the false esteem, and general
applause of the vulgar. I take one for all; and I confess to you, that the
good office this Gentleman has done us, makes me find, that censure is the
true mark of ignorance, and that to be a Critic, and a Varlet, is the same
thing.

How many of these gulls, and formal Cockscombs are there, who follow the
Court, and are harbored there, said the Marquess? For I know many kinds of
them; some whereof, act by a principle of vanity, and presumption, and do all
they do out of design, and vainglory. They pretend to be States men, and
Gallants, and make a mystery of all things, and by a certain counterfeit, and
studied glibnesse of tongue, labor to be held eloquent, and pass for great
men. Others dispose of themselves by interest, and insinuate with the Grandees,
to be protected by them, that so they may exact upon Players, and Booksellers,
and get a belly full, free cost.

All these people (said the Baron) make the high point of eloquence consist in
the politenesse, and niceness of speaking A la mode, and in certain new, and
unheard of words which they affect, to express themselves (as they think)
wittily, and seem eloquent by extravagancies; and instead of keeping themselves
within the usual terms, and within the bounds and decency of our Language, they
study strange expressions, and comment upon the Latin, and other Tongues; and
the worst of it is, that men do not only imitate them, but esteem them for it;
as a new fashioned Suit gets a Tailor reputation; or as new Shows, or new
Jugglers, make the people flock together.

Truly, (said the Count) if to speak, or write well, we must follow the Maxims
16. Of Eloquence, and the delicate parts thereof.
of Novelty, which these pretended fine speakers practice, by Verbalizing the
Nouns, and Nounnizing the Verbs; I find it to be too hard a Law, and disapprove
of it as tyrannical, and insupportable. For all Sciences are grounded upon
natural Sense; every Nation sets them out plainly and purely, in its ordinary
Language; and none but the French, seek new, and useless beautifications, and
embellishments, which will cause them to be despised in another Age, and serve
for no ornament at all in this. And what can they hope to gain by this levity
of theirs, but the vain applause, and vogue of the people, and the contempt of
prudent persons? The worst I see in this abuse is, that not only novelties
alone pass for politenesse, and quaintness, but besides, that whatsoever comes
out of the Country is neglected and slighted; that all, which comes not from
Court, is base, and barbarous; and that out of the reach thereof, it is
impossible to be capable of any thing; as if, forsooth, those Gallants, who
take upon them to be the Legislators of well speaking, had a just jurisdiction,
to impose Laws upon words, and to carve them into fashions.

If the Country Gentlemen, and they who are obliged to make public Speeches,
were forced to come five hundred miles, to learn the new fashioned speech, and
to procure a new Book, which is not often worth a rush in it self, and is not
esteemed neither, but for its new form of speaking: If I say these poor
Gentlemen should be bound for the purchase of eloquence, to make as many
journeys, as there are broacht new words and expressions, the Highways to
Paris would be more frequented, then the Pont Where all the Mountaubancs,
Jugglers, and Cheaters are.
Neuf, and by this concourse, the Court would be as populous as the Kingdom.
Besides, that it were a great unhappiness for them, if, because they are not
Courtiers, they should not be suffered to utter their thoughts, and if they
should be accused of not knowing how to speak French, because they amuse not
themselves, with these foolish affections, which our Sparks call the
politenesse, and quaintness of the times, choice words, handsomeness of
discourse, and speech A la mode.

The Counselor (to confirm what the Count had said in favor of the Country
Gentlemen) 17. For the Country.
spoke thus. I am apt to conceive (if I be not mistaken) that the art of well
speaking, consists not in the perfect knowledge of our Language alone: for if
so, they who are at Paris, or near any of them who follow the Court, would have
the advantage; and thence it would follow, that the birth of a Lackay, would be
better then the wit of a Gentleman. But it is much more honorable for the
Country Gentlemen to learn (as they do) the property of the Language of
themselves, then to receive it from their Nurses; and they had rather have any
fault of the Country seen in their style, then the least defect of judgment in
their discourses: for thereby it may be perceived, that they hold of
themselves, and not from their birth, whatsoever elegancy they have, and that
reason ought to be more valued then the quaintness of expressions. And for the
strengthening of my argument, I conclude in their behalf, that judgment, and
Science, are to be preferred before the politenesse of the Court, and that
those discourses which are made according to the rules of Art, and are
supported by reason, are better then all the Modes in France.

That in your opinon, Sir, (replied the Marquess) but you will not have many
on your side therein, in regard there be many arguments to oppose it. We know
very well, both Court and Country; and certain it is, that the later is
furnished with witty, valiant, and virtuous persons; but they are still to seek
of the true tincture of eloquence, and have much a do, to get accomplished
Orators; for Nature gives the first qualities thereof, Art produces, and
perfects the rest, and this Art (which is not exactly known, but where we are)
is partly founded upon the Language of the times. All those Authors who are
esteemed and celebrated at Court, and who pass for the prime Wits of this Age,
were but poor Poets, and very mean Orators, at their first coming thither; but
now, by the influence, and communication of this sweet air which we breath,
they are held to be great persons, and extraordinary men.

Whatsoever you say, in behalf of the Court, (said the Counselor) you will
still grant me, that the perfection of eloquence consists not in those
fopperies, which are ordinarily used, and which men strive to innovate daily
here; for it depends upon certain qualities of conceits, and words, and upon
the collection thereof with dexterity, and judgment.

That it is requisite, to have such qualities, as all who are styled Orators
have not, and that Eloquence is an art, which relies as much upon conduct, as
upon Nature, is not to be doubted; for learning and study, are (in part) the
rules, and precepts of it; quite different from Poetry, wherein Nature acts
more then Art, by the help, strength, and motion she gives the Poet, to make
use of his talent, and wherein (says the Prince of Eloquence, he is inspired
with a Divine Spirit. But for my part, I find study, and labor absolutely
necessary, to make a complete Orator, and that they must both be applied to the
true ways, and not to the novelty of fashions, and fancies: And therefore he
must take care, to have the terms of his discourse solid, expressive, and usual
with persons of honor; and not strange, extravagant, and vulgar; and his
periods round, and as short as conveniently they can be, without obscurity. His
style must be florid; and enrisht with Figures, and not only with such as serve
for ornament, but with such also, as are good to animate, corroborate, and
persuade. It is likewise very important, that the whole body of a Discourse, be
replenisht with acute, and sound conceits, and that the inventions be
amplified, according to the rules of art, and not according to the capricio of
the Orator; and in fine, that a speech be composed (to use the proper terms) of
all the Parts of Speech, and that these Parts be proportioned to their quality,
and quantity.

Since we are upon the business of new words, (said Hydaspe) what conditions
ought words to have, to be fit for all good discourses, and how must they be
handsomely chosen, to the end that we may not be left in confusion, about
choosing such as are perspicuous, and splendid, and shunning those which are so
dark, and ambiguous, that they cannot be comprehended? You know better then I
(answered the Counselor) and if I have presumed to dogmatize (with leave for
this word) it was only to disapprove of the hard law, which the inventers of
new words would fain impose upon us, and suppress that abuse, which begins to
slip in, and take root amongst us.

To make a happy speech, the Orator must choose his words on purpose, and they
must be significant, singular, proper, and conform both to custom, and to the
matter he handles; that is to say, if the matter be serious, and grave, the
words must be magnificent, and pompous; if vulgar, simple, and plain; if
pleasant, and delicious, sweet, and flourishing: For by significant terms, we
express our selves neatly, and clearly; and choice and proper words, add
grace, and charity to a Discourse. He who intends to speak well, must never
utter any mean and vulgar phrases, however they may sometimes be permitted, and
tolerated; and yet still, he must speak according to custom; for such words as
are not in use, make a speech ridiculous, and pedantick; as the want of choice
terms, and such as are suitable to the Subject we undertake, instead of making
the matter intelligible, renders it AEnigmatical, and barbarous.

The old Authors (said the Marquess) never spoke so worthily as you do, of
this Art; and though you have discourst of the perfection of Eloquence, and of
the conditions necessary for words, yet shall not that serve your turn; for you
shall come, if you please, to style in general, and to the other parts of an
Orator, since you acquit your self thereof so pertinently, and vigorously.

I perceive Gentlemen (said the Counselor) that I am insensibly engaged; but
though I should reap nothing, but shame, weariness, and vexation, by not
giving you satisfaction, (without prefuming to teach my Masters, who have
already both natural and artificial Eloquence, in a far larger measure then my
self) I will proceed at random.

Conceits, are the Soul of Reason, and they reign imperiously amongst many, and
various matters; they shine brightly through the mass of their own beauties;
they captivate the most severe, and obstinate spirits, and having charmed them
with their force, and subtility, they dispose of them at their pleasure. Now
those Conceits, which have fo much power, and efficacy to act, are of two
sorts: the one are proper, and necessary, for the intelligence of matters; and
the other serve to adorn, and illuminate a discourse; and as the former are
framed, by the definition, description, or denumeration of Parts, Proprieties,
and Accidents, and by the sequel of such reasons as are fit to prove the
subject; so are the later produced, by many parts, which serve for a mavailous
ornament thereto, and which I should be infinitely glad, to be able to deduce,
and demonstrate to you.

It is an ordinary trick of Orators, who study to sooth, and gull the world
with captious artifices, to make often use of fables, in pleasant matters; and
in grave ones, of Sentences, which are as the precious Stones, to make their
designs perspicuous: for they judiciously apply the good authorities they have
taken, from the most laudible persons of all times, and sometimes craftily
usurp them, and make them their own, without alleging the Author, the Book, or
the Terms; and they prudently place, in the weakest parts of their speech,
certain Hieroglificks, and Emblems, (which are the Images authorized by the
Ancients, to awaken, and stir up, by the dress and subtilty of the Secret,
(which makes the Mystery, and the embellishment) the eyes, and ears of the
hearers to the matter, and their minds to curiosity. It is also their way, to
cite certain Proverbs, which very much grace a discourse; but this they do but
seldom, in regard they are common; as they also forbear to propose examples,
unless they be picked out amongst such as are least known, and most
illustrious. As for comparisons, they take such as are single, such as are
composed of those, which compare one thing to another, in one point only; and
of those also, which are multiplied, and look upon various objects: For in
regard that they are often fain to make use of them, they shun the poor and
lame ones, and cull out the rich and sound ones, which are indeed of as great
force as Examples, to move, and animate powerfully. There is no doubt, but
naked thoughts are much weaker, then such as are armed with the assistance
which I have now deduc't; and it were to make them contemptible, to expose them
unsupported, and without those props, which serve them both for ornament,
strength, and clarity.

The Count perceiving him break off his discourse there, said, This is as
touching the conditions of words, and the qualities of conceits; but the ways
to distribute, and dispense them, are difficult, and unknown to many persons:
For it is not enough to have materials to build, but we must also have an
Architect, and a Design, and carry things on according to the Regular, and
Geometrical Ground-Plate of Fabrics: And so we must likewise know, how to
range, and order that which you have now said, and to reduce the matters, into
that which you call Style.

To this the Counselor replied, To entertain you with what you desire, it had
been good to let you know, that in the practice thereof, Imperceptible
Transitions are some of the finest secrets; that is, to pass in a discourse,
from one matter to another; and I should have slid insensibly upon it, to show
you the way of it, and to tell you, that men's thoughts are no less various,
and different, then their persons; that they make diverse impressions upon their
minds; that they never discover themselves without alteration, and are never
expressed with the same purity, wherewith they are received. The same thing holds
also in Style: for every Orator, speaks after his own fashion; and they differ
as much as the Subjects, and Matters whereof they treat; and the manner, or
method they hold in collecting their words, (which is the proper definition of
Style) is as particular, and peculiar to every Orator, as the ways of several
Painters are in their works.

It was very judiciously, and advantagiously observed by Demosthenes, and
Quinctilianus, (who were ancient Schoolmen, and great Masters, of Rhetoric)
that there are three kinds of Style: namely, the plain one, which is without
ornament, and artifice, and which clearly expresses things, by common
discourses: the ordinary, or middle one, which is more extended then the first,
and enricht with points, and figures, but which has very little vigor, and
life in it: And the third, which is excellent, has the qualities of both the
other, and is animated besides, with force, pomp, violence, and all the Maxims
of art. Now the excellency of this high Style, depends upon the heat wherewith
it ought to be enlivened, by the figures which are proper to the notions, and
by certain acute, sublime, and clear points, which captivate the mind. And
really, sweetness, and smoothness of Style, is almost always necessary, to
procure an indulgent hearing, and to win empire over Souls; as it also is, to
have the periods just, and of a measure conform to the Subject; besides, that
the tie, or connection of the words, must not be any way harsh to the ear, or to
the tongue, but agreeable, and harmonious. Moreover, they who are to speak to
stubborn, and obstinate Spirits, and endeavor to vanquish, and reduce them by
force of argument, use an eloquent, and imperious Style, and assemble certain
grave, and magnificent terms, with an order far above the common way of
speaking; for they dress, enrich, and fortify their Style, with points,
sentences, and violence of figures; and to exercise this violence, the Prince
of Eloquence says, that we must have pressing reasons, and puissant figures,
and that the Orator ought to be possessed with the same passion, to which he
persuades his hearer, to quicken him, prevail upon him, and obtain his desire
of him.

I wonder (said the Marquess) that one of the most famous Authors of the times
18. An Apology for Monsieur de Balzac.
should be censured, howbeit he observed all the precepts which you have
recited, and that his Style have purchased a general applause.

It is true (said the Counselor) that many have written against his manner of
speaking, and that his Style has been attempted to be suppressed; and yet you
see, that he leaves not to flourish; that his works are still in great vogue,
(as having been several times printed) and that the truth of his merit remains
victorious over censure.

He would do ill to complain (said the Baron) of the persecution of his
enemies, because it is partly by them, that he reigns amongst the Wits, and
holds most of his glory from them: for envy never acts strongly, but against
unparalleled virtue; and if they have sought reputation, by censuring his
Writings, which attract the hearts, and admiration of all men, he has done an
heroical action, by despising their attempt, in regard he could acquire no
subject of Triumph, by combating their weakness. For such conjurations are
more favorable then hurtful, in regard of the luster they confer upon virtue,
and for that mean spirits are never made objects of aemulation. And how many
Authors to purchase esteem; would be glad to be thus unfortunate, and to have
Philarks to encounter as he has had? But all are not Ciceros, or Ovids, to
merit enemies, and aemulators. It is strange, that a Friar, or the Rector of a
College, who has but the Theory of the art of well speaking, and has not so
much as sucked the air of true elegancy, should presume to enter the list with
him who has established it, who, (like another Crisiphonte) is not less
sedulous in the study of Philosophy, then in the practice of the Liberal
Sciences; and who, being the Christophero Columbo of our France, has opened us
the treasures of Eloquence, and clearly won the Palm in that field; and
therefore Philarok did undoubtedly better, to make a safe, though shameful
retreat, then to contest any longer.

In matter of war, the same and reputation of Conquerers makes them more
glorious, then the shares they have in enterprises; and so in order to Books,
some presumtuous Writers, instead of conserving the little repute they have
gotten, do ordinarily lose themselves, by undertaking to correct the works of
others: And this passes in the knowledge of the weaker judgments, for the
difference there is, between the force, and fertility of the wit, of the Author
of whom we speak, and the sterility of that of his Antagonist; between the
height and stateliness of that of the one, and the lowness, and meanness of
that of the other; between the property of speech of the former, and the
pedantry of the later; for in short, take the later out of the School, and you
strike him quite dumb; and really, all the honor he has gotten, consists in
the indignation of the whole world, which he has purchased to himself: nor is
his fault to be pardoned at all, as not being able so much as to imitate our
Author, after ten years study; and yet as worthy as this Pedant has been, of a
just rebuke, the Gentleman has never defended himself against his presumption,
with any other weapons, then those of the virtue of silence: And as Narses,
that great, and victorious Captain, subdued the Goths, conquered the Bactres,
and subjugated the Germans, more by patience then by force; just so has he
vanquished his adversary; who perceiving that there was nothing to be gotten, by
attempting his constancy, at length grew weary of the field, and defeated
himfelf; whereby the silence of the persecuted is become perfectly victorious,
and has given him as great an advantage over the persecutor, as he has by the
excellency of his Works.

A Spirit, when it is pricked, and exasperated by passion, produces still more,
and dictates better things, then when it is not: and therefore, had this
Gentleman been subject to revenge, having shown us such wonders in quiet, and
tranquillity, what could we have expected, but Divine Answers from him? But as
it was not sufficient for the Legislators of the Greeks, only to understand
Philosophy, but also to put it in practice; so was it also his pleasure, to
profess the Precepts of the Stoics, and particularly that of taming his
passions, and utterly extingnishing them, before he would prescribe us any
Laws, in the art of well speaking. The obligations which France has to him,
render her incapable of acknowledgement, and the thanks we owe his pen, are
much greater, then the satisfaction which we should be able to receive, from
the testimonies of our duties. Let him go boldly on, to purchase the
benedictions of the Kingdom, (since he cannot be paid with other coin) and by
the productions of new Works, furnish the rest of the world with matter, both
for envy, and admiration; for without being any thing lesle then a Barbarian,
no man can henceforward endeavor to blemish a wit, which makes our Language
flourish so much as he has done; and I shall always hold my self a good
Frenchman, as long as I shall be of this opinion.

If this Apology (said the Philosopher) had been made, and publsht, whilst
Philark was alive, it would certainly have made his pen fall out of his hand,
and his persecution would not have lasted so long. You may also say (said the
Marquess) that in that case, the Counselor would have been likewise censured,
as well as he whom he defends, and must certainly have made one in that great
quarrel.

I would challenge my self, (said the Baron) in regard that the Laws of
fighting oblige us to serve not only our friends, but also all such as employ
us, without exception; yea, and that even without being employed, we ought to
fight with any such as engage us in the field. But I am also confident, that I
should have had the advantage on my side, in regard of the justice of the
Cause, which I should have maintained; and that, having many reasons to protect
a docil Spirit, which fought with patience, the victory would surely have been
mine, and all the world have declared for us.

As to the point of the reasons (said the Colonel) by undertaking this Apology,
19. Of the distinction of Wits.
wherewith you have entertained us, the Counselor has left the reasons, and
figures of the Art of Oratory, which he had begun to show us. I am returning
thither, (said the Counselor) and Cicero had just cause to desire (as I told
you) that the Orator be possessed with the same passion, to which he endeavors
to persuade his hearers, if he mean to act with efficacy; and to establish in
good Rhetoric, that strong reasons, and pressing figures are necessary for him
to animate: for they are in effect, the most powerful reasons of an Orator, to
keep him from being beblinded, by any other nice part of his discourse, and
from being inebriated, with the vapor, of the good opinion he has, of what he
intends to persuade, and of the justice of his design: And if the force of his
figures, and the violence of his reasons, (which are the strongest ways to
convince) do not transport him, he will never obtain what he aims at, but will
certainly find in men's minds, many difficulties, and much resistance for him to
overcome. For howbeit, Rational Souls seem to be invincible to Reason, because
they are fortified therewith, and because that was the first object of their
creation; yet do we find, that Reason is their most susseptible, or obnoxious
part, and that such thoughts as are founded thereon, and such discourses as are
composed by ratiocination, captivate them with ease and facility. But it is to
be wished, that those reasons may have many conditions, and that they may be
well followed: for it is indeed a shame, that there should be laws against such
as break the images of Princes, and such as conterfeit money, and yet that we
should suffer falsity in rational discourses; yea, and that even those persons,
who pass for the most just, and reasonable, should surprise, and gull the
people, with Sophisms, Paradoxes, and false apparences of reason. Now, for the
avoiding of these surprises, and for the strict examination of such reasons as
are not ordinary, we must observe, whether they be certain, or at least
probable, and proportionate to the motions we mean to raise, in the affections;
and to excite the motions with success, the Orator must urge such reasons as
are easy to be understood, well deduc't, not hard to be explicated, animated
with figures, and not over numerous, (for then one spoils the effect of
another) and above all, he must take heed, least, though he express them with
artifice, there appear nevertheless some natural plainness, (for the later
must be visible, and the other invisible) in regard that if it be never so
little discovered, it forthwith produces a contrary effect. If the Orator will
observe all which I have said, in his Style, and if the reasons which he means
to propose, be sustained with such props as are necessary; there is no doubt,
but he will charm with his eloquence, and acquire with his sweetness, and
(when he lists) with affect or strain, those motions he intends to exact from
the hearer.

All this is highly delightful (said the Philosopher) to know, if a man, who
will needs seem to be a great Speaker, be effectively eloquent or no; and to
prove that the high point of Eloquence consists not in the inventing, and
coining of words; but in the practice of men of honor, in conditions
requisite, both for reasons, and conceits, in the accommodation of the Style,
and in the decisive perfection of the Orator. But now we must examine the way
we are held, to make a distinction of Wits in general, and what apparent signs
we may observe, to judge effectively, whether they be good, or bad: for the
manner of life of the Stoics, made them easy to be known, and their
reputation was either good, or bad, in despite of all their moderation of
Spirit; and however their retreats were close, their discourses private, and
that they forbore to publish their Philosophy; yet left they not to post
through the judements of men, because they were fain to speak, and could not
live without expressing themselves, and without being understood.

Speak, that I may know thee, said a certain wise man; and the Divine Oracle
has left us for a Precept, that we shall know men by their works. A dead Body
is always incognizable, not only because it is ordinarily changed, but because
it neither speaks, nor acts; and for that the qualities of its Soul, which we
should know, are departed with her, and have left nothing but a trunk, and a
lump without motion. An idle man is miserable, and wicked, because he renders
his Spirit dull, and his Body heavy, and sluggish, and because also he leads a
lazy life, and purchases the hatred of God and Man, and for that, in fine, he
makes not himself known what he is: And howbeit an Emperor of Rome endeavored
to excuse his laziness, by saying, that every one must render an account of
what he shall have done, and not of what he shall not have done, a person who
moves not, is incapable of doing evil; yet did he stain the luster of the Roman
Empire by his sloth, and a gap of infamy to his history, which could not be
stopped by his actions, because thereby he never afforded any matter for it. So
that it is necessary, either to see the man, or to see his works, to judge what
he is; and we must make use of this art, to observe the interior of all the
countenances he shows.

Action indeed (said the Count) facilitates knowledge; but it is also true,
that we might find other means, if the Science of Complexions were infallible,
and evident, in frequentation; and there is no doubt, but it would be easy, to
make a perfect judgment of Spirits, since they are not, but by the organs, and
that Bodies have no functions, but are merely subject to the humors which
govern them.

You make me take notice (said the Philosopher) of a certain form of trying,
and knowing men, which I find easy, and as it were indubitable; and it is,
that when we see a person of a cold, and moist complexion, we may judge, that
he has a good memory; and that if he have never so little learning, or
reading, he must needs have his mind full of the juice, and marrow of good
Books; and consequently, that he has good foundations, and may pass for an
able man; and of this we have an example in Herodotus, upon the subject of the
Amazons (whose sex participates most of the cold, and moist) that being allied
to men of foreign Countries, they sooner learnt the language of their husbands,
then their very husbands themselves, and changed their speech as often as their
Country, whenever their various Expeditions of War required it. So that we
may say, that a man of that Complexion, may be a good positive Divine, a good
Cosmographer, a good Arithmetician, a good Linguist, a good Lawyer, a good
Grammarian, and a good Historian; all which are the Sciences, and Arts, which
are acquired by the Memory.

If Phlegm, and Melancholy predominate in a man, and if he have drought, and
coldness in equal proportion, we may draw an infallible consequence, that he
has a strong Imagination; and that by his inclination, he may be capable of
Eloquence, Poetry, Music, and of all the Arts and Sciences, which consist in
figures, and correspondencies, in harmonies, and proportions, provided that he
have practiced, and applied himself to them.

On the other side, when a man of a Choleric, and dry Complexion, and that the
blood, by an agreeable conjunction, has an equal dominion between dry and
moist; it is not to be doubted, but that Nature has drained her forces, been
prodigal of her favors, and formed this excellent Temperament, of her purest
Substance: And we may conclude, that such a man has a good judgment, and
brisk, and pleasant humor; that he may be a good School Divine, a good Natural,
or Moral Philosopher, a good Lawyer, a good Companion, a good Drol, a good
Courtier of Ladies, and according to that, good at all other operations of the
mind, and functions of the Body.

But Sir, (said the Marquess) if Spirits, may be better known by their
actions, then by the Complexion, (because you have said, that they are the
inevitable marks of them, and that you mean to draw the conclusions thereof,
from what they act;) what say you of a man, who practices Physic, and the
Mathematics; and of another, who practices Policy, Wars, and Civil
Conversations; and of a third, who is a good Limner, and a good Engyneer? As I
have said (answered the Philosopher) that, by the knowledge of the Complexion,
we may discern Spirits; and so, according to the drift of their inclinations
(since things are dependent, and reflective upon one another) we may know that
a Limner, a Poet, a Mathematician, an Astrologer, a Politician, a Captain, or
an Orator, have a difference of Imagination, very contrary to the
Understanding, and memory; that they can never be good Grammarians, good
School-Divines, good Logicians, good Physicians, or good Lawyers; and that they
who are subtle, and crafty, and have a forwardness, and quickness of wit, are
fit to be Courtiers, Negotiators, and Merchants; but that they are not capable
of learning, and that there are no Spirits more contrary, and repugnant to
Sciences then these.

It will not be so difficult, to judge of the understanding by its effects, and
of the ignorance of the vulgar, who persuade themselves, that a man is wise,
and prudent, if he be eloquent, historical, and Romantic; if he be a good
Mathematician, and a Poet; which are things directly belonging to the
Imagination, and Memory, and not to the Judgment, which is the seat of
Prudence, and the just guide of the Soul, and Reason. And they have different
opinions, concerning these matters of Judgment; whereas they ought to refer
themselves to the learned, and know that the works of the Understanding, give
this Power of the Soul, the faculty to distinguish, to infer, to judge, to
argue, and to elect; and that such doubts as are in it, arise from accidents;
but that we answer them by distinctions, because thence we draw the
Consequences; which if they do not satisfy the mind, we still contest, till it
be appeased by reasons, and till the Judgment be satisfied.

If the Athenians had had this doctrine, they would not have wondered, to see so
wise a man as Socrates, not know how to speak, and discourse; nor should we at
present find so much obscurity, and roughness of Style, in the works of
Aristotle, Plato, and Hypocrates. From hence we must conclude, that whosoever
will have the knowledge of a good Judgment, a happy Memory, and a strong
Imagination, must draw it from the effects thereof; and that in the practice of
the Arts, and Sciences proposed, the issue demonstrates, whether they who
exercise them, be capable of them or no, and whether they applied themselves to
them by natural inclination, or by hard labor.

All this is not sufficient, said the Colonel; for I remember another
favorable Maxim, which I have experimented in my travels, to distinguish
Inclinations, and know men's Spirits perfectly, by their Complexions; which is,
by the origin of their birth; by the Science, of the various humors of Nations,
and by the consideration of the Climates. Galen was the first who well
practiced this way, in the enquire he makes, of the temperature, of the Region
where a man is born, or where he dwells, when he means to judge of the
Phisiognomy, and know the Spirit: And he says very well, when he says, that the
Northern People have no unfaithful Memory, and that they want Judgment; that
there never was but one Philosopher, in all Scythia; and that in Athens, they
were all Philosophers; and they who are near the Sun, are cunning, prudent, and
subtle. I ask the reason of this, as Aristotle does in his Problems, said the
Philosopher? That you may know in his Book, answered the Colonel. As for me, I
believe, that they of cold Countries, have Spirits like Drunkards, and cannot
discern the nature of things, in regard that the great coldness of the Region
reverberates the natural heat inwards, and makes the moisture of their brains,
and other parts, exceed the drought, and heat, which are the qualities of the
Understanding: In such sort, as that they have but the Imagination, and the
Memory; and their Spirit is like an image of wax, which may be molded, and
unmoulded at pleasure, as not being provided with address, subtility, vigor,
ratiocination, or any other judicious faculty.

That Power of the Soul therefore (said the Baron) which ought to have the
supremacy, is never found in them: and if they be bestial, inconstant, and
fickle, the reason thereof is, in my opinion, that the Moon, which immediately
presides over watery, and humid Bodies, predominates over the people of these
Regions, and casts upon them the influence, of the qualities she possesses:
Which we find true, in women who, for their humidity, participate also of this
Star, and we see by experience, that they have much of its levity, and
inconstance in them. Moreover we may observe it in Lobsters, and other
Shell-Fishes, which at the Full of the Moon, are full of meat, and at the wain
have nothing but water in them.

From this argument, (said Hydaspe) and from the knowledge of the Affricans, or
Scythians, (howbeit we converse but little with them) we may draw a judgment,
of the people of this Kingdom, who are nearer, or farther from the Sun, and
affirm, that they can, or cannot be capable, of such and such things: but in
order hereto, their presence helps much, and makes us know them, by their
Stature, by their Hair, and by the color, of their faces; and by these things,
we may judge of their Spirits; nor is it very difficult to guess, that a man,
who is big, white, or flaxen, is moist, and that this moisture has dilatated
his members, whitned his skin, gilded his hair, given him a happy memory to
retain things, and a strong Imagination to construe Specieses, and set on work
many inventions.

On the other side, not to believe, that a man of a little, and low pitch,
grows to be so by the force of heat, would be to deny the rarification of the
pores, caused by heat; and that the Sun does not black the hair, and tan the
face; which would be, not to admit any such heat in his beams, as in his
nature, and go against Philosophy, Physic, and Reason. It is therefore true,
that a little, and black man is ordinarily hot, and consequently of great
judgment; that he has a good wit to argue, dispute, and resolve, and that he
can act with force, and vigor, upon the most sharp, and subtle matters.

Thus you see Gentlemen (said the Philosopher) that the distinction of Spirits
may be made by discourse, by Works, by Complexions, by Birth, by Habitation, by
Stature, by Hair, and by the color of the face. But I find another more
efficacious, and more important way, which is Phisiognomy. That is comprised
(said the Marquess) in the color of the face; and the qualities of the Body
whereof we have spoken, compose the greatest part thereof.

We have indeed said something, (replied Angelin) but it was but weakly, and
skanningly; And these reasons will not win the game, if you add not, that
Phisiognomy, which is the miror, and rule of Nature, shows us the inclinations,
and conditions of men, by all those things together, and not by the retail,
which we perceive upon the out side of their bodies, and upon their faces. I
will not incumber my self in the diversity of subjects, which are to be
considered by this Rule, and make a disquisition after that of the Stars, the
Planets, and of Climats; for we are upon the discernment of men, without any
other pattern, then that of Bodies; and I pretend to know them distinctly, by
Phisiognomy in general; which is easy to do, by the scope thereof; that is, to
judge of the inclinations, propensions, and drifts of their Spirits, and by the
subject (which is man himself) guiding our selves by such motions, and
inclinations, as are purely Natural. From whence we must infer, that albeit the
Soul be spiritual, Immaterial, and Indivisible, she yet follows the affections,
and dispositions of the Body, and depends, in some sort, upon them, in her
operations; not yet, as the Cause, but as the Instrument, and Organ. If God
has reason to require an account of Graces unprofitably received, when
superfluities cause diseases in the body, when it is transported with Choler,
and infatuated with debauchery, and when so many other irregular motions alter,
and change the good operations which it ought to exercise: If, I say, the Soul
makes ill use of her Organs, and must yield an account of her actions to God,
we may well know, that she follows the dispositions of the body, which
perverts, and insnares her. That by the Body, we are enabled to know the
strength, or weakness, of the mind; and that as often, and as much, as the
Body, which is her Instrument, changes, and varies its inclinations; so often,
and so much must the Soul necessarily change, and vary her operations.

By this you may see, that if the mark of the Phisiognomy appears upon the
outside of the Body, and upon the face, we may draw from thence, the knowledge
of the interior motions; however Philosophy, by good habits, do sometimes
change, and reduce them to reason. Zophirus, who was the greatest Phisiognomist
of Antiquity, after having considered the air of Socrates, and Alcibiades,
knew, that their Natural Signs inclined them, the one to drunkenness, and
dullness, and the other to loosnesse, and leachery; but he perceived also at
the same time, certain counter-signs to these defects, and that virtue had
gotten the uper hand, of the inclinations of these great men, and vanquished
their ill natures. Now the same Author says, that the Phisiognomy, and the
principal marks thereof, are in the Eye-broughs, in the Forehead, upon the
Breast, upon the Shoulders, upon the Navel, and generally in all parts of the
Body.

Let this ancient Author say what he will, (said the Count) my opinion still
is, (and none can doubt it) that the Eyes are the fairest, and clearest part,
of this Science; in regard they are the image of the Soul, and the windows of
the heart; or Diaphanous, and transparent bodies, through which we may clearly
see the most secret thoughts; and in fine, they are the Indexes of manners, and
the true testimonies of the mind. Aristotle was taught by Plato, that one may
see evidently in a man's eyes, whether he be patient, or passionate; hateful, or
envious; merry, or sad; chaste, or leacherous; stupid, or subtle; giddy, or
judicious; and in fine, that all the passions of the Soul may be manifestly
seen, in these Looking-glasses. For, when we see the Eyes red, and fiery, it
suffices to signify a great excess of choler; and consequently that he who
has it, is touchy, and pettish, and furious, upon the least occasion; And the
spartling, and vigorous brightness, which shines in a puissant, and ardent
eye, (which has as it were something of the nature of fire in it;) (that is,
that it has store of spartling glances, or spirits) indicates much
concupiscence, impetuosity, boldness, temerity, and insolence. But what will
you say, of those dull and heavy eyes, which seem to be always half asleep, and
not to have confidence enough to look upon others, for fear of seeing
themselves in them? As timidity, fear, and faint-heartedness have their
Essential Signs, in these parts of the Body, (and principally, because they are
of a most noble substance, and very sensible, and delicate) so may we also
gather from thence, that such persons as hang down their eyes, are fearful,
bashful, unsettled, and melancholy.

The Sanguine Complexion is the most easy of all, to be known; and the grace
which we observe, in a cheerful, and smiling eye, is not only an appearance, but
a certain, and indubitable effect. We may often perceive some certain Souls to
laugh inwardly, as conceiving themselves to be very well hidden: but though
they be able to hold their mouths, and the other parts of their faces, yet do
their eyes declare the tranquillity of their minds, the candor of their Souls,
and that briskness of humor, which is covered by modesty; for the knowledge of
the Eyes has not the power to impose any passions, but to discover (by the
senses, and spirits which reign over them) those, which we ought to curb, with
the bridle of Reason, and which are manifested to us by natural Signs.

The Count having ended, the Philosopher said; Some Authors have given us for a
ground of Phisiognomy, that when a man has any kind of resemblance of a beast,
he has some kind of Sympathy, with that beast, both in nature, and
inclinations. But they who Phisiognomize men to beasts, make not the right
choice of the Signs, and their election is defective, in order to the Soul,
though it be, in some sort, conform to the Body. And the Prince of Philosophers
is not of this opinion, but teaches us, that the Nature of Men and Beasts are
repugnant to one another; and that where there is a repugnance, there is no
Sympathy; and that men have too noble operations to be compared to beasts.

Another Science of Phisiognomy is discovered by the head, where all the 21. Of
Metoposcopy.
principal operations of the Soul reside; and in the mould of the skull, are
disposed all the various Cellutes of the Faculties, which the School, in
barborous terms, calls Sensitive, Syllogistick, Memorial, and Motive. The head,
I say, is one of the greatest Indexes, to know the Spirit it contains; as the
hand likewise is in regard it is the instrument of the Understanding) a good
practice, to guide us by the lines thereof, to the knowledge of the
inclinations.

Chiromancy is a fine Science, and very proper to judge of Spirits, but it is
too common. But of all the precepts of Phisiognomy whereof we have spoken, it
is fit for every body to make use of that which he finds most facil, and easy,
and whereof he has had most experience, and proof.

The indubitable Secret, to make the Horoscopes, (said the Counselor) whereof
the Phisiognomists, and Astrologers serve themselves most, and whereby, for the
most part, they least baffle, and fool men is indeed the Phisiognomy of the
forehead, which is more then the other parts whereof we have spoken, and then
the very Complexion it self, the gate, and light, to know the Star, which
presided at the conception, and birth of any body; and it is this Star, which
forms the Complexion, makes the Inclinations, stirs the Passions, and which
infuses all the good, or evil, which befalls, and threatens us. The Body of Man
is composed of four Humors, which are ever striving for the superiority amongst
themselves, and some one of them always carries it, and predominates over the
rest; for otherwise, we should be immortal; because if they had equality, they
would make an exact, and perfect Temperament ad pondus, which was never found
in any but our Savior Christ. Now, these four Humors, or four Complxions, are
infused by the Seven Planets which govern them, and which form 22. Of the
infallibility of the Horoscopes.
them, of the mixture, of the pure substance, of the Elements, and of the
occult virtues of the Firmament: for Saturn infuses Melancholy; Jupiter, Sol,
and Venus, Blood; Mars, Choler; and Luna Phlegm; and Mercury concurs with some
one of the other, but is never alone. Wherefore, we need know no more, then the
force, nature, and influence of the Seven Planets, to judge of their power, and
of the propensions, and dispositions which they infuse into us; and to
understand perfectly the effect which is caused, by Saturn kind, and Saturn
unkind; Jupiter happy, and Jupiter unhappy; Mars propitious, and Mars contrary;
Sol gracious, and Sol ungracious; Venus fair, and Venus dangerous; Mercury
advantageous, or Mercury prejudicial; and in fine, what Luna pleasant, and Luna
unpleasant can do: for certainly, I say, after we have attained the Science of
the Planets, and come to know perfectively, that although their power, (like
the Heavens, which are their habitation) have the general qualities, which
unite themselves with those of the Elements, and agree with the humors of the
Bodies they produce; yet does this power still reserve to it self the empire of
their domination, or rule, and suffers not those Bodies to be governed, but by
a dependency upon, and submission to their influence. When, I say, we are
perfectly acquainted with the Influent aspect of the Planets, and can penetrate
to the depth of their powers, we need not have any more recourse to the
Complexion, in regard it is formed, and governed by them; nor hunt after the
Star, which infuses the Complexion, because we discover it already, as I have
showed.

How then (said the Baron) shall we be able to know, under what Planet a man is
born, and by what he is governed? That we may learn (said the Counselor) by
Metoposcopy, which is the contemplation, and knowledge of the forehead; wherein
four parts are to be considered; viz. the form, the color, the eyebrows, and
the lines; and from the last of these, we may draw the perfect science of the
predominating Planets, in this manner. All foreheads are marked with lines; and
according to the order of Nature, there be seven principal ones of them, which
are attributed to the seven superior Planets, and dependent upon their
influence. The single, plain, and clear lines, presage felicity; the cross,
broken, and uneven ones, infelicity. Saturn, who has his seat in the seventh
Heaven, and which is the highest of all the Planets, has the seventh line, at
the top of the forehead, near the hair, which is called the Saturnin line:
Jupiter, who has the sixth Heaven, has the sixth line, called the Jupiterian:
Mars, the fifth, which is called the Martial: Sol, the fourth, which is called
the Solar: Venus, the third, which is called the Venereal: Mercury, the second,
which is called the Mercurial: and Luna, the first, which is called the Lunary.

Now there are but five of these Lines entire, and the other two are but
halves: As the Lunary Line is upon the left eye; so the Mercurial, is a long
one, between the eyebrows: Sol and Venus, have each of them two lines to
answer them: for Sol has the fourth line, and a half one, and half of that
which is upon the right eye; and Venus has the third line, and half of the
nose besides, where there appears a little fullness. All other Lines, not
designed by the seven Planets, which go cross wise, upwards, or downwards,
either bending, or thwarting, and which are in any kind different from, or
contrary to the Natural ones, prognosticate poverty, dishonor, sickness,
persecution, and infamous death.

Thus having observed, that every line belongs properly to the Planet, which
has marked it, and which rules it; when there appear two, or more Lines alike,
in depth, color, largeness, and straitness; the Superior Planets, which are
denoted by these Lines, have concurred more or less, then they show themselves
to the Nativity of the forehead which bears them; and that Line only, which is
seen to be the longest, the deepest, and the clearest, is that which
demonstrates the Planet, which had the principal influence, and preheminency,
at the conception, and at the birth, of him who has it; and the longest of the
rest signifies the other Planet, which helped to concur to that Nativity, but
more weakly, then the principal Planet, which governs the longest Line of all.
So that every Line, according to the Planet it signifies, and the effect of its
influence (when it is not crossed) prognosticates happiness, and when it is so,
unhappiness. Wherefore, we need but observe the longest Line of the forehead,
and know to what Planet it belongs, and consequently the force and influence
which this Planet has; to judge afterward, by this way of Phisiognomy, of the
power superior things have over a Soul, and of her inclinations, and actions.
Moreover, we may learn a man's predominant Planet, by knowing the day, and hour
of his birth, and by counting, and turning the number of the seven Planets,
upon a Cercle: As for example, if we know a man to have been born upon a
Thursday Morning, about six of the Clock, in Summer; we must count from the
hour the Sun rises at, (which is at four a Clock) beginning with Jupiter,
(which is the Planet for that day;) then with Mars, at five a Clock, Sol at
six, Venus at seven, and so with the rest, still turning all the seven Planets
within the term of the four and twenty hours of the day; and so by observing
the hour, we shall find, that that man was born, under that Planet, which
presided at his birth; as you see in this, whom we find to have been born under
the Planet Sol, which concurred about six a Clock: But herein, we must be ever
sure to begin, the Cercle, at the certain hour at which the Sun rises, in that
season. And thus I have showed you two very subtle, and nice ways, to know men,
without having any recourse to the Complexion, and to so many sorts of
particular Phisiognomies as we have deduc't, (and which are not indeed very
certain) provided (as I have said) that we have the Science of the Planets, and
the knowledge of the faculties they inspire into Souls, and infuse into Bodies,
wherewith I should be highly glad to entertain you, at a more convenient time,
and occasion.

Hey Gentlemen! Look there is Cousin, said the Marquess: Page, call him hither;
and turning in the Coach, This is the pleasantest Fool, (said he to the
Company) and has the most admirable fancies, of any in the Kingdom: for in the
very sallies of his furies, and Rodomontados, you may sometimes perceive
judicious discourses; and he so handsomely marries jest and earnest, the
Gasconado and the Satyr together, that one would say, that even in his very
digressions themselves, he has the eloquence of an Orator. His manner of life
(said the Baron) is very strange: For the whole world is his Country, and all
Paris his Inn, where he has as many Quarters, and Officers, as there are
Gentlemen's houses, and good Tables. At meal-times, he makes no more ado, but
steps into the first Noble Man's house he goes by, and according to the hour,
says, Cousin, I come to dine, or sup with thee: Bring me some water, and cover
the Table: And so he sits down, and sings a world of merry songs, and catches,
and tells such stories as would make one burst to hear them. If it be night, he
asks for a Chamber, goes to bed, and the Gentleman of the house waits on him to
it, as if he were some very considerable person indeed. In fine, he is every
bodies Cousin: he is welcome in all good company; and he takes no care for any
thing of this life, in regard the whole world labors for him, and gives him
kind entertainment. O! I Will warrant you, (said the Count, who was upon the side
of the Coach where they said Cousin) he thinks not much of the time to come;
for he is so deep sunk into his freaks, and sancies, that he has lost the use
of his senses; and you see, he neither hears nor feels those Lackays, who speak
to him, and shake him.

Alas! Gentlemen, (said the Baron with wonder) all excesses are hurtful; and
the 23. Whence comes the folly of learned men.
enjoyment of a good, which is not possessed with temper, is prejudicial: Yea,
even Science it self, (which is the Sovereign good of the Rational Man, and the
best food of the mind) weakens and corrupts it, when it is over full of it, as
a Stomach, which regorges with too much meat, is corrupted by worms. This poor
distracted fellow, whom you see, is much to be pitied; for he has been one of
the most learned men of his time, and the greatest Speculative Philosopher of
many Ages. He has sustained diverse opinions, against the followers of the
ancient Philosophers; as for example, that the Earth moves, and the Heavens
stand still: That the Sun is hot in his Nature, and not in his beams: That the
four Elements operate with equal force, and virtue, in a just composure; and
that if any one of them predominated, the composure could not stand any longer;
and such like questions of this kind. Now you see Gentlemen, the unhappy
effect, which the admirable notions of this poor man have produced, and how
mediocrity, and moderation in all things, is evermore advantageous then excess.

These accidents of folly (said the Philosopher) happen to learned, and
studious men, by a too great contention of mind, which is made in the
production of the lights, and notions they have: for whereas these notions
strive to sally out altogether, they make an effort, or strain, and stupifie a
man; or else, coming out in too great abundance, they confound the Objects, and
offuscate the understanding: yea, and perhaps, the mischief happens, because
the Spirits in this great contention, and maze, ascend all to the brain, and
burn it; and so, by puzling the Imagination, they scatter the Judgment. And it
is very likly, that this happened to him, by some one of these ways; for if the
violence of a passion causes a commotion, and an exundation of all the Humors
in a Body, and casts it into Apoplexies; and if even an indifferent motion,
which is only counterfeited by the Will, causes certain perclusions, or
numnesses in some members, and universal Palsies, (as was seen upon the Stage
at Paris, in the person of a Player, who acted the part of Herod, in the
Mariana, and who in the heat of the motion of his speech, was suddenly
stricken with a numnesse) If, I say, the strain of a natural motion, and even
of a studied one, causes strange accidents in the Body, we must not wonder,
that the commotions of the dissipations, and excesses in the mind, (which is
frail, and delicate) make it weak, and sick.

It is said, that Cousin grew mad in an Academy, by holding a famous dispute,
and by maintaining a certain point of Philosophy, wherein he had the advantage
of all them who opposed his opinion: and it was a prodigious thing, that after
having disputed three hours together, and after having held the highest
discourses that could be, he was seen in the fields, raving, and tauing,
playing a thousand odd prancks, and freaks, and casting himself, by little and
little, into horrible extravagances.

What point was that Sir, (said the Philosopher) which caused that great and
vehement dispute? I was told of it (said the Counselor) and I found, that it
was but a trivial Proposition in Philosophy, to wit, whether the world be from
Eternity, or from Time! And Cousin, who was an Academical Philosopher,
maintained the opinion of Plato. But what could he say against Aristotle's
reasons? said Angelin; For I will prove to you, that the world has always
been; and in fine, the Peripateticks have ever carried it against the
Acadamicks: And you will see, that this Fool will have cast you into disputes
of Philosophy; and that with his plato, and his Aristotle, (who never agree)
you will be fain to define their contradictory opinions, by the discourse of
the creation of things, which is now in question.

I perceive (said the Count) that Monsieur Angelin has an itch to dispute;
that he would be highly pleased, to have me follow his inclinations, and frame
Subjects of Philosophy: which to please him, and not displease the Company, I
will do; but if I find him apt to Ergotize, I will instantly break off, and
then we shall have fine sport to hear him dispute alone. I maintain therefore
the opinion of Plato, which is, that the world is not Eternal; and this is the
best, and soundest doctrine, and authorized by the Scripture, where the Eternal
Wisdom, by the mouth of Solomon, Cap. 8. of his Proverbs, says, God possessed
me, in the beginning of his ways, and before he made any thing: And Jesus
Christ, who is the same Wisdom incarnate, confirms the opinion of the Creation
of the world, when Cap. 17. of St. John, he says, Father, clarify me with that
brightness, which I had in thee, before the world was made, and which I
possessed when men were not yet formed in thy praescience, and before the
constitution of things. If the world were Eternal, men would be so too; and
having been always in Formal Being, and not in Praescience, they would be
coequal, and coeternal with God. But for proof of the contrary, we know at
what time began the inventers of Arts; History teaches us the true origin of
man, and we daily see his end.

If God created not the world from all Eternity, it is not that he envied, or
24. Whether the World be Eternal or no.
grudged man that happiness; but that he found it good to make it, at his own
time and pleasure: for he acts freely, and not by force, or necessity: he
wanted nothing to complete his greatness, since he cannot be better satisfied
then with himself; and because we admit no necessary Communication in the
Divinity, but that which is made by the production of the Divine Persons, which
from all Eternity have acted internally: For had he done otherwise, he had
shown, that he wanted help, to increase, and support for his glory; and without
the Creation, and Settlement of the world in Time, he had not been acknowledged
above it, and Omnitent as he is. Doubtless he had, from all eternity, the
will, to create the world; though he created it not eternal, but just at that
time, when he did it: for otherwise, the premeditated design would be taken for
the deed, and we should be fain to reverse this principle established in good
Philosophy, that the Will cannot dispose of a former action, because the Will,
being the cause of the action, must need be before it, and for that the former
Will, is the cause of the present action; and if this Will be restrained to the
circumstance of time wherein this action is produced, as is evident in the
Creation of the world, which God made at such a time, having had the will to
create it before, it may be asked (said the Baron) why it is said, In the
beginning God created the Heaven and Earth, and consequently all things? It is
(said the Counselor) because it was the first work of the Creation, and not
the first work of God, who never had any beginning; and this word beginning,
resolves that Heaven, and the World, are not from Eternity, because they had
their beginning, Many great Doctors, as S. Augustine, Philon the Jew, and
Caietan, (after having said, that God is Sovereignly Good, and infinitely
Eternal; and that it is the property of a Good to communicate it self, if not
in whole, at least in part) affirm, that he who lives Eternally, created all
things of nothing, and that they are not Eternal: And after them, almost all
the Sects of Philosophers have believed, that it is not Eternal; and that there
is nothing eternal but God, however they have had various opinions concerning
the Creation.

Democritus says, that it sprung, by the congression, and from a mass of
Atoms, (which are certain little, almost invisible, and indivisible bodies;)
Plato, from an Inherent matter. Diodorus, from an inform, and imperceptile
matter. Zoroastus, from a Chaos, or Confusion of things. Pithagorus, from
Numbers, and Degrees. Epicurus, from a grain of Imaginary Spaces. Socrates,
Calistines, Dion, Aristophanes, and the Caldean Priests, from a First Cause,
wherein they agree with us. And with the greatest part of the ancient Stoics,
and Scinicks. So that, you see Gentlemen, by Rational Arguments, by Canonical
Authority, and by a good number of the Pagan Philosophers, that the World is
not Eternal. And you see Sir, (replied the Philosopher) that I have had the
patience to hear you out; and therefore, it is but justice, for you to hear me
also, since I have not been forward to contest, and dispute with you, as you
doubted I would. I pray tell me what shall become of our Aristotle, who is the
Prince of Philosophers, and who has ever been generally followed? Can you deny
what he says, of the Eternity of the world, and are you able to refute the
force of his arguments? It is the principal ground of the Articles of Faith,
that there is a God, and that he is Eternal, Infinite, Omnipotent, Independent,
and Immutable. Now it follows, that remaining still with equality the same, he
acts always equally, and does the same thing; and that being Immutable, as he
has said; he has ever been the same which he is: and therefore, either he
has always produced the world; or if he have been without producing it, he
has never produced it.

God, and Nature, are always doing that which is best, nor is there either
mediocrity, or extremity, in their productions: And it is much better, that the
world should be Eternal, then Temporary; wherefore, ought we to doubt, but that
it has ever been, in regard that durance is incomparably better, then the end
and cessation of being, and that Eternity is the only prize, of so vast, and
noble a matter. The Circular Motion has neither beginning, nor end, and
consequently is Eternal; as Heaven, which is Gods habitation, is Eternal, as
well as He is who inhabits it, and glorifies it: For otherwise, we must admit,
with some certain Philosophers, of the Imaginary Spaces, and give God another
residence, and another employment, before he operated in the creation, and
conservation of things. Take notice, if you please, that I answer all your
objections, and that I borrow of Aristotle, and Procles, that if the world were
made in Time, why was it made at that time, rather then at another? And if God
could, and would not make it, it looks as if he had grudged man that
happiness; as on the other side, to say that he would, and could not, would
suppose a want of power in God, which were abominable, and blasphemous to think.

The terms of my reasons follow yours, but differ in this, that mine are
indivisible, and without reply: for the Sovereign Good ought to communicate it
self infinitely, but not in part, as you have said: and therefore God must have
made the world from all Eternity, to produce an Infinity, which was equal to
him; or otherwise its production would be defective, and consequently would not
seem to have come from him. But suppose that the opinion of Plato be true, (who
will not believe, as well as you, that the world is Eternal) yet will you grant
me however, that it is also true, that Nature, which acts by constraint, acts
quite differently from God, who is Free, and whom it suffices to do all he
does, upon good formal Reason, which is his Infinite Goodness, by which he
acts, and makes all things: Supposing your opinion, (I say) and granting the
Free Will of Almighty God, we must ask him the reason, why he staid so long,
from communicating his Divine Goodness to man, and why the moment of the
Creation, (which has neither beginning nor end of extention in him, in order
either to the subject, why, or to the space, wherein we conceive it to have
been made?) Why Sir, I say, should this moment be later then other, if they be
all equal, and contemporary, and of one, and the same instant, in his Divinity?

That Argument which you started, though it seemed to be for you, was in
effect, for me; for it is resolved in Divinity, that in God there is no Time,
and that all those Times, which you admit, are present to him: And therefore we
must conclude, that since God produced the Universe, he produced it from all
Eternity; for otherwise, if there were Time in the Divine operations, he could
not be himself Eternal, and Infinite. This is confirmed by Cicero, when, after
having said, that God is a pure Spirit, a Free Understanding, a Proper Essence,
and an Infinite Being, he both calls him, and proves him to be an Eternal
Moment; as Philon the Jew also does, when he notes two Eternal Powers in God;
namely, the Creative Power, which gives him the name of God; and the
Gubernative (to use the School-term) which gives him the title of Lord. For, if
a moment have no time, and if these two Powers be eternal in God, we must
conclude, that he rules, and governs all from all Eternity, and that so
eminent; and so immortal a Principle, has no less productions, then coequal,
and coeternal, and that all is Eternal with it. I subscribe not however so
positively, and peremptorily, to this opinion; and if I have spoken to you like
a Philosopher, and not like a Christian, it was but for argument, and
recreation sake, and not for a testimony of my belief. For I blindly submit to
all things of Faith, without offering to oppose them with any Sciences, or
erroneous opinions; and for fear least I be accused of having too much
correspondence with Aristotle, I heartily renounce his Sect, and render my self
wholly up to your Plato.

Let them both alone, Gentlemen, said the Marquess; your discourses are very
25. Of Academies, and the differences thereof.
good, well deduc't, and far from the School; but these matters are too high
for the Course, and more fit to be reserved for the Sorban: For I perfectly
perceive, that you reap up the Colloquies which you hold at the Academies, and
that instead of diverting, and recreating our minds, you make us fix them upon
certain Problematical Questions, and Abstractions, which appertain to the
Closet, and the Gown: And therefore, I pray you, lay aside all Philosophical
Contestations, and hunt no more after contradictory reasons, upon sure
Principles: Let us leave doubts, and jealousies, to determinate Spirits, and
Syllogistical acts, to stated Conferences, which solve the obscurest
Propositions: Let us shun all contentions of mind, which destroy the Soul, and
beget no friendship at all; and let us forbear, in fine, to digress, upon such
things as are serious, and needless, which may provoke us, and are sure to
afford us no pleasure at all.

If the gifts of the mind (said the Count) were as equally distributed amongst
men in Nature, as the goods of Fortune anciently were in Sparta, where there
were neither poor, nor rich, it would be good sport, to see the witty scuffles,
and the endless and invincible disputes of the Academies: For the decisions of
Truth and Falsehood, would require no judgments; and Logic (whose property it
is to teach clearly, and regularly) would be a needless Science, and means to
refute falsehood, and distinguish, and define arguments: And as for Rhetoric,
that illustrious and resplendent art, which we use with pomp, and magnificence,
to captivate the Reason of our hearers; which moves, attracts, and charms the
affections; which has inevitable force, and arms, to obtain what it will;
which, when Reason has once given us the perfect knowledge of virtue,
persuades us, and obliges us to love it, follow it, and practice it: This fine
art, (I say) Gentlemen, as well as Logic, would certainly be the Essence of
things necessary; but neither Arguments, nor Eloquence would be in use, to make
us quarrel as we do: Always provided (as I have said) that we were equal in
understanding, and science, and that some Spirits had no more light in them
then others.

A lively force (said the Baron) gives a man a power, over such as will
exercise it: a temperate force affords him an eminent superiority, over such as
depend upon him; and a gentle force both conquers, and captivates all
resistance, much better then the former. Now the first, is the force of the
Body, which shows it self in all its actions, and which gulls not the senses
with a false appearance, but makes them feel its strains, and vigor: The second
is the force of Authority, which has a Sovereign power to rule, and command:
And the third, is the force of Love, which seazes, disarms, and conquers the
Soul, how obstinate and rebellious soever she be. I have observed, that there
is never any dispute, about the force of the Body, and that when a man has had
the worst at any exercise, (as boxing, wrestling, or fencing) he ingeniously
confesses, and acknowledges it: And it is also as certain, that every man
stoops freely, and without grudging, to the force of Authority, and to the
power of a Sovereign: Nor is there indeed any man, who is perfectly a man, and
who bears the character of Reason, but has sometime sacrificed it to the force
of Love, and acknowledges himself to have been willing to be the prize, of so
sweet, and so pleasant a Conquest.

In the combats of the mind, it is not so; since in this point, men never
acknowledge themselves to be worsted: For look but upon the acts, and arguments
of Philosophy, and the rest of the Sciences, and you will find two Disputants
so fierce and eager against one another, that they will never have done with
their Negatives and false Proofs; yea, and you shall hear them grumbling, and
mumbling one against another, even after their Disputes are ended, and their
Questions resolved; insomuch as that if they were not hindered, and silenc't by
force, they would come to handy-gripes, and decide the matter by strength of
body, instead of deciding it by strength of mind. Now I am not ignorant, that
the cause of this is, that the force of the Body is apparent; that the force of
Authority is undeniable; and that the force of Love is invinsible: But the
Mind, which is occult, immaterial, and invisible, conceals its weakness, and
seeks new productions, to contest the victory; yea, and it often happens, that
one of the two Disputants passes for a self-wil'd, and temerary Cockscomb; and
that by thinking to show his wit, he shows his ignorance.

Indeed (said the Colonel, with a scornful countenance) I do not approve of the
School-fashions; and those Disputes, which are perpetually contested, and never
resolved, make me almost out of love with the Sciences, which look, as if they
could not be taught without these Methods, and for the learning whereof, we
must necessarily pass under the lash of Barbarous Masters. But I think there
are none of them (said the Baron) reduced to so strict a point, as to oblige us
so peremptorily to dispute, for the learning of them; for we see, that
Philosophy is now a days taught so far different from the rules of the School,
and is so much civilized for Conversation, that the very women themselves both
understand it, and handle it, in a mild, and gentle way of argumentation, and
discourse; in regard there are now no more tricks, nor clinches, nor deceits,
nor impostures in it, to surprise, and gull the Judgment; the Academies
Portick, and Licea, being now reformed, and disposed into a most easy, and
smooth way, to deduce, and decide Questions, by the secret of the art of
Oratory, which persuades Sciences by reason, and sweetness; far from forcing,
and thrusting them upon men's minds, by rough, and violent contestations. Yes,
(said the Colonel) but in all Academies, they dispute, and quarrel, but they do
not fight. It is true (said the Baron) that they are of various Methods, and
not all of one, and the same fashion: for in some of them, they are always
arguing, as in the Colleges; in other, they have one point given them, upon
which they are to speak and write; and I have seen some of them, where they
take every ones opinion, upon a question, or doubt, and correct the works of an
Author. Yea, and I know some other, which have no set, and established order;
but only by plain Conversations, they discourse of various matters at random,
and without any selection at all; and some also, where they draw lots for the
Subject, upon which they are to write, and give their opinions, which are
afterward censured, and by the whole Body together. But, in fine, (said the
Colonel) let the manner be what it will, they never give over, without
disputes, and contradictions, upon the matter.

I swear to you (said the Baron) that I have been in a certain Academy, where
this never happened, and indeed, I never saw a better, and a more handsome, more
universal, and more profitable Institution then that, in regard of the easy,
and pleasant way there was to break, and inform men's Spirits: For Books,
Travels, and Conversation, are the three things, which make a man perfect, and
procure him a general esteem, and reputation, with persons of honor, and
prudence; And all these were practiced together, whenever we met in our
Assemblies, where indeed we profited much by hearing both the lecture, and
discourse of various matters, worthy of high admiration, and study. Now the
order of this Academy was this.

There were as many Matters handled, as there were persons in the Academy, and
every one having made choice of a particular Science, Art or Subject, he
managed it as regularly as he pleased, twice a week: And by this means, we had
as many different Lessons, as Persons, whereof to make our advantage; and all
the Virtues, and Sciences of the Ancients, being proposed, and laid before us
for examples, it looked as if they had left us their Libraries, and the exercise
of their Heroic actions. So that it was impossible, but that much or little,
of all these particular things, must stick in the mind, and that this variety
must sweeten the dryness of the Precepts, and utterly banish the sharpness of
dispute. For it was not there the way to oppose what was said, but to hearken
with attention, and delight, and to let the Orator carry the prize he aimed at;
in regard that every one spoke, or wrote, upon the matter he had thought fit to
elect, and ingeniously disposed himself to utter nothing but the very cream of
what he had been able to gather from it. Now the ordinary Subjects, were,
History, True and Fabulous; Sciences, Speculative and Practick; the
Mathematics. Heraldry, the Maps, the Horoscopes, Travels, and merry Tales; so
that by means of Conversation (which is one of the three ways to make a man
perfect) the other two, were put in pfactice, without the pains, and charge of
travel, and study: For we had all sorts of Books, in the heads of our
Co-academicks, and all the contents thereof in their mouths: We traveled upon
the Maps by Geography, and we learnt the manners, and customs of Countries, and
Nations, by the Variety of Histories: Yea, and we had another and better
advantage, and we were our selves both the Masters, and Scholars of the
progresses we made in our studies. For in regard that all our Notions are
imperfect, unless we produce them, and that according to Seneca, a good which
is not communicated, is not pleasing; therefore, by means of the Discourses,
and Speeches which we used to make in public, we learnt to write regularly,
and by frequent exercise, we easily acquired a habit, of hiding the defects of
Nature, and making our Artificial qualities seem proper, and natural to us. So
that, in a word, there was nothing more advantageous, and profitable, then the
exercises of the Academy, in regard that all which is requisite, to make a man
learned, eloquent, courteous, compleasant, valiant, active, dexterous, and
perfectly complete in all kinds, was there to be learnt.

How beautiful, and delightful is Nature in her diversities; and how
considerable, and adorable is the power of God, in the variety of things,
whereof he has composed the Universe? For if variety makes beauty, and beauty
makes pleasure, we may conclude from thence, that the variety of matters which
we handled, was extraordinarily delectable to us, and that the Institution of
our Academy, containing the three points, which give life, and motion, to the
great Fabric of Civil Society; we might all easily arive to our desired end,
(which was to be complete, and perfect men) without passing through those
thorny, and craggy difficulties, and labors, which were prescribed us by
diverse Sects of Philosophers: for so I call their contradictory opinions, their
Problems, their Sophisms, and all their odd tricks, which cause so many
disputes, and differences, in the Schools; for the avoiding whereof, all
questions, and scruples whatsoever, which might seem in the least kind,
contrary to what was pronounced, were absolutely prohibited in our Academy.

The Counselor having hearkened to the Baron with attention, and admiration,
said, Indeed, the method of this Academy deserves to be much esteemed, and the
particular advantages, drawn from the universality of things taught in it,
highly to be considered: for it is of the nature of Indivisible Goods, which
belong as much in bulk, to every one in particular, as to all men together; nor
do I believe, there is any false appearance, partiality, or imposture in it,
that but that it affords an evident, and sensible profit to all. Yet will I
tell you of another, which is no less commendable, albeit it be (like fair
faces) quite different in all its beauties, and seem not to embarass so many
Sciences: It is, that in the Circle of the Assembly, every one wonders at some
subject, and every one takes also by turn, the wonders, which are proposed to
him by the rest: For in the first place, he must wonder at the Proposition he
receives, and give the reasons also why he wonders; and then he must not
wonder, and give the reasons likewise, why he does not wonder. For example, one
will say to me, Sir, I wonder, that the Sun, which heats the whole world, has
no heat in himself? To this I must answer, that I wonder too, and make a
handsome discourse, to warrant my wonder, and from thence, by a gentle
transition, or an imperceptible passage, go to the contrary sense, and prove
with as much eloquence as I can, that I do not wonder at it, and that there is
no cause to wonder.

That which you say, Sir, (replied the Baron) is like the Play of wonders,
which is used amongst Women, at Wakes, and other petty Pastimes. It may be
(said the Counselor) that this form of discourse has been profaned in those
petty Divertisements, and gossipings of Women: but I believe not, that the
Questions amongst them, are various, or learned, or that they know how to
handle them handsomely, insomuch, as for that effect it is needful to have the
profundity, and universality of the Sciences, to handle them regularly, and
dexterously; and to be able to maintain, and defend any such argument as may be
started by curiosity. Now the wonders which are ordinarily moved in this
Academy, are drawn from Natural Questions, from Moral Maxims, and from all the
most sublime, and Speculative curiosities that can fall under a nice, and
subtle judgment; nor is it enought to speak something of them, but we must
sound the bottom of each of them, and stay a good while upon these two parts
of the Problem.

I must confess (said the Baron) that this is a handsome order, but not so
profitable, 26. Of that which makes a complete Man.
either for the Speakers, or Hearers, as that of the Academy whereof I told
you, which comprehended all the Sciences, and which had the true, and only way
to make a man Complete.

I remember (said the Count) that you said, that Reading, Travel, and
Conversation make a man Complete; and that all these things were in your
Academy: But to my apprehension, there are other Schools, no less, if not more
proper, then that, which are the Court, the Camp, and the Houses of great
Persons. The Camp (said the Baron) is included in Travel; and the Court, and
the houses of great Persons, in Conversation; for, there is a frequent, and
continual resort, which makes the Conversation both stronger, and closer. It is
true, that every body is not fit for the Court, and for great men's Houses: but
if a Country Gentleman, at his first coming thither, find himself troubled,
and disgusted, whereas others take so much pleasure, and contentment; he must
endeavor to grow familiar, and acceptable, by disposing himself to gallantry,
and courtship; by furnishing himself with the Discourses, and Complements of
the Times; and by studying the Maxims, and proceedings of the Court; of which
there are different opinions, of whether plain dealing, or cheatery, be most in
practice there; For some speak against those Courtiers, who make it all their
study, and care, to know how to cog, and fib, and prevaricate, and who think,
that the supreme virtue of the Court, consists in knowing how to lie well:
Others object against these, that they cousen themselves by couzening others,
and that the highest perfection is, to have a good stock of freedom and
plainness, and to trust even their very enemies, with their thoughts and
intentions.

That is to say (replied the Philosopher) that all the thoughts of a Courtier
must be so good, that he may not be afraid to discover them to the whole
world; and that he must not only not think any thing which is criminal, and
against Morality, but be able to defend himself also, even against temptations:
But this is too austere for the Court, and not very well relisht, even in
Cloisters. Some others (said the Baron) believe, that to purchase dexterity, a
man must know perfectly how to wear two faces under one hood, that is, to
forge, foist, flatter, and dissemble, and never to speak as he thinks; and
this, for certain reasons, and maxims, which (you know as well as I) ought to
seem void of all design, and artifice, and to be managed with such temper, that
the least inconstancy, or levity may not appear in them.

Few persons come to the Court, without 27. Of the posture men ought to be in
at Court.
engaging themselves in the service, either of the King, or of some Noble Man,
to get a support, or make a fortune; and a certain friend of mine, who has
fixed himself there in a very good one, made use of a great deal of art, and
industry, to win the heart of the Prince, to whom he belongs, (as well knowing
that to be the only way, and the principal spoak of the wheel of Fortune) in
order to which, he set all his craft on work, to study, and find out his humor,
without taking notice of the greatness of his Pomp, and Condition, or of his
Employments, Dignities, and Interests; but he looked only, and merely upon
himself, without any reflection at all, upon any of those frail, and fading
goods, and advantages of the world, which ordinarily overcharge, and overwhelm
the strongest Souls: Nay, and he desired (if it had been as possible as he
thought it necessary) to have him stripped of his Body, that so, by seeing his
Soul naked, he might with the more facility be able to judge, whether she were
great with temporal goods, or with her own, and consequently to discern her
inclinations. In fine, by this course of his, he came so perfectly to know him,
and to please him, by complying with him, in whatsoever he saw acceptable to
him, that he most easily grew to obtain of him whatsoever he would, and to
settle his fortune so advantagiously as he has done; and in order to this
effect, the friendship, which he procured with all his Creatures, and
Domestics, was of very considerable use, and assistance to him. For, as a
Lover endeavors to win the Maid before the Mistress, thereby to facilitate
his design, and enjoy his desire; just so do good reports stir up benevolence,
and prepare a Master to affect, and favor a Servant; as on the other side, bad
reports alienate, and avert the good intentions he may have toward him. In a
word, he rendered himself so officious, and submissive, that by his dexterity,
and care, he never met with any humor, opinion, or inclination so contrary, and
so irreconcilable to his, but he wrought so efficaciously upon it, as to make
it absolutely his own.

It must needs be very troublesome (said the Marquess) to a person of
condition, who has been wont to be served, and courted at home, to submit
himself to the service of a Noble Man, or Prince, whom he must be as careful to
please, as to please the King himself: and certainly if we considered this
well, we should see, that it is to give a Mountain for a Molehill, since when
we are under obedience, we must make a thousand congees, and cringes, for so
much as a nod, or a good look; a slight acknowledgement, God wot, of so
precious a gift as our liberty, which is the richest treasure of this life, and
which the Divine Providence it self thought fit to leave to our own disposal,
and direction.

There is no doubt (said the Baron) but he who betakes himself to service, and
subjection, finds at first, a great deal of hardness in the ways of the Court,
in regard that he has left his own house, and his business, for that of
another; and for that he cannot move, but by a second motion, in respect of his
duty to obedience, and of his having changed his liberty for captivity: But
pains, and troubles grow easy by custom, whereas otherwise they are odious,
and burdensome; and some men, rather then they will accustom themselves to
them, are content to loose, what others acquire, by suffering them; for they are
matters both of honor and profit; since by humility, and assiduity, we grow to
overcome. But every body cannot follow the Court, and maintain himself in the
Kings service, at his own charge.

No, (said the Marquess) but yet you will grant me, that if we voluntarily
follow a Prince, he bestows great courtships and favors upon us; whereas if we
serve him for wages, he slights us, and commands us: And what a vexation it is
for a Gentleman to be either stalking, or standing like a Crane, in an
Anticamera, or Lobby, whilst some mean and petty Officer of the Army, some
Poet, or some Lutenist, shall be jigg by joll in the Cabinet with my Lord?

If we should make all these reflections, and scruples, (said the Baron) the
Grandees would have no persons of quality about them; and very many Gentlemen
would also want, those good fortunes, which they purchase by their means and
assistance.

Colonel Hydaspe, (who sat in the Boot of the Coach) rising up, and looking
out; What do you look upon so earnestly, Sir? said the Baron. A Coach full of
the handsomest Wenches in Paris, and all of my acquaintance, said the Colonel.
I know well enough, (said the Count) that the Baggage was in the Rear, and that
now that the Course is almost ended, this blessed crew would come to beautify
the retreat, as hoping to meet with an occasion to pick up a Cully. Marry (said
the Marquess) there is enough of this stuff every where, and the greatest, and
gallantest meetings are composed of such kind of Cattle; though they all act
different Parts, and most of them are a lincognito. But as for such of them as
are unmaskt, and public enough to be known by persons of honor, they are
less dangerous, and more harmless in the trade they drive (as hurting no body
but themselves, and some fond blockheads) then those others, who under the
false appearance of modesty, and civility, palliate their brutality, or their
interest, with gallantry, and who are indeed, the poison of Nature, which every
one should do well to shun, like the Plague.

I know that Coach (said the Count) and I wonder whether the owner of it be
there, with that honorable Society? Who is it? said the Baron. A young
Gentleman of condition, and the Marquess de Bon air's Country man, (said the
Count) who was not long since a Friar, and being ashamed to show his head in
own Country, came, and hid himself here in base, and infamous places, where he
goes abroad but seldom, for fear of being seen, and keeps no other company but
such a Crew as this, which will ruin him, and bring him, peradventure, to the
end allotted for such courses.

I know both his Person and his Family, (said the Marquess) and indeed it is
pity, that the poor Gentleman is grown so debaucht; for he is of a good
descent, and has both Natural, and Artificial parts most worthy of his
quality, and of a better fortune then he has got himself: I was once employed
for him, and I would I could have given his Father that satisfaction which he
desired of me in his behalf. But the young man has carried himself ill, and
very much wronged his Parents. This always comes (said the Counselor) of wild
and rash actions, and of weighty resolutions ill digested, which cause shame
and repentance, and sometimes desolation in Families. I will tell you (said the
Marquess) the story of this person (which is after a manner Romansick) that so
you may see the different effects of his Passions.

His Father is an Officer, of a Sovereign Court of our Province, and one of the
most esteemed, and powerful of his Company. He bred up this Son with great
expense, and all imaginable care; and really, by his good nature, and
conditions, he at first answered all his Fathers expectations, and grew a very
complete young man; as being enricht, and adorned with many fine qualities, and
Sciences. He daunces, and plays on the Lute most admirably well; he is very
learned, and most accomplished in all his Academical Exercises; and besides all
this, he has a very handsome body, and a gentile behavior, which had already
gotten him some good esteem at Court. But since he has learnt ill customs,
neglected all his good parts, and done horrible things. For being taken with
that natural affection to his Country, (which is common to us all) (our native
air seeming sweeter, and pleasanter to us, then that of the gallantest Court in
the world) he would needs go taste the delights thereof, and make his Parents
and Friends spectators of his good qualities: But this journey proved fatal to
him, as being the source of all his misfortunes, and desolations: For he fell
so in love with a young woman, who was not of his condition, as to ruin
himself by it. Now his Father, who knew him to be of so violent, and impetuous
a Spirit, that he would undertake any thing to please his fancy, endeavored to
send him away, thereby to divert him from his Amors; but all in vain, for
after having used all imaginable diligences, as well by rendernesse, as
harshnesse, and by entreaties, as mennaces, without being able to persuade him;
he desired me (as knowing me to be one of his friends, and conceiving me to
have some influence upon him) to dissuade him, from the design he had taken, to
marry that person, who was so much inferior to him, both in birth, and fortune,
and of a contrary Religion besides, as being the Parsons daughter of the
Parish, which most of all troubled the poor Father. Wherefore, I being in that
Town, (whether I went to keep the Carnaval) and taking him one day abroad in my
Coach, I attempted to divert him from his said purpose; and after having
intimated to him his Fathers most passionate opposition, I asked him whether it
were true, (as I had heard) that he intended to seek contentment, and repose,
in a Marriage, where he would be sure to find nothing but disquiet and
vexation? I told him, that women were strong chains to entangle men; and that
being Diseases, (as the Proverb says they are) if they make us not keep our
beds, yet they make us keep our chamber, and weaken us, and deprive us of the
delights of the Court: And it is (said I) a strange thing, that every body
desires to marry, and to grow old; but when they have once obtained their
desires, they repent, and lament it. I did not signify to him, that I was so
great an enemy to Nature, as to intend to dissuade him altogether from
marriage, and to embrace a single life; but to make him defer it yet some time,
and shun that rock, and that gulf into which he was going to cast himself, to
the extreme coffeehouse of his Parents, and the utter destruction of his
affairs. In order to which, I spoke thus to him.

If you resolve to take a wife, you 28. Of Marriage, and single life.
hazard the infringment of your liberty; and you will have but a bad success
of the enterprise, if you charge your self with so heavy a burden. Consider it
maturely, before you do it; a Wife is a fine piece of housholdstuff in our
neighbors house; and he who intends to live happily in this world, must wish
every body else to marry, and never marry himself. Experience indeed ought to
have cured men of this folly, since it has taught them, that they quietly
enjoy the Estates of their Parents; but that those which are brought them by
their wives, are so fatal to their Families, that they do not only not receive
any benefit from them, but by a contagious conjuncture, they often cause them
to lose their own. But as for you, who pretend to a mean, and unworthy Match,
you have no cause to fear that, for many reasons, in regard you are to have
nothing with her; and I tell you as a friend, that if Love, and Generosity
makes you scorn interest, at least ought you to consider birth, and Religion,
and not cast your Father into a mortal affliction, nor give him just ground to
disinherit you, and make you miserable. Consider, that a single man may do much
with little means, and that our own inconveniences are insupportable enough,
without charging our selves with those of a whole Family: That a Batchellors
life, and the delights of the Court (where your Father intended to settle you)
are powerful charms to stay you there: That God, amongst the manifold and
various afflictions, which he cast upon that illustrious Patient in the holy
Scripture, left him his Wife, as the Alpha, and Omega, that is, the Source, and
Compliment, of all his miseries; and in fine, that this Evil (though it be
called a necessary one) is accompanied with many other; and that a married man
can have but two good days in his life; to wit, the day of his marriage, and
the day of his wives death. Therefore let me entreat you, to cease your suit;
for your Father will never give his consent, and your Equipage is ready for you
to go to Court, as soon as you please.

Upon this he seemed, in some sort, to be reduced, and made me a kind of
promise to obey his Father; but he would by no means hear of going out of Town;
and some days after, he was caught in his Mistresses chamber, by certain armed
men sent on purpose by the Parson, (for he had the hearts of his Disciples at
his devotion) who threatened him to kill him, unless he married her presently,
which to avoid the danger, he was accordingly constrained to do; and to make
the business the more notorious, and prevent the Fathers complaint, they got
it to be performed by a Roman Catholic Priest, with the Ceremonies of that
Church. Thus you may behold a most desolate Father, and a most miserable Son:
For the Father sued for his Son, and the abolition of the marriage; and for the
mittigation of this Suit, I was employed as an intercessor, for the Son to the
Father, as formerly I had been, for the Father, to the Son; and so, after time
had a little appeased his indignation, and moderated his passion, I went to see
him; and the better to reconcile him, to a thing already done, I spoke thus to
him.

Since hope is the only consolation of the distressed, and the object of an
uncertain good, you have no reason to afflict your self, if by flattering your
self with a favorable event, the uncertainty thereof have undeceived you, by
deceiving your expectation, and demonstrated to you, that we must look with an
indifferent eye, upon such things as depend upon Fortune, and sometimes slight
the fair appearance thereof, in regard they are casual, and have as different
successes, as she is inconstant, and various. All your Sons actions gave you
contentment, and satisfaction, because of his dexterity, and obedience; but
since he has been obnoxious to Love, you have seen, that that God will not
permit his vassals, to suffer any chains but his own; and that his persevering
to lodge his affections, in a place which you had forbidden him, has punished
his disobedience, with the premeditated surprise, wherewith they caught him.
Your intentions were just, and his chastizable; for though the consideration of
Religion had not been a sufficient obstacle to temper his passion, you had a
Right, and Authority, to prescribe rules to his designs; and he was obliged to
a blind obedience, not only for the respect, and reverence due from a Son to a
Father, but also for fear of being miserable. For he well knew, that to marry
against your will, was the Highway to beggary, and that your natural
affection, and paternal indulgence toward him, would run the hazard of being
taken from him, by the resentment you would have of his rebellion, and by the
little acknowledgement he had made you, of the good which you intended him. But
in fine, since sudden and passionate resolutions are of no long durance, it is
fit for you to break that, which you have taken of disinheriting him, and to
let your self be overcome by a Fatherly affection, which will not suffer you to
see the ruin of your Child. You are not ignorant, that the honor of a Virgin
cannot be repaired, but by Marriage, or Death; and your Son was necessitated,
either to finish the one, or undergo the other; and since you are his Father, I
am sure, you desire not his death; and consequently, having given him life, you
are bound to conserve and sustain it.

Affliction is the Touchstone, of a quiet and peaceful Soul, which, when she
once comes to wrestle with misfortune, and adversity, easily gets the victory.
I know well enough, that in regard you could have found a fitter, and a richer
Match for him, and have enjoyed the unity of Religion in your house, it will be
a great grief to you, to receive a smaller portion, and a subject of
controversy, instead of peace, and quiet, which you so much love and cherish:
But if thereby you win a Soul to God, that difficulty will give you a double
merit, and the Ladies virtue, (whose body is a Treasure) will bring more
happiness to your Family, then you would have elsewhere acquired. For, the
Maids of Sparta had no portions, but their virtues; and if they had a good
reputation, their poverty never hindered their marriage. Many things give us
more fear, then hurt; and we are more troubled by opinion, then by effect. You
will be even ravished with joy, when you shall find your self receive more
consolation from this Lady, then you would have done from another, and when you
shall confess your self bound to bless a thousand times the day, when you
left your suit, and gave your consent to this marriage. I make this good Augure
of this fair Lady, because I know, that the bounty of her soul, is not inferior
to the beauty of her body, and that the sweetness of her nature, and the
gentilenesse of her education, will not give you a greater dominion, over her
humility, then a reverence to her virtue. Take therefore quickly, possession of
this treasure, and forgetting the disobedience of your Son, instead of
chastizing him, requite him, for the interest you have in so worthy a purchase;
for it is to as little purpose for you to hinder him, from receiving the
fruits, and pleasures of the pains he has taken, and the trouble he has
suffered, as it is to show your aversion and opposition, by absenting him, since
at last you must resolve it. It Is true, the business was a little rash, and
violent, But -- I was willing to go on, but the impetuosity of his grief
breaking out into tears, he interrupted me, saying,

My Lord, the respect which I ow you, forced me to have the patience to hear
you, though not without much internal reluctance. I confess, I can refuse you
nothing, and that I resign my self wholly to your request; but I know you
likewise, to have too much discretion to command me any thing so repugnant,
both to my affairs, and to my reason; and in order thereto, he made me so many
protestations, and instanc't so many, and so strong arguments, that I was fain
to leave him re infecta; and he, by his continued prosecution, and diligence
afterward, obtained a breach and abbolition of the marriage.

It may be conceived (said the Councellor) that this young Gentleman caused
this plot to be laid for himself, and had intelligence with the Gentlewomans
parents, presuming that his father seeing the business without remedy, and the
marriage performed by a Roman Catholic Priest, would afterward condescend and
submit to Fate, without using any further opposition. But he was very much
mistaken, (said the Marquisse) and though you Counselors use to obtain your
ends by heat and confidence, yet this poor young Gentleman, either out of
spite and revenge, against his Father, or out of the tender sense of love, or
despair, to see himself deprived of so fair and sweet a consort) cast himself
into a Cloister.

Finish, if it please you my Lord (said the Count) and say, that he soon came
out of it again; for the cause, and manner of his going in, could promise
nothing but a fatal repentance, which obscures the noblest actions, and a
shameful coming out, which stains the purest life. And this is the reason (as I
told you) why he came to hide himself here for shame, in such places as I dare
not name, where he leads as disorderly, and loose a life, as that which he had
undertaken, was retired and holy.

The fervent desires of Religion (said the Baron) which arise in young persons,
ought not to be followed, upon the first motions; for unless they be
persecuted by these inspirations, at least ten years together, it is hard to
discern clearly, whether it be a vocation of Heaven, or a temptation of the
Devil, and whether it be a true zeal, to die to the world, and live to God, or
a snare of the enemy of mankind, to destroy our souls. It is fit therefore to
take much time to consider a design, which must last as long as he lives; for
it is easy for us to slip into hell, under the false appearance of heaven.

There are but two motives (said the Philosopher) to persuade us to a
Monastical Life; the one, in order, God, and the other, to our selves; and when
the love of God, and of our own Salvation is mixed with any shadow of particular
interest, and levity of Spirit, the yoke of the Lord becomes rough, and
insupportable; how sweet and charming soever it be, when we have no other end,
but the pure love of him. Wherefore, we must consult with our Consciences, to
make this distinction, and know, whether the passions we have for a Monastical
Life, have a disinterest perseverance; that so we may not sigh always in a
Cloister, for the world, after having sigh't a little in the world, for a
Cloister. Now, to make a firm, and solid judgment, of the suspicions, and
scruples, which may arise from such Inspirations, we may believe, that the
vocation is undoubtedly divine, and that fervency, and heat of devotion, comes
perfectly, and purely from the holy Ghost, when a perseverant zeal of the love
of God, accompanied with the contempt of the pleasures of this life, stirs us
up, and pricks us on, to unite our selves to him, and makes us (even whilst we
are in the world) begin to practice the mortifications of a Religious Life. And
when we are so truly enlightened with this knowledge, that there is no more
blindness, nor shame left to counter-ballance the truth; we ought not to bear
a deaf ear, nor spurn against the holy Spirit, but take up the burden, and
cover our selves with sackcloth, and ashes, to follow the summons of this
Divine Fire.

It is true indeed (said the Counselor) that we may be tempted to our
perdition, under a fair, and false appearance of Salvation; and that the false
motives of Religion, do ordinarily proceed from the discontentments of life,
from weariness of the world, or from some capricio, or fancy of the brain; and
therefore it is very necessary to sound to the bottomes of our hearts, to know,
whether our vocation be perfectly pure, or any way polluted with sensual
appetites; whether the desire of beautifying, and beatifying our Souls, guide
us toward solitude, rather then the desire of change, or the hope of a better
condition; and whether our intention be rather to please God, by forsaking the
world, then either to please our selves, or the first motion of our spirits;
and in fine, whether ambition have any prevalency with us, either to forward,
or hinder us; and that since secular honors are so high, that we have no hope
to attain to them, whether we aspire to merit, and obtain those of Religion.
Wherefore this Gentleman should have well pondered, whether it were the
saturity of wanton Love, or the abolition of his marriage, which made him
abandon, and detest that, which he had so passionately coveted before, and
retire himself into a Monastery, either to anger his Father, or to have a freer
access to women, under the Habit of Hypocrisy. Moreover, we must also take
heed, least by the sense of the indigency of our condition, and by the fear, of
not being able to hold out the immense expenses of the variety of Fashion, or
otherwise, we be induc't to make profession of poverty, in a place, where it is
as honorable, as it seems dishonorable, and shameful elsewhere. For how many
afflicted persons in the world, seek consolation in Cloisters? And how many
Droans, and Sluggards, make choice of a quiet, and sedentary life, to eat their
bread without working? How many, out of a blind, and false opinion, that it is
impossible to make their Salvation in the world, thrust themselves into
Monasteries? And how many out of too much instability, and levity of Spirit?
How great is the number of them, who are seduc't by the greedy, and
interessable persuasions, of their Directors, and Ghostly Fathers, who judge
them in some kind or other, either like to prove useful to their Order, or know
them to have Estates to dispose of? And how many also of them, whose simple,
and ill digested motion to piety, which lasts no longer then a blast of straw,
and suddenly turns to repentance? There is, in fine, an infinity, of false,
and treacherous motives, which inspire a soul to perdition, instead of
salvation; and there is only that of the holy Ghost, which under an appearance
of tempting us, does really operate to save us. Therefore how careful, and
punctual ought we to be in this case, to pick out the most abstruse, and secret
thoughts of a Soul, to make an absolute, and definitive judgment of her, and
know whether it be really, and only the pure love of God, which moves her, or
self love, and a defire to flattter her, with the plausible bait of devotion?
For, as the former makes us lead a happy, and celestial life, amongst the
rigors of abstinency, and mortification, and has the joy of heaven for its
scope; so does the later make us lead a dismal, and unhappy life here on earth,
and has no other end, then despair, and ignominy, that is, Apostasy, and Hell,
since it is a common thing, both to the learned, and unlearned, to brand
Apostasy with shame and ignominy, a forced, and irreligious life in a Monastery
with despair; and from thence comes the Proverb, that all persons consecrated
to God, are good, or bad Angels; that there is no mediocrity in Religion and
that a man must necessarily be, either the one, or the other.

According to this discourse (said the Baron) we may clearly distinguish
vocations; and a person who is moved by devotion, by sounding his heart to the
bottom, may know, whether he be rightly called, and whether the place he has
appointed for his retirement, be the right, or the wrong way, both to his
Temporal, and Eternal Felicity?

If a false vocation (said the Marquess) be so fatal to Monasteries, as to
make a man live a wicked, and scandalous life; the true one, which comes from
the holy Ghost, must needs be Divine, because it causes an Angelical life, and
purchases much veneration, and reverence, to such Souls, as having profited by
good inspirations, are like the gifts of Heaven and Nature, to serve for
lights, and patterns of Heroic, and moral virtue.

Indeed (said the Philosopher) we ought 31. Of the respect we owe to Sacred
persons.
to carry some respect, and reverence, toward good Religious men; and I know
not what to think, of those Libertines, who despise them, and scoff at holy
things; and who, setting light by Heaven, and the gifts thereof, upbraid, and
combat their felicity. Nor do I make a rash Proposition, when I affirm these
persons, who are marked with the sacred character, to be the gift of God,
because (besides that they lead a holy, and exemplary life, and instruct Souls
toward Salvation) the lively light they impart, to such as with whom they
converse, is an infallible sign of their being sent from above, to save Souls,
and to illuminate such Spirits, as have the ordinary notions; for God (who is
an universal, and Incomprehensible Intelligence) has a care of us, and makes
himself concerned, in the affairs of our consciences, procuring our salvation
by his providence, according as we cooperate with our actions; and in regard
that he has given us Rational Souls, he likes not that they should be in love
with our Bodies, and wholly transported to sensual delights; and that, in fine,
that beam of Divinity which we hold from him, should be put out upon earth, as
material fire is hidden under ashes. Therefore it was, that he sent his
Prophets in the Old Law, to prepare men's spirits for his coming; and his
Apostles in the New One, to announce his Passion, and his Miracles to our
Forefathers, and to instruct them, by the example he gave us in his life: And
for that, in the Infancy of the Church, it was expedient for him, to make
himself known, by the greatness of his gifts, thereby to attract to himself,
those People, which were then, either in disobedience, or Paganism; he sent his
holy Spirit; and that not secretly, and only to kindle the hearts of his
Apostles, with the fire of Charity, and to inspire them, with the Orthodox, and
sacred Doctrine, which they were to preach in the world; but openly, and
publicly, to show by his goodness, and by the magnificence of his gifts, a
pattern of the glory he had promised, which is unconceiveable, inefable, and
incomprehensible to human understanding. But now since Christianism is so
generally propagated, it is not needful, for God to use those attracts, and
specious magnificencies, or any other particular remedies, to retain the
faithful Believers in their duty, which only consists in the well keeping of
his Commandments, and in honoring the Announcers of his Divine Word.

Now, if he sends us secret Apostles, marked with the Sacred Character of his
Grace, and inspires them with the misterious Notions of a purely Celestial
Science; I pray you consider, what kind of persons they be, who have so good a
Mission, and how they ought to be esteemed? Wherefore, I will conclude, that as
all good Religious are called by God, so are they also sent by him, to
interpret his Oracles, and that he sends them, not with lightning, and thunder,
as he anciently communicated himself to his People; but secretly, and as if he
were familiar, amongst men; to the end, that not being of a higher essence then
theirs, their words, and deeds might preach together, and show us, that we our
selves are the causers of our destruction, as Israel was; and that though God
made us without our help, yet will he not save us without our help; and that we
must serve our selves of those two things, as of two spurs, to attain to
Christian perfection. That is called, in plain terms, Preaching (said Hydaspe)
and so going on with his caillery, the Count interrupted him, saying,
Gentlemen, shall we not retire our selves? For it grows late, and we must sup
more early then we use to do, to go to the Bal, or Mask, which is to be daunc't
to night, at the Hostel de Luxembourgh. With all my heart, said the Baron, when
you please; and so all agreeing, away they went, to the Barons house, whether
when they were come, Gentlemen, (said he) you must do me the honor to sup with
me, and then we will go all together to the Bal. What kind of Bal is it? said
the Marquess. It Is but a Bal of Entrances, without Machins, (said the Count;)
and they say, that the Divertisements, Exercises, and Passions of Youth, is the
Subject, and that the Baladins, or Maskers, took it out of their own ordinary
manner of life: Not to publish their vices, and volupties, which it were fit
for them to keep private, (and which they will not forbear to follow, and
enjoy, whether they be known, or not known) but because the pleasures of the
senses are not so satisfactory, and agreeable, when they are not communicated;
as being, for the most part, like those of love, the chief satisfaction
whereof, is, first to obtain ones desire, and then to divulge it: And so these
people take pride in their employments, and declare, that though 31. Of Bals
and Masks.
every body seeks after divertisements, and pleasures, yet few know how to
choose the true, and noble means to acquire them: For women are ignorant of it,
either for want of capacity, or through excess of Passions; Children are not
of maturity, to comprehend it; and old folks, are fond of toys and bables. But
they who are to dance this Ball, are both for Age, and Sex, in the most
perfect flower, and vigor, to have both the Theorical, and Practical knowledge,
of true pleasures: I mean that gang of inseparable Camerades, who are called La
Trouppe Galliarde, or the Jolly Company, and who study nothing but the
accomplishment, of the delights, and volupties of this life; for they trample
upon what is base; scorn as Chimerical, what is too witty, and give their minds
wholly to such things, as are exempt from sottish vanity, and sordity. This
mask (as I told you before) is a Picture, of their manner of life, and a true
type, and confirmation of their honest, and honorable divertizements; and if
you have the curiosity to see it, I doubt not but you will esteem it, as it
deserves, and instead of censuring it, not only approve it, but praise it, and
do your best to protect it, and prefer it, both for the fitness of the
Subject, the dexterity of the Actors, and the gallantry of the Scene, before
all you have ever seen.

Though you commended it not so much (said the Counselor) we should yet be
desirous to see it, because the other night we crowded so much, to see one near
us, which was not so good, either for the Scene, or for the Actors, and the
Subject of it was a little peccant too, as alluding to the disparagement of
women.

What Subject was it then, said the Marquess, who had not been then in their
company to see it? It was (said the Counselor) the Jubiley of Caelibat, or
Single Life, wherein were represented all the gallantries, which possibly could
be invented, in contempt, and scorn of Ladies: and therefore it was not only
not applauded, but all the Spectators (for their sakes) were much disgusted,
because the Ladies (who are the Oracles, which either give, or take away the
approbation of men) were much troubled at the blemishing of their credit, and
the deminution of their honor.

I will tell you (said the Marquess) of a Bal which I made in our Country this
Lent, a little after I employed my self for that young Gentleman, whose sad
story I have related to you; and I believe, you will find the Subject to be
very good, and the Invention most pleasant. It was this,

After the death of Alexander the Great, 32. The relation of a magnificent
Ball, or Mask.
(which was the noble cause of dividing the Empire of the world, amongst his
Captains, and prescribing limits to ambition) Antigonus, the Father of
Demetrius, and Salcucus, had each of them certain Kingdoms for their shares;
for in regard they were the Chief Commanders, who had signalized themselves in
Battails, and Victories, and had, in great part, by their exploits, forwarded
their Master, in the achievement of that Universal Sovereignty; it was
therefore fit, and just, that they should be requited, for their pains, and
dangers, with a recompense suitable to the greatness of their minds, and the
merit of their actions, and that their valor should be rewarded with Kingdoms,
since nothing but Triumph, and Potency can be the just, and equivalent price of
virtue. Wherefore, to Demetrius and his Father, was allotted the Kingdom of
Phrygia; and that of Syria, to Seleucus; who had to wife the Lady Stratonica,
Daughter to Demetrius; a Princess, as much worthy of admiration, for the
singular beauty of her Body, as of adoration, for the incomparable gifts, and
endowments of her mind. To assure you of the Historical part of the subject, it
is hard, because there is no Author, who has written truly, and perfectly of
it: but I conceive it to be thus.

Fame, the flying Trumpet of Stratonica's beauty, had already spread it, as a
Prodigy, upon the whole face of the earth, and erected as many Altars, as there
are Princely, and Sovereign hearts, to conceive love, and ambition for her.
This coming to the Court of Syria, and breeding some disorder in the Kings
Family, it also possessed Seleucus, and his Son Antiochus, with an equal passion
of love toward her; but Antiochus, (as a Son, and a Subject) must submit to
the Law of Nature, and to the Royal Power, by concealing his flame, and
tempering his Passion, by force, and duty. For Seleucus, having imposed
silence, upon those internal, and hidden motions, which his Son was like to
discover in his breast, declared to his Counsel the resolution he had, to take
Demetrius his Daughter, to his second wife; and for this effect, he sent
Appelles into Phrygia, to draw her Picture, thereby to know, by the Copy of so
perfect a hand, whether the Original were answerable to the reputation, and
whether his passions were seconded by verity. The Divine Appelles, (whose name
will never die, and merited alone to be styled the Author of a Second Nature)
lived at that time, upon the coast of Syria, and was a Subject to Seleucus.
But, this Picture proved fatal, to all such as beheld it; for they were all
deprived, of the use of some member of their bodies, because it was drawn in
the Temple, at the time of Sacrifice. This was the Subject of my Mask, which I
entitled, The Enchanted Picture of STRATONICA; and the Order, and Entries of
it were these.

The great Hall of the Palace, was the place where they daunc't, because it was
the most capable of the company, and the most remarkable to help their
memories, to retain the representation of this dumb History. A vast and stately
Theater was built from the floor, a dorn'd with a Scene magnificently dressed;
where an excellent Concert of Instruments, and voices, entertained the
Spectators, till the Assembly was full; and in the mean time, a stained cloth,
with the Subject painted upon it, hid from their eyes the proud Decorations,
and Ornaments of the Scene, and afforded a gentle, and sweet liberty to their
ears, to enjoy the charms of the Music, and avoid the confounding of the
functions of the Senses, that so they might suddenly, and all at once,
surprise them with the magnificence, and splendour thereof, and pleasantly
beguile them, by the distance of the Object.

Fame, (as the principal Subject of the History of this Mask) with her clothes
full of eyes, and tongues, and Gazets, or News-books, in her hands, showed her
self with incomparable celerity, at the first Entry; and dancing with an
imperceptible agility, made the Beholders believe that she flew in her steps,
and that he who represented her, (who was a Dauncing-Master) had both the
wings, and lightness of that Goddess. At the end of his part, he scattered
his Gazets in the Hall, and Exit. In the second Scene, was exhibited the
Frontispiece of a stately Temple, which being opened by a Sacristain, or
Sexton, displaid a most excellent, and resplendent Piece of painting,
representing the Altar, and Trevet, where the Idol rendered the Oracles; which
was very recreative, by means of the variety of actions, which the Sacristain
performed, in just measure, and cadency of the dance, to prepare, and
accommodate all things for the sacrifice, and which was as clear, and
intelligible indeed, as any Part of a Play.

The adorable Stratonica, led by her Gallant, daunc't the third Scene, and
afforded admiration to all the Spectators, by the Majesty of her countenance,
by the Stateliness of her Habit, and by her most sweet, and regulated gravity,
in the exactness of the dance. Having ended her Part, she kneeled down in a
corner of the Temple, and her Gallant behind her, expecting the Sacrisice.

The fourth represented the coming of Appelles from Syria, to the Court of
Phrygia, to take a Picture of Stratonica, who having understood that she was in
the Temple, at a Sacrifice which her Father Demetrius had commanded to be made,
as a thanksgiving, for a victory which he had obtained, came in with his
stained Cloth, his Slice, and his Pensils, and having daunc't a while, hid
himself behind a corner of the Altar, over against the Princess, to steal her
Picture, during the time of the Sacrifice, the most secretly he could,
according to his order. The high Priest, followed by two Sacrificers, having
each of them a Thurible in his hand, made the fifth Entrey, with a Majestic
gravity, and a Stateliness of Habit, taken out of the ancient Medals, fit for
the Parts they acted, and as they were dancing, offered Incense to the Idol,
and made the finest figures, and cadencies, that could be showed by the number
of three, still turning to the Altar, and offering Incense, at the end of their
Air, whilst Appelles, behind the Altar, drew Stratonica's Picture, with a
regulated motion, upon the fame Air they daunc't.

Upon a sudden, a huge, and terrible noise, behind the Altar, made both the
Musicians, and Dauncers stop, in the middle of the Sacrifice, and the Oracle
bellowed out a dreadful voice, that their adorations were not pleasing to the
Gods, because they had been profaned by a Painter; but that his Work should
expiate the crime, and that all men who should look upon it, should be deformed
in some part of their bodies, excepting only women, who should be exempt from
the punishment. Hereupon, the whole Assembly went out of the Temple much
afflicted, and disturbed.

Olympia, wife to one of the Sacrificers, made the sixth Entry, and then the
Music struck up again; and she understanding the disgust, which the Gods had
signified against the Sacrifice, by the concourse of people she saw going out
of the Temple, and showing her self desirous to know the cause thereof, she
found no body there, but Appelles cast into a profound, and Letargical sleep;
whom she (in vain) endeavored to awake, to consult about the business: For,
in regard he had been taken with the beauty of the picture whilst he was
drawing it, he was the first who received the punishment of the profanation he
had committed, by a dead sleep, into which he was cast, according to
thesentence of the Oracle. So that Olympia could not awake him; but observing,
amongst other marvailous excellencies of the Picture, the Inscription which it
bore, for King Seleucus, and nettled by covetousness (a vice constant to the
Sex) in hope of great reward for so rare a Present, she resolved to steal the
Picture, and carry it into Syria to the King. But it was no small pleasure, to
see this woman represent all the motions, which the Passions of this Entry
required, with a well composed cadency, and an agreeable disposition of Steps:
As the terror given by the Oracle; the Ecstasies, into which she was cast, by
the excellency of the Piece; and the flight she made out of the Temple, for
fear of being caught in so worthy a theft. In a word, this Entry was so
stupendous, and so expressive, that it raised so many buzzes of admiration,
and applause, as put the Music to silence.

Upon this, an excellent Trio was sung, by certain Musicians, in an Antic
Habit, to give time for Olympia's journey into Syria with the Picture, and to
observe the rules of the Representation; during which the Temple disappeared,
and at the same time, by a subtle change of the Scene, was suddenly
represented a stately Room, of a Kings Palace, which covered the whole Theater,
(and whose magnificent structure might dispute Architecture, with the most
pompous Palace of Italy, and the most admirable Porticks of Venice) where there
came out an Eunuch, Doorkeeper to King Seleucus's Chamber, and introduc't
Olympia to him. The Music (having given the Spectators leisure to recollect
their minds, from the excess of delight, wherewith they had been seaz'd by this
stately change of the Stage) began to play-again, and the Eunuch daunc't his
part, after a brisk, and antic fashion, not much disresembling the Ideas of
the Trio, performed by the Musicians.

The King Seleucus came forth of his Chamber, with Olympia, to whom he showed
many signs of recognizance, for the Present she had made him, and willing her
to set it upon a Cupboard which stood near the Stage, and not being able to
satiate himself with admiring it, or rather with adoring it, he suddenly
became blind; which Olympia perceiving, she fled away, and left him groaping up
and down the Stage; and it was a very pleasant spectacle to the Beholders, to
see him harnast in a Coat of Arms, glittering like the Sun, with Spangles of
Gold, and Embrodery, go grovelling, and staggering to his Chamber; and all this,
with the hansomest measure, and the most regulated Counterpaces that could be.

The Prince Antiochus, understanding the dismal news of the King his Fathers
blindness, came out of his Chamber, with intention to go visit, and consolate
him; but casting his eye upon this Divine, and fatal picture, and contemplating
the beauty thereof, he suddenly found his Right Leg shortened by a foot, with
strange and grievous pains; and so he was fain to go halting home.

In the second Entry, two Princes of the Court came forth, to go to the King;
but stopping to gaze upon the Picture, before they went in, the one of them
swelled up like a Tun, and the other grew bunch-backt.

Then, four of the Lifeguard daunc't excellently well, and were so much the
more admired, because they daunc't a Pyrrique after the old fashion, with their
Halbards in their hands, wherewith they showed many military feats, after the
manner of pitched, and well regulated Battails: But they also suffered by this
fatal Charm; for as they were peeping upon the Picture, they were all four
struck lame in their arms, and their Halbards fell out of their hands, and made
sport enough for the Company, to see them march off with every one a crooked
arm, dragging their Halbards with their other hands; and all this, with a very
fine cadency, and measure.

But the greatest mischief the Picture did, was to a litte knavish Page, who,
being sent to call the Physicians, and not content to stand and pry upon it, at
a distance, must needs forsooth creep toward it, and consider it near hand;
but upon a sudden, the poor Strippling found his thighs shivered, and was
forced to wriggle away upon his breech, which caused much laughter, to see him
throw away the Picture in a rage, and dance upon his arse. Now, the King
understanding that the whole Court had suffered by looking upon this Picture,
commanded it to be torn in pieces; to which purpose the Eunuch coming forth in
the third Entry, and finding the Picture upon the ground, could not forbear to
look upon it, before he brake it; but it cost him dear, for his head grew
forthwith as bald as his chin; and so scratching his noddle with one hand, and
assaulting the Picture with the other, he came as scurvily off as the rest.

A Physician, and a Mountebank being sent for, to cure the King, and his Son,
made the fourth Entry, so upon the same air, but with different steps, and
contrary figures, in regard of the Antipathy there is between them, in point of
their Vocation; and this Entry was of more force then the rest, and had more
paces of Science, and figures of peculiarity, in respect of their contrariety;
but it was too short; for really, had the whole Bal been composed of the same
steps, upon the same air, it would not have been tedious; so delightful, and
ravishing they were.

Now, all humane remedies being found useless, toward the cure of these great
mischiefs this Charm had wrought, it was thought fit, to have recourse to
Divine ones. Wherefore the King, with all his crippled Court, went to the
Temple, to beg remedy of the Gods; and here the Scene changed in a trice, and
showed another Temple, different from the former, where the high Priest, and
the Sacrificer immolated an Heyfer upon the Altar, for the recovery of the
King, and his Court: and then all the Cripples entered together, dancing after
odd, and ridiculous fashions, every one according to the defect of his
debilitated part; after which, the Music stopping, they all made halt,
expecting the Oracle, which answered, that nothing but the Original of the
Picture, could cure the evils which the Copy had wrought. Hereupon the Temple
disappeared, and Seleucus's Palace returned again, whence two Ambassadors were
dispatched to Demetrius, to demand Stratonica, for wise to the King of Syria;
which finished the sixth Entry; and after which the Musicians began to play, and
by a sweet concert of Voices, and Instruments, made an agreeable Interlude, to
give the Ambassadors leisure to make their journey, and bring the worthy fruit
of their Embassy.

Seleucus being informed, that the Ambassadors approached with the divine
Subject of his health, and the adorable object of his love, went forth at the
eighteenth Entry, with all his Court, in as pitiful a case as it was, to
receive her; where they daunc't, after the prettiest, and most fantastical
fashion that could be, with so many various, and extravagant postures,
(according to the various defects of their Members, and all together with so
much punctuality) that all these different persons composed a just harmony of
their bodies, like a good Concert, of a diversity of Notes.

The fair Stratonica, showed her self at the bottom of the Theater, ushered in
by the Ambassadors, and she soon suspended both the eyes, and hearts of the
Spectators, as well with the beauty of her person, as with her grace, and
comeliness in dancing; and as soon as she was presented to the King, he
recovered his sight, and all the poor, maimed Courtiers grew sound, and brisk;
in acknowledgement of which great felicity, the Stage was subtly, and suddenly
changed, into joy and jubily, and the Music, having altered their tune, for
the twentieth, and last Entry, Stratonica, and the whole Court daunc't the
Grand Bal, (being thirteen in number) to wit, Stratonica, Seleucus, Antiochus,
the two Ambassadors, the two Princes, the four Halbardeers, the Eunuch, and the
Page, and afterward, in representation of the Wedding, and copolusion of the
Mask, they all went to play the good fellows together.

Indeed (said the Count) the Subject of their Bal was gallant, and stately, and
I believe the representation of it was admirable, though it seem to be almost
impossible; not for the sumptuousness, and charge, but for the trouble and
difficulty of it. For, how could you make a man seem blind, bunch-backt, puffed
up, and broaken-thigh'd, which are things almost impossible? It was a pretty
trick indeed, said the Marquess: For whilst the King was rubbing his eyes, and
making a show of feeling some dimnesse in them, he imperceivably slipped on a
pair of false eyes, which he had hidden under his Vizard: And one of the
Princes, by means of a Cushion which he had under his Cassack, drew up a silken
string, and showed a bunch in his back: And the other made himself seem to be
swollen, with a Bag-pipe, which he had upon his breast, the pipes whereof were
tied to his armpits, filled the bag by their frequent motion. As for the Page,
he fell instantly upon his breech, having the Bowl dish tied behind him before,
though it appeared not at all, till he began to dance upon it, and to tumble
upon the Stage, the noise whereof signified the measures of the cadency, which
added great grace to the action, and great delight both to the ears, and eyes
of the Company. All the rest was very easy, and feasible; and all things were
so well, and so advantagiously ordered, that there was not any defect at all,
in the least point of the whole Representation.

These are but petty observations which you make, (said the Philosopher) and I
have taken notice of one thing, very irregular, and quite against the order of
the Scene, which requires the unity of Times, and Places, and which ought to be
regulated at most, within the term of a Natural Day, of four and twenty hours:
But in this Bal, I have noted, that of place, in the representation, of two
different Kingdoms far asunder; and in that of Time, two different Journeys,
which impugns the Unity of Time, and restrains not the mind, to the point which
the Stage desires. You could not be a Philosopher (replied the Marquess) if
you did not comment upon all things, and pretend even to shame an egg-shell.
But to give rational satisfaction, to such persons of judgment, as shall come
to the knowledge of the Subject; and to prevent the malice of such Critics, as
shall presume to condemn, either the Invention, or Order of this Bal; I will
only tell you, that we ought not to cavil, or find strange, to see fabulous
conceptions exhibited upon a true Foundation; and if we made any addition, to
the History of Piutarch, or to the famous Romance of Stratonica, to embellish
and illustrate the Stage, and to give the Spectators more cause of admiration,
you must consider, that common things do not surprise, and ravish the Senses,
as novelty does: For, if even Beauty it self were too familiar to us, it would
not be amiable; and if our Notions, and Sciences were not so defective as they
are, we should live without pleasure; in regard that all satisfactions of the
mind, and delights of the eyes, come from deprivations, or ignorance, which is
the whetstone of curiosity: And thence it is, that we draw those admirations,
attended by the charms, and divertizements which new things afford us; whereas
such, as wherewith we have been once satiated, seem always faint, and insipid,
though never so excellent.

Now, in regard that in this Design, the principal scope was the satisfaction
of the Intelligent; we conceived, that the Representation of a History, of a
Fable, or of any trivial subject, would not surprise the mind, nor charm the
senses; and therefore that it was fit to invent some particular Subject, so to
exact (at least by the novelty thereof) something, for the advantage, and
pleasure of the curious, and that to keep the learned within the compass of
their rules, it was also necessary, by diversifying the Scene, to insert
somewhat, contrary to the Dramatick, and to illustrate the beauty of the Epick,
and to elevate, in fine, the splendour of the Stage, by the thing, which is now
a days most unusual to it. I speak to you Master Philosopher, (said the
Marquess) and if you be not content with this, I send you back to the Hall,
where you would have found wherewith to satisfy you, in the pompous richness
of the Clothes, in the proud decorations of the Stage, and in the excellent
harmony, both of the Instruments, and Voices.

The Marquess had no sooner done, but the Coach was stopped, and invested Rue
des Lombards at Paris.
by a multitude of armed Citizens, and Sergeants, in Lumbard-Street, who all in
a rage, attend upon the Commissary of the Quarter, which their Pages, and
Lackays (who were in good number) perceiving, forthwith drew their swords to
repulse them, and laid so well about them, that they wounded some, put others
to flight, and slasht them for the most part to the purpose, whilst the
Commissary, coming to the Coach with some Torches about him, cried out with a
commanding voice, like a Magistrate, Are you they, who have stolen away a young
Lady, out of this Street? Come on, let us see? Feel, my friends, feel in this
Coach! To which the Gentlemen answered, We know not what you mean; we have no
Lady here; but if we had, we would keep her well enough from you. Herewith,
finding themselves mistaken, they departed, and the Coach went on; and when it
was pretty far advanced, the Gentlemen heard some Pistols go off, at the next
turning; and when they were past the corner of old Lavieille rue du Temple.
Temple Street, they saw in Rue des Blancs-Manteaux.
White-Cloak-Street, seven or eight Filous, or Thieves, having set upon another
Coach, which had but few folks in it, had killed the Coachman; and the Horses
being frighted, ran away with the Coach, and overthrew it in the middle of the
Street, which stopped the passage. The Rogues seeing so many people coming,
betook them to their heels, and got away, before these Gentlemen came up; whose
Coachman, to make way, fell a whipping his own horses, and those of the other
too so sharply, that they raised the Coach upright, in such sort, as the Boots
of the two Coaches rubbed one against another, and so the Gentlemen past slowly
on; when suddenly, a Lady skipt out of the other Coach, in despite of them
who endeavored to hold her, and resolutely catching hold of the boot of the
Barons Coach, cried help, help, for Gods sake! I am a poor Girl stolen from my
Fathers house, and would rather be hanged, then go with this villain, who has
forced me away! The civil, and officious Baron receiving her, took her in his
arms, set her down by him, and bid the Coachman drive on as fast as he could.
All the company crowded to see her, and examine her; but to no purpose, for she
gave them no answer; but, partly through the fright, and partly through her
straining to get out of the other Coach, she fell in a swoon.

Being come to the Barons house, they caused torches to be brought to the
Coach, to see what Fortune had bestowed upon them, and there they found so much
beauty, and so many charms, in the face of a young Lady, of about fifteen years
old, that even in the very fit of her swooning it self, it surpised them with
admiration, and passion. They laid her upon a bed, and when she was come to her
self again, she burst forth into such lamentable shriks, and complaints, as
that she was almost ready to use violence to her self, notwithstanding the
Baron did what he could, to appease and consolate her. Oh unhappy wretch that I
am! (said she) I fell at first but into the snares of one Ravisher; and now I
am at the mercy of many persons whom I know not, and who peradventure -- She
was going on, but the Baron interrupted her, saying, Cheer up Lady, and be of
good comfort, in the assurance I give you, that you shall here receive no
wrong, nor displeasure, but rather all kind of respect, and obedience. She
replied with resentment, and submission; I desire no such thing as that of you
Sir; but all the favor I crave of you, is, that I may be carried safe to my
Fathers house; and this I beg of you, by all the honor you have, and by all
you hold dear in the world! And with this, she burst out into so many tears and
sobs, and actions of humility, that she would have softened the heart of a very
Barbarian; and adding to her supplications (to captivate them whom she
petitioned) that the aversion, and hatred which she carried toward him who had
forced her away, made her cast her self upon the mercy of the first she met
with; but that the Fates had been propitious to her, in throwing her upon
persons of condition, amongst whom she found some light, of the only comfort of
the distressed, which is hope. Lady, (said the Baron) I should be glad to carry
you instantly home; but I can hardly do it, because I neither know where you
dwell, nor who you are.

Upon this, she took a little courage, and wiping her rosy, and most amiable
cheeks, which were all bedewed with tears, she told him where she dwelt, and
who she was; namely, the Daughter of a certain Financier, (whom she named) and
related part of the accident how she was forced away. Then the Marquess
catching up her words, said, Your Parents, Lady, are seeking after you, and the
Commissary of your Quarter came with a great multitude, and felt in our Coach
for you, as we past along the Street, to see if we had stolen you. I would to
God! (said she) (with a sob, which stopped her speech, and already flattered the
noble Company, with the hope, that, this word was spoken to their advantage) I
would to God, the Commissary, and my Parents had met that Coach wherein I was,
instead of yours! For then I had been by this time, in my dear Mothers arms.
But I should be sorry for that, replied the Baron; for then I should have been
deprived, of the highest felicity that could befall me: And I should be freed
(said she with a sigh) from the fear and danger wherein I am! I will warrant
you from the later, (said the Baron) and you have just ground to lay aside the
former, in regard you are in a safe refuge, where none shall command but your
self, and where you are as absolute by the respect I have vowed you, as by the
empire you have acquired upon my soul.

This sublime Complement dulled the heat of the fire wherewith the other
Gentlemen began to burn: for afterward, they spoke of nothing but going
instantly to supper, and then to the Bal, whereof they had talked upon the
Course, and to leave this fair desolate Lady to her rest, if it were possible
for her to take any, (being at the mercy of despair) but it was so far from it,
that she did nothing but impatiently ask now whether she were going home? then,
whether the Coach were ready? and in fine, whether they would keep their word
with her, or not? And the like.

The Steward having sent word, that the Meat was at table, the Company rose to
go to supper; but much ado they had to depart out of the Chamber, where they
had left their hearts, and where Love had laid new ambushes for them, at their
going out: For this charming Lady, having recovered some part of her strength
through hope, and rising, out of civility, from the bed to wait upon them to
the door, showed them so tall, straight, and slender a body, enricht, and
illustrated with so comely and majestic a grace, and with so sweet and
penetrating an air, that the gravity of her carriage, and the vivacity of her
aspect rendered her Divine, and inaccessible. Her supper was brought into her
chamber to her, but the would not touch so much as one bit of any thing; and
indeed, the Gentlemen did neither eat, nor say much; they being agitated with
the passion of love, and desire; and she with that of fear, and discomfort.
After supper, they all retired, save only the Baron, who dispatched a witty, and
discreet person, to inform himself of the Ladies condition, and of the truth of
the accident; whereby he found, that she was worth six hundred thousand Livers,
(which is near sixty thousand pound Sterling) as being the only Child, and
Heiress to a rich Financier, and that there was great diligence, and inquiry
made after her.

But if Love had sensibly touched his heart before, this news did it much more,
in despite of all the generus resistance he could make against it. Wherefore,
he presently began to consider how he might make use of his good Fortune, and
keep the Lady for himself: in order to which, he resolved to carry her
forthwith out of his house, where she had been seen; and to this effect, he
sent his Coach with six fresh horses, out at St. Anshonies Gate, with some men
on horseback well armed, to guard it. In the mean while, he went into the
Chamber of his fair Guest, to ask her if she were ready to go home; however he
intended to carry her farther. And she, as soon as ever she saw him, without
expecting his complement, earnestly ask't him what he came to offer her,
according to his promise. I am here to wait on you Lady (said he) and there is
a Chair on purpose at the Gate, to carry you with more ease, and convenience,
then in a Coach, in regard of your weakness. Whereupon she, without answering
him, without calling for hood or mask, and without expecting his hand, went
first down the stairs, and slipped into the Chair, and the Baron went into
another, to conduct her to the Coach, which stayed for them, and which was to
carry them before day, to the house of a friend of his in the Country.

They met with misfortune in the streets; but the Baron being in deep
contemplation upon his design, was furiously assaulted by two strong Passions,
which so tormented him, that they made a kind of a Portative Hell of his soul,
namely, Honor, and Profit, which made a fierce combat in his breast; and Love,
taking the stronger side of the two, suffered him not to deliberate much upon
it, but biased his Spirit that way. Honor said to him, Hold, whither go
thou? Thou go to commit an unworthy Rape, which will stain the brightness of
thy glory with irreparable shame; and to perpetrate a crime, whereof Heaven
has made thee the Preventer. Thou ought to send this Lady home to her
Parents, and therein thou would perform an Heroical Action.

Love said, Affection cannot be forced, and my fire is never kindled, but by
services, and complements. Thou will more vigorously captivate thy Mistress,
by carrying her home, then by keeping her prisoner; and her Father, in requital
of thy generosity, will make thee a Present of the thing which thou have given
him: Home with her, home with her!

No, (said Profit) thou art a fool, if thou let slip thy good fortune, and
out of faint-heartedness, loosest a certain treasure for an uncertain reward.
Whereupon, Love wheeled about, and tickled him with a desire, to take present
possession of the charms, and delights he had proposed him. In fine, after a
long contestation of his thoughts, Honor got the victory; and so, calling that
person to him, whom he had sent to inform him of the accident, (as confiding
most in him) he bid him softly, Go to the Financiers house; whither when they
came, the tears, desolation, and affliction, which was there before, turned
forthwith into as great a confusion of amazement, joy, and gladness. For, when
the Mother (who was in her bed, overwhelmed with grief) and the Father, (who
was walking sadly up and down the chamber, exaggerating the excess of his
misfortune) heard their Servants shout out upon a sudden, Mistress,
Mistress! the Father was coming out, to see what was the matter, and met the
Baron at the Chamber Door, ushering in his Daughter, and presenting her to him.
The Mother could not contain her self, but jumpt out of the bed, and caught her
in her arms; and whilst all was full of embra ements, and excesses of joy, the
Baron said to them; It has been my happiness, to take your Daughter out of
the hands of him who had stolen her, and now I bring her to you. Upon which the
young Lady began to relate the good treatment she had received; but the Baron
forthwith replied; Lady, all the recompense I desire, shall be the glory of
having served you. As for the Father, and Mother, their actions supplied the
want of words, to thank, and acknowledge the irremunerable favor he had done
them; and so having sent for his Coach, which expected him out of town, and
taking his leave, he said to the young Lady; Lady, I have yet served you but to
halves; nor shall I think my self to have merited any thing of you, till I
shall have fought with him who forced you, and till the justice of your cause
shall have made me sacrifice him, to revenge your injury.

In the second Walk, we will treat of the pretty adventures of the Barons love
to this Lady, and introduce his Coach, with other persons in it, amongst whom
we shall see a Conversation as various, as recreative. And the Ladies, and Wits
of the Court must be pleased to pardon me, if I have coucht any Entertainments
here, which are not proper for the Course, or any Matters which are not pleasing
to their palates: For, if I have showed in this book, that I am not much
inclined to verbosity, and that I love not superfluous and affected terms; I
was induc't to it by the advice of my friends, who are good book-men, and the
scourges of them, who talk much, and say nothing. However, to expiate this
crime committed against Gallantry, I was fain (contrary to my design) to change
the Scene of this first Walk, and retire the Coach of my Interlocutors, from
the Course; to the end, that not being distracted by the charming beauty of the
Ladies, nor diverted by the variety and confusion of Objects, their
Conversation might not be interrupted, and that they might probably be able to
continue it in a Walk apart, upon such subjects as require quiet and attention.
But in these following Walks, it shall not be so; and they shall allow the
Court more freedom, more gallantry, and more pleasure, then this has done.

FINIS.

