A Second EPISTLE, Being a Tender Salutation To the Seed of Jacob. Wherein is
contained an Exhortation to the Called and Chosen People of the Lord, who have
kept their First Love, to abide therein to the End. Also, A Hand of Dear Love
held forth to the Spiritual Travelers, who are traveling from Egypt's Land of
Darkness, toward the Spiritual Land of Rest. The Counsel and Determination of
the Lord God Almighty founded in the Ears of the Unfaithful, Disobedient and
Deceitful, who hold the Truth in Unrighteousness, and cover themselves with a
Profession of the Precious Truth, and yet live in the Nature and Spirit of
those who walk in the Broad Way, that leads to Destruction. Also, A brief
Rehearsal and Discovery of the Enemy of Man's Soul, his Workings from the
beginning of his Appearance unto this Day, Age and Generation.

Charles Marshall.

Ye have seen what I did unto the Egyptians, and how I bare you on Eagles
Wings, and brought you unto my self. Now therefore if you will obey my Voice
indeed, and keep my Covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar Treasure unto me
above all People; for all the Earth is mine. Printed in the Year, 1673.

A Second EPISTLE, Being a Tender Salutation To the Seed of Jacob.
THou Seed of Jacob, that have been scattered amongst the Nations, who have
indeed been small, and lain amongst the Pots, thy Glory has been covered, thou
have been as trodden down amongst all Nations, desolate, and forsaken as a
Widow, thy Habitation has been in the Wilderness, the great red Dragon has
sought to devour thee, the Beast that rose out of the Sea, and the Beast that
rose out of the Earth, and Mystery Babylon the great have all sought the
Vailing of thy Glory, and the Destruction of thy Life: thou have been as a
speckled Bird, and being desolate have mourned, and cried through many Ages and
Generations; thou have been as in a strange Land, how has the Egyptian and
Assyrian oppressed thee! how have the Taskmasters oppressed thee! Oh, thy
Burdens, thy Oppressions, thy Wounds, thy Cries and Tears, thy Lamentations,
thy Groanings under all thy Oppressions, and Oppressors! thy Burden is felt,
and thy deplorable Estate amongst the Nations (over which Darkness has spread
it self as a Covering) God Almighty has given a sense of.

Oh thou that art as in the Clifts of the Rocks, and as in the secret Places of
the Stairs, my Soul has been often bowed down in a sense and sight hereof; but
(blessed be the Name of my God) the Sorrow has not been without Hope, having
felt the Arm that will deliver thee.

Arise, Arise thou Worm Jacob, the Lord has heard thy Mournings, and has
taken notice of thy Oppressions, and his Bowels earn on thee; yea, he has
seen, he has seen thy desolate Estate, thy Cries are come before him, and thy
Sighings and Mournings; and he has taken notice of thy Oppressors, and is
angry with the Nations because of thee.

And now in the Name of the God of the whole Earth, the Everlasting Creator, ^
prophecy of thy universal Visitation and Deliverance through all Nations,
Tongues, and People; now will the Lord plead with all Nations for thy sake, and
give Nations for thee, and People for the Ransom of thy Life: Now will be
gather thee, thou Seed of Jacob, from the East, and from the West; he will now
say to the North give up, and to the South keep not back, and will bring his
Sons from far, and his Daughters from the Ends of the Earth; therefore thus
says the Lord, who redeemed Abraham, concerning the House of Jacob, Jacob
shall not now be ashamed, neither shall his Face now wax pale; but when he
sees his Children, the Work of my Hands in the midst of him, they shall
sanctify my Name, and Sanctify the Holy One of Jacob, and shall fear the God
of Israel.

And now behold, the Name of the Lord comes from far, burning with his Anger,
and the Burden thereof will be heavy; his Lips are full of Indignation, and his
Tongue is Devouring Fire, and his Breath (as an Overflowing Stream) shall
reach to the midst of the Neck to silt the Nations with the Sive of Vanity; and
there shall be a Bridle in the Jaws of the People, causing them to Err: but
thou Seed of Jacob shall have a Song as in the Night, when an holy Solemnity is
kept, and Gladness of Heart, as when one goes with a Pipe to come into the
Mountain of the Lord, to the Mighty One of Israel; and the Lord shall cause his
Glorious Voice to be heard, and shall show the lightning down of his Arm, and
the Indignation of his Anger, and with the Flame of devouring Fire, with
scattering Tempests and Hailstones.

And therefore Arise, thou Precious Seed, spring at the Salutation of the
Prophecy of thy Deliverance; for thou shall be made a quiet Habitation, a
Tabernacle that shall not be taken down, not one of the Stakes thereof shall
ever be moved, neither shall any of thy Cords be broken; thou shall be as a
Royal Diadem in the Hand of thy God, even an Eternal Excellency, the Joy of
many Generations, this is thy Portion, and the Lot of thy Inheritance, thou
Oppressed Afflicted Seed of Jacob.

And now unto you, the First Fruits of the Glorious Day of Visitation, which
has dawned in this Northern Island of the Gentiles, who have kept your first
Love, in and through which the Lord God Everlasting reached unto you, and have
kept your Habitations in the Light, unto which you were turned by the Might of
the Arm of Jacob's God, and therein have waited, and diligently sought and
served the Lord; I say, your Bones are full of Fatness, your Souls are full of
Virtue, and Hearts filled with the Love of God, and Minds possessed with the
Pure Fear and Aw of God the Almighty; your Tents are Goodly, and your
Habitation is Lovely; you it is I dearly love, honor and esteem; you are the
Jewels of the Lord, which he will now make up, and spare. My Soul is refreshed
in the very remembrance of you, and my Spirit is comforted in the sight of you
in the Invisible Spirit of Holiness, you Beloved of the Lord, you Amiable Ones,
whose Souls abhor every Graven Image, and Likeness, nothing satisfying your
Thirsty, Breathing, Panting Souls, but that River the Streams whereof make glad
the City of God.

Unto you this Exhortation springs in my Heart (who am a Fellow-Citizen with
you) in the pure Movings and Arisings of the Eternal Power of the Mighty One of
Israel, from day to day, from week to week, from month to month, from year to
year, to the very end of our days, let us keep our Habitations, and stand upon
our Watchtower, wherein we hear what the Lord says, who speaks Peace to his
People, that they turn not again unto Folly; let us keep the Commandments of
the Lord, cleaving to him, loving and serving him all our days, with all our
Hearts, and with all our Souls.

And as here all keep, we shall blossom as a Rose, we shall grow as the Willows
by the Watercourse, we shall mount up as on the Wings of Eagles; we shall
run, and not be weary; and go, and not be faint; here every one will daily feel
the Arisings of the living eternal Power of the Highest, which first reached to
quicken us, which alone can keep alive to the Lord; here Virtue is added unto
Virtue, and none are barren or unfruitful, but are as a Watered Garden, being
daily watered by our Beloved, who is as a Fountain of Gardens, and Well-springs
of Living Waters, who will lead you all, you beautiful Ones, into his
Banqueting House, where his Banner, even Love it self, will be displayed over
you; wherein Eat, oh Friends, and drink, oh Friends, at the Table of the Lord,
of the Fatness of the House of our God.

And oh you beautiful Flock of the good Shepherd of Israel, who have come up
from the Washing, among whom there is none Barren; I am in Love with your Life,
and taken with your Beauty, and the Splendor of your Garments, the fine Clean
Linen: You Virgins, your Day of Rejoicing is come, and coming; you are those
who stand with the Lamb on Mount Zion, yea, on the Sea of Glass, which is
mingled with the Purifying Fire; you have gotten and are getting Victory over
the Beast, and Image, and the Number of his Name; Harps are put into your
Hands, and the Song of the Redeemed into your Mouths, which none learn but the
Redeemed of the Lord, which is the Song of Moses, the Servant of the Lord, and
the Song of the Lamb; you have passed through the Ministration of Condemnation,
which was Glorious in its Time, and are come to that which exceeds in Glory;
you have seen, and shall see the Judgments and Desolation of the great Whore,
Mystery Babylon the Great, she is falling, she is falling; Rejoice over her ye
holy Prophets and People of the Lord; an utter End and utter Desolation in the
Name of the Eternal God is coming on her, and her Merchants, and all that shall
be found Drinking of her Cup of Fornication, and over all that have come in,
and been intreduced through the loss of the Ancient, Pure, Holy, Everlasting
Power.

And so dear Friends, Brethren and Sisters (unto whom is the Salutation of my
Love in the arising of his Power, that moves me at this time thus to write) let
us dwell, and forever abide, and keep, as aforesaid, in the holy Habitation,
where our Growth, Sasety and Preservation is forever; and the God of all
Consolation, Might, Power and Eternal Strength Water, Refresh, and Bless you
from this time forth, and forever.

And now unto you who have been visited with the right Arm of God's
Deliverance, when you were in Egypt's Land spiritual, and have been by that Arm
brought forth, and are now traveling in the Wilderness, wherein you meet with
many Trials, and find the Snares and Temptations of the Enemy strong and many,
and are ready therewith sometimes to be overwhelmed, and to faint in your
Minds; unto you my Heart and Soul yearns, and for you do my Bowels turn; dear
Lambs and Babes, hear the Counsel of the Lord unto you in his endless Love, his
Care is over you, that are and will be Obedient unto him, He will carry you his
Lambs in his Bosom, and gently lead all that are with Young; look not at your
own Weakness, not at the Temptations of the Enemy; neither at the Nature yet
remaining, which receives the Temptations; but look to the Lord, and believe in
his Power, trust in the Sufficiency of his Grace, and let the Waves beat, and
the Billows of Temptation go over; stand you still, and ye shall know, that he
is God, who changes not, who in his own time will lift up his Standard against
your Enemies; who by the Arm of his own Power can make all your and his Enemies
as Ashes under the Soals of your Feet; and here you shall know, that the
Everlasting God, the Creator of the Ends of the Earth does not sail, neither is
he weary; he gives Power to the Faint, and to them that have no Might he
increases Strength: The Youths shall fail, and the Young Men shall utterly
faint; but those that wait upon the Lord shall renew their Strength; they shall
mount up, as on Eagles wings; they shall run, and not be weary; and go, and not
faint: Therefore lift up your Heads all you Breathing, Panting, Thirsty Ones
(who cannot live without God's Appearance) in his Power your Enemies to
destroy, the Appearance whereof your Soul loathes and abhors, even you that
cannot take up a Rest or Delight in any perishing fading thing, but over all
Mortality cries for a Savior and Deliverer; neither can be satisfied with a
Name to live, but cries to live to God, whose Souls Pant after the Loving
Kindness of the Lord, as the Heart pants after the Waterbrooks; whose Tongues
sometimes even fail for Thirst after the Living Enjoyment of the Living God:
You are beloved of my Soul; your Travel I know in the Experience thereof; lift
up your Heads in the Name of the Mighty God, and be no more bowed down through
your long Infirmity, believe in the Anointed of the Lord, on whom your Help is
laid; touch but the Hem of his Garment, and Virtue comes forth of him to heal
your diseased inward Man; and when the Enemy, by all his Power and Strength,
would endeavor to destroy your Hope, believe in Hope against Hope, even
against the Hope of the Enemy; and look not at all at your own Deadness, nor
barren Womb, but believe in the God of Abraham, and the Seed you shall know
that shall be Heir, through whom to you the Inheritance shall be sure: and
never stagger at the Promise, because it is not presently fulfilled; but
believe (which is the Work of God) and it shall be imputed to you for
Righteousness; and in due time the Barren bears, and neither Eleazer, nor the
Son of the Bondwoman shall inherit, for that the Promises are Yea and Amen to
the Seed, and to all who are in the Seed.

Learn the Mystery of Faith, which is held in a pure Conscience, which is the
Substance of things not seen, and the very Evidence of things hoped for; and
here your Strength will be renewed: Cast not away your Confidence; for that
has a Reward; nor let go your Hope, which is as an Anchor, both sure and
steadfast; but as I said before, Believe in the Lord, and diligently wait upon
him: never go to Battle against the Lord's and your Souls Enemies in your own
Strength, nor Reason with the Enemies Appearances and Temptations in your own
Reason, nor consult concerning his Appearance in your own Thoughts and
Cogitations: Beware, I warn you in the Name and Love of God, of kindling Sparks
of your own, which is very incident to all thus exercised; for the Product and
Effect is to ^ie down in Sorrow thereof: but sink ye down into the Death of
your own Thoughts, Reasonings and Imaginations, Conceivings, Gatherings and
Fetchings in; neither ascend, nor descend, nor fly beyond the Sea; but sink
down into the Word of Life in the Heart, and there in pure Stilness wait
patiently upon God, until he arise your Enemies to scatter and destroy, and
your Souls to deliver; and believe in the Word, the Light, the Gift, the
Sufficient Grace, and cast all your Care upon the Lord, who cares for you: do
you nothing but submit to the Saving Grace of God; and here you will see and
have an Understanding how you have in your own Strength and Wills toiled all
Night, and thereby caught nothing, and in the Morning see your Savior, who
will direct you, so that by following his Directions you will see more effected
in a Moment of Time, then by your own Willing, Running and Toiling all Night;
for by his own Strength shall no Man prevail, its God that works both the
Will and the Deed; hear this, give ear, and be instructed, you afflicted and
tossed with Tempest, and not comforted; let the Scales fall off from your Eyes,
then will you see all things possible, and your Faith will increase that
removes Mountains. Arise you Afflicted Ones, who sit as in the Dust of the
Earth; Arise, arise in the Might of the Power of the Eternal Strength of
Israel; shake your selves from the Dust of your own Thoughts, Conceivings,
Contrivings and Imaginations; come into the Innocent Way, where the Wayfaring
Man, although a Fool, shall not err: And be no more discouraged you bowed down
in Soul and Spirit; li^t up your Heads in the Light of Righteousness, and you
shall see your Redeemer draw nigh, yea, very nigh.

And so, dear Mourners in Zion, who mourn as a Dove without a Mate, be ye
Comforted, be ye Comforted; behold I declare unto you in the Word of the Lord,
That if you look up unto him, and believe in his Name, and obey the Requirings
of his Power, your Warfare will be accomplished, your Hearts and desolate Souls
will be inhabited with Life and Love, and the Ancient Paths will the Lord
restore to you; for now the Fruitful Field shall become like a Wilderness; and
you who have seen your selves like a Wilderness, shall blossom as a Rose; and
you who have seen your selves as a standing Pool, shall now become as Springs
of Water; Night shall pass over with you, and the Day shall dawn; Winter shall
passover, and Summer draw nigh; and the Day hasteneth, you Mourners in Zion,
after the Enjoyment of your God, wherein the Voice of the Turtle shall be heard
(the Voice of the Innocent One) and the Singing of Birds in your Land;
therefore be you comforted, ye solitary Ones, the Arm of the Lord is awakened
for your Deliverance; break forth thou Barren that did not bear, for more (in
the Name of Israel's God) shall be the Children of the Barren and of the
Desolate, then of the merried Wife. And so dear Exercised Ones, sink down in
the Stayedness and pure Content in the Light; and I charge you, strive not to
stir up, nor awake your Beloved until he please, so will the Work prosper in
his Hands, and you shall the Spoil divide, that tarry at home in your
Habitation; and then you will see your Beloved come leaping over the Mountains,
and skipping over the Hills, ye will see him as the Apple Tree among the Trees
of the Wood, and sit down under his Shadow, and find his Fruit brought forth
(by his Working, and your Passiveness) pleasant to the Taste: so neither will,
nor run; for the Battle is not to the Strong, nor the Race to the Swift; and
here you will learn the Mystery of your Resting from all your Labors, that he
may work, and you not let; and as you are brought to be truly passive, as the
Clay in the Hand of the Potter; let but him (even the Lord Strong and Mighty)
arise, and in his Arisings your Enemies will be scattered.

So the Lord God Almighty open your Understandings clearly in these things
(which are indeed of Eternal Concernment) and lead you and guide you to the
Fountain of Living Waters, where you may be abundantly refreshed, consolated
and strengthened to grow strong in the Lord, and in the Power of his Might.

And unto you whom the Love of God has reached, in making manifest the Way of
Truth, in which you should walk, and who have received the Truth, and made
Profession and Confession thereof, but have not, nor do not obey from the
Heart; and all you who have tasted of the good Word of God, and of the Power of
the World to come, and have and do turn aside, and backslide from the Way of
the Lord, following the Lusts of your own Hearts, and Desires of your own Eyes,
professing the Truth, and in some Measure are in Outward Conformity unto it,
who profess to love God, but love the World, and the things thereof, who are
Doubleminded and Unstable in your Ways, who would serve two Masters, and be
Heirs of two Kingdoms, who from day to day come amongst the People of the Lord
(who are Children of the Light and of the Day) but still stand in that Nature
that is Corrupt; and although in the Assemblies of the Lord's People such may
be often smitten, and the Way in which they should walk is manifest, and their
By-Ways and Crooked Ways discovered, yet notwithstanding the many Reproofs of
Instruction continue in the same Nature and Spirit: and all Foolish Virgins,
who have a Lamp, but have no Oil, and all who have only received the Seed in
the Highway, Stony and Thorny Grounds, who therein brings forth no Fruit to
Perfection, but Dishonor the Name of him who has sowed the good Seed, being
one thing in Name, and another in Nature; and all you who have lost your First
Love, and all you who have a Name to live, but are dead, and all you who are
Lukewarm Ones, neither Hot nor Cold, who account your selves Rich, and
increased in Goods, but are indeed inwardly Wretched, Miserable, Poor, Blind
and Naked, hear the Counsel of the Mighty God concerning you, Ye are the People
with whom the Spirit of the Lord will not always strive; ye are the People who
are the Sloathful Servants, not improving the Talent given and communicated
unto you* ye are the People that turn from the Grace of God into Wantonness; ye
are the Backsliding Generation; ye are those who make an Image and a Likeness,
and are content therewith without S^bstance it self; ye are the People who
profefs God, his Light, Life, Grace and Holy Way of Truth in Words, but deny
him in Works, and are not Possessors of him; ye are those who dishonor the
Worthy Name of the Lord amongst the Heathen, laying Stumbling Blocks in the Way
of those who might come into the Way of Truth; ye are Lovers of the Unrighteous
Mammon, and your Minds, Hearts, Understandings and Capacities are therefore set
on work to compass it; ye are in Esau's Nature, selling the Birthright for a
Mess of Pottage; ye will run the hazard of opening the Mouths of the Heathen
to Blaspheme the Name of the Lord for little Gain; ye are they who have seen a
Goodliness in a Babylonish Garment, and in a Wedg of Gold and Silver; ye are of
them who trample under Foot the Blood of the Covenant, and do Despite unto the
Spirit of Grace.

Give ear, and hearken therefore; draw nigh to God, that he may draw nigh unto
you; cleanse your hands ye Sinners, purify your hearts ye Double-minded Ones,
lest his Fury break forth like Fire, and there be no Remedy; bow down, and kiss
the Son, lest his Anger be kindled against you, and ye Perish out of the Way.

I am constrained to sound the Controversy of the Mighty God in his dreadful
Name, Power and Authority with all the Unfaithful before mentioned; and if all
concerned herein do not speedily repent, and turn to the Lord, then shall your
plagues be wonderful, and the Lord God will appear in the Fire of his Jealousy
to consume you; and as you have, and do through disobedience dishonor the Pure
Name of the Lord, so will the Lord God dishonor you, and your Names shall rot,
and be as the Dung on the Face of the Earch: God's Fury, Fire, and Plagues will
destroy you, and ye shall be gathered into the sides of the Pit to be punished
with everlasting Destruction from the Presence of the Lord, and from the Glory
of his Power.

My Heart is filled with the Indignation of the God of Heaven, and my Quiver
with the Arrows of the Almighty against the Rebellious, and Uncircumcised:
Tremble, Tremble, Tremble before the Lord, and before the Glorious Arisings of
his Power: Woe, woe, woe to the False-hearted, and the Deceitful, who are as
broken Bows: unto all who are covered with a Profession (which is not the
Covering of the Spirit of the Lord) I testify God's Dreadful Vengeance, and
Vialls of Wrath are near to be poured forth upon you, ye shall drink of the Cup
of his Fury, even the Dregs thereof with the Heathen; be ye bowed down, and
dreadfully smitten at this Rebuk of the Lord all ye Unfaithful Ones, the Lord
is offended with you, and in the Day of Trial ye shall be consumed ye Reprobate
Silver, ye Uncircumcised in Heart, and Ears; you Profane Esaus, who sell your
Birthright for a Mess of Pottage; tremble ye Sinners in Zion, let fearfulness
surprise all Hypocrites; God Eternal is arisen, whose Spirit is upon me, and
Power fills my Heart at this time, moving thereby to prophecy against you, and
to proclaim his Controversy with your the Day of Fanning and Winnowing
hasteneth, in which you will be winnowed from the Wheat: the Day of the Lord
which burns as an Oven comes, and he will sit as a Refiner's Fire, and
Purifier of Silver, in which Day you will be separated from the Gold in the
purifying Fire, and thereby be consumed: Vengeance, Vengeance, Plagues,
Plagues, Fury, Fury, Calamity, Calamity, Amazement, Amazement, Astonishment,
Astonishment is coming over you, the full Cup of the Indignation of the Mighty
God will be given you: I am filled, I am filled with the Fury of the Lord God
of Hosts, and am constrained thus to pour it forth, which, as sure as the Lord
Lives that made Heaven and Earth, will be performed on you, who shall abide in
these states aforementioned, and not speedily repent, and bow under the mighty
Hand of the Lord.

Let this go through the family and through the hearts of all the unfaithful
amongst the people of the Lord through the Land, and enter ye (when you hear
these Words, and understand the Wrath determined) into the House of Mourning,
and Chamber of Lamentation, rend your Hearts, and not your Garments; sit in
Dust before the Lord, Repent, Repent, Repent, and as any are thus bowed down,
wait that the Testimony of the Lord may arise in that Power which breaks the
hard Hearts in those States and Conditions asorementioned, that all may hear
and sear before the dread^l God, who will now be reverenced from the rising of
the Sun to the setting of the same, and all that do not repent, and bow before
the Lord, ye shall be winnowed, and separated from the Assemblies of the Lord's
people, and gathered to your place, and there reserved under Chains of Darkness
unto the Judgment of the great I ay: Oh in the fence of what hasteneth to come
on the unsaithful Ones have I often been bowed down, and my Soul has in
remembrance the Wormwood and the Gall in my Travels through this the Land of my
Nativity, through which my God commanded me to pass swittly, saying, Run
through this Nation, and visit my Breathing, Panting, Bruised Birth, which I
begat among my People in the Day of their first Tender Visitation: Proclaim my
Acceptable Year, my Day of Perfect Deliverance to my Breathing, Panting,
Earning, Tender Birth, and my Day of Vengeance to come upon that which bruiseth
it, either amongst my People or in the World: But, Oh! says my Soul, that now
all the unfaithful who have trampled under Foot the Blood of the Covenant, and
done Despite unto the Spirit of Grace, and have hitherto neglected the Day of
their Visitation; Oh, that before the Eyelids of the Morning be to them as the
Shadow of Death, they might return to seek the Lord while he is to be found,
and to call upon him while he is yet near, before the Everlasting Night comes,
in which no man can work.

Postscript.
DEar Friends, great has been the work, and many have been the Devices of the
old Crooked Serpent, (even of him who kept not his first Habitation) to draw
the Sons and Daughters of Men from their God through Ages, and Generations; and
after every Appearance of the Lord God (wherein his eminent Hand has appeared
and Arm has been signally manifest) the Enemy has endeavored by diverse ways
to destroy the Work of God, sometimes by filling Instruments with Enmity to
oppose the Appearance of Truth by Persecution, and things of that nature; and
when that could not prevail, (the Power and Arm of God Almighty getting Victory
over it) then he has transformed in Appearance like unto an Angel of Light,
approving and leading into the Practice of that outwardly, which before in his
Instruments he had withstood, but still has separated from the Truth, and has
so deceived the minds of the Sons of Men, as that their co^formity and
obedience should not be really in Spirit and in Truth, but in the Name and
Profession only: and on this wise he began his appearance with the first man
Adam, thereby drawing him from the Tree of Life, and out of the Image of God,
and brought him into that State in which he could no longer dwell in the Garden
of the Lord, and after corrupted the Sons of men, that they grieved their God;
so as that of all upon the Earth he found Noah Upright, and saved him, and his
House, and destroyed all Mankind from off the Earth; and when Men began to
multiply upon the face of the Earth, the old Enemy led them to build that which
God took no Delight in, and therefore he came down and confounded them, and
scattered them: but Abraham he called from his Fathers House beyond the Flood,
who obeyed the Voice of God, and believed in him, and did cleave to the Lord
with all his Heart and Soul, and obeyed; to whom the Lord promised, To multiply
his Seed as the Stars of Heaven, and as the Sand on the Seashore; and
covenanted with him in the Circumcision, and gave him Isaac in which the Seed
was called, of whom this Seed was to spring that was to be as the Sand of the
Sea, and Stars of Heaven: then Abraham being required to offer him up, reasoned
not with the Lord, nor disobeyed the Voice of his Maker; but took the Lad, and
the Wood, and the Knife, and went to the Land of Moriah, to the Mount which the
Lord had showed him; but the Lord, after he had proved him, spared Isaac, and
the Ram was offered up: of which Isaac came Jacob, in whom the Seed was
multiplied; which Jacob wrestled with the God of his Fathers for a Blessing,
and prevailed with God, and then was named Israel, of whom came the Children
that went down into Egypt to Joseph, who was hated of his Brethren because of
his Dreams; afterward Israel multiplied into a People, who were Oppressed by
Pharaoh, who knew not Joseph, and would have destroyed the Seed of Israel, and
have hindered them from multiplying, howbeit God preserved Moses (that goodly
Child) who was drawn out of the Waters, who when he was keeping his
Father-in-Law Jethro's Sheep, and drove them to the Backside of the Desert, and
came to Horeb, the Mountain of God, then the Lord appeared in the Bush in a
Flame of Fire, saying, I have surely seen the Affliction of my People which are
in Fgypt, and have heard their Cries, by reason of their Taskmasters; for I
know their Sorrow; and the Lord God by the Hand of Moses wrought Wonders in the
Land of Egypt, and plagued Pharaoh, and brought Israel out of Egypt's I and by
an Outstretched Arm, and by a Mighty Hand through the Red Sea, on the Banks of
which they sang the Song of Deliverance; but the same Enemy that stirred up
Pharaoh to oppress them, and hinder them from coming out of Egypt, moved in
their Hearts to disobey the Lord, and to-draw them from a Belief in that Power
which had so signally delivered them; howbeit the Merciful God of Jacob healed
the Waters, and notwithstanding caused the Manna to come down Morning by
Morning to seed them, he also smote the Flinty Rock; and brought forth Waters;
after they thus murmured he brought them to Sinai, where the Glory of the Lord
appeared, and there gave them a Law and Precepts; but notwithstanding they had
seen the Wonderful Hand of the Lord, and his signal Deliverances, were fed and
preserved by him, yet they murmured in their Hearts against the Lord, and
through the Workings of the same subtle Enemy (to whom they gave way) made
Godds of Gold, and in their Hearts would have gone back again unto Egypt, and
Rebelled against the Lord, and so the Enemy of Mankind the Devil prevailed,
that after the Spies had spied the Land they murmured against the Lord, and
against his Servants, so as that the Lord destroyed them, and their Carkases
sell in the Wilderness to whom the Promise was, save Joshua and Caleb, Men of
another Spirit; howbeit Joshua led their Children over Jordan to possess the
Land of Canaan unto whom the Lord was good, and performed all the good Things
promised; and they drove forth the Inhabitants of the Land, and inhabited it;
and here the Enemy Satan prevailed again, so that Jesurum waxed sat, even
thick, and kicked, and then he forsook God that made him, and lightly esteemed
the Rock of his Salvation, and went and served other Godds, and the Lord
delivered them into their Enemies Hands; howbeit when they were brought low the
Lord heard their Cries, and delivered them by the Hands of many Instruments,
which he raised up as Judges and Kings in Israel, even unto the time of David,
who sound Favor before God, and desired to find a Tabernacle for the God of
Jacob, by whom he delivered Israel, who went out in the Strength of the Mighty
God, and sought their Battles, whose Heart loved the Lord, whose Name is a
Sweet Memorial: but Solomon his Son built a House for the God of Jacob, and the
Temple that was a Figure, and the Lord was with him and Israel, and his
Glotious Presence was amongst them; howbeit the Old Subtle Enemy that deceived
Adam, turned Solomon's Heart from following the Lord, to follow other Godds,
and built a Place for the Godds of the Heathen; after which the Enemy filled
the Heart of Jeroboam to do wickedly, and Israel departed from the Lord;
howbeit the Lord sent his Prophets arising early, to whom they did
despitefully, even to John, a Prophet and Forerunner of the Messiah, whom they
beheaded, and slew the Just One, the Anointed of the Lord, and believed not on
him who was the Heir, notwithstanding the Mighty Works which he did, who was
manifest in due time, taking not on himself the Nature of Angels, but the Seed
of Abraham, who sent the Comforter, the Spirit of Truth, the Holy Ghost, which
came upon the Disciples, and filled them, through whom the Power of the Most
High God was signally manifest, smiteing Thousands at the Heart; and in that
Day many were added to the Church, and great Grace was upon them; and there was
in that Blessed Day of the great Appearance of the Mighty God daily the
Revealings and Manifestings of his Eternal Power, so that great Fear came on
the Regions round about, and the Word of God grew; but presently the Roaring
Lion (that through Ages went about to destroy the Appearance of the Lord God)
by his Power stirred in the Hearts of the Ungodly to oppose that Appearance,
over whom the mighty Power of the Lord gave his Servants much Victory; yet he
ceased not, but transformed as an Angel of Light, and in his Instruments
wrought to draw People from the Power of Godliness, into the Form of Godliness,
and brought in damnable Heresies privily, through his Instruments that arose
amongst the People of the Lord, and in that day he wrought powerfully, that
notwithstanding the Church was in the Glorious Splendour of the Heavenly
Celestial Life (as a Woman clothed with the Sun, having the Moon under her
Feet, and on her Head a Crown of twelve Stars) and traveled, and brought forth
the Man-Child, who was to rule the Nations with a Rod of Iron, yet he in the
Appearance of a Red Dragon (who had the seven Heads, and ten Horns, and seven
Crowns on his Heads) stood ready to devour the Man-Child; but he was caught up
to God, and to his Throne; and the Woman having two Wings as of a great Eagle
given her, fled into the Wilderness for a Time, Times, and a half, from the
Face of the old Serpent, and he has made War with the Remnant of her Seed, and
by his powerful Workings brought Night over again, who worked mysteriously even
amongst the Churches, causing some to lose their First Love, others to hold the
Doctrine of Balaam, others the Doctrine of the Nicolaitans; others to have a
Name to live, and yet dead to God; others suffered the Woman Jezabel; others
called themselves Jews, and were not, but were in the Nature of the Synagogue
of Satan; others there were that were Lukewarm, neither Hot nor Cold: and
manifold have been the Transformings of the Adversary of Mankind the ^evil, but
in one and the same Nature and Power. His first Appearance under which he would
have destroyed the Man-Child, and the Woman, and the Remnant of her, was a
great Red Dragon, then as a Beast rising out of the Sea (the Waters) who had
seven Heads and ten Horns, and on his Heads seven Crowns, and the Beast had
his Power, Seat and great Authority from the ^ragon; and John saw another
Appearance, a second Beast, that rose out of the Earth, which Beast had only
two Horns, and that like a Lamb, but spoke as a Dragon, and exercised the Power
of the first Beast, which first Beast (having a Wound by the Sword and did
live) all the World wondered after, who had made War with the Saints and
overcame them, and all worshipped (and do worship) the Beast (that had a Wound
and did live) whose Names are not written in the Book of Life of the Lamb slain
from the Foundation of the World; if any Man has an Ear to hear let him hear:
Here is Wisdom, let him that has Understanding count the Number of the Beast,
who carried Mystery Babylon the great, the Mother of Harlots, who was drunken
with the Blood of the Saints and Martyrs Oh horrible Night! Oh deplorable Time
and Season that has been over all the Nations, Tongues and People this Forty
and Two Months, all which time the holy City has lain trodden under Foot, and
this Thousand two Hundred and Sixty Days, which time the Witnesses have
Prophesied in S^k-cloth and Ashes, and have been slain by the Beast, whose dead
Bodies have lain slain three days and a half in the midst of the great City
(not put into Graves) which i^ s^iritually called Sodom and Egypt, where also
our Lord was crucified; the Woman which was clothed with the Sun has been in
the Wilderness a Time, Times, and an half, the Book of Life was sealed with
seven Seals. But now that which lies on my Spirit is to manifest, that this
horrible Night of Apostasy entered at first through the departing of some from
the Power, even the Power of Godliness it self, into the Form thereof, through
which came into the Churches the beforementioned horrible Evils; And this
Depature from the Power is occasioned through going out of the Daily
Watchfulness in the Gi^t of God (in which and through which the Power of the
Almighty is daily felt and manifested) and through the getting up of that
Wisdom that is sensual, in which the cunning Serpent the Devil wrought to bring
in Damnable Heresies privily; for this is the Treacherous Part in Man, in which
the Devil has appeared against the Life, the Truth, the Power in all Ages and
Generations; for herein he makes a Likeness of the Truth, and thereby and
therein sets up Prescriptions, and Rules, and Limits to the Spirit and Power
of God it self, and those born of it; and this is that which has and would
kill the Heir, the Life, that Self may have the Inheritance; and this birth of
the Evil One leads to sacrifice to their own Net; and herein the Apostasy
came in privily, cunningly and gradually, and improved it self through the
Workings of the power of the old subtle Serpent, in his Transformings as an
Angel of Light, in the Wisdom of Men, which is from beneath, and is sensual:
For that which caused the Appearance of the Lord Jesus in the Apostles days to
be Glorious, was not the Wisdom of Man aforementioned, but the Outgoings, and
Daily Arisings, and Manifest Operations of God's Eternal Power and Spirit, in
which no Graven Image, Likeness or Similitude can be set up; for that is the
Work of the Devil in the Wisdom and Will of Man that acts (like the Devil) of
it self apart, and without the daily and continual Revealings of the Eternal
Power of God Almighty; and all Knowledge either gathered by, or standing here,
puffs up, and at last leads to forsake the Life and Power, like Demas. But
now dear Friends (ever-blessed be the Name of the God of Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, and all the Faithful through Ages and Generations past) the Lord God of
Heaven and Earth has caused his Ancient Power and Arm to be revealed after
this sore horrible Night of Darkness, that has been in and over the Earth, and
the good Old Way, and Ancient Path of Life is again revealed, into which
Thousands and Ten Thousands have been called, and many have been gathered;
Magnified and Praised be his Name for it, let it be given and returned to him
through Ages and Generations even for evermore, for that he has remembered and
visited again the Distressed in the Wilderness, and is bringing forth the
Desolate, so that now she is seen leaning on her Beloved; and Life from God is
entered into the two Witnesses; and the Seven Seals are opened, and opening;
and great. Babylon is come in Remembrance before him, to be sunk down, and
destroyed by a perpetual Destruction; and now Jerusalem is coming down as a
Bride adorned for her Husband, the Seven Thunders uttering their Voices, the
Perfection of Shaking, that the Mystery of God may be finished. But dear
Friends, the same Roaring Lion, that appeared in the Ages bypast, is now going
about, and that diligently, seeking how he may destroy this Appearance of the
Mighty God in this Age and Generation, by drawing the Mind and Heart gradually
aside from the Eternal Power it self that first visited, and also through his
many Instruments (opposing the Truth) that are led captive at his Will: And now
dear Friends, there is no Preservation but in keeping to the Simplicity of the
Gospel, and to the very Living Almighty Power of the Lord God, by which all
being kept low, Self (and that part aforementioned that the Enemy works in)
will be made of no Reputation; but be humbled to Death, even the very Death of
the Cross, which is the Power of God; and here let all keep in the pure
Retiredness, in the Valley of Humility, in pure Dread, Fear and Awe: and let
that be your Instructor and Teacher that has been least, and not the Wisdom of
Man; for that will lead in Nature from the Power, although in Name own and
speak thereof. And dear Friends, a Travel has been on my Spirit beyond all
expression, That the Enemy may never deceive any of us, as he did Eve by
Subtilty; for this I declare in the Name of the Lord God, The Enemy works no
way which has a tendency more secretly destructive to the Appearance of the
Most High God in this day, then in the Wisdom of Man, which is not that Wisdom
that is from above, which Wisdom is pure and peaceable, the Nature of which is
to lay low all, as the Nature of the other which is sensual, is to make Men and
Women grow Jesurum like, thick, and fat, and high, which leads and turns from
the Brokenhearted, Tender, Contrite-spirited estate.

And so dear Friends, in the Bowels of unexpressible Love to all that have been
visited with the right Arm of God's Salvation, and are tender before the Lord,
keep in the Light, in a daily watchful Estate; for if there be not a keeping
here, a good State and precious Growth in the Truth may soon be lost, and an
Image of the thing come up in its place.

God Almighty in his Heavenly Power, and by the working of his everlasting
quickening Spirit, open unto you all the many Snares and Wiles of the Enemy, by
which he lies in wait the Innocent to deceive, and preserve all in the Gift of
his Love, in the sight and knowledge thereof, that by the daily Manifestation
and Operation of his pure Power we may break all the Enemies Snares, and in the
same live to his Glory to the end of our days.

And all Friends every where, all to your Tents, dwell and walk with the Lord,
build on the sure Foundation, the tried Cornerstone, which they only do who
hear the Word of the Lord, and do it; so shall you and your Building stand in
the stormy Day, that comes to try all Foundations and Buildings, in which day
the Floods will come, the Waves will beat, and the Rain descend, and then all
Sandy Foundations, and all Buildings, how stately soever built thereon, shall
fall, and great will be their Fall and perpetual Destruction.

And so the Lord God preserve you all, to build and be established on the
Foundation of many Generations, so will you go through the Fiery Trial, in
which nothing shall be consumed but the Dross, Lead, Tin and reprobate Silver;
for the Gold will endure the Trial, and the Wheat the Fanning, but the Chaff
will be blown away, and all the Stubble consumed by the dreadful purifying Fire
of God that will try all.

The Lord gather the Upright into the Ark of his Covenant, and into the
Munition of Rocks, where Bread will be sure to the Hungry Ones, and Water to
the Thirsty; in which Estate the God of the Spirits of all Flesh preserve and
keep his Flock and Family every where, and abundantly water, dew upon and
Replenish His, even from this time forth and forever and ever.

Charles Marshall.
Tetherton in Wiltshire, the 7th of the 1st Month, in the Year, 1673.
THE END.

