ALL THE CHIEF POINTS Contained in the CHRISTIAN Religion, And those GREAT
TRUTHS in the word which we have not had a Right Apprehension of for almost
Thirteen Hundred Years, never since the Rise of the Beast: Are now discovered
by the FINGER of GOD. The whole here Collected into Short Heads, that thereby
they might the better sink down into the Understanding, and be Registered in our
Memories, which Truths are now proved and Published.

By M. M.

LONDON: Printed and are to be Sold by J. Clark at the Bible in the Old Change,
at the upper end of Cheapside; E. Whitlock in Stationers-Court in Amen-Corner:
and W. Reddish ni Griffiths Buildings near the Royal Cockpit, Westminster. 1697.

The Scriptures being now Rightly Understood are made to agree in a Holy
Harmony so as Justice* Mercy and Truth, go hand in hand together; which before
we came to have a right Underderstanding in the Word, we made to contradict it
self, which has caused so much Dissension amongst us.
Some there are that term the word a dead letter; but all them that believe the
scriptures to be the word of God and take to the way directed therein, such the
scriptures are able to make wise unto salvation 2. Tim. 3.15,16 18* for by them
we come to have faith in Christ Jesus, as to believe that he will perform his
promise according to the condition he has made in the word, Mat. 11.29. And
therefore Christ is said to be the Author and Finisher of Faith, because he
will give the hoped for promised Reward to them that are found in their
Obedience for the word our is not in the Hebrew Tongue.

And in the Scriptures is the Wisdom of God and the power of God* and such as
walk according to that Holy rule, blessed are they, Gal. 6.10. 2. Cor. 4.4.

And the word being Rightly understood, God does not swear and declare to do
one thing, and absolutely decree to do quite the contrary, for all the
scriptures agree in one and the same thing. And they that speak not according
to the La^, and to the Testimony, it is because there is no Ligbt in them, Isa.
8.20. Isa. 62 8. Ezekiel. 33.11.

And if we take to the way therein directed, God has promised his assistance,
and by so doing, we shall be brought off from the World, and so born again by
having a complying frame of Spirit to the will of God, if we are to the utmost
of our power sincere in our endeavor.

GREAT TRUTHS in the Word are now Discovered, by the Finger of GOD etc.
THE Mighty God according to his Promise, that at Evening time it should be
Light, Zech. 14.7. has now at the appointed time, discovered the true meaning
of his word, the which we lost the right apprehension of by our Predecessors,
who were involved in darkness of Popery, whereby we are now in great mistakes.

The Truths which have not been rightly understood are these that follow,

I. That the Eternal Purpose only reaches forward to the Eternity that lies
before us, as is proved; like as Christ in time became the Author of Eternal
Salvation, and as God in time promised Eternal Life.

II. That after Adam fell, the decree was made for the entrance into Life, to
be made strait; and how that straitness does consist, is proved.

III. That being of old ordained to this condemnation, has another meaning
than what we have hitherto apprehended.

IV. In Scripture there is mention made of Three Worlds, and therefore Three
Foundations, whereby it is clearly proved, there was none chosen before, or at
the Foundation of the Material Heavens and Earth: and that these Three Worlds
spoken of in Scripture, are Three Worlds of People. First, That which sprang
from Adam. Secondly, That whichsprang from the seed of Noah* Thirdly, That the
foundation of the World to come, was laid in the seed of Abraham, when God
brought them out of Egypt, and laid them for the foundation of the World to
come; and all that comes in heirs to that World, comes in as the seed of
Abraham, and from the foundation of that World, Christ was figuratively slain
in the Paschal Lamb; and from the foundation of that World was the works of
those unbelieving Jews finished, when they, through their unbelief, refused to
go to fight for the Land of Canaan: And then after this their miscarriage, God
Elected and Secured a certain Remnant in Christ of that foundation which was
then a laying in Israel for the world to come.

V. It is likewise proved, That there was no Election thorough the old World,
nor till the then time; and for Isreal's sinfulness, God did Elect and make
choice of the first Gentile Churches, and God chose them before the body of
Israel, but not as to matter of time, but as to matter of choice and likeing in
God, rather to choose them that had ignorantly offended him, then them that had
wilfully disobeyed him, as is proved: and therefore they are said to be chosen
before the Foundation, which Foundation was Israel.

VI. It was the Remnant chosen from among Israel, and the first Gentile
Churches, that had the peculiar calling, for from among the Gentiles did God
then Choose a People to the praise of his Name, which were chosen according to
the counsel of the will of God, for the purpose he had determined; which was to
receive the Holy Ghost, and to beartheir testimony to the Truth of the Gospel*
And also that in them in time to come he might show forth the Exceeding Riches
of his Grace. These were those that first received the word from the mouth of
the Disciples, and so believed in Christ thorough their word.

And it was by the Example of the Elect, that all they of Macedonia and Achaia
believed. 1 These. 1.4,5,6,7,8.

These were those for whom Christ in a peculiar manner prayed for, as he did
not for the World; these were those that were Glorified by their Receiving of
the Holy Ghost, John 14.17. for the Holy Spirit which was before but with the
Disciples, or Church, was afterward given ^o be in the first Churches: these
were those of whom St. Paul spoke of, that were Fore-known, Called, Justified
and Glorified, by their Receiving the Holy Ghost to be in them; and these were
those that were ordained to Eternal Life, being thus chosen to it who were
first to receive the Gospel, and who were as a candle lighted up by the Lord to
enlighten the World, who lay in wickedness and darkness; and by the mighty
Signs and Wonders, Miracles and Gifts of the Holy Ghost, part of the World
embraced the Faith in the Apostles time, and the Word brought forth fruit in
them as it did in the Elect, Colos. 1.6. Joh. 12.32. 1 Timothy 3.16.

VII. Whereas it is said, God daily added to the Church such as should be
saved; that was spoken to Israel as is proved; for of them there was some
excluded the then offered Mercy, but by the evident witness of the Spirit that
was given to the Elect, was the Gentile Nations convinced of the Truth of the
Doctrine of the Gospel, and so became the seed of Abraham by Chrtst, in
yielding their assent to the Obedience of the Gospel.

VIII. But when the Nations came to have no love to the Truth, that they might
be saved, but took pleasure in Iniquity; God then gave them up to strong
Delusion; that they might believe lies, and so worship the Beast; for as Israel
for sin was left to blindness, so the Gentile Nations for sin were left to
Delusion; for when their Rulers would no longer be holden with the cords of the
Laws of the Lord, then did God permit them to be deceived by the Beast, so as
to give their power unto him, and then did the Beast deprive the Nations of the
Gospel, by which God calls to his Creatures to walk in Newness of Life, that
they may become heirs to the Promises.

IX. Whereas it is said, The Promise was not to Abraham and his Seed after the
Flesh, but the seed in Christ and Isaac was the seed to whom the Promise was
made, by whom the natural seed of Abraham is included as well as the Adopted.
But neither to the Natural Seed, nor the Adopted Seed that live after the will
of the Flesh, are they to whom the Promise belongs, but to them that live
according to the Spirit, in Obedience to the Word, are them to whom the promise
is made, and the promise is, That in time to come, God will establish his
Everlasting Covenant with them* the which crowns Life to the Soul.

X. Whereas it is said, That Abraham believed God and it was imputed to him for
Righteousness. And that which Abraham believed was, that in the way of his
Obedience he should become heir to the Promises, and therefore he left his
Country, his Kindred and his Fathers House; and for the Promise sake God made
to Abraham, That he should be the Father of many Nations; therefore when he
first took the Gentiles into Covenant with himself, he did then declare his
Righteousness in being just to his Promise which he had made to Abraham, in
then Justifying them that believed in Jesus. For the Gentiles believing in
Christ, that Salvation was to be had by him according to his word, which was by
taking his Yoke upon them, in a willingness to render their sincere Obedience
to him, and thereupon they were Justified of God, from their past sins, in and
through Christ, by their willingness to obey him for the time to come, and the
Reward promised was to be received both by Abraham and his seed, according as
they should afterward perform the conditions.

XI. Whereas Christ says, In believing that he is the Son of God, is the Rock
on which he built his Church, and his Church is not only his Elect, but
likewise all them that obey him; against whom the Gates of Hell shall not
prevail. For he is become the Author of Eternal Salvation to all them that obey
him* Heb. 5.9. For the Faith that God requires of us, is to believe that he
is, and that he is a rewarder of them that dilligently seek him. Heb. 11.6. For
a Believer is no longer a Believer, than he believes Salvation is to be had by
Christ, according as he has declared in his word, which is, in the way of his
Obedience, no more than a Righteous Man is a Righteous Man in the day that he
commits Iniquity. And Good Works is proved by the word, to be a foundation for
us to build our hopes of Salvation upon, as well as the Merits of Christ, 1 Timothy 6.18,19. James 2.19,24 Ye see then, how that by Works a Man is Justified,
and not by Faith only. For tho whoever will, is permited to come to Christ, yet
all they that come to him must take his Yoke upon them, that is, Live in
Obedience to him, for though Christ remains an Advocate with the Father for
Sins of Ignorance and Sins of Infirmity, and Sins of Surprizal, yet woe be to
them that wilfully give themselves a liberty to sin Knowingly; for Israel was
termed the Reprobate Silver; so likewise it is the Christians that relinquish
their Obedience is proved the Reprobate* and the People of God's Curse to
Judgment.

XII* The Great Day of Salvation was, when God was in Christ Reconciling the
World to Himself, which was when the Gentile Nations were first taken into
Covenant, he then not imputing to them their Trespasses; but when they fell
into Sin, and had no love to the ways of the Lord, they were then left to
Delusion. And therefore then it was not the great day of Salvation, when they
were all given up to worship the Beast, but those whose names are written in
the Lambs Book of Life from the Foundation, the which were the Remnant chosen
from among Israel, from whom the Disciples of Christ sprang, and of whom Christ
said, None should pluck them out of his hand; and to whom he promised to be
with to the end of the World; and likewise that he would forsake none whilst
they keep the way.

XIII. Man was entrusted with the Word for his Posterity, as Adam was with
Eternal Life in Paradise for his; and God accordingly laid his commands, that
they should not add to the Word, nor diminish from it; and the Lord likewise
annexed those great Threatenings to those that should do either. Rev. 22.18,19.

And the Beast that has deprived the Nations of the Word, by which God calls to
his Creatures to walk in Newness of Life (and he is the Afflicter of them that
would yield Obedience to it) therefore is the most severe Vengeance pronounced
against him; but the Elect Remnant was secured by a promise from Christ, and by
further pertaking of the Spirit of God, and that we are none of the Remnant
that are thus Elected, is as clear as the Sun in the Firmament; because our
Predecessors were all deceived by the Beast, by whom the Elect Remnant were
never deceived: as by the word is proved.

XIV. Whereas the Apostle says, God works all things after the Counsel of
his own Will. The Apostle only had his referrence to the great works that
properly belong to God in carrying on of Man's Redemption, and also in Electing
some, and setting a door of Mercy open to others; and in determining that the
great Glory should be for the heirs of the world to come, unto whom the
Election did appertain; for not only the Remnant and First Churches, but Israel
will then be the Lords Elect, and likewise all them that are found in their
Obedience, though not Elected, will come in by Christ as heirs with them to the
promised Reward; but the Electing or Fore-choosing, was according to the will
of God, who according to his abundant Mercy to the heirs of Promise, will in
the time to come, establish his Everlasting Covevenant, and these are the Jacob
that he Loved; for Esau and Jacob were made the Representatives of the two
Worlds, Esau of this World, and Jacob of that which is to come, as is proved;
and they of this World, generally sell their Birthright for a mess of Pottage,
rather then they will wrestle with an Affliction, or withstand a Temptation;
they will part with the hope for promised Reward which is the Crown of Life:
and therefore God said, Jacob have I Loved and Esau have I Hated: for all are
in this time to wrestle with the Lord for the Blessing, as Jacob did. For tho
the Election was not attained by their Willing and Running; yet the promised
reward is to be attained by them that so does, whether Elect or not Elect, for
all that are found in their Obedience in this time, comes in as heirs to the
Promises. But before Esau or Jacob had done Good or Evil, God only said, The
Elder should serve the Younger. And this was so ordered by the determinate
Counsel of God, that the Elder should serve the Younger. That is, all that does
not come in as the seed of Jacob to be heirs to the World to come, the rest
that are then spared of this Elder World, or Esau Generation, are then given as
Daughters and Servants to Israel, and servants of them that are so, as is
proved. Thus God, as the Potter, has power over his Clay to make one Vessel to
honor and another to dishonor; but not that God did make any Vessel to do
Evil, that thereby they might become a Vessel to Dishonor.

XV. And though God said, That he will show Mercy on whom he will show Mercy,
and whom he will he hardneth, yet his Will is guided, as he is the fountain of
all Reason, with greater Reason than we can imagine. For after God had chosen
Abraham, it was then according to his obedient walking that he became heir to
the Promises; for which Promise sake, God did at the appointed time, appear to
deliver Israel, and so he will again at the appointed time; but then for
Pharoah's Cruelty and inhumane slavery to Israel, God did then for his Sin
harden him in unbelief, so as he should not believe the Miracles done by Moses,
that thereby he might show his power on him, by destroying him and his Army in
the Red Sea: and therefore as in the margent of the Bible, it is said, God made
him stand. That is, Stand in the place of power that he was in, till he himself
came in the Clouds to destroy him in the Sea. So likewise, tho God Elected some
of Israel, and left a door of Mercy open to others, and left others of them to
Blindness; yet it was those that were left to Blindness, that was most wicked
among them, and such as had the greater power to promote the knowledge of the
fear of the Lord; but none of them that were found in obedient walking were
left of him to Blindness, for unto them was the word of this Salvation sent,
Acts 13.26. and it is those that refuse Obedience to the same, that falls under
the Eternal Judgment, whilst others, that does but ignorantly offend, will be
beaten with fewer stripes, Luke 12.48. And there is a Redemption in the World
to come, for some, and none shall be punished in that body in which they never
took pleasure to commit Iniquity. Now whereas the Apostle says, God works
all things, the word all, in Scripture, does not include the whole, as I have
els-where proved.

XVI. And God is not the author of the evil of Sin, although he is the author
of the evil of Punishment, but upon man's repenting and returning, God has
often repented him of the Evil he thought to do unto them, as by the word is
proved, Jer. 18.7,8,9,10. Joel 2.13,14 Jonah 3.9,10. Genesis 6.6,7. Ezekiel.
18.20,21,22,23,24. Ezekiel. 33.18,19. Jer. 15.6. I am weary with Repenting.

Whereas God says Mal 3.6. I am the Lord I Change not, This God spoke as to
his Attributes, as his Justice, Mercy and Truth in which he is an Unchangable
Being, and therefore for his promise sake it is, that the Sons of Jacob are not
consumed; for in time to come they are to inherit the Land.

But when God promises a Blessing without condition, then he Repents not,
For God is not a man that he should Lie, neither the Son of Man that be should
Repent: Has be said, and shall he not do it? or has he spoken and shall he
not make it good? for God has promised to Bless Israel, and they shall be
Blessed; and then will he behold no Iniquity in Jacob, when be has purged all
Iniquity from them. For both in the Old and New Testament, those things which
are to come, are mentioned, as though they were already past, or present; so
accordingly St. Paul, in the Hebrews, Expostulating about the Covenant,
sometimes expresses himself as though it were already done, that is,
Established; but by the whole scope of his words he does fully declare to the
contrary, but that they were then given the Holy Ghost, which did bear witness
with their Spirit, they they were chosen to be heirs of that promised Covenant;
but if they did again wilfully Sin, and so do despite to the Spirit of Grace,
then there remained for them no more sacrifice for Sin, but a fearful looking
for of Judgment and fiery Indignation; for if they sinned wilfully under the
greater Light, they fell under the greater Condemnation: for although among the
Hebrews were the Remnant that was secured by a promise from Christ, that none
should pluck them out of his hand; but they stood not by the establishing of
the Everlasting Covenant, but by a promise from Christ, that they should not
only be heirs to it, but inheritors of it; and when the Everlasting Corenant is
Established, then by that Covenant, Blessedness is secured as well to the Body
as the Soul; for then the Souls of the Raised Saints will be again United to
their Bodies, and blessed in them; and so Israel and the True Believers, will
not only then by that Covenant, have an Inherent Perfect Righteousuess, but
they will then be freed from Sickness, Sorrow, Want, and the troubles that are
now in this Life, and in the time to come, in which God will manifest his
power, he will then also make his People Israel a willing People; and then it
is he will establish his Everlasting Covenant with them, for the good of them
and their Children after them. Jer. 32.39. For this promised Covenant was to be
established with Abraham and his seed together in their Generation* Genesis
17.7,8. And when the Lord again comes to Restore all things, he will then make
Mount Sion an Eternal Excellency, and the Joy of many Generations; Isa. 60.15.
And then not only the Remnant, but likewise the body of the Natural Seed of
Jacob, will then be the Lords Elect, which he will gather from the four winds
into which he has driven them.

XVII. The Christians of the Gentile Race, that comes in by Christ to be of the
seed of Abraham, were all termed heathen in the Old Testament, as is proved: so
as the most severe stroke threatened in the Gospel, will fall on the Christians
that shall be found in Rebellion and Darkness at that day, for the Law and
Gospel speak but to them that are under it; therefore they are the World that
will be condemned by it, that will not live in Obedience to it; Israel is not
reckoned with the World, therefore the Lord ordered Proclamation to be made to
the end of the world, Say ye to the daughter of Sion, Behold thy Salvation
comes, behold his Reward is with him, Isa. 62.11. Thereby showing the power of
this world will be taken away when their Salvation comes.

XVIII. In the Word there is mention made of Three Evers, Three Times, Three
Generations, Therefore Christ said, he would come before this Generation
passes away; and the Three Worlds spoken of, is the old World, this World, and
the World to come, unto whom the Blessing is promised of the establishing the
Everlasting Covenant, which crowns Life to the Soul, not only to the Raised
Saints, but to Israel and all that long for his Appearing, and according to his
Word, in an obedient frame wait for him. Therefore St. Paul exhorts To lay up
in store a good foundation against the time to come* 1 Timothy 6.19.

XIX. There is likewise figarative Heavens and Earth spoken of in scripture.
And the Lord, because of Isreal's sinfulness, for which they were left to
blindness; he therefore spoke to them in parables, all these things being now
at the appointed time rightly understood, it turns the scene, whereby the
Vision of the coming of the Lord is made so plain, that he that runs may read
it.

And when the Lord comes, the true Christian will be gathered as the Lord has
declared, and Israel will then be gathered according as God by his Prophets to
them has revealed, whose testimony they have received and then will the Lord
gather in others with them.

XX. And now the Lord according to his word, that at the end of the time,
knowledge should be increased Dan. 12.4. And that at evening time it shhould*
be light Zach. 14.4. And that at the end of the time the Vision should speak
Hab. 2.3. Has now made his promise, good in the discovery of the great and
hidden mysteries, in his word, which we have not rightly understood, are now
made so plain that there is no more room for Mistake, and by a speedy
Reformation, and owning the whole Truth, we may not only save our selves, but
thereby, great part of the Christian World may be awakened to come out from the
Darkness which they are now under.

XXI. And it is said, How shall a Young man Cleanse his way. But by taking heed
thereto, according to the word of God* which is a Light to the Path, and
Lanthorn to the Feet* and by which he calls to us to amend our lives. And the
like is said in the New Testament. He that looks into the perfect Law of
liberty, and continues therein, he being not a forgetful hearer, but a doer
of the work, this is the man that shall be Blessed in his deeds, James 1.25.
And in that it is termed the perfect Law, is because it is a perfect and
upright rule, by which we are to walk, and the Law of liberty, because upon the
wills consenting to yield sincere obedience to all Gods Commands and Preceps,
such are thereby set clear at liberty from the condemning power of their past
sins, and shall be Blessed in the promised reward if they be not forgetful
hearers, but doers of the work, And St. Paul said to the Heathen, God is not
far from every one Acts 17.27,28. And to them to whom God has given his word,
he has promised that they that Seek him shall find him if they search for him
with the whole heart, and Christ says, Whosoever will let him come. And tho
we can do nothing without Gods assistance, for in him we live, move, and have
our being, and it is he that has laid the Spiritual meat before us, Hosea
11.4. whereby to guide our feet into the way of peace, has promised, that
whilst they keep the way, he will be with them. And the Prodigal that knew that
he had wandered from his fathers House, first looked home before his father
looked on him; and tho God may some times go out of his ordinary way of working,
and pluck as it were a brand out of the burning, yet he no longer securely
stands then he is found in his obedience, for it is those that will fall under
the condemnation that will not choose the fear of the Lord Prove 1.29. but for
those that through long continuance in sin, have seared their Conscience, whereby
they become left of God to a stupid sense* it is such cannot learn to do well,
no more then the Ethiopian can change his Skin etc. but whilst we have a sense
to see the evil inclinations which our natures are prone to, we may continually
pray, Lord turn thou us, and we shall be turned. And if man does his endeavor,
God will never be wanting to such And if we resist the devil he will flee from
us, And if we draw nigh to God he will draw nigh to us James 4.7,8.

But whereas the Lord says, No man can come to me except the Father draw him:
And the drawings of God are the tenders of his Grace, with the good motions of
his Spirit, and checks of Conscience, the which the old World and Israel had,
till they resisted, for which they were condemned, Genesis 6.3. Acts 7.51.

And whereas the Lord says, Except a Man be born again he cannot enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven: This was spoken to Nicodemus who had embraced this
present World, and therefore came to Jesus by Night, as being ashamed to own
him; and such are to be born again, or brought off from the World, or they
cannot enter into the kingdom of Heaven, as is more fully proved in the book
where the Faith of Abraham is fully explained, and also there in is made
appear, what is meant by the Wind blowing where it lists; and likewise
therein is showed, Who they are that are not under the condemning power of the
Law for their past sins, Romans 3.25. but under Grace; that they are such as will
and do walk in Newness of Life; and if we will enter into Life, we must keep
the Commandments, Mat. 19.17. For all are his servants to whom ye obey, whether
of sin unto death, or of Obedience unto Righteousness, Romans 6.16.

And whereas it is said, It is not for the works of Righteousness that we have
done, but of his Mercy be saved us. This was spoken of the Elect who were then
brought out of Idolatry* and has no reference to us, as is proved.

XXII. Whereas the Apostle said, Ye are saved by Grace, and not of works. that
is, Man could not perform good works to that perfection as to become justified
by them without the Merits of Christ, and therefore saved by Grace* but there
is none that live in the performance of good works, but shall be rewarded
according to their works* Rev. 22.12.

The Eternal Life that is now in this time given the Believer, excepting the
very elect, which is the standing witness, is no otherwise given, then it was
to Adam and Eve in Paradise, for had they never sinned, they should never have
dyed; so the true Believer that believes salvation is to be had in the way of
his obedience according to the word of the Lord, he shall never be cast off,
but the Man that Departs from the Lord by wilful committing Iniquity, he is no
longer a Believer according to the Gospel, as is proved.

XXIII. Whereas the Lord said, when he sent his Disciples forth to preach the
Gospel to all the World, He that believes shall be saved, and he that
believes not shall be damned, Mark 16.15,16,17. That is, He that believes the
Doctrine that he sent them forth to Teach; and the Mercy and Condemnation, was
to them that accordingly Believed, or refused Believing the same, as not to
obey the truth, Mat. 28.19,20. For the Lord speaks by the Law and Gospel but to
them that hears it, as proved. But whereas Christ said, He that Believes not
is condemned already, This the Lord spoke to the Jews, who had heard him, but
believed not, and therefore were condemned: and thereby it also shows, that
more of Israel might have been saved, had they been willing to take hold of the
offered Mercy.

I here gather so many heads together, that through the misinterpretation of the
Scriptures, Satan might not beguile so many of their Souls; for if we take a
text of Scripture as it stands alone, without weighing how it is spoken, and
what the whole scope of the Scripture tends to, we may raise as falce Doctrine
as God is True.

O God who of thy great Mercy has made thy word plain in those things we have
been mistaken in, give more of thy Assisting Grace, for to improve the
knowledge of the Truth.

These things which are here but hinted, with the other disputable places, and
also the signs of the Times, with the near approach of the coming of the Lord,
are now fully explained and proved in about four small Treatises

The Books contain so many several heads that I have not here room to incert
them, but by them the word is so plain, that none need any longer remain in
mistakes, that are willing to understand the Truth. I shall only here mention
the chief Title of each Book. First, The Explaination of the Faith of Abraham,
Price bound 10. d. bound up with the Christian Belief, which has the
Eexplanation of the Trinity Price 1 s. 2 d. The signs of the times, and coming
of the Lord, bound up with the Prophecy of Moses that foretold the firing of
the Mountains, Price bound 10 d. all three bound up togather. Price 1 s. 6 d.
The book that Proves there Worlds and three Foundations with the Tree of
knowledge of good and evil, Price bound 1 s. And are to be Sold at the places
before mentioned in the Title. The book of the Figurative Speeches is not yet
out.

My aim is at the good of Souls, and therefore the they that understand not the
word may be convinced o^ the Truth. I Refer my Books to the Lord Bishops* who I
believe are men of that integrity that will not oppose the Truth, to whom I
shall by Gods assistance give further satisfaction if required; and when God
had enlightened my understanding in his word, I did dare do no other then leave
and venture the little concern I had, and come above a Hundred Miles to
acquaint the Nation, what God is a going about to do; this being the little
time that is given the Christians to prepare.

God make our KING and Parliament instruments for his Glory.
FINIS

