THE TRUMPET OF THE LORD SOUNDED OUT OF SION, TO AWAKEN England's Inhabitants
Into a SENSE OF THE Mercies and Judgments OF THE LORD.

By Charles Marshall.

Printed in the Year 1675.

THE TRUMPET OF THE Lord, etc.
GIve Ear O you Inhabitants of this Northern Island of the Gentiles, who sat
in Darkness, and under the Region of the Shadow of Death, in whom, and amongst
whom is arisen a Light.

God Eternal the Ancient of Days, who was from everlasting and is to
everlasting, has in these latter Ages of the World stretched out the Ancient
Arm of his great Power to gather thine Inhabitants out of the broad ways of
Destruction, into the narrow Way of Life eternal; and in order to the
Accomplishment of this great and glorious Work, he has caused his spiritual
Trumpet to be sounded to awaken thine Inhabitants to stand up and hear his
Determination, which was and is to overturn, lay waste, confound, and destroy
the Kingdom of Antichrist, and to set up and establish the Kingdom of his Son
Christ Jesus, and to translate thousands and ten thousands out of the Kingdom
of Satan, into the Kingdom of his dear Son.

This Work O England, God everlasting has begun within thy Borders, whose
Glorious, Bright, Splendorous Day is dawned over thee; magnified be the Name of
the mighty God, this Day has overtook some thousands of thine Inhabitants,
through which they have seen that grievous dark Night of Apostasy, in which
they wandered from Mountain unto Hill of lifeless Professions, seeking the
living among the dead, and Food for their immortal Souls in desolate Places;
but found it not until the glorious Lord God of eternal Might caused his Day
(which is Light) to dawn, through which they have seen the Displeasure of the
Lord of Hosts against Sin and Iniquity, and all outside Professions of
Christianity, which are void and remote from the Natue thereof.

But O England England! instead of prizing this unutterable Loving Kindness of
the Lord in visiting thine Inhabitants with his Day-springing from on high;
Multitudes, both Professors and profane did reject, withstand and oppose the
very first Breakings forth and Dawnings of this Day of Love, and wickedly and
despightfully treated the Lord's Ambassadors, that were sent to publish and
proclaim the Glad-tidings of Life and Salvation; and both Rulers, Priests and
People withstood as much as in them lay, the Lord in his Spiritual Appearance,
and put Briars and Thorns (as some did in Ages bypast) in Battle against the
Lord; but after he had given them a Day of tender Visitation, stretching out
his Hand all the Day long, which was rejected; the Almighty God kindled a Fire
in his Wrath, and his Displeasure waxed hot against them, and he caused his
Fire to go through their Briars and Thorns, and consumed them, in which Day the
mighty fell from their Seats into great Contempt, and the abasing-Hand of the
Lord signally appeared in the Power of its working, through whose Overthrow and
abasing, he exalted his Truth over their Power, and renowned it over their
Opposition, and has caused it to prosper, and his Day to dawn and appear more
and more, through which Light and Understanding have so appeared, and
increased, that Thousands have a Discovery what the righteous God requires of
them: And now O Inhabitants of England after your settlement in this Capacity
you are now in, how did the Lord strive with you, ye Rulers and People?
requiring you to do justly, love Mercy, bring forth Justice and Judgment, Truth
and Righteousness, ease the oppressed, judge the Cause of the innocent, and in
all things bow before the most high, who changed Time and Seasons before your
Eyes, pulling down and setting up, which was not accomplished by any Man or
Men's Might, Sword or Spear, that no Men might have whereof to glory; but dread
before his Greatness, Almightiness, Wisdom and Justice.

But O ye Rulers, Priests and People, how soon were ye turned aside by the
Spirit of Error from taking notice of the Goings of the Almighty, or having
Regard to the Operation of his Hand? but Joined Hand in Hand to do wickedly, to
oppose, gainsay and resist the Counsel of the Lord, which abundantly was
declared unto you, but ye rejected it, and with Greediness made Haste to work
Evil, and commit Unrighteousness, and to many great Abominations added this,
namely, cruelly in many Places to persecute and imprison an innocent People
that feared the Lord, dreading and trembling before him, having a Regard to the
Operation of his overturning Hand and Power; and those your great Evils greatly
displeased the Just God, yet in tender Love he arose early, and sent unto you;
and many Warnings you Rulers, Priests and People had before those dreadful
signal Judgments, viz. Pestilence and Fire, which came on Thousands, as an
armed Man, and as Travail on a Woman, wasting and destroying dreadfully the
People, Habitations and Treasures, in which Day the God of Mercy and
inexpressible Compassions, bowed down his Ear to your Sighings, and had a
Regard to your Cries, which were many and great, whilst those dreadful Strokes
were upon you; and he was entreated, and in his Mercy stayed the Sword in the
Hand of the destroying Angel, which was and is seen drawn over thee, O City of
London and Inhabitants of England: And the Lord God Almighty answered the
ardent Cries of his Prophets and People, which were in Supplication unto him,
to give you, O Inhabitants, a Day of Trial in Mercy, to see whether you would
amend and turn from the Evil of your Doings, and in the Sense of his Judgments
and Mercies, be humbled through all your Families in the Dust before him: And
in his Grace and unspeakable Mercies, he has given you a Time and Season ye
Rulers, Priests and People, and a small Remnant has taken notice of the Work
of the Hand of the Almighty, and bowed before him in the Sense of his Judgments
and Mercies, and have turned from the Evil of their Doings unto the Lord, and
by them the blessed End of the Lord is answered; but these are but a little
Remnant to the many Thousands of thy Inhabitants: For thy Multitudes, O
England, in thy Cities, Towns and Villages, Rulers, Priests and People have not
had a true Regard, neither to the Judgments nor Mercies of the Lord, but have
proceeded from great Evils to worse, rushing into Uncleanness, Debauchery and
all Iniquity, as the Horse into Battle, and drinking it up as the Ox drinks
Water. And now O Inhabitants of England, lift up your Eyes, be awakened into a
Sense, how in this Day of the Long-Suffering of the Lord, and Respite from
dreadful consuming Judgments, ye have declared your Sins like (if not far
exceeding) Sodom and Gomorrah: The Lord Almighty is greatly offended with you,
and his Spirit that has strove with you long, is exceedingly grieved; the
Cries of your Transgressions are come before him, and he is comedown, and has
vewed thy Cities, Towns and Villages, O England, and behold they are before him
like Sodom, and many of thy Inhabitants like Gomorrah, whom God overthrew, and
never repented.

And he has said, I will now draw near to Judgment, and hasten my
Determination, and accomplish my Purpose, that the Earth may be moved at the
uttering of my Thunders, and the Inhabitants reel like a Cottage, that the
mighty of the Earth may arise to meet me in the Ways of my Judgments; for from
the rising of the Sun to the going down of the same shall my Name be
reverenced, and the Acts of the Arm of my Power renowned.

O England, England! Awake, awake out of that Sleep of Death and Destruction,
which the Destroyer of Mankind has brought Multitudes of thine Inhabitants
into, and consider now thine Estate in this the Evening of many of thine
Inhabitants Day, for the Sun is setting over many, and Night coming on apace,
wherein no Man can work.

I am distressed for thee, O dear Land of my Nativity in the Sense of the
little Regard many of thine Inhabitants have of the Mercies and Judgments of
the Lord; but yet be awakened at the certain Sound of the Trumpet of the Lord,
to consider the things appertaining to your everlasting Peace, and to a serious
Consideration of the Times and Seasons that are over you and wherein you are.

And I am moved of the eternal holy Lord God to pat you in mind, that it was
not long since a great Fear and Dread was on many, that the Lord would swiftly
have brought that grievous and fore Judgment of removing the Plenty of Bread
within our Land through the dreadful Seasons in many Places (a sore manner of
wasting People) through which multitudes of cattle died before your Eyes, which
came so far as to give several a taste of that dreadful Judgment of Famine,
which threatening brought a Dread upon the Minds of many; but the God of our
Mercies, who is full of Compassions and Long-suffering, that he might try you O
Inhabitants of England, immediately and signally appeared in great and
unexpressible Mercy, and instead of a dreadful Famine, caused the Earth to
bring forth by Hand-fuls ABUNDANTLY.

Now O rebellious Nation, stiff-necked and hard-hearted People, be wise, be
instructed, lift up your Eyes, behold this Trial of Plenty; for so it is, I
declare it unto you in the Name of the Lord God of Hosts, to prove and to try
you, whether the dreadful Threatenings of Judgment, and the speedy large
Extention of his Mercies will move to a serious Examination of your Ways and
Walkings before the Lord; Then would the Sense of your great and coutinued
Iniquities on the one Hand, and the Sense of the great Long-Suffering and
tender Mercies of the Almighty on the other Hand bar you down and bring you
very low, even into the dust before the Lord through which a repenting Frame of
Spirit would come on you.

But now O England, England, if neither the Mercies nor Judgments of the Lord,
which have been, and are upon thee, will prevail, so as to work a Reformation
in thee; then O People hear this Word; Be in Expectation of a dreadful Day,
such as you have not known in this Generation, to come on you; for the Lord God
strong and mighty will smite through the Land in great Dread and Fury, bringing
Terror and the very Begirdings of Sorrows upon every County therein, and a
general Calamity, wasting, consuming, destroying and depopulating and
overturning will go over: And therefore in the Name of the mighty God, when
this Message comes to your Ears, lay aside all your Instruments and Objects of
Joy and Mirth, come down in the Dust before the dreadful God, all both high and
low, rich and poor, bond and free male and female, from him that sits upon the
Throne to the Beggar on the Dunghill, and speedily humble your selves before the
Lord, fast from Strife and Debate and all Iniquity, then approach and come
near, cry mightily to the Lord God of Sabboths, that he would spare you and
your Land from the dreadful Spoiler and Waster; and covenant with the Lord to
walk before him in Righteousness, putting away all your Abominations from
before his Eyes, the Stumbling Block of your Iniquities, and may be the Lord
may be yet entreated, otherwise remember this sealed Counsel and Determination
of the most high, glorious, dreadful Lord God of Heaven and Earth, When you
have filled up your measures, which greatly hastens and is near, your Judgments
shall be astonishing, both unto your selves, and unto Nations, in which Day you
shall know, that as Israel of old rejected and rebelled against the good Spirit
of the Lord given them, and against the Counsel of the Lord given by his
Prophets and Servants, for which a wasting and dreadful consuming Judgment came
on them; so have ye: So be instructed, bow down and kiss the Son, lest his
Wrath break forth without Remedy, and thousands perish out of the Way; and
whilst ye have a little time (a very short time) prize it, in making the
utmost Use of it, is the breathing Cries, and travailing in Spirit for you of
him who has been and am often afflicted and bowed in Spirit for you, who am a
Servant of the Lord, raised up to declare his certain Counsel unto you.

Tetherton in the County of Wilts the 6th Month, 1675. Charles Marshall.

THE END.

