An Account of the GROWTH OF POPERY, AND Arbitrary Government IN ENGLAND.

More Particularly, from the Long Prorogation, of November, 1675, Ending the
15th. of February 1676, till the Last Meeting of Parliament, the 16th. of July
1677.

AMSTERDAM, Printed in the Year 1677.

An account of the Growth of POPERY, and Arbitrary Government in England, etc.
THere has now for diverse Years, a design been carried on, to change the
Lawful Government of England into an Absolute Tyranny, and to convert the
established Protestant Religion into downright Popery: than both which,
nothing can be more destructive or contrary to the Interest and Happiness, to
the Constitution and Being of the King and Kingdom.

For if first we consider the State, the Kings of England Rule not upon the
same terms with those of our neighbor Nations, who, having by force or by
adresse usurped that due share which their People had in the Government, are
now for some Ages in possession of an Arbitrary Power (which yet no Presciption
can make Legal) and exercise it over their persons and estates in a most
Tyrannical manner. But here the Subjects retain their proportion in the
Legislature; the very meanest Commoner of England is represented in Parliament,
and is a party to those Laws by which the Prince is sworn to Govern himself and
his people. No Money is to be levied but by the common consent. No than is for
Life, Limb, Goods, or Liberty at the Sovereigns discretion: but we have the
same Right (modestly understood) in our Propriety that the Prince has in his
Regality; and in all Cases where the King is concerned, we have our just remedy
as against any private person of the neighborhood, in the Courts of
Westminster Hall or in the High Court of Parliament. His very Prerogative is no
more then what the Law has determined. His Broad Seal, which is the Legitimate
stamp of his pleasure, yet is no longer current, than upon the Trial it is
found to be Legal. He cannot commit any person by his particular warrant. He
cannot himself be witness in any cause: the Balance of Public Justice being
so dellicate, that not the hand only but even the breath of the Prince would
turn the scale. Nothing is left to the Kings will, but all is subjected to his
Authority: by which means it follows that he can do no wrong, nor can he
receive wrong; and a King of England, keeping to these measures, may without
arrogance be said to remain the only Intelligent Ruler over a Rational People.
In recompense therefore and acknowledgment of so good a Government under his
influence, his Person is most sacred and inviolable; and whatsoever excesses
are committed against so high a trust, nothing of them is imputed to him, as
being free from the necessity or temptation, but his Ministers only are
accountable for all and must answer it at their perils. He has a vast Revenue
constantly arising from the Hearth of the Householder, the Sweat of the
Labors, the Rent of the Farmer, the Industry of the Merchant, and
consequently out of the Estate of the Gentleman: a larg competence to defray
the ordinary expense of the Crown, and maintain its luster. And if any
extraordinary occasion happen, or be but with any probable decency pretended,
the whole Land at whatsoever season of the year does yield him a plentiful
Harvest. So forward are his Peoples affections to give even to superfluity,
that a Forainer (or English man that has been long abroad) would think they
could neither will nor choose, but that the asking of a supply, were a mere
formality, it is so readily granted. He is the Fountain of all Honors, and has
moreover the distribution of so many profitable Offices of the Household, of the
Revenue, of State, of Law, of Religion, of the Navy (and, since his persent
Majesty's time, of the Army) that it seems as if the Nation could scarce
furnish honest men enough to supply all those employments. So that the Kings of
England are in nothing inferior to other Princes, save in being more abridged
from injuring their own subjects: But have as large a field as any of external
felicity, wherein to exercise their own Virtue and so reward and encourage it
in others. In short, there is nothing that comes nearer in Government to the
Divine Perfection, then where the Monarch, as with us, injoys a capacity of
doing all the good imaginable to mankind, under a disability to all that is
evil.

And as we are thus happy in the Constitution of our State, so are we yet more
blessed in that of our Church; being free from that Romish Yoke, which so great
a part of Christendom do yet draw and labor under, That Popery is such a
thing as cannot, but for want of a word to express it, be called a Religion:
nor is it to be mentioned with that civility which is otherwise decent to be
used, in speaking of the differences of humane opinion about Divine Matters.
Were it either open Judaisine, or plain Turkery, or honest Paganism, there is
yet a certain Bona fides in the most extravagant Belief, and the sincerity of
an erroneous Profession may render it more pardonable: but this is a compound
of all the three, an extract of whatsoever is most ridiculous and impious in
them, incorporated with more peculiar absurdityes of its own, in which those
were deficient; and all this deliberately contrived, knowingly carried on by
the bold imposture of Priests under the name of Christianity. The wisdom of
this fifth Religion, this last and insolentest attempt upon the credulity of
mankind seems to me (though not ignorant otherwise of the times, degrees and
methods of its progress) principally to have consisted in their owning the
Scriptures to be the word of God, and the Rule of Faith and Manners, but in
prohibiting of the same time their common use, or the reading of them in
public Churches but in a Latin translation to the vulgar: there being no
better or more rational way to frustrate the very design of the great
Institutor of Christianity, who first planted it by the extraordinary gift of
Tongues, then to forbid the use even of the ordinary languages. For having thus
a book which is universally avowed to be of Divine Authority, but sequestring
it only into such hands as were entrusted in the cheat, they had the
opportunity to vitiate, suppress, or interpret to their own profit those
Records by which the poor People hold their salvation. And this necessary point
being once gained, there was thence forward nothing so monstrous to reason, so
abhorring from morality, or so contrary to scripture which they might not in
prudence adventure on. The Idolatry (for alas it is neither better nor worse)
of adoring and praying to Saints and Angels, of worshipping Pictures, Images
and Relics, Incredible Miracles and plapable Fables to promote that
veneration. The whole Liturgy and Worship of the Blessed Virgin. The saying of
Pater Nosters and Creeds, to the honor of Saints, and of Ave Mary's too, not
to her honor, but of others. The Public Service, which they can spare to God
among so many competitors, in an unknown tongue; and entangled with such
Vestments, Consecrations, Exorcismes, Whisperings, Sprinklings, Censings, and
Fantastical Rites, Gesticulations, and Removals, so unbeseeming a Christian
Office, that it represents rather the pranks and ceremonies of Juglers and
Conjurers. The Refusal of the Cup to the Laity. The necessity of the Priests
Intention to make any of their Sacraments effectual. Debarring their Clergy
from Marriage. Interdicting of Meats. Auricular Confession and Absolution, as
with them practiced. Penances, Pilgrimages, Purgatory, and Prayer for the dead.
But above all their other devices, that Transubstantiall solacisme, whereby
that glorified Body, which at the same time they allow to be in Heaven, is sold
again and crucified daily upon all the Altars of their Communion. For God
indeed may now and then do a Miracle, but a Romish Priest can, it seems, work
in one moment a thousand Impossibilityes. Thus by a new and antiscriptural
Belief, compiled of Terrors to the Phansy, Contradictions to Sense, and
Impositions on the Understanding, their Laity have turned Tenants for their
Souls, and in consequence Tributary for their Estates to a more then omnipotent
Priesthood.

I must indeed do them that right to avow that, out of an equitable
consideration and recompense of so faithful a slavery, they have discharged
the People from all other services and dependence, infranchised them from all
duty to God or Man; insomuch that their severer and more learned Divines, their
Governors of Conscience, have so well instructed them in all the arts of
Circumventing their neighbor, and of colluding with Heaven, that, wear the
scholars as apt as their teachers, their would have been long since an end of
all either true Piety, or common Honesty; and nothing left among them but
authorized Hypocrisy, Licentiousness and Knavery; had not the natural worth
of the better sort, and the Good simplicity of the meaner, in great measure
preferved them. For nothing indeed but an extraordinary temper and ingenuity of
spirit, and that too assisted by a diviner influence, could possibly restrain
those within any the terms or Laws of humanity, who at the same time own the
Doctrine of their Casuists or the Authority of the Pope, as it is by him
claimed and exercised. He by his Indulgences delivers souls out of the pains
of the other world: So that who would refuse to be vicious here, upon so good
security. He by his dispensation annuls Contracts betwixt man and man, dissoves
Oaths between Princes, or betwixt them and their People, and gives allowance in
cases which God and nature prohibits. He, as Clerk of the spiritual Market,
has set a rate upon all crimes: the more flagitious they are and abominable,
the better Commodities, and men pay only an higher price as for greater
rarityes. So that it seems as if the commands of God had been invented merely
to erect an Office for the Pope; the worse Christians men are, the better
Customers; and this Rome does by the same policy people its Church, as the
Pagan Rome did the City, by opening a sanctuary to all Malefactors. And why
not, if his Power be indeed of such virtue and extent as is by him challenged?
That he is the Ruler over Angels, Purgatory and Hell. That his Tribunal and
Gods are all one. That all that God, he can do, Clave non errant, and what he
does is as God and not as man. That he is the Universal Head of the Church,
The sole Interpreter of Scripture, and Judge of Controversy. That (...) is
above General Councils. That his Power is Absolute, and his Decrees
Infallible. That he can change the very nature of things, making what is Just
to be Unjust, and what is Vice to be Virtue. That all Laws are in the Cabinet
of his Breast. That he can Dispense with the new Testment to the great injury
of the Devils. That he is still Monarch of this World, and that he can dispose
of Kingdoms and Empires as he pleases. Which things being granted, that style
of Optimum, Maximum and supremum numen in terris, or that of Dominus, Deus
noster, Papa, was no such extraordinary stroke of Courtship as we reckoned: but
it was rather a great clownishness in him that treated so mighty a Prince under
the simple Title of Vice-Deus. The exercise of his Dominion is in all points
suitable to this his Pretense. He antiquates the precepts of Christ as things
only of good advice, not commanded: but makes it a mortal seu even to doubt of
any part of his own Religion, and demands under pain of damnation the
subjection of all Christians to his Papal Authority: the denying of two things
so reasonable as blind obedience to this Power, and an Implicit Faith to his
Doctrine, being the most unpardonable crime, under his Dispensation. He has
indeed of late been somewhat more retentive then formerly as to his faculty of
disposing of Kingdoms, the thing not having succeeded well with him in some
instances: but he lays the same claim still, continues the same inclination,
and though velvet headed has the more itch to be pushing. And however in order
to any occasion he keeps himself in breath always by cursing one Prince or
other upon every Maunday Thusday: Nor is their any, whether Prince or Nation,
that dissents from his Usurpations, but are marked out under the notion of
Heretics to ruin and destruction whensover he shall give the signal. That
word of Heresy misapplyed, has served him for so many Ages to Justify all the
Executions, Assassinations, Wars, Massacres, and Devastations, whereby his
Faith has been Propagated; of which our times also have not wanted examples,
and more is to be expected for the future. For by how much any thing is more
false and unreasonble, it requires more cruelty to establish it: and to
introduce that which is absurd, there must be somewhat done that is barbarous.
But nothing of any sect in Religion can be more recommended by all these
qualityes then the Papacy. The Pagans are excusable by their natural darkness,
without Revelation. The Jews are tolerable, who see not beyond the Old
Testament. Mahomet was so honest as to own what he would be at, that he himself
was the greatest Prophet, and that his was a Religion of the Sword. So that
these were all, as I may say, of another Allegiance and if Enemies, yet not
Traitors: But the Pope avowing Christianity by profession does in Doctrine and
practice renonce it: and presuming to be the only Catholic, does persecute
those to the death who dare worship the Author of their Religion instead of his
pretended Vicegerent.

And yet there is nothing more evident, notwithstanding his most notorious
forgeries and falsification of all Writers, then that the Pope was for several
Hundred of Years an honest Bishop as other men are, and never so much as
dreamed upon the Seven Hills of that universal power which he is now come to:
nay was the first that opposed any such pretension. But some of them at last,
growing wiser, by foisting a counterfeit Donation of Constantine, and wresting
another Donation from our Savior, advanced themselves in a weak, ignorant, and
credulous Age, to that Temporal and Spiritual Principality that they are now
seized of. Tues Petrus, and super hanc Petram, adificabo Ecclesiam meam. Never
was a Bishop-prick and a Verse of Scripture so improved by good management.
Thus, by exercising in the quality of Christ's Uicar the public function under
an invisible Prince, the Pope, like the Maires of the Palace, has set his
master aside and delivered the Government over to a new Line of Papal
Succession. But who can, unless wilfully, be ignorant what wretched doings,
what Bribery, what Ambition there are, how long the Church is without an Head
upon every Vacancy, till among the crew of bandying Cardinals the Holy Ghost
have declared for a Pope of the French or Spanish Faction. It is a sucession
like that of the Egyptian Ox (the living Idol of that Country) who dying or
being made away by the Priests, there was a solemn and general mourning for
want of a Deity; until in their Conclave they had found out another Beast with
the very same marks as the former, whom then they themselves adored and with
great Jubilee brought forth to the People to worship. Nor was that Election a
grosser reproach to human Reason then this is also to Christianity. Surely it
is the greatest Miracle of the Romish Church that it should still continue, and
that in all this time the Gates of Heaven should not prevail against it.

It is almost unconceivable how Princes can yet suffer a Power so pernicious,
and Doctrine so destructive to all Government. That so great a part of the Land
should be alienated and condemned to, as they call it, Pious Uses. That such
millions of their People as the Clergy, should, by remaining unmarryed, either
frustrate humane nature if they live chastely, or, if otherwise, adulterate it.
That they should be privileged from all labor, all public service, and
exempt from the power of all Secular Jurisdiction. That they, being all bound,
by strict Oaths and Vows of Obedience to the Pope, should evacuate the Fealty
due to the Sovereign. Nay, that not only the Clergy but their whole People, if
of the Romish preswasion, should be obliged to rebel at any time upon the Popes
pleasure. And yet how many of the Neighboring Princes are content, or do choose
to reign, upon those conditions; which being so dishonorable and dangerous,
surely some great and more weighty reason does cause them submit to. Whether it
be out of personal fear, having heard perhaps of several attempts which the
blind obedience of Popish Zelotes has executed against their Princes. Or,
whether aiming at a more absolute and tyrannical Government, they think it
still to be the case of Boniface and Phocas (an usurping Emperor and an
usurping Bishop) and that, as other Cheats, this also is best to be managed by
Confederacy. But, as far as I can apprehend, there is more of Sloth then
Policy on the Princes side in this whole matter: and all that pretense of
inslaving men by the assistance of Religion more easily, is neither more nor
less then when the Bramine, by having the first night of the Bride assures
himself of her devotion for the future, and makes her more fit for the husband.

This reflection upon the state of our Neighbors, in aspect to Religion, does
sufficiently illustrate our happiness, and spare me the labor of describing
it further, then by the Rule of Contraryes: Our Church standing upon all points
in a direct opposition to all the forementioned errors. Our Doctrine being
true to the Principles of the first Christian institution, and Episcopacy being
formed upon the Primitive Model, and no Ecclesiastical Power jostling the
Civil, but all concurring in common obedience to the Sovereign. Nor therefore
is their any, whether Prince or Nation, that can with less probability be
reduced back to the Romish persuasion, than ours of England.

For, if first we respect our Obedience to God, what appearance is there that,
after so durable and general an enlightening of our minds with the sacred Truth,
we should again put out our own Eyes, to wander through the palpable darkness of
that gross Superstition? But forasmuch as most men are less concerned for their
Interest in Heaven than on Earth, this seeming the nearer and more certain, on
this account also our alteration from the Protestant Religion is the more
impossible. When beside the common ill examples and consequences of Popery
observable abroad, whereby. we might grow wise at the expense of our
Neighbors, we cannot but reflect upon our own Experiments at home, which would
make even fools docible. The whole Reign of Queen Mary, in which the Papists
made Fuel of the Protestants. The Excommunicating and Deprivation of Queen
Elizabeth by the Pope, pursued with so many Treasons and attempts upon her
Person, by her own Subjects, and the Invasion in Eighty-Eight by the Spanish.
The two Breves of the Pope, in order to exclude King James from the Succession
to the Crown, seconded by the Gunpovvder-Treason. In the time of his late
Majesty, King Charles the first, (besides what they contributed to the Civil
War in England) the Rebellion and horrid Massacre in Ireland, and, which was
even worse than that, their pretending that it was done by the Kings
Commission, and vouching the Broad Seal for their Authority. The Popes Nuncio
assuming nevertheless and exercising there the Temporal as well as Spiritual
Power, granting out Commissions under his own Hand, breaking the Treatys of
Peace between the King, and, as they then styled themselves, the Confederate
Catholics; heading two Armies against the Marquess of Ormond, then Lord
Lieutenant, and forcing him at last to quit the Kingdom: all which ended in the
Ruin of his Majesty's Reputation, Government, and Person; which but upon
occasion of that Rebellion, could never have happened. So that we may reckon
the Reigns of our late Princes, by a succession of the Popish Treasons against
them. And, if under his present Majesty we have as yet seen no more visible
effects of the same spirit than the Firing of London (acted by Hubert, hired by
Pieddelou two Frenchmen) which remains a Controversy, it is not to be
attributed to the good nature or better Principles of that Sect, but to the
wisdom of his Holiness; who observes that we are not of late so dangerous
Protestants as to deserve any special mark of his Indignation, but that we may
be made better use of to the weakening of those that are of our own Religion,
and that if he do not disturb us, there are those among our selves, that are
leading us into a fair way of Reconciliation with him.

But those continued fresh Instances, in relation to the Crown, together with
the Popes claim of the Temporal and immediate Dominion of the Kingdoms of
England and Ireland, which he does so challenge, are a sufficient caution to
the Kings of England, and of the People, there is as little hopes to seduce
them, the Protestant Religion being so interwoven as it is with their Secular
Interest. For the Lands that were formerly given to superstitious uses, having
first been applied to the Public Revenue, and afterward by several
Alienations and Contracts distributed into private possession, the alteration
of Religion would necessarily introduce a change of Property. Nullum tempus
occurrit Ecelesiae, it would make a general Earthquake over the nation, and
even now the Romish Clergy on the other side of the water, snuff up the
savoury odor of so many rich Abbeys and Monasteries that belonged to their
predecessors. Hereby no considerably Estate in England but must have a piece
torn out of it upon the Titile of Piety, and the rest subject to be wholly
forfeited upon the account of Heresy. Another Chimny money of the old Peter
pence must again be paid. as tribute to the Pope, beside that which is
established on his Majesty: and the People, instead of those moderate Tithes
that are with too much difficulty paid to their Protestant Pastors, will be
exposed to all the exactions, of the Court of Rome, and a thousand artifices by
which in former times they were used to draine away the wealth of ours more
then any other Nation. So that in conclusion, there is no Englishman that has
a Soul, a Body, or an Estate to save, that Loves either God, his King, or his
Country, but is by all those Tenures bound, to the best of his Power and
Knowledge, to maintain the established Protestant Religion.

And yet, all this notwithstanding, there are those men among us, who have
undertaken, and do make it their business, under so Legal and perfect a
Government, to introduce a French slavery, and instead of so pure a Religion,
to establish the Roman Idolatry: both and either of which are Crimes of the
Highest nature. For, as to matter of Government, if to murder the King be, as
certainly it is, a Fact so, horred, how much more heinous is it to assassinate
the Kingdom? And as none will deny, that to alter our Monarchy into a
Commonwealth were Treason, so by the same Fundamenttal Rule, the Crime is no
less to make that Monarchy Absolute.

What is thus true in regard of the State, holds as well in reference to our
Religion. Former Parliaments have made it Treason in whosoever shall attempt to
seduce any one, the meanest of the Kings subjects, to the Church of Rome: And
this Parliament has, to all penalties by the Common or Statute Law, added
incapacity for any man who shall presume to say that the King is a Papist or an
Introducer of Popery. But what lawless and incapable miscreants then, what
wicked Traitors are those wretched men, who endeavor to pervert our whole
Church, and to bring that about in effect, which even to mention is penal, at
one Italian stroke attempting to subvert the Government and Religion, to kill
the Body and damn the Soul of our Nation.

Yet were these men honest old Cavaliers that had suffered in his late
Majesty's service, it were allowable in them, as often as their wounds brake out
at Spring or Fall, to think of a more Arbitrary Government, as a sovereign
Balsom for their Aches, or to imagine that no Weapon-salve but of the Moss that
grows on an Enemies Skul could cure them. Should they mistake this Long
Parliament also for Rebels, and that, although all Circumstances be altered,
there were still the same necessity to fight it all over again in pure Loyalty,
yet their Age and the Times they have lived in, might excuse them. But those
worthy Gentlemen are too Generous, too good Christians and Subjects, too
affectionate to the good English Government, to be capable of such an
Impression. Whereas these Conspiratours are such as have not one drop of
Cavalier Blood, or no Bowels at least of a Cavalier in them; but have starved
them, to Revel and Surfeit upon their Calamities, making their Persons, and the
very Cause, by pretending to it themselves, almost Ridiculous.

Or, were these Conspiratours on the other side but avowed Papists, they were
the more honest, the less dangerous, and the Religion were answerable for the
Errors they might commit in order to promote it. Who is there but must
acknowledge, if he do not commend the Ingenuity (or by what better Name I may
call it) of Sir Thomas Strickland, Lord Bellassis, the late Lord Clifford and
others, eminent in their several stations? These, having so long appeared the
most zealous Sons of our Church, yet, as soon as the late Test against Popery
was inacted, took up the Cross, quitted their present employments and all
hopes of the future, rather then falsify their opinion: though otherwise men
for Quality, Estate and Abilityes whether in War or Peace, as capable and
well deserving (without disparagement) as others that have the art to continue
in Offices. And above all his Royal Highness is to be admired for his
unparallelled magnanimity on the same account: there being in all history
perhaps no Record of any Prince that ever changed his Religion in his
circumstances. But these persons, that have since taken the work in hand, are
such as ly under no temptation of Religion: secure men, that are above either
Honor or Consciencs; but obliged by all the most sacred ties of Malice and
Ambition to advance the ruin of the King and Kingdom, and qualified much
better then others, under the name of good Protestants, to effect it.

And because it was yet difficult to find Accomplices enough at home, that were
ripe for so black a desing, but they wanted a Back for their Edge; therefore
they applied themselves to France, that King being endowed with all those
qualityes, which in a Prince, may pass for Virtues; but in any private man,
would be capital; and moreover so abounding in wealth that no man else could go
to the price of their wickedness: To which Considerations, adding that he is
the Master of Absolute Dominion, the Presumptive Monarch of Christendom, the
declared Champion of Popery, and the hereditary, natural, inveterate Enemy of
our King and Nation, he was in all respects the most likely (of all Earthly
Powers) to reward and support them in a Project every way suitable to his one
Inclination and Interest.

And now, should I enter into a particular retaile of all former and latter
Transactions, relating to this affair, there would be sufficient for a just
Volume of History. But my intention is only to write a naked Narrative of some
the most considerable passages in the meeting of Parliament the 15 of Febr.
1676. Such as have come to my notice which may serve for matter to some
stronger Pen and to such as have more leisure and further opportunity to
discover and communicate to the Public. This in the mean time will by the
Progress made in so few weeks, demonstrate at what rate these men drive over
the necks of King and People, of Religion and Government; and how near they are
in all humane probability to arrive Triumphant at the end of their Journey.
Yet, that I may not be too abrupt, and leave the Reader wholly destitute of a
thread to guide himself by through so intriguing a Labyrinth, I shall summarily
as short, as so copious and redundant a matter will admit, deduce the order of
affairs both at home and abroad, as it led into this Session.

It is well known, were it as well remembered, what the provocation was, and
what the success of the war begun by the English i^ the Year 1665. against
Holland: what vast supplies were furnished by the Subject for defraying it, and
yet after all. no Fleet set out, but the Flower of all the Royal Navy burnt or
taken in Port to save charges. How the French, during that War, joined
themselves in assistance of Holland against us, and yet, by the credit he had
with the Queen Mother, so far deluded his Majesty, that upon assurance the
Dutch neither would have any Fleet out that year, he forbore to make ready, and
so incurred that notable loss, and disgrace at Chatham. How (after this fatal
conclusion of all our Sea- Champaynes) as we had been obliged to the French for
that war, so we were glad to receive the Peace from his favor which was
agreed at Breda betwixt England, France, and Holland.

His Majesty was hereby now at leisure to remarke how the French had in the
year 1667. taken the time of us and while we were imbroled and weakened had in
violation of all the most solemn and sacred Oaths and Treatyes invaded and
taken a great part of the Spanish Nether-Land, which had always been
considered as the natural Frontier of England. And hereupon he judged it
necessary to interpose, before the flame that consumed his next neighbor
should throw its sparkles over the water. And therefore, generously slighting
all punctilious of ceremony or peeks of animosity, where the safty of his
People and the repose of Christendom were concerned, he sent first into
Holland, inviting them to a nearer Alliance, and to enter into such further
Counsels as were most proper to quiet this public disturbance which the
French had raised. This was a work wholly of his Majestys designing and
(according to that felicity which has allways attended him, when excluding the
corrupt Politics of others he has followed the dictates of his own Royal
wisdom) so well it succeeded. It is a thing searse credible, though true, that
two Treatyes of such weight, intricacy, and so various aspect as that of the
Defensive League with Holland, and the other for repressing the further
progress of the French in the Spanish Netherland, should in five days time, in
the year 1668. be concluded. Such was the Expedition and secrecy then used in
prosecuting his Majesty particular instructions, and so easy a thing is it for
Princes, when they have a mind to it, to be well served. The Svvede too shortly
after made the third in this Concert; whether wisely judging that in the
minority of their King reigning over several late acquired dominions, it was
their true intrest to have an hand in all the Counsels that tended to pease
and undisturbed possession, or, whether indeed those ministers, like ours, did
even then project in so glorious an Alliance to betray it afterward to their
own greater advantage. From their joining in it was called the Triple Alliance,
His Majesty with great sincerity continued to solicit other Princes according
to the seventh Article to come into the Guaranty of this Treaty, and delighted
himself in cultivating by all good means what he had planted. But in a very
short time these Counsels, which had taken effect with so great satisfaction
to the Nation and to his Majestyes eternal honor, were all changed and it
seemed that Treatyes, as soon as the Wax is cold, do lose their virtue. The
King in June 1670 went down to Dover to meet after a long absence. Madam, his
only remaining sister: where the days were the more pleasant, by how much it
seldomer happens to Princes then private persons to enjoy their Relations, and
when they do, yet their kind interviews are usually solemnized with some
fatlity and disaster, nothing of which here appeared. But upon her first return
into France she was dead, the Marquess of Belfonds was immediately sent hither,
a Person, of great Honor dispatched thither? and, before ever the inquiry and
grumbling at her death could be abated, in a trice there was an invisible
Leagle, in prejudice of the Triple one, struck up with France, to all the
height of dearnesse and affection. As if upon discecting the Princess there had
some state Philtre been found in her bowels, or the reconciliation wiah France
were not to be celebrated with a less sacrifice then of the Blood Royal of
England. The sequel will be suitable to so ominous a beginning. But, as this
Treaty was a work of Darkness and which could never yet be understood or
discovered but by the effects, so before those appeared it was necessary that
the Parliament should after the old wont be gulld to the giving of money. They
met the 24th Oct. 1670. and it is not without much labor that I have been able
to recover a written Copy of the Lord Bridgmans speech, none being printed, but
forbidden, doubtless lest so notorious a Practice as certainly was never
before, though there have indeed been many, put upon the Nation, might remain
public. Although that Honorable person cannot be persumed to have been
accessory to what was then intended, but was in due time, when the Project
ripened and grew hopeful, discharged from his Office, and he, the Duke of
Ormond, the late Secretary Trevor, with the Prince Rupert, discarded together
out of the Committee for the Foreign Affairs, He spoke thus.

My Lords, and you the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons.
WHen the two Houses were last Adjourned, this Day, as you well know, was
perfixed for your Meeting again. The Proclamation since issued requiring all
your attendances at the same time showed not only his Majesty's belief that his
business will thrive best when the Houses are fullest, but the importance also
of the Affairs for which you are so called: And important they are. You cannot
be ignorant of the great Forces both for Land and Sea-service which our
Neighbors of France and the Low Countries have raised, and have now in actual
Pay; nor of the great Preparations which they continue to make in Levying of
Men, Building of Ships, filling their Magazines and Stores with immense
quantities of all sorts of Warlike Provisions. Since the beginning of the last
Dutch War, the French have increased the Greatness and Number of their Ships so
much, that their Strength by Sea is thrice as much as it was before. And since
the end of it, the Dutch have been very diligent also in augmenting their
Fleets. In this conjuncture, when our Neighbors Arm so potently, even common
prudence requires that his Majesty should make some suitable preparations; that
he may at least keep pace with his Neighbors, if not out-go them in Number and
Strength of Shipping. For this being an Island, both our Safety, our Trade, our
Being, and our Well-Being depend upon our Forces at Sea.

His Majesty therefore, of his Princely Care for the Good of his People, has
given order for the fitting out of Fifty Sail of his Greatest Ships, against
the Spring, besides those which are to be for Security of our Merchants in the
Mediterranean: As foreseeing, if he should not have a considerable Fleet,
whilst his Neighbors have such Forces both at Land and Sea, Temptation might
be given to those who seem not now to intend it, to give us an Affront, at
least, if not to do us a Mifchief.

To which may be added, That his Majesty, by the Leagues which he has made,
for the Common Peace of Christendom, and the good of his Kingdoms, is obliged
to a certain Number of Forces in case of Infraction thereof, as also for the
Assistance of some of his Neighbors, in case of Invasion. And his Majesty
would be in a very ill condition to perform his part of the Leagues (if whilst
the Clouds are gathering so thick about us) he should, in hopes that the Wind
will disperse them, omit to provide against the Storm.

My Lords and Gentlemen, Having named the Leagues made by his Majesty, I think
it necessary to put you in mind, That since the Close of the late War, his
Majesty has made several Leagues, to his own great Honor, and infinite
Advantage to the Nation.

One known by the Name of the Tripple Alliance, wherein his Majesty, the Crown
of Sweden and the States of the United Provinces are engaged to preserve the
Treaty of Aix la Capelle, concerning a Peace between the two warring Princes,
which Peace produced that effect, that it quenched the Fire which was ready to
have set all Christendom in a Flame. And besides other great Benefits by it,
which she still enjoyes, gave opportunity to transmit those Forces against the
Infidels, which would otherwise have been imbrued in Christian Blood.

Another between his Majesty and the said States for a Mutual Assistance with a
certain number of Men and Ships in case of Invasion by any others.

Another between his Majesty and the Duke of Savoy, Establishing a Free Trade
for his Majesty's Subjects at Villa Franca, a Port of his own upon the
Mediterranean, and through the Dominions of that Prince; and thereby opening a
Passage to a Rich part of Italy, and part of Germany, which will be of a very
great advantage for the Vending of Cloth and other our home Commodities,
bringing back Silk and other Materials for Manifactures than here.

Another between his Majesty and the King of Denmark, whereby those other
Impositions that were lately laid upon our Trade there, are taken off, and as
great Privileges granted to our Merchants, as ever they had in former Times,
or as the Subjects of any other Prince or State do now enjoy.

And another League upon a Treaty of Commerce with Spain, whereby there is not
only a Cessation and giving up to his Majesty of all their Pretensions to
Jamaica, and other Islands and Countries in the West Indies, in the Possession
of his Majesty or his Subjects, but with all, free Liberty is given to his
Majesty's Subjects, to enter their Ports for Victuals and Water, and safety of
Harbor and Return, if Storm or other Accidents bring them thither; Privileges
which were never before granted by them to the English or any Others.

Not to mention the Leagues formerly made with Sweden and Portugal, and the
Advantages which we enjoy thereby; nor those Treaties now depending between his
Majesty and France, or his Majesty and the States of tbe United Provinces
touching Commerce, wherein his Majesty will have a singular regard to the
Honor of this Nation, and also to the Trade of it, which never was greater
than now it is.

In a word, Almost all the Princes in Europe do seek his Majesty's Friendship,
as acknowledging they cannot Secure, much less Improve their present condition
without it.

His Majesty is confident that you will not be contented to see him deprived of
all the advantages which he might procure hereby to his own Kingdoms, nay even
to all Christendom, in the Repose and Quiet of it. That you will not be content
abroad to see your Neighbors strengthening themselves in Shipping, so much
more than they were before, and at Home to see the Government struggling every
year with Difficulties; and not able to keep up our Navies equal with theirs.
He finds that by his Accounts from the year 1660 to the Late War, the ordinary
Charge of the Fleet Communibus annis, came to about 500000 l. a year, and it
cannot be supported with less.

If that particular alone take up so much, add to it the other constant Charges
of the Government, and the Revenue (although the Commissioners of the Treasury
have managed it with all imaginable Thrift) will in no degree suffice to take
of the Debts due upon Interest, much less give him a Fonds for the fitting out
of this Fleet, which by common Estimation thereof cannot cost less than 800000
l. His Majesty in his most gracious Speech, has expressed the great sense he
has of your zeal and affection for him, and as he will ever retain a grateful
memory of your former readiness to supply him in all Exigencies, so he does
with particular thanks acknowledge your frank and cheerful Gift of the New
Duty upon Wines, at your last Meeting: But the same is likely to fall very
short in value of what it was conceived to be worth, and should it have
answered expectation, yet far too short to ease and help him upon these
Occasions. And therefore such a Supply as may enable him to take off his Debts
upon Interest, and to set out this Fleet against the Spring, is that which he
desires from you, and recommends it to you, as that which concerns the Honor
and Support of the Government, and the Welfare and Safety of your Selves and
the whole Kingdom.

My Lords and Gentlemen, You may perceive by what his Majesty has already
said, that he holds it requisite that an End be put to this Meeting before
Christmas. It is so not only in reference to the Preparation for his Fleet,
which must be in readiness in the Spring, but also to the Season of the Year.
It is a time when you would be willing to be in your Countries, and your
Neighbors would be glad to see you there, and partake of your Hospitality and
Charity, and you thereby endear your selves to them, and keep up that Interest
and Power among them, which is necessary for the service of your King and
Country, and a Recesse at that time, leaving your business unfinished till your
Return, cannot either be convenient for you, or suitable to the condition of
his Majesty's Affairs, which requires your Speedy, as well as Affectionate
Consideration.

There needed not so larg a Catalogue of pass, present and future Leagues and
Treaties, for even Villa Franca sounded so well (being besides so considerable
a Port, and that too upon the Mediterranean (another remote word of much
efficacy) and opeing moreover a passage to a rich part of Italy, and a part of
Germany, etc.) that it alone would have sufficed to charm the more ready Votes
of the Commons into a supply, and to justify the Necessity of it in the noise
of the Country. But indeed the making of that Tripple League, was a thing of so
good a report and so generally acceptable to the Nation, as being a hook in the
French nostrils, that this Parliament (who are used, whether it be War or
Peace, to make us pay for it) could not have desired a fairer pretense to
color their liberality.

And therefore after all the immense sums lavished in the former War with
Holland, they had but in April last, 167^, given the Additional Duty upon Wines
for 8 years; amounting to 560000 and confirmed the sale of the Fee Farm Rents,
which was no less their gift, being a part of the public Revenue, to the
value of 180000l. Yet upon the telling of this Story by the Lord Keeper, they
could no longer hold but gave with both hands now again a Subsidy of 1s. in the
pound to the real value of all Lands, and other Estates proportionably, with
several more beneficial Clauses into the bargain, to begin the 24 of June
1671, and expire the 24 of June 1672. Together with this, they granted the
Additional Excise upon Beer, Ale, etc. for six years, to reckon from the same
24th of June 1671. And lastly, the Law Bill commencing from the first of May
1671, and at nine years end to determine. These three Bills summed up
therefore cannot be estimated at less than two millions and an half.

So that for the Tripple League, here was, also Tripple-Supply, and the Subject
had now all reason to believe that this Alliance, which had been fixed at first
by the Public Interest, Safety and Honor (yet, should any of those give way)
was by these Three Grants, as with three Golden Nails, sufficiently clenched
and reivetted. But now therefore was the most proper time and occasion for the
Conspirators, I have before described, to give demonstration of their fidelity
to the French King and by the forfeiture of all these obligations to their King
and Country, and other Princes, and at the expense of all this Treasure given
to contrary uses, to recommend themselves more meritoriously to his patronage.

The Parliament having once given this Money, were in consequence Prorogued, and
met not again till the 4th of February 1672, that there might be a competent
scope for so great a work as was desined, and the Architects of our Ruin might
be so long free from their busy and odious inspection till it were finished.
Henceforward, all the former applications made by his Majesty to induce
Foreign Princes into the Guaranty of the Treaty of Aix la Chapelle ceased, and
on the contrary, those who desired to be admitted into it, were here refused.
The Duke of Loraine, who had always been a true Friend to his Majesty, and by
his affection to the Tripple League had incurred the French Kings displeasure,
with the loss of his whole Territory, seized in the year 1669, against all
Laws not only of Peace but Hostility, yet was by means of these men rejected,
that he might have no Intrest in the Alliance, for which he was sacrificed. Nay
even the Emperor, though he did his Majesty the Honor to address voluntarily
to him, that himself might be received into that Tripple League, yet could not
so great a Prince prevail but was turned off with blind Reason, and most
srivolous Excuses. So far was it now from fortifying the Alliance by the
Accession of other Princes, that Mr. Henry Goventry went now to Sweden
expressly, as he affirmed at his departure hence, to dissolve the Tripple
League. And he did so much toward it, cooperating in that Court with the
French Ministers, that Sweden never (after it came to a Rupture) did assist or
prosecute effectually the ends of the Alliance, but only arming it self at the
expense of the Leagues did first, under a disguised Mediation, Act the French
Interest, and at last threw off the Vizard, and drew the Sword in their
Quarrel. Which is a matter of sad reflection, that he, who in his Embassy at
Breda, had been so happy an Instrument to end the first unfortunate War with
Holland, should now be made the Tool of a second, and of breaking that
threefold Cord, by which the Interest of England and all Christendom was
fastened. And, what renders it more wretched, is, that no man better than He
understood both the Theory and Practick of Honor; and yet, cold in so eminent
an Instance, forget it. All which can be said in his excuse, is, that upon his
return he was for this service made Secretary of State (as if to have remained
the same Honest Gentleman, had not been more necessary and less dishonorable)
Sir William Lockyard and several others were dispatched to other Courts upon
the like errand.

All things were thus far well disposed here toward a War with Holland: only
all this while there wanted a Quarrel, and to pick one required much invention.
For the Ducth although there was a si quis to find out complaints, and our East
India Company was summoned to know whether they had any thing to object against
them, had so punctually complied with all the Conditions of the Peace at Breda,
and observed his Majesty with such respect (and in paying the due Honor of the
Flagg particulary as it was agreed in the 19th. Article) that nothing could be
alleged: and as to the Tripple League, their Fleet was then out, riding near
their own Coasts, in prosecuting of the ends of that Treaty. Therefore, to try
a new experiment and to make a Case which had never before happened or been
imagined, a sorry Yatch, but bearing the English Jack, in August 1671. Sails
into the midst of their Fleet, singled out the Admyral, shooting twice, as they
call it, sharp upon him. Which must sure have appeared as ridiculous, and
unnatural as for a Lark to dare the Hobby. Nevertheless their Commander in
Chief, in diference to his Majestys Colors, and in consideration of the Amity
betwixt the two Nations, paid our Admiral of the Yatch a visit, to know the
reason; and learning that it was because he and his whole Fleet had failed to
strike Sail to his small-craft, the Dutch Commander civilly excused it as a
matter of the first instance, and in which he could have no Instructions,
therefore proper to be referred to their Masters, and so they parted. The Yatch
having thus acquitted it self, returned, fraught with the Quarrel she was sent
for, which yet was for several months passed over here in silence without any
Complaint or demand of satisfaction, but to be improved afterward when
occasion grew riper. Forthere was yet one thing more to be done at home to make
us more capable of what was shortly after to be executed on our Neighbors.

The Exohequer had now for some years by excessive gain decoyed in the wealthy
Goldsmiths, and they the rest of the Nation by due payment of Interest, till
the King was run (upon what account I know not) into debt of above two
Millions: which served for one of the pretenses in my Lord Keepers Speech above
recited, to demand and grant the late Supplies, and might have sufficed for
that work, with peace and any tolerable good husbandry. But as if it had been
perfidious to apply them to any one of the Purposes declared) it was instead of
payment privately resolved to shut up the Exchequer, least any part of the
money should be legally expended, but that all might be appropriate to the Holy
War in project, and those further pious uses to which the Conspirators had
dedicated it.

This affair was carried on with all the secresy of so great Statesmen, that
they might not by venting it unseasonably spoil the wit and malice of the
business. So that all on the sudden, upon the first of January 1671, to the
great astonishment, ruin and despair of so many interested persons, and to
the terror of the whole Nation, by so Arbitrary a Fact, the Proclamation
issued whereby the Crown, amid'st the confluence of so vast Aides and Revenue,
published it self Bankrupt, made prize of the Subject, and broke all Faith and
contract at home in order to the breaking of them abroad with more advantage.

There remained nothing now but that the Conspirators, after this exploit upon
our own Countrymen, should manifest their impartiallity to Forainers, and avoid
on both sides the reproach of Injustice by their equality in the distribution.
They had now started the dispute about the Flag upon occasion of the Yatch, and
begun the discourse of Surinam, and somewhat of Pictures and Medalls, but they
handled these matters so nicely as men not less afraid of receiving all
satisfaction therein from the Hollanders, then of giving them any umbrage of
arming against them upon those pretenses. The Dutch therefore, not being
conscious to themselves of any provocation given to England, but of their
readiness, if there had been any, to repair it, and relying upon that faith of
Treatyes and Alliances with us, which has been thought sufficient security,
not only amongst Christians but even with Infidels, pursued their Traffic and
Navigation through our Seas without the least suspicion. And accordingly a great
and rich Fleet of Merchantmen from Smyrna and Spain, were on their Voyage
homeward near the Isle of Wight, under a small Convoy of five or six of their
Men of War. This was the Fleet in contemplation of which the (conspirators had
so long deferred the War to plunder them in peace; the wealth of this was that
which by its weight turned the Balance of all Public Justice and Honor; with
this Treasure they imagined themselves in stock for all the wickedness of
which they were capable, and that they should never, after this addition, stand
in need again or fear of a Parliament. Therefore they had with great stillness
and expidition equipped early in the year, so many of the Kings Ships as might
without jealousy of the number, yet be of competent strength for the intended
action, but if any thing should chance to be wanting, they thought it
abundantly supplied by virtue of the Commander. For Sir Robert Holmes had with
the like number of Ships in the year 1661, even so timely, commenced the first
Hostility against Holand, in time of Peace; seizing upon Cape Verde, and other
of the Dutch-Forts on the Coast of Guiny, and the whole New Nether-lands, with
great success: in defense of which Conquests, the English undertook, 1665, the
first War against Holand. And in that same War, he with a proportionable
Squadron signalized himself by burning the Dutch Ships and Village of Brandaris
at Schelling, which was unfortunately revenged upon us at Chatham. So that he
was pitched upon as the person for understanding, experience and courage,
fittest for a design of this or any higher nature; and upon the 14th. of March,
1672. as they sailed on, to the number of 72 Vessels in all, whereof six the
Convoy; near our Coast, he fell in upon them with his accustomed bravery, and
could not have failed of giving a good account of them, would he but have
joined fortunes, Sr. Edward Spraggs Asistance to his own Conduct: For Sr.
Edward was in sight at the same time with his Squadron, and Captain Leg
making sail toward him, to acquaint him with the design, till called back by
a Gun from his Admiral, of which several persons have had their conjectures.
Possibly Sr. Robert Holmes, considering that Sr. Edward had sailed all along
in consort with the Ducth in their voyage, and did but now return from bringing
the Pirates of Algier to reason, thought him not so proper to engage in this
enterprise before he understood it better. But it is rather believed to have
proceeded partly from that Jealousy (which is usual to marshal spirits, like
Sr. Roberts) of admitting a Companion to share with him in the Spoil of Honor
or Profit; and partly out of too strict a regard to preserve the secret of his
Commission. However, by this means the whole affair miscarried. For the
Merchant Men themselves, and their little Convoy did so bestir them, that Sir
Robert, although he shifted his Ship, fell foul on his best Friends, and did
all that was possible, unless he could have multiplied himself, and been every
where, was forced to give it over, and all the Prize that was gotten, sufficed
not to pay the Surgeons and Carpenters.

To descend to the very bottom of their hellish Conspiracy, there was yet one
step more; that of Religion. For so pious and just an Action as Sir Robert
Holmes was employed upon, could not be better accompanied than by the
Declaration of Liberty of Conscience (unless they should have expected till he
had found that precious Commodity in plundering the Hoale of some Amsterdam
Fly-boat) Accordingly, while he was trying his Fortune in Battle with the
Smyrna Merchantmen, on the thirteenth and fourteenth of Marcb, One thousand
six hundred seventy two, the Indulgence was Printing off here in all haste,
and was Published on the fifteenth, as a more proper means than Fasting and
Prayer for propitiating Heaven to give Success to his Enterprise, and to the
War that must second it.

Hereby, all the Penal Laws against Papists, for which former Parliaments had
given so many Supplies, and against Nonconformists, for which this Parliament
had paid more largly, were at one Instant Suspended, in order to defraud the
Nation of all that Religion which they had so dearly purchased, and for which
they ought at least, the Bargain being broke, to have been re-imbursed.

There is, I confess, a measure to be taken in those things, and it is indeed
to the great reproach of Humane Wisdom, that no man has for so many Ages been
able or willing to find out the due temper of Government in Divine Matters. For
it appears at the first sight, that men ought to enjoy the same Propriety and
Protection in their Consciences, which they have in their Lives, Liberties, and
Estates: But that to take away these in Penalty for the other, is merely a more
Legal and Gentile way of Padding upon the Road of Heaven, and that it is only
for want of Money and for want of Religion that men take those desperate
Courses.

Nor can it be denied that the Original Law upon which Christianity at the
first was founded, does indeed expressly provide against all such severity. And
it was by the Humility, Meekness, Love, Forbearance and Patience which were
part of that excellent Doctrine, that it became at last the Universal Religion,
and can no more by any other means be preserved, than it is possible for
another Soul to animate the same Body.

But, with shame be it spoken, the Spartans obliging themselves to Lycargus his
Laws, till he should come back again, continued under his most rigid
Discipline, above twice as long as the Christians did endure under the
gentelest of all Institutions, though with far more certainty expecting the
return of their Divine Legislater Insomuch that it is no great Adventure to
say, That the World was better ordered under the Ancient Monarchies and
Commonvvealths, that the number of Virtuous men was then greater, and that the
Christians found fairer quarter under those, than among themselves, nor has
there any advantage acrued unto mankind from that most perfect and practical
Moddel of Humane Society, except the Speculation of a better way to future
Happiness, concerning which the very Guides disagree, and of those few that
follow, it will suffer no man to pass without paying at their Turn-pikes. All
which had proceeded from no other reason, but that men in stead of squaring
their Governments by the Rule of Christianity, have shaped Christianity by the
Measures of their Government, have reduced that straight Line by the crooked,
and bungling Divine and Humane things together, have been always hacking and
hewing one another, to frame an irregular Figure of Political Incongruity.

For wheresoever either the Magistrate, or the Clergy, or the People could
gratify their Ambition, their Profit, or their Phanfie by a Text improved or
misapplied, that they made use of though against the consent sense and
immutable precepts of Scipture, and because Obedience for Conscience sake was
there prescribed, the less Conscience did men make in Commanding; so that
several Nations have little else to show for their Christiainity (which
requires Instruction only and Example) but a pracell of sever Laws concerning
Opinion or about the Modes of Worship, not so much in order to the Power of
Religion as over it. Nevertheless because Mankind must be governed some way
and be held up to one Law or other, either of Christ's or their own making, the
vigor of such humane Constitutions is to be preserved until the same
Authority shall upon better reason revoke them; and as in the mean time no
private man may without the guilt of Sedition or Rebellion resist, so neither
by the Nature of the English Foundation can any Public Person suspend them
without committing an Error which is not the less for wanting a legal name
to express it. But it was the Master-peice therefore of boldness and
contrivance in these Conspiratours to issue this Declaration, and it is hard to
say wherein they took the greater felicity, whither in suspending hereby all
the Statutes against Popery, that it might thence forward pass like current
money over the Nation, and no man dare to refuse it, or whether gaining by this
a President to suspend as well all other Laws that respect the Subjects
Propriety, and by the same power to abrogate and at last inact what they
pleased, till there should be no further use for the Consent of the People in
Parliament.

Having been thus true to their great design and made so considerable a
progress, they advanced with all expedition. It was now high time to Declare
the War, after they had begun it; and therefore by a Manifesto of the
seventeenth of March 1672, the pretended Causes were made publich which were,
The not having Veiled Bonnet to the English Yatch: though the Duch had all
along, both at home and here as carefully endeavored to give, as the English
Minestrs to avoid the receiving of all satisfaction, or letting them understand
what would do it, and the Council Clock was on purpose set forward lest, their
utmost Compliance in the Flag at the hour appointed, should prevent the
Declaration of War by some minutes. The detaining of some few English families
(by their own Consent) in Surynam after the Dominion of it was by Treaty
surrendered up to the Hollander, in which they had likewise constantly yielded
to the unreasonable demands that were from one time to another extended from
hence to make the thing impracticable, till even Banister himself, that had
been employed as the Agent and Contriver of this misunderstanding, could not at
the last forbear to cry shame of it. And moreover to fill up the measure of the
Dutch iniquity, they are accused of Pillars, Medalls, and Pictures: a Poet
indeed, by a dash of his Pen, having once been the cause of a War against
Poland; but this certainly was the first time that ever a Painter could by a
stroke of his Pencill occasion the Breach of a Treaty. But considering the
weakness and invalidity of those other allegations, these indeed were not
unnecessary, the Pillars to add strength, the Meddalls Weight, and the
Pictures Color to their Reasons.

But herein they had however observed Faith with France though on all other
sides broken, having capitulated to be the first that should do it. Which as it
was no small piece of French Courtesey in so important an action to yield the
English the Precedence, so was it on the English part as great a Bravery in
accepting to be the foremost to discompose the State of all Christendom, and
make themselves principal to all the horrid Destruction, Devastation, Ravage
and Slaughter, which from that fatal seventeenth of March, One thousand six
hundred seventy two, has to this very day continued.

But that which was most admirable in the winding up of this Declaration, was
to behold these Words,

And whereas we are engaged by a Treaty to support the Peace made at Aix la
Chapelle; We do finally Declare, that, notvvithstanding the Prosecution of this
War, We will maintain the true intent and scope of the said Treaty, and that,
in all Alliances, which We have, or shall make in the progress of this War,
we have, and will take care, to preserve the ends thereof inviolable, unless
provoked to the contrary.

And yet it is as clear as the Sun, that the French had by that Treaty of Aix
la Chapelle, agreed to acquiess in their former Conquests in Flanders, and that
the English, Svvede and Hollander, were reciprocally bound to be aiding against
whomsoever should disturb that Regulation, (besides the League Offensive and
Defensive, which his Majesty had entered into with the States General of the
United Provinces) all which was by this Conjunction with France to be broken in
pieces. So that what is here declared, if it were reconcilable to Truth, yet
could not consist with Possibility (which two do seldom break company) unless
by one only Expedient, that the English, who by this new League with France,
were to be the Infractors and Aggressors of the Peace of Aix la Chapelle (and
with Holland) should to fulfill their Obligations to both Parties, have
sheathed the Sword in our own Bowels.

But such was the Zeal of the Conspirators, that it might easily transport them
either to say what was untrue, or undertake what was impossible, for the French
Service.

That King having seen the English thus engaged beyond a Retreat, comes now
into the War according to agreement. But he was more Generous and Monarchal
than to assign Cause, true or false, for his Actions. He therefore, on the
27th. of March 1672, publishes a Declaration of War without any Reasons. Only,
The ill satisfaction which his Majesty has of the Behavior of the States
General toward him, being risen to that degree, that he can no longer,
without diminution to his Glory dissemble his Indignation against them, etc.
Therefore he has resolved to make War against them both by Sea and Land, etc.
And commands all his Subjects, Courir sus, upon the Hollauders, (a Metaphor
which, out of respect to his own Nation, might have been spared) For such is
our pleasure.

Was ever in any Age or Nation of the World, the Sword drawn upon no better
Allegation? A style so far from being Most Christian, that nothing but some
vain French Romance can parallel or justify the Expression. How happy were it
could we once arrive at the same pitch, and how much credit and labor had been
saved, had the Compilers of our Declaration, in stead of the mean English way
of giving Reasons, contented themselves with that of the Diminution of the
English Honor, as the French of his Glory! But nevertheless, by his Ambassador
to the Pope, he gave afterward a more clear account of his Conjunction with
the English, and that he had not undertaken this War, against the Hollanders,
but for extirpating of Heresy. To the Emperor, That the Hollanders were a
People who had forsaken God, were Heretics, and that all good Christians were
in duty bound to associate for their extiapation, and ought to pray to God for
a blessing upon so pious an enterprise. And to other Popish Princes, that it
was a War of Religion and in order to the Propagation of the Catholic Faith.

And in the second Article of his Demands afterward from the Hollanders, it is
in express words contained, That from thenceforvvard there shall be not only an
entire Liberty, but a Public Exercise of the Catholic Apostolic Roman
Religion throughout all the United Provinces. So that wheresoever there shall
be more than one-Church, another shall be given to the Catholics. That where
there is none, they shall be permitted to build one: and till that be finished,
to exercise their Divine Service publicly in such Houses as they shall buy, or
hire for that purpose. That the States General, or each Province in particular,
shall appoint a reasonable Salary for a Curate or Priest in each of the said
Churches, out of such Revenues as have formerly appertained to the Church, or
otherwise. Which was conformable to what he published now abroad, that he had
entered into the War only for Gods Glory; and that he would lay down Arms
streightwayes, would the Hollanders but restore the True Worship in their
Dominions.

But he made indeed twelve Demands more, and notwithstanding all this devotion,
the Article of Commerce, and for revoking their Placaets against Wine, Brandy,
and French manufactures was the first, and took place of the Catholic
Apostolic Roman Religion, Whether all these were therefore only words of
course, and to be held or let lose according to his occasions, will better
appear when we shall have heard that he still insists upon the same at
Nimegen, and that, although deprived of our assistance, he will not yet agree
with the Dutch but upon the terms of restoring the True Worship. But, whatever
he were, it is evident that the English were sincere and in good earnest in the
Design of Popery; both by that Declaration above mentioned of Indulgence to the
Recusants, and by the Negotiation of those of the English Plenipotentiaryes
(whom for their honor I name not) that being in that year sent into Holland
pressed that Article among the rest upon them, as without which they could have
no hope of Peace with England. And the whole process of affairs will manifest
further that booth here and there it was all of a piece, as to the project of
Religion and the same thread ran throw the Web of the English and French
Counsels, no less in relation to that, then unto Government.

Although the issuing of the French Kings declaration and the sending of our
English Plenipotentiaries into Holland be involved together in this last
period, yet the difference of time was so small that the anticipation is
inconsiderable. For having declared the War but on the 27th of March, 1672.
He struck so home and followed his blow so close, that by July following, it
seemed that Holland could no longer stand him, but that the swiftness and
force of his motion was something supernatural. And it was thought necessary to
send over those Plenipotentiaries, if not for Interest yet at least for
Curiosity. But it is easier to find the Marks than Reasons of some men's
Actions, and he that does only know what happened before, and what after, might
perhaps wrong them by searching for further Intelligence.

So it was, that the English and French Navies being joined, were upon the
Tvventieighth of May, One thousand six hundred seventy two, Attaqued in Soul
Bay by De Ruyter, with too great advantage. For while his Royal Highness, then
Admiral, did all that could be expected, but Monsieur d' Estree, that commanded
the French, did all that he was sent for, Our English Vice Admiral, Mountague,
was sacrificed; and the rest of our Fleet so mangled, that there was no
occasion to boast of Victory. So that being here still on the losing hand,
'twas fit some body should look to the Betts on the other side of the Water;
least that Great and Lucky Gamster, when he had won all there, and stood no
longer in need of the Conspirators, should pay them with a Quarrel for his
Money, and their ill Fortune. Yet were they not conscious to themselves of
having given him by any Behavior of theirs, any cause of Dissatisfaction, but
that they had dealt with him in all things most frankly, That, notwithstanding
all the Expressions in my Lord Keeper Bridgmans Speech, of the Treaty betvveen
France and his Majesty concerning Commerce, wherein his Majesty will have a
singular regard to the Honor and also to the Trade of this Nation, and
notwithstanding the intolerable oppressions upon the English Traffic in
France ever since the Kings Restoration, they had not in all that time made
one step toward a Treaty of Commerce or Navigation with him; no not even now
when the English were so necessary to him, that he could not have begun this
War without them, and might probably therefore in this conjuncture have
condescended to some equality. But they knew how tender that King was on that
point, and to preserve and increase the Trade of his Subjects, and that it was
by the Diminution of that Beam of his Glory, that the Hollanders had raised his
Indignation. The Conspirators had therefore, the more to gratify him, made it
their constant Maxim, to burden the English Merchant here with one hand, while
the French should load them no less with the other, in his Teritories; which
was a parity of Trade indeed, though something an extravagant one, but the best
that could be hoped from the prudence and integrity of our Statesmen;
insomuch, that when the Merchants have at any time come down from London to
represent their grievances from the French, to seek redress, or offer their
humble advi^e, they were Hectored, Brow-beaten, Ridiculed, and might have found
fairer audience even from Monsieur Colbert.

They knew moreover, that as in the matter of Commerce, so they had more
obliged him in this War. That except the irresistible bounties of so great a
Prince in their own particular, and a frugal Subsistance-money for the Fleet,
they had put him to no charges, but the English Navy Royal served him, like so
many Privateers, No Purchase, No Pay. That in all things they had acted with
him upon the most abstracted Principles of Generosity. They had tied him to no
terms, had demanded no Partition of Conquests, had made no humane Condition;
but had sold all to him for those two Pearls of price, the True Worship, and
the True Government: Which disinteressed proceeding of theirs, though suited to
Foreign Magnanimity, yet, should we still lose at Sea, as we had hitherto, and
the French Conquer all at Land, as it was in prospect, might at one time or
other breed some difficulty in answering for it to the King and Kingdom:
However this were, it had so happened before the arrival of the
Plenipotentiaries, that, whereas here in England, all that brought applycations
from Holland were treated as Spies and Enemies, till the French King should
signify his pleasure; he on the contrary, without any communication here, had
received Addresses from the Dutch Plenipotentiaries, and given in to them the
sum of his Demands (not once mentioning his Majesty or his Interest, which
indeed he could not have done unless for mockery, having demanded all for
himself, so that there was no place left to have made the English any
satisfaction) and the French Ministers therefore did very heartily acquaint
those of Holland, that, upon their accepting those Articles, there should be a
firm Peace, and Amity restored: But as for England, the States, their Masters,
might use their discretion, for that France was not obliged by any Treaty to
procure their advantage.

This manner of dealing might probably have animated, as it did warrant the
English Plenipotentiaries, had they been as full of Resolution as of Power, to
have closed with the Dutch, who, out of aversion to the French, and their
intolerable demands, were ready to have thrown themselves into his Majesty's
Arms, or at his Feet, upon any reasonable conditions; But it wrought clean
otherwise: For, those of the English Plenipotentiaries, who were, it seems,
entrusted with a fuller Authority, and the deeper Secret, gave in also the
English Demands to the Hollanders, consisting in eight Articles, but at last
the Ninth says,

Although his Majesty contents himself with the foregoing Conditions, so that
they be accepted within ten days, after which his Majesty understands
himself to be no further obliged by them. He declares nevertheless precisely,
that albeit they should all of them be granted by the said States, yet they
shall be of no force, nor will his Majesty ma^e any Treaty of Peace or Truce,
unless the Most Christian King shall have received satisfastion from the said
States in his particular. And by this means they made it impossible for the
Dutch, however desirous, to comply with England, excluded us from more
advantageous terms, than we could at any other time hope for, and deprived us
of an honest, and honorable evasion out of so pernicious a War, and from a
more dangerous Alliance. So that now it appeared by what was done that the
Conspirtors securing their own fears at the price of the Public Interest, and
Safety, had bound us up more strait then ever, by a new Treaty, to the French
Project.

The rest of this year passed with great success to the French, but none to
the English. And therefore the hopes upon which the War was begun, of the
Smyrna and Spanish Fleet, and Dutch Prizes, being vanished, the slender
Allowance from the French not sufficing to defray it, and the ordinary Revenue
of the King, with all the former Aides being (as was fit to be believed) in
less then one years time exhausted, The Parliament by the Conspirators good
leave, was admitted again to sit at the day appointed, the 4th. of February
1672.

The War was then first communicated to them, and the Causes, the Necessity,
the Danger, so well Painted out, that the Dutch abusive Historical Pictures,
and False Medalls (which were not forgot to be mentioned) could not be better
imitated or revenged, Only, there was one great omission of their False
Pillars, which upheld the whole Fabric of the England Declarations; Upon this
signification, the House of Commons (who had never failed the Crown hitherto
upon any occosion of mutual gratuity) did now also, though in a War contrary
to former usuage, begun without their Advice, readily Vote, no less a sum
than 1250000 l. But for better Color, and least they should own in words, what
they did in effect, they would not say it was for the War, but for the Kings
Extraordinary Occasions.

And because the Nation began now to be aware of the more true Causes, for
which the War had been undertaken, they prepared an Act before the Money-Bill
slipped thorrow their Fingers, by which the Papists were obliged, to pass through
a new State Purgatory, to be capable of any Public Employment; whereby the
House of Commons, who seem to have all the Great Offices of the Kingdom in
Reversion, could not but expect some Wind-falls.

Upon this Occasion it was, that the Earl of Shaftsbury, though then Lord
Chancellor of England, yet, Engaged so far in Defense of that ACT, and of the
PROTESTANT RELIGION, that in due time it cost him his Place, and was the first
moving Cause of all those Misadventures, and Obloquy, which since he lies
(ABOVE, not) Under.

The Declaration also of Indulgence was questioned, which, though his MAJESTY
had out of his Princely, and Gracious Inclination, and the memory of some
former Obligations, granted, yet upon their Representation of the
Inconveniences, and at their humble Request, he was pleased to Cancel, and
Declare, that it should be no President for the Future: For otherwise some
succeeding Governor, by his single Power Suspending Penal Laws, in a
favorable matter, as that is of Religion, might become more dangerous to the
Government, than either Papists or Fanatics, and make us Either, when he
pleased: So Legal was it in this Session to Distinguish between the King of
Englands Personal, and his Parliamentary Authority.

But therefore the further sitting being grown very uneasy to those, who had
undertaken for the Change of Religion, and Government, they procured the Recess
so much sooner, and a Bill sent up by the Commons in favor of Dissenting
Protestants, not having passed through the Lords preparation, the Bill
concerning Papists, was enacted in Exchange for the Money, by which the
Conspiraiors, when it came into their management, hoped to frustrate, yet, the
effect of the former. So the Parliament was dismissed till the Twenty seventh
of October, One thousand six hundred seventy three.

In the mean time therefore they strove with all their might to regain by the
War, that part of their Design, which they had lost by Parliament; and though
several honorably forsook their Places rather than their Consciences, yet
there was never wanting some double-dyed Son of our Church, some Protestant in
grain, to succeed upon the same Conditions. And the difference was no more, but
that their Offices, or however their Counsels, were now to be administered by
their Deputies, such as they could confide in.

The business of the Land Army was vigourously carried on, in appearance to
have made some descent in Holland, but though the Regiments were Completed and
kept Imbodyed, it wanted effect, and therefore gave cause of sufpition: The
rather, because no Englishman, among so many well-disposed, and qualified for
the work, had been thought capable, or fit to be trusted with Chief Command of
those Forces, but that Monsieur Schomberg a French Protestant, had been made
General, and Colonel Fitsgerald, an Irish Papist, Major General, as more
proper for the Secret; the first of advancing the French Government, the second
of promoting the Irish Religion.

And therefore the dark hovering of that Army so long at Black-Hearth, might
not improbably seem the gatherings of a Storm to fall upon London; But the ill
successes which our Fleet met withal this Year, also, at Sea, were sufficient,
had there been any such design at home to have quasht it: for such Gallantries
are not to be attempted, but in the highest raptures of Fortune.

There were three several Engagements of ours against the Dutch Navy in this
one Summer, but while nothing was Tenable at Land, against the French, it
seemed that to us at Sea every thing was impregnable; which is not to be
attributed to the want of Courage or Conduct, either the former Year under the
Command of his Royal Highness, so Great a Soldier, or this Year under the
Prince, Robert; But is rather to be imputed to our unlucky Conjunction with the
French, like the disasters that happen to men by being in ill Company.

But besides it was manifest that in all these Wars, the French meant nothing
less than really to assist us: He had first practiced the same Art at Sea, when
he was in League with the Hollander against us, his Navy never having done them
any service, for his business was only to see us Batter one another. And now he
was on the English side, he only studied to sound our Seas, to spy our Ports,
to learn our Building, to contemplate our way of Fight, to consume ours, and
preserve his own Navy, to increase his Commerce, and to order all so, that the
two great Naval Powers of Europe, being crushed together, he might remain sole
Arbitrator of the Ocean, and by consequence Master of all the Isles and
Continent. To which purposes the Conspirators furnished him all possible
opportunities. Therefore it was that Monsieur d' Estree, though a Person
otherwise of tried Courage and Prudence, yet never did worse than in the third
and last Engagement; and because brave Monsieur d' Martel did better, and could
not endure a thing that looked like Cowardice or Treachery, though for the
Service of his Monarch, commanded him in, rated him, and at his return home he
was, as then was reported, discountenanced and dismissed from his Command, for
no other crime, but his breaking of the French measures, by adventuring one of
those sacred Ships in the English, or, rather his own Masters Quarrel.

His Royal Highness (by whose having quitted the Admiralty, the Sea service
thrived not the better) was now intent upon his Marrige, at the same time the
Parliament was to reassemble the 27th of October 1673. the Princess of Modena,
his consort, being upon the way for England, and that business seemed to have
passed all impediment. Nor were the Conspirators who (to use the French phrase)
made a considerable Figure in the Government, wholly averse to the Parliaments
meeting: For if the House of Commons had after one years unfortunate War, made
so vast a Present to his Majesty of 1250000 l. But the last February, it seemed
the argument would now be more pressing upon them, that by how much the ill
sucesses, of this year had been greater, they ought therefore to give a yet
more liberal Donative. And the Conspirators as to their own particular
reckoned, that while the Nation was under the more distress and hurry they
were themselves safer from Parliament, by the Public Calamity.

A supply therefore was demanded with much more importunity, and assurance then
ever before, and that it should be a large one and a speedy: They were told
that it was now Pro Aris and Focis, all was at stake, And yet besides all this,
the Payment of the Debt to the Banckers upon shutting the Exchequer was very
civilly recommended to them. And they were assured that his Majesty would be
constantly ready to give them all proofs of his Zeal for the true Religion and
the Laws of the Realm, upon all occasions: But the House of Commons not having
been sufficiently prepared for such demands, nor well satisfied in several
matters of Fact, which appeared contrary to what was represented, took check;
and first interposed in that tender point of his Royal Highuesse's Match,
although she was of his own Religion, which is a redoubled sort of Marriage, or
the more spiritual part of its Happiness. Besides, that she had been already
solemnly married by the Dukes Proxcy, so that unless the Parliament had been
Pope and calmed a power of Dispensation, it was now too late to avoid it. His
Majesty by a short Prorogation of six days, when he understood their intention,
gave them opportunity to have disisted: But it seems they judged the National
Jnterest of Religion so far concerned in this matter, that they no sooner
meet again, but they drew up a second request by way of Address to his Majesty
with their Reasons against it. That for his Royal Highness to marry the
Princess of Modena, or any other of that Religion, had very dangerous
consequences: That the minds of his Majesty's Protestant subjects will be much
disquieted, thereby filled with infinite discontents, and Jealousies. That his
Majesty would thereby be linked into such a foraine Alliance, which will be of
great disadvantage and possibly to the Ruin of the Protestant Religion. That
they have found by sad experience how such marriages have always increased
Popery, and incorraged Priests and Jesuits to prevert his Majesty's subjects:
That the Popish party already lift up their heads in hopes of his marriage:
That they fear it may diminish the affection of the people toward his Royal
Highness, who is by blood so near related to the Crown: That it is now more
then one Age, that the subjects have lived in continual apprehensions of the
increase of Popery, and the decay of the Protestant Religion: Finally that she
having many Kindred and Relations in the Court of Rome, by this means their
enterprises here might be facilitated, they might pierce into the most secret
Counsels of his Majesty, and discover the state of the Realm. That the most
learned men are of opinion, that Marriages no further Proceeded in, may
lawfully be Dissolved: And therefore they beseech his Majesty to Annul the
Consummation of it, and the Rather, because they have not yet the Happiness to
see any of his Majestyes own Lineage to Succeed in his Kingdoms.

These Reasons, which were extended more amply against his Royal Highnesses
Marriage, obtained more weight, because most men are apt to Judge of things by
Circumstances, and to attribute what happens by the Conjuncture of Times, to
the Effect of Contrivance. So that it was not difficult to Interpret what was
in his Royal Highness, an engagement only of Honor, and Affection, as
proceeding from the Conspirators Counsels, seeing it made so much to their
purpose.

But the business was too far advanced to retreat, as his Majesty with great
reason had replied, to their former Address, the Marriage having been
celebrated already, and confirmed by his Royal Authority, and the House of
Commons though sitting when the Duke was in a Treaty for the Arch Duchess of
Inspruck, one of the same Religion, yet having taken no notice of it.

Therefore while they pursued the matter thus, by a second Address, it seemed
an easier thing, and more decent, to Prorogue the Parliament, than to Dissolve
the Marriage. And, which might more incline his Majesty to this Resolution, the
House of Commons had now bound themselves up by a Vote that having considered
the present State of the Nation, they would not take into Deliberation, nor
have any further Debate upon any other Proposals of Aid, or any Surcharge upon
the Subject, before the payment of the Twelve hundred and fifty thousand
pounds, in eighteen Months, which was last granted, were expired, or at least
till they should evidently see that the Obstinacy of the Hollanders should
oblige them to the contrary, nor till after the kingdom should be effectually
secured against the dangers of Popery, and Popish Counselors, and that Order
be taken against other present Misdemeanors.

There was yet another thing, the Land-Army, which appearing to them expensive,
needless, and terrible to the People, they addressed to his Majesty also, that
they might be disbanded. All which things put together, his Majesty was induced
to Prorogue the Parliament again for a short time, till the seventh of January,
One thousand six hundred seventy three: That in the mean while the Princess of
Modena arriving, the Marriage might be consummated without further interruption.

That Session was opened with a large deduction also, by the new Lord Keeper,
this being his first Experiment, in the Lords House of his Eloquence and
Veracity, of the Hollanders averseness to Peace or Reason, and their uncivil
and indirect dealing in all Overtures of Treaty with his Majesty, and a Demand
was made therefore and reinforced as formerly, of a proportionable and speedy
Supply. But the Hollanders that had found themselves obstructed always
hitherto, and in a manner excluded from all Applications, and that whatever
means they had used was still mis-interpreted, and ill represented, were so
industrious, as by this time (which was perhaps the greatest part of their
Crime) to have undeceived the generallity of the Nation in those particulars.

The House of Commons therefore not doubting, but that if they held their hands
in matter of money, a Peace would in due time follow, grew troublesome rather
to several of the great Ministers of State, whom they suspected to have been
Principal in the late pernicious Counsels. But instead of the way of
Impeachment, whereby the Crimes might have been brought to Examination, Proof
and Judgment, they proceeded Summarily within themselves, noting them only with
an ill Character, and requesting his Majesty to remove them from his Counsels,
his Presence, and their Public Employments. Neither in that way of handling
were they Impartial.

Of the three which were questioned, the Duke of Buckingham seemed to have muoh
the more favorable Cause, but had the severest Fortune. And this whole matter
not having been managed in the solemn Methods of National Justice, but
transmitted to his Majesty, it was easily changed into a Court Intrigue, where
though it be a Modern Maxim,

That no State Minister ought to be punished, but, especially not upon
Parliamentary Applications.

Yet other Offenders thought it of security to themselves, in a time of Public
Discontent, to have one Man sacrisiced, and so the Duke of Buckingham having
worse Enemies, and as it chanced worse Friends, than the rest, was after all
his Services abandoned, they having only heard the sound, while he felt all the
smart of that Lash from the House of Commons.

But he was so far a Gainer, that with the loss of his Offices, and dependence,
he was restored to the Freedom of his own Spirit, to give thence-forward those
admirable (...) the Vigor, and Vivacity of his better Judgment, (...), though
to his own Imprisonment, the due Li^ of the English Nation.

(...) manner of proceeding in the House of Commons, (...) a new way of
negotiating the Peace with Holland, but the ^ost effectual; the Conspirators
living all the while under continual apprensions of being called to further
account for their Actions, and no money appearing, which would either have
prepetuated the War, or might, in case of a Pea^e, be misapplied, to other
uses, then the building of Ships, insinuated by the Lord Keeper.

The Hollanders Proposalls, by this means, therefore, began to be thought more
reasonable, and the Marquis del Fresno, the Spanish Minister in this Court,
labourd so well, that his Majesty thought fit to Communicate the overture to
both Houses, and though their advice had not been asked to the War, yet not to
make the Peace without it. There was not much difficulty in their resolutions.
For the general bent of the Nation was against the War, the French now had by
their ill behavior at Sea, in all the Engagements, raised also the English
Indignation, their pernicious Counsels were visible in their book of the
Politic Francoise, tending by frequent levyes of men, and money, to exhaust,
and weaken our Kingdom, and by their conjuction with us, on set purpose, to
raise, betwixt the King and his People, a rational Jealousy of Popery, and
French Government, till we should insensibly devolve into them by Inclination
or Necessity: As men of ill conversation, pin themselves maliciously on persons
more sober, that if they can no otherwise debauch them, they may blast their
Reputation by their society, and so oblige them to theirs; being suspected by
better Company.

Besides all which the very reason of Traffic which has been so long
neglected by our greater Statesmen was now of some consideration, for as much
as by a Peace with the Hollander the greatest part of the Trade and Navigation
of Europe as long as the French King disturbed it, would of course fall into
the English management. The Houses therefore gave their humble advice to his
Majesty for a just and honorable Peace with the States General, which when it
could be no longer resisted, was concluded.

In the seventh Article of this Treaty it is said.

That the Treaty which was made at Breda in the year 1667, as also all the
others which are by this present Treaty confirmed, shall by the present be
renewed, and shall continue in their full force and vigor, as far as they
shall not be contrary unto this said present Treaty.

Which words are the more to be taken notice of, that they may be compared
afterward with the effects that follow, to see how well on the English part
that Agreement has been observed.

The business of the Peace thus being once over, and this Parliament still
lowering upon the Ministers of State, or bogling at the Land Forces (whereof the
eight new raised Regiments were upon the request of the Commons at last
disbanded) or employed in further Bills against Popery, and for the Education,
and Protestant Marriage henceforward of those of the Royal Family; the
necessity of their further sitting seemed not so urgent, but that they might
have a repose till the tenth of November 1674. following.

The Conspirators had hitherto failed of the accomplishing their design, by
prepetual disappointments, and which was most grievous to them, foresaw, that
the want of money would still necessitate the frequent sitting of Parliament,
which danger they had hoped long ere this to have conquered In this state of
their affairs the French King therefore was by no means to be further
disobliged, he being the Master of their secret, and the only person which if
they helped him at this plunge, might yet carry them through. They were
therefore very diligent to profit themselves of all the advantages to this
purpose that their present posture could afford them. They knew that his
Majesty being now disengaged from War, would of his Royal Prudence interpose
for Peace by his Mediation, it being the most glorious Character that any
Prince can assume; and for which he was the more proper, as being the most
Potent, thereby to give the sway, and the most disintressed whereby to give the
Equity requisite to such a Negotiation; and the most obliged in Honor, as
having been the occasion by an unforeseen consequence of drawing the sword of
all this part of Europe. But if they feared any propension in his Majesty to
one party it was toward Spain, as knowing how that Crown (as it is at large
recited, and acknowledged, in the preamble of the last Treaty between England
and Holland had been the only instrument of the happy Peace which after that
pernicious War we now enjoyed.

Therefore they were resolved by all their influence, and industry (though the
profit of the War did now wholly, redown to the English Nation, and however in
case of peace it was our Interest, that if any, France should be depressed to
any equality, to labor that by this mediation France might be the only
gainer, and having all quiet about him, might be at perfect leisure to attend
their project upon England. And one of these our Statesmen being pressed,
solved all Arguments to the contrary with an oraculous French question

Faut il que tout se fasse par Politic, rien par Amity?

Must all things be done by Maxims or Reasons of State; nothing for Affection?

Therefore that such an absurdity as the ordering of Affairs abroad, according
to the Interest of our Nation might be avoided, the English, Sbotch and Irish
Regiments, that were already in the French Service, were not only to be kept in
their full Complement, but new numbers of Soldiers daily transported thither,
making up in all, as is related, at least a constant Body of Ten thousand Men,
of his Majesty's Subjects, and which oftentimes turned the Fortune of Battle on
the French side by their Valor.

How far this either consisted with the Office of a Mediator, or how consonant
it was to the seventh Article above mentioned, of the last Treaty with Holland;
It is for them to demonstrate who were the Authors. But it was indeed a good
way to train up an Army, under the French Discipline and Principles, who might
be ready seasoned upon occasion in England, to be called back and execute the
same Counsels.

In the mean time, they would be trying yet what they could do at home. For the
late proceedings of Parliament, in quashing the Indulgence, in questioning
Ministers of State, in Bills against Popery, in not granting Money whenever
asked, were Crimes not to be forgiven, nor (however the Conspirators had
provided for themselves) named in the Act of General Pardon.

They began therefore after fifteen Years to remember that there were such a
sort of men in England as the Old Cavalier Party; and reckoned, that by how
much the more generous, they were more credulous than others, and so more fit
to be a gain abused. These were told, that all was at Stake, Church and State
(How truly said! But meant, how falsely!) That the Nation was running again into
Forty One, That this was the time to refresh their ancient merit, and receive
the Recompense double of all their Loyalty, and that hence-forward the
Cavaliers should have the Lottery of all the Great or Small Offices in the
Kingdom, and not so much as Sir Joseph Williamson to have a share in it.

By this means they indeed designed to have raised a Civil War, for which they
had all along provided, by new Forts, and standing Forces, and to which they
had on purpose both in England and Scotland given all provocation if it would
have been taken, that so they might have a Raze Campaign of Religion,
Government, and Propriety: or they hoped at least by this means to fright the
one party, and encourage the other, to give hence forward Money at pleasure,
and that money on what title soever granted, with what stamp coined, might be
melted down for any other service or uses. But there could not have been a
greater affront and indignity offerred to those Gentlemen (and the best did so
resent it) then whether these hopes were real, to think them men that might be
hired to any base action, or whether as hitherto but imaginary, that by
erecting the late Kings Statue that whole Party might be rewarded in Effigy.

While these things were upon the Anvill the tenth of November was come for the
Parliaments sitting, but that was put of till the 13th. of April 1675. And in
the mean time, which fell out most opportune for the Conspirators, these
Counsels were matured, and something further to be contrived, that was yet
wanting: The Parliament accordingly meeting, and the House of Lords, as well as
that of the Commons, being in deliberation of several wholesome Bills, such as
the, present state of the Nation required the great Design came out in a Bill
unexpectedly offered one morning in the House of Lords, whereby all such as
enjoyed any beneficial Office, or Employment, Ecclesiastical, Civil, or
Military, to which was added, Privy Counselors, Justices of the Peace, and
Members of Parliament, were under a Penalty to take the Oath, and make the
Declaration, and Abhorrence, ensuing,

I A. B. Do declare, That it is not Lavvful upon any pretense whatsoever to
take up Arms against the King, and that I do abhor that Traitorous position,
of taking Arms by his Authority against his Person, or against those that are
Commissioned by him in Pursuance of such Commission. And I do svvear, that I
will not at any time Endeavor the Alteration of the Government either in
Church or State. So help me God.

This same Oath had been brought into the House of Commons in the Plague year
at Oxford, to have been imposed upon the Nation, but there, by the assistance
of those very same persons, that now introduce it, it was thrown out, for fear of
a General Infection of the Vitales of this Kingdom: And though it passed then
in a particular Bill, Known by the name of the Five-mile Act, because it only
concerned the Nonconformist Preachers, yet even in that, it was thoroughly
opposed by the late Earl of Southampton, whose Judgment might well have been
reckoned for the Standard of Prudence and Loyalty. It was indeed happily said,
by the Lord Keeper, in the opening of this Session, No Influences of the
Stars, no Configuration of the Heavens, are to be feared, so long as these
two Houses stand in a Good Disposition to each other, and both of them in a
happy Conjunction, with their Lord and Sovereign. But if he had so early this
Act in his prospect, the same Astrology might have taught him, that there is
nothing more portentous, and of worse Omen, then when such an Oath hangs over a
Nation, like a New Comet forboding the Alteration of Religion, or Government:
Such was the Holy League in France in the Reign of Henry the third. Such in
the time of Philip the second, the Oath in the Netherlands. And so the Oaths in
our late Kings time taught the Fanatics, because they could not swear, yet to
Covenant. Such things therefore are, if ever, not needlessely thought for good
fortune sake only to be attempted, and when was there any thing less
necessary? No King of England had ever so great a Treasure of this Peoples
Affections except what those ill men have, as they have, done, all the rest,
consumed; whom but out of an excess of Love to his Person, the Kingdom would
never (for it never did formerly) so long have suffered: The Old Acts of
Allegiance, and Supremacy, were still in their full Vigor, unless against the
Papists, and even against them too of late, whenever the way was to be
smoothed for a liberal Session of Parliament. And moreover to put the Crown in
full security, this Parliament had by an Act of theirs determined a Question
which the wisdom of their Ancestors had never decided, that the King has the
sole power of the Militia. And therefore my Lord Keeper did by his patronizing
this Oath, too grossly prevaricate, against two very good State Maxims, in
his Harangue to the Parliament, for which he had consulted not the Astrologer,
but the Historian, advising them first, That they should not Quieta movere,
that is, said he, when men stir those things or Questions which are, and
ought to be in peace. And secondly, That they should not Res parvas magnis
motibus agere: That is, says he again, when as much weight is laid upon a
new and not always necessary Proposition as if the whole sum of affairs
depended upon it.

And this Oath, it seems, was the little thing he meant of, being forsooth but
a Moderate Security to the Church and Crown, as he called it, but which he and
his party laid so much weight on, as if the whole sum of Affairs did depend
upon it.

But as to the Quieta movere, or stirring of those things or Questions which
are and ought to be in Peace, was not this so, of taking Arms against the King
upon any pretense whatsoever? And was not that also in Peace, of the Traiterous
Position of taking Arms by his Authority against his Person? Had not the three
Acts of Corporations, of Militia, and the Five Miles, sufficiently quieted it?
Why was it further stirred? But being stirred, it raises in men's thoughts many
things more; some les, others more to the purpose.

Sir Walter Tirrells Arrow grazed upon the Deer it was shot at, but by that
chance killed King William Rufus; Yet so far was it that Sir Walter should for
that chance shot be adjudged of Treason, that we do not perceive he underwent
any other Trial like that of Manslaughter: But which is more to the point, it
were difficult to instance a Law either in this or other Country, but that a
private Man, if any king in Christendom assault him, may, having retreated to
the Wall, stand upon his Guard; and therefore, if this matter as to a
particular man be dubious, it was not so prudent to stir it in the General,
being so well settled. And as to all other things, though since Lord
Chancellor, he havein his Speech of the 15 of Feb. One thousand six hundred
seveny six, said (to testify his own abhorrency) Away with that ill meant
distinstion betvveen the Natural and the Politic Capacity. He is too well
read to be ignorant that without that Distinction there would be no Law nor
Reason of Law left in England; To which end it was, and to put all out of
doubt, that it is also required in this Test, to declare men's abhorrency as of
a Traitorous Position, to take Arms against those that are Commissioned by
him, in pursuance of such Commission; and yet neither is the Tenor, or Rule,
of any such Commission specified, nor the Qualification of those that shall be
armed with such Commissions, expressed or limited. Never was so much sense
contained in so few words. No Conveyancer could ever in more Compendious or
binding terms have drawn a Dissettlement of the whole Birthright of England.

For as to the Commission, if it be to take away any man's Estate, or his Life
by force, Yet it is the Kings Commission: Or if the Person Commissionate, be
under never so many Dissabilities by Acts of Parliament, yet his taking this
Oath, removes all those Incapacities, or his Commission makes it not
Disputable. But if a man stand upon his Defense, a good Judge for the purpose,
finding that the Position is Traitorous, will declare that by this Law, he is
to be Executed for Treason.

These things are no Nicetyes, or remote Considerations (though in making of
Laws, and which must come afterward under Construction of Judges, Durante
Bene-placito, all Cases are to be put and imagined) but there being an Act in
Scotland for Twenty thousand Men to March into England upon Call, and so great
a Body of English Souldery in France, within Summons, besides what Forainers
may be obliged by Treaty to furnish, and it being so fresh in memory, what sort
of persons had lately been in Commission among us, to which add the many
Books, then Printed by License, Writ, some by Men of the Black, one of the
Green Cloth, wherein the Absoluteness of the English Monarchy is against all
Law asserted.

All these Considerations put together, were sufficient to make any honest and
well-advised man, to conceive indeed, that upon the passing of this Oath and
Declaration, the whole sum of Affairs depended.

It grew therefore to the greatest contest, that has perhaps ever been in
Parliament, wherein those Lords, that were against this Oath, being assured of
their own Loyalty and Merit, stood up now for the English Liberties with the
same Genius, Virtue and Courage, that their Noble Ancestors had formerly
defended the Great Charter of England, but with so much greater Commendation,
in that they had here a fairer Field, and the more Civil way of Decision: They
fought it out under all the disadvantages imaginable: They were overlaid by
Numbers, the noise of the House, like the VVind was against them, and if not
the Sun, the Fireside was always in their Faces; nor being so few, could
they, as their Adversaries, withdraw to refresh themselves in a whole days
Engagement: Yet never was there a clearer Demonstration how dull a thing is
humane Eloquence, and Greatness, how Little, when the bright Truth discovers
all things in their proper Colors and Dimensions, and shining shoots its Beams
through all their Fallacies, It might be injurious where all of them did so
excellently well, to attribute more to any one of those Lords than another,
unless because the Duke of Buckingham, and the Earl of Shaftsbury, have been
the more reproached for this brave Action, it be requisite by a double
proportion of Praise to set them two on equal terms with the rest of their
Companions in Honor. The particular Relation of this Debate, which lasted many
days with great eagerness on both sides, and the Reasons but on one, was in
the next Session burnt by Order of the Lords, but the Sparks of it will
eterually fly in their Adversaries faces.

Now before this Test could in so vigorous an opposition pass the House of
Peers, there arose unexpectedly a great Controversy betwixt the two Houses,
concerning their Privileges on this occasion, The Lords according to their
undoubted Right, being the Supreme Court of Judicature in the Nation, had upon
Petition of Doctor Shirley, taken cognizance of a Cause between him and Sir
John Fagg, a Member of the House of Commons, and of other Appeals from the
Court of Chancery, which the Commons, whether in good earnest, which I can
hardly believe, or rather some crafty Parliament men among them, having an eye
upon the Test, and to prevent the hazard of its coming among them, presently
took hold of, and blew the Coals to such a degree, that there was no quenching
them.

In the House of Peers both Parties, as in a point of their own Privilege,
easily united, and were no less inflamed against the Commons, and to uphold
their own ancient Jurisdiction; wherein nevertheless both the Lords for the
Test, and those against it, had their own particular reasons, and might have
accused each-other perhaps of some artifice; The matter in conclusion was so
husbanded on all sides, that any longer converse betwixt the two Houses grew
impracticable, and his Majesty Prorogued them therefore till the 13th of
October 1675, following: And in this manner that fatal Test which had given so
great disturbance to the minds of our Nation, dyed the second Death which in
the language of the Divines, is as much as to say, it was Damned.

The House of Commons had not in that Session been wanting to Vote 300000 l.
toward the building of Ships, and to draw a Bill for appropriating the Ancient
Tunnage and Poundage, amounting to 400000 l. yearly to the use of the Navy, as
it ought in Law already, and had been granted formerly upon that special Trust
and Confidence, but neither did that 300000 l. although Competent at present,
and but an earnest for future meeting, seem considerable, and had it been more,
yet that Bill of appropriating any thing to its true use, was a sufficient
cause to make them both miscarry, but upon pretense of the quarrel between the
Lords and Commons in which the Session thus ended.

The Conspirators had this interval to reflect upon their own affairs. They
saw that the King of France (as they called him) was so busy abroad, that he
could not be of farther use, yet, to them here, then by his directions, while
his Armies were by assistance of the English Forces, several times saved from
ruins. They considered that the Test was defeated, by which the Papists hoped
to have had Reprisalls for that of Transubstantiation, and the Conspirators to
have gained Commission, as extensive and arbitrary, as the malice of their own
hearts could dictate: That herewith they had missed of a Legality to have
raised money without Consent of Parliament, or to imprison or execute whosoever
should oppose them in pursuance of such their Commission. They knew it was in
vain to expect that his Majesty in that want, or rather opinion of want, which
they had reduced him to, should be diverted from holding this Session of
Parliament: nor were they themselves for this once wholly averse to it, For they
presumed either way to find their own account, that if money were granted it
should be attributed to their influence, and remain much within their
disposal, but if not granted, that by joining this with other accidents of
Parliament, they might so represent things to his Majesty as to incense him
against them, and distrusting all Parliamentary Advice to take Counsel from
themselves, from France, and from Necessity.

And in the mean time they fomented all the Jealousies which they caused. They
continued to inculcate Forty and One in Court, and Country.

Those that refused all the money they demanded, were to be the only Recusants,
and all that asserted the Libertyes of the Nation, were to be reckoned in the
Classis of Presbyterians.

The 13th. of October came, and his Majesty now asked not only a Supply for his
building of Ships, as formerly, but further, to take off the Anticipation upon
his Revenue.

The House of Commons took up again such Public Bills as they had on foot in
their former sitting, and others that might either Remedy Present, or Prevent
Future Mischiefs.

The Bill for Habeas Corpus.

That against sending men Prisoners beyond Sea.

That against raising Money without Consent of Parliament;

That against Papists sitting in either House.

Another Act for speedier convicting of Papists.

That for recalling his Mejestys Subjects out of the French service, etc: And
as to his Majestys supply, they proceeded in their former Method of the two
Bills, One for raising 300000 l. and the other for Appropriating the Tunnage
and Poundage to the use of the Navy.

And in the Lords House there was a good disposition toward things of Public
Interest: But 300000 l. was so insipid a thing, to those who had been
continually regaled with Millions, and that Act of Appropriation, with some
others, went so much against stomach that there wanted only an opportunity to
reject them, and that which was readiest at hand was the late quarrel betwixt
the House of Lords and the Commons. The house of Commons did now more
peremptorily then ever, oppose the Lords Jurisdiction in Appeals: The Lords on
the otherside were resolved not to depart from so essential a Privilege and
Authority, but to proceed in the Exercise of it: So that this Dispute was
raised to a greater Ardure and Contention then ever, and there appeared no way
of accommodation. Hereupon the Lords were in consultation for an Address to his
Majesty containing many weighty Reasons for his Majestyes dissolving this
Parliament, deduced from the nature and behavior of the present House of
Commons: But his Majesty, although the transaction between the two Houses was
at present become impracticable, Judging that this House might at some other
time be of use to him, chose only to Prorogue the Parliament; The blame of it
was not only laid, but aggravated, upon those in both Houses, but especially
on the Lords-House, who had most vigorously opposed the French and
Popish-Jnterest. But those who were present at the Lords, and observed the
conduct of the Great Ministers there, conceived of it otherwise; And as to the
House of Commons, who in the heat of the Contest, had Voted,

That whosoever shall Sollicity or prosecute any Appeal against any Commoner
of England, from any Court of Equity before the House of Lords, shall be deemed
and taken abetrayer of the Rights and Liberties of the Commons of England, and
shall be proceeded against accordingly.

Their Speaker, going through Westminster Hall to the House, and looking down
upon some of those Lawyers, commanded his Mace to seize them and led them up
Prisoners with him, which it is presumed, that he being of his Majesty's Privy
Council, would not have done, but for what some men call his Majesty's
Service; And yet it was the highest, this, of all the Provocations which the
Lords had received in this Controversy. But however, this fault ought to be
divided, there was a greater committed in Proroguing the Parliament, from the
22th. of November 1675, unto the 15th, of February 1676. And holding it after
that dismission, there being no Record of any such thing done since the being
of Parliaments in England, and the whole Reason of Law no less then the
Practice and Custom holding Contrary.

This vast space betwixt the meetings of Parliament cannot more properly be
filled up, then with the coherence of those things abroad and at home, that
those that are intelligent may observe whether the Conspirators found any
interruption, or did not rather suit this event also to the Continuance of
their Counsels. The Earl of Northampton is not to be esteemed as one engaged
in those Counsels, being a person of too great Honor, though the advanceing
of him to be Constable of the Tovver, was the first of our Domestic
occurrents. But if they could have any hand in it, it is more probable that lest
he might perceive their Contrivances, they apparelled him in so much Wall to
have made him insensible. However men conjectured even then by the Quality of
the Keeper, that he was not to be disparaged with any mean and vulgar
Prisoners. But another thing was all along very remarkable, That during this
Inter-Parliament, there were five Judges places either fell, or were made
vacant, (for it was some while before that Sir. Francis North had been created
Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas) the five that succeeded, were Sir
Richard Rainsford, Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench. Mountagne, Lord Chief
Baron of the Exchequer. Vere Bartie, Barrister at Law, one of the Barrons of
the Exchequer. Sir William Scroggs, one of the Justices of the Common Pleas.
And Sir Thomas Jones, one of the Justices of the Kings Bench. Concerning all
whom there it something too much to be said; and it is not out of a figure of
speech, but for mere reverence of their Profession that I thus pass it over,
considering also humane infirmity, and that they are all by their Pattens,
Durante Been Placito, bound as it were to the Good Behavior. And it is a shame
to think what trivial, and to say the best of them, obscure persons have and
do stand next in prospect, to come and sit by them. Justice Atknis also by
Warping too far toward the Laws, was in danger upon another pretense to have
made way for some of them, but upon true Repentance and Contrition, with some
Alms Deeds, was admitted to Mercy; And all the rest of the Benches will
doubtless have profited much by his, and some other example. Alas the Wisdom
and Probity of the Law went of for the most part with good Sir Matthew Hales,
and Justice is made a mere property. This poisonous Arrow strikes to the very
heart of Government, and could come from no Quiver but that of the
Conspirators. What French Counsel, what standing Forces, what Parliamentary
Bribes, what National Oaths, and all the other Machinations of wicked men have
not yet been able to effect, may be more compendiously Acted by twelve Judges
in Scarlet.

The next thing considerable that appeared preparatory for the next session,
was a Book that came out by public Authority, Entitled, Considerations
touching the true way to suppress Popery, etc. A very good design, and writ,
I believe, by a very good man, but under some mistakes, which are not to be
passed over. One in the Preface, wherein he says, The Favor here proposed in
behalf of the Romanists, is not more than they enjoy among Protestants abroad
at this day. This I take not to be true either in Denmark, or Sweden and some
other Countries were Popery is wholly suppressed; and therefore if that have
been effected there, in ways of prudence and consisting with Christianity, it
ought not to have been in so general words misrepresented.

Another is, P. 59, and 60. a thing ill and dangerously said, concluding; I
know but one Instance, that of David in Gath, of a man that was put to all
these straits, and yet not Corrupted in his principles. When there was a more
Illustrious Example near him, and more obious.

What else I have to say in passing, is, as to the Groundwork of his whole
design; which is to bring men nearer, as by a distinction betwixt the Church
and Court of Rome, a thing long attempted, but ineffectually, it being the same
thing as to distinguish betwixt the Church of England, and the English Bishops,
which cannot be separated. But the intention of the Author, was doubtless very
honest, and the English of that Profession, are certainly of all Papiest the
most sincere and most worthy of favor; but this seemed no proper time to
negotiate further then the Public Convenience.

There was another Book likewise that came out by Authority, toward the
Approach of the Session, Entitled, A Packet of Advise to the men of Shaftsbury,
etc. But the name of the Author was concealed, not out of any spark of
moModesty, but that he might with more security exercise his Impudence, not so
much against those Noble Lords, as against all Public Truth and Honesty. The
whole composition is nothing else but an Infusion of Malice, in the Froath of
the Town, and the Scum of the University, by the Prescription of the
Conspirators. Nor, therefore did the Book deserve naming, no more then the
Author, but that they should rot together in their own Infamy, had not the
first events of the following Session made it remarkable, that the Wizard dealt
with some Superior Intelligence.

And on the other side, some Scattering papers straggled out in Print, as is
usual for the information of Parliament men, in the matter of Law concerning
Prorogation, which all of them, it is to be presumed, understood not, but was
like to prove therefore a great Question.

As to matters abroad from the Year 1674, That the Peace was concluded betwixt
England and Holland; the French King, as a mark of his displeasure, and to
humble the English Nation, let Loose his Privateers among our Merchant men:
There was thenceforth no security of Commerce or Navigation notwithstanding the
public Amity betwixt the two Crowns, but at Sea they Murdered Plundered, made
Prize and Confiscated those they met with. Their Picaroons laid before the
Mouth of our Rivers, hoverd all along the Coast, took our Ships in the very
Ports, that we were in a manner blocked up by Water. And if any made
application at his Sovereign Port for Justice, they were insolently bassled,
except some sew, that by Sir, Ellis Leightous Interest, who made a second prize
of them, were redeemed upon easier Composition. In this manner it continued
from 1674, till the latter end of 1676 without remedy, even till the time of
the Parliaments Sitting: so that men doubted whether even the Conspirators were
not Accomplices also in the matter, and sound partly their own account in it. For
evidence of what is said, formerly, the Paper at the end of this Treatise
annexed may serve, returned by some Members of the Privy Council to his
Majesty's Order, to which was also adjoined a Register of so many of the
English Ships as then came to notice which the French had taken, (and to this
day cease not to treat our Merchants at the same rate.) And yet all this while
that they made these intolerable and barbarous Piracyes, and depredations upon
his Majestyes Subjects, from hence they were more deligently then ever supplied
with Recruits, and those that would go voluntarily into the French service were
encouraged, others that would not, pressed, imprisoned, and carried over by
maine force, and constraint, even as the Parliament here was ready to sit down;
notwithstanding all their former frequent applications to the Contrary. And his
Majesty's Magazins were daily emptied, to furnish the French with all sorts of
Ammunition, of which the following note contains but a small parcel, in
comparison of what was daily conveyed away, under color of Cockets for Jarsy,
and other places.

A short account of some Ammunition, etc. Exported from the Port of London to
France, from June, 1675. to June 1677.
Grenades without number, Shipped off under the color of unwroght Iron. Lead
Shot 21 Tuns. Gunpovvder 7134 Barrels. Iron Shot 18 Tun, 600 Weight. Matcb 88
Tun, 1900 Weight. Iorn Ordinance, 441. Quantity, 292 Tuns, 900 Weight.
Carriages, Bandileirs, Pikes, etc. uncertain.
Thus was the French King, to be gratified for undoing us by Sea with
contributing all that we could rap and rend of Men, or Ammunition at Land, to
make him more potent against us, and more formidable.

Thus are we at length arrived at this much controverted, and as much expected
Session. And though the way to it has proved much longer then was intended in
the entry of this discourse, yet is it very short of what the matter would have
afforded, but is past over to keep within bounds of this Volumn. The 15th of
February 1676 came, and that very same day, the French King appointed his March
for Flanders. It seemed that his motions were in Just Cadence, and that as in a
Grand Balet, he kept time with those that were tuned here to his measure. And
he thought it a becoming Galanttrie, to take the rest of Flanders our natural
out work in the very face of the King of England and his Petites Maisons of
Parliament.

His Majesty demanded of the Parliament in his Speech at the opening of the
Sessions, a Supply for building of Ships, and the further continuance of the
Additional Excise upon Beer and Ale, which was to expire the 24th. of June
1677, and recommended earnestly a good correspondence betvveen the two Houses,
representing their last Differences as the reason of so long a Prorogation, to
allay them. The Lord Chancellor, as is usual with him, spoiled all, which the
King had said so well, with straining to do it better; For indeed the
mischances of all the Sessions since he had the Seals, may in great part be
ascribed to his indiscreet and unlucky Eloquence. And had not the Lord Treasure
a far more effectual way of Persuasion with the Commons, there had been the
same danger of the ill success of this Meeting, as of those formerly. Each
House being now seated, the case of this long Prorogation had taken place so
far without doors, and was of that consequence to the Constitution of all
Parliaments, and the Ualidity of all proceedings in this Session, that even the
Commons, though sore against their inclination, could not pass it over. But
they handled it so tenderly, as if they were afraid to touch it.

The first day, instead of the Question, Whether the Parliament were by this
unpresidented Prorogation indeed Dissolved; it was proposed, something
ridiculously, Whether this Prorogation were not an Adjournment? And this Debate
too, they Adjourned till the next day, and from thence they put it off till the
Monday morning. Then those that had proposed it, yet before they would enter
upon the Debate, asked, Whether they might have liberty? as if that had not
been more then implied before, by Adjourning the Debate, and as if Freedom of
speech, were not a Concession of Right, which the King grants at the first
opening of all Parliaments. But by this faintness, and halfe-counsell, they
taught the House to deny them it. And so all that matter was wrapped up in a
cleanly Question, Whether their grand Committees should sit, which involving
the Legitimacy of the Houses Sitting, was carried in the Affirmative, as well
as their own hearts could wish: But in the Lords House it went otherwise. For
the first day, as soon as the Houses were separate, the Duke of Buckingham, who
usually says what he thinks, argued by all the Laws of Parliament, and with
great strength of Reason, that this Prorogation was Null and this Parliament
consequently Dissolved, offering moreover to maintain it to all the Judges,
and desiring as had been usual in such Cases, but would not here be admitted,
that even they might give their opinions. But my Lord Frechvvell as a better
Judge of so weighty a point in Law, did of his great Courtship move, That the
Duke of Buckingham might be called to the Bar, which being opposed by the
Lord Salisbury, as an extravagant motion, but the Duke of Buckinghams proposal
asserted, with all the Cecilian height of Courage and Reason, the Lord Arundell
of Trerise a Peer of no less consideration, and Authority, then my Lord
Frechvvell, and as much out of order, as if the Salt had been thrown down, or
an Hare had crossed his way, Opening, renewed the motion for calling the Duke
to the Bar; But there were yet too many Lords between, and the Couriers of
the Honse of Commons brought up advice every moment, that the matter was yet in
agitation among them, So that the Earl of Shaftsbury, had opportunity to appear
with such extraordinary vigor, in what concerned both the Duke of Buckingham's
person and his Proposal, that as the Duke of Buckingham might have stood single
in any rational contest, so the Earl of Shaftsbury was more properly another
Principal, than his Second. The Lord Chancellor therefore in answer undertook,
on the contrary, to make the Prorogation look very formal, laying the best
colors upon it, after his manner when Advocate, that the Cause would bear (and
the worst upon his Opponents) but such as could never yet endure the Daylight.
Thus for five or six hours it grew a fixed Debate, many arguing it in the
regular method, till the expected news came, that the Commons were rose without
doing any thing; whereupon the greater number called for the Question, and had
it in the Affirmative, that the Debate should be laid aside.

And being thus flushed, but not satisfied with their Victory, they fell upon
their Adversaries in cool blood, questioning such as they thought fit, that
same night, and the morrow after, sentencing them, the Duke of Buckingham, the
Earl of Salisbury, the Earl of Shaftsbury, and the Lord Wharton to be committed
to the Tower, under the notion of Contempt, during his Majestyes, and the
Houses pleasure. That Contempt, was their refusing to recant their Opinion, and
ask pardon, of the King, and the House of Lords. Thus a Prorogation without
President, was to be warranted by an Imprisonment without Example. A sad
Instance and whereby the Dignity of Parliamens, and especially of the House of
Peers, did at present much suffer, and may probably more for the future; For
nothing but Parliament can destroy Parliament, If a House shall once be Felon
of it self and stop its own breath, taking away that Liberty of speech, which
the King verbally, and of course, allows them, (as now they had done in both
Houses) to what purpose is it coming thither? But it was now over, and by the
weakness, in the House of Commons, and the Force in the House of Lords, this
Presumptuous Session, was thus far settled, and confirmed; so that
henceforward men begun to wipe their Mouths, as if nothing had been, and to
enter upon the Public Business.

And yet it is remarkable that shortly after, upon occasion of a discourse
among the Commons concerning Libells and Pamphlets, first one Member of them
stood up, and in the face of their House, said, That it was affirmed to him,
by a person that might be spoke with, that there were among them, thirty,
forty, fifty, God knovvs how many, Outlavved. Another thereupon rose, and told
them, It was reported too, that there were diverse of the Members Papists; A
third, That a multitude of them were Bribed, and Pensioners. And yet all this
was patiently hushed up by their House, and digessed, being it seems, a thing
of that Nature, which there is no Reply to; which may very well administer, and
deserve a serious Reflection, how great an opportunity this House of Commons
lost, of ingratiating themselves, with the Nation, by acknowledging in this
Convention their invalidity to proceed in Parliament, and by addressing to his
Majesty as being Dissolved, for a Dismission. For were it so, that all the Laws
of England require, and the very Constitution of our Government, as well as
Experience, teaches the necessity of the frequent Meeting, and change of
Parliaments, and suppose that the Question Concerning this Prorogation, were by
the Custom of Parliaments to be justified, (which has not been done hitherto)
yet who that desires to maintain the reputation of an honest man, would not
have laid hold upon so plausible an occasion, to break company when it was
grown so Scandalous. For it is too notorious to be concealed, that near a third
part of the House have beneficial Offices under his Majesty, in the Privy
Council, the Army, the Navy, the Law, the Household, the Revenue both in
England and Ireland, or in attendance on his Majesty's person. These are all of
them indeed to be esteemed Gentlemen of Honor, but more or less according to
the quality of their several employments under his Majesty, and it is to be
presumed that they brought along with them some Honor of their own into his
service at first to set up with. Nor is it sit that such an Assembly should be
destitute of them to inform the Commons of his Majesty's affairs, and
communicate his Counsels, so that they do not by irregular procureing of
Elections in place where they have no proper interest, thrust out the Gentelmen
that have, and thereby disturb the several Countries; Nor that they croude
into the House in numbers beyond modesty, and which instead of giving a Temper
to their deliberations, may seem to affect the Predominance. For although the
House of Peers, besides their supreme and sole Judicature, have an equal power
in the Legislature with the House of Commons, and at the second Thoughts in the
Government have often corrected their errors: yet it is to be confessed, that
the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses there assembled, are the Representers of
the People of England, and are more peculiarly empowered by them to transact
concerning the Religion, Lives, Liberties, and the Propriety of the Nation. And
therefore no Honorable person, related to his Majesty's more particular
service, but will in that place and opportunity suspect himself, least his
Gratitude to his Master, with his self-interest should tempt him beyond his
obligation there to the Public. The same excludes him that may next inherit
from being Guardian to an Infant, not but there may the same affection and
integrity be found in those of the Fathers side as those on the Mothers, but
out of decent and humane caution, and in like manner however his Majesty's
Officers may be of as, sound and untainted reputation, as the best, yet common
Discretion would teach them not to seek after and ingrosse such different
Trusts in those bordering Intrests of the King and Country, where from the
People they have no Legal advantage, but so much may be gained by betraying
them. How improper would it seem for a Privy Counselor if in the House of
Commons he should not justify the most arbytrary Proceedings of the Council
Table, represent affairs of State with another face, defend any misgovernment,
patronize the greatest Offenders against the Kingdom, even though they were
too his own particular enemies, and extend the supposed Prerogative on all
occasions, to the detriment of the Subjects certain and due Libertyes! What
self denial were it in the Learned Counsel at Law, did they not vindicate the
Misdemeanors of the Judges, perplex all Remedies against the Corruptions and
Incroachment of Courts of Judicature, Word all Acts toward the Advantage of
their own Profession, palliate unlawful Elections, extenuate and advocate
Public Crimes, where the Criminal may prove considerable; step into the
chair of a Money Bill' and pen the Clauses so dubiously, that they may be
interpret^ in Westminister-Hall beyond the Houses intention, mislead the House,
not only in point of Law, but even in matter of Fact, without any respect to
Veracity, but all to his own further Promotion! What Soldier in Pay, but might
think himself sit to be cashiered, should he oppose the increase of Standing
Forces, the Depression of Civil Authority, or the Levying of Money by
whatsoever means or in what Quantity? Or who of them ought not to abhor that
Traitorous Position, of taking Arms by the Kings Authority against those that
are Commissionated by him in pursuance of such Commission? What Officer of the
Navy, but takes himself under Obligation to magnify the expense, extol the
mannagment, conceal the neglect, increase the Debts and press the Necessity,
ringging and unringging it to the House in the same moment, and representing it
all at once in a good and a bad condition? should any Member of Parliament and
of the Exchequer omit to transform the Accounts, conceal the Issues, highten
the Anticipations, and in despite of himself oblidge whosoever chance to be
the Lord Treasurer; might not his Reversioner justly expect to be put into
present Posession of the Office? Who that is either concerned in the Customs,
or of their Brethren of the Excise, can with any decency refuse, if they do not
invent, all further Impositions upon Merchandise, Navigation, or our own
domestic Growth and Consumption; and if the Charge be but Temporary, to
perpetuate it? Hence it shall come that instead of relieving the Crown by the
good old and certain way of Subsidyes, wherein nothing was to be got by the
House of Commons, they devised this Foraine course of Revenue, to the great
Greivance and double charg of the People, that so many of the Members might be
gratified in the Farms or Commissions.

But to conclude this digression whatsoever other Offices have been set up for
the use of the Members, or have been extinguished upon occasion, should they
have failed at a Question, did not they deserve to be turned out? Were not all
the Votes as it were in Fee Farm, of those that were entrusted with the sale?
Must not Surinam be a sufficient cause of quarrel with Holland, to any
Commissioner of the Plantations? Or who would have denied Money to continue the
War with Holland, when he were a Commissioner of Prizes, of Sick and Wounded,
of Transporting the English, or of Starving the Dutch Prisoners? How much
greater then would the hardship be for those of his Majesty's Household, or who
attend upon his Royal Person, to forget by any chance Vote, or in being absent
from the House, that they are his Domestic servants? Or that all those of the
capacity abovementioned are to be look upon as a distinct Body under another
Discipline; and whatsoever they may commit in the House of Commons against the
National Interest, they take themselves to be justified by their Circumstances,
their hearts indeed are, they say, with the Country, and one of them had the
boldness to tell his Majesty, That he was come from Voting in the House Against
his Conscience.

And yet these Gentlemen being full, and already in Employment, are more good
natured and less dangerous to the Public, than those that are hungry and out
of Office, who may by probable computation, make another Third part of this
House of Commons. Those are such as having observed by what steps, or rather
leaps and strides, others of their House have ascended into the highest Places
of the Kingdom, do upon measuring their own Birth, Estates, Parts, and Merit,
think themselves as well and better qualified in all respects as their former
Companions. They are generally men, who by speaking against the French;
inveighing against the Debauches of Court, talking of the ill management of the
Revenue, and such Popular flourishes, have cheated the Countries into Electing
them, and when they come up, if they can speak in the House, they make a faint
attaque or two upon some great Minister of State, and perhaps relieve some
other that is in danger of Parliament, to make themselves either way
considerable.

In matters of money they seem at first difficult, but having been discourst
with in private, they are set right, and begin to understand it better
themselves, and to convert their Brethren: For they are all of them to be
bought and sold, only their Number makes them cheaper, and each of them does so
overvalue himself; that sometimes they outstand or let slip their own Market.

It is not to be imagined, how small things in this case, even Members of great
Estates will stoop at, and most of them will do as much for Hopes, as others
for Fruition, but if their patience be tired out, they grow at last mutinous,
and revolt to the Country, till some better occasion offer.

Among these are somemen of the best understanding, were they of equal
integrity, who affect to ingrosse all business, to be able to quash any good
motion by Parliamentary skill, unless themselves be the Authors, and to be the
leading men of the House, and for their natural Lives to Continue so. But
these are men that have been once fooled, most of them, and discovered, and
slighted at Court, so that till some turn of State shall set them in their
Adversaryes Place, in the mean time they look Sullen, make big Motions, and
contrive specious Bills for the Subject, yet only wait the opportunity to be
the Instruments of the same Counsels, which they oppose in others.

There is a Third Part still remaining, but as contrary in themselves as Light
and Darkness; Those are either the worst, or the best of Men; The first are
most profligate persons, that have neither Estates, Consciences, nor good
Manners, yet are therefore picked out as the necessary men, and whose Votes
will go furthest; The charges of their Elections are defraied, whatever they
amount to, Tables are kept for them at White Hall, and through Westminster,
that they may be ready at hand, within Call of a Question: All of them are
received into Pension, and know their Pay-day, which they never fail of:
Insomuch that a great Officer was pleased to say, That they came about him like
so many Jack davvs for Cheese, at the end of every Session. If they be not in
Parliament, they must be in Prison, and as they are Protected themselves, by
Privilege, so they sell their Protections to others, to the obstrnction so
many years together of the Law of the Land, and the public Justice; For these
it is, that the long and frequent Adjournments are calculated, but all whether
the Court, or the Monopolizers of the Country Party, or these that profane the
title of Old Cavaliers, do equally, though upon differing reasons, like Death
apprehend a Dissolution. But notwithstanding these, there is an hanfull of
Salt, a sparkle of Soul, that has hitherto preserved this gross Body from
Putrefaction, some Gentlemen that are constant, invariable, indeed English men,
such as are above hopes, or fears, or dissimulation, that can neither flatter,
nor betray their King, or Country: But being conscious of their own Loyalty,
and Integrity, proceed throw good and bad report, to acquit themselves in their
Duty to God, their Prince, and their Nation; Although so small a Scantling in
number, that men can scarce reckon of them more then a Quorum; Insomuch that it
is less difficult to conceive, how Fire was first brought to light in the
World then how any good thing could ever be produced out of an House of Commons
so constituted, unless as that is imagined to have come from the rushing of
Trees, or batterring of Rocks together, by accident, so these by their clashing
with one another, have struck out, an useful effect from so unlikely causes.
But whatsoever casual good has been wrought at any time by the assimilation
of ambitious, factious, and disappointed Members, to the little, but solid, and
unbyassed Party, the more frequent ill effects, and consequences of so unequal
a mixture, so long continued, are demonstrable and apparent. For while scarce
any man comes thither with respect to the public service, but in design to
make, and raiso his fortune, it is not to be expressed, the Debauchery, and
Lewdness, which upon occasion of Election to Parliaments, are now grown
habitual through the Nation. So that the Vice, and the Expense, are risen to
such a prodigious height, that few sober men can endure to stand to be chosen
on such conditious. From whence also arise Feuids, and perpetual Animosityes,
over most of the Countyes, and Corporations, while Gentlemen of Worth, Spirit,
and ancient Estates, and Dependances, see themselves overpowered in their own
neighborhood by the Drunknesse, and Bribery, of their Competitors. But if
nevertheless any worthy person chance to carry the Election, some mercenary or
corrupt Sheriff makes a double Return, and so the Cause is handed to the
Committee of Elections, who ask no better, but are ready to adopt his
Adversary into the House if he be not Legitimate. And if the Gentleman agrieved
seek his Remedy against the Sheriff in Westminster Hall, and the proofs be so
palpable, that the Kings Bench cannot invent how to do him injustice, yet the
major part of the twelve Judges, shall upon better consideration vacate the
Sheriffs Fine, and reverse the Judgment; but those of them that dare dissent
from their Brethren are in danger to be turned off the Bench without any cause
assigned. While men therefore care not thus, how they get into the House of
Commons, neither can it be expected that they should make any conscience of
what they do there, but they are only intent how to reimburse themselves (if
their Elections were at their own charge) or how to bargine their Votes for a
Place, or a Pension. They list themselves streightways into some Court faction,
and it is as well known among them, to what Lord each of them retain, as when
formerly they wore Coats, and Badges. By this long haunting so together they
are grown too so familiar among themselves, that all reverence of their own
Assembly is lost, that they live together not like Parliament men, but like so
many Good felows, met together in a Public House to make merry. And which is
yet worse, by being so thoroughly acquainted, they understand their Number and
Party, so that the use of so public a Counsel is frustrated, there is no place
for deliberation, no persuading by reason, but they can see one another Votes
through both Throats and Cravats before they hear them.

Where the Cards are so well known, they are only fit for a Cheat and no fair
Gamster, but would throw them under the Table.

Hereby it is that their House has lost all the ancient weight and authority,
and being conscious of their own guilt and weakness, dare not adventure, as
heretofore, the Impeaching of any man before the Lords, for the most heinous
Crimes of State, and the most Public Misdemeanors; upon which confidence it
is, that the Conspirators have so long presumed, and gone unpunished. For
although the Conspirators have sometimes (that this House might appear still
necessary to the People, and to make the money more glib) yielded that even
their own Names should be tossed among them, and Grievances be talked of, yet
at the same time they have been so prevalent as to hinder any Effect, and if
the House has Emancipated itself beyond Instructions, then by Chastizing them
with Prorogations, frighting them with Dissolution, comforting them with long,
frequent, and seasonable Adjournments, now by suspending, or diminishing their
pensions, then again by increasing them, sometimes by a scorn, and otherwhiles
by a favor, there has a way been found to reduce them again under discipline.
All these things and more being considered and how doubtful a foot this Long
Parliament now stood upon by this long Prorogation, there could not have been a
more Legal, or however no more wise and honest a thing done, then for both the
Lords and Commons to have separated themselves, or have besought his Majesty to
that purpose, left the Conspirators should any longer shelter and carry on
their design against the Government and Religion, under this shadow of
Parliamentary Authority. But it was otherwise ordered, of which it is now time
to relate the Consequences.

The four Lords having thus been committed, it cannot properly be said that the
House of Peers was thence forward under the Government of the Lord Frechvvel,
and the Lord Arundel of Trerise but those two noble Peers had of necessity no
small Influence upon the Counsels of that House, (having hoped ere this to have
made their way also into his Majesty's Privy Council) and all things fell out
as they could have wished, if under their own direction. For most of them, who
had been the most active formerly in the Public Interest, sat mute in the
House, whether, as is probable out of reverence to their two Persons, and
confidence in their wisdom, they left all to their Conduct, and gave them a
general Proxy, or whether, as some would have it, they were sullen at the
Commitment of of the four Lords, and by reason of that, or the Prorogation,
began now to think the Parliament, or their House to be Non Compos. But now
therefore Doctor Carry, a Commner, was brought to the Bar before them, and
questioned concerning a written Book which it seems he had carried to be
printed, treating of the Illegality of this Prorogation, and because he
satisfied them not in some Interrogatories, which no man would in Common honor
to others, or in self preservation, as neither was he in Law bound to have
answered, they therefore Fined him a thousand pounds, under that new Notion of
Contempt, when no other Crime would do it, and sentenced him to continue close
Prisoner in the Tovver until payment. Yet the Commons were in so admirable good
temper (having been conjured by the charming Eloquence of the Lord Chancellor,
to avoid all misunderstanding between the two Houses) that their could no
Member, or time, be found in all the session, to offer their House his
Petition; much less would that breach upon the whole Parliament; by
imprisoning the Lords, for using their liberty of speech, be entertained by
them upon motion, for fear of entrenching upon the privilege of the House of
Peers, which it had been well for them if they had been as tender of formerly.

One further Instance of the Completion of their House, at that season, may be
sufficient. One Master Harrington, had before the Session been Committed Close
Prisoner (for that was now the mode, as though the Earl of Norhampton, would
not otherwise have kept him Close enough) by Order of the King and Council,
the Warrant bearing for subornation of Perjury, tending to the Defamation of
his Majesty, and his Government, and for Contemptuously Declaring, he would
not answer his Majesty any Question, which his Majesty, or his Privy Council
should ask him. As this Gentleman was hurried along to the Tovver, he was so
dexterous as to convey into a friends hand passing by, a Blanke Paper only
with his name, that a Petition might be written above it, to be presented to
the House of Commons, without rejecting for want of his own hand in the
subscription. His Case notwithstanding the Warrant was thus.

He had met with two Scotch soldiers in Town returned from Flanders, who
complained that many of their Country men had in Scotland been seized by
force, to be carried over into the French service, had been detained in the
Public prisons till an opportunity to transport them: were heaved on board fast
tied and bound like malefactors, some of them struggling and contesting it,
were cast into the Sea, or maimed, in conclusion an intolerable violence and
barbarity used to compel them and this near the present session of Parliament.
Hereupon this Gentleman considering how often the House of Commons had addressed
to his Majesty and framed an Act for recalling his Majesty's Subjects out of
the French service, as also that his Majesty had i^ued his Proclamation to the
same purpose, thought he might do a good and acceptable thing in giving
information of it to the House as time served, But withal knowing how
witnesses might possibly be taken off, he for his own greater security took
them before a Master of Chancery, where they comfirmed by Oath the same things
they had told him. But hereupon he was brought before his Majesty, and the
Privy Council, where he declared this matter but being here asked by the Lord
Chancellor some insnaring and improper questions, he modestly, as those that
were by affirmed, desired to be ex^ised from answering him further, but after
this, answered (...) Majesty with great humility and respect to diverse
quest^us. This was the subornation of Perjury, and this the Contempt to his
Majesty, for which he was made Close Prisoner. upon his Petition to the House
of Commons he was sent for, and called in, where he is reported to have given a
very clear account of the whole matter, and of his behavior at the Council
board. But of the two Scotch soldiers the one made himself perjured without
being suborned by Harrington, denying or misrepresenting to the House what he
had sworn formerly. And the other, the honester fellow it ^ms of the two, only
was absented. But however diverse honorable Members of that House attested
voluntarily, that the soldiers had affirmed the same thing to them, and in^ed
the Truth of that matter is notorious, by several other (...) that since came
over, and by further account from (...). Master Harrington also carried himself
toward (...) ^ouse with that modesty, that it seemed inseparable (...) him,
and much more in his Majesty's presence, so that (...) House was inclined, and
ready to have concerned themselves for his Liberty. But Master Secretary
Williamson stood (...) having been a Principal Instrument in commiting him, and
because the other crimes rather deserved Thanks and Commendation, and the
Warrant would not Justify it self, he insisted upon his strange demeanor
toward his Majesty, decipherd his very looks, how truly it matters not, and but
that his Majesty and the House remained still living Flesh and Blood, it might
have been imagined by his discourse that Master Harrington had the Head of a
Gorgon. But this story so wrought with, and amazed the Commons, that Mr.
Harrington found no redress; but might thank God that he escaped again into
Close Prison. It was thought notwithstanding by most men that his looks might
have past any where but with a man of Sir Joseph's delicacy. For neither indeed
had Master Harrington ever the same oportunities that others of practiting the
Hocus Pocus of the Face, of Playing the French Scaramuccie or of living abroad
to learn how to make the Plenipotentiary Grimass for his Majestys service.

And now to proceed, rather according to the Coherence of the matters, then to
the particular Date of every days action. By this good humor, and the House
being so free of the Liberty of their fellow Commoners, it might be guessed
that they would not be less liberal of their Monythis Session.

The Bill therefore for 600000 l. Tax for eighteen month toward the building
and furnishing of Ships easily passed without once dreaming any more of
appropriating the Customs. For the Nation being generally possessed by the
Members with the defects of the Navy, and not considering at all from what
neglect it proceeded, the House of Commons were very willing, and glad to take
this occasion, of confirming the Authority of their sitting, and to pay double
the sum that in the former Sessions they had thought necessary toward the
Fleet; hereby to hedge in, and purchase their own continuance. And for the same
purpose they engrossed the Act with so numerous a list of Commissioners, that
it seemed rather a Register or Muster-roll of the Nation, and that they raised
the whole kingdom to raise the money. For who could doubt that they were still a
lawful Parliament, when they saw so many gentlemen's names (though by the Clerks
hand only) subscribed to an Act of their making? Only Mr. Seymour the
speaker, would have diminished the number in his own Country. For he had entered
into a Combination, that none should serve the King or their Country through
Devonshire, in any capacity but under his approbation, and therefore he highly
inveighed against many Gentlemen of the best rank there, that ought him no
homage, as persons disaffected, oppossing their names at a Commit of the
whole House, before he heard them. But being checked in his careere, he let
fall the contest, with as much judgment and modesty, as he had begun it with
boldness and indescretion.

This Bill was not enough, but though the Nation had hoped to be relieved from
the Additionall Excise upon Beer and Ale, which the Tripple League had foold
them into, but was now of course to expire the 24th of June, 1677. Yet a Bill
for the continuing of it for three years more passed them likewise with little
Difficulty. For the late fear of Dissolution was still so fresh upon them, that
they would continue any thing to buy their own Continuance; and this Bill might
considering their present want of Legality, have been properly entitled, An
Act for the Extraor dinary Occasion of the House of Commons. But that they
might seem within this tenderness to themselves not to have cast of all toward
the People, they sunk all former Grievances into a Bill of Chancery, knowing
well that a suit in that Court would be sooner ended, then a Reformation of it
be effected; and that thereby they might gain work enough to direct the whole
Session. And of their usual Bills for the Liberty of the Subjects, they sent
up only that of Habeas Corpus; pretending, and perhaps truly, that they durst
not adventure them either in their own or the Lords House as they were now
governed, lest they should be further ensnared by struging for freedom. But
least they should trouble themselves too much with Religion, the Lords
presented them with two Bills of a very good name, but of a strange and unheard
of nature. The one entitled An Ast for securing the Protestant Religion by
educating the Children of the Royal Family, and providing for the continuance
of a Protestant Clergy. The other, An Act for the more effectual Conviction
and Prosecution of Popish Recusants. And with these they sent down another for
the further regulation of the Presses and suppressing all unlicensed Books,
with clauses most severe and general upon the subject, whereof one for
breaking all Houses whatsoever on suspicion of any such Pamphlet where by
Master L' Estranges Authority was much amplifyed to search any other House with
the same liberty as he had Sir Thomas Dolemans.

But as to those two Bills of Religion, although they were of the highest
consequence that ever were offered in Parliament since Protestancy came in (and
went out of fashion) yet it is not to be imagined, how indisputable and easy a
passage they found through the House of Peers, to the House of Commons; which
must be ascribed to the great unanimity among them, after the committing of the
four Lords, and to the Power of those two noble Peers, their Adversaries, which
was now so established, that their sense being once declared, the rest seemed
to yield them an Implicit Faith and Obedience; and they were now in such
Vogue, that whatsoever was spoken or done any where abroad in perfection, with
great weight and judgment, men said it was A la Fraischeville. But if gentily
and acutely, A la Trerise.

That Entitled, An Act for the more effectual Conviction and Prosecution of
Popish Recusants, is too long to be here inserted, and the Fate it met with,
makes it unnecessary, for as soon as it was first read a Gentleman of great
worth and apprehension spoke short but roundly and through against it.

A second immediately moved that it might not only be thrown out, but with a
particular mark of infamy. And it being without any more ado ready to be put to
the Question, a third demanded that they should stay a while to see whether
there were any one so hardy as to speak a word for it. Which no man offerring
at, it was forthwith rejected with this censure added to the Journal.

And because the Body of the Bill was contrary to the Title, This unusual
sentence of the House of Commons, though excusable by the Crimes of the Bill,
yet was not to be justified by the Rules of intercourse between the two Houses.
But because all men have hence taken occasion to accuse the Lords Spiritual, as
the Authors both of this Bill and the other, it is necessary to insert here
the true Fact in their just vindication. It was above two years ago that a
select Caball of great Ministers, had been consulting about Church matters, tho
it seldom happens (nor did it in this instance) that the Statesmen are more
fortunate in meddling with Religion, then the Churchmen with Government, but
each marrs them with tampering out of their Provinces. This only difference,
that what Ecclesiastical persons may do by chance or consequence, that harm the
others commit on set purpose. For it was by these politicians, that these two
Cockatrice Eggs were laid and by their assiduous incubation hatched. It is true
indeed afterward they took some few of the Bishops into Communication, and as
it were for advice, upon what was before resolved. And to make this Bill go the
better down, they flatterd them with the other, as wholly calculated forsooth to
the Churches Interest. And by this means possibly they prevailed so far, that
the Bishops both there and in the House, less vigorously opposed. But that the
Bishopes were either the Contrivers or Promoters of the Bill, is a scandalous
falsehood, and devised by the Authors to throw the Odium off from themselves upon
the Clergy and (the Bills that aimed at the ruin of the Church of England
having miscarried) to compass the same end by this defamation. A sufficient
warning to the Clargy, how to be intrigued with the Statesmen for the future.

The second Bill follows.

An Act for further securing the Protestant Religion, by Educating the Children
of the Royal Family therein; and for the providing for the continuance of a
Protestant Clergy.
TO the Intent that the Protestant Religion, which through the blessing of God
has been happily Established in this Realm, and is at present sufficiently
secured by his Majestys known Piety and Zeal for the preservation thereof, may
remain secure in all future times.

Be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and
consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this Parliament
Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That upon the demise of his
Majesty that now is, to whom God grant a long and prosperous Reign, and upon
the demise of any other King or Queen Regnant, that shall hereafter bear the
Imperial Crown of this Realm, the Archbishops, and all and every the Bishops
of England and Wales, for the time being, as shall not be disabled by Sickness
or other Infirmity, shall within forty days next after such Demise, repair
to Lambeth House, and being there assembled, to the number of nine at least,
shall cause to be fairly ingrosed in Parchment the Oath and Declaration
following.

1. (...) King or Queen of England, do declare and Svvear, that I do believe
that there is not any Transubstantiation in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
or in the Elements of Bread and Wine, at or after the Consecration, thereof by
any person whatsoever. So help me God.

Which blanck shall be filled up with the Christian Name of such King or Queen,
And thereupon the Prelates so bled, shall without delay repair to the persons
of such succeeding King or Queen Regnant, and in humble manner tender (...)
said Oath or Declaraiton, to be taken by such succeeding King or Queen Regnant,
which they are hereby Authorized to Administer, and shall abide in or near the
Court by the space of fourteen days, and at convenient (...), as often as
conveniently they may, they shall appear in the presence of such King and Queen
ready to receive Commands for Administering the said Oath and Declaration, which
if such succeeding King and Queen shall make and subscribe in presence of them,
or any nine or more of them, they shall attest the doing thereof, by
subscribing their Names to a Certificate, Indorsed upon the said Indorsment,
and carry the same into the high Court of Chancery there to be safely deposited
amongst the Records of the said Court. And if such King or Queen Regnant, shall
refuse or omit to make and subscribe the said Oath, and Decalration, for the
space of fourteen days after such humble tender made in manner aforesaid, the
said Prelates may depart from the Court without any further attendance on this
occasion. But if at any time afterward such King or Queen shall be pleased to
take and subcribe the said Oath, and Declaration, and shall signify such
pleasure to the Archbishops and Bishops or any nine or more of them, the said
Archbishops and Bishops, or such nine or more of them, are hereby Authorized
and required forthwith to Administer the same, and to attest and certify the
same in manner aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any succeeding
King or Queen Regnant, shall refuse or Omit to make such Oath and Declaration,
within the time therefore limited, the same having been tendered in manner
aforesaid, or there shall be any Let, Obstruction, or hindrance whatsoever, to
their making the said tender in manner aforesaid, they are hereby enjoined and
required to endorse upon the said Engrosement such refusal or omission, or any
obstruction, let or hinderance, that shall happen to them, whereby they are not
able to make the said tender, according to the Act, and attest the same by
subscribing their names thereunto, and carry the same into the high Court of
Chancery, there to be safely deposited in manner aforesaid. And if any the said
persons, hereby appointed to make the said tender, shall neglect or refuse to
do the same, or in case of any refusal, or omission of making the said Oath and
Declaration, or in case of any Obstruction or hindrance to the making of the
said tender, shall refuse or neglect to make certificate thereof in manner
aforesaid, that the Archbishopric or Bishopric of the Person or Persons so
refusing, shall be Ipso Facto, void, as if he or they were naturally Dead, and
the said Person or Persons shall be incapable, during his or their Life or
Life's, of that, or any other Ecclesiastical perferment.

And be it further Enacted, That if any King or Queen Regnant, at the time when
the Imprial Crown of this Realm shall devolve, shall he under the age of
fourteen years, and that upon his or her attaining the said age of fourteen
years, the Archbishops and Bishops shall, and are upon the like penalties
hereby enjoined, within fourteen days next after such attaining to the said
Age, to assemble at the said place, and thereupon to do and perform all things
in proparing and tendering the said Oath and Declaration, and making certificate
of the taking or omission thereof, that are required by this Act to be done,
upon the demise of any King or Queen Regnant.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That until any
succeeding King or Queen Regnant shall make the said Oath and Declaration, in
manner aforesaid, such respective King or Queen shall not grant, confer, or
dispose of any Archbishopric or any Bishopric, in England or Wales,
otherwise than in manner following, that is to say, within seven days after
the Vacancy of any Biship-prick or See, shall be known to the Archbishop of
Canterbury for the time being, he shall and is hereby required to send forth a
Summons in Writing to all the Prelates in England and Wales, requiring them to
meet at a certain convenient time and place, to be appointed by the summons, to
consult concerning the nomination of sit persons for the supply of that
Vacancy. And in case of vacancy of the Arch Bishop-prick of Canterbury, the
Arch Bishop of York, for the time being. And if that See shall be also vacant,
such Prelate of the Realm, as by the Statute of 31 H. 8. ought to have place
before the rest in Parliament, shall and are hereby required to issue forth the
said Summons, and at the said time and place, so appointed, in manner
aforesaid, the Prelates then assembled, being seven at the least, or the major
part of them, shall by writing under their Hands and Seals, nominate three
persons, natural born subjects of the King, and in holy Orders, for the
supplying of the said Vacancy, and to be placed in such Order as the said
Prelates so assembled or the major part of them shall think fit, without regard
to dignity, antiquity, or any other form, which Writing shall be presented to
the King who may thereupon appoint one of the three persous so to be named, to
succeed in the said Vacancy. And the person so appointed or chosen, shall by
due form of Law, according to the course now used, be made Bishop of that See.
But if in 30 days after such presentment, of such Names, the King or Queen
Regnant shall not Elect or appoint, which of the said three persons shall
succeed in the said vacant See; or if after such Election or appointment there
shall be any obstruction in pressing of the usual Instruments and formalities
of Law, in order to his Consecration, then such person, whose Name shall be
first written in the said Instrument of nomination, if there be no Election or
appointment made by the King, within the time aforesaid, shall be the Bishop of
the vacant See. And if there be an Election or appointment made, then the
person so appointed shall be the Bishop of the vacant See. And the Archbishop
of the Province wherein the said vacancy shall be, or such other person or
persons, who ought by his Majesty's Ecclesiastical Laws to Consecrate the said
Bishop, shall upon reasonable demand, and are hereby required to make
Consecration accordingly upon pain of forfeiting trebble damages and costs to
the party grieved, to be recovered in any of his Majesty's Courts at
Westminster. And immediately after such Consecration, the person so
consecrated, shall be, and is hereby Enacted to be complete Bishop of the said
vacant See, and is hereby vested in the Temporalties of the said Bishop-prick
and in actual possession thereof, to all intents and purposes, and shall have a
Seat and Place in Parliament, as if he had by due forms of Law been made
Bishop, and had the Temporalities restored unto him; And in case the person so
first named in the said Instrument of nomination, or the person so Elected by
the King or Queen Regnant, shall then be a Bishop, so that no Consecration be
requisite, then immediately after default of Election or appointment by the
King, or immediately after such Election or appointment, if any shall be made
within the said time, and any Obstructions in pressing the Instruments and
Formalities in Law, in such cases used, the Bishop so first Named or Elected
and appointed, shall thereupon, ipso facto, be translated, and become Bishop of
that See, to which he was so nominated and appointed, and shall be, and is
hereby vested in the Temporalties and actual possession thereof to all intents
and purposes, and shall have his Seat and Place in Parliament accordingly, and
his former See shall become vacant, as if he had been by due Forms of Law
chosen and confirmed into the same, and had the Temporalities restored unto him.

And be it further Enacted, That until the making the said Oath and Declaration
in manner aforesaid, the respective succeeding Kings and Queens that shall not
have made and subscribed the same, shall not grant or dispose of any Denary, or
Arch-Deconary, Prebendary, Mastership of any College, Parsonage, Viccarage or
any Ecclesiastical Benefice or Promotion whatsoever, to any other person, but
such person as shall be nominated for the same, unto the said King or Queen
Regnant, by the Archbishop of Canterbury, or Guardians of the Spiritualities
of the said Arch-bishop-prick, for the time being, if the same be within the
Province of Canterbury, and by the Arch-bishop-prick of York, or Guardians of
the spiritualities of the said Arch-bishop-prick for the time being, if the
same be within the Province of York, by writing under their respective Hands
and Seals, and in case any such as shall be accordingly nominated, shall not be
able to obtein Presentation or grant thereof within 30 days, next after such
nomination, then the said person shall and may, and is hereby enabled, by force
of the said nomination, to require Institution and Induction from such person
and persons unto whom it shall belong to grant the same, who shall accordingly
make Institution and Induction, as if the said person were lawfully presented
by the said King or Queen Regnant, upon pain to forfeit to the party grieved,
trebble damages and costs, to be recovered in any of his Majesty's Courts at
Westminster; and in cases where no Institution or Induction is requisite the
said person so nominated, from and after the end of the said 30 days, shall be
and is hereby actually vested in the possession of such Denary, Arch-Deaconary,
Prebendary, Mastership, Rectory, Parsonage or, Vicarage, Donative, or other
Ecclefiastical Benefice or Promotion and shall be full and absolute proprietor
and Incumbent thereof, to all Intents and Purposes as if he had obtained
possession thereof upon a legal grant by the said King or Queen Regnant, and
proceeding thereupon in due form of Law.

Provided always and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall
and may be lawful for the Lord High Chancellor of England, or the Lord Keeper
of the great Seal of England, for the time being, to pass presentations or
grants, to any Ecclesiastical Benefice, under value in the Kings Gift, in such
manner as has been accustomed, any thing in this present Act to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted, That during such time as any King or Queen Regnant,
shall be under the said fourteen years, no person that shall be Lord
Protector, or Regent of this Realm, During such minority, shall in any wise,
either in the name of the King or Queen Regnant, or in his own name grant,
confer or dispose, of any Arch-Bishop-prick, Bishoprik, Deanary, Prebendary,
Master-ship of any College, Personage, Vicarage, or other Ecclesiastical
Benefice or Promotion whatsoever, but the same shall be disposed of in manner
above mentioned, during such miniority, until such Lord Protector or Regent,
shall make and subscribe the said Oath and Declaration, (mutatis mutandis)
before such nine or more of the said Prelates, as he shall call to Administer
the same unto him, which Oath and Declaration they are hereby Authorized and
required to Administer, under the penaltyes aforesaid, when they shall be
called thereunto, by such Lord Protector or Regent, for the time being.

And be it further Enacted, That the Children of such succeeding King or Queen
Regnant, that shall not have made and subscribed the Oath and Declaration in
manner aforsaid, shall from their respective Ages of seven years, until the
respective Ages of fourteen years, to be under the care and government of the
Archbishops of Canterbury and York, and Bishop of London, Durham and
Winchester, for the time being, who are hereby enjoined and required to take
care, that they be well instructed and Educated in the true Protestant
Religion, as it is now Established by Law, and to the Intent that the
Archbishops and Bishops, for the time being, may effectally have the Care and
Government of such Children, according to the true intent of this Law; Be it
Enected, That after any such Children shall have attained their respective Ages
of fourteen years, no person shall have enjoy, bear and execute any office,
service, employment or place of attendment relateing to their persons, but such
as shall be approved of in writing under the Hands and Seals of the said
Archbishops and Bishops in being, or the Major part of such of them as are
there in being. And if any person shall take upon him to Execute any such
Office, Service, Employment or place of Attendance, contrary to the true intent
and meaning of this Act, he shall forfeit the sum of 100 l. for every month he
shall so Execute the same, to be recovered by any person that will sue for the
same, in any Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information' in any of his
Majesty's Courts at VVestminister, shall also suffer Imprisonment for the space
of six months without Bail or Manieprize.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Person born
within this Realm or any other of his Majesty's Dominions, being a Popish
Priest, Deacon or Ecclesiiastical Person, made, or deemed, or professed by any
Authority or Jurisdiction derived, challenged, or pretended from the Sea of
Rome, or any Jesuit whatsoever shall be allowed to attend the person of the
Queens Majesty that now is, or any Quen Consort, or Queen Dowager, that shall
be hereafter, whilst they are within this Realm, ^or by pretense of such
service, or any other matter, shall be Exempted from the penal Laws already
made against such persons coming into being or remaining in this Kingdom, but
shall be, and are hereby liable to the utmost severity thereof.

Provided always, That it shall and may be lawful for Master John Huddleston
being one of the Queens Majesty's Domestique servant, to attend her said
Majesty's service, any thing in this Act or any other Law to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted, That after the Death of the Queens Majesty, to whom
God grant a long and happy life, all lay persons whatsoever, born within this
Realm, or any other of his Majesty's Dominions, that shall be of the Household,
or in the service or Employment of any succeeding Queen Consort, or Queen
Dowager, shall do and perform all things, in a late Act of this Parliament,
Entitled, An Act for preventing Dangers which may happen from Popish
Recusants: required to be done and performed by any person, that shall be
admitted into the service or Employment of his Majesty, or his Royal Highness
the Duke of York, which if they shall neglect or refuse to do and perform, and
nevertheless, after such Refusal and execute any Office, Service, or
Employment under any succeeding Queen Consort, or Queen Dowager, every person
so offending, shall be liable to the same penalties and disabilities, as by the
said Act are may be inflicted upon the breakers of that Law Provided always,
That all and every person or persons, that shallby virtue of this Act, have or
claym any Archbishopric, Bishopric, Deanery, Prebendary, Parsonage, Vicarage,
or other Ecclesiastical Benefits, with Cure or without Cure, shall be and is
hereby, enjoined, under the like penalties and disabilitys, to do and perform
all things whatsoever, which by Law they ought to have done if they had
obtained the same, and by the usual course and form of Law, without the help
and benefit of this Act.

And be it further Enacted, That all and every Archbishops, Bishops, appointed
by this Act to Assemble upon the Demise of his Majesty, or any other King or
Queen Regnant, in order to repair and make humble tender of the Oath and
Declaration aforementioned, to any succeeding King or Queen, be bound by this
Act to Administer the same, shall before such tender and Administration
thereof, and are hereby required to Administer the same Oath and Declaration,
to one another, with such of the Archbishops and Bishops, at any time
assembled as by the statute 31. H. 8. ought to have precedence of all the rest
of them, that shall be so assembled, is hereby Authorized and required, to
administer to the rest of them, and the next in order to such Prelates, is
hereby Authorized and required to administer the same to him, and the same Oath
and Declaration being Engrossed in other piece of Parchment, they and every of
them are hereby enjoined to subscribe their names to the same, and to return
the same into the high Court of Chancery, hereafter with their Certificate,
which they are before by this Act appointed to make. And if any of the said
Archbishops or Bishops, shall be under (...) same penalties, forfeiture, and
disabilities, as are hereby, ^ointed for such Archbishops and Bishops, as
neglect or refuse to make any tender of the said Oath and Declaration, to any
succeeding King or Queen Regnant.

And be it further Enacted, That the Archbishop of Canterbury, or Archbishop
of York, or such other Bishop to whom it shall belong to issue forth summons to
all the Bishops of England and Wales, requiring to meet and consult concerning
the Nomination of fit persons, for the supply of any Arch-Bishopprick, or
Bishopprick, according to this Act, shall make the said summons in such manner
that the time therein mentioned for the meeting the said Archbishops and
Bishops, shall not be more then forty days, distinct from the time of the Date,
and Issuing out of the said summons.

And be it further Enacted, That in case any person entitled by this Act, does
demand Consecration, in order to make him Bishop of any vacant See, in manner
aforesaid, shall demand the same of the Archbishop of the Province, and such
Arch Bishop that shall neglect or refuse to do the same, either by himself or
by others Commissioned by him, by the space of thirty days, that then such Arch
Bishop shall over and besides the trebble Damages, to the party before
appointed, forfeit the sum of 1000 l. to any person that will sue for the
same, in any of his Majesty's Courts at Westminster by Action of Debt, Bill,
Plaint, or Information, wherein no Essoyn, Protection, or Wager of Law, shall
be allowed. And being thereof lawfully convicted, his Arch-Bishopprick shall
thereby become, Ipso Facto, void as if he were naturally Dead, and he shall be
and is hereby made incapable and disabled to hold, have, receive the same, or
any other Bishopprick, or Ecclesiastical Benefice whatsoever.

And be it further Enacted That after such neglect or refusal by the space of
thirty days after Demand, to make such Consecration, or in case of the vacancy
of the Arch-Bishopprick, such Bishop of the said Province, for time being, who
by the Statute of 31. H. 8. ought to have presidents of all the rest, calling
to his Assistance, a sufficient number of Bishops, who are likewise required to
assist, at such time and place, as he shall thereunto appoint, shall and is
hereby required, upon reasonable Demands, to make such Consecration which shall
be good and effectual in Law, as if the said Bishops were thereunto authorized,
and empowred by Commission from such Archbishop, or any other person, or
persons, having authority to grant Commission for the doing the same.

And be it further Enacted, That the said Bishops and every of them, are hereby
enjoined and required to perform the same, upon pain of forfeiting, upon any
neglect or refusal, trebble damages to the party grieved, to be recovered with
Costs, in any of his Majesty's Courts of Record, at Westminster, as also the
sum of 1000 l. to any person that will sue for the same, in any of his
Majesty's Courts at Westminster, by any action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or
Information, wherein no Essoyn, Protection, or Wager of Law shall be allowed;
and being lawfully convicted of any such neglect or refusal, his or their
Bishopprick that shall be so convicted, shall become, ipso facto, void, as if
he or they were naturally dead, and he or they are hereby made incapable, and
disabled to have, hold, or receive the same, or any other Bishopprick or any
other Ecclesiastical Benefice whatsoever.

Yet this Notorious Bill had not the same accident with the first, but was read
a second time, and committed; wherein their Houses curiousity seems to have
led them, rather than any satisfaction they had in the matter, or hope of
amending it, For it died away, the Committee disdaining, or not daring
publicly to enter upon it, some indeed having, as is said, once attempted it
in private, and provided R, S. a fit Lawyer for the Chairman, but were
discovered. And thus let these two Bills perish like unseasonable and monstrous
Births, but the Legitimate issue of the Conspirators, and upon the hopes of
whose growth they had built the succession of their Projects.

Hence-forward another Scene opens: The House of Commons through the whole
remainder of this Session, falling in with some unanimity, and great Vigor
against the French Counsels. Of which their Proceedings it were easy to assign
the more intimate Causes; but they having therein also acted according to the
Public Interest, we will be glad to suppose it to have been their only Motive.
That business having occasioned many weighty Debates in their House, and
frequent Addresses to his Majesty, deserves a more particular account, Nor has
it been difficult to recever it, most of them being unwilling to forget any
thing they have said to the purpose, but rather seeking to divulge what they
think was bravely spoken; and that they may be thought somebody, often
arrogating where they cannot be disproved, another man's Conception to their own
honor.

March the 6th. 1676, the House being resolved into a Committee of the whole
House to consider of Grievances, Resolved. That a Commitee be appointed to
prepare an Addrsse, to represent unto his Majesty the danger of the Power of
France, and to desire that his Majesty by such Alliances as he shall think fit,
do secure his Kingdoms, and quiet the fears of his People, and for
preservation of the Spanish Netherlands. May it please your Majesty.
WE your Majesty's most Loyal Subjects, the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, in
Parliament Assembled, find our selves Obliged in duty and faithfulness to your
Majesty, and in discharge of the Trust reposed in us, by those vvhomvve
represent, Most bumbly to Offer to your Majesty's consideration, that the
minds of your People are much disquieted, with the Manifest dangers arising
to your Majesty, by the Growth and Power of the French King; Especially by
the acquisition already made and the further progress like to be made by him,
in the Spanish Nether-lands, in the preservation and security whereof, we
humbly Conceive the Intrest of your Majesty, and the safety of your People, are
highly concerned; and therefore we most humbly beseech your Majesty, to take
the same into your Royal care, and to strengthen your self with such
strictter Alliances, as may secure your Majesty's Kingdoms and secure and
preserve the said Spanish Nether-lands and thereby quiet the Minds of your
Majesty's People.

This Address was presented to his Majesty the 16. of March, and his Majesty's
Answer was Reported to the House of Commons, by Mr. Speaker, the 17, of March,
which was thus.

That his Majesty was of the Opinion of his two Houses of Parliament; That the
Preservation of Flanders was of great consequence; And that he would use all
means in his power for the Safety of his Kingdoms.

A motion was therefore made for a second Address upon the same subject, on
Monday March, 26th. which here follows.

May it please your Majesty,
WE your Majesty's most loyal Subjects, the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses in
Parliament Assembled, do with unspeakable joy and Comfort, present our humble
thanks to your Majesty, for your Majesty's gracious acceptance of our late
Address, and that your Majesty was pleased in your Princely Wisdom to express
your Concurrance and Opinion with your two Houses in reference to the
Preservation of the Spanish Netherlands.

And we do with most carnest and repeated desires implore your Majesty, That
you would be pleased to take timely care to prevent those dangers that may
arise to these Kingdoms by the great Power of the French King, and the
Progress he daily makes in those Netherlands and other places.

And therefore that your Majesty would not defer the entering into such
Allyances as may obtain those ends, and in case it shall happen, that in
pursuance of such Alliances, your Majesty should be engaged in a War with the
French King, we do hold our solves obliged, and do with all humility and
cheerfulness assure your Majesty, That we your most loyal Subject, shall
alvvayes be ready upon your signification thereof in Parliament, fully, and
from time to time, to assist your Majesty with such Aids and Supplies as; by
the Divine assillance, may enable your Majesty to prosecute the same with
Success.

All which we do most humbly offer to your Majesty as the unanimous sense and
desire of the whole Kingdom.

March 30th. 1677.
IT was alleged against this Address, that to press the King to make further
Alliances with the Confederates against the French King, was in effect to press
him to a War, that being the direct and unavoidable Consequence thereof.

That the Consideration of War was most proper for the King, who had the
intelligence of Foreign Affairs, and knew the Arcana Imperii.

That it was a dangerous thing hastily to Incite the King to a War.

That our Merchant-Ships and Effects would be presently seized by the French
King within his Dominions, and thereby he would acquire the value of, it may be
near, a million to enable him to maintain the War against us.

That he would fall upon our Plantations and take Plunder and annoy them.

That he would send out abundance of Capers, and take and disturb all our
Trading Ships in these Seas, and the Mediterranean.

That we had not so many Ships of War as he, and those thirty which were to be
built with the 600000 l. now given, could not be finished in two years.

That we had not Naval Stores and Ammunition, etc. sufficient for such a
Purpose, and if we had, yet the season of the Year was too far advanced to set
out a considerable Fleet: and we could not now lay in Beef, Pork, etc.

That when we were engaged in a War, the Dutch would likely slip Collar, leave
us in the War, and so Gain to themselves the singular advantage of sole trading
in Peace, which is the Privilege we now enjoy, and should not be weary of.

That it was next to Impossible, to make Alliances with the several parties as
might be expected, such and so various were the several Interests, and
crosse-biasses, of and amongst the Emperor, the Spaniard, the Dane, the Dutch,
the Brandenburgh, and the several lesser Princes of Germany, and others.

That we might easily enter into a War, but it would be hard to find the way
out of it, and a long War would be destructive to us; for though the Emperor,
French, Spaniard, etc. use to maintain War for many years, yet a Trading Nation
as England is, could not endure a long-winded War.

On the other side, it was said;

That they did not Address for making War but making Leagues, which might be a
means to prevent War.

That the best way to preserve Peace, was to be in a prepration for War

That admitting a War should ensue thereupon, as was not unlikely, yet that
would tend to our peace, and safety in conclusion; for it must be agreeded,
that if the Power of France were not reduced, and brought to a more equal
Balance with its neighbors, we must fight or submit, first or last.

That it was Commonly the Fate of those that kept themselves Neutral, when
their Neighbors were at War, to become a prey to the Conqueror.

That now or never was the Crititall season to make War upon the French,
whilst we may haveso great auxiliary conjunction; and if it were a dangerous
and formidable thing to Encounter him now, how much more would it be so when
this Opportunity was lost, the Consederacy disbanded, a Peace made on the
otherside the water, and we left alone to withstand him single.

That as to his seizing our Merchants Effects, the Case was (...) the same and)
no other now than it would be three years hence, or at any time when ever the
War should commence.

That as to our Plantations and our Traders, we must consider, though the
French was Powerful, he was not Omnipotent, and we might as well defend them as
the Dutch do theirs by Guards, Convoys, etc. and chiefly when the French have
so many Enemies, and we shall have so many Friends, as no other time is like to
afford.

That they were sorry to hear we had not Ships, Stores, etc. equal to the
French, and to our Occasions, and hoped it would appear to be otherwise.

That the Season was not so far spent, but that a Competent Fleet might be set
out this Summer, and that however Deficient we might be in this kind, the Dutch
were forward and ready to make an effectual Supplement in that behalf.

That howsoever ill and false some men might esteem the Dutch, yet Interest
will not lie, and it is so much their Interest to confine and bring down the
French, that it is not to be apprehended, but they will steadily adhere to
every Friend and every Alliance they shall join with for that purpose.

That however cross and diverse the several Confederates and their Interests
were, yet a common Alliance may be made with them against the French, and
as well as they have Allied themselves together, as well may the Alliance be
extended to another, to be added to them, viz. the King of England.

That a Numerous and Vigorous conjunction against him is the way to shorten the
work, whereas if he should hereafter attaque us singly, he would continue the
War on us as long as he pleased, till he pleased to make an end of it and us
together, by our final destruction.

That if now we should neglect to make Alliances, we had no cause to expect to
have one Friend, when the French should make Peace beyond Sea, and single us
out for Conquest; for all that are conjoined against the French, are provoked
and disobliged, by reason of the Great Number of English, Scotch and Irish,
which have served, and do still serve the French, and it was proved at the Bar
of this House within this fortnight, That 1000 men were levied in Scotland, and
sent to the French service in January last, and some of them by force and
pressing.

Also that it was understood and resented, that we had mainely contributed to
this over grown Greatness of the French, by selling Dunkirk, that special Key
and Inlet of Flanders, by making War on the Dutch, in 1665. Whereupon the
French Joined with the Dutch, under which shelter, and opportunity, the French
lying laid the foundation of this Great Fleet he now has, buying then many
Great Ships of the Dutch, and obuilding many others: as to which, but for that
occasion, the Dutch would have denied and hindered him, by not observing the
Tripple League, and by our making a Joint War with the French against the
Dutch, in which, the French yet proceeds and Tryumphs. So that in this respect
we have much to redeem and retreive.

That enmnity against the French, was the thing wherein this divided Nation did
unite, and this occasion was to be laid hold on, as an opportunity of moment
amongst our selves.

That the bent and weight of the Nation, did lean this way, and that was a
strong Inducement and Argument to Incline their Representatives.

That it had been made appear, and that in Parliament, that upon the Balance
of the French Trade, this Nation was detrimented yearly, 900000 l. Or a
Million, the value of the Goods Imported from France, annually so much
exceeding that of the Goods Exported hence thither, whereby it is evident, that
such a sum of the Treasure and money of the Nation was yearly Exhausted and
carried into France, and all this by unnecessary Wines, Silks, Ribbons,
Feathers, etc. The saving and retrenching of which Expense, and Exhaustion,
will in a Great Degree serve to maintain the Charg of a War.

That the present, was the best time for the purpose, and that this would give
Reputation to the Confederates, and Comfort and Courradge to our bestfriends
Imediately, and safety to our selves in futurity, against the Old perpetual
Enemy of England.

The second Address was presented to his Majesty, March the 30. and till the
11 of April they received no Answer. Insomuch that it became doubtful,
whether the money Bill, would be accepted or 10 and if the Commons made any
difficulty in passing them, unless they were first secured against the Frenuh
intrest, it seemed that the supply would be rejected, by the Conspirators good
will; And that even the building of Ships, how necessary soever, might rather
have been respited again, as it had in former Sessions, and for the whole long
Prorogation. But their House was far from such Obstinacy. And the news being
come of the taking both of Valenciennes and St. Omar, with the defeat of the
Prince of Orange at Mont-Cassel, so that now there was no further danger of
preventing or Interrupting the successes of the French-King, this Campagn, at
last therefore upon the 11, of April, this following answer was offerred to
their House, from his Majesty by Master Secretary Coventry.

C. R.

HIs Majesty having considered your last, Address, and finding some late
alteration in affairs abroad, thinks it necessary to put you in mind, That the
only way to prevent the dangers which may arise to these Kingdoms, must be by
putting his Majesty timely in a Condition to make such fitting preparation, as
may enable him to do what may be most for the security of them* And if for
this reason you shall desire to fit any longer time, his Majesty is content you
may Adjourn now before Easter, and meet again suddenly after, to ripen this
matter, and to perfect some of the most necessary Bills now depending.

Given at our Court at White Hall, the 11. of April. 1677.
Somewhat was said on both these matters, but the Greater debate of them, was
Adjorned till next day, and then reassumed.

Then it was moved that the House should Adjorn till after Easter, and then
meet again, with a Resolution to enable the King to make such preprations as
should be thought necessary, and also pass some necessary Bills for the
Kingdom, which if they did not, the blame of the neglect, must rest upon
themselves, and it would be observed, they had not sat to any effect this four
years; and that now they had a session, and had given a Million, they did take
little care to redress Greviances, or pass Good Laws, for the People, and
that they should not be able to give any account of themselves to their
Neighbors in the Country, unless they should face them down, that there was
no Greviance or Mischeife in the Nation to be Redressed, and that the King had
stopped their mouths, and laid it to them by offering to them to sit longer.

Others said, they should perfect the two money Bills, and give the King Ease,
and take another time to consider further of Religion, Liberty, and Property,
especially seeing all Bills now depending, would be kept on foot, the Intended
Recesse, being to be but an Adjournment, that they had very good Laws already,
and would give their shares in any new ones, they were making, to be in the
Country at the present time, that it was necessary for them to be there the
10th. of May, to Execute the Act for 600000 l. etc. And some time was to be
allowed for their Journyes, and rest after it, that the passing some necessary
Bills, came in the end of the Kings Message, and by the by; For his Majesty
says, That if for this Reason, that is, for making of preparations, etc, they
should desire to sit longer, and if so, then also take the opportunity of
passing such Bills. So the sense and inclination of the House was to rise
before Easter, as had been before intimated and expected.

Then they fell upon the main consideration of the Message, and to make a
present Answer.

The Secretary and other Ministers of State, said, that the Alteration of
Affairs which his Majesty took notice of, was the success of the French
against the Prince of Orange, in the Battle, and their proceeding to take
Cambray, and St. Omars.

Thus by Inches or rather great measures they were taking in Flanders, which
was reckoned the Out-work of England, as well as Holland) and they said
plainly, nothing could put his Majesty in a condition to make fitting
preparations to preserve the Kingdom, but ready money.

To this it was answered, that it was not proper nor usual to ask money at
the end of a Session, and it was fit that Alliances should be first made, and
that they should Adjourn rather till that were done, for they ought not to give
money till they knew for what, and it was clearly spoken and made out to them,
that if there were no Summers War, there was money enough given already.

It was replied, That they had not direction from his Majesty as to what he had
resolved, and it might be not convenient to discover and publish such things,
but they would offer their Guess and Aim at some things, if there were any
Approaches toward War, though they ought to consider and compute like him in
the Gospel, whether with such a force they could encounter a King that came
against them with such a force, they should think of providing a Guard for the
Isle of Wight, sersey, Carnsey and Ireland, and secure our Coasts, and be in a
defensive posture on the Land, we might be Attaqued in a night.

Also there would be a necessity of an extraordinary Summer Guard at Sea, his
Majesty did use to apply 400000 l. vearly out of the Customs upon his Fleets,
(the very harbor Expense) which in Anchorage, Mooring, Docks, and Repaires,
etc. was 110000 l. per annum, and he was now setting forth 40 Ships for the
Summer Guard, but if there were a disposition toward War, there must be more
Ships or at least those must be more fully manned, and more strongly
appointed, and furnished the more, especially if the Breach were sudden, for
otherwise, our Trading Ships at Sea, as well as those Ships and Goods in the
French Ports, would be exposed. Now it is reasonable that the remander which
was above and beyond the Kings ordinary Allowance, should be supplied by the
Parliament, and the Extraordinary preparations of this kind for the present,
could not amount to less than 200000 l.

It was answered, that it was a Mealancholy thing to think Jersey, etc. Were
not well enough secured, at least as well as in the year 1665, when we alone
had War with the French and Dutch too, and yet the Kings Revenue was less then
than now: That the Revenue of Ireland was 50000 l. per annum, beyond the
Establishment (that is, the Civil, Military; and all payments of the
Government) which if not sent over hither, but disposed there, would suffice to
defend that Kingdom, and they remember that about a month ago, they were told
by some of these Gentlemen, that the French King would not take more Towns in
Flanders if he might have them, but was drawing off to meet the Germans, who
would be in the field in May, and therefore it was strange, he should be
represented now as ready to Invade us, and that we must have an Army raised and
kept on our Islands and Land. No they would not have that, it would be a Great
matter in the Balance, if the Kings Subjects were withdrawn from the French
service, and applied on the other side, and tell that were done, that we did
continue to be Contributary to the Greatness of France. But a Fleet would
protect our whole. Ships are the defense of an Island and thereby we may hope
to keep at a distance, and not apprehend, or prepare to meet him at our Doors,
he Learns by Sicily what it is to Invade an Island, he is not like to attempt
an Invasion of us, till he has some Masterie at Sea, which is Impossible for
him to have so long as he is diverted and employed at Land in the
Mediterranean, and in the West Indies, as he is.

And as to our Merchants Ships and Goods, they are in no more danger now then
they were in any War whenever. Nay, there was more expectation of this, then
there was of the last War, for the first notice we or the Dutch had of that
Breach, was the Attempt upon their Smyrna Fleet.

Also it is observed, that what was said a fortnight ago (that the season was
too far advanced to lay in Be^f, and it would stink) was admitted to be a
mistake, for that now it was urged, that a greater and better appointed Fleet
must be furnished out, but still it was insisted on, that they were in the
dark, his Majesty did not speak out, that he would make the desired Alliances
against the growth of France, and resolve with his Parliament to maintain them,
and so long as there was any coldness or reservedness of this kind, they had no
clear grounds to grant money for preparations. His Majesty was a Prince of that
Goodness and ^are, toward his People, that none did distrust him, but there
was a distrust of some of his Ministers, and a Jealousy that they were under
French Influences; and Complaints and Addresses had been made against them; and
upon the discourse of providing for the safety of the Nation, it being said we
might be secured by the Guarranty of the General Peace, it was reflected on as
a thing most pernicious to us, and that our money and endeavors could not be
worse applied, than to procure that Peace. Articles are not to be relied on.
All that they desired was, that his Majesty and his People Unanimously, Truly,
Sincerely and Thoroughly declare and engage in this business, with a mutual
confidence speaking out on both sides, and this, and nothing but this, would
discharge and extinguish all jealousies.

But it was Objected, It was not convenient to discover his Majesty's secret
purposes in a Public Assembly, it might be too soon known abroad, and there
was no reason to distrust his Majesty, but that being enabled, he would prepare
and do all things expedient for the Kingdom.

It was answered, That it was usual for Foreign Ministers to get notice of the
Councils of Princes, as the Earl of Bristol Ambassador in Spain, in the last
part of King James's Reign, procured Coppies, and often the sight of the
Originals of of Dispatches, and Cabinet papers of the King of Spain. But
acknowledging that his Majesty's Councels cannot be penetrated by the French,
yet the things would in a short time discover themselves: besides they said,
they did not much desire secresy, for let the King take a great Resolution, and
put himself at the Head of his Parliament and People in this weighty and worthy
Cause of England, and let a flying Post carry the news to Paris, and let the
French King do his worst.

His Majesty never had nor never will have cause to distrust his People. In
1667, in confidence of our Aid, he made a League without advice of Parliament
(commonly called the Tripple League) which was for the Interest of England, and
whereby his Majesty became the Arbiter of Cristendom, and in the Name and upon
the Account of that, the Parliament gave him several Supplies.

In 1672, He made War without the Advice, of Parliament, whith War the
Parliament thought not for the Interest of England to continue, yet even
therein they would not leave him, but gave him 1200000 l. to carry himself on
and out of it.

How much more are they concerned and obliged to supply and assist him in these
Alliances (and War if it ensue) which are so much for the Interest of England,
and entered into by the pressing Advice of Parliament.

We hope his Majesty will declare himself in earnest, and we are in earnest,
having his Majesty's heart with us, Let his hand Rot off that is not stretched
out for this Affair, we will not stick at this or that sum or thing, but we
will go with his Majesty to all Extremities.

We are now afraid of the French King, because he has great force, and
extraordinary thinking men about him, which manage his affairs to a wonder,
but we trust his Majesty will have his Business managed by thinking men, that
will be provident and careful of his Interest, and not suffer him to pay, Cent.
per Cent. more than the things are worth, that are taken up and used, and if
the work be entered upon in this manner, we hope England will have English
success with France, as it is in Bowling, if your Bowl be well set out, you may
think, and it will go to the Mark.

Were the thing clear and thoroughly undertaken, there would be less reason to
dispute of time; there never was a Council but would sit on Sunday, or any day
for such Public Work.

In fine, they said, the business must lie at one door or another, and they
would not for any thing, that it should flat in their hands.

And although they should hope in an Exigence his Majesty would lend to his
People, who had given so much to him, yet they said they could not leave him
without providing him a sum of money, as much as he could use between this and
some convenient time after Easter, when he might, if he please command their
full attendance, by some public Notification, and this was the mentioned sum
of 200000 l. The Expedient they provided for doing this, was adding a Borrowing
Clause to the Bill for almost 600000 l. (such an one as was in the Poll Bill)
the Effect of which is to enable his Majesty presently to take up, on the
Credit of this Bill 200000 l. ready money at 7 l. per Cent. per annum Interest.

And this they said might now be done, though the Bill were passed by them, and
also (save that they had made the above mentioned amendment) by the Lords, for
that Poll Bill was explained by another Act passed a few days after, in the
same session. But in Hackvvells Modus tenendi Parli. page 173, was a more
remarkable President, and exact in the Point.

But after some Discourse of setting loose part of this 600000 l. etc. they
reflected that this 600000 l. etc. was appropriate for the building of Ships,
and they would not have this appropriation unhinged by any means, and thereupon
resolved to annex the borrowing Clause to the Bill for continuing the
additional duty of Excise, for three years, which was not yet passed; against
which it was Objected, That it was given for other purposes, viz. to give the
King ease to pay Interest for his Debts, etc. But on the contrary it was
answered, that the Preamble speaks not of his Debts, but His extraordinary
Occasions; But besides, they did not intend to withdraw so much of their Gift,
but did resolve to re-emburse his Majesty the 200000 l. so much of it as he
should lay out in extraordinary Preparations.

But then it was Objected, that this would be a kind of denouncing of War, and
that 200000 l. was a miserable, mean and incompetent sum to defend us against
those whom we should provoke.

But it was Answered, That it was but an Earnest of what they intended, and
that they were willing to meet again and give further Supplies; Besides the
French King was not Formidable for any great hurt that he could do us during
the Confederacy, there were several Princes of Germany, as the Archbishop of
Metz and Triers, the Palsgrave, the Duke of Nevvburgh, etc. which are at War
with him and are safe; and yet they are much more weak and inconsiderable than
we; but they are defended not by their own strength, but by the whole
Confederacy.

The Debate concluded in Voting the following Answer, which was presented to
his Majesty by the Speaker of the whole House, Friday April the 13th.

May it Please your Majesty.
WE your Majesty's most dutiful and Loyal subjects the Commons in this
present Parliament Assembled, do with, Great satisfaction of mind, Observe the
regard your Majesty is pleased to Express to our former Addresses, by
Intimating to us the late alterations of Affairs abroad, and do return our
most humble thanks, for your Majesty's most Gracious Offer made to us thereupon
in your late message: and having taken a serious deliberation of the same, and
of the preparation your Majesty has therein Intimated to us were fitting to
be made, in order to those public ends, we have for the present provided a
security in a Bill for the Additional duty of Excise, upon which your Majesty
may raise the sum of 200000 l. And if your Majesty shall think fit to call us
together again for this purpose, in some short time after Easter, by any
public signification of your pleasure, commanding our Attendance; we shall at
our next meetting not only be ready to re-imburse your Majesty what Sums of
money shall be expended upon such Extraordinary preparations as shall be made
in pursuance of our former Addresses; but shall likewise with thankful
hearts proceed then, and at all other times, to furnish your Majesty with so
large proportion of assistance and supplies upon this Occasion, as may give
your Majesty and the whole world, an ample Testimony of our Loyalty' and
affection to your Majesty's service and as may enable your Majesty by the help
of Almighty God, to maintain sucbstricter Alliances as you shall have entered
into against all Opposition whatsoever.

Easter Mondy, April 19th.
Another Message in writing from his Majesty, was delivered by Secreatary
Williamson to the House of Commons (Viz.)

C. R.

HIS Majesty having considered the Answer of this House to the last message
about enabling him to make fitting preparations for the security of these
Kingdoms, finds by it that they have only enabled him to borrow 200000 l. upon
a Fond given him for other uses. His Majesty desires therefore this House
should know, and he hopes they will always believe of him, that not only that
Fond, but any other within his Power shall be engaged to the utmost of his
power for the preservation of his Kingdoms; but as his Majesty's condition is
(which his Majesty doubts not but is as well known to this House as himself) he
must tell them plainly, that without the sum Six hundred thousand pounds, or
Credit for such a sum, upon new Fonds, it will not be possible for him to
speak or act those things which should answer the ends of their several
Addresses, without exposing the Kingdom to much Grearer danger: His Majstyes
does further acquaint you that having done his part, and laid the true state of
things before you, he will not be wanting to use the best means for the safety
of his People, which his presen Condition is Capable off.

Given at our Court at White Hall, April. 16. 1677.
There upon the House fell into present Consideration of an Answer, and in the
first place, it was Agreed to return Great thanks to his Majesty for his Zeal
for the safety of the Kingdom, and the hopes he had given them that he was
convinced and satisfied, so as he would speak and act according to what they
had desired, and they resolved to give him the utmost assurance, that they
would stand by him and said no man could be unwilling to give a fourth or third
part to save the residue. But they said they ought to consider that now they
were a very thine House, many of their Members being gone home, and that upon
such a Ground as they could not well blame them; for it was upon a presumption
that the Parliament should rise before Easter, as had been intimated from his
Majesty within this fortnight, and universally expected since, and it would be
un-Parliamentary, and very ill taken by their Fellow Members, if in this their
absence they should steal the Privilege of granting money, and the Thanks
which are given for it; That this was a National business if ever any were, and
therefore fit to be handled in a full National Representative, and if it had
hitherto seemed to go up-hill, there was a greater cause to put the whole
shoulder to it, and this would be assuring, animating, and satisfactory to the
whole Nation. But they said it was not their mind to give or suffer any delay,
they would desire a Recess but for three weeks or a month at most.

And the 200000 l. which they had provided for present use, was as much as
could be laid out in the mean time, tho his Majesty had 600000 l. more ready
told upon the Table.

And therefore they thought it most reasonable and advisable that his Majesty
should suffer them to Adjorn for such a time; in the Interim of which his
Majesty might if he pleased, make use of the 200000 l. and might also complete
the desired Alliances, and give notice by Proclamation to all Members to attend
at the time appointed.

The Answer is as follows.

May it please your Majesty.
WE your Majesty's most Loyal Subjects the Commons in this present Parliament
Assembled, having considered your Majesty's last Message, and the gracious
expressions there^n contained, for employing your Majesty's whole Revenue at
any time to raise money for the preservation of your Majesty's Kingdoms; find
great cause to return our most humble thanks to your Majesty for the same, and
to desire your Majesty to rest assured, that you shall find as much duty and
affection in us, as can be expected from a most Loyal People, to their most
gracious Sovereign, and whereas your Majesty is pleased to signify to us, that
the sum of 200000 l. is not sufficient without a further Supply, to enable
your Majesty to Speak or Act those things which are desired by your People; We
humbly take leave to acquaint your Majesty, that many of our Members (being
upon an expectation of an Adjournment before Easter) are gone into their
several Countries, we cannot think it Parliamentary in their absence to take
upon us the granting of money, but do therefore desire your Majesty to be
pleased that this House may Adjourn it self for such short time, before the sum
of 200000 l. can be expended, as your Majesty shall think sit, and by your
Royal Proclamation to command the attendance of all our Members at the day of
Meeting; by which time we hope your Majesty may have so formed your Affairs,
and fixed your Alliances, in pursuance of our former Addresses, that your
Majesty may be graciously pleased to Impart them to us in Parliament; and we
no vvayes doubt but at our next Assembling, your Majesty will not only meet
with a Compliance in the Supply your Majesty desires, but vvithall such
farther Assistance as the posture of your Majesty's Affairs shall require; in
confidence whereof we hope your Majesty will be encouraged in the mean time
to speak and act such things as your Majesty shall judge necessary for
attaining those great ends, as ye have formerly represented to your Majesty.

And now the money Bill being Passed both Houses, and the French having by the
surrender of Cambray also to them, perfected the Conquest of this Campaign, as
was projected, and the money for further preparations having been asked, only
to gain a pretense for refusing their Addresses, the Houses were adjourned
April the 16th, till the 21 of May next. And the rather, becuase at the same
moment of their rising, a Grand French Ambassador was coming over. For all
things betwixt France and England moved with that punctual Regularity, that it
was like the Harmony of the Spheres, so Consonant with themselves, although we
cannot hear the music.

There landed immediately after the Recesse, the Duke of Crequy, the
Archbishop of Rheims, Monsieur Barrillon, and a Train of three or four
hundred persons of all Qualities, so that the Lords Spiritual and Temporal of
France, with so many of their Commons, meeting the King at Nevv-market, it
looked like another Parliament, And that the English had been Adjourned, in
order to their better Reception. But what Address they made to his Majesty, or
what Acts they passed, has not yet been Published. But those that have been in
discourse were,

An Act for continuing his Majesty's subjests in the service of France.

An Act of abolition of all Claymes and demandes from the subjests of France,
on Account of all Prizes made of the English at Sea, since the year 1674 till
that day, and for the future.

An Act for marring the Children of the Royal Family to Protestants Princes.

An Act for a further supply of French money.

But because it appears not that all these, and many others of more secret
nature, passed the Royal Assent, it suffices thus far to have mentioned them.
Only it is most certain, that although the English Parliament was kept aloof
from the business of War, Peace, and Alliance, as Improper for their
Intermedling, and Presumptuous. Yet with these 3 Estates of France all these
things were Negotiated and transacted in the Greatest confidence. And so they
were Adjourned from Nevv-Market to London, and there continued till the return
of the English Parliament, when they were dismissed home with all the signs
and demonstrations of mutual (...).

And for better Preparations at home, before the Parliament met, there was
Printed a second Packet of Advice to the men of Shaftsbury, the first had been
sold up and down the Nation, and Transmitted to Scotland, where 300 of them
were Printed at Edinburgh: and 40 Copyes sent from thence to England fariely
bound up and Gilded, to show in what great Estmiation it was in that kingdom;
But this, the sale growing heavy, was dispersed as a Donative all over England,
and it was an Incivilty to have enquired from whence they had it, but it was a
Book though it came from Hell, that seemed as if it dropped from Heaven, among
men, some Imagined by the weight and the wit of it, that it proceeded from the
Two Lords, the Black and the White, who when their care of the late Sitting was
over, had given themselves Caviere, and after the Triumphs of the Tongue, had
Establish those Trophes of the Pen, over their Imprisoned Adversaries. But that
had been a thing unworthy of the Frechvvellian Generosity, or Trerisian
Magnanimity; And rather besits the mean malice of the same Vulgar Scribler,
hired by the Conspirators at so much a sh^t, or for day wages; and when that is
spent, he shall for less money Blaspheme his God, Revile his Prince, and Belie
his Country, if his former Books have Omitted any thing of those Arguments; and
shall Curse his own Father into the Bargain.

Monday, May 21. 1677.
The Parliament met according to their late Adjornment, on, and from April
16th. to May, 21, 1677.

There was no speech from the King to the Parliament, but in the House of
Commons.

This Meeting was opened with a verbal message from his Majesty, delivered by
Secretary Coventry, wherein his Majesty acquainted the House, that having
according to their desire in their Answer to his late Message April 16th.
driected their Adjournment to this time, because they did allege it to be
unparliamentary to grant Supplies when the House was so thin, in expectation of
a speedy Adjournment; and having also Issued out his Proclamation of summons to
the end there might be a full House, he did now expect they would forthwith
enter upon the consideration of his last message, and the rather, because he
did intend there should be a Recesse very quickly.

Upon this it was moved, That the Kings last Message (of April 16.) And the
Answer thereto should be Read and they were read accordingly.

Thereupon, after a long silence, a discourse began about their expectation,
and necessity of Alliances.

And particularly, it was intimated that an Alliance with Holland was most
expedient, for that we should deceive our selves if we thought we could be
defended otherwise, we alone could not withstand the French, his purse and
power was too great. Nor could the Dutch withstand him. But both together might.

The general discourse was, that they came with an expectation to have
Allyances declared, and if they were not made so as to be imparted, they were
not called or come to that purpose they desired, and hoped to meet upon, and if
some few days might ripen them, they would be content to Adjorn for the mean
time.

The Secretary and others said, these Allyances were things of great weight,
and (...), and the time had been short, but if they were finished, yet it was
not convenient to publish them, till the King was in a readiness and posture
to prosecute and maintain them, till when his Majesty could not so much as
speak out, insisting on his words, That without 600000 l. it would not be
possible for him to speak or Act those things which should answer the ends of
their several Addresses, without exposing the Kingdom to much greater dangers.

By others it was observed and said, That they met now upon a public notice by
Proclamation, which Proclamation was in pursuance of their last Address, in
which Address they desire the King they may Adjourn for such time, as with in
which (they hoped) Allyances might be fixed, so as to be imparted, they
mentioned not any particular day, If his Majesty had not thought this time long
enough for the purpose, he might have appointed the Adjournment for a longer
time; or he might have given notice by Proclamation that upon this account they
should re-adjourn to a yet longer time.

But surely, the time has been sufficient, especially considering the readiness
of the Parties to be Allied with; it is five weeks since our (...). He that was
a minister chiefly employed in making the Tripple ^ague, has since published in
print that, that League was made in sive days, and yet that might well be
thought a matter more tedious and long then this; For when people are in
profound peace (as the Dutch then were) it was not easy to embark them
presently into Leagues. They had time and might take it for greater
deliberation. But here the people are in the distress of War, and need our
Alliance, and therefore it might be contracted with ease and expidition, were
we as forward as they.

Neither is five weeks the limit of the time, that has been for this purpose,
for it is about ten weeks since we first Addressed for these Allyances.

And as to the Objection, That it was not fit to make them known before
preparation were made, they said, the force of that lay in this, that the
French would be allarmed. But they answered that the asking and giving money
for this purpose would be no less an Allarm. For the French could not be
ignorant of what Addresses and Answers have passed; and if money be granted to
make warlike preperations, for the end therein specified, it is rather a
greater discovery and denouncing of what we intended against the French.

Grot^us (de jure Belli and Pacis) says, If a Prince make extraordinary
preparations, a neighbor Prince who may be affected by them may expostulate,
and demand an account of the purpose for which they are intended, and if he
receive not satisfaction, that they are not to be used against him, it is a
cause of War on his part, so as that Neighbor may begin if he think fit, and
is not bound to stay till the first preparer first begin actual Hostility, and
this is agreeable to reason, and the nature of Government.

Now the French King, is a vigilant Prince, and has wise Ministers about him,
upon which general account (tho we had not as we have seen an extraordinary
French Embassy here dureing our Recesse) we should suppose that the French King
has demanded an account of our Kings purpose, and whether the extraordinary
preparations that are begun and to be made are designed against him or not. In
which case his Majesty could give but one of three answers.

1. To say, They are not designed against him, and then his Majesty may
acquaint us with the same, and then there is no occasion of our giving money,

2. To say, They are designed against him, in which case his Majesty may very
well impart the same to us. For it were in vain to conceal it from us, to the
end that the French might not be allarmd, when it is before expressly told the
French, that the design was against him.

3. To give a doubtful answer. But that resolves into the second. For when a
Prince out of an apprehension that extraordinary preparations may be used
against him, desires a clear categoricall and satifactory answer concerning the
matter (as the manner of Princes is) a dubious answer does not at all satisfy
his inquiry, nor allay his jealousy; But, in that case it is, and is used, to
be taken and understood, that the forces are desined against him.

And if his Majesty have given no answer at all (which is not probable) it is
the same with the last.

So that this being so, by one means or other the French have the knowledge of
the Kings purpose, and if it be known to, or but guessed at by hem, why is it
concealed from his Parliament? Why this darkness toward us?

Besides we expect not so much good as we would, so long as we are afraid the
French should know what we are a doing.

In this state of uncertainty, and un^ipeness the House Adjourned to Wednesday
Morning nine a clo^k, (...) first ordered the Commit for the Bill for
recalling his Majesty's Subjects out of the service of the French King, to sit
this afternoon, which did sit accordingly, and went thorough the Bill,

Wednesday, May 23d. 1677.
His Majesty sent a Message for the House to attend him presently at the
Banqueting House in White Hall, where he made the following Speech to them.

Gentlemen,
I Have sent for you hither, that I might prevent those mistakes and distrusts
which I find some are ready to make, as if I had called you together, only to
get money from you, for other uses than you would have it employed. I do
assure you on the Word of a King, that you shall not repent any trust you
repose in me, for the safety of my Kingdoms; and I desire you to believe I
would not break my Credit with you, but as I have already told you, that it
will not be possible for me to speak or act those things which should answer
the ends of your several Addresses, without exposing my kingdoms to much
greater dangers, so I declare to you again, I will neither hazard my own
safety, nor yours, until I be in a better condition than I am able to put my
self, both to defend my Subjects and offend my Enemies.

I do further assure you, I have not lost one day since your last meeting, in
doing all I could for your desence; and I tell you plainly, it shall be your
fault and not mine if your Security be not sufficiently provided for.

The Commons returning to their House, and the Speech being there read, they
presently resolved to consider it, and after a little while resolved into a
Committee of the whole House, for the more full, free, and regular debate

The Secretary and others propounded the supplying the King, wherein they said
they did not press the House, but they might do as they pleased. But if it be
expected that Allyances be made, and made known, there must be 600000 l* raised
to make preperation before, for the king had declared that without it, it could
not be possible for him to speak or Act; he could not safely move a step
further. The king had the right of making Peace, War, and Leagues, as this
House has of giving money, he could not have money without them, nor they
Alliance without him. The king had considered this matter, and this was his
Judgment, That he ought by such a sum to be put into a posture to maintain
and prosecute his Alliance, before they could or should be declared, and truly
otherwise our nakedness and weakness would be exposed.

It Is true as has been Objected, the asking and giving money for this purpose,
would allarm as much as the declaring Alliance, but then it would defend too. A
Whip will allarm a wild Beast, but it will not defend the man, a Sword will
allarm the Beast too, but then it will also defend the man.

We know the King would strip himself to his shirt rather then hazard the
Nation. He has done much already, he has set out, and made ready to set out, 44
Ships, but they must be distributed to several places for Convoys, etc. Their
would need, it may be 40 more in a body. And it is difficult to get Seamen,
many are gone into the service of the French, Dutch, etc, The King is fain to
press now.

The King has not had any fruit of the 200000 l. credit provided him upon the
three years Excise, he has tried the City to borrow money of them, thereupon,
and my Lord Mayor returned answer, that he had endeavored but could not
encourage his Majesty to depend upon the City for it.

Several others, somewhat different, spoke to this effect. We should consider
in this case, as in the case of the Kings Letters, Pattents, Proclamations,
etc. If any thing in them be against Law and Reason, Lawyers and Courts, Judge
is void, and reckon it not to be said or doneby the King. For the King can do
no vvrong, tho his Counsel may. So we must look upon the Kings Speeches and
Messages as the product of Counsel, and therefore if any mistake be therein, it
must be imputed to the error of his Counsel, and it must be taken that the king
never said it. Now to apply certainly the treating and concluding of Alliances,
requirs, not a previous sum of money, however the kings Counsel may misinform.
They may be propounded and accepted, by the means of the Foreign Ministers,
even without an Embassy to be sent hence, and yet if that were requisite, it
were not an extraordinary charg.

Allyances may be made forthwith, and then money would be granted forthwith; If
they were declared to day, the 600000 l. should be given to morrow, and as
occasion should require.

And there is no fear but money would be found for this purpose, our own
Extravagancies would maintain a War.

The money which has been provided the King already this Session, is sufficient
for all Preparations that can possibly be made before these Allyances may be
made.

Forty Ships of ours with the help of the Dutch, are a good Defense against the
French at Sea, now he is so entangled with (...), the West Indies, etc, In the
Tripple League, it was stipulated, that forty of our Ships, and forty of the
Dutch, should be provided, and they were thought sufficient for the purpose.

If it were required that 40 more Ships should be s^t out, 600000 l is enough
to maintain and pay a whole year clear for the Carpenters work, and such like
as should presently be required, for the fitting them to go out a little money
will serve.

And surely this is the only preparation that can be meant, for if it should be
meant, that we ^ould fortisie the Land with (...), Garrisons, (...) Towns, etc.
it is not 6 millions will do it. But our strength, force and defense, is our
Ships, for the debate of this day it is as great and weighty as ever was any in
England it concerns our very being, and includes our Religion, Liberty and
Property; The door toward France must be shut and Guarded, for so long as it
is open our Treasure and Trade will creep out and their Religon creep in at
it, and this time is ou^ season, some mischief will be done us, and so there
will at any time when the War is begun, but now the least.

The French is not very dangerous to us, no^ to be much feared by us at this
present, but we ought to advise and act so now, as we may not fear or despair
hereafter when the French shall make peace beyond Sea, and likely he will make
Allyances with those People with whom we deferr to make them; How ripe and
great is ou^ Misery then?

The power and policy of the French is extraordinary, and his money Influences
round about him.

We are glad to observe upon what is said by and of the King, that his Majesty
agrees with us in the end, and we hope he will be convinced of the
reasonableness of the means, which is to make and follow these Allyances,
without which plainly we can give no account to our selves, or those we
represent, of giving money.

We have made several Addresses about some of the Kings Ministers, their
management, etc. Of which we have seen little fruit, Their have continually
almost to this hour gone out of England succors to France, of Men, Powder,
Ammunition, Ordnance, etc. Not to take into the matter, how far the Ministers
have been active or passive in this, nor to mention any other particulars, we
must say that unless the Ministers, or their minds are altered, we have no
reason to trust money in their hands, Though we declare we have no purpose to
arrign or attempt upon them, but would rather propose to them an easy way how
they might have Oblivion, nay, and the thanks of the People viz. That they
should endeavor and contend, who could do most to dispose the king to Comply
with this advice of his Parliament.

We think the prosecuting these Alliances, the only good use for which our
money can be employed, and therefore before we give, we would be secure it
should be applied to this purpose, and not by (...) ^lls be diverted to others.

This (...) Counsel of the Parliament, and no Cros^ other counsel is to be
(...) or Trusted, for attaining these great advices which the King and
Parliament are (...).

To part with money before Allyances are made, is needless and to no purpose,
at best it would be the way to spend that money before hand, in vain, which we
shall need hereafter, when we shall be forced to enter into this defense against
France.

It would be like an error committed in the late Kings time, and which looks
as if men had given Counsel on purpose to destroy that Good King, he had by the
care and faithfulness of Bishop Juxton and others, Collected and preserved a
good sum of money before the Scottish Rebellion, in One thousand Six hundred
Thirty nine, upon that Rebellion he was advised to raise an Army at Land, which
indeed was necessary, But he was likewise advised to set out several of his
great Rate (...), this appeared in the papers of Sir Robert (...) Office, and
may there be seen still, if the Papers are not (...). A man (...) not tell to
what end this advise was given, unless to spend the Kings money, for the
Admiralty of Scotland is not now, and much less then was so considerable, as
to require any such force against it. And if the design were to hinder their
Co^erce and succors by Sea, the charg of one of those great Ships might have
been divided and applied to the setting out five or six less Ships, each of
which was capable of doing as much for that service, as such a great one, and
could keep out at Sea longer.

It is a plain case, unless the power of France be lowred we cannot be safe,
without Conjunction with other Confederates, it cannot be done. The question
is, whether the present be the proper time for the work. Certainly it is, there
is a happy Confederation against the French, which we cannot so well hope to
have continued without our coming into it, much less can we hope to recover or
recruite it, if once broken. The very season of the year favors the business.
It is proper and safe to begin with the French in the summer, now he is engaged
and not at Leisure, whereas in Winter when the Armies are ^wn out of the Field
he will be able to apply himself to us.

As to the Citizens not advancing money upon the late cerdit, we are informed
they were never regularly or effectually asked, my Lord Major indeed was spoken
to, and perhaps some of the Aldermen, but all they are not the City, he sent
about curiously to some of the Citizens, to know if they would lend, of which
they took little or no notice, it being not agreeable to their way and usage,
for the custom in such cases has always been, that some Lord of the Council did
go down (...) ^he Common Counsel, which is the Representative body of the
City, and there propound the matter.

Besides in this particular case the Citizens generally asked the same question
we do: are the Alliances made, and said if they were made they would lend
money, but if not, they saw no cause for it.

Philip the second of Spain made an observation in his Will, or some last
Memorial, and it is since published in Print by Monsieur, he observes the vanity
of any Princes aspiring at the universal Monarchy, for that it naturally made
the rest of the world jointly his enemies, but ambition blinds men, suffers
them not to look back on such Experiences. But this observation shows what is
natural for others to do in such a case, and that the way to repel and break
such a design, is by their universal confederation.

Philip the Second was most capable of making this Observation, for in his
hands p^ed the Spanish Design of the Universal Monarchy, and that chiefly by
reason of the Conjunction of the English and Dutch against him.

In the process of this debate, Gentlemen did more particularly explain
themselves, and propound to Address their design to the King, for a League
offensive and defensive, with the Dutch against the French power.

Against which a specious Objection was made, That the Dutch, were already
treating with the French, and 'twas like they would slip Collar, make a
separate Peace for themselves and leave us engaged in a War with France.

To which was Answered, That there was no just fear of that, the Dutch were
Interessed in repressing the Power of France as well as we, and they knew their
Interest; It was reasonable for them to say, If England, which is as much
concerned in this danger, will not assist us, we will make the best terms we
can for our selves, there is yet a Seam of Land between the French and us, we
may Trade by or under them, etc.

But if England will join with the Dutch, they cannot find one syllable of
reason to desert the Common Cause.

They have observed a propensity in the People of England to help them, but not
in the Couurt of England. If they can find that the Court does heartily join,
it will above all things oblige and confirm them.

In One thousand six hundred sixty seven, when the Dutch were in Peace and
Plenty, when Flanders was a greater Bullwork to them, for the French had not
pierced so far into it, and when the direction of their affairs was in a hand
of in^ enmity to the Crown of England (John de Wit) yet (...) the Interest did
so far Govern him and them, as to en^ (...) Tripple League, against the growth
and power of (...) more, and most certainly therefore now (...) and weakened by
a War, and stand in need of our help, now the French have approached nearer the
b^ink of their Country, and are increased in Naval force to the danger of their
Trade and Navigation, and now their affairs are chiefly directed by a kinsman
of the Crown of England, the Prince of Orange, they cannot deflect or start
from a League they make with us against our Common Enemy.

It was moved, that there might be a League Offensive and Defensive with Spain
and the Dutch, and other convenient Allyances with the rest of the
Confederates, but the particular concerning Spain, was retracted and laid aside
by the general Discourse of the Members to this purpose, We do covet an
Alliance with Spain above others, for that they are Owners of the Netherlands,
for whose preservation we have Addressed, that it is with Spain that we have
the most, if not the only profitable Trade, and the Spaniards are good, gallant
and sure Friends. But they are remote, and we know not whether there are full
powers here or at Brussels for this matter, and to wait for their coming from
Madrid would make Church-work, whereas we need the swiftest expedition.

Therefore they Voted their Address to be particular and expressly for such a
League with the Dutch, and as to the Spaniards together with the other
Confederates in general.

This passed with very general consent, there was an extraordinary full House,
and upon putting the question, there were but two negative Voices to it.

There were more ordinary particulars appointed to be in the Address, but no
contest or debate about them.

The Vote was as follows;

Resolved
THat an Address be made to the King, That his Majesty would be pleased to
enter into a League, offensive and defensive, with the Sates General of the
Vinited Provinces, and to make such other Alliances with others of the
Confederates, as his Majesty shall think ^it, against the growth and power of
the French King, and for the preservation of the Spanish Nether-Lands, and that
a Commit be appointed to dravv up the Address, with reasons why this House
cannot comply with his Majestics Speech, until such Alliances be (...) into,
and further shevving the necessity of the speedy making such Alliances, and
when such Alliances are made, giving his Majesty Assurance of speedy and
cheerful supplies, from time to time, for supporting and maintaining such
Alliances.

To which (the Speaker re-assuming the Chair, and this being reported) the
House agreed, and appointed the Committee.

And Adjourned over As^nsion day till Friday,

In the interim, the Committee appointed, met and drew the Address according to
the above mentioned Order, a true Copy of which is here annexed.

May it please your Most excellent Majesty.
YOur Majesty's most Loyal and Dutiful Subjects, (...) Commons in Parliament
assembled, have taken into their serious consideration, your Majesty's gracious
Speech and do beseech your Majesty, to believe it is a great affliction to
them, to find themselves obleiged (at present) to decline the granting your
Majesty the supply your Majesty is pleased to demand, conceiving it is not
agreeable to the usage of Parliament, to grant Supplies for mainteance of Wars,
and Alliances, before they are signified in Parliament (which the too Wars
against the States of the United Provinces, since your Majesty's happy
Restoration, and the League made in January 1668, for preservation of the
Spanish Nether Lands, sufficiently proved, without ling your Majesty with
Instances of greater antiquity) from which usage if we might depart, the
president might be of dangerous consequence in future times, though your
Majesty's Goodness gives us great security during your Majesty's Reign, which
we beseech God long to continue

This Consideration prompted us in our last Address to your Majesty, before
our last Recesse, humbly to mention to your Majesty, our hopes, that before our
meeting again your Majesty's Alliances might be so fixed, as that your Majesty
might begraciously pleased to impart them to us in Parliament, that so our
earnest desires of supplying your Majesty, for prosecuting those great ends, we
had humbly laid before your Majesty, might meet with no impediment or
obstruction; being highly sensible of the necessity of supporting, as well as
making the Alliances, humbly desired in our former Addresses, and which we
still conceive so important to the safety of your Majesty, and your Kingdoms,
That we cannot (without unfaithfulness to your Majesty and those we Represent)
omit upon all occasions, humbly to beseech your Majesty, as we now do, To enter
into a League offensive and defensive with the States General of the United
Provinces, against the growth and power of the French King, and for the
preservation of the Spanish Nether-Lands, and to make such other Alliances,
with such other of the Confiderates, as your Majesty shall think fit and
useful to that end; in doing which (That no time may be lost) we humbly offer
to his Majesty these Reasons for the expediting of it.

1. That if the entering into such Alliances, should draw on a War with the
French King, it would be lest detrimental to your Majesty's Subjects at this
time of the year, they having now fewest effects, within the Dominion of that
King.

2. That though we have great reason to believe the power of the French King to
be dangerous, to your Majesty and your (...), when he shall be at more leisure
to molest us; yet we conceive the many Enemies he has to deal with at present,
together with the situation of your Majesty's Kingdoms, the Unanimity of the
People in the Cause, the care your Majesty has been pleased to take of your
ordinary Guards of the Sea, together with the Credit provided by the late Act
for an additional Excise for three years make the entering into, and declaring
Alliances very safe, until we may in a regular way give your Majesty such
further Supplies, as may enable your Majesty to support your Allyances, and
defend your kingdoms.

And because of the great danger and charge which must necessarily fall upon
your Majesty's kingdoms, if through want of that timely encouragement and
assistance, which your Majesty's joining with the States General of the United
Provinces, and other the Confederates would give them, The said States or any
other considerable part of the Confederates, should this next Winter, or
sooner, make a Peace or Truce with the French King (the prevention whereof
must (...) be acknowledged a singular effect of Gods goodness to us) which if
it should happen, your Majesty would be afterward necessitated with fewer,
perhaps with no Alliances or Assistance to withstand the power of the French
king, which has so long and so succesfully contended with so many, and so
potent Adversaries, and whilst he continues his over-ballancing greatness,
must always be dangerous to his Neighbors, since he would be able to oppress
any one Confederate, before the rest could get together, and be in so good a
posture of offending him as they now are, being jointly engaged in a War. And
if he should be so successful as to make a Peace, or (...) the present
Confederation against him, it is much to be feared, whether (...) would be
possible ever to reunite it, at least it would be work of so much time and
difficulty, as would leave your Majesty's Kingdoms exposed to much misery and
danger.

Having thus discharged our duty, in laying before your Majesty the Dangers
threatening your Majesty, and your Kingdoms, and the only Remedies we can
think of, for the preventing, securing, and queting the minds of your Majesty's
People, with some few of those Reasons which have moved us to this, and our
former Addresses. On these Subjects; We most humbly beseech your Majesty to
take the matter to your serious Consideration, and to take such Resolutions, as
may not leave it in the power of any neighboring Prince, to rob your People of
that happiness which they enjoy, under your Majesty's gracious Government;
beseeching your Majesty to ^fident and assured, that when your Majesty shall be
(...) to declare such Alliances in Parliament, We shall hold our selves
obliged, not only by our promises, and assurances given, and now which great
Unaninity revived in a full House, but by the Zeal and desires of those whom we
represent, and by the Interests of all our safetyes, most cheerfully to give
your Majesty from time to time such speedy Supplies, and Assistances, as may
fully and plentifully answer the Occasions, and by Gods blessing preserve your
Majesty Honor, and the safty of the People.

All which is most humbly submitted to your Majesty's great Wisdom.

Friday May 25th. 1677
Sir John Trevor reported from the said Committee the Address, as 'twas drawn
by them, which was read.

Whereupon it was moved to agree with the Committee, but before it was agreed
to, there was a debate and division of the House.

It was observed and objected that there was but one reason given herein for
declining the granting money and that is the Unpresidentednesse, and as to one
of the Instances to this purpose mentioned, Viz. the Kings first Dutch War, it
was said to be mistaken for that the 2500000 l. was voted before the War
declared.

But it was answred, that if the Declaration was not before the grant of the
money (which Quaere) yet 'twas certain that the War it self, and great
Hostilites were before the money, and some said there might be other reasons
Assigned against giving money before the Alliances, but they rather desired to
spare them, only in general said, it was not reasonable to grant money before
there was a Change (they (...) not say of Counselors but of Counsels) and an
har^ ^dertaking these Alliances would be the best demonstration of that Change.
For the swerving from this Interest and part, was the step by which we went
awry, and the returning thereto would restore us to our right place and way.

And a Gentleman produced and read the Kings Speech made Monday the 10th. of
February 1667. wherein he speak chiefly of the League which afterward when the
Svvede came into it, was called the Tripple League.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Am glad to see you hear again to tell you what I have done in this
Intervall, which I am consident you will be pleased with, since it is so much
to the Honor and security of the Nation. I have made a League Offensive and
Defensive with the States of the United Provinces, and likewise a League for an
efficacious mediation of Peace between the two Crowns, into which League that
of Sweden by its Ambassador has offered to enter as a principal, I did not at
our last Meeting move you for any Aid, though I lie under great Debts
contracted by the last War but now the posture of our Neighbors abroad, and
the consequence of this new Alliance will oblige me for our security to set out
a considerable fleet to Sea this Summer, and besides I must build more great
Ships, and it is as necessary that I do something in order to the fortifying some
of our Ports. I have begun my self in order to these ends, but if I have not
your speedy assistance, I shall not be able to go through with it, wherefore I
do earnestly desire you to take it into your speedy consideration, etc.

Which shows the proper course and practice, That Kings first communicate their
Alliances made, before they demand Supplies upon the account of them.

So the Exception was let fall.

But the grand Objection managed against it, was upon the main point of the
Address, wherein they desired his Majesty to make a League Offensive and
Defensive with the Dutch, and such other Alliances with the rest as he should
think sit.

Those who were against this particular (or particularizeing) in the Address,
spoke to this effect.

This is an Invasion upon his Majesty's Prerogative of making Peace, War and
Leagues, and it is the worse for the Distinction that is used; in respect of
the Dutch and the rest; by which you giving him express directions as to the
Dutch, and referring to his discretion as to the others, it looks and gives an
Umbrage as if what he was to do was by your leave.

The Ancient Landmark, the Boundaries between King and People must not be
removed; This power is one of the few things reserved entirely to the Crown.
Parliaments are summoned to treat de Arduis, but He, de quibusdam Arduis, this
is unpresidented.

The Marriages of the Royal Family is such a peculiar thing reserved to the
King, and the matter of the Lady Arrabella is an Instance. Queen Elizabeth
resented it high, that the Parliament should propound her marrying, and she
said that however it is well they did not name the person, if they had named
the person, it had been intolerable, now here you name the person whom you
would have the King Ally.

If you may go so far, you may come to draw a Treaty, and propose to the King
to sign it, By this you would put a great Indecorum upon the King, he is now
concerned as a Mediator at Nimmegen, and it would be an indecent thing for him
at the same time to declare himself a party. It is believed the House of
Austria (though they sent full powers to Nimmegen, for the purpose, yet) never
intended to conclude a Peace. But it was an absurd thing for them to declare so
in Public; There must be public decorum.

This is the way for the King to have the worse bargain with the Confederates,
for they observing how he is importuned, and as it were driven to make these
Alliances, will slacken and lessen those advantageous offers, which other wise
they would be forced to make.

And again and again, they said his Majesty did agree with this House in the
End, and they did not doubt but he would prosecute it by the same means as was
desired. But his Prerogative was not to be incroacht upon. This manner of
proceeding would never obtain with the King, nay, it would make the Address
miscarry with the King.

On the other Side, several spoke to this effect.

We ought to consider, we are upon the Question of agreeing an Address drawn by
our Committee, by our Order.

If they have not in matter and manner corresponded with our direction or
intention, we have cause to disagree. But here the Exception taken, and cause
pressed why we should not agree with them is, because they have observed the
very words and substance of our Order, which exactly justifies this Draught.

This passed on Wednesday, upon a full Debate, in a very full House, two only
contradicting, but not one speaking or thinking the Kings Prerogative was
touched: and therefore its strange it should be made the great Objection and
Question of this day.

But the Prerogative is not at all intrenc^d upon, we do not, nor do pretend to
Treat or make Alliances, we only offer our advice about them, and leave it with
the King he may do as he pleases, either make or not make them. It is no more
than other persons may do to the King, or doubtless the Privy Council may
Advise him in this particular, and why not his Great Council? This rate of
discourse would make the Kings Prerogative consist merely in not being advised
by his Parliament (of all People.)

There are manifold Presidents of such Advices: Leagues have been made by
Advice of Parliament, and have been ratified in Parliament: In Edw. 3. R^ch.
2. and especially in Henry the Fifths time, and particularly with (...) the
Emperor and king of the Romans, and Henry the fifth was a Magnanimous Prince
and not to be ^mposed upon.

18. Jac. The Parliament Advised the King about making and mannaging a War,
Rushvv. Coll. 36, 41, 42, 45, 46. And we may well remember our own advising the
first Dutch War; and making Leagues is less than War.

But if there was no President in this particular Case, it was no Objection;
for matter of Advice is not to be circums^ribed by President. If there be a
(...) case that a Prince should join in a War, together with another Prince,
when that Prince was too potent before and that when this was discerned, and a
Peace made, yet Succors should continually go out of the first Princes
Dominions to the service of the other Prince (and that notwithstanding several
Addresses and advices to the contrary.

It Is true (as Objected) that the Commons have sometimes declined advising in
the matter of War, etc. proposed to them. But that shows not their want of
right to meddle therewith, but rather the contrary. The very truth is, it has
been the desire and endeavor of kings in all Ages, to engage their Parliaments
in advising War, etc. That so they might be obliged to supply the King to the
utmost for and through it, but they out of a prudent caution have some times
waved the matter, lest they should engage further or deeper than they were
aware or willing.

Since his Majesty is treating as Mediator at Nimmegen, about the general
Peace, it is a great reason why he should specifi^ the Alliances desired as we
have done, that we might make it known, we are far from desiring such Alliances
as might be made by and with a general Peace; but on the contrary coveting such
as might prevent and secure us against that dangerous and formidable Peace.

Doubtless the Confederates will offer honorable and worthy Terms; Their
necessity is too great to boggle or take advantages, nor will they think this
League the less worth because we advise it, but rather value it the more,
because it is done unanimously by the King with the Advice and applause of his
People in Parliament.

We cannot suppose that our proceeding thus to his Majesty will pejudice our
Address or endanger its miscarriage since it is for his Rush Coll. 171. 172,
177, 178.
Majesty's advantage, in that it obliges us to supply him to all degrees
through this Affair, and the more particular it is, the more still for the
Kings advantage, for if it had been more general, and the King thereupon had
made Alliances, whatever they were, men might have thought and said they were
not the Alliances intended, and it might be used as an excuse or reason for
their not giving money to supply his Majesty hereafter, but this as it is now,
does most expressly, strictly and particularly bind us up.

We reflect that a great deal of time (and precious time) has been spent since
and in our Address on this Subject, and finding no effectual fruit, especially
of our last Address, we have cause to apprehend we are not clearly understood
in what we mean. Now it is the ordinary way of pursuing discourse in such Case,
and it is Proper and natural for us to speak (out) more explicitly and
particularly, and tell (...) Majesty, That what we have meant is a League
offensive and defensive, And to perswad us again to Address on, in more
general Terms, as before, is to persuade us, that as we have done nothing this
ten weeks, so we should do nothing still.

And said his Majesty in his late Message and last Speech, has been pleased to
demand 600000 l. for answering the purpose of our Addresses, and assures us
that the money shall not be employed to other uses than we would have it
employed, it is most seasonable for us to declare plainly the use and purpose
we intend, that so it may be concerted and clearly understood of all hands, and
therefore it is well done to mention to his Majesty these express Alliances, we
thinking no other Alliances, worth the said Sum, and we withal promising and
undertaking that his Majesty shall have this and and more for these ends.

Nor have we any cause to apprehend that his Majesty will take amiss our
advising Leagues in this manner. We have presented more than one Address for
Alliances against the growth and power of the French King, and his Majesty has
received, admitted and answered them without any exception, and if we may
Address for Alliances against a particular Prince or state, Why not for
Alliances with a particular Prince or state? It cannot be less regular or
Parliamentary then the former.

And moreover (though we know that punctual presidents are on our side,
besides our Commissions by our Writts. to treat de arduis, and urgentibus
Regem, Statum, and Defensionem Reg^, and (...) Anglicanae, concernentibus. And
besides the Kings General intimations in his Printed Speech, yet) if it ^e said
to be a decent and proper thing to have his Majestys (...) and consent, before
we proceed on such a matter, in such a manner, as we now do, we say, that that
in effect is with us too; for consider all our former Addresses, and his
Majestyes Answers, and Messages thereupon, and it will appear that his Majesty
has engaged and encouraged us to upon this Subject; and that which he expects
and would have, is not to limit or check our advise, but to open and en^ our
(...). His Majesty appears content to be thoroughly advised, provided he be
proportionably furnished and enabled with money, which we being now ready to
do, we clearly and conclusively present him our advice, for the application of
it. To prevent those mistakes and distrusts which his Majesty says he finds
some are so ready to make, as if he had called us together only to get money
from us, for other uses then we would have it employed.

And truly the advising these Allyances, together with assuring his Majesty
thereupon to assist and supply him presently, and plentifully to prosecute the
same, is our only way of complying and corresponding with his last speech: For
those Leagues followed and supported by these Supplies are the only means and
methodes to put his Majesty in the best condition, both to defend his
Subjects, and offend his Enemies: and so there will be no sault in his Majesty
nor Us, but His and Our security will sufficiently provide for.

Besides it will be worse, it will be a very bad thing indeed not to make the
Address for this particular League, now, since we have resolved it already.
Our intention being to have the Dutch, etc. comforted, encouraged and assured,
we did order this on Wednesday, and there is public notice taken of it abroad,
and beyond Sea. If we should now upupon solemn debate set the same aside, it
would beget a great doubt, discomfort, and discouragment to them; It is one
thing never to have ordered it; another, to retract it.

Also it was said, that this was necessary, but was not all that was necessary,
for suppose (which was not credible) that France should be prevailed with to
deliver up all Lorraine, Flanders, Alsatia, and other Conquered places; Are we
safe? No, He has too many hands, too much Money, and this money is in great
measure (a Million Sterling yearly at least) supplied him from hence. We must
depress him by force as far as may be, but further we must have Leagues and
Laws to impoverish him, We must destroy the French Trade. This would quiet and
secure us, this would make our Lands rise, and this would enable us to set the
king at ease.

After this long debate the House came to the Question, Whether this particular
of a League Offensive and Defensive with the Dutch should be left out of the
Address, upon which Question, the House divided,

Yeas 142, Noes 182.

So that it was carried by Forty that it should stand.

Then the main Question was put for agreeing, with their Committee, this
Address: which passed in the Affirmative without Division of the House.

Then it was Ordered, That those Members of the House who were of his Majestys
Privy Counsel, should move his Majesty to know his pleasure, when the House
might wait upon him with their Address.

Mr. Povvle reported from the Committee, Amendments to the Bill for Recalling
his Majestys Subjects out of the French Kings Service, which were Read and
Agreed to by the House and the Bill with the Amendments Ordered to be Engrossed.

And then the House Adjourned to the morrow.

Saturday, May 26 1677, in the morn.
The House being sat had notice by Secretary Coventry That the King would
receive their Address at three in the afternoon.

The Bill for Recalling his Majesty's Subjects, etc. being then Engrossed, was
Read the Third time and Passed; The effect of the Bill in short was this.

That all and every of the Natural born Subjects of his Majesty who should
continue or be, after the first of August next, in the Military Service of the
French King, should be disabled to inherit any Lands, Tenements or
Hereditaments, and be incapable of any Gift, Grant or Legacy, or to be Executor
or Administrator, and being convicted, should be adjudged guilty of Felony,
without benefit of the Clergy, and not pardonable by his Majesty, his Heirs or
Successors, except only by Act of Parliament, wherein such Offenders should be
particularly named.

The like appointment for such as should continue in the Sea-service, of the
French King, after the first of May, 1678.

This Act as to the prohibiting the offense, and incurring the penalties, to
continue but for two years, but the executeing and proceeding upon it for
Offenses against the Act, might be at any time, as well after as within the two
years.

Then it was Ordered, that Mr. Povvle should carry up this Bill to the Lords,
and withal should put the Lords in mind, of a Bill for The better suppressing
the growth of Popery, which they had sent up to their Lordships before Easter,
which was forth with done accordingly.

As soon as this was ordered, several other Bills were moved for to be Read,
etc. But the Members generally said, No. They would proceed on nothing but the
French and Popery. So they Adjourned to the afternoon, when they attended the
King with their Address, at the Banqueting House in White Hall. Which being
presented, The King Answered, That it was long and of great importance, that he
would consider of it, and give them an Answer as soon as he could.

The House did nothing else but Adjourn till Monday morn.

Monday, May 28, 1677.
The House being sat, they received notice by Secretary Coventry, that the
King expected them immediately at the Banqueting House.

Whether being come, The King made a Speech to them on the Subject of their
Address. Which Speech to prevent mistakes, his Majesty read out of his Paper,
and then delivered the same to the Speaker. And his Majesty added a few words
about their Adjournment.

The Kings Speech is as follows;

Gentlemen,
Could I have been Silent, I would rather have chosen to be so then to call to
mind things so unfit for you to meddle with, as are contained in some parts of
your last Addresses, wherein you have entrenched upon so undoubted a Right of
the Crown, that I am confident it will appear in no Age (when the Svvord
was not drawn) that the Prerogative of making Peace and War has been so
dangerously invaded.

You do not content your selves with desiring Me to enter into such Leagues,
as may be for the safety of the Kingdom, but you tell Me what sort of Leagues
they must be, and with whom, (and as your Address is vvorded) it is more
liable to be understood to be by your Leave, then at your Request, that I
should make such other Alliances, as I please with other of the Confederates.

Should I suffer this fundamental Power of making Peace and War to be so far
invaded (though but once) as to have the manner and circumstances of Leagues
prescribed to Me by Parliament it is plain that no Prince or State would any
longer believe that the Sovereignty of England rests in the Crown, Nor could I
think My Self to signify any more to Foreign Princes, then the empty Sound of
a King. Wherefore you may rest assured, that no Condition shall make Me depart
from, or lessen so essential a part of the Monarchy. And I am vvilling to
believe so well of this House of Commons, that I am confident these ill
Consequences are not intended by you.

These are in short the Reasons, why I can by no means approve of your
Address; and yet though you have declined to grans Me that Supply which is
necessary to the Ends of it, I do again declare to you, That as I have done all
that lay in my power since your last Meeting, so I will still apply my self
by all the means I ^an, to let the World see my Care both for the Security and
Satisfaction of my People, although it may not be with those Advantages to
them, which by your Assistances I might have procured.

And having said this, he signified to them that they should Adjourn till the
16th. of July.

Upon hearing of this Speech read, their House is said to have been greatly
appalled, both in that they were so severely Checked in his Majesty's name,
from whom they had been used to receive so constant Testimones of his Royal
Bounty and Affection, which they thought they had deserved, as also, because
there are so many Old and fresh Presidents, of the same Nature; and if there
had not, yet they were led into this by all the stepps of Necessity, in duty to
his Majesty and the Nation. And several of them offering therefore modestly to
have spoken, they were interrupted continually by the Speaker, contesting that
after the Kings pleasure signified for Adjornment, there was no further Liberty
of speaking. And yet it is certain, that at the same time in the Lords House,
the Adjournment was in the (...) form, and upon the Question first propounded
to that House, and allowed by them; All Adjournments (unless made by special
Commission under his Majesty's Broad Seal) being and having always been so, an
Act of the Houses by their own Authority. Nevertheless, several of their
Members requiring to be heard, the Speaker had the confidence, without any
Question put, and of his own motion, to pronounce the House Adjourned till the
16th. of July, and s^pt down in the middle of the floor, all the House being
astonished at so unheard of a violation of their inherent Privilege and
Constitution. And that which more amazed them afterward was, that while none
of their own transactions or Addresses for the Public Good are suffered to be
Printed, but even all Written Coppies of them with the same care as Libells
suppressed; Yet they found this severe speech published in (...) next days News
Book, to mark them out to their own, and all other Nations, as refractory
disobedient Persons, that had lost all respect to his Majesty. Thus were they
well rewarded for their Itch of Perpetual Sitting, and of Acting; the
Parliament being grown to that height of Contempt, as to be Gazetted among
Runaway Servants, Lost Dogs, Strayed Horses, and Highway Robbers.

In this manner was the second meeting of this, whether Convention or
Parliament, concluded; But by what Name soever it is lawful to call them, or
how irregular they were in other things, yet it must be confessed, That this
House or Barn of Commons, deserved commendations for having so far prevented
the establishment of Popery, by rejecting the Conspiratours two Bills;
Entitled.

1. An Act for further securing the Protestant Religion by educating the
Children of the Royal family therein; And for the providing for the Continuance
of a Protestant Clergy.

2. An Act for the more effectual conviction and Prosecution of Popish
Recusants. And for having in so many Addresses applied against the French power
and (...). And their Debates before recited upon this latter subject, do
sufficently show, that there are men of great parts among them, who understand
the Intrest of the Nation, and as long as it is for their purpose, can
prosecute it.

For who would not commend Chastity, and rail against Whoreing, while his
Rival injoyes their Mistress?

But on the other side, that poor desire of Perpetuating themselves those
advantages which they have swallowed, or do yet gape for, renders them so
^bject, that they are become a mere property to the Conspiratours, and must, in
order to their continuance, do and suffer such things, so much below and
contrary to the spirit of the Nation, that any honest man would swear that they
were no more an English House of Parliament. And by this weakness of theirs it
was, that the House of Peers also (as it is in contiguous Buildings) yielded
and gave way so far even to the shaking of the Government. For had the Commons
stood firm, it had been impossible that ever two men, such as the Black and
White Lords, Trerise and Frechvvel, though of so vast fortunes, extraordinary
understanding, and so proportionable Courage, should but for speaking against
their sense have committed the Four Lords (not much their inferiors) and
thereby brought the whole Peerage of England under their vassalage.

They met again at the Day appointed, the 16 of July, The supposed House of
Commons were so well appayed, and found themselves at such ease, under the
Protection of these frequent Adjournments, which seemed also further to
confirm their Title to Parliament, that they quite forgot how they had been
outlawed in the Gazette, or if any sense or it remaind, there was no
opportunity to discover it. For his Majesty having signified by Mr. Secretary
Coventry his pleasure; that there should be a further Adjournment, their Mr.
Seymour (the speaker deceased) would not suffer any man to proceed, But an
honorable Member requiring modestly to have the Order Read, by which they were
before Adjourned, he Interrupted him and the Seconder of that motion. For he
had at the last Meeting gained one President of his own making for Adjourning
the House without question, by his own Authority, and was loath to have it
discontinued, so that without more ado, like an infallible Judge, and who had
the power over Counsels, he declared, Ex Cathedra, that they were Adjourned
till the third of December next. And in the same moment stamped down on the
floor, and went forth (trampling upon, and treading under foot, I had almost
said, the Privileges and usage of Parliament, but however) without showing
that decent respect which is due to a multitude in Order, and to whom he was a
Menial servant.

In the mean time the four Lords lay all this while in the Tower, looking
perhaps to have been set free, at least of Course by Prorogation. And there was
the more reason to have expected one, because the Corn Clause which deducted
Communibus Annis, 55000 I. out of the Kings Customs, was by the Act of
Parliament to have expired.

But those frequent Adjournments left no place for Divination, but that they
must rather have been calculated to give the French more scope for perfecting
their Conquests, or to keep the Lords closer, till the Conspirators Designs
were accomplished; and it is less probable that one of these was false, than
that both were the true Causes So that the Lords, if they had been taken in
War, might have been ransomed cheaper than they were Imprisoned. When therefore
after so long patience, they saw no end of their Captivity, they began to think
that the procuring of their Liberty deserved almost the same care which others
took to continue them in Durance; and each of them chose the Method he thought
most advisable.

The Earl of Shaftsbury having addressed in vain for his Majesty's favor
resorted by Habeas Corpus to the Kings Bench, the constant Residence of his
Justice. But the Judges were more true to their Pattents then their
Jurisdiction and remanded him, Sir Thomas Jones having done him double Justice,
answering both for himself and his Brother Tvvisden, that was absent and had
never hard any Argument in the case.

The Duke of Buckingham, the Earl of Salisbury, and the Lord Wharton, had
better Fortune then he in recurring to his Majesty by a Petition, upon which
they were enlarged, making use of an honorable Evasion, where no Legal
Reparation could be hoped for. Ungrateful Persons may censure them for
enduring no more, not considering how much they had suffered. But it is Honor
enough for them to have been Confessors, nor as yet is the Earl of Shaftsbury a
Martyr, for the English Liberties and the Protestant Religion, but may still
live to the Envy of those that malign him for his Constancy.

There remains now only to relate that before the meeting appointed for the
third of December, his Majesty's Proclamation was Issued, signifying that he
expected not the Members attendance, but that those of them about Town may
Adjourn themselves till the fourth of April 1678. Wherein it seemed not so
strange, because often done before, as unfortunate that the French should still
have so much further leisure allowed him to complete his design upon Flanders,
before the Nation should have the last opportunity of interposing their
Counsels with his Majesty (it cannot now be said) to prevent it. But these
words that the House may Adjourn themselves were very well received by those of
the Commons who imagined themselves thereby restored to their Right, after
Master Seymours Invasion; When in reversal of this, he probably desiring to
retain a Jurisdiction, that he had twice usurped, and to add this Flower to
the Crown, of his own planting, Mr. Secretary Coventry delivered a written
Message from his Majesty on the 3d. of December, of a contrary effect, though
not of the same validity with the Proclamation, to wit, That the Houses should
be Adjourned only to the 15. of January 1677. Which as soon as read, Mr.
Seymour would not give leave to a worthy Member offerring to speak, but
abruptly, now the third time of his own authority, Adjourned them, without
putting the Question, although Sr. J. Finch, for once doing so in Tertio
Charoli, was accused of high Treason; This only can be said, perhaps in his
excuse, That whereas that in tertio Car. was a Parliament Legally constituted,
Mr. Seymour did here do as a Sheriff that disperses a Riotous assembly. In this
manner they were kicked from Adjourment to Adjournment, as from one stair down
to another, and when they were at the bottom kicked up again, having no mind yet
to Go out of Doors.

And here it is time to fix a period, if not to them, yet to this Narrative.
But if neither one Prorogation, against all the Laws in being, nor three
Vicious Adjournments, against all Presidents, can Dissolve them, this
Parliament then is Immortal, they can subsist without his Majesty's Authority,
and it is less dangerous to say with Captain Elsdon, so lately, Si Rebellio
evenerit in Regno, and non accideret fore, contra omnes tres Status, Non est
Rebellio.

Thus far has the Conspiracy against our Religion and Government been laid
open, which if true, it was more than time that it should be discovered, but if
any thing therein have been falsely suggested the disproving of it in any
particular will be a courtesy both to the Public and to the Relator; who would
be glad to have the world convinced of the contrary, tho to the prejudice of
his own reputation. But so far is it from this, that it is rather impossible
for any observing man to read without making his own farther remarkes of the
same nature, and adding a supplement of most passages which are here but
imperfectly touched. Yet some perhaps may Object, as if the Assistance given to
France were all along invidiously aggravated, whereas there have been and are,
considerable numbers likewise of his Majesty's Subjects in the Service of
Holland, which has not been mentioned. But in Answer to that, it is well known
through what difficulty and hardship they passed thither, escaping hence over,
like so many Malefactors; and since they are there, such care has been taken
to make them as serviceable as others to the Design, that of those three
Regiments, two, if not the third also, have been new modelled under Popish
Officers, and the Protestants displaced. Yet had the Relator made that
voluntary Omission in partiality to his Argument, he has abundantly
recompensed in sparing so many Instances on the otherside which made to his
purpose; The abandoning his Majesty's own Nephew for so many years in
compliance with His and our Nations Enemies, the further particulars of the
French Depradations and Cruelties exercised at Sea upon his Majesty's Subjects,
and to this day continued and tolerated without reparation; Their notorious
Treacheries and Insolences, more especially relating to his Majesty's Affairs.
These things abroad, which were capable of being illustrated by many former and
fresh Examples. At home, the constant irregularities and injustice from Term to
Term, of those that administer the Judicature betwixt his Majesty and his
People. The Scrutiny all over the Kingdom, to find out men of Arbitrary
Principles, that will Bovv the knee to Baal, in order to their Promotion to all
Public Commissions and Employments; and the Disgracing on the contrary and
Displacing of such as yet dare in so universal a depravation be honest and
faithful in their Trust and Offices. The defection of considerable persons both
Male and Female to the Popish Religion, as if they entered by Couples clean and
unclean into the Ark of that Church, not more in order to their salvation, than
for their temporal safety. The state of the Kingdom of Ireland, which would
require a whole Volume to represent it. The tendency of all Affairs and
Counsels in this Nation toward a Revolution. And (by the great Civility and
Foresight of his Holiness) an English Cardinal now for several years prepared
like Cardinal Poole to give us Absolution, Benediction, and receive us into
Apostolical Obedience.

It is now come to the fourth Act, and the next Scene that opens may be Rome or
Paris, yet men sit by, like idle Spectators, and still give money toward their
own Tragedy. It is true, that by his Majesty and the Churches care, under Gods
Special providence, the Conspiracy has received frequent disappointments. But
it is here as in Gaming, where, tho the Cheat may lose for a while, to the
Skill or good fortune of a fairer Player, and sometimes on purpose to draw him
in deeper, yet the false Dice must at the long run Carry it, unless discovered,
and when it comes once to a great Stake, will Infallibly Sweep the Table.

If the Relator had extended all these Articles in their particular Instances,
with several other Heads, which out of Respect he forbore to enumerate, it is
evident there was matter sufficient to have further accused his Subjects. And
nevertheless, he foresees that he shall on both hands be blamed for pursuing
this method. Some on the one side will expect, that the very Persons should
have been named, whereas he only gives evidence to the Fact, and leaves the
malefactors to those who have the power of inquiry. It was his design indeed to
give Information, but not to turn ^ormer. That these to whom he has only a
puplick enmity, no private animosity, might have the priviledige of Statesmen,
to repent at the last hour, and by one signal Action to expiate all their
former misdemeanors. But if any one delight in the Chase, he is an ill Woodman
that knows not the size of the Beast by the proportion of his Excrement.

On the other hand, some will represent this discourse (as they do all Books
that tend to detect their Conspiracy) against his Majesty and the Kingdom, as
if it too were written against the Government. For now of late, as soon as any
man is gotten into public employment by ill Acts and by worse continues it,
he, if it please the Fates, is thence forward the Government, and by being
Criminal, pretends to be sacred. These are, themselves, the men who are the
Living Libells against the Government, and who (whereas the Law discharges the
Prince upon his Ministers) do if in danger of being Questioned, plead or rather
Impeach his Authority in their own Justification. Yea, so impudent is their
ingratitude, that as they entitle him to their Crimes, so they arrogate to
themselves his Virtues, chalenging whatsoever is well done, and is the pure
emanation of his Royal Goodness, to have proceeded from their Influence.
Objecting thereby his Majesty, if it were possible, to the hatred and
interposing as far as in them lies, betwixt the love of his People. For being
conscious to themselves how inconsiderable they would be under any good
Government, but for their notorious wickedness, they have no other way of
subsisting, but by nourishing suspicions betwixt a most loyal People, and most
gracious Sovereign. But this Book, though of an extra^dinary nature, as the
case required, and however it may (...) calu^iated by interessed persons, was
written with no (...) intent than of mere Fidelity and Service to his Majesty,
(...) God forbid that it should have any other effect, than (...) the mouth of
all Iniquity and of Flatterers may be stopped, and that his Majesty having
discerned the Disease, may with his Healing Touch apply the Remedy. For so far
is the Relator himself from any Sinister surmise of his Majesty, or from
suggesting it to others, that he acknowledges, if it were fit for Caesar's Wife
to be free, much more is Caesar himself from all Crime and Suspicion. Let us
therefore conclude with our own Common Devotions, From all Privy Conspiracy,
etc.

Good Lord deliver us.

Errata. Page 6 line 5 read, at the same time. p. 8 l 6 r. clave non erranie.
p. 8 l. 25 dele still. p. 17 l. (...) r. Feb. 15. 1676. p. 27 l. 20. r.
1800000. p. 30 l. 1 r. deference. p. 43 l. 34 r. Eng. Declaration p. 48 l.
(...) r. claimed a power. p. 67 l. 20 r. obvious. p. 74 l. 20 r. as. p. 75 l.
34; 35 r. rigging and unrigging. p. 79 l. 2 r. these. p. 85 l. (...) that
others had of practicing. p. 114 l. 5 r. vvink. p. 115 l. 27, 28 r. and the
whole house. p. 120 l. 8 r. French Embassade. p. ^21 l. 23. (...) car^re. p.
133 l. 28 r. more then ordinary.

FINIS.

