THE COVENANT Acknowledged by an English Covenanter: AND The manifested wants
of the Common Prayer, or Divine Service, formerly used, thought the fittest for
Public Worship, by one, Whose hearty desires are presented to all the Lovers
of Peace and Truth in these Nations: AND Shall be the Prayers of a Wel-wisher
to both, and a very much obliged Servant to all the Promoters of this Just
Cause, E. M. Mason.

LONDON, Printed for JOHN MARRIOT, and are to be sold in Fetter-lane, next
door to the Golden Faulcon. 1660.

To the moderate Reader or others, whose chance it may be to meet with these
few leaves following.
I Am persuaded that some men will be offended with me because I should appear
upon Paper, and I desire to give them some of my weak reasons in way of
satisfaction; as being an engaged Covenanter, who oftentimes have had some sad
reflections upon my Spirit, for being so silent through fear, whether it did not
make me, and diverse others, accessory to the Death and Blood of the late King;
which thing I ever abhorred in my thoughts, he being Gods Vicegerent, and by
him set over us, and by him alone to be judged; who by a poor ague or grief of
his distressed heart could have silenced him, but left to try us Covenanters;
and also having protested to God with the rest of the Nation, in a solemn
League and Covenant, not to diminish his just Power and Greatness, much less
his Life; and with it such a destruction both of Church and State, which I have
lived to see to my great grief; and done by professing Christians, those that
Covenanted also as we did, not with Man but with the dreadful God; and for
private ends, I fear, and as now it does plainly appear by the fruits this
Self-interest has brought forth, (for the good of the whole Nation these many
years.)

Otherwhiles I have had thoughts of the words that our blessed Savior said to
his Apostles, that A Sparrow falls not to the ground without the will of God;
and it was his will to bring these heavy afflictions upon the Church, State and
King; As the sacred Scriptures in diverse places show, how the glorious Majesty
and all-commanding power of Heaven and Earth has done for the sins of diverse
Nations; all whose ways and judgments are perfect Justice, and uncontrollable
Truths.

And so likewise I had thoughts at other times, of the gracious goodness of our
merciful Father, in ordering a way for the Redemption of lost man, by the death
and precious bloud-shedding of his righteous Son, that holy Oblation: But I
observe that Judas had a hand in betraying his righteous Master, for self ends
or envy, but he perished with his ill-gotten moneys, and not alone: For also in
that relation I find diverse persons of rank and quality, both Priests and
learned people too, seeking diverse ways by their Emissaries, how they might
put him to death, and not without the consent of many of the Commons also, with
whom they used such artifices; being Joynt-confederates, that the whole gang of
them cry out, His Blood be on us and on our children; and it stuck so close to
them, that the whole Nation felt the sad issues of their fearful Imprecations.
The good God deliver us from the same Judgments; we having slain our King, and
taken possession, and banished his Posterity, toplease or share with a Party of
self-interested men, in the ruins of Him, the Church, and the Nations Laws and
goods, after a solemn Covenant made with hands lifted up to the most high God,
and contrary to the consent of most of the whole Nations, who had no hand in
his Death, nor means to prevent it, but by Weeping to see and hear what a few
Armed men, and their Accomplices, would violently do, contrary to known Law or
right, by a new-devised High Court, by them called Justice, set up by the
tyrannizing Sword to destroy King, Nobles and Law, to satisfy their own
bloodthirsty designs.

I have had also diverse debates in my mind, about some scruples that were often
there, when I could not sleep, about the Covenant, and the Hanging of it up in
our Churches, as if it were a thing seriously to be performed, or as a
Testimony against us, being so solemnly taken in his holy Temple, once made to
the God of all the earth, who is able in a moment of time to destroy us poor
crawling worms; and so earnestly pressed also upon the people by the Divines, and
by them and us so little regarded, as if God were to be jested with and Man's
Conscience would perpetually be injured, and yet be silent or wink at such high
deceiving subtilties.

And chancing to read in the Turkish History, in the reign of Amurath the sixth
King of the Turks, who seeing the great slaughter of his men, and all brought
into extreme danger, As the Covenant is in our Churches.
and beholding the Picture of the Crucifix in the displayed Ensigns of the
Christians, plucked the writing out of his bosom, wherein the League of the
Christians was comprised, and holding it up in his hands, with his eyes cast up
to Heaven, said:

Behold, thou crucified Christ; This is the League thy Christians in thy name
made with me, which they have without cause violated; now if thou be a God, as
they say thou art, and as we dream, revenge the wrong now done unto thy Name
and me, and show thy power upon thy perjured people, who in their deeds deny
thee their God.

Shortly after the Turks got the victory, and the poor Christians miserably put
to the slaughter, and Julian one of the Cardinals, Author of the breach of the
Christians Articles (though fled) found mortally wounded and near dead; who was
sharply reproved by an eminent Christian, Gregory Sanose, but left to perish
unpitied in a Desert; in which fatal Battle were slain such huge numbers of
men, that the hills and mountains, raised with the bones of the slain in this
Battle, to this day bear witness; as says the same Author of the Turkish
History.

Then, good Friends, what may we fear when the great God makes inquisition for
Blood and breach of Vows? both of the Clergy that had the charge of our souls,
and should have given us true counsel, as well as of the poor Laity, who have
been led as sheep to the slaughter, when the Alarums have founded out of the
Pulpits in the beginning of these Times, Curse ye Meroz, curse ye bitterly the
Inhabitants thereof, because they came not to the help of the Lord against the
mighty: Judges 5. 23.
and others violently reproching the Liturgy or Prayer Book of our Church, and
all that owned it Malignants and Opposers of the Reformation.

Besides, I being called, though very unfit and more unserviceable for any
public duty, and voted down or turned away February 9. 1659. from the
discharge of our duties and Conscience enjoined by Oath, for the public
service of the City, (which that hasty Vote did not dissolve.) And I humbly
conceiving it might be somewhat more than man that brought things so about,
that such a poor Mushrome, as my unworthy self, should be at all thought on for
such affairs, when diverse of more knowing worth, degree and fitness were
forgotten.

But thus being put into the traces, and my dull senses lasht by diverse able
men's disputes, about our National and City-priviledges; and hearing Mr.
Barbone a justing those members (in these words) now sitting to be the
Parliament of England, and the same men that acted there the last Summer, and
were so by the City and Nation acknowledged, and the Taxes then leavyed by
them, gathered by us, and why not now being the same Parliament of England now
sitting, it was a wonder to him, being lasht, as I said before, and this
Gentleman's words, so touching my galled Conscience, began to winch, and being
pressed by its discharge, I like blind Bayard said:

My Lord Mayor, The Gentleman that spoke last concerning the Parliament of
England, as he calls the Gentlemen now sitting, surely mistakes the sense of
this Court; for truly, my Lord, I am persuaded there is never a Member here but
honors the Parliament of England, and will lay their hands under their feet,
and sacrifice their lives and estates to do them service, and we honor these
that now are set at the Stern as men of worth and quality: But, my Lord, we
cannot say by these Gentlemen, though by us once freely chosen, because they
were d^ssolved by the late Kings death, as by Law has been undeniably proved;
but, my Lord, diverse of these did desert their Trust that we reposed in them,
and went to the Army, and brought in Oliver the great Oppressor to invade our
Rights, and with his and their Adherents by force secluded most of our
Trustees, and were themselves also dissolved so by him and his Accomplices,
though they acted with and for him a long time; and now, my Lord, your Honor
and all us well know, that the same force that pulled down great Olivers Son,
set up these that now sit by the Lord Lamberts assistance, and by his force
were the third time dissolved, and now by the strength of an Army are again set
in power to act as our Representatives, although not new elected or chosen by
us, according to our Laws and English Birthrights, as has been thoroughly
debated in this Court by diverse worthy Citizens of able knowing judgments, that
intended no hurt to these Gentlemen that now sit, but the right and good of all
the Nation and themselves. My Lord, this that has now been plainly said is
truth, and Truth seeks no corners, nor these Gentlemen a Parliament by us
chosen.

The substance of these words was offered at the Guildhall in the Council of
the Commons, February 8. 1659. when the Army was new come to London.

The next Friday being the 10. of the same Month, the Gates of the City were
broken down, and our Posts and Chains plucked up, and diverse of our Members sent
Prisoners to the Tower; and our sorrowful hearts overwhelmed with grief,
dreading the fearful issue following; yet trusting still in God, our alone
great Deliverer, who comforting our drooping hearts by his gracious appearance
in a merciful measure for us, on Saturday the II. of the same Month, on which
night was great joy expressed by many of the younger sort by Bonfires in every
eminent street; and I doubt not but the elder sort, both Laymen and Divines,
sacrificed diverse humble Prayers and hearty thanks to the most high God our
whole deliverer, whose heavenly smiles did then graciously glimmer upon us his
poor distressed creatures; whose holy Name be eternally praised by all that
fear him; whose goodness we hope will now perfect our now new begun joy.

I have lived to see our Moses and Aaron, the defenders of our Faith and
Church, with their friends and adherents suffer; and I may yet live to see the
Troublers of our Peace and Church, with their Corah, Dathan, and all their
Abiramists, overwhelmed, or as I desire, converted.

Then let not our Faith fail us, but stand still and see, how our God will
deliver us; and remember when his servants, the distressed Sons of Jacob, were
at the brink of the Sea, and Egypts Host fiercely pursuing, and Isreal's
fainting spirits sinking, and their doubtful thoughts breaking out into doleful
expressions, Because there were no graves in Egypt, have thou brought us forth
to die in this wilderness? Exodus 14 11.
Therefore take courage, dear Brethren, of this City, and the bottomless sea of
our distrusts may become walls to our fainting spirits, and our selves though
going through these troubled seas in this night of our afflictions, we may yet
stand upon the shore of safety, by the power of our God, and see these furious
Conjurers and Pharaoh-like Taskmasters floating upon the deep waters of
Despair, helpless; for it is the same Jehovah, who saved Israel, that will
deliver us; and be confident the Arc of his Truth, which we trust in, will
tumble down the Dagon of their Injustice, let them set it up never so often;
and let us belive with faithful Abraham, that The Judge of all the earth will
do right. Genesis 18. 25.


I have been also often grieved to hear and see such a dull and negligent garb
of Public Worship as is now used in diverse Churches.

Over that reverential form of Public Worship was that I had the happiness to
see, before these times of Trouble and Confusion; which, if at all offensive to
any, might by skilful Workmen have been handsomelier mended, than by such
self-conceited Bunglers thus ill-favour'dly patcht up, and pestered with
Sectaries of all kind of colors, as if they intended to make it like my Lord
Husons Fool: But the holy Scripture says, When the blind lead the blind, we
must needs fall into the distressed ditch of our confused Fopperies.

The good Lord give us grace to return and humbly beg mercy through the merits
of our dear Savior, whose offended Father we have most egregiously provoked to
displeasure, before his fierce deserved warth break in upon us; and seek our
God in sincerity by humiliation and true imitation of the Ninevites unfeigned
Fasts, and lay by our hypocritical vizards with which we have so long deceived
the Nation and our selves, and walk no more by Satan's Dark-lanthorns, but
revive the former pure lights that showed us the right ways to Unity in
perfect forms of divine Worship; which teaches us to pray for the Governors
his goodness will be pleased to set over us, and for one another, that our
Church and State may once again flourish in unity and concord, with due respect
to tender Consciences that are not factious.

And then it were but equity, if rightly considered, in my weak apprehension,
for to suffer us that would join together in the praising of the Almighty glory
with our interlocutory voices, in acknowledging and humbly confessing our
manifold sins before the great God of Heaven and earth, Angels and Men, in his
public fit-to-be-done Worship; and, because it best suits with our
Consciences, and the rules of Righteousness in the holy Scripture, which says,
That At what time soever a Sinner does repent him of his sins from the bottom
of his heart, I will put away all his wickedness out of my remembrance, says
the Lord: and likewise, When two or three are gathered together in my Name,
there will I be in the midst of them.

And humbly may I say, and cannot otherwise think, but that when so many
multitudes of People, at the known divine Worship of the immortal God in
public, but that there be diverse that worship him in Spirit and Truth, and do
not conceive it an Idol-worship, (as I have heard Mr. Pernes out of his Pulpit
call the Common Prayer Book an Idol) although they knew the words they were to
praise God with before they met, rather than unpremeditated disgustings;
remembering the rule of a wise man, God is in Heaven and thou art on Earth; and
also well knowing that The spirit is willing but the flesh is weak.

Therefore the Confession used in our well-ordered Church, that all the
Congregation might bear a part in the humble acknowledgment of their many
faults, meekly kneeling upon their bended knees, with holy adorations to the
Almighty glory, clapping their trembling hands upon their sorrow-smitten
breasts, humbly begging pardon for our manifold transgressions of him who only
can grant us pardon, and hear our petitions; and most likely, when so many
millions of sin-sick humbled souls shall be invocating Heaven with one consent
in the same words, betwixt the hours of 9. and 12. upon his days and places
appointed for his public Worship in the three nations, over it is now in our
Churches; when but one in a Congregation, and that what he pleases, and many
times so low that few can hear or learn, the matter being changed so often, and
many times so thin, that it slides away unheeded, and without an Absolution
also of our sins, though never more need.

Nor can I be of Mr. Pernes opinion, who directed his Auditors to pray in their
Families although their folks laughed at them, when so many well-formed prayers
are extant for poor Penitents to follow, without oftentation, or vain Fantasies
of their own giddy brain; as that Prayer of prayers taught us by the blessed
lips of our dear Redeemer, wherein all things needful at once are begged in
that holy Epitomie, which teaches us how to pray, and to whom, and by him
commanded, When you pray, say our Father which art in Heaven, etc. and yet by
diverse not at all used, for what reason I never yet heard, nor can I think,
unless they think it is too mean or too common for their high-gifted Fantasies,
or would help the Enemy to obliterate it, that he might do us more evil. Pardon
me, I pray, all you that neglect it, for it does make the common people too too
much slight it by such eminent examples.

Nor would I be herein mistaken, as not to like and allow of voluntary prayers,
which ought to be often seriously practiced before publicly used by devout
souls, it being the only remedy for the saddest complaints of any afflicting
conscience, to make his timely addresses to his offended God, for the quieting
of his sorrow-troubled soul; and was always allowed in our Churches before and
after Sermons, as I have often heard before these times; and now praise be to
the highest Lord, by diverse rarely gifted Divines, as the Angel of the Church
of St. Dunstans, and many others, whose heavenly expressing language pours
forth the dictates of the holy Spirit, filling their Auditors ears with such
soul-ravishing meditations, as if the Cloven-working power had inflamed their
zealous hearts with heavenly firing raptures. And it was well with us when such
men steered the helm of public Worship, that being always most for Gods
glory: Although private Worship ought to be in great esteem, as best pleasing
to God, which our blessed Savior does direct; those secret Closet-confessions
of a broken and contrite heart, with all the sorrow-shaking throws of a
distressed soul, pouring forth his saddest griefs before the heavenly throne,
that only can help in time of greatest need; which our old enemy knows is
likeliest to prevail with God, whose merciful goodness has said, Come unto me
all ye that are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.

But the subtle betrayer of our weak performances, is apt to suggest his old
cunning sophistries into our soondeluded souls, as he did our first Mother,
These meditations in public, amongst the gifted Brotherhood would make thee
highly esteemed and accounted wise, in letting your inspired new-tinded Lights
be seen before religious men; for the most tear-melting Hypocrite, that is best
able to deceive himself and others, is the Saint, that likes him best: (Herod
had the applause, that It was the voice of a God and not of a man.) Acts 12. 22.
For he by no means would have us take counsel of our most endearing Savior,
nor follow his examples; who often withdrew himself apart to pray unto his
all-guiding God, to hold an heavenly conference with his Almighty Father about
the great work of our Redemption; and he has also directed us To enter into
our Clossets to pray in secret to our heavenly Father, where we should
unburthen our sin-guilty souls with the groans of his heavenly Spirit, no where
else so sufficiently to unfold our troubled minds and the distresses of our
dejected spirits, before a powerful forgiving God, who knows the secret
thoughts of our deceitful hearts, before our tongues or brinish tears unfold
our shameful griefs, not fit for others ears to hear. Nor can such
grief-expressing mones be made by a truly Penitents throbbing breast in
public, but our old enemy will be distracting our thoughts with his subtle
delusions, which spoil the meditation of the serious prayers that we poor
weaklings can perform in the sight of others. The Lord preserve us from his
trecheries, whose whole work is to deceive us.

Therefore a known form of public Worship, that all may use, is surely
requisite: For may we not observe by the vile things now done by diverse, what
want there has been of the due observance of the great commands of the
everliving God, delivered upon Mount Sinai by the voice of the powerful Master,
when the Heaven-shaking thunders made the earth to tremble, and Jacobs whole
posterity to quake to hear what indignations the wilful breakers of these
Heaven-given Laws should be punished with; yet now for more than 12. years in
diverse Congregations not read to the people nor observed, as our duty binds us:
whereby our transgressions (we may observe) are multiplied, our great Gods
commands too much dishonored, and by many falsely worshipped, his Name
violently taken in vain by our too too many Oaths and breaches of Covenants,
and hypocritical Fasts, breaking of Sabbaths, marching of armed men all days
alike, dishonouring our Magistrates and Parents, Murdering our King, Priests
and Commons, odious Adulteries used among us, and many false Witnesses for
Sequestrations, and unneighbourly dealings too frequently used amongst us, and
too covetous of all manner of our Neighbors goods.

But when those heavenly-breathed Petitions were poured out by all the
Congregation to the Almighty glory, Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our
hearts to keep this Law; and also, Lord have mercy upon us, and write all these
thy Laws in our hearts we beseech thee; O what acclamations of joy those men
breathed Petitons made against the walls of heaven, and entered into the holy
ears of the Almighty; which by experience we may and ought to know, when his
holy, glorious blessings preserved our Governors and Nation with tranquillity
and peace, both from domestic and foreign foes, for many score years
together, when those forms of public Worship were continued, wherein all had a
share: But our old enemy (with his busy instruments, who were long ago about
to slight this work) knew well, that as long as God was so worshipped by those
constant forms of so well an instructing Church, his labors were to no end:
But at last he found Feoffees indeed he could trust, who with their
schismatique hammers and destroying Pickaxes of Division would now up with Root
and Branch, and take the Bramble for the Vine, whose government he well knew
would sufficiently scratch both Church and Commonwealth, into the sad condition
he long ago wished for, as our selves and the distressed poor stripped Sons of
the Church by woeful experience can testify.

But since the constant Prayers for all occasions of our well-ordered Church
were put out of use, how has all things looked like the Antipodes, as if a
Chaos of confusion had infatuated all our Councils and actings, that nothing
comes to good: And since the Pale of our distressed Sion and National
Government was broken down by our schismatique Factions, England, Scotland and
Ireland have all suffered a just deserved affliction, by the loss of uniformity
in Prayer for Magistrates and people: And also those unhappy hands who set
about this fatal work, in making way for the Church of Rome to unkennel her
subtle Foxes to destroy ours, with the help of our long tusked Bores with their
basket-hilted swords, who have rooted out and thrown down the Vineyard, and
laid waste the inheritance of our dear Mother, and are like to destroy the rest
of her tender plants, if God in mercy prevent it not. But Gods divine
vengeance, whose Judgments have fallen upon diverse of them, our eyes have seen,
that are roled into their graves with reproach, and their names recorded in
infamy for after-Ages to abhor, that nulled these heavenly petitions, From
Plague, Pestilence and Famine, from Battle and Murder, and from sudden death,
Good Lord deliver us. From all sedition and privy conspiracy, from all false
doctrine and heresy, from hardness of heart and contempt of thy Word and
Commandments. Good Lord deliver us: the which in all likelihood by our humble
addresses, and with our hearty united prayers, and truly compunctious tears to
his heavenly Majesty, might have moved our gracious God to have had compassion
on us, and our King and all his people, which now lie languishing in woeful
distresses, because we have rejected those usual means, by which for many years
his gracious goodness was pleased to deliver our Land and Governors from
Plague, Famine, and intestine Wars, and from factious Schisciomites.

What a decent sight it was to see the people so reverently worshipping the
mighty Lord, when they warbled forth with joint consent, O come let us sing
unto the Lord, let us heartily rejoice in the strength of our Salvation; and
those eternal dues from all the Earth, in the Landamus, We praise thee, O God,
we acknowledge thee to be the Lord, etc. that all the people, both young and
old, rich and poor, are in duty bound reverently to worship the Father
everlasting, whose infinite Majesty gloriously commands all the whole world:
And yet we poor Underlings, the sinful Sons of Adam, must be tongue-tied, and
may not bear a part in those heavenly Hallelujahs to our most gracious
preserver and powerful Redeemer, because a few of our tender-conscienc'd
brethren will not allow us that freedom to discharge our eternally obliged
duties without offending them, who under the name of Liberty of Conscience do
manage all kind of mischiefs; (...)
witness the direful Petition Febr. 9. 1658.

When these decent Orders were used in our well-disciplined Church, with what
reverence did my eyes behold both old and young adore their holy Maker, and
since this named Reformation, how unreverently do most demean themselves in his
sacred Temples, the place of his divine worship, where children, boys and
unmannerly servants clap on their hats before their Masters, Magistrates,
Ministers, Judges and all degrees of men, and yet forbear it at home, but
presume to affront God with as much unhandsom worship as the Reformation is
pleased to suffer to avoid Superstition. When I have observed in inferior
Courts, as at Sessions and elsewhere in cooler air before men, only earthly
Judges and upon wooden benches, highly reverenced, as if it were some great
fault to be covered before them, who are but the Keepers of the laws of Men,
when our ever-living God, who made the glorious heavens, with all the mighty
vast movables, who keep their course for the observation of times and seasons,
ever since the Creation, with the massy globe we trample upon, which he has
hung in the air by the power of his all-commanding word, with the proud waves
of the great Deep, who keep their violent ebbings and flowings in their
appointed channels, round the circumference of the earth with admiration and
wonder: And yet this infinite incomprehensible all-powerful God, that gives us
all good things here, and eternal life hereafter, is so unhandsomly served by
us his poor creatures, and may not be suffered without offense (forsooth) to
tender Consciences to use our dear Mothers decent dressings in her humble
ornaments to do her divine adorations to this glorious King, for fear of
ushering in Superstition; as if rational men might not teach their children and
servants such respective observations in holy worship (to our great God, before
whom the Cherubims and glorious Angels tremble when they come before him) as in
civility we do to one another, and before our earthly Judges which die like men.

And why those decent postures of humbly kneeling when the Sacrament is
received, and those known prayers fitted for that posture said, as The body of
our Lord Jesus Christ which was given for thee, etc. and likewise those
agonizing words, The blood of our Lord Jesus Christ which was shed for thee,
etc. all those known prayers used by all the Communicants, to keep the evil one
from hindering our serious meditations, and humble invocations upon our bended
knees, whiles others were singing those hallowed Hymns, while the holy
sacrificed Oblation was remembringly performed by all the believing
Communicants; over that that I have seen of late by diverse, who are very
observant to see how the deliverer prays and receives, whilst diverse are at
gaze to see what others do, more than seriously I fear to consider the great
work we are about which brings life or death. Truly I like not the new way
though performed by able men, but will have none but their select permitted,
when they cannot see into the hearts of men more now, than the inspired
Apostles could, who charged us to examine our selves upon great penalties. The
people would indeed go up to Jerusalem to worship, after the accustomed manner,
and Jeroboam would devise a new way to restrain their old way of Sacrificing,
but it became a fault, I pray God it may be none to our Restrainers from the
usual Sacraments.

Likewise, I have wondered why the Birth of our blessed Savior should not be
solemnized, (as formerly it was) by as wise and learned men as are now, to keep
in memory a day for his birth; since God so miraculously, and of his own
goodness, has been pleased to discover how our God was made man, and that holy
born man made God to redeem us, and therefore in my weak judgment fit to be
kept in perpetual memory to all generations of Christian men, until the
Resurrection, when there will be no distinction of Gods: At last I did conceive
it was the old enemy of man's happiness, that would obliterate the great Gods
Birthday, under some reforming pretense, that in time he might bring in
Infidelism, and by degrees damp the light of the holy Scriptures, the great
work he is now about; the Lord prevent him with the birth of our dear Savior
whom he would have forgotten: Then let him alone to bring several gods amongst
us, as Ashteroth, Molech, Mahomet, or any of those heathenish Baboons; but God,
who is always good to his, is now raising up one instrument or other to keep
the memory of his holy Child's birth on foot, as may be spoken to his glorious
honor, and the immortal praise of that virtuous Lady Parthenia Lowman, who
has given to St. Dunstans west, and two or three adjacent parishes 100 l.
apeece, the improvement whereof she has ordered to be given to glad the hearts
of the Poor upon the Birthday of our blessed Lord, with a commemoration-Sermon
also to continue his sacred memory to all succeeding generations.

What offense likewise to any did that soul-ravishing Emphasis and general
applause of all the Congregation to the honor of our most endearing God, Glory
be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost, etc. fit to be
acknowledged and used by all the sincere Worshippers of God throughout the
whole world. And this interlocutory Doxology holy David did allow, and sure his
judgment was right, being by testimony of holy Writ, A man after Gods own
heart, when he breaks forth into holy raptures in Psalm. 67. Let all the people
praise thee, O God, let all the people praise thee; and with this promised
blessing, ver. 6. Then shall the Earth bring forth her increase, and God, even
our God, shall give us his blessing. To speak the very truth, there are so many
holy sentences, and heavenly ejaculations, and divine prayers for all
occasions, that it makes my amazed soul to wonder and tremble, that we should
neglect, nay with contempt slight and cast out, such a well-framed form of
public worship, that instructed the simple and unlearned to rightly worship
God, by her constant rules of public worship. But I have done: This is a work
indeed for some Angelick Orator, to let us ignorant know the heavenly use might
be made of such a mercy we once enjoyed, though now slighting that Manna so
wisely provided for us.

Having thus cast in my two poor inconsiderable Mites, the one for the
Liberties of my native Country, the other for my dear Mother the distressed
Church of England in these troublesome times: I hope my friends will sparingly
censure the weak smoakings of this smothering flax; and for my foes to this
just cause and me, the good Lord forgive them and pardon me, in time of
greatest need (if any trouble come) for thus discharging my Conscience as being
a Covenanter and loving well-willer to the Church and State. Pardon me also, I
pray you, ye great learned lights of the Church, for thus presuming to offer
with my roughhewing hands and unpollished Pen, in touching things so far above
my feeble reach, (and with the greatest, accept of the will for the deed) you
know the poor widow would cast into the Treasury all that she had; and it was
the poor Shepherds, inconsiderable persons, I humbly conceive, that had the
happiness to see that heavenly sight of the blessed Quire of Angels, when they
proclaimed Glory to God in the highest, on earth peace, good will toward men;
yea their poor ears had the honor to hear that unexpressible soul-ravishing
mirth, that that Hierarchy of Angels made at the birth of our dear mothers
newborn Bridgroom: And we poor weaklings would heartily rejoice to hear and
see the Church again comforted; therefore I hope you will excuse me, poor
despicable worm, (and with humble reverence I Will but remember you) A Carpenter
was dry Nurse to the holy Son of the most high God; and diverse mean men have
had a hand in repairing of Churches though they could not perfect them; and I
am confident the Church with her decencies and truths will again be in high
esteem with moderate men, when these foggy mists of our misled understandings
are dispersed, as God has already begun to manifest his divine power after his
own way, The wicked fly when none pursue.
without one blow stricken by man as yet, and many of the opposers of Church
and State nonplus'd or amazedly astonished and vanished; and a great part of
that prophecy uttered by the late King performed, and all the rest of it
hasting by divine justice to be made known to all the world, as in the Kings
Book of his Prophesies is foretold:

Nor will he suffer those men long to prosper in their Babel, who build it with
the bones, and cement it with the blood of their Kings. I am confident they
will find avengers of my death amongst themselves* the injuries I have
sustained from them shall be first punished by them, who agreed in nothing so
much as in opposing me. Their impatience to hear the loud cry of my blood,
shall make them think no way better to expiate it than by shedding theirs, who
with them most thirsted after mine; who have cause to fear, that God will both
further divide, and by mutual vengeance afterward destroy. (...), page 179.
A great part of which Prophecy has already been manifested to the observers
of it, and the rest expected.

But let us the lovers of Sion and her sacred-truths, that have had the hateful
names of Malignants, etc. cast upon us, move like sober men that truly fear
God, and desire no revenge, but the love of our Brethren that have been too
much misled by Phanatick humors, (for love covers a multitude of sins)
whereof we are all guilty, and remember it is said 2 Samuel 24. The anger of the
Lord was moved against Israel, and he movedDavid to number Israel and Judah;
and Israel was punished, but the holy-hearted King, when he saw the people in
perplexity, cried out, Lo I have sinned, and I have done wickedly, but these
sheep what have they done? let thine hand, I pray thee, be against me and my
Fathers house: And how did our dear slain Sovereign, that meek Christian and
tenderhearted King, imitate that holy forespoken-of King, when he said page
142. Aftertimes may see what the blindness of this Age will not, and God may
at length show my Subjects, that I chose rather to suffer for them than with
them. Happily I might redeem my self to some show of liberty if I would consent
to enslave them; I had rather hazard the ruin of one King, than to confirm
many Tyrants over them, from whom I pray God deliver them, what ever becomes of
me.

Here was his Christian Charity showed indeed, whose blessed Soul, I
confidently believe, is crowned in eternal bliss, and enjoyes that full
happiness there, that was but promised To be be made Glorious here: But his
Martyrdom will make his Name renowned to all generations to come, and his
Murderers as infamous to all succeeding Ages.

FINIS.

