A DISCOURSE Concerning the LOVE OF GOD.

LONDON, Printed for Awnsham and John Churchil, at the Black-Swan in ^

PREFACE.
THE Prejudice that Piety and Religion receive by being removed from their true
Foundations, is of so ill Consequence; in disturbing, or misleading, the best
meaning and most serious part of Mankind; that any Design which tends to
prevent Mistakes about them, will, I hope, at least merit Pardon. The ensuing
Discourse is Published with this View: It being intended to show the
unserviceableness of an Hypothesis lately recommended to the World for a Ground
of Christianity, and Morality; As likewise, the farther injuriousness of that
Hypothesis to True Religion, and Piety: Which, I think, I may securely affirm,
neither ever have suffered, or ever can suffer so much, from the Arguments of
any Opposers, as from theirs, who induced by Weakness, Vanity, or any other
Motive, have undertaken, or pretended to Support them, upon false Grounds, and
wrong Reasonings. I am, indeed, inclined to Believe (as well as Hope) that the
Notion which this Discourse is levelled against, is in no great danger of being
a very general, or prevailing Opinion: It being too Visionary to be likely to
be received by many Intelligent Persons; And too abstruse to be easily
entertained by those who are altogether unconversant with Scholastic
Speculations. Yet there are so many to whom Novelty alone has sufficient Charms
to recommend any thing, that I cannot but think (if what I have writ answers
the Intention it was writ with) the Subject of the following Papers very well
merited those few Hours that were bestowed upon 'em. And I am confirmed in this
Opinion, by that of one of the Highest order in our Church; Who (since the
Writing of them) I was glad to hear say, That it would be well done of any one
who had leisure for it, to show the weakness, and extravagance of such of Mr.
N's late Practical Discourses as are built upon the Principles of Pere
Malbranche. This Encouragement, added to the like from some other Persons, has
occasioned the Printing of a Discourse which was not writ with such an
intention.

A DISCOURSE Concerning the Love of God.
WHatever Reproaches have been made by the Romanists on the one hand, of the
Want of Books of Devotion in the Church of England; or by the Dissenters on the
other, of a dead and lifeless Way of Preaching; I think it may be affirmed,
That there cannot, any where, be found so good a Collection of Discourses upon
Moral Subjects, as might be made of English Sermons, and other Treatises of
that Nature, written by the Divines of our Church: Which Books are certainly,
in themselves, of the greatest and most general Use of any; and do most conduce
to that which is the chief Aim of Christianity, a good Life. For whatsoever
else its Professors, divided into Parties, may contend about; This they must
all agree in, That we ought to be a People zealous of good Works.

Yet though no body can deny this; And all are forced to allow, that the Duties
of a good Life ought to be practiced; It is certain, that this which is so
essential to Religion, is so far degraded by some, as not to pass for a part of
it. They accordingly distinguish a Religious, from a Moral Man; and carry their
Zeal for the Doctrinal Part of Religion so far, that they seem to lay little
Stress on the Performance of those Virtues recommended by our Savior Christ,
as the Way to Eternal Life; Which Virtues, have been commonly enough termed
Splendid Vices, in those they account not true Believers; And the Books writ by
others, to recommend the Practice of them to the World, are looked upon by
these Men, as little more worthy of a Christian's Perusal, as such, than
Histories or Maxims of humane Prudence.

But others there are, who do not in this manner undervalue Morality, that yet
perhaps are not less injurious to it; Whilst they strain the Duties of it to an
impracticable Pitch; or pretend to ascend by it to something beyond, or above
it: Which has been mightily the Fault of those in the Church of Rome; Who
having a better Relish of Religion, than to be satisfied with one consisting of
nothing but idle, superstitious, and pompous Shows, have betaken themselves to
that which they call the inward Way, or Life of Contemplation: Of which, there
never has wanted great Numbers in that Church, known in several times by
several Names, which distinguished them more than their Opinions. For in those,
they all agreed in one common Difference from all the rest, though variously
expressed: And who (whatever their Errors have been) have yet seemed the most
in earnest in the Business of Religion, of any that the Roman Church can boast
of.

But however excusable these may be, in regard of their own Church (which
perhaps allows them no other Way of being Religious, than that which leads them
into these Mistakes) they yet are certainly very injurious to Christianity in
the Representations they make of it; by supposing, as they do, the Perfection
of a Christian State to consist in Contemplation; And the Duties of a social
Life (for which it is plain Mankind were intended) to be low Matters, fit only
to exercise the young Christian, not yet advanced into the spiritual State; to
which when he arrives, even but to the first Degree (for they talk of three
Degrees at least of it, by which Perfection is to be ascended to) he then looks
down upon all the Duties of the second Table, as an inferior Dispensation,
belonging to those of a lower Class: And when he is ascended to the highest
Degree, he is then got above Reason it self; being first melted and brought to
nothing, and then lost and swallowed up in God. And by these, who suppose
themselves thus far advanced, the Use of Reasoning, and internal Discourse,
tending to fix our Affections upon God, and expressing it self in sensible
Devotion; and even outward Acts of Obedience to God's Will, are looked upon as
parts of the active Life, and less perfect State of a Christian; as may be seen
in diverse Books which treat of this Matter, and particularly in Santa Sophia,
Treat. 1st. Chapter 1. c. 3. Which sufficiently shows of how dangerous Consequence
it is to talk after this Fashion; and to erect into a Rule, or Dispensation of
Life, what possibly the Experience of some (whose Circumstances, or
extraordinary Illuminations, for ends unknown (and which we have nothing to do
with) may have enabled them to give a sober, and intelligible Sense of to
themselves; though to others it appear Jargon, Enthusiasm, or even Irreligion.

If Books of this kind (which more or less those usually are, the Papists call
their spiritual Books) are wanting in the Church of England, it is well that
they are so; since they would be likely to make many more Enthusiasts than good
Christians. For as the Bishop of Worcester (in his Fanaticism of the Roman
Church) says very well: If once an unintelligible Way of Practical Religion
become the Standard of Devotion, no Men of Sense and Reason will ever set
themselves about it; but leave it to be understood by mad Men, and practiced by
Fools. Which is a Reflection that it were to be wished all would make, who may
be tempted by Affectation of Novelty, Fondness of an Hypothesis, or any other
better Reason, to build their Practical and Devotional Discourses upon
Principles which not only will not bear the Test, but which oblige them to lay
down such Assertions in Morality, as sober and well disposed Christians cannot
understand to be practicable: Than which, I think there never was any more
evidently so, than that Mankind are obliged strictly, as their Duty, to love
with Desire, nothing but God only; Every Degree of Desire of any Creature
whatsoever, being Sin. This Assertion, though not altogether new, yet has been
but lately brought into our Pulpits, and been pretended to be set on Foot upon
a Philosophical, or Natural Ground, viz. That God, not the Creature, is the
immediate, efficient Cause of our Sensations: For whatever gives us Pleasure
(say they who hold this Hypothesis) has a right to our Love; but God only gives
us Pleasure, therefore he only has a right to our Love.

Indeed, in a Sermon upon this Subject, Matt. xxij. 37. the Author pretends to
establish his Sense of the Words upon a double Basis. 1. That God is the only
Cause of our Love. 2. That he is also the only proper Object of it. But in
Reference to the first, he does no more to this Purpose, but prove what
(plainly expressed) cannot be contested; viz. That we receive the Power which
we have of Desiring, from God: And then asks himself several Questions, as, Can
God act for a Creature? Does not God make all things for himself? etc. Which
amount only to thus much, that they signify it is his Opinion, that God (who
doubtless made all things for himself) because his own Glory was his primary
End in creating all things, had not therefore Secondary, and intermediate Ends
for which he made the Creatures to operate one upon another: Which is but in a
tacit Way to beg the Question. But he confesses rightly, that the Stress of
this Business lies in the Proof of the second Proposition. Upon this Hinge
(says he) the whole Weight of the Theory turns, viz. That God is the only
proper Object of our Love, as being the only Cause of all our pleasing
Sensations; the Creatures having no Efficiency at all to operate upon us; they
being only occasional Causes of those Sentiments which God produces in us. And
on this Foundation it then is, that he asserts, that every Act that carries our
Desires toward the Creature is sinful: Which Opinion if received, and
followed, must necessarily bring in the like unintelligible Way of Practical
Religion, which the Bishop of Worcester has justly censured in the Church of
Rome.

But however persuaded, either the Author himself, or this great Assertor of
this Hypothesis are of its Truth, or Reasonableness; As there was no need at
all of interessing Religion, and Morality, in the Matter; so it is also very
unserviceable to them; Since that which they would infer from it is manifestly
no just Consequence, any more than a useful, or practicable Doctrine. And a Man
that had not been mighty fond of an Hypothesis, would never have attempted from
the Pulpit, to fortify by Scripture, an Opinion so opposite to the Tenor of
it; as well as to that Morality which has been so excellently preached to the
World by the Divines of his own Church: Whose Discourses are generally, if not
universally, founded upon this Supposition; (or at least imply it) that there
may be a lawful Love of the Creatures: And being herein conformed to right
Reason, and consequently adapted to humane Life, they have helped to make some
Opposition to that Irreligion, which by looseness of Manners on the one hand,
and uncharitable Zeal on the other, has spread it self amongst us in this last
Age; But must doubtless have prevailed further, had not more reasonable
Principles of Morality been inculcated into Men, than can be grounded upon
seeing all things in God, etc.

For apparently, if the practical Duties of Religion had not been better
accounted for, and enforced, than by the so much boasted of spiritual Books of
the Roman Church, Religion and Virtue had before this time been disputed, or
ridiculed, out of our World. And yet any of these Books of mystical Divinity,
will be found as well able to support them, as some of the late practical
Discourses of Mr. N. or as any Man's else can be, upon the Principle of our
being obliged to have no Love of Desire for any of the Creatures: Which is
particularly endeavored to be made good in the forementioned Sermon, upon the
great Commandment of the Law, Matt. xxij. 37. Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thy Heart, with all thy Soul, and with all thy Mind. Wherein the
Author pretends to show, that all our Love is to be so entirely centered upon
God, that not any part of it is to be allowed to the Creatures.

But least the enlarging this first Commandment to such a Magnitude, should
make it seem to swallow up the second; He prevents that Objection by showing,
that these Two Commandments clash not at all: The Love of God, and of our
Neighbor, (as he says) being different Loves: For we love God with Love of
Desire; and love, or should love, our Neighbor, only with Love of Benevolence.
Which Distinction, in other Discourses of his, he is more large upon; and seems
to believe the latter part of it confirmed by these Words, Thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thy self.

Moses, in Levit.xix. repeating to the Children of Israel sundry Laws, and
amongst others, several special Duties toward their Neighbor, thus concludes
the last; ( ver. the 18th.) Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. Which
Conclusion is comprehensive of all that preceded it, or that had been omitted;
And in a short Rule, better teaches the Extent of what we owe to our Neighbor,
than it was possible any Enumeration of Particulars could. This Duty is indeed
so fully expressed herein, that we cannot conceive any Addition could be made
to the Perfection of this Precept by our Blessed Savior; Who came to teach us
the whole Will of the Father, and to give us the most perfect Rule of Life that
had yet been delivered to Mankind; and accordingly, Luke the 4th. chapter v. 25.
being asked, Master what shall I do to inherit Eternal Life? He said, How
read thou in the Law? It being answered, Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, with all thy Mind, and with all thy
Strength; and thy Neighbor as thy self: He replied, Thou have answered right;
This do, and thou shall live. He had answered right, in joining together these
two Commandments in the Law, on which all the rest of the Law and Prophets did
depend, Matt. xxij. 40. And our Savior assures him the Rule of the Law was in
neither part short, or defective: For he says, This do, and thou shall live. We
are here taught, that the Love of God, and of our Neighbor, comprises the
whole of our Duty: And accordingly we are elsewhere also told, That Love is
the fullfilling of the Law. Its Regulation therefore is certainly of the utmost
Consequence to us; And the Measures of it are, That we love God with all our
Heart, with all our Souls, with all our Mind, and with all our Strength; and
our Neighbor as our selves.

These Precepts are joined together in the Gospel, and there is a very near
Affinity between them. But they are not so joined in the Law from whence they
are cited; Neither is there any Appearance that those to whom they were there
given understood, or could understand by them, the Love of God and the Love of
their Neighbor to be distinct Affections, differing in kind; as is affirmed by
Mr. N. Who in Pursuance of (at best) a useless Notion, would take from a great
part of Mankind their only sure Retreat, when bewildered in the Maze of
Opinions, endlesly contested by the Men of Skill in Disputation: He having done
as much to perplex the plain Duties of Morality, as others have done the
speculative parts of Religion. But there appears no Ground from the Text here,
to affirm that the Command of loving their Neighbor as themselves, was (as he
says it was) not only an absolute Measure, but a relative Character put in on
purpose to distinguish it from their Love of God, Page 165. of his
Philosophical and Divine Letters: Unless that Mr. N. will say, that the Words
necessarily imply so much; which is to beg the thing he contests for, and not
to prove it.

Moses speaking as a Lawgiver, to a Multitude that did not much refine in
their Speculations, or distinguish things with Philosophical Niceness, seems
very plainly by this Text (as the foregoing ones make it evident) to design
only to tell them how far the Love of their Neighbor ought to extend: As not
only to the doing no Injury (specified in sundry Instances) but even to the
bearing no Grudge; And (Finally says he) Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy
self. That is, do him as little Harm, and as much Good, as thou desire should
be done to thy self. Whether, or no, he should be the Object of Desire, is not
determined by this Precept, any farther than as Love naturally draws Desire
after it. But against the Lawfulness of any Creature's being desired by us, it
is said by Mr. N. That as we cannot love God with a Love of Benevolence, he
wanting nothing to be wished to his Perfection, and Happiness; so we ought not
to love the Creature with a Love of Desire, they being incapable to make any
part of our Happiness. What we cannot do, we are certain we shall not: And we
need little Caution, not to desire what is not desirable, or (which is here
equivalent) not pleasing to us. But though Men may possibly (in the Ignorance
they are in of their own Being, and the Constitution of other things, with
their mutual Relations) mistake, that which can make them finally happy; yet
none can be supposed not to know what, at the present, pleases them; which is
the Happiness, or Pleasure here intended. How little it signifies to this
Matter (though the Stress of the Assertion lies in it) to say, That sensible
Objects are not the efficient, but occasional Causes of our pleasing
Sensations, will soon be considered. But if when we use the Word Love, we
reflected what it is we mean by it, we should perhaps be more inlighten'd than
by Mr. N's Definition of it, and should learn to distinguish better, than to
call different Passions by the same Name; or confound Love, with whatever is a
Concomitant of it.

When I say that I love my Child, or my Friend, I find that my Meaning is, that
they are things I am delighted in; Their Being is a Pleasure to me.

When I say that I love God above all, I find I would express that he is my
chiefest Good, and I delight in him above all things.

Again, when I say that I love my self, I likewise mean by it that my Being is
dear, and pleasing to me. To say one loves a thing, and that it is that which
one has Complaisency in, is just the same: Love being only a Name given to that
Disposition, or Act of the Mind, we find in our selves toward any thing we are
pleased with; And so far as it is simply Love, consists barely in That; and
cannot be distinguished into different Acts of wishing well, and desiring;
which are other different Acts of the Mind, consequential to Love, according to
the difference of the Object. To intelligent Beings that we love, our Love is
followed with acts of Benevolence, or wishing well to the Being, and Happiness
of that thing that helps to make us happy; and with desire of enjoying that in
them that delights us: And our Love to Inanimate things is followed with
Benevolence and Well wishing to their Being, if it may be continued with their
Enjoyment; and with desire also of enjoying them. But, because Benevolence
appears most in Wishing Happiness to Beings capable of it; And the use of most
Inanimate things which we love and desire to enjoy, destroys them in the
Enjoyment; Therefore Learned Men have talked as if there were two sorts of Love
Whereas Love is but one simple act of the Mind, always accompanied with Desire,
and Benevolence too, where the Object is capable of it. But as that Definition
which Mr. N. has given us, (viz. That Love is that Original Weight, Bent or
Endeavor, whereby the Soul stands inclined to, and is moved forwards to Good
ingeneral, or Happiness) tells as not so well what Love is, as our own Hearts
can when we consult them; So perhaps an Examination of them will not only
better acquaint us with the Nature of our Passions; but also direct us better
to the Measures of their Regulation, than Notions concerning them deduced from
the Consequences of an Hypothesis.

Let us therefore consider more particularly, how by the different Objects of
our Love our Hearts are affected.

When we say we love our selves Have we then only a simple Perception of
Pleasure, and Complaisance in our Being? Or is any thing else annexed to that
Pleasure as a necessary Concomitant, or Consequence of it Mr. N. says, (
Letters Philosophical and Divine, p. 165.) that our love of our selves is not
love of Desire, but love of Benevolence most undoubtedly. Most undoubtedly
these words of Mr. N. very much clash with what he affirms elsewhere (see his
Theory and Regulation of Love, p. 14. and 15.) where having reduced or
comprehended Love under Concupiscence and Benevolence, he expressly tells us,
that There is no desire without Benevolence, and no Benevolence without define.
But he does not in this oppose himself only, but Truth also since the desire of
the continuation of our Being is truly a Desire of our Selves, a Desire of
something of our selves which we have not already: As he that having Light and
Warmth enough of the Sun, desiring its Continuation, desires more of the Sun
than he has already. The Continuation of our Being is necessary to our
Happiness in the Beatifick Vision: And if we desire more of that Happiness by
only desiring the Continuation of it, we certainly desire more of our selves,
by desiring the Continuation of our Being.

Let us farther observe, how our Hearts are affected in our love of other
things. Our Being, we evidently find stands in need of other Beings for its
Support and Happiness; because it is not sufficient alone for either: And
therefore to the Complaisance or Pleasure we have in it, we find necessarily
annexed a wishing to it whatever we conceive may either continue, or improve it.

As to God himself, whom Mr. N. makes the sole Object of our Desires; I wish
Mr. N. had a little more explained himself what he means by our Desiring of
God. For the Perfection and Superlativeness of his Nature, makes him the Object
of our Love, Desire and Benevolence, in a quite different way from Created
Beings. We love God for those Excellencies of his Nature, wherein he infinitely
surpasses all that is good, or desirable in the Creature. When we are said to
Desire him, I think we mean such a Communication of his Goodness, whereby he
bestows on us any Degree of Happiness: And in this sense, we shall to Eternity
desire more and more of him.

But he being both Necessary and Perfect, we can therefore wish no good to him,
which he has not already; Because we cannot conceive any Addition of Good can
be made to him. Our Benevolence is limited by his perfect Nature, only to Acts
of Joy and Complaisance in his Perfections, which is all we can do; But the
doing of That declares, That if any thing could be added to his Perfection and
Happiness, we should wish it. And therefore, as an Expression of that
Benevolence, it is made our Duty to give him Praise, and as much as we can to
Glorify him.

Again, When we say, That we love our Children, or Friends; It is evident also
from the Nature of the Object, that we not only wish to them as to our selves,
whatever we conceive may tend to continue, or improve their Being; but also,
that Desire of them is a necessary Concomitant of our Love: Because we are not
always present with them, whereby we should enjoy them more: And it is
impossible to love the Presence, or Kindness of any thing, without desiring to
possess it. Now, If any one will say, we ought not to be so pleased; They then
deny that we ought to love: For we cannot love but what we are pleased with. It
is true, that every one may apply words as they think fit; But then others
ought to take care not to be imposed on by them. And if any one will either
tell us, That we love things in which we find no Pleasure; Or, That being
pleased with a thing, we do not yet love it; Or will call different Passions by
the same Name; Or imply in the word Love, that complication of other Passions
inseparable, indeed, from Love, but varying according to the Objects of it; It
will concern us to examine what they say, before we receive their Dictates, as
Measures for the Regulation of a Passion, upon the right Regulation of which
depends both our Present, and Future Happiness.

Love is but one simple Act of the Mind: But whether our desiring of what we
love, or only wishing well to it, or both, follows that act of Love; the Nature
of the loved Object alone Determines. For if that be both capable of being a
good to us, and of receiving good from us, or from any thing else, it is then
certain that we wish both: If it be capable of but one, and we know it to be
so, it is certain we can then wish but one. The Distinction which is made of
love of Benevolence, and Concupiscence, (arising only from the different
Natures of the Objects of our Love) is only the Mis-application of the word
Love to different acts consequent to Love, but distinct from it, and depending
on the different Nature of the Object.

But it is said, That no Creature is capable of being a Good to us. Every Man's
Experience confutes this every Day, and would do so, although that were true
that these Men contend for; which therefore cannot in the least tend to promote
Piety.

It is certain, that to believe (which is evidently true) that we receive all
our Good from the Hand of God; ought to be, and effectively is, the proper
Ground of our Love of Him above all things. But that we do receive all our good
from the Hand of God, is equally acknowledged whether we believe the creature
receives an Efficiency from God to excite pleasing Sensations in us; Or that
God himself exhibiting part of his Essence to us, at the presence of the
Creature, is himself the immediate Author of those Pleasing Sensations: Which
is the Hypothesis proposed for the Advancement of the Love of God.

But as Truth of no kind is ever advantaged by Falsehood; so also, it seems a
respect Due to so important, and withal, so evident a Duty as the Love of God,
not needlessly to lay the stress of it upon any Doubtful, Unintelligible, or
Precarious Hypothesis; whatever Pretenses it carries with it of Piety.

Pompous Rhapsodies of the Soul's debasing her self, when she descends to set
the least part of her Affections upon any thing but her Creator, (however well
they may possibly be intended) are plainly but a complementing God with the
contempt of his Works, by which we are the most effectually led to Know, Love,
and Adore him. And such kind of Expressions as carry not a Relative, but
Absolute Abhorrence, or Contempt of Enjoyments the most Lawful, seem only
allowable, as unpremeditated Raptures of Devout Minds, not the Productions of
Philosophical Disquisition; and will only affect those that are truly Pious,
whilst they carry a show of some Truth in the Heart of the Speaker, which they
strictly have not in themselves. For it is not unlikely that a lively Remorse
may so turn the Stream of some Men's Affections from all sensible Pleasures,
and give them so strong a Disgust for them, that the very Remembrances and
Ideas of those Pleasures, even where allowable, may become Ungrateful: As Men
have often Aversion to see or hear of Places or Persons, (othertimes Dear to
them) by which, or in which, they have suffered much. The Passions where they
are strong, argue by a Logic of their own, not that of Reason, which they
often and significantly enough, invert to serve their own Purpose. And when
Religion is in the case (with which too many are persuaded Reason has little to
do) they can easily advance this so far, as to dress out an entire System,
intelligible only by Sentiment, not to Reason; of which, perhaps some of the
Mystical Divines are an Example. But to what Extravagance soever this may be
carried, it is not therefore to be believed, That he who requires the Service
of the whole Man, rejects the Passions from bearing a part; whilst we suffer
them neither to impose upon our selves, nor others, to the admitting of wrong
Notions, Prejudicial to true Religion. And it is likely, that many People of
weak Understandings, may owe most of their Religion to their Passions; It being
certain, that if some Men had no more Religion than they are capable of having
by a Rational Disquisition, it must be exceeding little.

But whenever any one pretends to prescribe Measures of Duty, not suited to a
Popular Audience, but such as shall challenge the strictest Attention and
Scrutiny of Reason, he ought to exclude all Metaphor and Hyperbole. For those
Notions will deservedly be suspected of some Defect, which are ushered in, or
attended with Flights, not only out of the reach of common Sense, but which
oppose the Experience of Mankind; As all such do that have for Foundation the
Creature's being incapable to procure us any good: There being none of them,
perhaps, that we approach, which either does not, or may not, contribute to our
Good, or Ill; And which truly are not in Effect allowed to do so, by those who
deny them to be Efficient Causes. For it will be found to amount to the same
thing in regard of us, and our Obligation to desire them, whether they are
Efficient, or Occasional Causes, of our pleasing Sensations: The proof of which
last Opinion, (taken from their own Ignorance of any other way to explain the
Nature of our Ideas, and Perceptions) They can hardly feel the force of;
Without having a great Opinion of their own Faculties, or a very small one of
the Power, and Wisdom of God. And they must also be very clear sighted, if they
can discern how this Hypothesis of seeing all things in God, helps us one jot
further in the Knowledge of our Ideas, and Perceptions; which is the thing it
was Primarily pretended to be designed for. They who advance this Notion, do
only fetch a Circuit, and then return where they were before, without gaining
any advantage, by Derogating (as they do) from the Wisdom of God, in framing
his Creatures like the Idols of the Heathen, that have Eyes, and see not; Ears,
and hear not, etc.

But we are only now concerned, to inquire of what Use this Opinion is in
Morality; That any one should be zealous in asserting it on that account.

The Creatures they say are occasional Causes of our pleasing Sensations. Then,
however, they are Causes of them. They deny not also, That they are such Causes
as are always accompanied with the Effect, and without which the Effect is not
produced. And are they not then considered as Goods to us, just the same as if
they were efficient Causes? Or must we think a beautiful Flower has not the
same Appearance, whether it be believed that God has lodged a power in the
Flower to excite the Idea of its Color in us, or that he himself exhibits the
Idea of its Color at the presence of that Object? If the Flower is either way
equally pleasing (as certainly it is) then it is also equally desirable. But
the Wisdom of God cannot herein be equally admired, because it is not equally
conspicuous. For if God immediately exhibits to me all my Idea's, and that I do
not truly see with my Eyes, and hear with my Ears; then all that wonderful
Exactness and curious Workmanship, in framing the Organs of Sense, seems
superfluous and vain; Which is no small Reflection upon infinite Wisdom.

We are moreover told, That the whole of our Duty, and Happiness, consists in
making God the sole Object of our Desires; The least spark of which sacred Fire
cannot light upon the Creatures, without so far defrauding him: And that the
Reason of this Duty is, because the Creatures are not the efficient Causes of
our Sensations. If this be so, this seems also to lay an Imputation upon the
Wisdom and Goodness of God, who has laid the Foundation of our Duty in a Reason
which he has concealed from us. For this great Cause why we should love him
alone, ( viz. because the Creatures are not the efficient Causes of our
Sensations) is so hidden from us by all the Art, and Contrivance, observable in
Nature, that if it were purposely designed to be concealed, and we purposely
intended to be misled, it could not be more so. For in Effect till this last
Age, it has not been discovered; Or at least very sparingly; And even still (as
it seems) only Heads cast in Metaphysical Moulds are capable of it. This, I
say, one would think were some Reflection upon the Divine Wisdom; Yet no less
than this is said. For the whole of our Duty is placed in a right Regulation of
our Love: The whole of that Regulation in making God the sole Object of our
Desires; And having only Charity, or Benevolence, for his Creatures. And this
Distribution is grounded on no clear Text of Scripture; Nor on other Foundation
from Reason, than this only, That the Creatures are not the efficient Causes of
our pleasing Sensations.

Indeed, sometimes, the Severity of some Precepts of Morality may well be
thought to have been a hindrance to the Discovery of their Truth; And this of
Centring all our Affections upon God, and not permitting the least part of our
Desires to run out after sensible Goods, carries at first Sight, a specious
Pretense of being of that Nature. And doubtless, with many plain, well-meaning
People, (who understood not the Metaphysical Ground of it, But endeavored to
practice it without pretending to prove it) it tended to great Austerities;
sometimes perhaps Useful; but most commonly Superstitious, and Pernicious to
true Religion. But a late Teacher of this Doctrine, though he has advanced the
Theory, is more favorable in the practical part, than to recommend by it any
such Popish Mortifications and Severities: And he, with great Reason, seems to
believe, that the good things of this World were given to be enjoyed by us. No
Creature he says, indeed, can be Loved, or Desired, without Defrauding God, and
even committing the Sin of Idolatry, Vol. III. Practical Discourse, p. 62.67.
Consequently therefore, there can be no more hateful Sin to the Almighty than
(feeling Cold, or Hunger) to desire Fire, or Food, as any good to us: But he
tells us at the same time, That though the things which satisfy these Natural
Cravings are by no means to be desired as Goods; Yet they may be securely
sought for as such, and enjoyed, p. 73, 74. He whose Head is cast in a
Metaphysical Mould has, it may be, Privileges of Nature which accompany it,
that ordinary Mortals are Strangers to; Who though they can conceive indeed a
thing to be loved without being sought, or to be sought without being loved;
Yet from the Frailty of their own Constitutions will scarce ever be persuaded
in Fact that they, and this Author, being thoroughly Cold, seek for Fire, upon
different Motives; Or will think that He being truly Hungry, seeks Food only
upon a prudential Account, and not out of any Desire that he has to the Meat;
Should he tell them ever so much, That the Mind of Man, conscious of its own
Dignity, and Innate Nobleness, ought not to debase it self to such mean
Affections, as the Love of any Creature: The Creatures being no more capable to
please any Faculty than to Create it; And therefore have no Pretense to the
least Interest in our Love, Prac. D. p. 59. And it will even not be easy for
him to persuade them, That he does not, in this, vilify the Wisdom of his
Creator, and reproach God for not having made him as he ought to have done. For
Men are very seldom talked out of their Senses. And if they should not want the
Charity to believe him sincere; they will yet also be very ready to conclude
him unacquainted with the World, and Humane Nature, to judge of that of others
by his own extraordinary, and Metaphysical Constitution.

But the Words of the Text, Matt. xxij. 37. Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thy Heart, with all thy Soul, and with all thy Mind, he says, will
admit of no other good Interpretation than that God is solely, and only, to be
Loved: Since with no tolerable Sense he can be said to Love God with all his
Soul, and all his Mind, that only loves him above other things; Allowing other
things at the same time a share in his Love, p. 10. The highest Sense, he
thinks, that is generally put upon these Words amounts to no more than this:
That God is to be the Prime, and Principal, Object of our Love, and Delight:
That we are to Love him in a superlative way above all other things whatsoever,
so as to lose any Good, or suffer any Evil, rather than commit the least Sin
against him: That we are always to prefer him in our Love, choosing to obey him
rather than Man, and to please him rather than satisfy our own Will, and to
enjoy him rather than any Worldy or Carnal Pleasure, p. 5, 6. But this
Interpretation, he thinks, exhausts not the Sense of the Commandment; since no
Logic, or Grammar, can bear to call the Part, though the larger Part, the
whole, p. 10. But it is not the Question whether Logic, or Grammar, will bear
calling the Part the whole; but whether every Text in Scripture is to be
interpreted by his Logic, and Grammar: Or whether, in some Cases, Scripture
does not accommodate it self to the fashion, and figurative ways of speaking
usual amongst Men; Which when rightly, not literally understood, are not
contrary to Logic, and Grammar. This it is plain the Opinion of the Divines,
and other Learned Men is, That the Scripture does so accommodate it self:
Because they have interpreted this Text, and not this alone, but others also in
such a Sense. And therefore if he would put any Stress upon this Argument, he
must first show that those are mistaken who think that Scripture oftentimes
speaks figuratively and popularly; which is so received an Opinion, that to
oppose it as he does (or else says nothing to the Purpose) without giving any
reason at all, in this place, for so doing, seems to argue more Arrogance than
Impartiality in the search of Truth. Now if Scripture does sometimes
accommodate it self to the ordinary ways of speaking amongst Men; Why should it
not be thought to do so in this Text? Wherein the common Sense of Mankind
opposes any other Meaning as possible, than that which is familiar to us. For
it cannot be denied, that, in every Language, nothing is more ordinary than to
say we love a Person entirely, or with all our Hearts, when we love them very
much; And yet better may this be said, if we love them above all others. And as
we mean no more than one of these two things, by these Expressions, so we
design not to be understood otherwise: And this is so well known, that we are
also never mistaken in them.

But it is yet more evident, that this Text is to be understood in the familiar
Sense of the Words; If it be remembered that they are the Injunction of a
Lawmakers ( Deuteronomy. vi. 5. from whence our Savior cites them) to a Rude, and
Illiterate People. Now the Duty that these Words injoins, Mr. N. himself
confesses, cannot be carried higher than the Interpreters have carried it (viz.
to Love God supremely, and above all things) without building in the Air;
Unless his Hypothesis be received: Which unless he will say Moses delivered
also to the Israelites, he makes him an admirable Lawgiver, to deliver to his
People the most Essential of all his Laws, so as it was not, or cannot be
thought, likely that one of a Hundred, if at least any one amongst them, did
understand it. For I suppose it will not be denied by Mr. N. That though by the
Parturiency of his own Mind, he very early light upon this Notion, and was not
(as the World imagines he was) beholden to Pere Malbranche for it; That the
Israelites generally were not so speculative, and philosophical as he, in their
Natural Genius; And yet less, that they either Cultivated any such Speculations
in the time of Moses; Or had any Tradition, or received Opinion amongst them,
That the Creatures were not Efficient, but Occasional Causes of their Pleasing
Sensations; by which they might be enabled to understand this Command
concerning loving God. not in the familiar, and conceivable Sense of the Words,
but in Mr. N's Logical, and Grammatical, though otherwise Inconceivable Sense
of them.

But besides that Lawgivers always give their Laws in the most familiar manner
they can; The Inconceivableness also of Mr. N's Sense of the Words as a Moral
Rule, is a sufficient reason in it self why Moses should not be understood
according to his Explanation; Which puts a Meaning upon the Command that is
apparently, and plainly impracticable: viz. That God is so wholly to be loved,
that it is defrauding Him, to place the least Degree of our Love upon the
Creatures; And that therefore, though they may be sought and enjoyed by us as
Goods, yet they cannot be desired by us as such, without Sin. This
Inconceivableness of any other Sense, that could (by his Auditors at least) be
put upon his Words; might, I doubt not, in any other Case, plead Moses's Excuse
to Mr. N. himself, for having thus transgressed, as he thinks, against Logic
and Grammar, whilst he expressed himself in a way, that may well be supposed to
have been as familiar and usual then, as it is now. It is to be hoped, that to
many others he will not need excuse in this, wherein, (with what has a Natural
Connection, and is accordingly, out of Moses, joined to it by our Savior) he
has so well comprehended the Duty of Mankind, that Christ says, This do, and
thou shall live: That is, Love the Lord thy God with all thy Soul, with all thy
Heart, with all thy Mind, and with all thy Strength: And thy Neighbor as thy
self.

These Commands have no Obscurity, or Difficulty at all to be understood, if we
have honest Hearts, and Heads not possessed with an Hypothesis which every
thing must be made to chime to. For to love any thing with all our Hearts, is
in its known and usual Signification, to love it a dently. Moses joins to
loving God with all our Hearts, loving him also, with all our Souls, and all
our Minds; That is, with all the Faculties of our reasonable Nature. And by
this, we are taught not only to love him very ardently, but above all other
things; As being our Creator, and great Benefactor, upon whom we depend every
Moment, and from whom we receive all the Good that we enjoy, and from whose
Bounty we expect all that we hope for; As also, as being every way in himself
infinitely (beyond all Degrees of Comparison) a Being the most lovely. Foolish
Men (too frequent Experience shows) love ardently oftentimes, without
considering whether the Object of their Love be worthy of it. But to love with
the Mind and the Soul, as well as the Heart, is not to love so; but to love
with the Understanding, Rationally, as well as Passionately. And we cannot Love
God with our Souls and with our Mind, that is, with the Application of our
Understandings, and with a reasonable Love, without loving him above all his
Creatures; Because he is infinitely more lovely; And every ones reason, when he
consults it, must always assent that he is so.

The Duty then that we are taught is plainly what reason requires, viz. That we
love the most lovely Being above all others; And that all the Powers, and
Faculties of our Mind, consent in this Preference of him: That we think of him
(as well as we are able) as he is; and pay the highest Tribute of Affection,
and Adoration, to him that our Natures are capable of. This is also plainly
Practicable, and what we may know whether we perform or no, by asking our
selves, whether we are willing to part with any other Good for the Sake of
this; (as Father, Mother, Husband, Wife, or Children, and c.) Which our Savior
tells us, whoever is not ready to part with for his Sake is not worthy of him;
But that whosoever parts with any of these for the Gospel's Sake, shall receive
manifold Reward, both in this Life, and in the World to come. Now if none of
these were allowed to be desirable to us, but to be only Objects of our Charity
(as Mr. N. says they ought to be) Why should we deserve so great Reward for
forsaking of them for God's Sake? And why should our Savior, as he plainly
does, confirm the Desireableness of these things to us, if they were not in
some Degree allowed to be desired?

But Mr. N. says, we are commanded to Love our Neighbor, as our selves; And
that it being plain, that we do not love our selves with a Love of Desire,
therefore it is plain that we ought not to love our Neighbor so.

Moses, in Levit. xix. from whence the above cited Text is taken, having
rehearsed diverse other Laws to the People, comes to tell them what they owe to
their Neighbor; which he does from the 13 to the 18th. Verse; with which he
thus concludes: Thou shall not avenge, nor bear any grudge against the Children
of thy People. But thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. The Sense of
these Words could not be mistaken by any one who was not prepossessed with an
Hypothesis, which he was willing to support from Scripture Authority. For Moses
having told the People, That they should not defraud their Neighbor; That they
should not mock at his Infirmities: That they should not oppress him; But judge
in Righteousness, not respecting the Person of the Poor or the Rich; That they
should not only not stand against the Blood of their Neighbor; But also, not
hate him in their Heart; And further, That they should not only take care of
his Temporal Welfare, but also of his Spiritual; By rebuking him when he sins;
And likewise, be so far from avenging themselves when injured by him, that they
should not so much as bear a Grudge against him; He concludes all with that
which ought to be the Spring from which all these good Offices to our Neighbor
should proceed; and which in short, fully teaches us the Extent of our Duty to
him: Thou shall Love thy Neighbor as thy self. That is, plainly, That as we
love our selves; and from that Principle of Love, do good to our selves; so we
should also love our Neighbor, and from that Principle of Love to him, should
do him all the good that we can: Not only barely performing toward him the
outward Acts of those Duties here injoined, or any other; But performing them
upon the same Principles of Delight, and Complaisance in his well being which
we have in our own; Without which, all our Performances will be defective.

We must here consider, Moses speaking either as a Lawgiver, or as a
Philosopher. If as the First, then without doubt he must be thought to have
spoke so, as the People whom he spoke to could the easiliest apprehend him. And
the whole Scope of his Discourse, makes the abovementioned Sense of his Words
plainly the most obvious meaning of them, viz. That as People love themselves,
and upon that Principle of Love do good to themselves; So also it is their Duty
to love their Neighbor; without which, they cannot discharge what they owe to
him. Neither could any other Sense be put upon the Words of Moses, Thou shall
Love thy Neighbor as thy self; Without the Learned Distinction of Love of
Benevolence, and Love of Concupiscence; Which it is hard to believe, That Mr.
N, or any one else can think many, if any, of the Israelites were acquainted
with. Though if he could suppose they had been so, and that Moses himself had had
Regard to it; and had also Philosophiz'd as ill as the People; I wonder Mr. N.
should not see that it would yet make nothing to his purpose: Since Moses is
not here telling them all that they lawfully may do, but all that they
necessarily must do, not to fail in their Duty.

But if Mr. N. had rather Moses should be considered here, speaking as a
Philosopher, according to, (and instructing the People in) the true Nature of
things; as well as laying down Precepts for them to obey; It is then more
evident, That the Words of Moses will not only not comply with the Sense He
puts upon them, but also that they are opposite to it. For Moses says, Thou
shall Love thy Neighbor as thy self: That is, thou shall take the same
Complaisance, in the Being, and well Being of thy Neighbor, as in thy own. Now
it is manifestly impossible, and contradictious, that we should rejoice, and
take Complaisance, in what is no way desirable to us: Or that we should not
desire that in which we rejoice, and take Complaisance. The Being therefore,
and well Being of our Neighbor; must necessarily be desirable to us; and we
could not otherwise love him as our selves. For it is certain, That our own
Being, and well Being, are desirable to us: (Who is there that does not desire
the Continuation of them?) And therefore that there is no Love without Desire,
any more than without Benevolence (as is apparent in our Love of God) so far as
the Objects of our Love admits of both.

But Love simply, as is above said, is that Disposition, or Act, of the Mind,
which we find in our selves toward any thing we are pleased with; and consists
barely in that Disposition, or Act; And cannot be distinguished into different
Acts of wishing well, or Benevolence; And Desiring: Which are other different
Acts of the Mind, exerted according to the different Objects of our Love. We
desire to enjoy in every thing, that in them which delights us: And we wish
well to the Being of every thing that helps to make us happy. If their Being
can be continued with our Enjoyment of them; that Enjoyment is also necessarily
desired by us: It being impossible for any Creature not to Desire whatever
appears to them to make a part of their Happiness.

But now whence is it that arises either those Wars, and Violences, that are in
the World amongst Men one with another; or those Tumults and Perturbations,
that too frequently spring up in their own Breasts, when all things without
them are Serene, Peaceable, and Quiet? From Desire, it is true, all these
Mischiefs proceed: And Desire is the inexhaustible Fountain of Folly, Sin, and
Misery.

Is it not therefore worthy of our greatest Application, and Endeavors, to
free our selves from so Dangerous Evils? Without doubt it is so. And this has
always been the Care of the Wife: Present, as well as Future Happiness, being
concerned in it.

Qui Cupit aut metuit, juvat illum sic Domus aut res;
Ut Lippum pictae Tabulae fomenta podagram,
Auriculas Citharae collecta sorde dolentes.
But we are to enquire what remedy Religion gives us to this Disease? And that
we are sure can be no other than Reason prescribes; which is to proportion our
Desires to the worth of things: For where they go beyond that, we are certain
to be disappointed, whether we miss, or obtain, what we desire. But so far as
the enjoyment of things are in their real worth answerable to our Desires; so
far we are really Happy: And should we always so succeed in a constant train of
our Desires, we should, according to our Capacity, be perfectly Happy.

We cannot conceive any Being to be without Desires but God. Nor can we
conceive it to be a fault for any Creature to act suitable to its Nature; and
desire things that can be enjoyed; and will contribute to its Happiness. This I
am sure Holy Writ allows us: For the Apostle tells us, That God has given us
all things richly to enjoy. And Moses himself, (whatever Metaphysical Notions
Mr. N. puts into him) tells the People of Israel, Deuteronomy. xxvi. 11. Thou shall
rejoice in every good thing which the Lord thy God has given to thee; Thou and
the Levite, and the Stranger that is amongst you: Which was but suitable to the
Land of Promise, flowing with Milk, and Honey, proposed to the Desires of that
whole People. And, I think, we may say, not one of the Six hundred Thousand
would have marched through the Wilderness, had not Moses allowed them to desire
the good things of Canaan, but told them they must desire nothing of the
Creature. But our Error, and Unhappiness is, that we do not regulate our
Desires aright They are not under the Government, and Direction of our Reason,
and Judgment; but lead these away Captive with them in their endless Chase
after whatever strikes our Imaginations with any Pleasing Idea. The best Remedy
for which that Reason can prescribe, is what Religion has enjoined us; viz. an
Ardent Love of God above all things. For our Desires placed upon this Object
will not only never be disappointed; But also the Love of God above all other
things, will the most effectually secure us from any immoderate Love of any of
his Creatures: Because the contrariety between such a Love of God, and any
sinful or inordinate Love of the Creature makes them inconsistent. If therefore
the Love of God, and the Interests of another life, were constantly our Ruling
and Predominant Passion; If in this sense (as low as it seems to Mr. N.) we did
Love God with all our Heart, with all our Soul, and with all our Strength; We
should not only be secure of doing our Duty, but also make the best provision
that we could for our Happiness even here in this World. For then the
disappointments we might meet with in the Love of any thing else, would never
endanger the foundations of our Satisfaction; which, like a House built upon a
Rock, could not be moved by any Storms or Tempests of Fortune: And we might
say, with Dr. H. More, What Is Plague, or Prison, Loss of Friends,
War, Dearth, or Death, that all things Ends?
Mere Bugbears for the Childish Mind;
Pure Panick Terrors of the Blind.


Which however it may look to some like a Religious Rant, is no more than in
other instances we may find Experience to have made good the truth of. For even
in the Love of the things of this World, very often, one Affection, or Desire,
has so much the Possession of a Man's Heart, that all others (how natural a
tendency soever he has to them) do but very weakly, and superficially affect
him in their Success, or Miscarriage: And this no Man that is either very
Ambitious; very Covetous; very much in Love; or possessed strongly with any
other Passion; can deny to be so.

The Love of God therefore as we are capable of loving him, (that is, chiefly,
not solely) does effectually secure our Happiness, and consequently our Duty:
For he desires nothing of us, but that we should be as Happy as he has made us
capable of Being; And has laid no Traps, or Snares, to render us Miserable; Nor
does he require impossible Performances from us. Yet it is true nevertheless,
that the constant Communication that we have with sensible Objects, which are
apt too far to engage our Affections, makes the Regulation of our Desires to
demand our greatest Care, and Watchfulness: And too much can never be said of
the Necessity of this Duty, which in general consists in desiring every thing
according to its worth: And the Objects of our Desires are either Things of
Temporal concern only, or of Eternal also; between which, as there cannot be in
themselves, so therefore there ought not to be in our Estimation, any
Comparison.

Of things Temporal which are the Objects of our Desires, They are either such
as are so, from Wants of Nature; or Wants of our own making. For it is certain,
That Custom, and Education (to which we owe most of the Mischiefs we suffer,
and usually charge upon Nature) have procured us very many Wants which She
intended us not; And which therefore accordingly vary in different Countries,
and Ages of the World: And these Wants are very many more (especially in the
Civilized Nations as we call them) than the Wants of Nature; viz. Queis humana
sibi doleat
Natura negatis.


They are wise who endeavor to contract their Desires to the last: But whoever
says the Denial of what Nature requires, ought not to be esteemed an
Unhappiness, talks like a Disciple of Chr^, and not of Jesus Christ; W^^^^
^^llowers are so often exhorted to do good to all Men: Which, at least a chief
part of it, consists in removing the Pains and Miseries they suffer from their
Natural Wants, and Necessities: And This great part of Charity must be
performed according to that Rule of the Apostle, Heb. xiii. 16. To do good and
to communicate forget not, for with such Sacrifice God is well pleased.

And although when the want of those things which Nature requires, comes in
competition with any good of Eternal Concernment, they may well be thought
light, and be slighted in that Comparison; yet in themselves they cannot, nor
ought to be so. And our Master himself, thought thus; When for the Joy that was
set before him he endured the Cross, etc. But though it be a great part of Wisdom
to contract our Desire, only to what Nature requires; Yet, as we must not seek
the Satisfaction of our Natural Appetites, when it cannot be obtained without
prejudice to some Duty which ought at that time to be preferred; So the
gratification of Appetites which are not properly Natural, but which we have
received from Custom, and Education, is not always Sinful. For besides that
Custom (which it may be was none of our fault) is oftentimes as strong as
Nature in us; Those acquired Appetites are also many times no ways prejudicial
to what we owe either to God, or our Neighbor; And where they are not so,
their Gratification cannot be Sinful. Our Savior, who said, This do, and thou
shall Live; assures us, That he who heartily loves God, and his Neighbor as
himself, can make no mistake in his Duty dangerous to his Salvation: And those
Mistakes which are so, only to our happy living whilst here; are sufficiently
punished in the disappointment they carry along with them. It is not therefore
hard for a Man, if he be sincere, to know when his Desires are rightly
regulated: And he will need no Casuist besides himself, to tell him what, and
how far, he may lawfully Love, or Desire; and what or how far he may not do so.
Loves he any thing in the World to the prejudice of his Love of God, or his
Neighbor; it is Sinful: Does he not do so, there is no Sin. To oppose this,
would be to contradict those words of our Savior. And indeed these two great
Duties of the Love of God, and our Neighbor, imply or include each other. If,
says the Apostle, (1 John iv. 20.) a man say, I love God, and hates his
Brother, he is a Liar; And v. 12. If we love one another, God dwells in us,
and the Love of God is perfected in us. Again, v. 7. Let us love one another,
every one that loves is born of God, and knows God: v. 8. He that loves not,
knows not God: Chap. iii. 17. But who so has this Worlds Goods, and sees his
Brother have need, and shuts up his Bowels of Compassion from him, how
dwells the Love of God in him?

God is an invisible Being: And it is by his Works, that we are led both to
know, and to love him. They lead us to their invisible Author. And if we loved
not the Creatures, it is not conceiveable how we should love God; at least, how
they should have loved him, who not having the Law, yet did by Nature the things
contained in the Law. And this, however opposite to what some tell us, seems
nevertheless the sense of the abovenamed Apostle, who says (1 John iv. 20.) He
that loves not his Brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has
not seen? And I would demand of any one if they could suppose themselves, or
any other, never to have loved any Creature, what they could imagine they
should love? I suppose it must be replied by such a one, That as he was not the
Author of his own Being, and saw clearly that he could not be produced by
nothing; He was thereby led to the Acknowledgment of a Superior Being, to whom
he was indebted for his own; and therefore stood obliged to love him. But
Being, or Existence, barely considered, is so far from being a Good, that in
the state of the Damned, few are so Paradoxical as not to believe it an
intolerable Misery: And many, even in this World, are so unhappy, that they
would much rather part with their Existence, than be eternally continued in the
State they are in. The Author of our Being therefore merits not our Love,
unless he has given to us such a Being as we can Love. Now if none of the
Objects that every way surround us, were pleasing to us; How could our Beings,
that have a continual Communication with, and necessary Dependence upon these,
be so?

But if the Objects that surround us do please us; that is, if we do love them;
As it is then evident, they must be the first Objects of our Love, so from
their Gratefulness, or Pleasingness to us, it is also evident, that we have
both the Idea of Love, and are led to the Discovery of the Author of that
Being, that produces what is lovely. And like as our own Existence, and that of
other Beings, has assured us of the Existence of some Cause more Powerful than
these Effects; so also the Loveliness of his Works as well assures us, that
that Cause, or Author, is yet more Lovely than they, and consequently the
Object the most worthy of our Love. But if none of those Beings which surround
us did move our Love, we should then both be ignorant of the Nature of the
Author of all things, and of Love it self. For what should then exert it, that
it should not lie for ever Dormant? And which way could we (in the state we are
in) receive the Idea of Love, or Lovely? For God as Powerful (which is all we
should know of him, considered barely as a Creator) is no more an Object of
Love than of Hate, or Fear; and is truly an Object only of Admiration. It seems
therefore plain, that if any could be without the Love of the Creatures, they
would be without the Love of God also: For as by the Existence of the
Creatures, we come to know there is a Creator; so by their Loveliness it is
that we come to know That of their Author, and to Love him.

But it will be said here, That we have Pleasing Sensations ('it is true) as soon
as Perception; But that we have them not from the Beings which surround us, but
from God. I ask, can we know this, before we know that there is a God? Or, will
they say that we know there is a God as soon as ever we have Perception? Let it
be true, that the Creatures have received no efficiency from God to excite
pleasing Sensations in us, and are but the occasional Causes of those we feel:
Yet, does a Child in the Cradle know this? Or is this apparent so soon as it is
that the Fire pleases us when we are Cold? or Meat when we are Hungry? No, nor
is it at any time a self evident Truth. We must know many other Truths before
we come to know this; which is a Proposition containing many complex Ideas in
it; and which we are not capable of framing, till we have been long acquainted
with pleasing Sensations. In the mean while, it is certain, that till we can
make this Discovery, we shall necessarily Love that which appears to us to be
the Cause of our Pleasure, as much as if it really were so; It being
unavoidably by us the same thing to us: And we are necessitated by God himself
to that which Mr. N. says is truly Idolatry. For our Passions are not moved by
the reality, but appearance of things. To the prevention of which, this Notion
were it true, and received amongst Men as such, could be of no use at all,
neither could it teach them not to ascend to the Love of God, by the Love of
Creatures: Since it can be of use to none till they are convinced of it, and
none are capable of being convinced of it, till sensible Objects by appearing
the Causes of their Pleasing Sensations, have gotten Possession of their Love,
and have as soon assured them that God is the Object the most worthy of their
Love, as they have assured them of his Existence. It is true, when first in our
infancy we feel pleasing Sensations, we are no more capable of being taught by
them that there is a Superior Invisible Being that made these things to affect
us thus, who therefore ought supreamly to be loved; than that this Invisible
Being, at the Presence of these Objects, exhibits to us a part of his own
Essence, by which these Pleasing Sensations are excited on occasion of those
Objects without us, and that therefore he is only and solely to be loved. But
though we are incapable of these both alike, when first we cry for the Fire, or
the Sucking-Bottle; Yet it is certain, that by the former way we are not only
safe, all the time of our Ignorance, from the Sin of Idolatry, and the fatal
pre-ingagement of a sinful affection; but that our love to God upon that ground
is of easier deduction, and earlier apprehended than by the latter. So soon as
we do begin to leave off judging by appearances, and are Capable of being
convinced that the Diameter of the Sun exceeds that of a Bushel; We are capable
also of understanding that there is a Superior Invisible Being, the Author of
those things which afford us pleasing Sensations, who therefore is supreamly to
be loved. But if we are not capable of scaping Idolatry unless we love God
alone, because he immediately exhibits to us a part of his Essence, by which
all pleasing Sensations are caused in us, I fear all Mankind (before this
present Age) lived and died Idolaters, and the greatest part for the future
will do so; Since I guess not One of a Thousand will be found capable of
apprehending, and being convinced of this new Hypothesis of seeing all things
in God. And as, I think, this cannot be denied, so is it also more suitable to
the Wisdom, and Goodness of God, that it should be true. For one must say, that
the Happiness and Welfare of Mankind were ill taken care for, if it depended
upon a Knowledge, which not only few are ever likely to have, but which comes
too late to any for much Use to be made of it. For when sensible Ideas have
taken Possession of us for Twelve, or Twenty Years, they must be very ignorant
of the constitution of Humane Nature, that can think it possible they should
presently, or probably they should ever, be dispossessed by a Notion, although a
true one.

And for this, Mr. N. is not so kind as to furnish us with any remedy. But he
whom he is supposed to have received this Hypothesis from, endeavors to solve
the Goodness and Wisdom of God in this Matter, and to help us out of this
Difficulty, by making this Principle of our being obliged to have no Love for
the Creatures, to be the very Ground upon which Christianity stands; Which he
thus, in short, accounts for.

We must not Desire, or Love the Creatures, they being incapable to be our
Good. We yet do Love, and desire them, though Reason assures us of This. And our
Doing thus, is the Original Sin which we bring into the World with us: Which
makes us Children of Wrath, and liable to Damnation; Unable to please God but
by a Mediator, both God and Man, who only could atone the Justice of God by the
Excellency of his Sacrifice; Intercede to God by the Dignity of his Priesthood;
and send us the Holy Ghost by the quality of his Person.

But as this Ground of Christianity has a weak Foundation, viz. The Creature's
being only occasional Causes of our Pleasing Sensations, (which is neither
proved, nor would support the Superstructure that is raised upon it, if it
could be proved) So it is to be hoped, that if we reject what so few have
received, or so much as thought of, we may yet be good Christians. And those
seem more than a little to endanger Christianity, if not Deism also, who lay
the great stress of their proof upon the Hypothesis of seeing all things in
God. For in that, the whole Argument for both (by which Atheists or Skeptics
are proposed to be brought over to Deism, or Christianity) terminates; in the
Conversations Chrestiennes of Mr. Malebranche, lately Translated into English,
for the introducing amongst us that Unintelligible way of Practical Religion,
above spoken of. And I doubt not, but if it were generally received and
Preached by our Divines, that this Opinion of Seeing all things in God was the
Basis upon which Christianity was built, Skepticism would be so far from
finding thereby a Cure, that it would spread it self much farther amongst us
than it has yet done; And that many who find Christianity a very Reasonable
Religion in the Scriptures, would think it a very unaccountable one in a System
that (laying down That for its foundation) adds also further, That the Desire
we have to the Creature, is the Punishment of Sin, not the Institution of
Nature: For this Concupiscence is transmitted to us from our first Parent. Qui
voyoit clairement Dieu en toutes chooses: Il scavoit avec evidence, que les
Corpse ne pouvoient estre son bien, ni le render par eux memes heureux ou
Malheureux en aucune maniere: Il estoit convaincu de l'operation continuelle de
Dieu sur luy; Mais sa Conviction n'estoit pas sensible. Il le connoissoit sans
le sentir. Au contraire il sentoit que les Corpse agissoient sur lui, quoy qu'il
ne le connut pas. Il est vrai qu'estant raisonnable, il devoit suivre sa
lumiere, et non pas son sentiment; and qu'il pouvoit facilement suivre sa
lumiere contre son sentiment, sa connoisance claire contre sa sensation
confuse, parce qu'il arrestoit sans peine ses sentimens, lors-qu'il le vouloit,
a cause qu'il etoit sans concupiscence. Cependant s'arretant trop a ses sens,
se laissant aller peu-a-peu a les ecouter plus volontiers que Dieu meme, a
cause que les sens parlent toujours agreablement, et que Dieu ne le portoit pas
a l'ecouter par des plaisirs prevenans qui auroient diminue sa Liberte; vous
concevez bien comment il a pu s'eloigner de Dieu jusqu'a le perdre de vue, pour
s'unir de volonte a une Creature, Entr. iv. p. 106, 107. Who did clearly see
God in all things, and evidently knew that Bodies could not be his true Good,
nor properly make him in the least happy, or unhappy, and was fully convinced
of God's continual Operation on him. But he had no sensible conviction: He knew
this, but without feeling it. On the contrary, he could feel that Bodies acted
on him, though he could not know it: Yet having Reason, he should have followed
his Light, not his Sentiment; And could have done it; since he could stop his
Sentiment when he pleased, being free from Concupiscence: However deferring to
his senses, and suffering himself to hearken to them more willingly than to
God, by reason the senses always move pleasingly, and God did not move him by
pre-ingageing Pleasure, which might have lessened his freedom, it is easy to
conceive how he came to remove himself so far from God as to lose sight of him,
and to join himself to the Creature. The same Author also gives us an account
how Adam's Posterity came to be infected; (which, it seems, was not from Adam,
as is commonly taught, but from Eve) a cause de l'union que les enfans ont avec
leur mere, p. 110. By reason of the Union that Children have with their Mother.
Il n'y a point de femme qui n'ait dans le cerveau quelque trace and quelque
movement d'esprits, qui la sasse penser, et qui la port a quelque chose de
sensible. Or quand l'enfant est dans le sein de sa mere, il a les memes traces
et les memes emotions d'esprits que sa mere; donc en cet etat il connoit et
aim les corpse, p. 111. And there is no Woman that has not some traces in her
Brain, and motions of her Spirits, which carry her to something sensible. Now
when the Child is in the Womb of its Mother, it has the same traces, and the
same motion of the Spirits: Therefore in this estate it knows and loves Bodies,
and consequently is born a Sinner. And this no holiness of the Mother can
hinder; Since L'amour de Dieu ne se communique pas comme l'amour des Corpse:
Don't la raison est, que Dieu n'est pas sensible, et qu'il n'y a point de traces
dans le Cerveau, qui par l'institution de la Nature representent Dieu, ni
aucune des chooses qui sont purement intelligibles.

Une femme peut bien se representer Dieu sous la form d'un Venerable
Vieillard: Mais lors qu'elle pensera a Dieu; son enfant pensera a un Vieillard:
Lors qu'elle aimera Dieu, son enfant aura de l'amour pour les Vieillards, p.
112, 113. The Love of God does not communicate it self like the love of Bodies;
Of which the reason is, that God is not sensible, and there are no Vestiges in
the Brain, which by the institution of Nature represent God, or anything that
is purely intelligible.

So that the Children of Women who represent to themselves God in the form of a
Reverend old Man, will love Old Men: And whenever the Mothers think upon God
and love God, the Children will think upon Old Men and love Old Men. Wherefore
from this Original Corruption, springs the Necessity of a Mediator, who must be
both God and Man, etc.

There seems to be some things in this Hypothesis very unintelligible; And also
that it has Consequences intolerable to be admitted. But if neither of these
were so; it is yet reason enough not to embrace it, that it is no where either
revealed, or proved; it being all but a Chain of Consequences (such as they
are) depending upon the Supposition of our seeing all things in God. For the
Desire we have to the Creatures, is asserted to be the Punishment of Sin, not
the Institution of Nature, because (which is a strange Reason) the Desire of
the Creatures is supposed Sinful, upon the ground of their not being the
Efficient Causes of our Pleasing Sensations. And the Proof which is brought
that they are not the Efficient Causes of our Pleasing Sensations is, that we
see all things in God. But this Proof it self which is the Foundation of all,
remains yet to be proved: For neither Pere Malebranche, nor any one else has
done it; nor I think can do it. And that which might alone give just ground for
this Suspicion is, That this Hypothesis tends to the shaking and unsettling the
known Grounds of True Piety; though He, and a late Follower of his, would
establish it upon this new, and formerly unknown Foundation.

But setting aside those Absurdities that this new Conceit would run us into,
in Morality (which are sufficient Reasons for rejecting it) there are, I doubt
not, some, who, if they would be at the Pains to treat it Philosophically,
might be able to demonstrate its Weakness and Inconsistency on other Grounds,
as well as those of Morality. But whether, or no, any one shall believe That a
Work worth their while; This Hypothesis seems, yet at least, of moment enough
to be so far inquired into, as these Papers have Undertaken: Since how
unserviceable or injurious soever it really is to Piety, it has yet been
Seriously and Zealously pretended to be of great Use to Religion; And that not
only by a young Writer, whose Judgment may, perhaps, be thought By assed by the
Affectation of Novelty; But also it is made the very Ground of Christianity, by
a Man of an established Character in the World for Philosophical Science. But
as Christianity (whatever some are persuaded) is a rational Religion, and needs
no Inventions of Men to support it; so it receives no Advantage by this, which
it has not in the Orthodox, and commonly received Doctrine of Original Sin.
That serves to all the purposes this is brought in for, as well; and therefore
makes this Needless; Unless it be pretended that the Opinion of Seeing all
things in God, etc. is needful to give Light to, and to make the commonly
received Doctrine of Original Sin intelligible; Which is, to charge this
Doctrine with having wanted such Evidence before this Discovery was made, as
was necessary for the making it the Foundation of Christian Religion: Which
surely those cannot agree to who have made it so. And those who have not made
it so, will not be concerned in the Light pretended to be brought to it; The
thing it self being no more proved by this Explanation of the manner of it,
than it was before. Upon which of these two accounts, or whatever other, Mr. N.
declined, or approved not the declaring this Opinion of the Creatures not being
Efficient Causes of our Sensations, etc. to be the Ground and Basis of
Christianity; Yet certainly his Subject (especially being Preached to a Country
Congregation) obliged him, if not to account for the Goodness of God in this
Matter, in making us without any fault of ours, the Subjects of his Wrath; yet
at least to have showed which way we were to be brought out of that State, and
by what means after we were come to the Knowledge of the Truth, we should be
made obedient to it. For if (as it is to be hoped he does) he believes God to
wink at our Sins in the time of our Ignorance, before we are capable of
understanding the Creatures to be only Occasional Causes of our Pleasing
Sensations; Yet we must suppose when Men are convinced of that Truth, they are
called on not only to Repentance, but Amendment. And if Loving the Creatures
so, as yet to be willing readily to part with them all for the Love of God, or
rather than offend in any thing that we know to be our Duty, (which is the
highest Love of him that most People can conceive themselves capable of,) will
not hinder us from being truly Idolaters, and Sacrilegious; Whilst being
Hungry or Cold, Food or Fire are desired by us; And that we cannot Love our
Children, or Friends, without looking on them as Goods Desirable to us;
Methinks he should tell us by what means we may get rid of Appetites and
Affections so offensive to God, and destructive to our Soul's Happiness; and
should let us know whether he finds this attainable by our own Natural
Abilities, or whether Christ has Purchased the Ability of doing it for those
that believe in him; Or what we are to do, or conceive of our selves in an
Estate so deplorable. He says indeed, That could we but see how God alone acts
in us, and Causes all our Sensations, whilst the Creatures stand mute and
silent, like so many Ciphers in his Presence, having not the least Activity or
Operation upon us; We should quickly dismiss the whole Creation from our
Hearts, and be wholly swallowed up by the Love of God. But as the case is, he
gives us no Remedy at all. For his making no question afterward, but that it
is thus in Heaven, and that this is the Measure of Divine Love There, is so far
from helping us; That it will not so much as infer (if he could prove it were
so) that this ought to be the Measure of Divine Love upon Earth. But we have a
better Authority than his for it, That we know not what we shall be There;
Therefore cannot tell what may be added to, or changed in our present
Faculties: And as for those of Angels, and Archangels, (which he mentions) we
are yet less acquainted with them: And every one will not be convinced (though
they did agree in Mr. N -- 's Supposition concerning them) that it were more
reasonable to propose or pray to be like them (at least whilst upon Earth) then
it would be for the Fishes (if they were capable of it) to propose, or pray to
God, that they might fly in the Air like Birds; or Ride Posthorses as Men do.
For it may be our Earthly Element no more admits of the first, than theirs of
the last. And those must be very little considerate or serious in their
Prayers, who will venture to ask God for their sakes, to change the Order of
Nature, which he has established. It is certain, that if we had no Desires but
after God, the several Societies of Mankind could not long hold together, nor
the very Species be continued: For few would give themselves Care, and Sorrow,
in the pursuit of Possessions not desirable.

But Mr. N. pretends that there are places of Scripture, besides that of his
Text, which make good his Opinion. Scripture-Authority, is that to which Reason
may safely refer it self: But it were to be wished that it were appealed to
with more Care and Consideration than it often is; and that Men would not
presently, because perhaps they are persuaded their Opinions are Right, back
them with any Text of Scripture that they can make Chime to them, though they be
very little, or not at all to the Purpose; as they could not oftentimes but
discern, if they would but either regard the Scope of the Discourse; or read to
the end of it.

The first Text Mr. N. brings for his purpose, is Mat. vi. 24. No Man can serve
two Masters; for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else he
will hold to the one, and despise the other; ye cannot serve God and Mammon.
Here, Mr. N. says, We are plainly told, we cannot divide between God, and the
Creature: and the reason is not only because our Capacities are too narrow and
scanty to be employed upon two such vastly different Objects; but also because
we cannot love either of them, but upon such a Principle as must utterly
exclude the Love of the other. For we must not love any thing but what is our
true Good, what can both deserve and reward our Love: And there can be but one
thing that is so, and that must either be God or the Creature. If then the
Creature be our Good, let us Love That, and that only; That, and not God: But
if God be our True Good (as most certainly he is) then let us Love God, and God
only; God, and not the Creature: For it is a most inconsistent and impracticable
thing to talk of Carving out our Love between both: Ye cannot serve God and
Mammon. Practical Discourse, p. 64, 65. By Mammon, I suppose was never
understood before, any thing but Riches, or those things for which Riches are
desired: And our Savior here tells us, we must not set our Hearts upon these
things, or make our selves Slaves, or Servants to them: That is, the Desire of
them must not command us; If we command it, and make it Obedient to Reason, it
is then certain it does not command us, and consequently that we are not
Servants to it. This is then plainly no more, but that our Desires after
Riches, etc. must not be beyond their Worth; So as that we forget they are
perishable, and uncertain Goods, such as Moth and Rust do corrupt, and the
Violence and Injustice of Men may deprive us of; No longer (at best) of any
value, than during our short abode in this World. For, if we do otherwise, our
Reason is captivated, and we become truly Servants; The Servants of Mammon; And
cannot be the Servants of God; Because we cannot Serve two so opposite and
differing Masters. For it is from the contrariety of their Commands, and not
from the littleness of our Minds, or Capacities, that we cannot Serve God and
Mammon; Since neither little nor great can obey two Masters that command
Contraries; And that is true of the Apostle, His Servants ye are, to whom you
obey. But our Minds, as little as they are, may love God, and the Creature;
when the Love of the Creature is Subordinate; And I think Mr. N. nor no one
else, will deny, That there are many who sincerely love God, that do yet love
something in the Creature; And if so, whether their Love be Sinful, or no, it
is evident their Capacities are not too little to love both; As it is also that
our Reason is not captivated, and we thereby enslaved, or rendered the Servants
of every thing that we love. And here is nothing at all said by our Savior of
any other degree of Love, but such as makes us the Servants of what we love.
And therefore it is no more true that we are here forbid by our Savior to love
any thing but God, than that our Capacities are too little to love any two
different Objects. For if Mr. N. means any thing else by to be employed, than
To Love, when he says, That our Capacities are too narrow and scanty to be
employed upon two such vastly different Objects, it is not to his purpose. But
if he means by employed, to Love; what he affirms is then neither true in his
own sense of Love, nor in that of the Text. For it is not true that our
Capacities are too narrow to Love any two different Objects, either in the
smallest degree, (which he contends for) or so as to become the Servants of
them, which is what the Text says; Provided, there be no contrariety in their
Commands. His first Reason therefore why we cannot divide our Love, viz. From
the scantiness of Our Capacities, is utterly false; our Capacities being
evidently not too narrow to love any two different Objects, or even every
Object which appears to us to be lovely. And there is no reason that if we love
the Creatures in some degree, as occasions of Pleasure to us (we necessarily
loving whatever is accompanied with Pleasure) that That Love of the Creature
should exclude the Love of God; any more than that the Love of Cherries should
exclude the love of our Friend that gives them us. And if we love God, yet less
does the Love of him exclude our Love of his Creatures: For we love them then
not only for the Pleasure that they occasion us, but for the sake of their
Author; and the more we Love God, the more we shall Love his Creatures.

But another Reason, besides the narrowness of our Capacities, Why we cannot
divide our Love between God and the Creature, is, because we cannot love either
of them, but upon such a Principle as must utterly exclude the love of the
other; which is thus offered to be made out: We must not love any thing but
what is our true Good: There can be but one thing that is so: And that must be
either God, or the Creature.

What is our True Good, he tells us is that which can both Deserve and Reward
our Love. But certainly whatever is a Good to us, is a True Good; since
whatever pleases us, pleases us: And our Love, which he says is to be deserved
and rewarded, is nothing else but that Disposition of Mind, which we find in
our selves toward any thing with which we are pleased. So that to tell us,
that we must not love any thing but what is our True God; Is as much as to say,
that we must not be pleased with any thing but what Pleases us; which it is
likely we are not in Danger of. And what is added of deserving and rewarding
our Love, being put in as a Synonymous Expression, to explain to us what is
meant by our True Good; Our True Good, does consequently tell us what is meant
by deserving and rewarding our Love; They both signifying one and the same
thing. There can therefore no more be made of This notable Principle, viz. That
we must not love any thing but what is our True Good, that is, which can both
deserve and reward our Love, then that we must not be pleased with any thing
but what Pleases us; or reflect upon the Pleasure any thing causes in us, which
never did cause us any Pleasure.

This, without doubt, carries much information with it; But the word True
(otherwise very impertinent here) is Subtilty to insinuate that which should be
proved, viz. That the Creatures are not the Essicient Causes of our Pleasing
Sensations. And in the Lines following, he seruples not to beg the Question in
more express terms; When he says, There can be but one thing that is so; viz.
our True Good: And then follows, and that must be either God, or the Creature;
But if God be our True Good (as most certainly he is) let us Love God, and God
only; God and not the Creature: For it is a most inconsistent and impracticable
thing to carve out our Love between both: Ye cannot serve God, and Mammon. Here
we see, having needlessly told us that we must not love any thing but our True
Good; That is, that which pleases us; He tells us next, that there can be but
one thing that is so, viz. our True Good: Which is yet more evidently false,
than his first Assertion is impertinent. Notwithstanding, as if it were as
evidently True, as it is manifestly the contrary; He offers not any thing at
all to make it good; His Assertion only seeming to him sufficient to oppose to
the daily Sense and Experience of all Mankind. But indeed if by True Good, he
did mean our chief Good; then it is true that there is but one such Good, and
that is God alone, who is also the Author and Donor of all our other Good: But
in this sense it is nothing to his purpose. To conclude his Demonstration, that
we cannot Love God, or the Creature, but upon such a Principle as must utterly
exclude the Love of the other; Having said we must Love nothing but our True
Good; and that That can be but one thing; He tells us lastly, that that one
thing must be either God or the Creature. Which Conclusion, when he has proved
his foregoing Assertion, viz. That there can be but one thing our Good; it may
be convenient for him to explain a little better; But till he has proved that
there is but one thing a Good to us, this last Assertion serves for nothing,
unless to make it more evident that he has all along said nothing to the
Purpose. For his Affirmation that we cannot Love either God, or the Creature,
but upon such a Principle as must utterly exclude the Love of the other, Was of
as much Authority to us as his Assertion, that there can be but one thing a
Good to us: And there is no more proof offered by him for the one, than the
other.

This, I believe, his own Observation and Experience, has often offered to him,
for the confutation of what he affirms, viz. That it is not true that all Men
in the World either Love God, and God only; Or the Creature only, and God not
at all: Which ought to be, according to his Principles. But the Admonition of
St. John, he says, is somewhat more express to his Purpose than that of our
Savior was, 1 John 11.15. Love not the World nor the things of the World: If
any Man love the World, the Love of the Father is not in him. Here again Mr. N.
acknowledges, that according to the common Interpretation, this is meant of the
immoderate love of the World. But he says, they interpreted it so for want of
Principles on which to raise a higher sense. It Is plain the words import more;
viz. That we are not to love the World at all; That all Love of it is
immoderate. And by his, former measures (before laid down) it appears how, and
why, it is so. But I believe St. John will be found to explain himself much
better than Mr. N. explains him. St. John says, Love not the World, nor the
things of the World; If any Man love the World, the Love of the Father is not
in him. Now the Question is, whether Mr. N. be in the right in understanding
(as he does) by Love; every the least degree of Love: Or whether other
Interpreters are so, in thinking that by Love, immoderate Love is meant: And I
think there needs nothing more to satisfy us that the last are in the Right
than Mr. N -- 's own concession, viz. That without his Hypothesis, this
Scripture could not be understood otherwise than those Interpreters understand
it: So that unless St. John writ not to be understood by those he wrote to; or
that the Christians to whom he wrote, had Mr. N -- 's Hypothesis, it is past
doubt that the other Interpreters he mentions are to be thought in the Right.
But because it is believed by him, that St. John, who so much presses Love to
others, had himself so little Love to Mankind, as to leave the strongest
inforcement of their greatest Duty in obscurity; We will see whether, or no,
there is any appearance that he did so; And whether Mr. N-'s Hypothesis serve
to illustrate this Scripture. For that this Hypothesis could not be learnt from
it, is apparently confessed; Because the Hypothesis must be known (as he
himself owns) before the Scripture Proof of it can be understood: And therefore
our former Argument against this Hypothesis from the Goodness, and Wisdom of
God, that would not permit a Doctrine of the consequence this is pretended to
be, to be so obscure as it is, stands still good, for all this fresh pretense
to Scripture Proof. But St. John (1 John 11.15.) says, Love not the World, nor
the things which are in the World: If any Man love the World, the Love of the
Father is not in him. Now that this is meant of the sinful Pleasures of the
World, or the immoderate, and consequently sinful Love of Pleasures in
themselves not sinful; what words can make Plainer than the immediately
following ones, wherein the Reasons are given why we should not Love, the
World, nor the things of the World? viz. ( v. 16.) Because all that is in the
World, as the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of Life, is
not of the Father, but is of the World: That is, proceeds not from God, but
from the Passions, Vanities, and Follies of corrupt and sinful Men: And we
should not set our Hearts upon the World; That is, even the allowable Pleasures
of it; Because ( v. 17.) The World passes away; And therefore by no means ought
to be considered as the ultimate Good of a Being of a more enduring Nature; But
is indeed so far removed from it, as the little Duration of the one holds of
proportion to the endless Duration of the other. This is what St. John says;
And it seems too plain to need any other Explanation, than what he himself has
given. But as if every Text in Scripture were a distinct Aphorism, it is
frequently enough quoted by some, without any regard to what goes before, or to
what comes after; with how much sincerity cannot be said; But certainly to the
manifest bringing into Contempt those Oracles of Truth.

But for whatever Cause Mr. N. omitted these Reasons of St. John for our not
loving the World, and the things of it; And substitured one of his own in the
Place; viz. That the Creatures are not the Efficient, but Occasional Cause of
our Pleasing Sensations; He does say, That, without the knowledge of this his
Hypothesis, we cannot know that every degree of Love of the Creature is sinful;
and consequently that St. John's Reasons for enforcing the Duty he urges, were
defective. But St. John tells us not that every degree of Love of the Creature
is sinful: On the contrary, he says, If we love not our Brother whom we have
seen, how can we love God whom we have not seen?

Therefore there is no more need of Mr. N's Opinion, to enforce what St. John
teaches; than there is use of what St. John teaches to confirm Mr. N -- 's
Opinion. For that St. John meant not by Love every degree of Love, is evident;
Both because he would contradict himself if he did, and also from the Reasons
he gives why we should not love the World, and the things of the World: viz.
Because all that is in the World is not of the Father, and passes away quickly.
For he would either have given us the true Reason of This, or stopping where
Mr. N. did in his Citation of him, not have misled us, by giving us Reasons,
which not only reach not the matter, But which also serve to Determine us to
another sense. For, as short-lived Flowers, though they ought not to employ the
continual care of our whole lives, may yet reasonably enough be found in our
Gardens, and delight us in their Seasons; So the fading Good Things of this
Life, though (for that reason) they are not to be fixed on as the Ultimate Good
of Eternal Beings, yet there is no reason why we may not rejoice in them, as
the good Gifts of God, and find all that Delight which he has joined with the
lawful use of them.

But St. John says, Love not; Therefore Mr. N. says, we must not Love them at
all. Our Savior also in St. Matthew, in the Chapter above cited, says, Seek
not: But Mr. N. says not in like manner seek not at all. On the contrary, he
tells us very expressly, we may seek the good things of this World, provided we
love them not. Now, if he knows a Reason why one of these places must be taken
strictly according to the Letter, and not the other; he was doubtless obliged
to tell it us; especially having been so indulgent to Seeking as to have given
no rules of restriction to that. But our Savior says, Seek not what ye shall
Eat, or what ye shall Drink, or with what you shall be clothed, for after
these things do the Gentiles seek. Mr. N. must doubtless say to this that our
Savior meant by not seeking, that we should not seek immoderately, and
solicitously; And so say others to what St. John says: The sense of the
Discourse in both places determining that to be the meaning of both. And till
Mr. N. has told us why Seeking must be understood in this sense, and not Loving
be understood so; he cannot surely disallow of it, if (after his example) we
thus understand the words of St. John, viz. That we should not love
immoderately; that is, beyond the worth of what we love. And thus the
Admonition of St. John is no more express to his purpose than that of our
Savior, in St. Matt. was. I am sure the reason with which St. John inforces
his Admonition, is expressly contrary to that with which Mr. N. inforces his
interpretation of it. St. John says, Love not the World, etc. For all that is
in the World, viz. the lust of the Flesh, the lust of the Eye, and the Pride of
Life, is not of the Father, but is of the World. But Mr. N. says, Love not the
World, etc. For all that is in the World, viz. all those Pleasures
Worldly-minded Men so greedily hunt after; as the lust of the Flesh, the lust
of the Eye, and the Pride of Life, are not of the World, but of the Fathe:
Which seems not only to oppose St. John; But also sounds very harshly, and
offensively to many Pious Persons; Who are apt to think it unworthy of, and
mis-becoming the Majesty of the great God, who is of Purer Eyes than to behold
iniquity, to be as it were at the beck of his sinful Creatures, to excite in
them Sentiments of Delight, and Pleasure, whenever they are disposed to
transgress against his Laws, though in the most gross, and erroneous Instances.

But the Author of this Hypothesis tells us, That this is that indeed which
makes Sin to be so exceeding sinful, viz. That we oblige God in Virtue of that
first immutable Law, or Order, which he has established (that is, of exciting
Sentiments of Pleasure in us upon some operation of Bodies upon us) to Reward
our Transgressions against him with Pleasure, and Delight. It is strange that
we cannot seem sinful enough, without having a Power of forcing God to be a
Partner in our Wickedness! But this is a Consequence of an Hypothesis whose
uselesness, and want of proof, are alone sufficient Causes for rejecting it.
And if we will once quit what Reason and Revelation evidently and plainly tell
us, to build our Religion upon the foundation of uncertain Opinions; where must
we stop? Every Man, indeed, cannot so handsomely compose his System as P.
Malebranche; But every Man has as much Authority to impose it upon others, or
to be credited without Proof. The abovementioned account of Sin, is plainly
only supported upon its being a consequence of our seeing all things in God;
who being the alone efficient Cause of all our Pleasing Sensations, must
necessarily be the only efficient Cause of sinful, as well as innocent
Pleasures: But no Pleasure, simply as Pleasure, being evil, God is not supposed
in this by P. Malebranche the Author of Sin, but only Man himself; Who, he
says, etant pecheur and par consequent indigne d'etre recompense par des
sentimens agreables, oblige Dieu en consequence de ses volontes immuables, de
luy fair sentir du plaisir dans le tems meme qu'il l'offense. Entr. III. p.
91. We being Sinners, and by consequence unworthy to be recompensed by
agreeable Sentiments, oblige God in consequence of his immutable Will, to make
us feel pleasure in the time that we offend him. Viz. Whenever we Love or
Delight in any Creature. But our seeing all things in God, upon which this
Notion of Sin, of Original Corruption, and the following account of
Christianity stands, remains yet to be better proved; Before we reject, for so
unintelligible a fancy, what is evident and plain; What may satisfy the Wife,
and what the Weak (whose Souls are Doubtless of as much value, and They as much
concerned for them) may easily comprehend.

That God has made us Reasonable Creatures, we certainly know: And it is
evident also, that by virtue of our being such; we are obliged to Live by the
Law of Reason; which whenever we transgress, we must necessarily offend against
God; We inverting that Order which he has established, in making that to obey,
which ought to command; and that to command, which ought to obey. And that we
are so prone (as Experience shows we are) to offend against this Law of Reason,
is from the Unruliness of our Affections; Which being strong in us, (whilst
Reason is weak and unable to direct them) take up with the first alluring
Objects, whose impressions making settled habits in us, it is not easy for
Reason to remove them, even when it does discover their Pravity; and sets us to
struggle against them. And to this loose Education, and ill Custom, greatly
contribute: There being scarce any Vice we are capable of, which is not
instilled into us (or at least the Seeds of it) in our very Childhood, by those
foolish People that usually have the Direction of it. For it is obvious that
there are few Children who are not taught by their Nurses to be Proud, Angry,
Covetous, and Revengeful; and principled with those Vices, even before they
have Language enough to talk of them. But God made Adam a Man, and not a Child;
Therefore his Reason was in its full strength as early as his Appetites; and he
had not the unhappy Preventions which others receive. He himself therefore, and
his Posterity, one would have thought, ran no very great Hazard of losing those
Advantages his Obedience would have procured them.

That Mankind did lose by Adam what they are restored to by Jesus Christ, we
are plainly told in the Scripture: But that by his Miscarriage, or Eve's, any
one single Soul should be doomed to Eternal Misery, or to any condition worse
than not being; whether immediately, as some hold, for Adam's Sin; or by
subjecting them to a state of necessary sinning; Can neither comport with the
Goodness of God, or is any where revealed in Scripture.

The last of these Opinions, Pere Malebranche's Hypothesis maintains; though he
accounts for it differently from others. Children, he expressly tells us, become
(through their Union with their Mothers) Sinners; and are in a state of
Damnation before they are born into the World. But both the Apostle and Reason
assure us, that where there is no Law, there is no Transgression. And Pere
Malebranche opposes this, upon no other ground offered by him for so doing* but
that the conclusion he makes, viz. That Children are born Sinners, is a
necessary consequence of our seeing all things in God. For God only causing us
Pleasure, he only has a right to our Love, and all love of the Creature is
sinful. But a Child (by virtue of its union with the Mother) does, whilst in
her Womb, know and love Bodies; consequently therefore is a Sinner, and shall
be necessarily Damned, p. 114. (Though indeed in a Note upon that Word, he
mitigates the sense of it to being eternally deprived of the Possession of
God). And that we come into the World utterly incapable to please God, (as he
expressly says we do) is not through any fault at all of our own, but for Eve's;
Concerning whose Transgression any ways influencing her Posterity, the
Scripture yet makes no mention at all.

However, this Principle is made by Pere Malebranthe (p. 94.) the Foundation of
Christianity. But it is certain, that the New Testament tells us nothing of it:
And there it is, surely, that we ought to look for the Christian Religion. What
we are there told, is, That as in Adam all died, so in Christ shall all be made
alive, 1 Cor. xv. 22. That he came to abolish Death, and to bring Life and
Immortality to light, 2 Timothy i. 10. That we shall be justified by Faith,
without the works of the Law, Romans iii. 28. And that for this end, God sent his
Son into the World, that as many as believe in him might have Eternal Life. Yet
do we then (says the Apostle) make void the Law through Faith? God forbid! yea,
we establish the Law. Romans iii. 31. But the Wisdom of God in Christ Jesus, is
manifest in this, that we are hereby at once the most effectually put upon
using our Endeavors to work out our Salvation with fear and trembling; And
also kept from Despair, in the sense of our own weakness to perform that Law
which Adam in his more Advantageous Circumstances transgressing against,
forfeited thereby Bliss and Immortality: We having not only a Promise that we
shall receive from God whatever (asking as we ought) we shall ask in his Son's
Name; And also of his Spirit to help our Infirmities; But to complete all, that
for the sake of Christ, our sincere, though imperfect. Obedience shall be
accepted; Faith in him supplying its defects.

This is what the Scripture tells us of the Dispensation of God to Mankind in
the Gospel of his Son: Which is so visibly suitable to, and worthy of the
Divine Wisdom and Goodness, that no Inventions of Man can add any thing to it,
to make it appear more so. yet were our Views larger than to comprehend only
the compass of our little Globe, they would probably afford us still further
Matter for our Admiration. For it is a thought too limited and narrow for Women
and Children now to be kept in, that this Spot of ours is all the Habitable
part of the Creation. But without understanding the System of the World, or
considering what Mathematicians and Naturalists offer to convince us, that so
many Regions fit for Inhabitants are not empty Deserts, and such numberless
Orbs of Light more insignificant than so many Farthing Candles; We read, in the
Scripture, of other Ranks of Intelligent Beings, besides our selves; Of whom,
though it would be Presumption to affirm any thing beyond what is revealed, yet
we know not what Relation may possibly be between them and us. The Scripture
plainly intimates great Numbers of them, Superior to us in the Dignity of
their Creation, to be fallen by Disobedience (like Man) from a Happier State;
And also that they are Enemies to us: Whether out of Envy for what Jesus Christ
had undertaken for our Redemption, or for other Reasons, we know not. But by
the small account we have of them, they seem to have set up themselves in
opposition to their Maker, as thinking themselves sufficient to carve out their
own Happiness; And shall find full reward of their Folly and Rebellion, when
the Judgment of the great Day shall meet them.

But on Man, who after his Transgression saw his Nakedness, and was ashamed,
the Father of Mercies has had Compassion, and has found out a Way for his
Restoration: Such a Way as may well humble these Proud ones in the Imagination
of their hearts; And which leaves no room to us for Boasting. For it is
certain, That by the Works of the Law no Flesh shall be Justified, Romans iii.
20. Faith, which would have preserved Adam in the state of Innocence, shall
alone justify his Posterity. And though the Wisdom of God has made Faith in his
Son that which is required to Salvation, in those to whom he is revealed; We
are told that the Just, in all Ages, have lived by Faith: Which is necessarily
the Immutable Basis of all true Religion. For without we believe not only in
the Being, but also in the Veracity of God, That he Is, and that he is a
Rewarder of them that diligently seek him, it is impossible we should love him
with all our Hearts, with all our Souls, etc. which contains the whole Moral
Law; Whose Obligations not being Arbitrary, but arising from the Nature of
things, must necessarily under every Dispensation be always the same: And
Christ tells us expressly, He came not to destroy this Law, but to fulfill it. He
came to give us a clearer and fairer Transcript of it; To enforce it by his
Authority and Example; To assure us of our own Future Existence, which Reason
could not; And of the great Love of God to Mankind, in accepting of Faith to
supply the Defects of Sincere Obedience; By which we are freed from the
Terrors of an offended Deity; And have hopes of being made Heirs of a glad
Immortality; Coheirs with Christ, the Author and Finisher of our Salvation,
Who, for the Joy that was set before him, endured the Cross, and despised the
Shame, and has obtained for himself a Kingdom of which all true Believers are
the Subjects. We are restored by him to a more assured Felicity than that from
which Adam fell, by not believing that in the Day he ate of the forbidden Fruit
he should surely Die; Too little attending to the Light of his Reason; (Which
would have taught him not to question the Divine Veracity) and having yet no
Experience to oppose to the Solicitations of his Appetite. And perhaps God in
this Restoration of Mankind by Jesus Christ (who took not on him the Nature of
Angels) having herein put down the Mighty from their feats, and exalted those
of Low degree, does by this Economy of his Providence in our Salvation, teach
all the Orders of Intellectual Beings, whom he has made free Agents (as well as
Man) That as he cannot make a Being Independent on himself for its Happiness;
So the most enlightened Reason is only safe and secure, whilst it feels its
weakness and dependency: Which if we be thoroughy, as we ought, sensible of, we
shall necessarily love God with all our Hearts, with all our Souls, etc.

Mr. N. says these words signify, That we must love nothing but God alone. And
to confirm that his sense of them, he brings yet two other places of Scripture:
The first is, james iv. 4. Ye Adulterers and Adulteresses, know ye not that the
Friendship of the World is Enmity with God? Whosoever therefore will be a
Friend of the World, is the Enemy of God. He tells us here, That in St. James's
account, Our Heart is so much God's Property and Peculiar, and ought so
entirely to be devoted to him, that it is a kind of Spiritual Adultery to admit
any Creature into a Partnership with him in our Love. It is certain these are
not St. James's words, and we have only Mr. N-'s Affirmation that this is his
sense. But though Mr. N-'s affirming without any Proof, that all love of the
Creature is here condemned, and said to be a kind of Spiritual Adultery, needs
no other Answer but a bare Negation; And the saying without any Proof, that it
is only the inordinate love of the Creature that is so called and condemned,
would be enough; Yet the context further plainly shows, that that is the
meaning of St. James here, by what he calls Friendship of the World. To which
let me add, that Adultery does not wholly exclude all other Love of any other
Person; but a love that comes in competition, or invades that which properly
belongs to the Husband. For a Woman may love her Brother, or her Child, without
being an Adulteress; it being not with that Love that is due to her Husband.
The last place Mr. N. cites to prove that Love of the Creatures is Sinful, is,
from St. Paul, Gal. vi. 14. The World is Crucified to me, and I unto the World.
Which last words, Mr. N. says at once comprize his present conclusion, that the
Creature is not to be (in any degree) the Object of our love; with the very
same ground and bottom upon which he has built it. For the Apostle here first
of all supposes the World to be Crucified, that is to be a Dead, Unactive,
Silent, and Quiescent thing, in respect of himself; as not being able to
operate upon him, or affect his Soul with any Sentiment as an Efficient Cause:
And then in consequence of that declares himself to be also Crucified to the
World, p. 68. which Mr. N. explains very truly (though not very conformably to
his Opinion) by being insensible to all its Charms: For, according to his
Explanation, St. Paul knew very well that the World had no Charms. But
whosoever will read this whole Passage in St. Paul, will evidently see that it
amounts to this; That there were some Men so Preached Christ, as yet to have
regard to the favor and good liking of Men; That they might avoid Persecution
from some, and gain Glory from others: But St. Paul in his Preaching of the
Gospel, had so entirely given up himself to it, that he minded nothing but the
Preaching of the Gospel; Going on in that Work, without any regard either to
Persecution, or Vainglory. And thus the World was Crucified to him, and he to
the World: They were as Dead things, and in this respect had no Operation. St.
Paul's words are, As many as desire to make a fair show in the Flesh, they
constrain you to be Circumcised; Only, lest they should suffer Persecution for
the Cross of Christ. For neither They themselves, who are Circumcised, keep the
Law; But desire to have you Circumcised, that they may glory in your Flesh. But
God forbid that I should Glory, save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ,
whereby the World is Crucified to me, and I unto the World. Very often it
happens, that a piece of a Discourse, or as here, even a piece of a Verse,
serves for a Quotation, much better than the whole would do. This is so evident
in this Place, that it requires some Charity to think that a Man is in earnest
fearching after Truth, or believes himself, whilst he is a Writing after such a
manner.

But because the Character Mr. N. bears ought to be a Warrant for his
Sincerity, we must conclude, that he does think St. Paul tells the Galatians,
that some would have them Circumcised only that they might avoid Persecution,
and might Glory in their Flesh. But God forbid that he should Glory in any
thing but the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by which the Creatures are only
the Occasional, not the Efficient Causes of his Pleasing Sensations; and he
Dead to them. This Mr. N. it seems, does think was the Sense of what St. Paul
said: But that it was not, I think common Sense will sufficiently satisfy us,
without consulting Interpreters about it.

Theseare the Texts brought by Mr. N. to support an Opinion grounded on an
Hypothesis, perhaps Demonstrably false; That has evidently no proof, but the
poor one from our Ignorance, that yet is not at all helped by this Hypothesis:
Which is (therefore) as well as for the Ends of Morality, plainly useless. Yet
all this might well be Pardoned to any Effort of advancing our Knowledge, if it
did not pretend to influence our Religion; And not only so, but to be the very
Basis, and Foundation of Christianity, as it is made to be by the first
Ingenious Inventor of it. Mr. N. has not, indeed, advanced that so directly:
But with more Confidence a great deal, making it the ground of Morality, he
falls as little short of it as is possible. And his Discourses upon this
Subject being in a more Popular way, are more likely to do hurt. For certainly
to persuade Men that God requires what they find impossible to perform, and
opposite to their very Constitution and Being in this World, is to make
Religion, and the Teachers of it, ridiculous to some; And to drive others
weaker, but better-minded People into Despair; By giving them occasion to think
that they do not love God as they ought. Such Effects, I fear, may be the
Consequences of Mr. N's Doctrine, who teaches that we do not love God as we
ought, whilst we love any Creature at all: And particularly in the above cited
Sermon, He positively says, That the Creatures are no more our Goods, than our
Gods; and that we may as well worship them, as love them. Pract. Disc. p. 62.

These Opinions of Mr. N. seem also to endanger the introducing, especially
amongst those whose Imaginations are stronger than their Reason, a Devout way
of talking; which having no sober, and intelligible sense under it, will either
inevitably by degrees beget an Insensibility to Religion, in those themselves
who use it, as well as others; By thus accustoming them to handle Holy things
without Fear; Or else will turn to as wild an Enthusiasm as any that has been
yet seen; and which can End in nothing but Monasteries, and Hermitages; with
all those Sottish and Wicked Superstitions which have accompanied them
wherever they have been in use. And this the Author of the Christian
Conversations foresaw very well must be the Consequence; Or rather conformably
to his Religion and Profession, might perhaps have it in his View and Design,
to justify those things by this his Hypothesis; which makes them not only
allowable, but of necessary use. But however that were, he concludes his
Discourse of our being obliged to have no Love for any Creature, with a sincere
Acknowledgment that if this be true (which he has concluded it is) it is then
absolutely necessary to renounce the World, and betake our selves to Woods and
Deserts: For it is impossible to live in the daily Commerce and Conversation of
the World, and love God as we ought to do. And accordingly he makes his Young
Men, introduced to be Converts to Religion upon these Principles, bid Adien to
the World, even to their Dearest Friends, and Relations.

For Pere Malebranche, it seems, was unacquainted with that Distinction which
Mr. N. says, ought to be made of Movements of the Soul, and Movements of the
Body. Otherwise he might have assured his Aristarchus, that he was in a very
great Mistake, to believe that the Principles before laid down, obliged him to
any retreat from the World, or Renunciation of the Enjoyments of it: Since the
Movements of the Body (Mr. N. tells us) may be determined by those Objects
which inviron it; and by those Movements, Aristarchus might have United himself
to those things which were the Natural or Occasional Causes of his Pleasure.
(See Mr. N's Letters Philosophical and Divine, p. 75.) But Pere Malebranche
designing his Notions to be of some use to the World pursued them, whether by
just consequence they led him; and sought not for any contrivance to make them
insignificant to any other Purpose than to show the Parturiency of their
Author. He therefore reasonably from his Principles, insists upon it, that the
retreat from the World, is best for all; and necessary to most who design to
lead a Christian Life; Those being much to be pitied whom God calls to live in
the World for the Conversion of others.

This in a Papist, and one of a Religious Order amongst them, cannot seem
strange. But there can certainly be no greater Disparagement to Christian
Religion, than to say; That it unfits Men for Society; That we must not only
literally become Fools for Christ's sake; but also cease to be Men. Can any
Rational Man, not bred up in the Bigottry of Popery, ever persuade himself that
such a Religion can be from God? Or is there any appearance throughout the
whole New Testament of its being so? John, indeed, who had not the power of
Miracles, or a Voice from Heaven to Authorize his Mission, made himself be
taken notice of, by the remarkable Austerity of his Life: But he neither
Preached it, nor proposed himself, in that, an Example to others. He was by
something extraordinary (though without Miracles) to draw Auditors to him, whom
he might prepare to receive the Messiah. But that living in a Desert, and
bidding adieu to Society, were not necessary to Religion, our Savior's
Example, as well as his Precepts, show. He came Eating and Drinking, Conversing
in the World like other Men: And he assures us, That he came not to destroy,
but to fulfill the Law; viz. The Moral Law, which is the same with the Law of
Reason; than which, Heaven and Earth, shall sooner pass away; and in which are
legibly found those Duties of an active and social Life, that have so much
recommended and eternized the Memories of many Philosophers, and Lawgivers, and
other great Men of Antiquity; Whose Religion Mankind would be apt to think they
had reason to wish for again, if they were persuaded that Christianity were
opposite to, and inconsistent with those admired and beneficial Virtues that
Support and Profit Society.

There is nothing more evident than that Mankind is designed for a Sociable
Life. To say that Religion unfits us for it, is to reproach the Wisdom of God
as highly as it is possible; And to represent Religion as the most mischievous
thing in the World, dissolving Societies. And there could not be a greater
Artifice of the Devil, or Wicked Men to bring Christianity into contempt than
this. But it is to be hoped, that where the Scriptures are allowed to be read,
this can never prevail; And that those who are not in danger of being led into
it by the Superstitions of Priestcraft, will not be imposed upon in it by vain
Philosophy: Nor can there be any stronger Evidence, that (That Notion, of the
Love of God, grounded on his Being the immediate Cause of all our Sensations)
is false, than this, viz. That it Destroys all the Duties and Obligations of
Social Life. This indeed is not Mr. N's deduction from thence, But it is that
of his Oracle Pere Malebranche, and that of Reason; And he will scarce be
believed to be Sincere, that shall say he can daily see and enjoy the Creatures
as Goods, without desiring them as such; Or that shall deny, that if it be our
Duty not to desire any Creature, it must then necessarily be our Duty (as P. M.
expressly says it is) to have as little communication with them as is possible;
and to betake our selves to Deserts. But whether it were that Mr. N. has no
inclination to this way of Living, and that it is to That that we owe his Happy
Invention of Seeking, and enjoying the good things of the World, without loving
them; Or that he was afraid by owning his Opinion (that we are obliged to
renounce the World and live in Woods) He should be suspected of favoring
Popish Superstition; He can scarcely be presumed not to see that this
inevitably follows from the Hypothesis he has embraced. But yet how injurious
soever this Consequence is to Religion, so much is not therefore denied to what
Per. Malebranche largely insists upon, viz. That Retirement is sometimes
useful, if not necessary to a Christian Life. Those who live always in the
hurry of the World, and the avocations of Worldly Business, without giving
themselves time, and retreat, frequently to reflect, being no doubt very likely
to enter too much into the Spirit of it; We insensibly giving up our selves to,
and uniting our Hearts with what we are constantly engaged in, and with delight
apply our selves to. But if in opposition to this, any one should run into the
other extreme, of retreating wholly from all commerce and conversation with
Men; And should give themselves the Happiness Pere Malebranche speaks of, of
attending Eternity in Deserts; it is to be feared they would not mend the
Matter. For whatever Vices they might part with by it, they must necessarily
oppose thereby, one great end that they were sent into the World for, viz. of
doing good; By becoming wholly useless to others: And such a one would
certainly, by such a renunciation of all commerce with Men, be likelier to grow
Wild, than improve the great Virtue of Christianity, and Ornament of Humane
Nature, Good Will, Charity, and the being Useful to others.

As for Monasteries, and Religious Houses, (as they are called) all who are
acquainted with them, know that they are nothing less than what is pretended;
And serve only to draw in Discontented, Devout People, with an imaginary
Happiness. For there is constantly as much Pride, Malice, and Faction, within
those Walls, as without them; And (if we may believe what is said, and has not
wanted farther Evidence) very often as much licentiousness.

In short, our Natures are so suited to a mediocrity in all things, that we can
scarce exceed in any kind with Safety, To be always busy in the Affairs of the
World, or always shut up from them, cannot be born: Always Company, or always
Solitude, are Dangerous: And so are any other Extremes.

FINIS.

