A RELATION OF THE Labor, Travail AND SUFFERING Of that faithful Servant of
the Lord Alice Curwen.

Who departed this Life the 7th Day of the 6th Month, 1679. and rests in
Peace with the LORD.

Here is the Patience of the Saints, here are they that keep the Commandments
of God, and the Faith of Jesus,

Rev. 14.12. The Souls of the Righteous are precious in the Eyes of the Lord,
and they shall be had in Everlasting Remembrance. Printed in the Year 1680.

Something of Alice Curwen's Testimony, which did lie upon her to declare some
few days before she departed out of the Body: she spoke for one to come to
write, and there was one that did come, and did purpose to write, but the
Lord's Power and Presence was so with her, that the Friends that were with her
were so broken into Tenderness that there could nothing be written; but there
was one Friend which was present with her at that time which did remember
something of what she did speak as follows, whose Name is Anne Martindall.
AND I can truly say, my Heart was greatly affected and much broken in hearing
of that powerful Testimony which dear Alice Curmen did bear for the Lord, and
for his Eternal Truth, and in the Sense and Consideration of that blessed
heavenly Power, which did run through her at that time, my Spirit is often
tendered as before the Lord; and truly many of her Words are past out of my
Memory. The first time I did see her she had been sick about five days, and
she seemed (...) but I went again (...) very sick that (...) continued that
Night, yet she was very sensible, and desired me to sit up with her, and so I
did stay all that Night, in which time she did utter many precious Words, which
I cannot call to mind; she said, That she felt nothing upon her, but all was
clear; for (she said) I do not know that ever I did any thing that did offend
the Lord, if it was but a Hasty word or a Thought, but I was reproved for it,
and I was willing to lie low and wait upon the Lord until he was pleased to
arise again: And she spoke much of the Goodness of the Lord toward her, how
that He had been with her at all times and in all places. Some asked her, If
she did think that she should not get over it? To which she answered, I do not
know what the Lord has to do; but I am freely given up to do his will, whatever
it be, Life or Death, I am as clear as a Child: this she spoke several times,
and desired, that the will of the Lord might be done. And after she had lain a
while, she said, I have something in my Mind to speak, if the Lord will enable
me; and she spoke forth with a Heavenly Melody, and so spoke a long time, but I
do remember very few of her words; but she said, The Lord is on his way, and he
will go on Conquerings and to Conquer; and he will carry on his great work
which he has begun: And she often desired Friends to be faithful, and follow
the Lord fully; and said, That she would have none to go before, nor none to
stay behind, nor to turn aside either to the Right Hand or to the Left, but
follows the Lord your Leader wheresoever he goes: for she had (...) Sense upon
her of the (...) know the Truth, (...) with us in a great (...) were sold it
for the Preferment of this World, which will perish and past away, and yet they
can come in with us, and sit down in Meetings, and have their Clothes made like
the World's Fashions, and like their order, and speak their own Words; but the
Lord will blow such away with the Whirlewind of his Wrath: but those that are
faithful Travailers in the work of the Lord, the Lord will preserve, though
they may meet with many Trials and Besetments both inwardly and outwardly. And
she desired, That all would let their Light shine, and none to put it under a
Bushel or under a Bed, but all stand faithful for the Lord in your Day, and
then you need not be afraid of Death, but it will be as easy to you as it is
to me. Truly she was so filled with the Lord's blessed Power and living
Presence, that the Sense of her Sickness was many times taken from her; and she
did often say, Truly Friends, I have little Pain upon me, only weak; and many a
time she did lie singing, and did make a sweet Melody to the Lord, when she
uttered very few words, except on this wise, Oh my Heavenly Father! how have
thou filled my Cup, and made it to overflow! for I can do no less but even
praise and magnify they holy eternal Name: and so she often desired, That the
Will of the Lord might be done, whether it was Life or Death; and said, For to
me to live is Christ and to dye is Gain: and many such like precious words,
which she did speak, which I cannot call to mind. She spoke many very clear
weighty things concerning the Virgins and their Lamps, and exhorted all to be
diligent, and to know Life and Virtue in themselves to feed upon; for she said,
The time will come that Words will cease, and Life shall more arise; and many
more weighty things she did speak, and said if she did live she must declare
it, and if she did dye she must leave it as a Testimony for the Lord: she often
desired Friends to be faithful to the Lord, and follow the Lord fully, as
Deborah and Baruk did; which if all had stood faithful, what a blessed Day
would it have been ere now! So when she had declared and spoken what was upon
her Spirit, she had some ease, and so continued about two hours; and she spoke
very much of her Off spring, and said, She desired nothing more concerning
them, then that they may Fear the Lord, and then they will never Want. And then
toward the latter end of the Night she had an extreme great Pain in her Head,
which was very hard to bear, yet in all this time she did not utter one
unpatient word, but was like a patient Lamb, and said, Friends, breathe to the
Lord for me, that he may lay no more upon me than I am able to bear, that I may
not offend this good God: and immediately she did breathe forth in Prayer to
the Lord; then she had a little Ease, and lay still, as if she had been in a
Slumber, and a little after she said, I have been in the Deep, and I had
something to speak, but I could not. So she did grow weaker and weaker, but she
was sweetly carried through it to the End.

This was declared of this faithful Servant of the Lord, who said, She would
have none to mourn for her when she was gone.

The Names of them that were with her: Mary Nelson, Marvel Fallbery, Alice
Cobb, Rebecca Reckly, Anne Martindall, Thomas Curwen the elder, Thomas Curwen
the younger, Thomas Cobb.


Thomas Curwen HIS TESTIMONY, Which is in behalf of his Wife's Testimony, which
she did bear faithfully for God and for his Eternal Truth ever since she was
Convinced, and her Heart and Mind turned from Darkness to the Light of Jesus
Christ, and from Satan's Power to the Power of God, who did serve the Lord in
Fear, and rejoiced with Trembling whilst Breath and Life remained.
And Blessed are the Dead, that Dye in the Lord; they do Rest from their
Labors, and their Works do follow them.
AND this I can say to the Praise and Glory of our God, That she did Dye in the
Lord; for she did Praise and magnify the Name of the Lord, and was freely
given up to dye; and the Lord's Presence was with her, which did carry her up
above her Weakness in the Flesh: and though she be dead, and her Body return to
the Dust, yet her Spirit is alive, where Hell, Death and the Grave can never
separate us; Glory to our God forever, who is the God of the Living, and not of
the Dead; and the Living Praise the Lord, the Dead in the Grave of Sin cannot;
For the Wages of Sin is Death, but the Gift of God is Eternal Life: and blessed
are they that know the Gift of God, and have their Minds exercised in it, or
else it had been better for them they had never known it; but as their Minds
are exercised in the Gift of God, they come to witness Redemption from Sin and
Death, and come to witness Eternal Life, where the Redeemed of the Lord do
rejoice, who are redeemed out of the Earth, and have a Habitation in Heaven;
and the Redeemed do sing Praises and Halelujahs to the Lord God and the Lamb
forever and for evermore, over Death, Hell and the Grave; for he is risen whom
the Grave could not hold, Glory to our God forever, to whom all Power is given
both in Heaven and in Earth, and he will rule all with his Iron Rod,
everlasting Praises forever be given unto his holy and blessed Name, the Lamb
of God, who was slain from the Foundation of the world, by whom the world was
made, who was dead, but he is alive, whose Name is called The word of God, who
was in the World, and the World knew him not; And ye will not come to me (says
Christ) that ye may have Life; who has given us Life, Breath and Being, that
we may live to his Praise, and to his Honor and Glory forever, who is worthy,
who is worthy forever and for evermore, says my Soul.

And this I can say concerning my dear and loving Wife, who was dear and tender
over me, to serve me in any thing that might do me good either for Soul or
Body; and the Consideration of her endeared Love to me does often times come
very fresh into my Remembrance, which does break my Heart into much Tenderness,
which does cause me to write these few Lines concerning God's Testimony, which
she did bear for his Eternal Truth: And I can truly say, She was given me of
the Lord; who was a Meet Help for me, who did live Husband and Wife about
Thirty Eight Years, who was my true Friend and Companion in Tribulation, who
did keep the Word of Patience in the Day of Trial and in the Hour of
Temptation, and did bear the Burden in the heat of the Day without Murmuring,
or looking back to the Fleshpots of Egypt, but did Rejoice in Tribulation:
Know ye not (says the Apostle) that Tribulation works Patience, and Patience
Experience, and Experience Hope, and this Hope makes not ashamed, because we
have obtained the End of our Hope, which is, Salvation to be as Walls and
Bulwarks: And now we can say to the Praise and Glory of our God, That now is
Salvation nearer than when we first believed. And when a measure of the Spirit
of Grace was manifested to her, and she did feel the Operation of it working in
her Heart, and was led and guided by it, Oh! how she did improve her Talent for
the Lord! and for one Talent he gave her more; and the Grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ did teach her to deny all Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, and to live
Soberly, and Righteously, and Godly in this World; and she did grow in the
Grace of God from Strength to Strength, and from Grace to Grace; and her
Affections were not on things below, but on things above: for her Treasure was
in Heaven, where neither Rust nor Moth could corrupt, nor Thieves break through
and Steal; and the Lord was her Portion, who is the Portion of the Righteous:
And when she was got into the highest Form of Profession, she was very Zealous
in her Way and Form, that when the Truth came, she was ready to receive it, who
did receive it with great Joy and Gladness of Heart, and said, Now I have found
him whom my Soul loves, which was my Desire, which the blind watchmen could
never know in reading of the Scriptures of Truth: She had much comfort in
reading of David's Psalms, which was much Refreshment to her to sound forth
Praises to the Lord; and she did sing with the Spirit, and with Understanding;
and she was almost always Praising the Lord, and magnifying his holy and
blessed Name; and when she could not speak, she put her Hands together, and did
lift them up unto the Lord, and did Praise the Lord in her Heart: And when the
Lord did send her forth to preach the Everlasting Gospel, she did not reason
with Flesh and Blood; for the Lord's Power and Presence was with her, wherein
she did sound forth his Praises to the Nations, and did declare of the
Wonderful Works which the Lord had done for the Sons and Daughters of Men: And
she was not ashamed to confess the Name of the Lord before men, who was brought
several times before Magistrates and Rulers, and was cast into Prison, and was
set in the Stocks, and brought to the Whipping-Post for her Testimony, which
she had to bear for the Lord, and for his Eternal Truth; for she did follow
Christ Jesus fully, who was the Captain of her Salvation, and did make War in
Righteousness with the Beast and the False Prophet, and her Captain did never
fail her in time of Need, but did go before her, and did tread down her Enemies
as Ashes under her Feet, and the Lamb did get the Victory; Glory to our God
forever, who did plead the Cause of the Innocent, and did put a Word in her
Mouth in every needful time; and the Lord was with her, and his Eternal Arm and
Power did cover her Head in the Day of Battle: And she did often pray to the
Lord, and said, Lord, let me enjoy thy Presence, and I desire no more; and the
Lord did hear her Cry, and did answer her Desire; for the Love of God was so
large unto her, which is more than I can express; Glory and Everlasting Praises
be unto the Lord. And she had great Exercise with the Priests of this Nation,
and other Nations and Islands beyond the Seas, and did go in the Fear and Dread
of the Lord to several Priests and Steeple Houses, and the Lord was with her,
and gave her Dominion, who went in the Name of the Lord: and she did not matter
how Great they were, nor how High they had builded Babel; for she was over them
all in the Fear and Wisdom of God; for she was a Dread and a Terror to the
Wicked wherever she came: For the Wicked could not stand in Judgment, nor
Sinners in the Congregation of the Righteous. She did discover the Seat of the
Beast and the Whore, who does sit upon the Waters, with a Golden Cup in her
Hand full of Abomination, which all the World wonder after, who have the Mark
of the Beast in their Hand and in their Fore head. And she had a true Sense of
the Priests spirit, and did know and discover them let them come under what
Pretense they would; for she did esteem the Lords Truth above all, and would
not have neglected any Opportunity whereby she might have been serviceable for
the Lord; for it was her Meat and Drink to do the Will of God, who did receive
her Reward in a large measure; for there are some that received thirty fold,
and some sixty, but she did receive an hundred fold in this Life, and in the
World to come Life Everlasting; for it was much Joy and Gladness of Heart to
her in meeting to meet with the Lord and his People in the blessed Unity of the
Spirit, where the Lord is Worshipped; and the Lord did fill her Cup to the
overflowing to others, who would never have eaten her Morsel alone, but would
have others to have eaten and drunk with her, which was to the great
Refreshment and Edifying and Building up of others in the Faith of the Elect;
for her Cry was to the Lord, That all who were called might be elected and
chosen Vessels of Honor for the Lord; for her Joy was full in the Lord, and
she did sound forth Living Eternal Praises to the God of her Life, and did
Magnify his great Name while she did live in her Earthly Tabernacle, which she
did give freely up to be laid in the Dust; and the Heavenly Tabernacle of Grace
was with her, which God had pitched, and not Man; and the Lord put a New Song
in her Mouth, which none could sing but the Redeemed of the Lord, wherein she
did often in secret breathe forth Praises to the Lord; for the Lord's Presence
was with her, wherein she could not contain her self, but she breathed forth
Praises to the Lord, which did refresh the tender Plants of the Lord when she
had no Words to speak. But when she did speak, she did speak from the Mouth of
the Lord, and did blow the Trumpet in Sion, and did sound forth an Alarm in the
Holy Mount, which made the Inhabitants of the Earth to tremble; for the Lion of
the Tribe of Judah did roar out of Sion, and the Trumpet did give a certain
sound, whereby many were awakened, and their Minds turned from Darkness to the
Light; and the Day did spring from on High, which did give Light to them that
had long sitten in Darkness, and under the Shadow of Death, whose Feet were
guided in the Way of Peace; who was instrumental to bring many from under the
Woe, whose Feet were set upon the Rock; and she did not despise the Day of small
things, but was always bringing up the hindermost of the Flock, as Jacob did;
and she would have stooped for the least Grain for the gathering of the Seed
out of Egypt, where it did not grow, which was under Pharaoh's hard-hearted
Taskmasters, and was oppressed as a Cart was pressed with Sheaves: And her
Conversation was as becomes the Gospel; for her Children and many more were
Convinced by her Wise Walking before them, in the Wisdom of God; for she had a
great Care of her Offspring, to bring them up in the Fear of the Lord, and did
often breathe to the Lord for them, and the Lord did hear her Cry, and did
answer her Desire; and I can say to the Praise and Glory of our God, that the
Lord has had Regard to them, and has done wonderfully for them, who has
gathered them home unto himself, out of the Vain Conversation of the World, and
has placed his Fear in their Hearts; For a Mother may forget her
Sucking-Child, but the Lord does not forget them: Oh! what Cause have we to
return Praise, Honor and Glory to the Lord forever, who is worthy forever and
for evermore. And in all Places and Countries wherever she came, she exhorted
Friends, To have a Care of their Children, and to bring them up in the Fear of
the Lord, so that from one Generation to another the Lord's Truth may spread,
and cover the Earth as the Waters cover the Sea, and that the Lord's Testimony
may not fall, and that his great Name may be exalted over all, to the Praise
and Glory of our God forever: For she was singly given up to do whatever might
be for the Prosperity of God's Eternal Truth. Her Labor and Travail was very
great, wherein she did spend her self, and was spent for the Seed's sake, that
did suffer under great Oppression. And she did preach the Gospel freely,
without Money and without Price; for the Gospel was to be preached freely:
Therefore away with all Hirelings, who preach for Hire and divine for Money,
who keep People always learning, and never come to the Truth: For she did
desire no man's Gold, or Silver, or Apparel; for she had the Lord for her
Portion, and she desired no more; for her Habitation was in Heaven, and her
Dwelling was in Eternity, where she did live and move, and had her eternal
Being; For no other Foundation can any man lay, than that which is already
laid, which is Christ Jesus, the Rock of Ages, the Foundation of many
Generations, which she did build upon, not Hay, nor Stubble, nor Gold, nor
Silver, nor Precious Stones; for all these will burn when the heat of
Persecution comes; but she did witness a spiritual House made up of Living
Stones, and the Top-Stone was laid, which is the Ground and Pillar of Truth;
for she had finished up her Testimony, and laid down her Head in Rest and Peace
with the Lord. And she did exhort Friends in her Travail in the Service of the
Lord, To Mind their Latter-End, and be ready and prepared for Death; for when
Death comes, you may have enough to do to dye; that ye be not like the Foolish
Virgins, who had no Oil in their Lamps, against whom the Door was shut.

But now the Lambs War is accomplished, and the Lamb has got the Victory, who
has made War in Righteousness, and has overcome and gotten the Victory over
the Beast and the False Prophet, the Lamb of God, that takes away the Sins of
the World, who was slain from the Foundation of the World; and while the World
has a Foundation in man's Heart, who was dead, but is now alive, whose Name is
called the Word of God: Praises, Praises endless, pure, living, eternal Praises
be given, ascribed, rendered and returned by all the faithful Followers of the
Lamb, as this faithful Servant of the Lord has done Alice Curwen. Praises,
Praises, endless Praises be given to the Lord God and the Lamb forever and for
evermore, says my Soul, and the Souls of the Righteous, who are traveling on
in the New and Living Way, which is the Way of Life and Salvation; Glory,
Honor and Everlasting Praises forever and for evermore.

And this little Testimony I do not write in any way, but that it might be upon
Record for Ages and Generations to come, and that every Testimony that is from
the Right Seed may be kept, and that not one Grain be lost, that the Blessing
of the Lord may be with us and with our Posterity forever, which was the Desire
of my dear Wife.

Thomas Curwen.

Alice Cobb 's Testimony concerning her Mother Alice Curwen.
OH, my dearly beloved Mother! though she be gone from us, and her Body in the
Bowels of the Earth does lie, yet to me her Memorial will never dye, and to
thousands more of the faithful ones; for indeed her Labor has been great
(both in this Nation and other Nations and Islands) to gather many from
Darkness to the Light, in which she did walk; and in her Day did bear a noble
Testimony for the Lord God and his Truth: She was freely given up to spend and
be spent in and for the Service of the Truth; for she thought nothing too dear
nor too near to part with or from, but was freely given up to follow the Lord
what way soever he did call her to go: and she did preach the Truth very
powerfully, and in God's Authority did she go on, not mattering what man could
do unto her; for indeed the Lord was with her in every Exercise and Trial; for
her Labor was great, but she did know the Lord to support her, and to lift up
her Head above the many waters; for indeed before Rulers and Governors, though
they were never so great, she was bold and valient for the Lord and his Truth.
And as for us her tender Children, our Loss is great; for she was a tender
Mother to us indeed; and she did in her wise Walking and her harmless
Conversation preach to us daily; for truly her Life was all along as it was now
upon her Sickbed, breathing to the Lord God for her Offspring, That they
might live to his Praise: and she prayed to the Lord very powerfully, and in as
much strength as in her Health, That if the Lord see it good to remove her,
that he would lay no more upon her than he would give her Patience to bear,
that so whether she lived or dyed it might be to the Honor and Glory of the
Lord God: and the Lord did give her Patience, for there came not an unpatient
word out of her Mouth in all the time of her Sickness, but was exceedingly
filled with the good Power and Presence of the Lord our God; for she lay making
sweet Melody to the Lord when she could not speak: and a little before her
Speech was taken away from her I asked my dear Mother, How art thou now? and
how do thou feel thy self? I fear thou art worse than thou wast: and her
Answer was, My dear Child, be not troubled for me; I am very Easy, and have
little Pain upon me, but Weakness. And so all along the Power and Presence of
the Lord did keep her and preserve her, to the great Refreshment and
Consolation of those that were with her. And so the Memorial of my endeared
Mother can never be forgotten by me

Alice Cobb.

A Testimony concerning Alice Curwen.
THE Enemies of Truth among other Devices of the Devil, beset the Son of God
with hard Questions, thereby to ensnare him, one which is brought to my
Bemembrance was, to oppose the Resurrection of the Dead; and the Son of God to
reprove it says, God is the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and of Jacob;
and not the God of the Dead, but of the Living: This Answer left that Ranting
Generation of the Saduces as blind as (...) ^ound them; but the Living thereby
then learned, and are now strengthened in assurance of Faith, that He, Christ,
the Resurrection and the Life is risen, and alive, and lives for evermore; and
who of this Life has part, the Second Death has no power over. So I speak not
the Praise of the Dead, but of the Living, which in Spirit the Righteous have
fellowship with when the outward Vessel is going or gone to Dust, as this
Servant of the Lord is known to me more by her Life and Testimony than by any
outward Acquaintance; and being with her on her Dying-Bed, though I heard not
so much as some about her did, I could not but take notice of her Resignedness
to God's Will, though she showed to me her Unwillingness to take any Medicine,
not choosing any thing but the Will of God, to which she freely gave up, though
she seemed not very Aged, and but a few days before appeared a healthy strong
Woman, and was so; and as her Desire and Endeavor was freely to declare what
she received of the Spirit of Life, and in this she lives, and in this stands
the Fellowship and Communion of the Saints, whether in these earthly Bodies, or
out of them, and in this stands my Unity with her. And a near Relation of this
deceased Alice Curwen showing me a Paper writ by one with her in her Sickness,
and asked me, If I could add any thing to it; for he intended to print it? and
in my mind I had not much for printing it, there being not much Prophecy in it,
and so put it off, not purposing to do any thing to it: But upon my Bed that
Night or toward Morning, when in stillness was set before me the Blessing of
Abraham, God's Friend, and his Portion was to Dye in Peace, and this thou art a
Witness this good Woman did; and do thou think it small to be testified to
when thou see so many Restless Impatient Ones tossed, and crying for Help to
Physicians of no value, and can find no Rest? Then said I, Let me Dye as she
has done; for I feel it a blessed End to Dye in Peace; for Prophecy has and
must cease, and Torgaes fail, but the Peace that is given us of Christ Jesus is
Everlasting: So in the Spirit is witnessed the Bond of Peace, to bind up
together in the Bundle of Life, which Hell nor Death can never break, and here
is the Heaven where no Unrighteous enter, but the Sanctified rejoice together
therein for evermore.

R. T.

A RELATION OF THE Labor, Travail and Suffering OF Alice Curwen.
THE 10th day of the 11th month, 1677 when I was retired in my Mind waiting
upon the Lord, it was opened in my Heart by the invisible Power of the living
God, the virtue of which I felt, and the Springs of Life being witnessed, I was
moved to write of the Dealings of the Lord with me, and of my Travels and of my
Testimony in writing, since I went from my outward Being; and what I had
received from Friends in writing, of the good Success, and Blessing, and
Presence of the invisible God, who moves in secret, and is now come to reward
his People openly; Everlasting Holy Praises be breathed forth and sounded out
unto the Lord our God for all his Mercies, for they are manifold at this day,
therefore does my Soul in secret bless his holy Name, who alone is worthy. And
whilst I questioned in my Mind, Why I should write, fearing the Subtilty of the
Enemy, and also not minding to keep Copies of several Papers that had been
written, yet as I waited patiently to see my Clearness, it was said in the
secret of my Heart, What thou have kept, write: but I fearing said within my
self, Why should it be known? and the Answer was, For the Encouragement of them
that hereafter may put their Trust in the Lord: and then I was made willing to
write as follows.

IN the year 1660. I hearing of the great Tribulation that the Servants of the
Lord did suffer in Boston in New England, of cruel Whippings, of Bonds and
Imprisonments, yea, to the laying down of their natural Lives; four Friends
being Hanged there for their Testimony to God's blessed weighty Truth, against
a Wicked Generation, which remains there until this day; I, at the hearing of
their Patient Sufferings, my Heart was broken, and my Spirit deeply affected
with Admiration of the Goodness of the Lord, who bears up the Spirits of them
that truly fear him, and are willing to give up all that is near and dear, and
to follow the Lamb whithersoever he leads; and my Spirit was comforted in the
blessed invisible Power: but it was said in the secret of my Heart, That I
should travail in that Nation, and see that Bloody Town of Boston; at which my
Heart was exceedingly broken, and I cried unto the Lord with many Tears, and
said, O Lord, what shall become of my little Children, and of my poor Husband?
(he being then in Prison for Tithe) and I mourned many days in a sense of my
Inability; yet at that time I could truly say, Thy blessed Will be done; let me
enjoy thy Presence, and keep me in thy Heavenly Power, and I desire no more: so
the thing was weighty upon me, but I kept it unto my self, not knowing how it
would be brought to pass, considering in my mind the Lord might try me, whether
I would give up or not; and as I found a Willingness, the thing was made easy,
and the Burden taken away, whereupon I thought the Lord would accept my
Willingness, and it was hid from me for a season; but I can truly say in my
measure, and that to the Praise of God, that I hid the Word of the Lord in my
Heart until it was as a Fire in me till I had declared it, and I then told it
to my Husband, the Power being fresh in me, and the Love of God filled my
Heart, in which I had true Unity with Friends in New England; and I told my
Husband, That the Lord would deliver him out of Prison, and that we must
travail in another Nation together, and there bear a Testimony to God's blessed
Truth, which is broken forth in this Day of his Power, wherein he is making his
People willing: And though we were then, and are at this day the least of many
of the Lord's People, yet his Strength has been manifested in Weakness, for
which we have cause to bless his holy Name whilst we have a day to live. So the
thing rested in my Heart many Months and Years, and then the Lord delivered my
Husband out of Prison, in which time my little Children were grown up, all
except the youngest, which the Lord took away from me; then the Springs of Life
opened in me, and the time was come that I might no longer hide it in my Heart,
but make it known to Friends, which after I had done so, in opening my Heart a
little to some Friends, the thing seemed harder to me to get through than
before, in which time I was in a great strait, but the Lord appeared, and it
was said secretly, that If I did go, I should feel my Reward from the Lord in
my own Bosom: then I having this Testimony sealed in my Heart, I labored with
my Husband day and night to know his Mind, because it was much with me, that we
were to Travail together; but he did not yet see it to be required of him at
that time, but gave me Liberty in Obedience to the Invisible Power, though the
thing was hard, because it was showed me at first, that we should Travail
together; but the Lord made me willing to leave all (that was near and dear to
me) and I went on my Journey toward London, and after some time had with
Friends there, I made Preparation to go to Sea, and having got my Bed and
Clothes on board the Ship, it pleased the Lord (in whom was and is my Trust) to
send my Husband to go along with me: and so we took shipping together, and were
thirteen Weeks in our Passage from London to Road-Island belonging to
New England; and I can truly say, I did not know what I might do; for all there
were in an Uproar, Killing, and Burning, and Murdering, and great Distress was
upon the Peoples Minds; and I said in my Heart, The Lord that has brought me
out of my Native Country, lead me whither thou will; let me but enjoy thy Power
and feel thy Presence, and I desire no more. So we stayed a few days in that
Island, and were refreshed with Friends; and we heard of a new Law that was
made at Boston against the People of God called Quakers, which Law was as
follows, (viz.) It was ordered at their Court at Boston and the Authority
thereof, That every Person found at a Quakers Meeting shall be apprehended (Ex
Officio) by the Constable, etc. by Warrant from a Magistrate or Commissioner,
and shall be committed to the House of Correction, and there to have the
Discipline of the House applied unto them, and to be kept to work with Bread
and Water for Three Days, and then released; or else shall pay Five Pounds in
Money as a Fine for such an Offense (to the Collony) and all Constables
neglecting their Duty, in not faithfully executing this Order, shall incur the
Penalty of Five Pounds upon Conviction.

And then it opened in us in the Springs of Life, That We must travail thither,
and break in upon their new Law; in which we were willing to bear our
Testimony, with the rest of Friends, to God's blessed weighty Truth, against
this Generation, that remain there unto this day, that so with therest of the
Lord's People, we might fill up the Sufferings that remain behind, that so the
Righteous Blood shed by this Generation may come upon them, which they shall
not escape. So we travailed through the Woods and Places where the devouring
Indians had made great Desolation in many Places, but the Lord preserved us,
and we came to Boston, and on the First Day of the Week we had a Meeting with
Friends there, and their Law not being yet published, we had our Liberty and
our Meeting peaceable, and afterward, travailed Eastward near One Hundred
Miles, and visited Friends, and sought them out where they were scattered
because of the great Distress of the Indians War, so that they had not had a
Meeting to wait upon the Lord for several months before: so we travailed
Eastward as far as Great-Island, and Piscattoway River, and Dover, and several
other places, and came to a Friend's House beyond the River, where there were
about two hundred people (some Friends, and others) who were come thither for
Safety, and had fortified the House very strongly about for fear of these
Bloody Indians, which had killed two of our Friends within three miles of that
place; there we had several good Meetings, and the Presence of the Lord was
with us, and it was a time of great Distress, both Friends and others received
our Testimony gladly; for it was a needful time; and the Power of the Lord was
with us, and was our Support, for which we cannot but bless his Name whilst we
have a Being. Then we travailed again toward Boston, and visiting Friends all
along, and so came to Boston again, where being in our Meeting, their Law being
now published, the Constable with others came forcibly and drove us out of our
Meeting all along the Street, until they came to the Prison, or House of
Correction, whereinto they thrust us; but the Lord was with us, and our Service
there was great; for many people, both rich and poor, came to look upon us, and
some were convinced, it being a time of great Tribulation, their Hearts failed
for fear, and God's Witness was reached, Praises to God forever: And the third
day of our Imprisonment they brought us down to the Whipping-Post, but the
Presence of the Lord was manifested there, which gave us Dominion over all
their Cruelty, and we could not but Magnify the Name of the Lord, and declare
of his Wonderful Work at that time, at which the Heathen were astonished, and
shook their Heads: And the next day we were set at liberty, and went to our
Meeting again (from which place they did fetch us to Prison before) and we had
a good Meeting peaceably, and took leave of Friends, and so we parted; and we
came to Sittuate, and Dukesberry, and to Sandwich, and did visit Friends all
along in several places until we came to Road-Island; and after a little time
spent with Friends there, it was with us to go into the West part of
New England, to Shelter-Island and Long-Istand, Oyster-Bay, Westchester and
Eastchester, and to Gravesend, and a Place there called Jamaco, and Matunicock,
and New York, and some part of New-Jarsey, so far as Friends did inhabit to our
Knowledge, when we were there: in this time of our Passage thither we were
several times put on Shore, the Wind not being for us, where we had good
Service for the Lord and for his Truth, where there were no Friends, upon the
main Land, at a place called New London, and Seabrook, and Milford; then we did
return unto the Yearly Meeting in Road-Island; and then Bermudus and Barbados
were before us, and we would gladly have got a Passage to Bermudus, but could
not, but a Passage to Barbados was near ready at that time, at the hearing of
which I was afraid, and great Fear fell upon me, considering my own Weakness,
and the Highness of all sorts of people there, and fearing lest they should
even trample upon my little Testimony, and lest I should suffer Loss; and I,
like Jonah in his day, would have fled, but there was no Hiding Place but in
the Arm of the Lord, which was to me, and is to all that believe and obey a
strong Tower; Everlasting Blessing, Glory and Honor be ascribed unto his great
Name, to whom does belong the Glory for all his Mercies, and that for evermore.
And such as may read this Epistle, may believe that it was the Lord that put it
into my Heart to write it, for the Encouragement of them that hereafter
maytrust in the Lord. So my Husband having much upon him to Barbados, Friends
accompanied us on Shipboard, where we had a blessed good Meeting before we
parted, and in Five Weeks and Two Days we came to Barbados. And the next day
after we came ashore was their Quarterly Meeting, where our Testimony was
gladly received; and we travailed in that Island about Seven Months, where we
had good Service both amongst Whites and Blacks; and the Lord added unto our
Talent another Talent more; Everlasting Praises (says our Souls in secret)
unto his most holy Name, who has given us good Success, and is adding unto his
Church such as shall be saved in every Nation; for many did gather unto our
Meetings: and we visited some of their Priests, and invited them to our
Meetings, some by Word, and some by Writing. And when we were clear in our
Spirits of this Island, we would gladly have gone to Bermudus, but could not
get a Passage, and then we found Freedom to write to Friends in that Island,
and so to return home; and after we had taken leave of Friends in the Freedom
of our Spirits we took Shipping, and came for London, where we arrived the same
day Seven Weeks after we came from Barbados, which was the beginning of the
third month, 1677. And after we had seen Friends at London, it was secretly in
our Hearts, that we must visit all the Meetings upon the Sea Coast Westward
unto the Lands-End; and now since we had performed that Service, it was upon us
to visit some Meetings Eastward; and the good Presence of the Lord has been
with us, for which Cause we have good Cause to bless his holy Name whilst we
have a day to live.

Now, in regard we could not meet with a Passago to Bermudus, neither from
Road-Island nor from Barbados, it was in our Hearts to write this Epistle to
Friends there, as follows.

Dear Friends;
WE having this Opportunity, it was in our Hearts to signify our Loves in
writing a few words unto you, by these our dear Friends, Katherine Norton and
Eliz. Cater; and we would have gladly visited you, if we could have gotten a
Passage thither; for you have been often in our Remembrance, but in the Will of
the Lord we stand, and in that Power that is unlimitted, where neither Earth
nor Seas can separate us from the Lord, nor one from another; but that is known
which breathes for the Seed, and wrestles with the Lord, as Jacob did. So dear
Friends, to whom the Salutation of our Unfeigned Love reaches, dwell at Home,
keep in your Tents; for they that dwell at Home, they divide the Spoil, their
Enemies shall become subject unto them. Truly, dear Friends, we should have
been glad to have seen your Faces, but in the Will of our Heavenly Father we
stand; and we do believe, we should have been comforted together; in the mean
time, let us all be diligent to stir up one the other, and to provoke one the
other to Love and Good Works: So see that in Gods Vineyard ye may be all found,
for they that labor there, they do receive their promise, which is an earnest
of that Inheritance that God has prepared for all that love him. So dear
Friends, there are but twelve Hours in the Day, in which we may all work; in
the Night none can work; therefore said Christ Jesus, who is the true Light,
While ye have the Light, walk in the Light, that ye may be the Children of the
Light, lest Darkness come upon you. So dear Friends, in the unfeigned Love of
our God (that can never be separated, as we abide faithful) do we write unto
you in that Love which first begot us unto God, and is as precious unto us as
ever it was; yea, the desire of our Hearts is, that in this feeling Life ye may
all dwell, which is nearer then what can be declared either by Word or Writing:
for blessed be the Lord God for evermore, this great and mavelous Light
shines through Darkness, and shines in Peoples Hearts; and the Lord is working
secretly, though they do little know it. And therefore, Friends, in the Holy
Invisible Power of the Immortal Living God, all dwell Low and Humble in that
quiet and meek Spirit that thinks no evil, but in Lowliness of Mind esteeming
each other in the Lord, and truly denying self; so will you dwell upon the Rock
Christ Jesus, who is become our hiding place, in this our Age and Generation,
as he was in Ages past, unto whom we flee in time of Trouble, and we are saved;
Everlasting Holy Praises be unto his blessed Name for evermore: So in this
weighty Power, Christ Jesus, dwell Low, that you may spread at the Root as
Lebanon, and bring forth Fruit upward, to the Praise and Glory of God, unto
whom be Everlasting Holy 'Praises forever, and for evermore.

So dearly beloved Friends, Brethren and Sisters, in the true Fellowship of the
Gospel, which is the Power of God unto Salvation, though this be the Day of
Jacob's Troubles, and the Afflictions of Joseph, yet the Worm Jacob shall
rejoice, and Israel shall dwell safely; and the true Israelite, in whose Heart
is found no Guile, the Seed Christ Jesus, the Power of God, which does and
shall reign over all the Dark Powers of the Earth, who has a Habitation in the
Earth, which the Woe from the Lord is to. So in the Life and Power of God, and
in this blessed Seed, which never sinned, nor consented to Sin, all dwell, that
the Blessing of God every one may receive, and be kept in true Peace with the
Lord, when Time shall be no more; for the Blessing of God is to the Seed; not
unto Seeds many, but unto the one seed, Christ, that all may witness the
Promise of God fulfilled, That the Seed of the Woman shall bruise the Serpents
Head, in every particular where the Blessing is received, and where the Promise
is Yea and Amen forever; for Caleb and Joshua did enter into the Promised Land,
who were of a right Spirit. So, dear Friends, keep your Dominion, and be true
to your Testimony, that he may reign whose right it is; for the Devil, the
Serpent, has no right to reign in the Hearts of People; but Christ Jesus is
come to destroy the Works of the Devil, and to reign in Righteousness, and to
set up his Government; and would have all People to come under his Government
(for the Increase of his Government has no End) that he may reign whose right
it is: And here we can say, in the Truth of our Hearts, That the Son of God is
come, and has given us a good Understanding to understand and know the things
of God; for the Light is broken forth, which comprehends all the Works of
Darkness, and shines in the Hearts of the Righteous; and the Righteous do
rejoice in the Light, which gives the Knowledge of the Glory of God in the face
of Jesus Christ. And so walk in the Light, and be encouraged, and you shall
have the Light of Life; and stand fast in your Liberty and Freedom wherein
Christ Jesus has made you Free; and that none may be entangled with the Yoke
of Bondage, which may cause the Just to suffer; For though Trouble and Sorrow
may endure for a Night, yet Joy comes in the Morning; and ye shall come to sing
the Song of Moses and the Lamb.

So dearly Beloved Friends, be encouraged to keep to the Word of Patience, and
the Lord God will keep you in the Day of Trial, and in the Hour of Temptation;
For the Rod of the Wicked will not always lie on the Back of the Righteous;
for the Wicked, and they that forget God (who Repent not) shall be turned into
Hell; Everlasting Holy Praises be unto the Lord our God forever, and for
evermore.

From us your Friends, though unknown to you outwardly, yet well-known in the
Mystery of the Fellow ship,
the Power of God, in which we dearly Salute you all, and bid you all Farewell.
Barbados, the 9th of the 12th Month, 1676.

Barbados, the 4th of the 8th Month, 1676.
For the Friends of Road-Island.
DEar Friends, in the openness of Gods blessed Life, in which our Unity stands,
not only when we are together, but when we are separated; in this is the
Salutation of our dear Love unto you, for the Lord our God has shed his Love
abroad in our Hearts, in which love we can truly say, the Lord laid it upon us
to visit his Seed amongst you, though we be the least of many of the Lords
People, and our Testimony is but little, yet we are sure it is true for the
Lord. So in the feeling of God's blessed Life, which cannot be limited, but
limits all under it, and brings into true Subjection to do the Will of God:
This blessed Life and Love of God, oh our dear Friends, which reaches over Sea
and Land, this Love constrains us, as it did to visit you, so to write unto
you. Therefore, Friends, dwell together in Unity, and in this precious Love
that thinks no Evil, nor is not easily provoked, but endures all things; this
Love seeks not its own, but every one another good. Friends, we desire you,
That you would bear with us a little; for we do not write these things unto you
because ye know not the Truth, but because you know it; and therefore a
necessity is upon us to write unto you, That no Prejudices, nor Evil
Surmisings, nor Whisperings, nor Back-bitings be or remain among you; for these
things work not the Righteousness of God, but where ye lie in the bottom,
though covered over with a Profession of the Truth, yet ye will eat as a
Canker: Therefore, Friends, we beseech you to stand in Awe, and in the Fear and
Dread of the Lord God, and sin not; for we have known the Terrors of the Lord
against Sin in our own Particulars, and also his Mercies, blessed be his Name
forever and ever. And therefore, we beseech you in the Love of God, that ye
wait together to feel God's weighty Power, that so the ground Work ye may know,
and the top Stone laid in the true Self-denial, that so as Lambs of one Fold ye
may feed together in the low Valleys; Everlasting Glory and Honor be unto the
Lord our God for all his Mercies, for they are exceeding great unto the
Children of men in this Day of God's Salvation, which is now broken forth, and
is largely manifested; and the Voice of the Lord is heard, which Voice shakes
the Earth terribly, and even removes it out of its place; and not only the
Earth, but the Heaven also: And the Lord is gathering in both Professors and
Profane; Everlasting Blessing be to our God, the Work of the Lord prospers:
Therefore, Friends, that ye may all be diligent, and Helpers on of this great
Work, as Moses, and Aaron and Hurr, that so Miriam's Curse ye may escape.

So the Lord God Almighty, who separated us from our Native Country, and from
our dear Relations, the Lord of Hosts is his Name, he has found us Worthy,
with the rest of his Messengers, to bear a Testimony unto his blessed
Unchangeable Truth. Therefore, Friends, to the keeping of him who keeps his
Israel, who neither slumbers nor sleeps, we do commit the keeping of our Souls
and Spirits, with yours also, who are of the Family of God; though we be far
separated, and cannot behold the faces one of another, but in the Mystery of
the Fellowship, which is the Power of God, where the World knows us not, we bid
you all Farewell.

From us your Friends, in the blessed Truth of God, in our measures, Thomas and
Alice Curwen.


Friends here are generally well, and here is an increase daily; for a Priest
comes to our Meetings, and People of all sorts come, so that here is good
Service for God, and the Truth increases; for the more the Enemy seeks to
hinder the increase of Truth, the more it spreads: Therefore blessed will all
they be, who abide faithful in the Truth. And we earnestly desire to hear from
you in Writing; for our Dear Unfeigned Love is more than we can express.

Thu for Friends at Road-Island in New England.

Barbados, the 11th of the 9th Month, 1677.
DEar Friends, Thomas and Alice Curwen, whom I truly honor in the Lord; My
Soul is truly comforted in the remembrance of you, and in the feeling of that
Heavenly Life by which you are supported in God's Service amongst us; my Spirit
does rejoice and Praise the Lord our God in your behalf, who has been very
bountiful in visiting of his Seed, by sending of his faithful Servants and
Ministers amongst us, to declare God's Way, which is Life, among whom ye shall
be numbered. Dear Friends, this is a Salutation of my unfeigned Love and
honorable Esteem which lives in my Heart of you in the blessed Truth of God.
And Dear Friends, I am not a little comforted, that ye have thought me worthy
of a few Lines from you, which I have received; and do desire, that ye may
bteathe to the Lord our God for my Preservation in the pure Truth, which is
more to be desired than all the World, and the Glory of it. And so, dear
Friends, I shall conclude this with my dear Love in the Truth to you both, and
remain

Your Loving Friend in the Truth, John Readman.


An Epistle to Nathaniel Sylvester and his Wife, at Shelter-Island, the 6th of
the 4th Month, 1676.
FRIENDS;
IF the Truth make us free, then are we free indeed: so let none grieve the
Spirit of Truth, that the Power of the Lord may be felt, which keeps all in
good Order, and brings the Mind into true subjection to do the Will of God, and
not our own Wills; and therefore this is in our Hearts, as a Salutation of our
Love, That you who are Parents may stand in the Truth of our God as Pillars,
and watch over your Children in the Fear of the Lord, and keep them to
Plainness of Speech, and not only you to them, and them to you, but to all
people, that so the pure Cross they may come to know, which is the Power of
God, that it may rule the Mind, and this will bring them, as they stand and
wait in the Simplicity of it, to see and put away all their Needless Attire,
and so they will grow as tender Plants, and this is our Love in the Simplicity
of our Hearts, that ye may stand over them in the Fear and Wisdom of the Lord
as Pillars; or else how will ye answer the Lord, who sees the secrets of all
Hearts? we do leave it to that of God in you to judge.

THOMAS and ALICE CURWEN.


To Friends in Gravesend in Long Island.
FRIENDS;
IN the Sense of God's infinite Presence and holy Power, in which our Life is
preserved, and in which our Unity stands with the Father and the Son, and one
with another, do we salute you (as we abide faithful to the Lord) and in his
blessed Truth, a Measure whereof ye are Witnesses of, and therefore it is in
our Hearts, in remembrance of God's living Presence, in which we were well
refreshed when we were together, and therefore to stir up your pure Minds, and
to put you in remembrance of the blessed Presence of the Lord; for ye are
Witnesses how good the Lord is: Oh Dear Friends! the Lord even filled our Cup,
and made it for to overflow, which broke our Hearts before the Lord, and one to
another; yea, he even caused his living Presence to be manifested amongst us,
to our great Satisfaction; Everlasting Holy Praises be returned to his blessed
Name forever and for evermore, for his Mercies are exceeding great. And now,
Friends, in a living Sense of the Lord's Presence do we write unto you, that ye
may feel in reading hereof the Springings of that Life in which we write unto
you, that so as Epistles in one another Hearts we may be read and known of all
men. Oh, dear Friends! abide in the Vine Christ Jesus, that so ye may bring
forth precious Fruit to God, and this is a Christian's State indeed; for the
Day of the Lord is come very near, and all that bear not this holy Fruit are
nigh unto Cursing; Therefore do we dearly desire, that you and all the rest of
our dear Friends, with whom we have been well refreshed in God's blessed Truth,
may so walk as to adorn the same, and be Possessors of it; that so they that
fear not God seeing our Light shining, may confess that ye are of God. Oh
Friends! see that your Lamps be trimmed, and that ye have Oil in your Vessels;
for the Day of the Lord is near, when he will pour out his Wrath upon the
Heathen that know him not, nor call not upon his Name in Righteousness: and
therefore, Friends, do we write unto you in a living Sense, and in the
Tenderness of our Spirits, that ye may be exercised in the Gift of God, every
one in your several places; and none to hide the Lord's Money in the Earth, nor
to account him a hard Master; for indeed he is exceeding good unto all that in
the Simplicity of their Spirits seek after him, blessed be his Name forever and
evermore. And if it be your Freedom, let Friends at New York and at Flushen (as
ye see convenient) see and read this Epistle in their Meeting; for our dear and
unfeigned Love is unto you all more than we can here declare: And we cannot but
return Praise and Thanksgiving unto the Lord, who raised his own Witness in you
to receive our Testimony, though we be the least of many of the Lord's People;
and truly the Remembrance thereof is exceeding precious, blessed be the Name of
our God forever and for evermore.

We are here waiting for our Passage to Barbados; and we desire you, if you
have a convenient Opportunity, to let us hear from you, and to write to
Barbados; for it is our Joy, and the Joy of all that truly Fear the Lord, to
hear from one another, and not only to hear, but to feel one another in the
Life and Power of God's eternal Truth. So in the true Sense of the Love of our
God, wherein our true Comfort and Consolation stands, we remain in the eternal
Spirit of Truth, which has made us free from the Law of Sin and Death; eternal
Praises, Praises forever and for evermore be rendered and returned unto the Lord
God of our Life, who is worthy forever and for evermore, Amen; in which we
remain

Your Friends in the Unchangeable Truth of our God, THOMAS and ALICE CURWEN.
From Newport in Road-Island, the 9th of the 5th Month, 1676.

To Friends at New York in New England.
FRIENDS;
IN that Love of our God which caused us to leave our Native Country, and all
that was dear and near unto us, and come and visit you, and in Obedience we
came, and we are well satisfied in the Lord, and refreshed one in another, as
you your selves very well know: and we wrote to you from Road-Island, and
earnestly desired to hear from you to Barbados, which made us greatly to
wonder that we did not receive one Line from you; we did expect to hear from
you in writing by Jews Morris; but indeed, we can truly say, That if our
Exercise be great, yet the Lord is with us, who will not suffer us to be tried
but he also brings us through by the Arm of his holy Power: and so the
Righteous can Rejoice; Everlasting Holy Praises be unto the Lord our God
forever and for evermore. So that which is chiefly in our hearts at this time
is, That we may all serve the Lord in Fear, and Rejoice in Trembling; and with
the Holy Man of God we can sing of the Judgments of the Lord, and also of his
Mercies; and so shall we all dwell together in the holy Fear low in our
measures, where we offer up unto God a living Sacrifice wellpleasing in his
sight. So mind our dear Love to Friends at the Gravesend, and Long Island, and
Oyster-Bay; and let them know, that the Love of our God, which is shed abroad
in our Hearts, reaches to the Seed, and breathes for the Preservation of its
Offspring, that we may be comforted in our Travails concerning you; for we are
very certain, that our Testimony is true for the Lord; for he rewards us an
hundred fold into our Bosom; for we have had great Service in this Island, and
the Lord has given unto our two Talents two more, for which our Souls bless
the Lord: Let all that feel his holy Power rejoice with us, for the Work of the
Lord goes on and Prospers in this Island since our coming hither; he is turning
back the Wisdom of the Wise, though they laid many Baits and Snares for the
Innocent, yet the Snares are broken, and we are delivered; and Truth prospers
over the Heads of them that do oppose; Everlasting holy Praises be unto the
Lord our God, who carries his Lambs in his Arms, and prospers his own Work:
Here is a great openness in this Island, and the Lord is working secretly in
Peoples Hearts, though they little know it who it is that smites them.

So dear Friends, when you have read this Epistle, which is a Salutation of our
Unfeigned Love, you may read it in your Meeting; and let Friends at Gravesend,
Long Island and Oyster-Bay see it, for you are all as one to us, whose Hearts
are Upright to God. Our dear Love to Matthew Pryer and his Family, to Mary
Willis and her Family, and Alice Crabe and her Family, and to John Dickson and
his Family, and to Friends about Flushen and Jamaco, to Hugh Couperwhete and
his Wife; and though we cannot remember their Names, yet in that Unchangeable
Love that can never be forgotten, in which the Lord refresht our Immortal Souls
when we were together, do we dearly salute you all, and do bid you all Farewell.
And if it be in any of your Hearts to write a few Lines to us, ye may write to
London, for we should be glad to hear from Friends at so great a distance, and
how things are; but we do not know at present when we shall go Home; but in the
Will of the Lord we stand, who has given us good Success, Holy Praises be to
his Name forever and evermore, says your Friends,

From Oliver Hutton's at Barbados, the 12th of the 12th Mon. 1676. Thomas and
Alice Curwen.


There was a Widdow-Woman in Barbados that had Negro's to her Servants, who
were convinced of God's Eternal Truth, and I hearing of them was moved to go to
speak to the Woman for their coming to our Meetings; and when I did speak to
her she did deny me, and then I did write to her as follows.

Martha Tavernor;
I Cannot pass by, but in Love write to thee, for in Love we came to visit
thee, and to invite thee and thy Family to the Meeting; but thou for thy part
art like him that was invited to work in the Vineyard, and went not: And as for
thy Servants, whom thou callst thy Slaves, I tell thee plainly, thou have no
right to reign over their Conscience in Matters of Worship of the Living God;
for thou thy self confessedst, that they had Souls to save as well as we:
Therefore, for time to come let them have Liberty, lest thou be called to give
an Account to God for them, as well as for thy self: So in thy old Age choose
rather, as a good Man did, that both thou and thy whole Family may serve the
Lord; for I am persuaded, that if they whom thou call'st thy Slaves, be
Upright-hearted to God, the Lord God Almighty will set them Free in a way that
thou know not; for there is none set Free but in Christ Jesus, for all other
Freedom will prove but a Bondage,

From thy Friend, Alice Curwen.


Something in Answer to Thomas White's Paper, which he did write against us,
and not only against us, but against the whole Body of Friends, who did profess
himself to be a Friend, but now joins himself with the Ranters, who did come to
our Meeting in New-Jarsey at Eliakim Wardall's House, who did give his
Testimony for us in the Meeting, and said, That we were sent of God; and told
us where he would have had us to have pointed another Meeting amongst the
Ranters in New-Jarsey, at a place called Midletown; and he said, He would come
to our Meeting, and came not: We did write something to him, and then he did
write to us; and then we wrote an Answer, as follows.

Thomas White;
WE cannot pass by thee and thy muddy Stuff, but warn thee, because we know
the Terrors of the Lord in our selves against Sin, and also his Mercies, though
we be the least of many of the Lord's People, which thou calls our Tribe: And
we finding thy Paper nothing worth, but for the Fire, therefore we write a few
Lines unto thee to put thee in mind of thy own words in Eliakim Wardall's
House, which was more large than we shall here declare; therefore call to mind,
and do not eat thy own words, and say, thou was not refreshed by T. C. and A.
C. We are Instruments in the hand of the Lord, and thou may see thy own Folly
and Madness, twisting as the Serpent did; and if not by T. C. and A. C. why did
thou desire of us to have a Meeting at Midletown? Thou dark Sodomite, out of
thy own Mouth thou art judged and condemned with the Light of Christ Jesus; for
thou art turning backward from that of God in thy Conscience, by which the
Children of Light are led and guided into all Truth. And like a Serpent, thou
art shooting out thy Venom and thy Sting, the Foyson of Asps is under thy
Tongue: Thou may read thy Condition, thou false Accuser, for thou first
desiredst a Meeting at Midletown, to see if the Breaches can be made up, and
then thou condemnest us for meeting together, with many Lies and false
Accusations, which was like the rest of thy confused Stuff, forged up in thy
Paper. And as for our visiting of Friends in New England, it is like the rest
of thy Accusations; for we had been there before we did fee thy face: therefore
let thy Mouth be stopped, and draw in thy Venom and Sting, and turn to the Light
of God in thy Conscience, and deal plainly and honestly with thy own Heart,
that if it be possible, thou may find Mercy with the Lord; for a Day of
Blackness is over thee; for Rebellion is worse than Witchcraft: And if thou
findst Mercy with the Lord, thou must pass through the Fire, and the Sword thou
must witness to cut down that which is exalted. So in the Plainness and Honesty
of our Hearts in the sight of the Lord we have cleared our Consciences, and
remain.

Thy Friends, in the Truth of our God, which is out of all Imaginations, Thomas
and Alice Curwen.
From Jamaco in Long Island in New England, the 18th of the 3d Month, 1676.

This for a Priest at Barbados, the 20th of the 11th Month, 1676.
Friend, William Walker;
THe Day of the Lord's Power is come, and the mavelous Light now shines, and
the Lord is making his People a Willing People, according to his Promise; and
the Call of the Lord is gone forth to call People out of Darkness into his
Mavelous Light; and the Trumpet of the Lord is Sounded and Sounding, that
People may be awakened out of Sin and Transgression; so I being moved in the
true Fear of the living God, and in his holy Power, which works secretly, the
Day is come, blessed be the Lord God forever, that that which is revealed in
secret must be declared openly, that so all may hear, that many may be turned
from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan to the Power of God; for I
feeling a necessity to warn you of the Day of your Visitation, thou for thy
part beekened to a man to drive us away; but if I had not Freely Declared, as I
Freely Received, Woe and Misery would be my Portion; for the Searcher of all
Hearts is known, from whom none can be hid: And the Day hastens that all
Coverings shall be stripped off, but the Spirit of the Lord; and therefore do I
write unto thee, to mind the Day of thy Visitation; for it is safe for every
one to try all things, and hold fast that which is good. So if it be in thy
Heart to prove thy Practice by the Scriptures, as we are willing to prove ours,
thou may come to Widow Wickame's the next Sixth day, called by the men of thy
Generation Friday, being the 20th of this Month; for we keep our Doors open,
and drive none away by Force and Cruelty, but the desire of our Hearts is to
the Lord, That People may so hear, that they may know the thing that belongs to
their Everlasting Peace, before the Day of their Visitation be over; For the
Spirit of the Lord will not always strive. No more, but my Unfeigned Love to
thee and all the Sons and Daughters of men; and the Desire of my Heart is, That
every one may know Christ, who is the Power of God unto Salvation: From me,

Thy Friend, Alice Curwen.


This was given forth to another Priest of Barbados, called Daniel Dikes, on
the 8th of the 1st Month, 1676.
Priest, Daniel Dikes;
IF thou had been invited to a Feast, where thou might have filled thy
Belly, and have drunk Wine at thy pleasure, and have had the chiefest Seat, and
have been called of men Master, we do believe thou would have come; but thou
art so far from being a Master, that thou art the Parish Servant, who hires
thee, and thou receivest Wages of them; and therefore we tell thee plainly,
that a man's Servant that is bought with his Money (whether black or white) is
more honorable than thee; for in the invisible Light thou art seen with the
same Eye as Daniel in his Day saw the Priests, their Wives and Children, though
they went in at the Privy Door: but now the Light is broken forth, blessed be
the Lord God forever, and that every Boy and Girl that abides in the Light,
which is invisible, sees your Footsteps: Therefore says the Lord unto the Idol
Shepherds, that feed not the Block of Christ, but their own Bellies, I will
gather my Sheep, and they shall not always he Meat for the Devourer, but I
will feed them my self, and they shall not need to say, Know the Lord and his
Spirit, for ye shall all know me, says the Lord, from the greatest to the
least; for I will write my Law in their Hearts, and put my Fear in their inward
Parts, says the Lord God Almighty. Therefore, Oh Priest! I tell thee plainly,
'twas to a Feast that thou wast invited; and the Lord is sending out into the
Highways and Hedges to call in all, and even to compel them that will not
come, that so his House may be filled, that so all may be lest without excuse,
as he was that had not on his Wedding Garment, who was Speechless; for the Day
is come, that that whcih is seen in secret must be declared openly: And
therefore in the invisible Light we are moved to write unto thee, seeing thee
in the Light of the Lord Jesus Christ, which lights every man that comes
into the World, which has long shined in Darkness, but now the commanding
Power of the Lord is gone forth; and he has commanded Light to shine out of
Darkness, and it shines in Peoples Hearts, and will shine more and more until
the Perfect Day; for which a Remnant can bless the Lord, and sing Praises to
his Name, and unto the Lamb for evermore, who was slain from the Foundation of
the World, but is now alive, and lives forever and evermore, and rules in the
Hearts of the Upright: And therefore, in the invisible Light, as I was waiting
upon the Lord, my Heart was truly opened to write unto thee, seeing thee to be
one of them that shut the Kingdom of Heaven against men, that will neither
enter in themselves, nor suffer others: Therefore says Christ Jesus, Woe unto
you, ye Whited Walls, ye Painted Sepulchers, ye Blind Guides; and indeed you
are so, and lead the Blind, and a Pit of Darkness is before you: Therefore is
our Advice unto thee, and to all whom it may concern, That ye turn to this
invisible Light, and as you wait in it, and abide with it, it will preserve
your Hearts and Minds to God, and ye shall not fall into the Pit. And if thou
enquire of us, What is our Way? We tell thee plainly, Christ Jesus, the Light
of the World, who said, I am the Way, the Truth and the Life; he that believes
in me, out of his Belly shall flow Rivers of Living Water: And He, even Christ
Jesus, the Power of God is the Original, and not Hebrew, Greek and Latin, which
the Jews set over his Head when they Crucified him, as it is in these days;
and as is said before, he is our Way, and he is the Hope of our Glory; and we
are not ashamed to confess him before men; for if we should not confess him
before men, but be ashamed of him, as too too many are, then he will not
confess us before his Father in Heaven: Therefore, Oh Priest! we warn thee,
that thou cease giving thy Meanings to the Scriptures: Thou may read thy
Doom, in the Revelations; He that Adds or Diminishes, God will add unto him the
Plagues written in that Book.

THOMAS and ALICE CURWEN.


An Epistle written to Friends at Thickets and Clifts Meetings at Barbados,
the 20th of the 1st Month, 1676.
TO you, Friends, of the Thickets and Clifts Meetings, and to all whom it may
concern, in the Love of God that truly opens our Hearts, do we write unto you,
to stir up the pure Mind, and to raise up that Love that brought us unto you,
even the Love of God that first begat us by the Word of his Power, that we
should be as the first Fruits unto God; and this makes us to Cry many a time in
the secret of our Hearts, both in Meetings and out of Meetings; Oh! how great
is thy Loving kindness, O Lord! Oh, that the World knew it! And in the feeling
of it we can truly say as one did, Oh! that all the Lord's People were
Prophets, that they might speak one by one, that all might be comforted; and
that the Lord would enlarge Japhet to dwell in the Tents of Shem; then there
would be no complaining for want of Power, but the Lord would open even the
Windows of Heaven, and pour out Blessings upon you, that ye shall not have room
to hold it in, but the Overflowings of it you would feel in your own
particulars; and when you were thus filled, you would bless the Lord, and you
would cry unto others to come away and taste and feel how good the Lord is, for
his Mercies endure forever to them that fear him and wait upon him. And
therefore, Friends, we beseech you think it not hard to keep your Meetings
apart, for the Blessing of the Lord is as truly witnessed in Meetings apart,
both in Men and Women's Meetings; and though Women be the Weaker, yet he has
laid Help upon one that is Mighty, Oh! Praises, Praises, says our Souls
forever and for evermore, who feel his Power in our Hearts at this time: And
therefore do we write unto all that may be concerned in it, That ye beware of
that Spirit that was in the Children of Israel in the days of old; for the Lord
knows right well, before whom we stand, who knows the Innocence of our Hearts
and Spirits, that we judge no man's Person, nor hint at no Particular, the Lord
knows; but we have heard some say, That it was well in the Beginning, when
there was not so many Meetings; and we say the same: But Friends, consider, we
beseech you all, for our Spirits are bowed down in a Sense of the Work of the
Lord in this Island; and therefore, ye that have known good days in your
Infancy, rest not there, but come to your Growth, to a Young man's state, and to
an Old man's state; for according to the manner of men, in Twenty Years time we
come to our Growth; much more in the Work of the Lord can we come to teach
others: And therefore look not back, as the Children of Israel did, who fainted
in their Minds because of their long Travel; but take heed of that Spirit that
would not have many Meetings, nor to have Truth to spread; for the Enemy lies
near that would betray the Simplicity: Therefore thus says the Lord in our
Hearts this day, as he did unto Moses in days past, Speak unto the Children of
Israel, that they go forward; for this is the Day of the Lord's Appearance
spiritually; he is bringing out of Egypt by a strong Arm; and blessed is every
one that helps on the Work, and puts his Shoulder to it. So faint not, Friends,
in your Minds, nor be not weary, for the Work is the Lords, and he will carry
it on; it shall Prosper; and God prospers it in this Island, Everlasting
Praises be unto the Lord our God, can our Souls truly say, who feel the Work of
the Lord to Prosper: and therefore we say again, Let none faint in the Day of
Trial; for that is a Testimony that their Strength is small: And therefore,
Friends, be Bold and Valiant for God's blessed Truth, and take no thought, but
wait upon the Lord; and if ye be called before Magistrates, the Lord will put a
word into your Mouths that they shall not be able to gainsay: And if it be so
that ye suffer joyfully the Spoiling of your Goods, ye shall come to witness,
That the Earth is the Lord's and the Fullness of it; and they that Fear the Lord
shall want no no good thing, neither for Soul nor Body: And if it be so, that
the Devil cast into Prison, fear it not, but in Patience possess your Souls,
for the Lord will bring through; for we speak what we know; for the Lord has
delivered us out of Prison inwardly and outwardly, and his Presence has been
with us in all our Troubles; and he has made us to sing in Prison, and in the
Stocks, Praises be to the Lord God, and to the Lamb forever, sayour Souls: But
Friends, we do not write this to make our Sufferings known, but to encourage
all to abide patiently, that ye may come through as Gold purified; for the
Wicked are but like Waters, and their Persecution is but like a Wave of the
Sea; and though they rise never so high, yet it is our Faith in God, That he
that has put a Limit to the Bound of the Sea, and has said unto it, Thus far
shall thou pass, and no further, and there shall thou stay thy proud Waves: Oh
Friends! bless the Lord with us; for it is a Day of fulfilling. Therefore, O
let Truth spread in every Particular; let it take Root downward and grow
upward, and bring forth Fruit to the Praise and Glory of our heavenly Father.
And this we have to say, That every Plant that he has not planted, shall be
plucked up; and every Plant that his right hand has planted, he waters it,
that it may bring forth more Fruit; and in this is our heavenly Father
Glorified and Well-pleased, that we bear much Fruit; Everlasting Praises be
unto the Lord our God forever and evermore. So with our Unfeigned Love, we take
leave of you, and remain

Your Friends in that which never alters, nor never changes, but remains
forever, do we Salute you all, and bid you all Farewell. Thomas and Alice Curwen.


For the Mayor of Plymouth in Devonshire.
Friend, Richard Tomes;
WE do read in the Scriptures of Truth, that in the Apostles days there was a
noble Festus amongst the Magistrates: Therefore do I write unto thee, that thou
be not stired up against a peaceable People that meets together singlely to
worship God in Spirit and in Truth; for God is a Spirit, and will be worshipped
in Spirit and in Truth; and until People turn to the Spirit of Truth, which is
the Light within, with which he has lighted every one that comes into the
World; and he that hates this Light has it, and though they may kick against
it, yet it stands a faithful Witness for God; and whatever People may profess,
they never worship the living God acceptably; for we know at this day, that God
hears not Sinners, no more then he did in the days of Old; and that the
Prayers of the Wicked are abomination to him, as well in this day as in times
past; but he that fears God and does his Will, them he hears; and the Will of
God is done in hearing and obeying the Light; and by this did they witness, in
days past their Hearts to be Sanctified, and this is it that we meet together
for; and we are but yet learning the Lord's Prayer; and as we are willing to
wait that the Will of God may be done in Earth, as well as in Heaven, the Lord
has blessed us, and we shall spread over the face of the Earth; and though Balaam
and Balack would rise up to Curse Israel at this day, yet this Testimony is in
my Heart for God, That he has blessed us, and no man can Curse that which God
has blessed: And as we keep the Word of his Patience, the Lord God will keep us
in the Day of Trial, which shall certainly come upon all that dwell on the
Earth, and know not a Habitation in the God of Jacob; for the Day is come which
many would have seen (wherein the Lord is bringing mighty Things to pass, who
reveals his Secrets to them that truly fear him) the same which was in the
Apostles days, wherein the Everlasting Gospel was preached, which is the Power
of God unto Salvation; and if any preach any other Gospel, let them be
accursed: And this Gospel is a wonder to you, and is hid from you; and
therefore ye perish in your Sins, which separate you from the Living God, and
does hinder good things from you, who live in the pleasure of the Flesh, and
drink up Iniquity as the Ox drinks Water; but now in the Latter Days the Lord
is pouring forth his Spirit upon all Flesh, his Sons and upon his Daughters;
and they do Preach and Prophecy in his Name, and in his Name do wonderful
things; and it is a great Wonder to all the World, who lies in Wickedness; and
therefore the People perish for want of Knowledge; for the Lord would have
gathered you in this Day, as he would have gathered Jerusalem in the days of
old, but they would not be gathered, and therefore they were left Desolate: and
the same is coming upon you, if you do not speedily Repent; for Jerusalem was
destroyed, who would not be gathered, and then Lamentation, Woe and Misery did
fall upon them, and remains upon them till this Day; but the Lord has gathered
a Remnant into Covenant with himself, wherein Jacob does rejoice, and Israel
does dwell safely: And therefore the Sons of Jacob are not consumed, though
many be Jacob's Troubles, and the Afflictions of Joseph, which is now, as was
in the Days of old; and they that suffer for him, they shall reign with him
forever and for evermore, and fit at his right Hand in his Throne of Grace, and
in his Kingdom of Glory forever and for evermore, where we shall Sing and
Rejoice with the Lord God and the Lamb forever; the Lamb that was slain in us
in Sodom and Egypt, while the World had a Foundation in us, who was dead, but
is now alive, whose Name is called the Word of God, which was in the Beginning,
as the Scripture does declare, 1 John 1.


This was for the Priest of Ives, Joshua Herning, the 19th of the 10th Month,
1677.
I could not be clear in the sight of the Lord, until I had written a few
Lines unto thee, seeing thee come into our Meeting with the Constable and his
great Staff; and I heard thee say, That thou wast an Informer; and I tell thee
plainly it were better for thee to be a Hangman; for they do but execute
others that by their Law are condemned to dye; but many Informers have brought
shameful Death upon themselves, and Ruin upon their Families, as it is on
Record: Indeed, we confess we are a Suffering People at this day, as they were
that went before us, who took joyfully the spoiling of their Goods, who were
scoffed and mocked at, and said, That Bonds and Imprisonments were their
portion, and it was for their Testimony which they held, as thou may read at
large in the Scriptures of Truth, who have nothing now against us but
concerning the Law of our God, and there ye go about tocatch us, as they of Old
did Daniel; but oh Priest! read what became of these Informers, and of those
that informed against the three Children, thou blind Guide, which Christ cried,
We against, and said, They were whited Walls, and painted Sepulchers, and wore
long Robes, and loved to be called of men Masters, and that they loved the
upper most Romes at Feasts, and greetings in the Markets; and further he said,
that By your Fruits your are known; and so it is this day: Woe unto you, said
he, for ye lay heavy Burdens upon the People, and ye shut the Kingdom of
Heaven against men, ye neither enter in your selves, nor suffer others:
Therefore says Christ Jesus, Woe unto you. And if thou ask, how I know these
things? I tell thee plainly it is by the invisible Light which shines in my
Heart, which manifests all things, as it is written in the Scriptures of Truth;
and this Light was in the beginning, and will be when all visible things shall
have an end, to which thou shall be turned to give account of all thy Deeds
done in thy Body all thy Life time, and of all thy hard Speeches against the
Servants of the living God; therefore turn to it, and let it search thy Heart,
and believe in it: for this is my living Testimony for God, that it will
deceive no man, but it will bring the hidden things of Esau to Light, and
believing in it and obeying it, it will lead out of Sin: Therefore Repent, and
pray unto the Lord, that he take thee not away in the midst of thy Sins, lest
thou go down into the Pit out of which there is no Redemption. And as for our
Names and Place of abode, it is in Lancashire, in a little Village, called
Beaklife, in the Parish of Alldingham, where we were haled to Prison by such a
proud Priest as thee, because we could not bow in this our day, no more than
they could do in days past, but the Lord shortened that Priests days; and we
do witness Christ's words fulfilled in this our day, where he said, That it
should come to pass that the Devil should cast some into Prison: But blessed be
the Lord, who has delivered us; and we are at this day and time free of all the
Goals in the World: therefore do we warn thee that thou come not upon thy
Neighbors in pretense of a Fine for us, for we have to satisfy of our own,
and according to the Act ye are to fetch it where we live, whose Names are here
set down, Thomas and Alice Curwen.

And that further We do declare what the Lord has done for us in the inncency
of our Hearts, we Bless and Praise the Lord: Oh my Soul bless thou the Lord,
that has witnessed that Scripture of Truth this day fulfilled in my Ears, where
Christ Jesus said, That men should speak all manner of Evil against us for his
Names sake, and that falsely; Rejoice, said he, and be exceeding glad, for great
is your reward in Heaven. Oh, Praises, Praises, says my Soul, with many
Thousands more that God has redeemed from Death to Life; And to his blessed
Name be Everlasting holy Praises, and that for evermore, says a Friend in the
Truth of God, though the least of many;

Who am known unto men by the Name of Alice Curwen.
Huntingdonshire.

For the Priest at Godmanchester, the 21st of the 11th Month, 1677.
Friend,
YEsternight I spoke to thee, as thou passedst by, and thou wentst away
laughing, like the rest of thy Brethren, making merry over God's Witness in
thee, which is the Grace of God, which appears at this day as it did in the
Apostles days; and unto all them that believe in it and obey it, it works the
same effect; everlasting Praises be sounded out unto the Lord our God at this
day for his blessed Appearance, says my Soul, who is come the second time
without Sin to save them that believe; Everlasting Holy Praises be sounded out
aloud, says my Soul in secret, unto the Lord for all his Mercies, and that for
evermore. And truly Priest (for I do not know thee by any other Name) my Spirit
is grieved when I do see any of you, or wherever I do meet with you, that you
should take upon you the charge of Peoples Souls, and to teach them the Way of
the Lord; and in all my Travels I find no men so light and airy as you Priests
are, who wear your long Robes; and by Christ's words (as you may read in the
Scriptures) and by the Spirit of Truth (which God has manifested in my
particular) do I see you to be them which Christ cried Woe against: therefore is
the Word of the Lord as a Sword in my Mouth against the Mystery of Babylon, and
the Merchants of her also; for the Lambs War is begun, and as it is written in
the Scripture of Truth, The Beast and the false Prophet makes War against the
Lamb and his followers, but God shall take the Beast and the false Prophet
alive, and cast them into the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone forever
and evermore; and the Lamb and the Saints shall get the Victory. And so my Soul
blesses the Lord that I have lived to see this day, wherein the Scriptures are
fulfilled; for it is the Lords day: therefore I desire thee in love to thy
immortal Soul, to prise the day of thy Visitation; for I could not be clear
till I had eased my Spirit, who am a Friend to thy Soul, and truly loves all
Men and Women also with that Love that God has loved me withal,

Who am known by my Name, Alice Curwen.
Huntingdonshire.

My Dear Friends, Thomas and Alice Curwen;
I With many more, are glad to hear of the Arrival of John Grove his Ship, and
we hope you are all safe; you are often in my Mind, but more your Innocent
Lives and Conversation amongst us, which showed clear also your great Labor of
Love amongst us, which will not be forgotten in the Hearts of the Faithful; and
I hope will not go without its Reward. The Lord God of our Life preserve us in
these Times of Troubles, which are at this time amongst us, of which I do
believe you will have a full Account: I am straightened for Time at present, so
cannot enlarge; only my dear Love (with my Childrens) is to you both, desiring,
that we may be all kept in his blessed Fear to our Lives end. So my dear
Friends, Farewell.

Barbados, the 7th of the 5th Mon. 1677. Your Loving Friend, Elizabeth Griffin.


Dearly Beloved, Thomas and Alice Curwen.
YOur good wills toward me and my Wife when you were with us, we cannot
forget: And truly, Friends, would you know where I am, and how far I am grown
in the Truth of our God, I cannot well resolve my self, by reason of the gross
Darkness, and the Straitness of the Way: I seek Rest, but I cannot find it: I
seek my Beloved, but cannot find him: I am often amongst those with whom God is
not well-pleased, although not yet overthrown amongst those that lust after
Evil Things, those that tempted Christ, and those that Murmured, though not
yet, through the Riches of the Patience and Goodness of God, not destroyed of
the Destroyer: Sometimes I think I feel the Well springing up, the Day of the
Lord's burning, to burn like an Oven, and the Leaven working and the Seed of
the Kingdom no more the least of all Seeds, the Grave opening, and the Dead
arising at the Voice of the Son of God: And at other times as one that Dreamed,
and mere Stranger in Israel, I am Hungry, I am Thursty, I am hardly filled; yet
I must needs acknowledge, that sometimes I do meet with Manna; and blessed be
the Shepherd of Israel, I sometimes drink, and am resreshed at the Brook by the
Way: I still wait for the blessed Hope and the Glorious Appearance of the great
God, and our Savior Jesus Christ: I see that Patience must have its Perfect
Work. that my Beloved must not be awakened until he please, and that Times and
Seasons are in the Father's Hand; and am a Witness for him, That he is
Faithful, who has promised, by what of his Promises I have already found to be
Yea and Amen in Christ Jesus: He does not break the bruised Reed, nor quench
the smoking Flax; on whom I do wait to bring forth Judgment into Victory, to
kindle his Refiners Fire, to consume the Dross and take away the Tinn, and to
answer and to save so as by Fire, that I may become a Vessel meet for the
Masters Use. Oh, Travel for me! Help me forward with your Breathings, and that
I fall not in the Wilderness.

From me Henry Byrch, who was a Baptist-Teacher, but now, through the Mercy of
the Lord, am come to be taught of the Lord, and in measure established in the
blessed Truth of our God, to the Praise, Glory and Honor of the Lord our God,
who is God over all, Heaven and Earth, blessed forever and for evermore, Amen,
says my Soul, and the Souls of the Righteous, whom God has redeemed from
Death to Life; to him alone be Glory forever and evermore.
Barbados, the 9th of the 7th Month, 1677.

Dear Friends, Thomas and Alice Curwen,
YOur Letter I received, and I was very glad to hear of your Welfare, and of
your arrival safely in England; and truly Friends, I know you cannot easily be
forgotten by me, nor many good Friends in this Island, for your faithful
Service, Pains and Travel, whilst among us, in the Service and Work of the
Lord; and the Desire of my Soul is, That we may be all kept in a living Sense
of his Holy Fear dwelling in our Hearts at all times; for the Fear of the Lord
is only that that keeps the Heart clean, and preserves us in the greatest
Trials and Exercises that we meet withal, that so continuing faithful to the
end of our days, we may receive our Reward from our Heavenly Father, even the
Salvation of our Immortal Souls. So dear Friends, I need not use many words
unto you: I could not well omit sending these two or three Lines, though at
present something s^^itned in point of time. Friends are generally in pretty
good Condition, though of late we were like to have had a further Breach here
amongst us, by reason of altering Men and Women's Meetings, at the Bridge-Town;
but blessed be the Lord, the Meetings at present are pretty well ordered and
composed, so that I am in good hopes that all Difference and Strife will cease,
and Truth will outlive all; here are good Friends, which I hope will keep down
these Unruly Passions and Heats that were usual and too often accustomed by
some to rise amongst us. My Wife desires dearly to be remembered to you. So with
my True and Unfeigned Love to you both, I rest and remain

Your Friend and Brother, in my Measure of the blessed Truth, John Todd.
Barbados, the 4th of the 11th Month, 1677.

Loving Friends, dear Thomas and Alice;
WE do dearly salute you in the blessed Truth of our God; and in the sense of
the same do our Souls truly rejoice, and our Hearts are made truly Glad, in
that we feel one another in that blessed Life which keeps our Souls alive to
God, together and assunder: And truly, our dear Friends, you have been often in
our remembrance; and in the sensible feeling of that blessed Life has our
Souls been truly refreshed in you; though many Miles assunder, yet can we truly
say, That oft-times our Hearts and Souls have been truly refreshed in you, and
the Sense of that Living Testimony you left behind you, that oft-times lives in
our Hearts: Oh! blessed be the Lord our God for evermore, that has brought us
to see this blessed Day, in that we can feel one another in this blessed Life,
which keeps our Souls alive to God, and tender one to another: And so, our dear
Friends, words are too short to tell of the goodness of God to our Souls, as
our Minds have been truly staid on him: Oh! how has his Love flown forth in
our Hearts to the great Refreshment and Satisfaction of our Immortal Souls,
together and assunder! We have known the Renewings of the Blessings and Mercies
of the Lord unto our Souls; Oh, praised be the Name of our God forever and for
evermore, that he has brought a Remnant to see this blessed Day of the
flowings forth of his Love in our Hearts, which makes us truly to rejoice more
than the Increase of any Visible Thing. And so, our dear Friends, how have we
known the bedewings of the Lord, as our Minds and Hearts have been kept low
before him; and in the sense of the same we have been kept fresh and green, and
alive to God; Oh! holy Praises be to the Name of the Lord our God forever and
for evermore. And so, our dear Friends, having not much more in our Hearts to
you at this time, our dear Love is to you, with the rest of Friends: We remain

Your dear Friends, Brother and Sister, in that blessed Truth of our God,
Stephen Richards, Anne Barber.
Falmouth, the 1st of the 3d Mon. 1678.

Dear Friends, Thomas and Alice Curwen;
MY True Love dearly salutes you both, and all True-hearted Friends that may
enquire after me: Since your coming away good Friends have been much wanting,
and things have been pretty high against me; but I hope, in the general, it
will not prevail, and the Lord has made me willing to bear; but the Lord's
hand of Power will preserve the Simple and Upright in Heart, Amen, says your
Friend, in Brotherly Love,

Barbados, the 2d of the 6th Mon. 1677. Ralph Freatwell.


Dear Friends;
I Could not be clear, without the Tender of my true Love unto you both, whose
Labor of Love, Service and daily Travels for the Lord's Truth in this Place
will never be forgotten by a Remnant, and the Lord's Reward I know is with you;
to whom belongs all Praise, Honor and Glory, both now and forever, and for
evermore, Amen, says your Friend,

Thomas Freatwell.


Dear Friends, Thomas and Alice Curwen;
IN the Unchangeable and Everlasting Love of God, do I dearly salute you both:
I have received a Letter from you, which was very acceptable to me; in the
reading of which I was sweetly consolated and refreshed; and your Love to us
all I cannot, nor I hope shall not forget; Oh! the many precious Meetings and
Opportunities which we enjoyed when ye were with us! the Remembrance of which
was precious, but the glorious Presence of God which we enjoyed was much more
precious: Oh! the goodness of the Lord God is Unutterable, who continues his
Love to us daily, and accompanies us with his living Presence at all Times, and
in all Places, as we abide low in his Fear, and are found faithful in his Work
and Service: Oh! my Soul's Desire is, That I may be kept low before him
forever: And my Friends, I hope your Prayers to the Almighty will be for the
same.

The Lord's Truth does prosper mightily, and his Power is over this whole
Island, though the Devil does Rage in his Instruments mightily, even at this
present time, more than ever before, as I think; and such Threatening Times
against the poor Innocent Lambs, as have not been known; and only because of
the Prosperity of God's blessed Truth in this little Island: But we fear not
man, but are greatly encouraged to go on in the Work of the Lord, and be
Valiant for God until Death; for I am persuaded here is a little Remnant, whose
Trust is in the Lord, that does not regard any of their Threatenings and
Unrighteous Laws, which are lately made, if they were ten times greater than
they are; and I believe We shall have the Victory, through the Power of the
Lord, as we abide steadfast in the Unchangeable Truth of our God, though many
that are not faithful to the Lord God, but let their Testimony fall, who are
the fearful and unbelieving, may lose the Crown of Eternal Life: And your Love
to our Family was very large, and I am right sensible of it, in the Sense of
which I am refreshed at this present; and so, in the same Love do I dearly
salute you: And so with my Love to all Friends, I remain

Your Loving Friend, in the Everlasting Truth of God, Robert Thorp.


An Epistle to Swarthmore Meeting.
DEar Friends at Swarthmore Meeting, to whem is my true Love; and I have an
Honorable Esteem in my Heart for you all, who keep to your first Love, and
retain your Integrity to this day, which is a blessed Day indeed of the
Breakings-forth of the blessed weighty Truth, which we breathed for in the
days of our Infancy. Oh! what shall I say to stir up your pure Minds, that ye
may travail forward, that none may stand still, nor none may go backward! for
this is the Day of God's spiritual Israel's Travel, God has made me a living
Witness; and therefore my dear Friends, as one that has been nursed up there,
can I not at this time contain my self, but in a living Sense of the days
past, when we waited together for true Israel's Hope: And Oh! how is my Spirit
bowed down in the weighty Power of the blessed Appearance of the
Breakings-forth of the weighty Truth in the days of our Infancy, in that
Meeting which I so dearly love and truly honor in the Lord, though the
breakings out at first of the Power of the Living God was very Dreadful and
very Terrible, yet (oh my Friends!) I cannot but ease my Spirit a little at
this time, being loaded with the Power of the Lord, which causes me to write.
And oh! what shall I say of the blessed heavenly Melody, and the spiritual
Songs, yea, the new Song that God has put into our Mouths; Oh! endless
Praises, says my Soul, with you my dear Friends, with whom I would be glad
that I might sit down with you once more, that we might sing together of the
Mercies of the Lord, and of his pure Judgments in this our day, as poor David
did. And oh! how am I affected in my Bowels for an Opportunity that we might be
comforted together! but I do not see my Service over, that I may come to my
Place of Abode in the oatward; for I can truly say, that I have not taken up
another; and I am as a Weaned Child at this time: and the Desire of my Heart to
God is, That these few days I have to spend may be in his blessed Truth, which
is more to me than all the World: therefore let none of you question in your
Minds my coming home; for when I have done the Will of God, who am one of the
least of the Lord's People, I shall be willing to come into the North, and sit
down with you, and wait upon the Lord, who has brought me thus far toward my
Native Being, and yet my way is shut up, that I cannot come Home. Oh my Dear
Friends! breath with me to the Lord for the Prosperity of this great Work,
which the Lord has made me Instrumental in; though but weak and little, yet
blessed be the Lord who appears strong and weighty in every needful time,
though in weak Instruments; let his Name be purely Praised, and had in
Everlasting Reverence from Age to Age, and from Generation to Generation, says
my Soul, which is Immortal, and that for evermore. So, as I began in a Sense of
the Love of God, and in his weighty Power, in that do I dearly salute you, and
bid you all Farewell; and remain as one of God's Flock, and that Family where we
were begotten to God, for which my Soul shall bless the Lord, whilst I have a
Day to live.

Huntingdon-shire, the 29th of the 11th Month, 1677. Alice Curwen.


My Dear and Well-beloved Friends, Thomas and Alice Curwen;
MY dear Love is to you both; and by this you may know that we received your
Letter from Barbados, the which indeed was very acceptable to us, and I was
refreshed thereby; I carried it to our General-Meeting at Oyster-Bay, and it
was read in the Men and Women's Meeting; and I know many were truly glad to hear
of your Welfare, and the Prosperity of Truth. My Dear Friends, you are often
in my remembrance, and the remembrance of your Savoury Life is very pleasant
unto me; for I am a Witness with you, That the Glory of the Lord often filled
his Temple when we were together; and the Lord's Eternal Love is not wanting to
his People that wait upon him in the Uprightness of their Hearts, for he
opens of his pure Fountain, and refreshes his own, though many are the
Exercises of his People: We are, as it were, a Song among a wild Generation;
and those Ranting Spirits are much as they were when ye were here; they come in
the like manner Ranting, Roaring, Singing and Dancing int our Meetings; and it
is the harder to bear because it casts stumbling blocks in the way of the
Simple; for some of the World think they are of us, and call them Quakers;
saying, Look where they differ among themselves! These Ranters were very Wicked
at Oyster-Bay the last Meeting; when the Meeting was near ended my Husband was
taken violent Sick with a Vomiting and Gripes; some of them hearing of it were
very glad, and said to me, I should lose my Right Eye and my Right Arm; and
came near the Door where we were, and where my Husband lay sick; and cried, Woe,
Woe, Woe to that Damned Story and Jezebel his Wife. Friends are pretty well over
their Spirits in these Parts, and generally well at Cravesend, Oyster-Bay and
Westchester; there is much Affiction on Josiah Parnel, his Family has been
much afflicted with Sickness. My dear Friends, I am glad to write to you now,
not knowing when I may have the like time again, I being with Child, and
wanting but about six Weeks of my Account. My dear Husband's dear Love is to
you both. So not knowing how the Lord may be pleased to deal with me, I dearly
salute you, and take my leave of you both, in that Love which is of the Lords
begetting.

Your True Friend, Patience Story.
New York in New England, the 10th of the 8th Month, 1675.

Salem in New England, the 22d of the 5th Month, 1677.
My Dear and Well-beloved Friends;
IN the Blessed Everlasting Truth of our God, revealed and made manifest, do I
at this time dearly salute you. My dearly Beloved in the Lord, unto whom the
Salutation of my Love abounds, and with whom I have been well refreshed in that
pure and heavenly Unity, which makes us near unto the Lord, and one to another,
even in that endless love which cannot be broken, and which nothing can
separate from, but it reaches over Sea and Land, for it is unlimited, neither
can any Waters quench it: Oh! read me here and feel me here, even in that which
Tongue cannot express, nor Lips declare; for truly in this are you dear and
near unto me; for as the Truth is dear and precious unto me, so are they that
dwell in it, even in this blessed Truth which the Lord God has been pleased to
make a Remnant partakers of in this our Day and Age, and has caused us with
them to taste of his heavenly divine Love, which flows from the Fountain of
Endless Life, in which we can feel one another, and truly rejoice tegether in
the Spirit, though separated in the outward, and may not see one another faces
any more in the Flesh; yet as we dwell in that which is Immortal, we shall
enjoy one another in the Invisible Life, which changes not, where there is Joy
and Pleasure for evermore: Oh! blessed and magnified be the Name of our God
forever, who is not wanting unto them that put their Trust in him, but he
supports and preserves in all Conditions and Trials whatsoever. And dear
Friends, for so you are to me in the Truth, that changes not: for you are as
an Epistle written in my Heart never to be blotted out, and the Remembrance of
you is a refreshing to me, when I call to mind the blessed Society and
Fellowship we enjoyed when we were together, in which the Lord God of Heaven
preserve and keep us forever unto the end of our days, so shall we reap a good
Harvest, if we faint not, and come to lay down our Heads in Peace and be at
rest with the Lord when Time shall be no more. Dear Hearts, I have much to
write unto you, but being in haste time will not permit, I being also but ill
in Body. I am willing to give you an Account concerning Margaret Brewster, whom
you know, who came lately from Barbados in the Lord's Service to Boston, where
she performed it, I being also with her in her Service and in her Sufferings
(except Whipping) as also was Lydia Wright and Barbary Bowers, and John Eston's
Son also a Prisoner with us a Month. And Dear Hearts, I have met with many
Trials since I saw your Faces, but the Lord has hitherto preserved me through
it all, blessed be his Name forever. I cannot now give you an account
concerning my Mother and Brothers, who were taken Captives by the Cruel Indians
some Months; but the Lord has delivered them, and they are here now with me.
So dear Friends, being in great Haste, I must take my leave of you, committing
you to the Care and Keeping of the Lord, in which Everlasting Love I bid you
Farewell, my dear Friends Farewell, who am

Your True and Real Friend, Mary Milles.


Friends here in general their Love is to you. I received your Letter with
Gladness of Heart, and desire to hear from you again.

From Flushen in Long Island in New England, the 15th of the 7th Month, 1677.
Dear and Inwardly beloved Friends, Thomas and Alice Curwen;
YOu are both dear and near unto me, as my own Life; for I can truly say, that
I have been often Refreshed in remembrance of you, feeling you in that dear
Love and Life which proceeds from him who is our Life, and length of our days,
in whom we live and have our Being, who is our Strength in time of need, when
Trials come and Exercises come, we find him a God at hand, and not afar off,
blessed and praised be his holy Name forever, says my Soul, for his
unspeakable Love, by which he has gathered us near unto himself, and near one
to another, by the Arm of his endless Power, which reaches over Sea and Land,
and reaches to his own, wherein we have true Fellowship one with another in the
Spirit of Truth, where the World knows us not; for therein does his Worship
stand, and such does the Lord seek to worship him, that worship him in the
Spirit and in the Truth, blessed be his holy Name, who is God over all, blessed
be his holy Name forever and for evermore, who has filled our Hearts with his
living Presence, which does engage us more and more to follow him, and to lean
upon him; for his Judgments are pure, and he delights to abound in Mercy. And
so in that Everlasting Love, which our Heavenly Father has loved us from the
beginning, I do dearly salute you both; for you have often been in my
Remembrance since we have been separated as outwardly, and have been often with
you in that blessed Truth wherein our Unity stands, which endures forever,
which will live over all, and out-last all the invented Worships which the
Devil has begot many into; but their Day is almost over; for they are all in
Confusion, and all in Heaps; but blessed be the holy and sacred Name of the
Lord forever, who has preserved a Remnant to stand in their Testimony for the
Honor of his Everlasting Truth. Friends are generally well in Health, blessed
be the Name of the Lord forever and for evermore. So having this opportunity I
was willing to write these few Lines. Friends, you are dear and near unto me,
and the Springs of Love and Life do often flow sorth unto you more than Tongue
or Pen can express. So no more but

Your assured Friend and Brother in the Truth of our God, Matthew Pryar.
And as Opportunity presents let me hear from you. Friends have suffered pretty
much at Boston since you were there; Margaret Brewster of Barbados has been
sorely Whipped, and many Friends more; and here are a great many Friends come
over to Delaware, and I fear that there is great need of Faithful Laborers in
these parts. No more, but my dear Love to you both.

Matthew Pryar.




Dear Friends, Thomas and Alice Curwen;
IN that Love of God which is Everlasting and Endless in all his dear Babes and
Children, whom he has begotten by his Immortal Word, do I salute you, and you
are often in my Remembrance, although far separated as to the Outward, yet near
in that which is Invisible and Immortal, in the Life of Innocence, in which
Life you were made instrumental in the Hand of our God to comfort me and hold
me up in a living hope, when I was well nigh overwhelmed with Sorrow; but
Praises are given by me unto our God that lives forever, who has given me
Patience to wait his time, and a Contented Heart, that into what Estate and
Condition I may be brought, I hope I shall be contented. Dear Friends, I do own
dearly your Labor of Love, and in the sense of the same do bid you Farewell;

Who am your Friend in the Truth Francis Colley.
Flushen in New England, the 15th of the 8th Month, 1677.

DEar and Well-beloved Friends, Thomas and Alice Curwen' whom I love in the
Truth; and as my Love was dear to you when you were with us, so it remains now
when we are separated, and my Heart is truly knit unto you in Unfeigned Love;
and as you were a Comfort and a Strengthening in my great Weakness when you were
with me, which I cannot forget, though far separated; but I do say, The Lord
reward your Labor of Love into your Bosoms; for the Lord has of his abundant
Love raised me from a weak estate, that I may yet remain in the Land of the
Living, to declare his Praise, and to signify my endeared Love to my Brethren
and Sisters, and to bear a Living Testimony for my God against the Wrong
Spirits, that burden the Seed of God. So my dear Friends, I have not much to
acquaint you with, only that which was foreseen, That Bad Spirits are working
their own Destruction. So in that Love which I began, I do take my leave, and
remain

Your Friend and Sister, Mary Tyllton.
Gravesend in New England, the 15th Day of the 8th Month, 1677.

Antego, the 19th of the 4th Month, 1677.
Dear Friends, Thomas and Alice Curwen;
MY true love is to you both, desiring your Everlasting Welfare and
Well-being in God's Everlasting Truth, that is broken forth amongst us, blessed
be his Name forever, who does daily engage us with his Love, and gives us a
living Experience of his Mercies and Goodness, who feeds our Immortal Souls,
and keeps us fresh and green, and bears up our Heads in the time of great and
deep Exercises and Trials, which we do meet withal; Everlasting Praises and
Glory be to his Name forever: so that we can say of a Truth, Good is the Lord
to all that wait upon him, and choose him to be their chiefest Beloved; who
indeed is the chiefest of Ten Thousand to his little Remnant, that has none in
Heaven but only the Lord Jesus Christ, nor none on Earth in comparison of him.
And so desiring we may forever wait in singleness upon the Lord, that he may
keep us and preserve us in the sense of his Love, breathing and crying unto the
Lord one for another in the blessed Seed and Gift and holy Spirit, that the
Lord has blessed through all Ages and Generations; Everlasting Praises be unto
his holy Name forever. Oh Friends! your Faithfulness the Lord has made me in
my measure sensible of, wherein my Soul is comforted, being Members of the one
Body, of which Christ Jesus is the Head and Leader, that goes before his
People, and leads into the green Pastures of Life, which the World cannot give
us, nor take from us.

JASPER TREGOUSE.


Dear Friends, Thomas and Alice Curwen;
I Received your Lines and your Friend R. J. and cannot but accept kindly of
your Remembrance of me in the Lord, and was refreshed in them, and your true
Love therein, as I have also been in your Company in several good Meetings by
God's Power refreshed, for which let him have the Praise forever: and your
tender and dear Advice in the Truth is owned, and I desire your Remembrance of
me in the Lord may be continued, and that I may be preserved through all Trials
to God's Praise, and worthy of his Mercies and Loving Kindness, which is large
and incomparable. And, dear Friends; your Labor of Love in, and Service for
the Lord, is not to be slipped out of Remembrance in many Hearts in this Island,
but is still very fresh and green; and your Reward (I question not) is in your
Bosom, and will be with the Lord, who was and is the exceeding great Reward of
his Servants both in others and in this Age, who were willing to forsake their
Country and Kindred at his Requirings. So dear Friends, in the Salutation of
that Love which exceeds all other I remember you, and desire to be remembered by
you. And if you see G. F. mind me to him; I have him in due Respect and Honor,
though I am as one of the least of the Thousands of Israel, yet of true Jacob's
stock, the Stem is felt through the Goodness of Jacob's God, whose Presence is
better than this World's Glory.

Your Friend and Brother in measure of God's Power, JOHN BARKER.
Barbados, the 1st of the 5th Month, 1676.

Dear Thomas and Alice Curwen;
TO whom is my dear Love, desiring these precious Seasons may never be
forgotten, wherein we have been sweetly watered and refreshed together, but
that the Glory of all may return to him in whom all our fresh Springs are. Your
Service for God amongst us I believe will be owned forever, and a Testimony
thereof is fresh in the Hearts of a Remnant in this Island; and a sad and
bitter Condition are many reduced to who opposed your Testimonies, and so have
come to wither and blast, as is woefully manifest by Henry Jones at this
present, who is gone out of the Unity into the Enmity, and heaped up a parcel
of dirty stuff in writing against Friends, and some others there: about stand
by him, I think none but such as are out of the Practice of meeting with their
Families: I write the less of these things, because I believe William Mullnex
may give you a fuller account.

Dear Friends, your honorable Service and innocent Behavior amongst us cannot
be forgotten by a Remnant in this Island, who would be glad (if the Lord saw
meet) once more to see you; but in the mean time, I desire we may be bound up
together in that one Spirit which partakes of the Dew from Heaven, and keeps
always green and fresh, blossoming and bringing forth Fruit well-pleasing to
the Lord. And the Desire of my Heart is, that in your Breathings to the Lord, I
may not be forgotten, who love and honor in my Soul all true-hearted and
right-begotten Friends, who have the right Image, yea, the Father's Image
stamped upon them, and with such I hope to be one forever. So no more at
present, but mine with my Wife's dear Love to you both, I remain

Your Friend in the nearest Relation, Edward Wright.
Barbados, the 18th of the 12th Month, 1679.

Dear Friends, Thomas and Alice Curwen;
MY dear and well-beloved Friends in God, who has begotten us to himself in
his blessed Truth, and so one to another, in which my Soul and Spirit does
salute you both: Having still in my Heart your faithful Labor and Courage in
which you travailed amongst us here, to the refreshing of the Honest-hearted,
and lives fresh in the Hearts of the Upright. Oh! how did the Lord make you as
a Nursing-Father and Mother to the tender weak Lambs of God! and labored to
gather in the straying Sheep, which were wandering from the Flock, laboring to
bring them into the Fold again, where Rest is truly known: for in the
Outgoings and Wanderings there is a Spirit that is seeking for Liberty, but not
that of God, but that which will not bow to Christ's Yoke; in which your
Spirits had a sore travel whilst here amongst us, and all the Valiant to this
day do feel the same; yet as we keep to the Lord, we do find Victory over all
the Contrary Opposing Spirits, and the Lord's Power and Living Presence is with
us to our great Refreshings, and Spiritual Comfort of the little ones, who keep
low in his Fear, and are made willing to follow him through whatsoever he will
carry them; so that we can say, It is very good to keep near to the Lord, that
we may feel him to bear us up continually, in Trials, Troubles and Afflictions,
in which we are made to Rejoice more than in the Increase of Corn, Wine or Oil,
to God's Praise and Glory, and to the Comfort of our Souls, and to the carrying
on of his great Work which he has begun, and will carry on by his Faithful,
Upright, Single-hearted Ones. The Lord raise up more Faithful Ones, that may
stand up for God, and plead God's Cause against all that shall oppose it, as he
did faithful Moses and Joshua in the day of Israel's Rebellion, that like the
good Spies, may give a good Report of the good Land, and so encourage, but not
discourage any, but are willing to help forward the hindmost of the Flock, and
encourage the foremost, so that we may all come to travel on to the Land of
Rest, that we may all come to praise God together with one Heart and one Mind,
and bless him together forever, says my Soul.

Barbados, the 12th of the 3d Month, 1676. Elizabeth Gretton.


THE People of God called Quakers being met together in the Fear of the Lord to
worship God, and to feel the Presence of the Lord, whereby we might strengthen
and edify one another, to the Praise and Glory of our God, who is worthy
forever; and after we had been some hours in the Meeting, there came in a
Constable, called, Constable Noise, and a Merchant, called, Benjamin Gibs, with
their Aid, having a Warrant from Simon Broadstreet, in his Majesty's Name (as
they said) to break up our Meeting; some Friends desired them to read their
Warrant, which was to this effect, That they were to bring every Person found
at a Quakers Meeting; then a Friend said, This Warrant is to bring such Persons
as are found at a Quakers Meeting to the House of Correction. Alice Curwen
answered, This Warrant takes not hold on us; we are the Meeting; this Warrant
is to bring such Persons as are found at a Quakers Meeting. So the Constable
stood pretty moderately; but Benj. Gibs turned about to a Friend in the
Ministry, and said, Come, ye are Blasphemers; we will not stand to sac the
Devil Worshipped: Then Benj. Gibs being asked, What he heard us say? His answer
was, He had not heard us speak one word; though before he had called us
Blasphemers, and said, They would not stand there to see the Devil worshipped.
Alice Curwen (in the Fear of the Lord) kneeling down to Prayer, was violently
haled along the Room and down Stairs to the House of Correction.

Flushen in New England, the 6th of the 12th Month, 1677. Thomas Curwen.


The Sufferings of Thomas Curwen, which he has suffered for Conscience sake
toward God, which was for the Testimony of Jesus, the Spirit of Prophecy, the
Word of God, who have Contended with several Priests concerning my Testimony
for the Tithe ever since I was convinced of the Eternal Truth of God, who does
Witness the Law changed, and the Priesthood changed also, that took Tithes
under the Law, which was an Offering in the time of the Law, before Christ
came; but now Christ Jesus is come, and I do witness him come, who is the one
Offering, who was sacrificed and offered up once for all, who has Fulfilled
and put an End to all Tithes, Types, Figures and Shadows, and Offerings under
the Law of a Carnal Command: but now I do witness (Glory be to God forever)
Christ Jesus come, who is the Power of God unto Salvation, who is a Priest
forever, without Beginning or End of Days, who is Alpha and Omega forever; and
therefore I cannot pay Tithes.

Concerning my Sufferings and Persecution by Thomas Shaw Priest of Aldingham in
Fornis in Lancashire.
IN the year 1652. about the 14th day of the 7th month, I had a Mare taken
away worth 6 l. also in the year 1654. I had a Cow taken away worth 2 l. 10 s.
and in the year 1656. I had two Cows taken away worth 8 l. and in the year
1658. I had the most part of sixteen Acres of Corn taken away, which was worth
at least 30 l. whose Bailiffs and Servants came forcibly and brake into the
Barn: and also in the year 1660. about the 10th day of the 11th month, I had a
Horse taken away worth 4 l. or there-about. And these Goods took Priest Shaw
from me, besides Eleaven Years Imprisonment; and then shortly after he ended
his days in great Woe and Misery to the sight of all the World that did know
him; for the Lord laid his Judgments upon him, who was struck into a Palsy,
that he was not sensible what he did or said.

And then another with his Horns began to push, and make War with the Lamb, as
the Scripture declares, That the Beast and the False Prophet shall make War
with the Lamb, but the Lamb shall get the Victory, wherein the Redeemed of the
Lord sing Praises, Praises to the Lord God and the Lamb forever in the Land of
the Living; for it is the Lamb of God that takes away the Sins of the World,
and blotteth out the Handwriting, and come to know their Names written in the
Book of Life: And I am a Witness that the Promise of the Lord is fulfilled,
where the Lord has written his Law in our Hearts, and put his Spirit into our
inward parts, wherein we can read in the Book of Life in the great Mystery of
Godsiness, which is manifest in the Flesh in this our Day; Praises to the Lord
God and the Lamb forevermore.

The Priest's Name was Theophilus Ames, who continued in Persecuting the
Innocent; but the Lord shortened his days in a little time, he was so very
Cruel; he sent his Bailiffs to take away my Goods, who took sixteen Beasts at
one time, which were worth 50 l. or there-about in the year 1665 about the 29th
day of the 8th Month; and about the (...) of the 5th month in the year 1667.
my self, my Wife and my Son were taken to Prison for not coming to their
worship nor receiving the Sacrament, and carried me to Prison in a Cart, who
was so ill that I could neither go nor ride on Horseback, who did carry me
about twenty Miles, and did purpose to keep us in Prison for term of Life; but
the Lord did deliver us, who is a present Help in time of need to the Faithful
and Upright in Heart, who are kept in his Fear; blessed for evermore be his
holy and blessed Name, which is a strong Tower for the Righteous to flee unto
in time of Storm, when the Heathen rages, and the People imagine vain things:
and after Priest Ames had cast us into Prison, in the year 1667. about the 29th
of the 5th month the Priest caused to be taken from me eleaven Beasts and one
Horse, which were worth about 40 l. and when he had taken these Beasts he fell
on to plunder the House, and took all the Goods that he could get away, he took
so near, that he took Garden-Mittans and the Cole-Rake; and when he had done
this, then the measure of his Wickedness and Iniquity was filled up, and then
the Lord shortly after shortened his days, who dyed a Woeful and Miserable
Death; for the Lord laid his Judgments upon him, who wa both Blind and Mad
before he dyed, to the great Admiration and astonishment of all that did see
his Death.

And then another Beast with his Horns began to push, and to make War with the
Lamb, as the Scripture declares, and blessed are they who are called to make
War in Righteousness; and if we put not into the false Prophets Mouths, they
will make War against us; and he that stands in the Gap makes himself a Prey.

The Priest's Name is Michael Stanford, who is driving on Pharaoh's Charriots
as fast as he can, until the Lord shorten his days; for Pharaoh's Heart was
hardened when he did persecute the Children of Israel in the days of old; and
this Priest said, That his Heart was hardened against us: And what became of
Pharaoh when his Heart was hardened that he would not let Israel go? So all
read that can; for the Lord God will shorten the days of the Wicked for the
Elect Seed's sake; for it was the full Intent and Purpose of my Heart to
continue in this Warfare about Tithes, and Contend for the Faith which was once
delivered to the Saints, and to stand a faithful Witness for the Lord's
Testimony against the Beast and the False Prophet whilst I had a being in this
Earthly Tabernacle, until the Lord laid an Engagement upon me (wherein I durst
not disobey) to go along with my dear Friend my Wife, to be her Companion for
the Clearing of her Testimony, which the Lord had called her to; who did bear a
faithful Testimony for the Lord, and has laid down her Head in Peace.

And as for this Persecuting Priest, these are his Actions, and the Fruits of
his Ministry at this time, who about the 2d of the first month, 1674. did take
from me my Brewing-pan; and also in the year 1674. his Bailiffs took from me
three Beasts worth 8 l. and that which he called his Due was but about 6 s. So
all People may see and know (wheresoever this may come) the Fruits of this
Persecuting Priest's Ministry.

Priest Stanford's Tythe-mongers in the year 1673. took from me as follows,
viz. Upon the 4th day of the 7th month James Chambers came forcibly, and broke
into a Field of Corn of mine, and broke down the Hedge in several places, and
took the Corn out of the Field before I took, and before one part of the Field
was reapt, contrary to the Law of the Nation.

And also, James Chambers did break into another Corn-Field of mine upon the
11th day of the 7th month, who broke down the Hedge in several places, and did
carry the Corn away before I took any.

And at another time James Chambers, Thomas Chamblay and James Geldert, went
through a Field of Corn before the most of it was reapt, contrary to the Law of
the Nation.

And also on another day James Geldert came, and broke into a Corn-Field of
mine, and did break down the Hedge, and carried away the Corn, contrary to the
Law of the Nation.

And upon another day James Geldert came, and broke into a Field of Corn, and
broke down the Hedge, and took away the Corn, contrary to theLaw of the Nation.

And also John Hawood, who rented the Fines, caused a Horse to be taken from me
for a Fine of 15 s. which was worth 4 l. which was for Conscience sake toward
God in Obedience to his holy Command.

The Bailiffs Names by whom Priest Shaw cansed my Body to be imprisoned, and my
Goods to be taken away, were these, viz. Will. Garner, John Garner, Tho.
Marshall, James Postelwhete, Tho. Poolton, Christopher Garner, John Poolton,
Miles Fell, James Garner, Richard Fell, Will. Fell, John Sanford. The
Constables Names, viz. John Garner, Christopher Chamblay, Timothy Mount,
Leonard Cooper and Luke Benson Bailiff.

Priest Ames his Bailiffs Names, viz. William Struckland, Geo. Askew, William
Garner, Tho. Poope, Thomas Poolton. James Chambers was Priest Ames his
Constable to assist the Bailiffs for the Plundering of my House, and let the
Priest have a House to put the plundered Goods in; and this Constable did
provide a Horse and a Cart to carry me to Prison.

Priest Stanford's Bailiffs Names, viz. William Struckland, George Askew, John
Garner, Richard Fell, Luke Benson, and also Roger Woodborn, who was the Steward
of the Court and also Judge; there was a Jury appointed, but he did not put the
Action to the Jury, but passed Judgment on it himself; but the Lord shortened
his days, that he never tried more Actions, but dyed shortly.

Oh! that all People would take Warning and Repent, lest they provoke the Lord
to anger, and they perish in his Wrath! for the Indignation of the Lord burns
like Fire against the Wicked and Ungodly upon the Earth, who is a Consuming
Fire to the Wicked.

THOMAS CURWEN.


THE END.

