THE Country-Survey-Book: OR LAND-METERS VADE-MECVM. WHEREIN The PRINCIPLES and
practical RULES for Surveying of Land, are so plainly (though briefly)
delivered, that any one of ordinary parts (understanding how to add, subtract,
multiply and divide,) may by the help of this small Treatise alone, and a few
cheap Instruments easy to be procured, Measure a parcel of Land, and with
judgment and expedition Plot it, and give up the Content thereof. WITH An
APPENDIX, containing Twelve Problems touching Compound Interest and Annuities;
and a Method to Contract the work of Fellowship and Alligation Alternate, very
considerably in many Cases.

Illustrated with Copper Plates.

By ADAM MARTINDALE, A Friend to Mathematical Learning.

Frustra sit per plura quod fieri potest per pauciora.

London, Printed for R. Clavel, at the Peacock in St. Paul's Churchyard, and T.
Sawbridge, at the Three Flower-de-luces in Little-Britain, 1692.

TO THE Right Honorable THE LORD DELAMER, Baron of Dunham-Massie, etc.
My Lord,
THIS small Tract comes to Your Lordship, not as to a Patron to protect its
Errors (if any such there be) but as to a critical noble Friend, that will be
sure faithfully to tell the Author of them. Which favor, together with a
cheerful acceptance of this poor present, he humbly hopes for, because of its
Relation, being writ at Dunham, by Your humble Servant, who besides his
domestic dependence, cannot forbear without ingratitude to tell the World that
Your Lordship's kindness has very much encouraged and assisted him in
Mathematical Studies, not only by a free Communication of many a choice notion
both viva voce, and by the loan of Manuscripts. But also by a Considerable
number of excellent Books and costly Instruments bountifully bestowed upon him:
Who wanting other ways to express his many singular Obligations, and deep sense
thereof, humbly offers this Punie Treatise for Your Lordships diversion at
spare hours; and is ambitious to write himself,

Oct: 26. 1681. MY LORD, An humble and faithful (though unworthy) Servant to
all Your Lordship's Noble Family A. M.

Mr. COLLINS TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
THE Learned Mr. Adam Martindale formerly Writ two excellent Almanacks, called
Country Almanacks, which were Printed, and esteemed by several Members of the
Royal Society very useful, especially for Country Affairs, but meeting with
some Discouragements from such as knew not how to judge of the Authors worth,
he gave over that undertaking, contrary to the desires of many Ingenious Men.

And having since Writ a little Treatise of Survey, in which he has had
experience, as well as Theory, and being willing to have the Approbation or
Dislike of others, that it might either be Printed or Stifled, imparted the
same to some of the Members of the aforesaid Illustrious Body.

Upon the Perusal of whom and diverse Experienced Artists who make a Livelihood
of it, I find it well approved (as clear and concise) only the latter were
sorry so much was discovered, as detrimental to their Practice, particularly
about setting off the outjettings, where it is inconvenient entirely to measure
them.

The Book is small, the price (though not the worth) mean, no small
Encouragements to young Students and the Vulgar, for whom it was chiefly
intended: By which, that they may reap Benefit, is the hearty desire of (a
Well-willer to the Author and them)

John Collins.

The PREFACE.
READER,
THe Title sufficiently informs thee in general of my Designs: But I confess I
owe thee a a more particular Account, not only of that, but several other
things which I shall briefly give thee.

1. I have observed that the Country abounds with such, as by their
Inclination and Interest are prevailed with to take pains in measuring Land,
that for want of better Instruction use ill divided Chains and tedious Methods
of Computation, which makes their work intolerable troublesome, if exactness be
required. And some for want of skill in the Fundamentals of Geometry, have
imbibed prodigiously false Principles, as this for one, viz. That the Content
of any Close, of what Figure soever, may be found by Squaring a quarter of the
Perimeter. Mathematical-Schools, where better things might be learned, are very
rare, and an able Artist to instruct one in private is hard, and charge able to
be procured. Excellent Books indeed there are in our English Tongue, Written by
our Famous Rathborn, Wing, Leybourn, and Holwell, to which may be added
Industrious Mr. Atwells Treatise, and some part of Capt. Sturmy's: But those I
rather esteem fit to be read byan able Artist (toward his perfecting) than by
a new beginner, for in the best of those Books he will find the most useful and
plain Rules so intermixed with others that are less necessary, and more
intricate, (though very excellent for their proper ends) and so many
Curiosities touching Trigonometry, Transmtation of Figures, etc. which his
business never calls for, that for want of judgment to pick out that which fits
his present purpose, and to study higher Speculations afterward, he is apt to
be confounded and discouraged; whereby it accidentally comes to pass that
plenty, makes him poor.

Besides, three of these six Books are in Folio, another in Quarto, and the
other two (though Octavo's) too large for ordinary carrying in a Pocket, and in
that regard not so convenient for one that has much occasion to be out of his
own House; to say nothing of their Price, which to some poor Youths is not the
least discouragement.

I have therefore made my Book so little, that the Price can neither much empty
the Pocket, nor the Bulk overfill it. And yet so plain, that I doubt not to be
understood by very ordinary Capacities. My Method is fitted to my Design:
Beginning with the Principles of the Art, and so proceeding gradatim till I
have showed how all ordinary Figures may be Measured, Protracted, and Cast up,
without any other Instrument of charge but Chains, Compasses and Scales.
Afterward for such as desire higher Seize, I have endeavored to speak
so fully (in a little compass) of the Plain Table, and given such hints,
applicable not only to it, but also to the Peractor, Theodolite, and
Semicircle, as that an Ingenious Person may make great use of them.

But as touching the Doctrine of Triangles, and Transmutation of Figures into
others equipollent, with the large Tables (referring to the former) of
Logarithms of Numbers, Sines, and Tangents, I thought it improper to cumber
this small Manual, or the unlearned Reader with them, having (as I humbly hope)
sufficiently informed him how to find all his Sides and Angles by Instruments,
and also the Content of any Figure without such transmutation, reserving such
Curiosities and many others touching Drawing and Painting of Maps; Measuring of
Ways, and Rivers, etc. to a Second Part, which I may perhaps hereafter Publish
upon due encouragement, but if I do not, the Curious may find themselves good
store of work in the Authors even now quoted.

2. It may seem strange to some, that in referring to the Figures, I sometimes
use Words seeming to imply that the Figure I speak of is in that very Page, and
so it was in my Copy, but the Printer and Gravers have otherwise contrived them
for convenience in Copper Cuts by themselves. And to give them their due they
are generally done with great accuracy, and none of them having any such error
as is like to beget trouble or mistake to the Reader, saving only that fig. 19
has D instead of O at the Center, and the Line OL in the Margin of Fig. 14.
should be of the length from L to the uppermost o in the Scale, and the Figures
on the side should be made 1 less than they are, viz. 2 should be 1, 3 made 2,
etc.

And lastly, as to the Errata, though I have not been so anxiously careful, as
to correct every literal mistake, I have very diligently perused all from p. 1
to p. 224 inclusive, and hope I have sufficiently restored the Sense to the
places wronged, when thou have done them right by the Pen according to the
Directions of the Errata following next after the contents, and that you
continue the Line in the Margin of p. 34. to the length of the Line OL in fig.
14.

THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS.
Chapt. 1. OF Geometrical Definitions, Divisions, and Remarks. p. 1. Chapt. 2.
Of Geometrical Problems. p. 6. Chapt. 3. To find the Superficial Content of any
right lined Figure, the lines being given. p. 17. Chapt. 4. Concerning Chains,
Compasses, and Scales. p. 26. Chapt. 5. How to cast up the Content of a Figure,
the lines being given in Chains and Links. p. 35. Chapt. 6. How to measure a
Close, or parcel of Land, and to protract it, and give up the Content. p. 41.
Chapt. 7. Concerning the measuring of Circles and their parts. p. 48. Chapt. 8.
Concerning Customary measure, and how it may be reduced to Statute measure, and
e Contra, either by the Rule of Three, or a more compendious may by
Multiplication only. p. 52. Chapt. 9. How a Man may become a ready Measurer by
Practice in his private Study, without any ones assistance or observation, till
he design to practice abroad. p. 65. Chapt. 10. How to measure a piece of Land
with any Chain of what length soever, and howsoever divided; yea with a Cord or
Cart-rope; being a good Expedient when Instruments are not at hand of a more
Artificial ^ake. p. 67. Chapt. 11. Concerning dividing of Land Artificially and
^echanically. p. 70 Chapt. 12. Concerning the Boundaries of Land, where the
^ines to be measured must begin and end. p. 80. Chapt. 13. Containing a
Description of the Plain-Table, the ^rotractor, and Lines of Chords. p. 82.
Chapt. 14. How to take the true Plot of a Field by the ^lain-Table upon the
Paper that covers it, at one or ^ore Stations. p. 85. Chapt. 15. Concerning the
plotting of many Closes together, ^hether the ground be even or uneven. p. 99.
Chapt. 16. Concerning shifting of Paper. p. 102. Chapt. 17. Concerning the
plotting of a Town Field, where (...) several Lands, Buts, or Doles, are very
crooked: ^^th a Note concerning Hypothenusual or sloping ^^undaries, common to
this and the fifteenth Chapter. ^ 104. Chapt. 18. Concerning taking the plot of
a piece of ground (...) the Degrees upon the Frame of the Plain-Table se^^^al
ways, and protracting the same. p. 108. Chapt. 19. Concerning taking
inaccessible Distances by the ^^ain-Table, and accessible Altitudes by the
Protractor. ^ 121. Chapt. 20. Of casting up the Content of Land by a Table. ^
193.
ERRATA.
PAge 3 Line 16 Read Trilaterals. p. 4 (...) Geodates. p. 5 l. 29 Eneagon. p.
10 l. 6 belong as the other two. p. 16 l. 6 Centers at right A^^gles. p. 28 l.
1 forefinger. p. 36 l. 20 Poles or R^^ p. 47 l. 15 fourth Diagonal and the
sixth side. p. (...) l. 28 as in this figure is ABC. p. 56 l. 23, (...) and l.
24 ^. 22 p. 58 l. 11 28. p. 69 l. 5 side 74 l. 25 FG. p. 77 l. 27 138562, and
l. 28 (...) 33 r. 242030. p. 79 l. 33 triangulate. p. 80 l* former. p. 82 l. 24
fitted. p. 86 l. 2 Stationary ^^^stances. p. 90 l. 15 Chart, or Card. p. 95 l.
^ Park, Pond. p. 103 l. 22 Line. p. 104. l. 19 (...)

Fig. 1. Fig. 2. Fig. 3. Fig. 4. Fig. 5. Fig. 6. Fig. 7. Fig. 8. Fig. 9. Fig.
10. Fig. 11. Fig. 12. Fig. 13. Fig. 14




Fig. 15. Fig. 16. Fig. 17. Fig. 18. Fig. 19. Fig. 20. Fig. 21. Fig. 22. Fig.
23. Fig. 24. Fig. 25.




Fig. 26. Fig. 27. Fig. 28. Fig. 29. Fig. 30. Fig. 31. Fig. 32. Fig. 33. Fig.
34. Fig. 35. Fig. 36. Fig. 37. Fig. 38. Fig. 39.




THE Country Survey-Book: OR, LAND-METER's VADE-MECVM.
CHAP. I.
Of Geometrical Definitions, Divisions, and Remarks.
I. A Point is that which has no parts, either of longitude or latitude, but
is indivisible, ordinarily expressed with a small prick, like a period at the
end of a sentence.

II. A Line has length, but no breadth nor depth, whose limits or extremities
are Points. This is either right or crooked.

III. A right Line lies straight, and equal between its extreme points, being
the shortest extension between them; the crocked or circular not so.

IV. A Superficies has length and breadth, but no depth; of this Lines are the
limits.

V. A plain Superficies is that which lies equally (or evenly) between its
Lines.

VI. An Angle is the Meeting or two Lines in one point, so as not to make one
straight Line, and if drawn on past that point, they will intersect or cross
one another. This is vulgar English may be called a Corner; of which there be
two sorts, one right, the other oblique.

VII. A right Angle is that which is made by two right lines, crossing or
touching one another perpendicularly, (or squarely) like an ordinary Cross, or
Carpenters Square.

VIII. An oblique Angle is that which is either greater or less than a right
Angle, and this is of two sorts, obtuse and acute.

IX. An obtuse Angle is greater than a right Angle, like the left and right
Corners of a Roman X.

X. An acute Angle is less than a right Angle, like the highest and lowest
Corners of the same Letter.

XI. A Figure is that which is comprehended under one line or many: Of this
there are two kinds, a Circle and a right-lined Figure.

XII. A Circle is a perfect round Figure, such as is drawn with a pair of
Compasses, the one Foot being turned round in a point, and the other wheeled
about it. The point in the precise middle is called the Center; the round line,
the Circumference or Peripheri; a line going through the Center, and divide the
Circle into two equal parts, is called the Diameter; half of that line is a
Somidiameter, or Radius; half the Circle is styled a Semicircle; the quarter, a
Quadrant; any portion of it, cut off by a right Line not touching the Center,
is called a Segment.

XIII. Right-lined Figures are such as are limited by three right Lines or
more, and are either Triangles or Triangulate, that is, such as are compounded
of, and resolvable into Triangles.

XIV. Triangles are Figures comprehended under three right Lines, and (as Ramus
thinks for a Reason that he gives, lib. 6. pr. 6.) might be better called
Trilaterals; but the name Triangle from the number of the Angles has obtained.

Also from the nature and Quantity of their Angles these Triangles are
distinguished into three sorts: 1. Rectangled, having one right Angle; 2
Obtuse-angled, having one obtuse Angle; and 3. Acute-angled; having all acute
Angles; for no Triangle can have more right or obtuse Angles than one, because
by by an old Rule (easy to be demonstrated) no Triangle upon a plain
Superficies can consist of three greater Angles than such, as being jointly
taken are equal to two Right.

These three sorts of Triangles may, according to the length and proportion of
their sides, be subdistinguished into seven; for each of them may have either
two equal Sides or none, and the Acute-angled may have all three Sides or lines
equal: To all which kinds, learned Men give distinct Greek Names, which if mine
English Reader have a mind to see, they are to be found in (...) Practices,
Book 1. page. 6. for my present purpose the abovementioned ^rimembred
distinction will abundantly suffice; for be Triangles of what name or kind
soever, they are all capable of being exactly measured by one plain Rule as
hereafter shall fully appear.

XV. Triangulare Figures are such as have more Angles (and consequently more
Sides or Lines) than three: and these are either Quadrangular or Multangular.

XVI. Quadrangular Figures are such as have fo^^ Angles (and as many Side) and
these are either Parallellograms or Trapezia's.

XVII. Parallellograms are Figures that are bounded with parallel Lines, that
is, such lines as are every where of the same distance one from another, so as
if they were infinitely extended they would never meet, like the upright lines
of he Roman H. These Parallellograms are either Rectangular or Obliquangular.

XVIII. Rectangular Parallellograms are such as have four right Angles. viz.
the Square or Quadrat, and the long Square, otherwise called the Oblong.

XIX. The Square is that Figure that has four right Angles, and four equal
Sides, like any of the six Faces of a Die.

XX. The long Square has also four right Angles, and the oposite Sides are
equal, but the adjoining Sides meeting at each Angle differ in length. Of this
Figure is a well printed Page in a Book, and the Superficies of a well cut
Sheet of Paper, or an ordinary Pane of Glass.

XXI. Obliquangled Parallellograms are such as have oblique Angles, viz. two
acute, and two obtuse. Of these there are two kinds, the Rhombus, and the
Rhomboides.

XXII. The Rhombus is a Figure that has equal Sides, but no right Angles,
(like the form of a Diamond on the Cards, or the most ordinary Cut of Glass in
Windows) whose oposite Angles are equal.

XXIII. The Rhomboides is (as it were) a defective Rbombus, for if from any
side of a Rhombus we cut off a part with a parallel Line, the Remainder will be
a Rhomboides, which has neither equal Sides nor Angles, but yet the opposite
Sides and Angles are equal.

XXIV. The Trapezium is a Figure that is neither parallellogram, nor
(consequently) has equal Sides or Angles, but is irregularly quadrangular, as
if drawn at adventure. Of this shape most Fields prove, that seem to the Eye to
be Squares or Oblongs.

XXV. Multangular Figures are such as contain more Sides and Angles than four,
and they are either regular or irregular.

XXVI. Regular Multangulars take their names from their Number of Angles, so a
Pentagon, Hexagon, Heptagon, Octogon, Encagon, Decagon, signify a multangular
Figure of five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, Angles, and consequently Sides.

XXVII. An irregular Polygon or multangular Figure, is that which has more
Angles (and Sides) than four, the Sides (and Angles) being unequal to one
another.

CHAP. II.
Of Geometrical Problems.
I. To draw a Line parallel to another, at any Distance assigned.



II. To raise a Perpendicular upon a Line given, or to cross that Line at right
Angles in a Point assigned.



But if the said line AB had been given to be divided in the precise middle, by
another Line crossing it at right Angles, the way were to set one Point of the
Compasses in A and B severally, and having described two Arches above the line,
intersecting one another as at D, do the like below the line AB from the same
points and with the same extent of your Compasses, then through the several
intersections (a Rule being laid upon them) a line may be drawn, cutting the
given line exactly in the middle at right Angles.

Note, That when one point of your Compasses stand in A, you may make both the
Arches belonging to that Center above and below the line, and then removing the
Compasses to B, you may cross them both.

III. To raise a Perpendicular at the End of a Line.



IV. To let fall a Perpendicular upon a given Line from any Point assigned.

Open your Compasses so as one Foot being set in the assigned point the other
may go clear over the line given, and thereby describe an Arch cutting the line
at two points; then shall the half distance between those two points be the
point to which the Perpendicular may be drawn from the point assigned. But if
you think it too much pains to find the point of half distance by trial, you
may help your self by the second Problem: For if you describe two Arches
intersecting one another on the farther side of the line from the assigned
point, placing (to that purpose) the Foot of your Compasses first in one of the
Intersections of the given line, and then in the other; you may by laying a
Rule upon the assigned Point, and the Intersection of the two Arches, draw a
Perpendicular from the said assigned Point, cutting the given Line at right
Angles.

Note,
that all these Problems touching perpendiculars, aim at no greater matter,
than what may be performed in a Mechanical way with exactness enough (and much
more neatly by avoiding unhandsome Pricks and Arches) by the help of a small
Square exactly made, (or for want thereof a Plate Quadrant, or broad Rule,
having a right Angle and true Sides) for if you apply one Leg of such a Square
to any Line, so as the Angle of the Square may touch the end of the said Line,
or any other Point where the Perpendicular is to be raised, you may by the
other Leg draw the Perpendicular. In like sort to let fall a perpendicular from
a point assigned you need only to apply one Leg of the Square to the Line, so
as the other may touch (at the same time) the assigned point whence you may
draw the perpendicular, by that Leg that touches the Point:

If the Angle of your Square be a little blunt either through ill making or
long using, you must allow for it when you apply it to the point in a Line. And
when you are drawing a Perpendicular, you must stop before you reach the given
line, and then by applying the Leg of your Square to that part of the
perpendicular already drawn, so as part of that Leg may pass clearly over the
given Line, you may draw the rest of your perpendicular as exactly as if the
Angle had been true. The like course is to be taken when a line is to be
crossed by another drawn quite through it at right Angles.

V. An Angle being given, to make another equal to it.



Note,
when we speak of the quantity of Angles, their equality, or unequality, we
never regard the length of the Lines; for if you extend or contract them at
pleasure, the Angle is still the same. But that is the greatest Angle whose
lines are farthest distant from one another, at the same distance from the
Angular Point, or the place where its lines meet.

VI. Any three Lines being given (equal or unequal) so as no one of them be
longer than the other two joined together to make a Triangle of them.



Note,
that if all the Sides, or two of them, be equal, the method is the same; but
the labor less, because we need not to take the same length twice over with
the Compasses.

VII. To find the Perpendicular of the Triangle, in order to the measuring of
it.

Probl. 4. Upon that line at D, which is ready for taking off with Compasses
and measuring on a Scale, of which hereafter in the Chapters of measuring the
Content of Figures.

But if we have no occasion to draw the perpendicular, but only to know the
length of it, (as it most frequently falls out in measuring) no more is needful
but to set one foot of the Compasses in the Angular point C, and extend the
other to the Base AB, so as it may touch it, but not go beyond it; then have we
the perpendicular between the points of the Compasses.

VIII. One Side being given, how to make a Square.



IX. To make a long Square, the length and breadth being given.

This is so like the former, that a particular Figure is not necessary to
conceive of it. Suppose each side of the Square in the last Problem to consist
of 8 small equal parts, and you were to make a long Square whose length must be
equal to a side thereof, viz. 8. and the breadth half so much given in a line
thus -- 4; then when you had drawn the line CD for the length, and raised the
Perpendicular at C, you must take the shorter Line given for the breadth, and
set it upon the Perpendicular from C upwards to a Point, which for distinction
we shall call the Point E, imagining it so marked: With the same extent of the
Compasses describe the Arch, placing (to that purpose) one foot in D. Lastly,
extending your Compasses to the length of the line CD, set one foot in E, and
with the other cross the Arch aforesaid. Then a right Line drawn from that
Intersection to E, and another from the same to D, complete the long Square.

X. To make a Rbombus, the Sides being given.

viz. in D to describe the Arch FG, and in E to describe the Arch HI, crossing
one another in the Point K, from which, right lines drawn to D and E, finish
the Rhombus DAEK.

Note,
if any Angle be given, together with the Side; to limit the shape and content,
begin with that, and proceed as before: For you must know, that to make a
Rhombus (or Rhomboides) like to another for Figure, or equal to it in Content,
it is not sufficient to have the same Sides; for the more oblique the Angles
(...) the farther will the Rhombus differ from a (...) (and the Rhomboides from
a long (...) are) and the less will be the Content. But (...) must have an
Angle given, (which will pro^^^e all the rest) or else a Diagonal Line, which
(...) right Line passing through the Rhombus (or ^omboides), from one opposite
Angle to another, and dividing the Figure into two equal ^^^angles. If the
former (viz. an Angle) be ^^n, I have showed what use is to be made (...). If
the latter, (i. e. a Diagonal) toget^^^ with the length of the Sides, you may
by ^^^ng the length of the Sides with your Com^^es, and setting a Foot in the
ends of the ^^gonal Line, make a Triangle on the one side ^he Diagonal, by
Probl. 6. and then another on the other side by the same problem, the ^^gonal
being a common Base to them both; this will give the Figure exactly.

To make a Rbomboides, the Sides being given.



XII. To make a Trapezium, the Diagonal and Lines in order being given.



Then with your Compasses set to the length of the Line A, place one Foot in H,
and with the other describe the Arch OF. Next taking the length of the Line B,
with the one Foot, o^ your Compasses placed in L, with the other make the Arch
GI intersecting the former at K, from which Point of Intersection, Lines drawn
to H and L make the Triangle HKL.

Then with the extent of the Line C, set one of the Feet of your Compasses at
L, and describe the Arch OP. Lastly, setting them to the length of the Line D,
and placing one Foot of your Compasses in H, with the other make the Arch SR
intersecting the former at Q; (...) shall Lines drawn from Q to L and H make u^
the Triangle LQH, and finish the Trapezium HKLQ.

I could have been much briefer in this problem by referring to the sixth; but
this being of very great and frequent use, I desired to be very plain.

XIII. To make a regular Polygon, otherwise called a regular multangular, or
multilateral Figure, consisting of many equal Sides and Angles, viz. above four
apiece.

Being satisfied what shall be the distance between the Center and every Angle,
with that distance describe a Circle, which being equally divided into as many
Parts, as the Figure must have Angles (or Sides, for they are equal in number)
and Lines drawn from the Points of Division within the Circle from Point to
Point, (ordinarily called Chords) the Polygon is finished as in this Diagram.



I shall rather leave my unlearned Reader to find out the Points of Division by
many trials, than to puzzle him with the Geometrical way for finding out Chords
to that purpose; nor shall I busy my self to tell him at large how he may
divide 360 by the number of his Angles or Sides, and then finding in his
Quotient the Degrees and Parts belonging to every Division, set them readily
out by a Protractor, or (for want thereof) by a Line of Chords; for I suppose
him yet ignorant of such things.

I shall therefore only tell him thus much: A Line drawn through the Circle at
the Center divides it into two equal parts, which being crossed in the Center
by another Line, the Circle will be parted into four equal Parts or Quadrants,
and those by halving them into eight Parts. The extent of the Compasses whereby
the Circle is drawn (usually called the Radius or Semidiameter) will divide it
into six equal parts; two whereof must be a third part, and half of one a
twelfth part; and these still easily capable of farther Division.

XIV. Having the Sides of the Triangles whereof it consists, orderly given,
to make an irregular multangler, or multilateral Figure.

This will be more fully handled hereafter, when I come to show the method of
drawing plots of Ground: In the interim I will give you a Specimen of an
irregular Pentagon.

viz. 20, from A to B for a Base, and by Probl. 6. make a Triangle of it and
the other Lines 16 and 10. viz. the Triangle ABO.

Secondly, you find by the number o over the first Line of the second Triangle
that it is the common Base to them both, and therefore by the same Probl. 6.
make the Triangle A B P of the Lines 20, 14, 18.



How every Line is to be found in its due order in this or any other sort of
multangular Figures, so as to give a true and exact account, not only of the
superficial Content, but also of the Figure (or shape) and situation, is to be
taught hereafter in the Doctrine and Practice of protraction.

CHAP. III.
How to find the Superficial Content of any Right-lined Figure, the Lines being
given.
AS a Foundation to what I shall say upon this Subject, there are some few
Geometrical principles or Theorems out of Enclid and Ramus, which I desire may
be remembered; and because understanding is a mighty help to memory, I design
for my Country Reader a kind of ocular Demonstration, which though not so
strict and artificial as that which is to be found in the Commentators upon
Euclid in the quoted places, will be more serviceable to him, because more
easily understood.

Theor. 1. Every Parallellogram being of the same length with the Base of a
Triangle, and of the same height with the Perpendicular of that Triangle, is
double to it, Euclid 41. 1.



In like manner it is evident, that the Parallellogram BEFC is double to the
Triangle CQF, because CRQ is equal to BQC, and QRF is equal to QEF.

Theor. 2. All Triangles having the same Base, and lying between the same
Parallels, are equal. Euclid 37. 1.

So in our last Diagram, the two given Triangles having Bases of the same
length, and lying between the same parallels, are evidently equal, because they
are demonstrated to contain each of them the exact half of the Parallellograms,
wherein they are inscribed; and the Parallellograms being equal, their halves
must be equal also.

Theor. 3. The Sides of a Triangulate (that is, one that has four or more
Sides) are ever two more than the Triangles of which it is made. Ram. lib. 10.
prop. 2.

12th and 14th Problems of the second Chapter.

These Theorems being allowed to be found (as nothing more certain) the
Doctrine concerning the Superficial Content of Right-lined Figures might be
reduced to a narrow compass; for he that knows how to husband these three
Theorems, may easily take up these Corollaries, ordine inverso.

1. Any quadrangular Figure (regular or irregular) may by a Diagonal be parted
into two Triangles; any five-sided Figure by two Diagonals into three
Triangles; and six-sided Figures into four by three Diagonals, etc. by Theor. 3.

2. It Is no matter of what shape the Triangle is, as to the rule for measuring,
for whether it be Right-angled, Acute-angled, or Obtuseangled, and whether it
have three, two, or no Lines equal; it is only the length of the Base, and
height of the Perpendicular, that is considerable* by Theor. 2.

3. The true measure or content of any Triangle, whether alone, or as part of
any triangulate Figure of 4, 5, 6, or more Sides (and consequently of the whole
Figure, by summing up the content of all the several Triangles) is found by
multiplying the whele Base of the Triangle by half the Perpendicular,
or the whole Perpendicular by half the Base; which being a Rule of such
infinite use in surveying, I desire it may be remembered; and that it may be
understood, I shall give you a plain Example.

44 10 440
20 22 40 40 440


Having thus given a general method how all Right lined Figures may be reduced
to Triangles, and so their Content found out; I might pass to the next Head
concerning Instruments, and their use; but because there are nearer ways in
measuring particular kinds of triangulate Figures proper to those kinds. I
shall briefly touch them.

I. To find the Contents of a Square, or long Square.

Multiply the length by the breadth, the product gives the Area or Content.

Example of a Square 17 Inches length. 17 Inches breadth. 119 17 289 Square
Inches.


Example of an Oblong 25 Feet long. 13 Feet broad. 75 25 325 Square Feet.


II. To find the Area or Content in Measure of a Rhombus.

Let fall a perpendicular from one of the obtuse Angles upon the opposite side;
that side multiplied by the perpendicular, gives the Area. 20 Yards the Side.
14 Yards the Perpendicular. 80 20 80 Square Yards.


III. To find the Area of a Rhomboides.

Divide it into two Triangles by a Diagonal drawn between either pair of the
opposite Angles, (as suppose the Acute) then from either of the other Angles
(for instance, the Obtuse let fall a perpendicular upon that Diagonal then
shall that Diagonal, being multiplied by that perpendicular, give the Area.

Example.

19 Rods the Diagonal. 5 Rods the Perpendicular. 95 Square Rods the Content.
IV. To find the Content of a Trapezium.

Chapter 2. pr. 12 is divided by the Diagonal HL, then from the other two Angles
(which in that Figure a^^ marked with K and Q) let fall Perpendicular upon the
Diagonal, half the Sum of those Perpendiculars being multiplied by the Diagonal
(or common Base) gives the Superficial Content.

Example.

Suppose in the Trapezium before mentioned the Diagonal is 33, the
Perpendicular from (...) Area or Superficial Content is thus computed: 13
Chains the first Perpendicular. 15 The second Perpendicular 28 The Sum of both
Perpendiculars. 14 Their half Sum. 33 The Diagonal. 42 42 462 Square Chains the
Area.


V. To find the Content of a regular Polygonial, or multangular Figure,
otherwise called multilateral.

Draw a Line from the Center to the middle of any Side; half of the Perimeter
(or of all the Sides) being multiplied by that Line beforementioned, gives the
Content.

VI. To find the Content of an irregular Polygon, or many sided Figure.

Divide it into Trapezia's and Triangles by Diagonals, then find their Content
severally, and sum up all together; which that you may better apprehend,

those Diagonals, Area of the whole polygonial Figure.

But now methinks I see (as it were) my Country Student scratching his Head,
and wishing for an opportunity) to propound two doubts to me.

1. Why I called the Numbers correspondent to my Lines by diverse denominations,
as Inches, Feet, Yards, Rods; and sometimes by none at all but propounding the
Numbers abstractly.

2. How I came to know how many of those Measures (whatever they be) are
represented by the Lines given, and perpendiculars found.

To the former I answer, I am not yet teaching how to measure Lines (that work
is presently to follow) but what Lines of Figures are to be measured, and the
measures of those Lines being known (or supposed) how the Content upon those
real (or supposed) Grounds may be found, and to this purpose I might call the
Numbers represented by the Lines, Inches, Feet, Yards, or any other Measures,
at pleasure, provided I called the Squares, to which the Area is equal, by the
same names; for an Inch in length bears the same proportion to a square Inch
(having length and breadth) that a Mile in length bears to a square Mile. For
this reason I profess not in the Title of this Chapter to teach how to measure
Figures, (much less how to measure the Lines of such Figures) but how to find
the Content, the Lines being given.

And then to take away the second doubt, know that the Numbers represented by
the Lines, were either given by those Learned Artists from whom I borrowed the
Figures, or supposed by my self as grounds to go upon (as in such cases is
ordinary) or, lastly, found out to be agreeable thereto by some Scale of small
equal parts, which he is yet supposed ignorant of. But now I am going to show
him the nature and use of two or three plain and cheap Instruments, by the help
whereof he may with much exactness, 1. Measure the length of any Lines bounding
Right-lined Figures upon the ground. 2. Draw Lines and Figures upon paper
proportionable thereunto (which we call protracting). 3. Find upon his
paper-figures the true length of all the desired Perpendiculars, which shall
also be proportionable to those on the Ground, but much more easy to be
obtained. And withal, I intend to give him such farther Instructions and
Cautions for the application of the general and more particular Rules of this
Chapter to his peculiar use, as will render them (especially some of them)
singularly advantageous.

CHAP. IV.
Concerning Chains, Compasses, and Scales.
1. Amongst the many sorts of Chains used for measuring Land, three are most
famous* bearing the Names of their Inventors, Mr. Rathborne, Mr. Gunter, and
Mr. Wing, all of them Ingeniously divided, and useful in their kind^ but my
brievity will give me leave only to describe one, and that shall be Mr.
Gunter's, being most in use, and easy to be procured.

This Chain contains in length four Statute-Poles or Perches, each Perch
containing 1^ Feet and a half, or 5 Yards and a half; so that the whole Chain
is 66 Feet, or 22 Yards long.

This whole Chain is divided into 100 equal parts or Links, whereof 25 are a
just Pole or Perch; and for ready counting, there is usually a remarkable
distinction by some Plate or large Ring at the end of every 25 Links, but
especially at the precise middle of the Chain, which should differ from the
rest in greatness and conspicuousness. Also at the end of every tenth Link it is
usual to hang a small Curtain-Ring and if there be at every five Links end a
piece o^ Wire made like the bow of a Link, with a little shank an Inch or less
long, (or some such distinction) it is still better.

When you are to measure any Line by this Chain, you need to regard no other
Denomination but only Chains and Links, set down with a prick of your pen
betwixt them, e. g. If you found the side of a Close to be 6 Chains and 35
Links long, it is thus to be put down 6. 35.

But if the Links be under 10, a Cipher must be prefixed; so 7 Chains 9 Links
must be thus set, 7. 09.

In the using of this (or indeed of any) Chain, care must be taken, both to go
strait, and to keep a true account; for which purpose, it is good that he which
goes before carry in his hand a bundle of Rods, to stick down one at the end
of the Chain which leads, having first stretched it well, and that he which
follows do not only gather up the Rods to keep the Account, but also at every
remove, mark whether he see the Leader directly between his Eye and the Angle,
or other Mark he aims to measure to; and if need be, call to the Leader to move
toward the right or left hand, till he see him in a direct Line to it.

II. Compasses are so well known, that I need not describe them; only they
should be of Brass, with Steel Points small and neatly wrought, nine or ten
Inches long from the Joint to the points, turning so truly upon the Rivet that
they may be easily opened; and yet stand so firmly, that an Arch or Circle may
be without their shrinking described upon a large Radius.

For the form, I would commend above all, those that have large Bows, so
contrived, that by pressing them with the hinder part of the Hand, they will
gently open, and by the Thumb and fourth Finger be put together (as others
will) so that they are manageable by one hand, which is a great convenience for
one that at the same time should hold his Rule with Scales in the other.

These might also be contrived with a Screw to take out one of the points, to
place in the room (upon occasion) a Black-Lead pen, or any pen to draw Circles,
with either black or otherwise colored.

And for a Man that would be an Artist indeed, it were convenient he were
furnished with dividing Campasses, beam Compasses, and triangular ones, for
several uses not here to be mentioned; but a Country Surveyor may make a good
shift with such a plain pair as I first described; which Mr. Wynn, over against
the Rolls in Chancer^-lane, will help him to, with the Chain and Scales, for a
small matter.

III. Scales are certain Lines divided into equal parts, upon plates or broad
Rules of Brass or Box, and they are of two sorts, 1. Plain; 2. Diagonal.

1. Plain Scales are made up of two small Lines parallel to one another at a
little distance, and these are divided into great equal parts, which signify
Tens, and are noted 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, etc. according to the length of the
Lines.

They may be of any convenient length, but these great divisions are seldom
more than Inches, or less than third parts a piece.

Again, one of the great Divisions (or parts) is subdivided into ten equal
parts by short Lines, whereof that in the middle standing for 5 is longer than
the rest.

According to the Numbers of these little parts contained in an Inch, the Scale
is named A Scale of 10, 11, 12, 16, 20, 24, 30, etc. in an Inch.

As for Example.

7 is the extent of the Compasses upon the Scale A from the Line OQ to K; 30 is
their extent from the Line so marked to OQ; and 27 is their extent from the
Line 20, to the short Line K aforesaid.

Here note, that you must not expect to find the Letters OQ or K upon the
Scales which you buy, being only marks used at pleasure, to make my meaning
plain; and likewise that this Scale of 10 in an Inch, and others that are
smaller (all being composed after the same manner) are usually made for more
convenient use, so long as to contain nine or ten (the more the better) of the
great Divisions, signifying Tens* though the Figure at A being designed for no
other use than to help your conceptions, extends but a little beyond 30, that
length being sufficient for my purpose in this place.



Also in the surveying of Forests, Chases, and great Commons, where the Lines
are vastly long, and the mistake of a few Links (yea, of half a Pole) is not
considerable, they may be conveniently used, accounting the Tens and Unites to
signify so many whole Chains, and so estimating the parts of a Chain with the
Compasses upon the small Divisions, which a sagacious Man may do very near upon
one of the larger Scales. But it were much better, in my opinion, for ordinary
measuring, if the grand Divisions on the Scale were two Inches a piece, as I
have one upon the Index of my plain Table) for then the smaller Divisions being
of five in an Inch, would be so large as to be subdivided into five apiece,
which represents 20 Links; and then the half of one of those smaller Divisions
signifying 10 Links, and the quarter 5, a very ordinary judgment may come very
near to the truth by estimation.

2. But the Diagonal Scale is so well known to every Mathematical
Instrument-maker, so easy to be procured, and every ways so fitted to Gunter's
Chain, and our Countryman's use, that I cannot but highly commend it.

Of these Diagonal Scales, there are two sorts, the Old and New.

Leybourn's Book, whereof I shall present you with a fragment, with such a
description as may enable you to understand the whole.

1. It is made (as appears by the Figure B) upon eleven parallel Lines
equidistant, so as to include ten equal spaces, which are all cut at right
Angles by Transwerse Lines dividing them all into four equal parts.

2. One of these Transverse Lines (viz: PR) where it touches the first and
last Lines, separates between the Hundreds (or whole Chains) and the Tens,
(representing 10 Links apiece) the Chains being numbered downwards on the left
hand from P only to 3, but on the Instrument it self they may go on to 9 or 10,
(the Rule being a Foot long) but the Tens (or Decads) upward from P to 10.

3. From the Points of Division into Tens upon the first Line beginning at P,
to the like Points beginning at R in the last Line, are nine Diagonal Lines
drawn, the first beginning at P, and ending at the first Division above R. The
second beginning at the first Division above P, and ending at the second above
R. In a word, they are all drawn from one Division less from P, to one more
from R; by which it comes to pass, that every Diagonal, by that time it has
passed from the first Line to the eleventh is a whole tenth part of an Inch
(which answers to ten Links of the Chain) farther distant from the Line PR,
than at the Point upon the first Line whence it was drawn.



From what has been said, and inspection of the Figure B, these things plainly
follow, which as so many clear instances will help you to understand it fully.

1. The distance from PR to the second Division below it answers to two
Chains.

2. The distance from PR to the eighth Division upward being taken (with
Compasses) upon the first Line of the eleven from P to 8, answers to 80 Links.

3. Consequently the extent of the Compasses from the second grand Division
below P to the eighth of the less Divisions upward, is proportionable to 2
Chains 80 Links.

4. The distance from PR to the first Diagonal being taken upon the parallel
Line noted with 9 above answers to 9 Links: Where note, that the first
Diagonal is not that which is noted with 1, but that which is drawn from the
point P.

5. The distance upon the same Line from PR to the Diagonal that is marked with
7, is answerable to 79 Links.



Briefly whole Chains may (by Analogy) be measured upon any Line from PR to the
grand Division noted with the given Number, Decads alone, or Chains and Decads
upon the first Line of the eleven where the Diagonals begin. Links alone,
Decads with Links, and Chains and De^ads with Links, always upon that Line upon
which the number ofodd Links stands at the head of the Scale.

And know,
that these Directions (mutatis mutandis) will as well fit, if half an Inch be
only allowed for a Chain, and consequently all the Diagonals drawn within that
extent, as it is usual (and very commodious for longer Lines) upon the other
end of the same Rule, the grand Divisions for Chains going the contrary way,
and noted with Numeral Figures in order. It (...) good therefore when you
furnish your self with Scales, to have Diagonal Scales of both ^imensions on
the fore-side of your Rule; and upon the backside many plain Scales of equal
parts, with a Line of Chords; all which you may have (by enquiring only for the
Scales described ^n Mr. Leybourn's Book) of Mr. Win aforesaid, ^s likewise
all other Mathematical Instruments.

Having been so large for my plain Countryman's sake, I shall not proceed to
the description of the new Diagonal Scale, of which you may have the Figure and
Description in Mr. Wing's Book: For though it be an excellent good one, Hayes
having (at my desire) furnished my noble Friend Si^ Charles Hoghton with an
artificial one of that sort, when I had the honor of assisting him in
Mathematical Studies) yet because it is pretty cost^^ (if well made), and that
before described will very well answer its end, I shall at present say no more
of it.

But my Reader may perhaps object to me, th^^ though I have instructed him how
he may make a Line of an exact length, to answer to any number of Chains and
Links (given or found by measure) upon the Diagonal Scales: I have not yet
showed him how to measure a Line (as suppose a Perpendicular) whose length is
unknown, upon them.

To give him therefore all satisfaction (though what I have writ already, might
help him to find this out) let us suppose, that in some Figure made according
to the Diagonal Scale B of 10^ in an Inch, we meet in measuring with an unknown
Perpendicular equal to the Line in the Margin. Taking it between the Points of
my Compasses, I first try whether it be even Chains and finding upon the first
view that it is not, (...) make a second trial, whether it will prove to be
even Decads, or Tens of Links; to which purpose I set one Foot at 3 Chains in
the bottom o^ my Scale in the first Line where the Diagonals begin, and the
other Foot rests in the same line betwixt 6 and 7; whereby I am assured the odd
Links above 3 Chains are more than 60 and less than 70. And to find how many
above 60, I remove the Compasses from parallel to

CHAP. V.
How to cast up the Content of a Figure, the Lines being given in Chains and
Links.
HAving described these plain Instruments, and in some measure showed the use
of them in severals, it were very proper in the next place to teach their joint
use in measuring and protracting; but because I would have my young Surveyor,
before I take him into a Close, able to perform his whole work together, I
intend to show him, 1. How he ought to make his Computations; 2. The Grounds or
Principles that will justify him in so doing.

For the first, take these Rules:

1. Put down your length and breadth of Squares and Oblongs, and your Base and
half Perpendicular of Triangles directly under one another, expressed by chains
and links with a prick betwixt them, as was taught before, Chap. 4.

2. If the odd links were under ten, put a Cipher before the numeral Figure
expressing them, (as there also was showed) and if ther^ be no odd links, but
all even chains, put tw^ Ciphers after the prick.

3. Multiply length by breadth, and Base (...) the half Perpendicular, according
to the Rul^ for finding the Content of Figures, Chap. 3.

4. From their Product cut off 5 Figures (accoun^ing Ciphers for such) reckoned
from the right hand backward, with a dash of your (...) so shall those to the
left hand signify Acres.

5. If those five cut off were not all Cypher^ multiply them by 4, and cutting
off fiv^ towar^^ the right hand again, the rest will be Roods (...) Quarters.

6. If amongst these five Figures toward the right hand that were cut off at
the second Multiplication there be any Figures besides Ciphers multiply all the
five by 40, and cutting off fiv^ again by a dash of your Pen, those on the left
hand signify square Perches, Poles, or Roods*

A few Examples will make all plain.

Quest. 1. What is the content of a Square, (...) Sides are every one of them 7
Chains, 25 Links?

Length 7.25 Breadth 7.25 3625 1450 5075 525625 525625 4 102500 40 100000
Answ. 5 Acres, 1 Rood, and 1 Perch, as here appears.

Quest. 2. In a long Square, whose length is 14 Chains, and the breadth 6 Chains
5 Links, what is contained?

Length 14.00 Breadth 6.05 7000 84000 847000 4 188000 40 3520000
Answ. 8 Acres, 1 Rood, and 35 Perches, as the Work makes it evident.

Quest. 3. In a Triangle, whose Base is 3 Chains, and half the Perpendicular 98
Links, what is the Content?

The Base 3.00 Half Perpend. 0.98 2400 2700 29400 4 117600 40 704000
Answ. 0 Acres, 1 Rood, 7 Perches, as here is plain.

There be other ways of Computation by Scales, Tables, etc. but that this is
sound and demonstrative, I come now to show by these following Steps.

1. It is evident, that in this way of Multiplication the Product is square
Links; for every Chain being 100 Links, it is all one to multiply 7.25 by 7.25,
or 725 by 725 without pricks, for the pricks signify something as to
Conceptions but nothing at all in Operation. The Product therefore of the first
Example was really 525625 Links.

2. Every Chain being 4 Perches long, it follows, that 5 Chains (or 20 Perches)
in length, and 2 Chains (or 8 Perches) in breadth, make an Acre, or 160 square
Perches; for 20 being multiplied by 8, gives 160.

3. From hence it plainly follows farther, that there are exactly 100000
square Links in an Acre; for 5 Chains multiplied by 2, is the same with 500
Links by 200, which makes 100000. And he deserves not the name of an
Arithmetician that is ignorant of this old plain Rule, When the Devisor
consists of 1 and Ciphers, (as 10, 100, 1000, 10000, 100000, etc.) cut off from
the right hand so many Figures of the Dividend as the Devisor has Ciphers,
accounting them the Remain; so shall the rest on the left side be the Quotient.
It is plain then that 525625 square Links make 5 Acres, and 25625 square Links
over.

Thus I have made it clear to a very ordinary capacity, that as far as concern
Acres, the Rules for Computation are good. Now for Roods and Perches, though I
might turn off my Reader with that known Rule in Decimal Arithmetic:
Multiplying Decimal Fractions by known Parts, gives those known Parts in
Integers, due regard being had to the separation. I shall proceed in my plain
way thus: If 25625 square Links, which remain above an Acre, do contain any
quarter or quarters of an Acre; then if they be multiplned by 4, and divided by
100000, (that is, five cut off from the Product) they will contain so many
Acres as now they do quarters (or Roods), for any number of quarters multiplied
by 4, must needs produce the like number of Unites or Integers, and the
Division does only reduce them into the right denomination. Now 25625 being
multiplied by 4, and five Figures being cut off from the product, the result
is, 1^02500, that is an Acre and above; which shows it was above a quarter
before it was multiplied by 4.

And to find how much, (that is, how many square Perches are contained in this
last remainder) you must consider this 2500, not as square Links remaining
above the Rood or Quarter, but as fourth parts or quarters of square Links; or
(which is all one) as the true number of square Links multiplied by 4, and
consequently being multiplied by 40, (the fourth part of square Perches in an
Acre) it must as often contain 100000 square Links (or an Acre) as the quarter
of this number 2500, viz. 625, signifying square Links, containing square
Perches; and so it does, for 100000 divided by 160 (the number of Perches in an
Acre) gives 625 as answerable to 1 Perch; and 2500 multiplied by 40, gives
100000, or 1 Acre; the five Ciphers being cut off as here is manifest.

2500 40 100000
160) 100000 (625 960 400 320 800 800 0
Some may perhaps wonder, that in so small a Manual I spend so many words about
such ordinary things, as in this and the last Chapter; but I am most afraid,
lest I shall not for all my plainness be sufficiently understood by such as I
purposely write for, in things of such necessary and frequent use: And I
designed not to make this Treatise small by being obscurely brief in
substantial things, but by leaving out such Curiosities as I thought my Country
Friend might well spare.

CHAP. VI.
How to measure a Close, or parcel of Land, and to Protract it, and give up the
Content.
HItherto we have been like Children learning to spell, now let us set our
Syllables together. I mean, let us make use of the Instructions beforegoing to
measure a plece of land, to plot it, and to cast up the Content.

All Closes, or parcels of land, are either such as need not to be plotted for
finding out their true measure, but the Chain alone does the Work; or such as
cannot be conveniently measured without plotting or protraction.

Of the first sort are the Square and long Square, known beforehand to be
such, or found so to be by such Instruments as I have not yet described, or by
measuring all the Sides and Diagonals. These Squares and long Squares (I say)
need no protracting, for you need only to multiply the Chains and Links of the
length, by the Chains and Links of the breadth, and so proceed as in the first
and second Examples of the fifth Chapter: But all others, whether Triangles or
Triangulate, are to be protracted. I shall give Examples therefore in the 3
sorts of Figures, triangular, quadrangular, and multangular.

But before I proceed to particular Instances, let me advise the young
Practitioner thus: Remember,

1. To begin at some notable Angle of the Field, where there is some House,
Gate, Style, Well, or the like; or if there be none, then to dig up a Clod,
drive down a Stake; or at least, to observe what quarter of the Heavens it
points toward, whether East, West, North, or South, and on your Paper mark
it with the Letter A, or any other.

2. To go parallel to the side of the Field, (...) Pits, Bushes, or the like,
hinder not, (and if they do, to allow for it) accustoming your self to go
either cum Sole, that is, with your left hand toward the Hedges, Walls, or
Pales; or contra Solemn, with your right hand toward them; and when you go
contrary to your usual custom, note it on your paper by some mark known to your
self.

3. To set down the Chains and Links of every side as you measure them, and not
to trust your memory. A Black lead pen will be very proper for this purpose.

4. To take heed (if you have more Scales than one upon your Rule) lest you
confound your self by taking lines off of several Scales, or measuring
perpendiculars upon wrong ones; for every line of the same Figure must be made
by the same Scale, and the perpendiculars measured by it.

5. To make use of a Scale of larger Divisions when you measure small Closes,
and of smaller when you measure great ones.

6. To make your lines and points where Angles meet, small, pure, and neat.

7. To set on your Chains and Links at twice, when any line is too long for
your Scale.

These things being premised, I proceed thus:

I. Suppose I measure a triangular Field with my Chain, beginning at the
Eastern Angle A, and find the Sides in their order and measures to be
severally, thus: (I going cum Sole) 2.229, 3.45, 4.07.

cum Sole, I describe (at that distance 2. 29.) the Arch E E.

Chapter 2. Probl. 6.) the Triangle A B C is the Plot of the Triangular Field
measured.

But before I can give the Content, I must find the length of the
Perpendicular, which is done by setting one Foot of the Compasses in B, and
extending the other to the Base A C, so as (...) touch it and pass not over it,
(according to Chapter ^* Probl. 7.) for then the length of the Perpendicular is
between the Points of the Compasses, and being applied to the same Scale by
which the Triangle A B C was made, it appears to be 1 Chain 42 Links. With the
half whereof I multiply 4.07 the length of the Base, and proceeding in my Work
as was showed in the last Chapter, the Content appears to be 0 Acres, 1 Rood, 6
Perches, as it is here evident.

The Base 4.07 Half Perpend. 0.71 407 2849 28897 4 115588 115588 40 623520
II. Suppose I were to measure a quadrangular or four-corner'd Field, I begin
as before at ^ome remarkable Angle; and going round the ^lose cum Sole, I find
the Sides to be 9.04, 6.72, ^.46, 7.28, and the Diagonal from that remarkable
Angle to the opposite Angle to be 10.02, I ^^gin therefore to protract it thus.

Chapter 2. Probl. 6. and another after the same method of that Diagonal, and the
third and fourth Sides 8.46 and ^.28, so have I the Trapezium ABCD.

Then by the help of my Scale and Compasses, (...) find the Perpendicular of
the Triangle A B C (...) be 6.02, and of the other, viz. CDA 6.01, which added
are 12.03, whereof the half Sum (...) 6.01; by which multiplying the Base
10.02, and proceeding as formerly has been shown, I and the Content of the
Field to be 6 Acres, 0 Roods, 3 Perches, as is here apparent.

The Base10.02 Half Perpend. 6.01 1002 60120 6^02202 4 ^08808 40 3^52320


Before I pass any further, let me tell you,

1. Any quadrangular Close, or parcel Ground whatsoever, having right Lines,
(...) be thus measured, protracted, and computed.

2. The odd measure above Perches is (...) valuable here, nor in the former
Computatio^ being always under a square Perch; but in mu^^ angulars where there
be many Remainders, th^^^ must be summed up, and the Perches contain^ in them
added to the Content before found.

3. This last, and the following Figures (wh^^ I use any Scale at all) are made
that they mig^^ not be too large, by a Scale of 400 in an In^^^ i. e. by the
less Diagonal Scale, each Chain (...) Link being counted two.





But when I come to protract by the help of ^^y Scale and Compasses, I first
make the Trian^^e BCD of the first Diagonal, and the second and third sides.
Then the Triangle DEF upon (...) second Diagonal, and fourth and fifth sides,
(...) upon the same Diagonal as a common Base, (...) Triangle BDF of the first,
second and third Diagonals.

Next of the same third Diagonal, together ^ith the fourth and sixth sides I
make the Triangle BFG, and upon the fourth Diagonal as upon a common Base with
the first and last sides (...) Triangle ABG, so is the whole Close ^^otted.

And now it stands visibly reduced into two ^rapezia's ABFG and BDEF, together
with ^he Triangle BCD, which I shall not now cast (...), having so often showed
how such work is (...) be done.

But I must acknowledge that this sort of plotting of parcels of Land that have
many Angles, ^equires not only more care and pains, but better skill and memory
than to draw Diago^als upon Paper, when the Plot is already taken by the plain
Table, or other standing Instrument. I shall therefore to help my young
Practitioner in this case, advertize him of two easy ways to help himself, so
as to be out of danger of mistakes.

One way is to divide the Multangular Field into two or more parts as the last
might have been by the Diagonal BF; then might each pa^^ have been measured
severally, as if they had been separated by a Pale, or were sundry Men's Land
parted by a Boundary.

Another way that much helps both the understanding and memory, is to draw a
rude Draugh^ of the Figure of the Land you intend to measure, not only as to
the sides, but also necessary Diagonals. Then measuring the Lines upon the
Ground correspondent to those on the Paper (which by the help of the Draught
may be easily hit) set the Lines as you measure them upon the Lines of the
Draught, as if it were the true ones, and when you have finished your
measuring, protract it truly. Such as you see her^ (but it is better larger)
will do your business for it is not a Pin matter how rude or false the Lines or
Angles be, resemblance being all that is desired.

CHAP. VII.
Concerning the measuring of Circles, and their Parts.
I Have hitherto abstained of purpose from meddling with the Circle and its
Parts, that I might lay those things close together without unnecessary
mixtures, that are of the greatest use.

It Is wonderful rare, if a Land-meeter ever have occasion to measure any Field
or parcel of Land, that will prove either Circle, Semicircle, Quadrant, or
Sector. Sometimes indeed there will be a little crook in an old Hedge bowing
like an Arch: But I have never seen any offer to measure it as a Segment, but
always take it as an Angle or Angles.

Yet because it may be expected I should say somewhat of those things, I shall
briefly do it.

1. To measere a Circle in the more exact way (...) to square the Diameter, and
to multiply that Square by. 7854, so shall the Content be in Integers and
Decimals.

But the more usual and quick way (and near enough for any use we shall make of
it) is to multiply the half of the Periphery or Circumference by the
Semidiameter.

In like manner to find the Content of a Semicircle, Quadrant, or Sector made
up of Semidiameters, and arched Lines, multiplying the half Arch by the
Semidiameter, gives the Content.

Section, less than a Semicircle, such as this Figure ABC. And to find the
Content of it, the center of the Circle whereof this is a Section must be first
found out, as here at O, from which Lines drawn to A and B, make up the Sector
AOBC; which being measured according to the last Rule, and from the Content
thereof,

But two Questions may be here demanded:

1. How may the Center be found? 2. How may such a portion of Land be truly
protracted and computed?

To the first I answer, that the most exact and artificial way is by making a
Mark any where in the Arch.

As for Example.

At the Point C; and then (by a Problem known not only to every Surveyor, but
to ordinary Carpenters and Joyners, for finding the center of a Circle, whose
Circumference will pass through 3 given points that are not in a right line as
ACB) to find the Center O. But if you know not how to do it so, cross the Line
AB in the middle, as here it is done by the Perpendicular OC, so you may by a
few trials find both the due extent of your Compasses, and the point in the
Perpendicular that will fit your purpose near enough; for if a little error be
committed in making up the Sector, the most of it goes off again in the
substraction of the Triangle.

II. For the latter you may take this ready course: Measure the length of both
your Lines, (the Chord and the Arch) and their distance at the middle of them
both. Then when you come to protract, first take the length of your right Line
from the Scale, and having laid it down, cross it in the middle at right Angles
with a dry Line as in the last Figure, so shall it intersect the Line AB in the
point E;

These few hints are as much as I thought necessary for my Country Practitioner
concerning circular lines; but if he think otherwise, there are large Treatises
enough, and particularly those I mentioned, whose Rules (though ingenious,
sound, and fit to be known by every one that intends to plunge deep into
Mathematical Studies) will not (I think) be of that use to him in ordinary
measuring, that I should transcend the intended bounds of brevity to transcribe
them.

CHAP. VIII.
Concerning customary Measure, and how it may be reduced to Statute-Measure,
and e contra, either by the Rule of Three, or a more compendious way by
Multiplication only.
WHereas the Statute-Perch or Pole is 16 Feet and a half, and no more, there be
Poles of larger measure used in many places, as of 18, 20, 21, 24, and 28 Feet,
yea in some 22 Feet and a half. It were therefore very convenient, that our
young Surveyor were furnished with a Chain fitted to the customary measure of
the Country where he lives, as I use to make Chains for my self and Scholars of
21 or 24 Feet to the Pole for Lancashire and Cheshire, where those Measures
most obtain. But because these are too large and cumbersome for small Closes,
it is very convenient, instead of one Chain of 100 Links, to make two of 2
Poles apiece, each Pole divided into 25 Links as that of 100 is, which two half
Chains may in measuring large Fields be tied together by the Loops with
Pack-thread, or joined by a buttoning Keyring for more speedy dispatch; but in
smaller we may use the half Chain of 50 Links, only taking care that we count
not half Chains for whole ones.

And in these cases where the Poles are large and the Closes small,
it were still more convenient if you had a Chain of 2 Poles only, divided into
100 Links: Only you must then take notice, that whereas working by whole Chains
and Links, the first Multiplication, after five cut off, gives the Content in
Acres and Parts. The like work by half Chains and half Links will give the
Content in Roods or quarters of Acres, and parts of such Roods.

But though it is no hard matter (for one that can find out the length of a
Link by dividing the number of Feet in a Chain by 100, and provide himself of
good Iron-wyre, and Curtain Rings to make it of, and a sharp edged File, and
round nosed Plyers to make it with) to be furnished with such a Chain; yet
because every one cannot do this, I shall show you how you may easily and yet
very truly reduce Statutemeasure into customary, that so the Chain before
described may do your business all England over.

Know therefore (for a ground to go upon) that Acres bear proportion to one
another, as the squares of their Poles; and therefore if you multiply 33, the
number of half Feet in the Statute-pole by it self, which gives 1089, and also
multiply the number of half feet contained in a Pole of that measure you would
reduce into; in the same manner you may by the Rule of Three reverse obtain
your desire, making to that purpose 1089 the first number, the Statutemeasure
the second, and the squared half-feet of the Pole given the third. As for
example: 9.33 L. 7.21 B. 933 1866 6531 672693 prod.
Suppose of a Close measured by the Statute-Pole, the length, breadth, and
their product be as here represented in the Margin. And it is desired that the
Content may be cast up according to our large Cheshire measure of eight yards
or 24 feet to the Pole or Rood (as we call it:) The^ before I cut off any
Figures, I consider that in the Statutepole are 33 half-feet, and in the
Cheshire-pole 48, then multiplying 33 by 33, and 48 by 48, I have these two
square numbers, 1089 and 2304, which together with the said product may be thus
placed: 1089. 672693 2304, and so multiplying 672693 by 1089, and dividing
their product being 732562677 by 2304, the quotient is 317952, from which if 5
figures toward the right hand be cut off, and dealt withal as was taught in the
fifth Chapter, the Content by our customary measure of 24 feet to the Pole,
will be 3 acres, 0 roods, 28 perches as here appears 317952 4 71808 40 2872320


But if the lines on the land had been measured according to our custom here,
of 24 feet to the pole, and the Content must have been found according to
Statute measure; then I must have multiplied the product by 2304, and have
divided that latter product by 1089* And in the same method you may proceed in
all or any of the rest. But the truth is, that though this way be very exact,
plain and comprehensive, suting all the customary measures beforementioned
without fractions, which for my Learners sake I studiously avoid, and for that
reason reduced my poles to half-feet: It is something tedious except he knows
how to relieve himself by a large Table of Logarithms, or at least a set of
Nepair's-bones, which I cannot stand here to treat of: Therefore to contract
the work a little, take notice, that all the customary poles before mentioned,
(saving only those of 20 and 28 feet, which I suppose are somewhat rarely used,
because I never heard nor read of them (to my remembrance) save only in Mr.
Holwel; all the rest I say, are capable of being divided into half-yards: And
therefore if instead of squaring the half-feet you square the half-yards of
both poles, and work with them, you will attain the same end without any
regardable difference, the small diversity that there is being usually in the
useless remainders, not at all affecting the desired Quotient that gives the
answer near enough for use.

As for Example.

If I had squared 11, the number of half-yards in the Statute-pole, which would
make 121, and also 16 the number of half-yards, in our Cheshire-pole, which
would make 256, as appears in the Margin, and then multiplied the first product
672693 by 121, the second product would have been 81319853, which being divided
by 256, the Quotient would have been (as before) 317952. And this way is in a
manner coincident with Mr. Holwells first Method.

11 11 11 11 121
16 16 96 16 256
Take notice also further once for all, that whether you use either of these or
the following Methods, you need not reduce the particular Squares, Triangles,
or Trapezia's severally; but sum up all their products together, and then
reduce all at once.

But if you would reduce Statute measure into Customary by Multiplication only,
take notice of this present Table following.

The Content by the Statute-pole being multiplied by. 84027 Gives the Content
by the Pole of 18 feet.. 68062 20. 61734 21. 53777 22. 47265 24. 34725 28

The use of this Table.

When you have multiplied Lengths by Bredths, or Bases by half Perpendicalars,
multiply these Products by the Decimal Fractions answering to the
Customary-measure into which you would reduce Statute-measure, and from that
latter product, first cut off five places toward the right hand as not to be
regarded, (being only parts of a square Link;) then cutting off 5 more, and
proceeding to multiply by (...), and then by 40, as has been often showed, you
will have the Content by that Customary-measure,

Example.

Suppose once more the length of a Close measured by Gunter's Chain, and
multiplied by the breadth measured also by the same, produced 672693 square
Links; and it is desired that the Content may be given in Cheshire-measure of
24 to the Pole: You must multiply (...) 72693 by.47265, the decimal fraction
answering to 24 feet, and from that product being 31794834645 cut off and cast
away 5 places, and the rest being ^17948, are in the usual way easily ^educible
into 3 Acres, 0 Roods, 28 Perches, as here appears, agreeable ^o what it
amounted to in the former Method.

317948 4 71792 40 2871680
But if you measured by a Chain of Customary Poles, and desire to know what the
Content (...) in Statute-measure; this following Table is for your purpose.

The Content measured by the Pole of 18 Feet. being multiplied by 1. 19008
gives the Content by the Statute-pole. 20 Feet. 1. 46923 21 Feet. 1. 61983 22
Feet. 1. 85950 24 Feet. 2. 11570 26 Feet. 2. 87970

To understand which, take this Example.

Suppose the length and breadth of a lo^ Square being measured by a Chain of 24
feet (...) the Pole, and multiplied together, make the^^ product 317952, le^
this be multiplied b^ 2.11570, which answers to 24 feet, and the latter
product will be 67269104640, from which if you cut off and cast away 5 places
toward the right hand, the remainder is 672691, which in the usual way is
easily reduced to 6 Acres, 2 Roods, and 36 Perches, as you see here.

67269 29076 4 363056
One thing more and I have done with the business of Reduction: If the Content
to be r^^duced, be given cast up into Acres, Roods, and Perches, reduce all
into Perches, and then i^ other respects work as before either by the Rule of
Three, or by this last Method of Multi^^lication only. So shall you have the
Content in square Perches according to the Measure desired, which you may
reduce into Acres by dividing them by 160, and if any thing remain, that
remainder being divided by 40, will give you the Roods in the Quotient, and the
latter remainder the number of square Perches.

For trial of which Rules, mind the Answer ^o these two following Questions
wrought all ^hree ways.

Quest. 1. How many Acres, Roods and Perches, according to the Pole of 18 Feet,
are contained in 5 Acres, 3 Roods, and 11 Perches, Statute-measure?

Answ. 4 Acres, 3 Roods, and 22 Perches, as ^^ere appears:

I. Method.
33 36 5 A: 3 R: 11 P. 33 36 4 -- -- -- 99 216 23 99 108 40 -- -- -- 1089 1296
931

1089. 931 1296 1089 8379 7448 9310 1013859 1296) 1013859 (782 9072 10665 10368
2979 2592 387
160) 782 (4 640
40) 142 (3 120 22
II. Method.
11 11 11 11 121
12 12 24 12 144


121. 931 144 121 931 1862 931 144) 112651 (782 1008 1185 1152 331 288 43
160) 782 (4 640 40) 142 (3 120 22
Or thus: 40) 782 (19 40 382 360 22
4) 19 (4 16 3


III. Method
. 84027 931 84027 252081 756243 782. 291 37
160) 782 (4 640 40) 142 (3 120 22
Quest. 2. How many Acres, Roods and Perches, of Statute-measure are contained
in 8 Acres, 3 Roods (or Quarters) and 21 Perches of 21 Feet to the Pole?

Answ. 14 Acres, 1 Rood, and 21 Perches, as appears by the three following
works in the several Methods.

I. Method.
8 A: 3 R: 21 P 4 35 40 1421
42 42 84 168 1764
33 33 99 99 1089
1764. 1421 1089 1764 5684 8526 9947 1421 1089) 2506644 (2301 2178 3286 3267
1944 1089 855
160) 2301 (14 160 701 640 40) 61 (1 40 21
II. Method.
14 14 56 14 196
11 11 11 121


196. 1421 121 196 8526 12789 1421
121) 278516 (2301 242 365 363 216 121 95
160) 2301 (14 160 701 640 61
40) 61 (1 40 21
III. Method.
1.61983 1421 161983 323966 647932 161983 2301.77843
160) 2301 (14 160 701 640 40) 61 (1 40 21
CHAP. IX.
How a man may become a ready Measurer by Practice in his private Study,
without any ones assistance or observation, till he design to practice abroad.
THis Art above all parts of the Mathematics, is burdened with two
Inconveniences to the young Practitioner: The necessity of having one to assist
him in measuring his Lines with the Chain, as often as he would practice his
skill, or get more, and the exposing of his unreadiness to the view of
meddlesom people, while he is yet raw and unexperienced, as every one must
needs be at first: Both which may in good measure be avoided by this easy
knack.

Take a small Packthread, and by knots about half Inch asunder divide it into
an 100 parts, as Gunter's Chain is divided; So shall these small divisions
between the knots answer to Links; and if they be not exactly of one length,
the matter is not very weighty, but the more equal and short they are, the
better. Having this String thus prepared, and marked with longer and shorter
pieces of thread tied in the knots, so as you may readily see where is the
middle, and where your divisions of 25 Links, and the smaller divisions of 10
links begin and end; make all sorts of Figures in your Study or Chamber, by
marking places, or sticking Knives or Bodkins at pleasure for Angles,
accounting the straight lines betwixt them for sides, and so measure the
Figures by your knotted string, and cast up the Content by a Scale. This Work
you may manage with your own hands in private, and so make your self very quick
and ready when you begin to measure for good and all; as I once made a full
experiment, and it was thus:

When I first began to instruct Youths in Mathematical Learning in Warrington,
some of my Boys Parents desired a sensible demonstration of their Sons
proficiency in somewhat that they themselves could in some measure understand;
and particularly pitched upon measuring a Piece of Land: Whereupon I took four
or five of my Scholars to the Heath with me, that had only been exercised
within the Walls of the School, and never saw (that I know of) so much as a
Chain laid on the ground: and to the admiration of the Spectators, and
especially of a skilful Surveyor then living in the Town, they went about their
work as regularly, and dispatched it with as much expedition and exactness, as
if they had been old Land-meters.

CHAP. X.
How to measure a piece of Land with any Chain of what length soever and
howsoever divided; yea with a Cord or Cart-Rope, being a good Expedient when
Instruments are not at hand of a more Artificial make.
IF you can procure a Chain, and find it is not divided as before has been
showed, but into Feet or quarters of Yards, or any such vulgar divisions, make
no reckoning of the divisions at all, but measure it as exactly as you can to
find out the true length of the whole Chain, and if it fit none of those
lengths mentioned in the 8th Chapter, nor any of their halfs, make it to fit,
by taking off a Link or two, or piecing it out with a string; then dividing the
length of that Chain by 100, or the half of it by 50, find the true length of a
Link according to our artificial division, and having got a long stick or rod,
set as many of those link-lengths upon it as it will hold; Then may you measure
all the whole Chains by your regulated Chain, and the odd links of every line
by your divided stick or rod, as is manifest in this Example following.

Being far from mine Instruments, and requested by a Friend to measure him a
Close, I procure a pair of Compasses, an ordinary Carpenters Rule of two foot,
divided into Inches and quarters, and meeting also with a piece of an old Chain
seemingly divided into feet, I measure it by the Rule, and finding it to be 45
feet long, and some odd measure, I piece it out with a pretty strong Cord that
will not stretch much, to 48 feet exactly; then it will serve me for half a
Chain of 24 feet to the Pole: This 48 I multiply by 12 (the number of Inches in
a Foot) and that product being 576, I divide by 50, the number of links in half
a decimal Chain, and the Quotient is 1166-50 Inches, or 11 Inches and an half,
and an trifle over: So then dividing a long stick throughout into such parts,
each containing 11 Inches and an half, besides the breadth of the nicks, I am
provided of Tools to measure Lines to a Link with exactness enough.

In like manner would I proceed with a Cord or Rope, having fitted them to some
known length or other. And then for protraction it were easy with the
Compasses to make a plain Scale of a large sort, either upon Paper, or an even
piece of Wood; this for once may serve a man's turn well enough.

Besides there is a way of measuring the Perpendiculars of Triangles and
Trapezia`s upon the ground it self, so as to prevent the necessity of a Scale;
for if you have a little Square with an hole in it, to turn upon the head of a
little stick, which you may fix where you please, as you are measuring the Base
of a Triangle, or the Diagonal of a Trapezium, you may by a very few trials
find the place where the one Leg will be just in the Line which you are
measuring, and the other point at the Angle from which the Perpendicular falls
on it, and then the space between your Stick and that Angle truly measured, is
the Perpendicular.

If you have not such a Square, a square Trencher, or any end of a Board that
has one right Angle, and two true sided, will supply the want of it.

And now that I am mentioning this way of measuring,
I shall make bold to add, that this is a good way, (and as such ordinarily
used by that general Scholar and reverend Minister Mr. Samuel Langley of
Tamworth in Staffordshire, whose ancient acquaintance I have long esteemed both
mine happiness and honor) to measure a Trapezium thus, though it be protracted
afterward; for by measuring the Perpendiculars as aforesaid, and observing at
how many Chains and Links end the said Perpendiculars meet the common Base, the
whole Trapezium may be truly protracted, without going about it; this little
Square competently supplying the place of an Instrument, which is usually
called a Cross or Square, made up (as it were) of two small Indices, like those
for a Plain-Table (but much less) with fore-sights and back-sights, and cutting
one another at right Angles, put together, and having an hole at the Center,
like those things which here in Cheshire we call Yarndles, being used by
Country Housewives in winding of their Yarn.

CHAP. XI.
Concerning dividing of Land Artificially and Mechanically.
WEre it suitable to my Design or Humor to be copious or curious, I had here a
fait opportunity; for four or five modern Survey-Books of the best Account
lying open before me, would tempt me to transcribe abundance of ingenious
things; but for reasons often hinted before, I shall confine my self to a few
plain things that will competently do this business.

1. To divide a Triangle into any parts required; divide the Base as the Demand
imports; then shall Lines drawn from the Points of Division to the opposite
Angle finish the Division of the Triangle.

Example.



Also it is very obvious, that if the same Triangle were so to be divided, that
the one part should be double to the other; a Line drawn from B to 4 or 8, does
the work. Or if it be required to divide it into two parts, so as the one shall
be triple to the other, a Line drawn from B to 3 or 9, compleats the Work. So
also a Line from B to 2 or 10 divides it into two parts, whereof the one is
quintuple (or five-fold) to the other, and a Line from B to 1 or 11, divides it
into two parts, whereof the one is 11 times as large as the other.

Further yet, if it were required this Triangle should be so divided, that the
two parts should in quantity bear proportion, as 5 and 7, a Line from B to 5 or
7, does that feat.

But to deal plainly with you, I must confess that sometimes the Division will
be a little more intricate than thus, yet not such, but that the seeming
difficulty may be easily overcome, by observing the method wherein I shall
satisfy the following demand.

Suppose a large Triangle of common Land be to be divided amongst three Tenants
A, B, and C, according to the quantity of their Tenements, A having 19 Acres of
Land to his Tenement, B13, and C7, the Base of the Triangle being found by
measure to be 17 Chains and 27 Links; and the Them and is, where the Points of
Division must be placed in the Base, so as Lines drawn from thence to the
opposite Angle, shall truly limit each man's part?

To answer this, let us add 13 and 07 to 19, (as in the Margin) and they give
39: So is the work plainly reduced to the Rule of Fellowship; and therefore to
find every man's distinct portion, we need only to multiply the Base by his 19
13 07 39
particular number, and divide that product by 39, the sum of all their numbers
as here is plain* A
39. 17. 27 19 19 15543 1727 39) 32813 (841 14/39 312 161 156 53 39 14
B
39. 17. 27 13 13 5181 1727 39) 22451 (575 2^/3^ 195 295 273 221 195 26
C
39. 17. 27 7 7 39) 12089 (309 38/39 117 389 351 38


From these Operations it is plain, that if we set off from the Angular point
where the Base begins, 8 Chains 41 Links, and a little above the third part of
a Link upon the Base for A, and where that ends, 5 Chains and 75 Links and 2/3
of a Link for B, and consequently leave between this second division and the
other end of the Base 3 Chains and almost 10 Links for C; Lines drawn from
those points of division to the opposite Angle, will give each man his due.

What I have said touching the division of Triangles upon their Bases,
will with a little variation serve for the dividing of all sorts of
Parallellograms, whether Square, Long-squares, Rhombus's, or Rhomboides's: all
the difference is, that in stead of drawing Lines from Points in the Base to
the opposite Angle, you must draw parallel Lines from Points in one opposite
side to another, as will be sufficiently plain by this one Instance.



If it be not thought convenient (as in some cases it is not) to cut off a
piece so long and narrow, you may by the Rule of Three find what other length
of any greater breadth will limit an equal quantity to it. Or you may multiply
the breadth by 2, 3, or any other, and divide the length by the same number
that you multiplied the breadth by. Or lastly, if you set out a double
proportion that is 2/6 or 1/3, from C toward D, and from the Point where it
falls, draw a Line to the Angle A, you will have a Triangle equal to 1/6 of
the Square ACDN.

But to return to Triangles, (the most simple and primitive of all
Rectilinears, and therefore the most considerable in this case of partition, as
giving Laws often to the rest:) It may fall out, that a Triangle must be
divided (convenience so requiring) by a Line from some Point in a side, so as
that Line may either be parallel to some other side, or not parallel to any.
For the former case take this Example following out of Mr. Wing. Lib. 5. Prob.
5.





Let ABC be a Triangle given to be divided into two parts which shall bear
proportion to one another, as 3 and 2, by a Line drawn from the point D in the
Base, or, Line AC.

From the limited point D, draw a Line to the Angle B; then divide the Base AC
into five equal parts, and from the third point of Division draw the Line to E,
parallel to BD. Lastly, from E draw the Line ED. So shall the Trapezium ABED be
in content, as 3 to 2, to the new Triangle DEC.

I have now done with the Division of Triangles, when I have added these three
Advertisements.

1. You must be sure to take very exactly the distance of every point, where a
dividing line cutteth any side, to one of the ends of the same side, as in this
last Figure, the distances BE and AD, which distances being applied to the
Scale by which the Triangle was protracted, will show at how many Chains and
Links-end you are to make your dividing Line on the Field it self.

2. The proportions by which you are to divide, are not always so formally
given as in the former examples, but are sometimes to be found out by
Arithmetical working, as in this case.

Suppose a Triangular Field of 6 Acres, 2 Roods, and 31 Perches, must be
divided, so as the one of the two parts shall be 4 Acres, 3 Roods, and 5
Perches, and the other (consequently) 1 Acre, 3 Roods, and 26 Perches, reduce
both measures into Perches, and the one will be 765, and the other 306. Their
Sum is 1071, which by their common measure being reduced into their lowest
terms of proportion in whole Numbers, will be 5, 2, and 7, which shows that the
Triangle being divided into 7 equal parts, the one must have 5 of those 7
parts, and the other 2. And observe, that it will be sufficient to find the
common measure between the Sum of the terms and either of the terms; the method
whereof is showed in every Arithmetic Book for reducing Fractions into their
lowest terms.

But if my unlearned Reader cannot skill of that work, he may multiply either
of the parts; (as suppose 765) by the length of the Base, which we will suppose
to be 8 Chains and 75 Links, or 875 Links: and that product divided by 1071,
(the Content of the whole Close in Perches) gives by the Rule of Three direct,
625 Links, or 6 Chains and 1 Pole, the true distance from either end of the
Base, that his mind or occasions may direct him to begin with, to the point of
Division; for the Division must be not only for proportion or quantity, but
also as to position or situation of parts upon the Paper, as it is required to
be on the Ground.

3. In these and all other divisions of Land, where a strict proportion in
quantity is to be observed, you must have respect to the Rules hereafter
following, concerning measuring of uneven Ground, Chapter 15. especially if one
part prove much more uneven than another: and if there be any useful Pond or
Well to draw your Line of Division through it; but if it be an unuseful Pond,
Lake or Puddle; or if there be an boggy or barren ground, that must be cast out
in the divisions; measure that first, and substract it from the Content of the
whole Close, and then lay the just proportion of the remainder on that side
that is free from it, that the other may have its just part also, besides that
which is useless.

What has been said, with an ordinary measure of discretion, may sufficiently
instruct a young Artist to divide Triangles, Parallellograms, and regular
Polygonials, in an artificial way: but because many Closes and open Grounds are
Trapezia's, and many irregular Polygons, and even those that are regular
enough, may fall under an irregular division, in regard of the quality of the
Land, Woods upon it, or Quarries in it: Or the conveniences of ways, Currents
of Water, situation in respect of adjacent Lands, etc. I shall propose a
Method, which though it has somewhat of the Mechanic in it, will be
singularly useful in such cases.

Chap. 5.)

But as to my present Work, they are in a better Order already. Dividing then
242018 into three parts, each of them is 80676 and 2/3,

Then resolving to lay out the double part toward the Line BD, I strike at
adventures the Line OF, and measuring the Trapezium bounded by that Line, and
the opposite side BD, together with the Interjacent parts of the Lines AB and
CD, I find it to contain 119140 square Links, but because it should have been
161353, I substract 119140, out of 161353, and their difference is 42213, and
perceiving that the Lines AB and CD are very near parallel, and finding their
distance where they are cut by the Line OF, to be 326 Links, or 3 Chains and 26
Links, I divide 42213 by 326, and the quotient is 129 Links and almost half, at
which distance I draw the Line GH parallel to OF; so shall the Trapezium GBDH
be the Heirs part.

Another way whereby this may be preformed, is thus: Finding the Triangle ABC,
to contain 138550 square Links, substract it out of the Heirs part, viz.
161353, the difference 22803, shows how many square Links must be taken out of
the Triangle BCD, and added to the Triangle ABC: Which to perform with all
necessary exactness; suppose the side or line BD to be the Base, which by
measure proves to be 344 Links, or 3 Chains and 44 Links. Say by the Rule of
Three direct, If the whole Content of the lesser Triangle, viz. 103468, give
344; what shall 22803 give? so will the result be 75 links, and somewhat more
than 4/5 of a Link; for 22803 multiplied by 344, gives 7844232, which being
divided by 103468, the Quotient is 75 84132/^03468; or (according to decimal
Division) 75.8131, which is (as I said before) somewhat more than 75 Links and
4/5, wherefore extending your Compasses upon the Scale to almost' 76 Links, set
that distance upon the Line BD, from B to I, and draw the Line CI: so shall the
Trapezium ABIC be double to the Triangle ICD, within so small a matter as is
not worth regarding, though the Land were a rich Meadow.

I hope I need not stand to tell any man of sense, that if he please he may
begin with the less part, and take out that: or if there be many Partners, he
may divide betwixt any one and all the rest, (putting their parts together) and
then by the same method subdivide amongst them till each has his due share;
nor to spend many words in telling him he must substract where he has by a
separating Line at adventures, or by choosing, out a Triangle, taken too much.
as I added, when I took too little. Nor lastly, that these methods are not only
applicable to Trapezia's, but to any triangular Figure whatsoever, whether
regular or irregular.

CHAP. XII.
Concerning the Boundaries of Land, where the Lines to be measured must begin
and end.
IF there be no agreement between the Parties concerned, (for if there be, that
must be observed) Reason and Custom are the Surveyor's Guide.

The Farmer speaks loudly, that when a piece of Arable or Meadow-land is let
for a year to be sown or mown, no more should be measured nor expected to be
paid for, either to the Letter or Workmen, than the Plow or Sithe can go over.
So also when a parcel of Land is let for Pasture by measure to a Farmer, it
seems very reasonable, that all and only so much should be measured as is
useful to that purpose.

But Commons to be enclosed are usually measured (except it be otherwise
agreed) to the uttermost bounds of every man's particular proportion, without
any allowance for Ditch or Fence; every man being to make them upon his own of
what breadth he pleases: Nor is this unreasonable, for it is as good for one as
another, and the rate paid to the Lord is usually very little, sometimes
nothing.

It is also very usual in measuring betwixt Lord and Tenant, in case of Leases
for Lives, and long terms of years, to extend the Lines to the utmost bounds of
the Tenants claim, taking in the very Walls, Hedges, and Ditches: but this is
accounted very hard, and often proves very unequal among the Tenants of a
Lordship; some being forced to make much more waste of their Ground this way,
than others that hold as much or more. But where the Custom obtains, the Survey
or must observe it: For it is others work to appoint what must be measured, and
his only to measure truly what is so appointed. A good Landlord may (and will
be apt) to consider it in his Rates, and a bad one it is like will be tenaC^^us
of a Custom to his own advantage.

Lastly, In case of Sale by measure at a rate agreed upon per Acre (no
Boundaries being specified in the Bargain) the Rule (as I had it from an old
famous Surveyor many years ago) is to extend the Lines to the quick Wood-row,
that is, as Reason prompts me to understand him, to the place where the
quick-wood actually grows, or where according to custom it ought to be set.

I confess these things are trivial, but yet more necessary to be known, than
many artificial things much stood upon, for a young Artist, whom ignorance of
these things may expose to considerable mistakes in practice.

CHAP. XIII.
Containing a description of the Plain-Table, the Protractor, and Lines of
Chords.
THough what has been already said, may competently suffice to instruct my
young Artist in measuring a Close of Land, yet to advance him a degree higher
in useful knowledge, I shall take occasion to describe unto him the
Plain-Table, which with Mr. Wing I account the best of all fixed Instruments:
This Instrument consists of several parts.

1. The Table it self, which is a Parallellogram of Wood fourteen Inches and an
half long, and eleven Inches broad, or thereabouts, and for necessity may be
made by an ordinary Country-workman of one Board: but for neatness, convenience
of carriage, and freedom from warping, it is usually made of three little
Boards joined together side-ways, with a ledge at each end to hold them fast
together, and upon the middle Board a Socket of Brass fixed with three Screws,
and with a fourth to be fastened on the head of a three-legged Staff; of which
anon.

2. A Frame of Wood fixed to it, so as a sheet of Paper being laid on the
Table, the Frame being forced down upon it, squeezes in all the edges, and
makes it lie firm and even, so as a Plot may be very conveniently drawn upon
it: this is usually made with Joints for more easy carriage, but a plain one
may suffice. Upon one side of this Frame should be equal divisions, for drawing
parallel Lines both longwise and cross-wise (as occasion may require) over your
Paper, and on the other side the 360 degrees of a Circle projected from a
Center of Brass conveniently placed in the Table.

3. A Box with a Needle and Card, to be fixed with two Screws to the Table,
very useful for placing the Instrument in the same Position upon every remove.

4. A three-legged Staff to support it, the Head being made so as to fill the
Socket of the Table, yet so as the Table may be easily turned round upon it,
when it is not fixed by the Screw.

5. An Index, which is a large Ruler of wood, (or rather brass) at the least
sixteen Inches long, and two Inches broad, and so thick as to make it strong
and firm, having a sloaped edge, (by which we draw the Lines) called usually
the fiducial edge, and two sights of one height, (whereof the one has a slit
above, and a thread below, and the other a thread above and a slit below) so
set in the Ruler, as to be perfectly of the same distance from the fiducial
edge. Upon this Index it is usual to have many Scales of equal parts, and there
might be a Diagonal Scale if the Instrument-maker please, and Lines of Chords
of sundry lengths: but if you have such a Scale as I before described; you need
not to have them here.

The Protractor is an Instrument so well known, and so easy to be made and
procured, that I shall be very brief in the description of it. As it is usually
made, it consists of two parts, a Scale and a Semicircle, but the Scale is no
necessary part of it, but serving (if you be not otherwise provided) for other
uses before mentioned in the case of Plain-Scales.

But the Semicircle is more essential, and it may be made of Brass or other
Metal of any convenient size, as four Inches (more or less) for the straight
sid, this Semicircle being bounded as all others are by two Lines, the one
right or strait, the other circular.

The right Line is divided in the precise middle by a Point which is in the
Center, upon which the Circular boundary is drawn, and two other Arches
concentrial with it.

The Center, when the Semicircle goes alone without the Scale, should be
guarded with two little lips, on each side one, or a little loop, for more
convenient turning of the Instrument about upon a Pin fixed in a Paper.

The arched or circular edge is divided into 180 Degrees or equal Parts numbered
by Tens upon the upper Concentrick Arch, from 0 to 180, and in the lower from
180 to 360. So that by applying the straight edge of the Protractor twice to
any Line, (keeping the Center right^ upon a Pin fixed in the Line) that is,
with the Semicircle first above it, and then below it, or contrarily, you may
draw a whole Circle by the guidance of the Arch, or set out any number of
Degrees, as will appear more plainly hereafter.

A Line of Chords is a Line divided into 90 unequal parts, whereof 60, and the
Radius upon which the Circle was drawn, are equal, and the Divisions upon that
Line are equal to the next Extent in a right line, of so many Degrees from the
beginning of the Quadrant as answer thereunto.

When lines of Chords are cut upon wood, it is both usual and necessary that
there be two Studs of Brass, the one at the beginning, and the other at 60 Degrees.
with little holes for the feet of the Compasses, when you take the extent of
the Radius, to preserve the line from being wounded by the Compasses; and being
thus fenced, it will for need do the work of a Protractor, but not altogether
so commodiously.

CHAP. XIV.
How to take the true Plot of a Field by the Plain-Table, upon the Paper that
covers it, at one or more Stations.
THere are three ways or methods for doing this work, two more usual and
ordinary, the third more unusual and extraordinary, though now pretty well
known to most Surveyors, and in late Books published. The first performs the
work by measuring every line from the Instrument to every Angle, and is a very
sure substantial way where it can be done, as it ordinarily may in most Closes.

The second does it by measuring only the Station or the Distances, and is very
quick, but not so sure and exact as the other; yet if managed by a skilful
Artist, that knows how to plant his Instrument, so as to avoid making acute
Angles unnecessarily, it will come near enough the matter in many cases; as in
measuring for Workmen, that take the Mowing or Reaping of Fields by the Acre,
or when Tithes are let at a small value per Acre, as in poor barren Parishes
they usually are.

The third is the way of Circuition or Perambulation, the Instrument being often
to be planted, and the Plot to be measured about, by which not only difficult
Closes, but even the thickest Woods, yea Bogs, Meres, and Pools of Water, may
be plotted, which by neither of the other methods can be performed.

In all these Methods, two things are to be performed:

1. At every Angle where there is no perspicuous Mark already, as a Tree, Bush,
Style, etc. one must be placed, as a white Paper, or such like; or else some
one must go from Angle to Angle, and remain there as your Mark to look at, till
you bid him remove to another: only when Angles are very near you, this labor
may be spared.

2. When ever you have occasion to plant your Instrument more than once, (as it
will often fall out in the first Method, and ever in in the two latter) you
must be sure it stand just as it did the first time for situation, for which
your Needle if well touched and hung, will be good direction, but is not
thought sufficient without back sight and foresight, (by some practical
Surveyors:) I shall therefore in due season show you that knack. Now for the
first Method.

I. When you go about to plot your parcel of Land, find such a place in it if
possible, from whence you can see all the Angles, and in that place plant your
Instrument covered with a sheet of Paper, and turning it about till the Needle
playing at liberty, hang over the Flower-de-luce, (or any other notable place
that you make choice of) screw it fast. Then choosing any convenient place in
your Paper for a Center, and to represent your station (or place where you fix
your Instrument) make a prick with the small point of your Compasses, to which
prick applying the fiducial edge of the Index, (which is easily done if you
keep the Point of the Compasses resting in it) direct the Index by the sight to
all the Angles, and when through the slit or long sight, you see the opposite
Thread cut the Mark in the Angle, draw a neat dry line along the fiducial edge
to or from the Center: then measuring from the Instrument to every Angle, set
the measure by a Scale and Compasses from the Center toward the Angle, upon
the line that points at it, making a prick in the line where the Chains and
Links (reckoned from the Center) do truly end: then shall Lines drawn by a
straight Rule from prick to prick, give you the perfect plot upon your paper,
which you may divide (as has been before showed) into Trapezla's and
Triangles, and to find the true Content. To make which plain, mark this Example.

etc. limit the true Figure of the Field according to the Scale I used, viz. of
400 in an Inch.

And now before I pass to further varieties, let my Reader take notice of these
following things.

1. From henceforth I shall forbear (for brevities sake) to take any notice of
the measures of lines measured from the Instrument to the several Angles,
having so often showed how to measure by a Scale.

2. When I speak of measuring from or to the Instrument, I always mean from or
to that part of ground that is perpendicularly under the head of the
Instrument, where you are to draw your Plot, which will ever be enclosed with
the three Legs of your Staff.

3. That it is usually the quickest way to measure first from the Instrument to
the first Angle, and then back from the second Angle to the Instrument, and so
the rest in order, still one from the Instrument, and the other to it.

4. It is no matter at all whether your Plain-Table be placed toward the
middle of a Field, as was represented in this Figure, or at an Angle, as will
appear anon.

5. In all workings by this Instrument, you must have a care that the
Instrument be not moved out of its due place, till you have finished the work
of the present Station; for which purpose, cast your eye now and then upon your
Needle, observing whether it continue to hang directly over the same point you
set it at when you began your work, and to rectify your Instrument if you see
cause. But because all Tables have not Needles, and where Needles are, they are
not accounted over-trusty, make use of the following help.

When you have planted your Instrument, and made a point or prick in your
paper, representing your station, set the fiducial edge of your Index to it,
and turning it softly about till you find one remarkable thing or other upon
one side of the Close, and another on the opposite side as you look through the
sights of your Index (which we call foresight and back-sight) draw a
remarkable Line with Ink, or rather with a Black-lead Pen quite over your
Paper, which in this Figure is represented by the black line KL: and then if
you suspect that by any accidental jog, or other casuality, the Instrument is
any thing removed, you may easily try and rectify it, by applying the fiducial
edge to the same Line, and making use of fore-sights and back-sights again,
upon the same Marks which you before observed upon the opposite sides of the
Close.

But if there be no convenient place for the placing of your Instrument, whence
you may see all the Angles of the Field, more stations must be made use of thus:



Then I remove the Instrument to the place of my second station, having set up
a mark at A, and laying the fiducial edge to the Line OP, I turn about the
Table upon the head of the Staff, till through the slit of the back-sight, I
see the thread cutting the mark at A, and then screw it fast, so will my
Needle, if a good one, hang directly over the same point that it did at the
first station; but however that be, foresight and back-sight will do the
business; for which purpose it is good to take back-marks as well as fore-marks
at every station, as was taught in the Example of a single station, only taking
notice that the back-mark when the Instrument is planted in an Angle, must
needs be out of the Field; as suppose here at O. But to proceed.

Having measured the distance between the first and second station, and finding
it to be 7. 10, I set it upon the Line OP, from A to Q, where I make another
point to represent the second station, and turning about my Index with the
fiducial edge upon that point, and so looking through the sights at the Angles
GHIK, I draw Lines toward them on my Paper, and having measured between every
one of those four Angles, and the Instrument, I set those Measures as I did the
other, with my Scale and Compasses, from Q toward every Angle upon his proper
Line: and then having drawn the black bounding-lines from A to B, from B to C
and so round about the Close, the Protraction is finished.

But here to make this Figure yet more advantageous, let me (according to my
usual method) add some Advertisements.

1. Sometimes a Station is so taken, that you may measure toward two Angles at
once, (as here from Q to G and H) in which case you are to set down the Chains
and Links where the first Angle falls, but still be proceeding to the further
Angle, causing the remainder of the Chains at the fore-end to advance beyond
the former Angle, so going on with whole Chains so far as you can, to which the
odd Links at the end are to be added.

2. If at any of your Stations (as suppose A) you can see an Angle (for example
E) to which you cannot measure in a direct Line without passing the boundaries
of your parcel of Land given to be measured; you may notwithstanding take in
that Angle by a strait measured Line, as I have done, provided it may be
lawfully done without trespass, and conveniently without troublesome passing of
Fences, otherwise it must be taken from another station.

3. I here took one of my Stations at an Angle, and the other within the body
of the Field, to show the variety of working taught by other Authors, and that
it is no great matter where you make your Stations, so you can see the Angles:
else it had been full as convenient to have taken my first Station also within
the body of the Field, as suppose at R.

4. Though this Figure represents to your eye only two Stations, A and Q,
your fancy may multiply them at pleasure, for suppose the Angle H could not
have been seen from A or Q, how easy had it been to have set up a Mark at S,
and then to have removed the Instrument thither, observing the same directions
that were given at the removal from A to Q.

II. In the second Method the Instrument is to be planted twice, or oftener as
occasion is, the Rules for removal of the Instrument foresight and back-sight,
and measuring the distance of Stations, being the same as formerly was ^aught:
but instead of measuring to and from ^very Angle, we only view each Angle
through ^he Sights from two Stations, having applied ^he fiducial edge to the
Points representing those Stations, and having drawn Lines with the point of
the Compasses, or a protracting Needle, the Interfections represent the Angles,
from which the boundary-lines may be drawn, so is the Field protracted: Which
that my Reader may understand, let him note these three Figures.

etc. and ^he Stations by a point in a small Circle numbered, 1, 2, or 1, 2, 3,
according to their number and order.





at three Stations or more, when two such places cannot be found whence to view
al^ the Angles; which last having more of difficulty than the two former,
(though indeed no^ very much) and the Explanation of that will sufficiently
help to the understanding of them* I shall a little explicate the meaning of it
in these particulars.

1. From the first Station taken acording to former directions, I see the
Angles ABCD FGK, and acordingly draw Lines upon my Paper toward them from the
point representing that Station, by the fiducial edge of my Inde^ with the
point of my Compasses.

2. Having removed my Instrument to the second Station, (and in so doing,
observed the Rules before given, touching such removals) I thence see the
Angles ABDEFGHIK* and draw Lines upon my Paper toward them from the point
representing the second Station. And now viewing my Work, I find upon my Paper
Interfections for the Angles ABDF GK, but only single Lines toward the Angles
CEHI: therefore.

3. Removing the Instrument regularly as before, to a third Station, I thence
see those four Angles CEHI, and drawing Lines toward them, I have
interfections for them also; so that having drawn the Lines AB, BC, etc. from
one Interfection to another,
I have the Field perfectly protracted. For these bounding-lines from Angle to
Angle, do not only signify the Boundaries of a piece of Land given to be
measured, limiting the Figure or shape thereof, (and are to that purpose given
in this and all other Survey-books) but also are the true distance by a Scale
from Angle to Angle for the Plot upon the Paper: I mean by the same Scale by
which the stationary distances were laid down upon their own lines. And this
holds true in all kind of true plotting, whether in this Method or any other.

III. The third Method is that of Circuition, and this has several varieties,
according to these three following Cases.

1. When the distance from Angle to Angle, (without any exception) is measured
quite round the Plot, either within or without.

2. When the distance is taken only between some more notable Angles, and the
Perpendiculars of the rest measured as you pass along their Bases, within the
Plot, proper for plain solid ground.

3. When the like is done without the Plot, as in the case of Plotting thick
Woods, Meres, Pools, Bogs, etc.

The first of these is very easy, consisting in nothing but planting the
Instrument at every Angle (either within or without, as necessity and
convenience determine it*) observing the former directions for planting and
removing the instrument; and also for measuring the stationary-lines on the
ground, and protracting them on the paper, as is manifest in this Example.

B, drawing a dry Line from a convenient Poin^ on my Paper toward B on the
ground, and having measured by my Chain the distance AB I set it by a Scale
upon the Correspondent Line from A to B, drawing a black-line between them with
Ink or a Lead-pen, the Extremities whereof are the Points A and B on my Paper,
and the little pricked Line that goes beyond B, represents the remainder of the
dry Line drawn at random (as to length) with the point of the Compasses.

Then setting up a Mark at A (if there was none before) I remove the Instrument
to B, and laying the fiducial edge to the Line AB, I turn about the Instrument
upon the Saff, till through the sight I perceive the thread cutting the Mark at
A, and my Needle (if I have one) directly over the same point, that it was when
it was planted at A, and so screw it fast.

My next work is to lay the fiducial edge to the point B, and direct the sights
to C, drawing a dry Line toward it, and setting the distance BC measured by
the Chain from B to C.

In this manner I proceed, surrounding the Close till I come at last to A,
where I began, by planting the Instrument at every Angle, using the help of
Back-sight and my Needle, as I did at B, and then from the point representing
my present station, directing the sight to the next Angle, as I did from B to C.

In the second Case, we do not plant the Instrument at every Angle, but at the
more considerable, taking in the smaller by their Perpendiculars from the Base
as we pass along, of which this following Figure may be an Instance.

Tenth Chapter; for thereby finding at how many Chains and Links distance from
A upon the ground, the Perpendicular B b falls upon the Line AC; and having
measured the length of that Perpendicular, and taken it between my
Compass-points off my Scale, I erect a Perpendicular of that length at b, which
is the point upon the Paper, where so many Chains and Links determine, as were
measured upon the Ground, from the Angles A, to the place where the
Perpendicular fell on Ac, viz. at b. Just in the same manner I raise the other
Perpendiculars, Dd, Gg, Ii, and Ll: and then by the help of the Perpendiculars,
I draw (from and to the proper Angles) the Boundary-lines AB, BC, CD, DE, FG,
GH, HI, IK, K L, LA; which together with the Line OF between the Angles E and
F, give the true Plot of the Field in one large Trapezium, and five small
Triangles ready for casting up.

The third case is so like the second, that there needs no new Direction
concerning it, but to annex one plain Diagram; all the difference consisting in
this, that because we cannot go within it, (being supposed to be some Pool,
Bog, or Thicket) we must of necessity go on the outside, and consequently all
the Triangles made by inward Angles, and their Lines upon the measured Bases,
must be excluded by the boundary-lines from being any parts of the Plot, as
here is manifest.

viz. at AEFH and M, and upon the dry Lines AE, FH, HM, and MA, I raise their
Perpendiculars in due places, (according to measure) and also of a right
height: by which and my five stationary Angles, I draw the bounding-lines of
the Plot, excluding all the Triangles as foreign to it, they being no
resemblances of any part of the Pool, but of Land adjacent.

Where note, 1. That both in this and the former Case, such a little Square as
I mentioned in the Second Chapter, will be very useful for speedy raising of
Perdendiculars; but where the Triangles are very small, it needs not be used,
not the other mentioned Chap. 10.

2. That if by reason of troublesome Brushwood, Gorse, or Bogs, etc. I could not
have measured close to the sides OF, HI, or LM, it would be the same thing if I
went parallel to them. And this is a shift that the practical Surveyor will often
be put to make use of, in other cases as well as this.

CHAP. XV.
Concerning the Plotting of many Closes together, whether the Ground be even or
uneven.
THough I design not so high in this Manual as to make my Reader able to Survey
Lordships and Forests, much less to draw Maps of Countries, but to measure a
parcel of Land with truth and judgment; yet I would have him so expert, as not
to be puzzled, if any should desire him to draw (as it were) a true Map of a
Tenement or small Demesne, consisting of several Closes; for which purpose, let
him that knows no better observe this Method.

(cum scle) to M again: And then for the third Close I plant my Table at C and
go round to B, (the Line BC being protracted already) and so of all the rest,
still observing which are common Lines belonging to several Closes
(representing the Fences) that I may avoid the trouble of measuring those Lines
oftener than once, and lay ever^ part of ev^^y Close in its due place; and that
I be su^^ to keep the Instrument throughout the whole Work to its true Position
by Needle, foresight and back-sight.

There are I confess diverse other ways of doing this Work, but none more sure
or plain, especially if the ground be uneven; for in that case, if you protract
according to the length of Lines measured from your Station to the Angles, you
will put your Closes into unproportionable shapes, except you reduce
Hypothenusal Lines to Horizontal, by instruments or otherwise (which is
somewhat troublesome:) and the like may be said when you Plot with the Chain
only. Indeed the Method of measuring only the stationary distances were very
proper for setting out the Figure of each particular Close, provided the
distance of the stations be large, and taken (if possible) upon pretty even
ground, (which sometimes may be done, though most of the Close be uneven) and
the Work so ordered, as not to make too acute Angles: but because this
requires skill and care, I rather advise my young Artist to use the circling
way, as ordinarily most commodious in my poor judgment, (but not prejudicing
other men's that may differ from me in opinion) and where need requires let him
observe the directions in the 17 Chapter.

But which way soever you go to work,
there is one very necessary Rule to be observed. If the Ground be uneven
considerably, you must not give up the Content by measuring the Bases and
Perpendiculars of the Triangles on the Paper by your Scale; but you must
measure the Lines correspondent to them on the Ground, and cast up the Content
according to that measure. And if it be desired that you should adjoyn to your
Plot (as is usual) a Scale of Chains to measure distances by; you must either
by making the Forms of Hills erect and reverse, or some other Note in writing,
mark out your uneven Ground, lest those that try it by the Scale, judge your
work erroneous: for though you make that Scale exactly correspondent to that
you protracted by (as you ought to do) the Hills and Dales in the ground truly
measured, may make a considerable alteration.

It is convenient when you plant your Table that the Needle hang just over the
North-point of the Compass under it in the Box; then may you by the Lines
overthwart the Frame of the Table, easily draw two Lines quite through the
Plot, cutting one another at right Angles, the one pointing at North and South,
and the other at East and West. And if your skill serve you to make the Two and
thirty Points of the Compass upon the place where they intersect, and to draw
the Forms of the Houses, Woods, and other remarkable things upon the Demesne,
and the course of Brooks and Rivers running through it, it will add to your
commendation.

And so it will also, if you take in such parcels of Land bounding it, whether
common or peculiar to other men, as will make your Plot to look handsomely, like
a perfect Square or Oblong. But however that be, you must be sure to protract
truly all Lanes going into it, or through it, and all Closes of other men's
mixed with it; and also all considerable Ponds, Ways and Outlets, with the
Names of the Closes and quality of the Ground, whether Meadow, Pasture, Arable,
etc.

CHAP. XVI.
Concerning shifting of Paper.
IN such work as that of the last Chapter, it may sometimes fall out (through
the multitude and largeness of Fields) that one sheet will not hold your whole
Plot, in which case you may help your self by shifting Paper (as we call it)
thus.

with the Point of my Compasses striking the Line PO, parallel to the edge of
the Paper BC, and the Line QO parallel to DC, and cutting PO in O, I throw
aside that paper for a while, covering the Instrument with a new one, which I
mark with the figure (2) for my second sheet.

viz. the Line OR, being of the same distance from BC, that QO in the former
sheet was from DC. Then with a Rule and a sharp Penknife I cut off the end of
the first sheet at the Line PO, and applying the edge of it to the Line PO of
the second sheet, so as it may touch that Line all along, and the Line QO of
the former, touch the Line OR in the latter, so as to make one Line with it: I
draw the Lines PG, being the Remainder of the Line FG, and the Line OH being
the remainder of the Line IH, and from their extremities the Line GH. And if
the Plot required it, you might proceed on in the second sheet, and annex a
third and a fourth, etc. as there is occasion.

These sheets may be pieced together with Mouth-Glew or fine Paste, applying
the edge of the former (as you did upon the Table) to the Line PO of the latter.

And note here once for all, that when I speak of applying the edge of the
paper to a Line, I mean the precise edge cut by the Line PO; but when I speak
of drawing Lines to the edge of the Paper upon the Table, I hope none will
think me so absurd as to mean the edge that is couched under the Frame, but
that my meaning is, that the Lines must be continued on the paper till they
touch the Frame.

CHAP. XVII.
Concerning the Plotting of a Town-Field, where the several Lands, Butts, or
Doles, are very crooked: With a Note concerning Hypothenusal, or sloaping
Boundaries, common to this and the Fift^enth Chapter.
you on a Table, with the side AE toward you; the Compasses must be so opened
and placed (as by a few trials they may) that one foot resting upon the Table,
the other may pass through the Points of Division upon all the three Lines,
viz. AB, OC, and ED, as in this Figure they do.

If the Content of any one or more of these Parts, Butts or Doles, be desired
without Plotting; it may easily be done without your Plain-Table thus: Take the
breadth by your Chain at the head, middle, and lower end, and adding these
Numbers together, the third part of their Sum is the equated breadth: by which
multiplying the length measured down the ridge (or middle) the Product gives
the Content.

But both in this case, and that mentioned in the 15th Chapter, the Figure of a
Plot may be somewhat disordered, not only by the unevenness of the ground
within, for which I have given due caution already (that being both the more
common and more considerable case) but also by the great diclivity of the
Ground where the boundary-lines go, either of the whole Plot or particular
parcels. For whereas in Plotting, every Line is presumed to be Horizontal (or
level) that it may pass from Angle to Angle the shortest way, and that every
part may be duly situated, and none thrust another out of its right place: If
it be not level, but falling down toward a Valley, or rising up Hill, or
compounded of both; a Line over such Ground (though true for the measure, and
for giving up the Content) will be false as to the Plot, and therefore must be
reduced to a level, and so taken off the Scale and protracted. For the doing of
this there are several Instruments very proper, especially Mr. Rathbourne's
Quadrant upon the head of his Peractor (though it were better to have a
Semicircle than a Quadrant so placed) and diverse others. But supposing my
Country friend to have no other but such as I have already described; I shall
show him a plain easy way much used by practical Surveyors, especially in
Ireland, as some of themselves have told me, being the very same that he may
meet with in Mr. Leybourn's Book, Entitled, The Complete Surveyor; I mean the
second way by him discovered.

viz. the point B. And now as the pricked Lines of this Figure put together,
and evidently equal to the Line AC: So are the Links noted down at every
Station, when summed up, equal to the Horizontal Line of that part of the Hill.

In the very same manner, only inverting the Order, you may find the Horizontal
Line going down-hill, where that is most convenient: And if there be both
Ascents and Descents in one Line betwixt two Angles, the Horizontal Lines of
both must be found and joined together in Protraction.

All this concerning Declivities of rising or falling Ground, is to be
understood when they are considerable, and a very exact plot required: for
small ones, especially when much exactness is not expected, are not regardable.

CHAP. XVIII.
Concerning Plotting a piece of Ground by the Degrees upon the Frame of the
Plain-Table several ways, and Protracting the same.
HItherto I have showed the use of the Plain-Table as such, and I think my
Directions have been near as plain as the Instrument it self: At which some
quarrel for its over-plainness, exposing the Art to proud ignorant people, who
judging the rest of the Surveyors work to be as easy as looking through sights
at a Mark, and drawing lines by a Rule, are apt to undertake to use it, or
slight the skill of such as do. Others say, (and that truly) that for vast
things, such as Forests, Chases, etc. the Circumferentor is more proper: And
every one must grant, that in wet Weather, either that a Peractor, a
Theodolite, or Semicircle, must needs be better than the Plain-Table covered
with the paper which cannot endure wet. Hence it is that some Artists have to
good purpose showed how the Box screwed to the Index, and that made to turn on
the head of the three-legged Staff become a Circumferentor. And if these thus
fixed be turned about upon the Center of the Table; they will (say some with
good reason, Mr. Leybourn for one) perform the work of the Peractor, much
better than the Peractor it self. Others show, (as I shall briefly) that taking
the Instrument as it is without the charge of further fitting it, or trouble of
removing the Box, the Index turned upon the Center will by help of the Degrees
on the Frame, perform the work of the Theodolite, to which the Semicircle is
near of kin.

And though I might easily answer all these Objections, by saying the first is
frivolous; such foolish Arrogance being easily contemned or checked (if worth
the while) by putting such conceited Fools upon the harder part of the work.
The second impertinent to our purpose, who design not to plot such vast parcels
of Land: And the third concerning only an extraordinary case, and that well
provided for otherways, for sure no man that has not a Body of the same Metal
with his Instruments, will ordinarily measure Land in continual Rain, (a sudden
shower may be fenced against by a cover:) and if any be so eager upon his work,
I have showed ^how it may be done in the former Chapters of this Book, without
planting any Instrument at all, by Chain, Scale, and Compasses alone: Yet I
shall show how the plot of a Field may be ta^en by the Degrees on the Frame not
every way that I could imagine, nor that I could transcribe, (for that would be
tedious) but two ways only, whereof the one is proper for an ordinary Close,
where all the Angles may be seen from (...) Station within it, the other
fitting any par^^l of Land though much larger, whatever be the Figure of it.

For the former take this Example

The like work I do, turning the Sights to CD and D, (but not to F, for there
is no Angle, but only a Mark in the Boundary) and I find mine Index to cut for
every Angle as I have marked them within the pricked Circle of the last Figure,
viz. 157 Degrees. 35 Min. for C, 225 Degrees. 20 Min. for D, and 278 Degrees. and 50 Min.
for E.

Then I measure (or cause to be strictly measured by others) the Distances
betwixt the Place where the Instrument stands, and every Angle, and find them
to be as I have set them upon the pricked lines in the little Circle, viz. A4
Chains ^0 Links, B4 Chains 3 Links, C3 Chapter 84 Li. D5 Chapter 35 Li. E5 Cha. 6 L.
And now my Table both for Lines and Angles is thus perfected, and the Work is
ready for Protraction within Doors. D. M. C. L A 360 00 4 20 B 76 15 4 03 C 157
35 3 84 D 225 20 5 35 E 278 50 6 06

Your judgment will easily inform you, that in such weather we shall hardly
stand to make our Table neat and formal, but any thing (how rude soever) that
we can understand, does the feat. A Welsh Slate with a sharp Style, (or for
want thereof, a Black-lead Pen and a smooth end of an hard Board like a
Trencher) is more convenient at such a season than Pen, Ink and Paper. But of
all I would commend for expedition a Red-lead Pen,
whereby you may mark out every Angle neatly with one touch upon the Table it
self, just where it touches the Frame, by help of the fiducial edge, and close
by it the length of the Line from the Center to that Angle: All which may be
easily cleared off by a wet Sponge or Cloth so soon as you have protracted. Or
if through the sponginess of the wood, the head of the Table (which we use to
cover with paper) were made a little reddish, what great harm were that? We are
forced to do it more real wrong by the points of the Compasses in the ordinary
way.

Now to protract our Observations: I draw upon a paper the Line AF at
adventures, so it be long enough, and stick a Pin in it at pleasure for the
Center O, upon which I place the Center of the Protractor, so as the straight
side (or Diameter) of the Protractor may just lie upon the Line AF, the Limb or
Arched-side being upwards toward B, by help whereof I make a prick or point on
the paper at 76 Degrees. 15 Min. for B, and at 157 Degrees. 35 Min. for C, according to
the numbers nearest to the Limb.

Then turning the Protractor about on the Pin with the Arch or Limb down
toward D and E, till the Diameter lie again just upon the Line AF, I number
downwards from the right hand toward the left, by that rank of Figures that
are nearer to the Center, beginning 190, 200, etc. and over against the places
where 225 Degrees. 20 Min. and 278 Degrees. 50 Min. fall, I prick the Paper at the side
of the Limb, and through those four points I draw so many several Lines,
(having laid aside the Protractor) upon which and also upon the Line AO, I mark
out by Points the true measure of every Line (by a Scale) from the Center, and
from those points drawing the Lines AB, BC, CD, DE, and EA, I have the true
Plot of the Field.

Where note by the way, that we estimate Minutes as well as we can both upon
the Frame of the Plain-Table, and the Protractor, accounting half a Degree, 30
Minutes; a third part, ^0; a fourth part, 15, etc. And though by this means it
is impossible to avoid small errors, it is easy to avoid sensible ones; and
the like may be said when we protract by a Line of Chords, of which I now come
to treat.

Having proceeded in the Field as before, and made my Table for Lines and
Angles, or done that which is equivolent by a Red-lead Pen, I draw the Line AF,
and having extended my Compasses to the Radius (or 60 Degrees) on a Line of
Chords, I set one Foot toward the middle of the Line AF, and with the other I
describe a Circle like that in this Figure of a five-angled Field, but much
larger, according to the length of the Radius: Then extending the Compasses
from the beginning of the Line to 76 Degrees. 15 Min. I set one foot in the
Intersection of the Circle by the Line A, and with the other foot make a mark
in the Circumference of the Circle upwards toward the righthand, and through
it draw the dry Line BO.

In the next place I substract the angle 76. 15 from 157. 35, where the Index
cut for the Angle C, and there rests 81 Degrees. 20 Min. which I take off the
Line as before, and set it upon the Circumference from the Intersection by BO,
toward the end of the Diameter marked with F, and through the Point were it
falls, draw the dry line CO.

In like manner I subtract 157 Degrees. 35 Min. from 225 Degrees. 20 Min. and the
difference is 67 Degrees. 45 Min. which I set from the Intersection by the Line CO
downwards past the prime Diameter AF, and through the point where it falls,
draw the Line DO.

Lastly, Having subtracted 225 Degrees. 20 Min. from 278 Degrees. 50 Min. there rests
53 Degrees. 30 Min. which must be set downward toward the left hand from the
Intersection by DO, and through the point where that falls, I draw the Line
EO. And now when I have set the particular Measures upon every Line, and drawn
the Boundary lines, as I must have done if I had used a Protractor, the Plot is
finished.

But for better assurance that I have done my Work well, I take the measure of
the remaining Angle AOE upon its proper Arch, viz. from the Intersection of the
Circumference by AF, to the Intersection by EO, and applying it to the Line of
Chords, I find it to be 81 Degrees. 10 Min as it ought to be, for it should be the
Complement of 276 Degrees. 50 Min. to 360, and so it is,

And for further satisfaction, I sum up the Degrees and Minutes of all the five
Angles, which for plainness sake I have noted in every one of them on the
outside of the Circle in the Figure so often referred to, and their sum is 360,
as it ought to be, and as here is evident.

76. 1^ 81. 20 67. 4^ 53. 3^ 81. 1^ 360. 00
My Reader may now perhaps expect that I teach him how to take a Plot at two or
more Stations, when all the Angles cannot be seen from one: But because this is
so easy from the grounds already laid, to any that is Ingenious, and in part
rend^red unnecessary by the Method presently following, I shall content my self
to give this general hint.

When you have from one Station taken in all the Angles you can see from
thence, and then are to remove to your second Station, do just as you would do
if the Table were covered with a Paper; only it is at your choice, whether you
would guide your self for back-sight by a Line that may be rubbed off, drawn
upon the Table it self from the Center to the Degrees on the Frame along the
fiducial edge, or by noting only what Degrees it cuts on either side of the
Center, the edge passing through it, that by the help thereof and the Needle,
the Instrument may be placed in the same Line and Situation as before, for
taking in the rest of the Angles, if it can be, if not, another Station must be
taken after the same manner. But now to my second Method;

cum sole, beginning at A, who return me such an account of every side, in
Chains, and Links, as I have noted them upon the Figure and in the Table
following, viz. AB 3 Chains, 73 Links, BC 4 Chains, 91 Links, etc. In the mean
season, I make haste to find the Angles, and without curiosity plant the
Instrument at B, and laying the Index on the Center, I look at C, and find the
Index cutting 10 Degrees. 15 Min. and looking at A, it cuts 126 Degrees. 45 Min. out of
which if I subtract 10 Degrees. 15. Min. there rests 116 Degrees 30 Min. for the
Angle A: but because I like not my Quarters so well as to subtract there, I set
them down thus;

B A 126. 45 C 10. 15.
the meaning whereof is, that B notes the Angle, and CA the Lines meeting
there, cutting such Degrees on the Frame, and the reason why I set A above, is
for more ready subtracting afterward: then removing to the Angle C, and thence
looking at B and D, I find the Index to cut as here expressed,

C B 153. 10 C 15. 40.


In like manner I find at D thus,

D C 96. 05 E 28. 50
At E thus,

E D 141. 20 A 11. 45.


And lastly, at A I find them thus,

A E 98. 30 B. 9. 20
An. D. M Sides. Chapter L. A 89 10 A B 3 73 B 116 30 B C 4 91 C 137 30 C D 1 88 D
67 15 D E 6 64 E 129 35 E A 2 29 This being done, I have under Covert, and by
Subtraction find 116 Degrees. 30 M. for the Angle B. 137 Degrees. 30 M. for C. 67 Degrees.
15 Min. for D. 129 Degrees. 35 Min. for E. and 89. Degrees. 10 Min. for A, as you find
them on the Figure, and in this Table together with the length of the Lines.

Note, that there is a way to find the Angles without Subtraction, if at every
Station you lay the fiducial edge over the Center, and the Divisions 180 and
360, turning about the head of the Instrument upon the Staff, till through the
Sights you see one of the Neighboring Angles, for the Index turned upon the
Center to the other Angle, will give you the quantity of the Angle you are at,
but this exact planting at every Angle is more tedious than the other, and
therefore not so fit for wet weather. But now to protract this Plot:

First, by my Scale, Rule, and Compass, I draw the Line AB in length 3 Chains,
73 Links, ending at the pont B: then laying the Center of my Protractor upon
the Line AB, so as the Center of it be upon the Point A, and that end of the
Diameter from which the Numbers are reckoned on the Arch or Limb toward B, I
make a point for the Angle A at 89 Degrees. 10 Min. by the guidance whereof and the
point A, I draw the Line AE, which according to my Scale, must be 2 Chains, 29
Links.

In like manner placing the Diameter upon AE, just as it was upon AB, and the
Center upon the point E, I mark out by the Limb (for the Angle E) 129 Degrees. 20
Min. by which I draw the Line ED, 6 Chains, 64 Links.

In the next place, I bring the Center of the Protractor to the point D its
Diameter, lying on the Line ED, and its Limb toward A, by which I prick out 67
Degrees. 15 Min. for the Angle at D and draw the Line 1 Chain, 88 Links.

Lastly, the Center being at C, and the Diameter upon the Line DC, in such
manner as before at other Angles, I prick out by the Limb or Arch 137 Degrees. 30
Min. and draw the Line CB, for at B my Plot should close, and if rightly done,
the Angle at B will be 116 Degrees. 30 Min. and the side BC 4 Chains 91 Links,
which by measure I find so to be.

But if I plot by a Line of Chords, I am not bound to this Order, but may go
from A to B, and so round that way if I please, which I could not so well do
with a Protractor, without reckoning my Numbers backward, yet it must be
granted that a Line of Chords neither does the work so quickly nor
conveniently, for this is the way.

When I have drawn the Line AB of a right length, I set the Compasses to the
Radius, and placing one Foot of the Compasses in the point B, and with the
other describe an Arch of a competent length, beginning at that side of the
Line AB, that is designed to be the inward-side, and upon this Arch, 116 Degrees.
30 Min. must be set, but because my Line of Chords gives me only 90, I set them
first on from the Line AB, and then take off the remainder 26 Degrees. 30 Min. I
join them to the 90 upon the Arch, making a Point, through which the Line B
must be drawn of a due length. In the like manner must I do at CE, but the
Angles at A and D need no such piecing, being capable of being measured out by
a Line of Chords at once.

Nor do your Angles only give you trouble in this kind of work, but oft-times
your Lines will be found too short to receive the touch of an Arch upon the
Radius, especially if the Line of Chords be large and your Scale little, and so
it may often fall out when you use the Protractor upon such short lines as AE
and CD of this last Figure: In which case a Rule must be applied to them, and
they must be extended to a due length that the Arches may meet them without the
Figure. And if those Extensions of lines and describing of Arches spoil the
beauty of your Plot, the matter is not weighty, it is so easy to be retrieved,
for if you lay it on a clean paper and prick through every Angle, lines drawn
between those points will give you the Plot neat and perfect.

One thing more before I close this long Chapter; the Artist sometimes loses
his labor of Protraction through some error in the Field, so as his Plot will
not close: it is therefore good to know before we begin that work, whether it
will or no; for which purpose if we take a Number less by two than the number
of Angles in the Plot, and thereby-multiply 180, that Product being found to be
equal to all the Angles, the Plot will close, and so it appears by our Plot in
this present work: the Multiplier being 3, because the Angles are 5, and the
Multiplier must be two less than the number of Angles.

180 3 540
Degrees. Min. 89. 10 116. 30 137. 30 67. 15 129. 35 540

This kind of trial is grounded upon two principles of Euclid and Ramus
mentioned in the first and third Chapters of this Book, showing that in all
plain Triangles, all the Angles taken together, are equal to two right Angles,
and that the sides (consequently the Angle also) of every triangulate Figure,
are more by two than the Triangles of which it consists: But I think it not
proper to be large in such things whereof my young Artist is like to make but
little use; for when all is done, I confess with Mr. Wing in his Art of
Surveying, Lib. 6. Chap. 15, that this way of Plotting by the Degrees, is far
more troublesome, tedious, and liable to error, than the other ways upon a
sheet of paper, and therefore not ordinarily to be used, but when necessity
compels us.

CHAP. XIX.
Concerning taking inaccessible Distances by the Plain-Table, and accessible
Altitudes by the Protractor.


To satisfy his demand, I plant my Table covered with a paper at A, causing
one to set me up a mark at B at a good distance from me, along the Bank of the
River (the further the better, if distance do not hinder sight:) Then having
chosen a point to represent A, and laid the fiducial edge upon it, I direct my
sights toward C and B, and strike lines toward them. Which done, I set up a
mark at A, and from thence measure to B, (6 Chains, 32 Links) and so plant my
Instrument at B, laying the fiducial edge to the line AB, and turning about the
head of the Instrument upon the Staff, till through the sights I spy the Mark
at A, and then screw it fast.

In the last place, I take 6 Chains 32 Links off my Scale, and set it on the
Line AB, from A to B, and laying the fiducial edge to the point B, from thence
direct the sights to C, and draw the Line BC, meeting or cutting the Line AC in
C: So shall the space AC measured on the Scale (viz. 8 Chains, 29 Links be the
distance desired: and because the Chain is 22 Yards long, if I multiply 8. 29
by 22, the Product is 182 Yards and 38/100 of a Yard, which by reduction is
some little more than 13 Inches and 3/5 of an Inch.

Now to take the height of a Tree, Tower, or Steeple by a Protractor, without
any Arithmetical operation, hang a Plumet with a fine Silk Thread at the Center
of it, and hold it steadfastly with that end to your Eye where the Numbers
begin, then look straight along the Diameter, as if you were to shoot in a
Crossbow without a Sight (still removing backward and forward as there is
occasion) till you see the top of the Tree, Tower, or Steeple, and the Thread
at the same time fall upon 45 degrees; 10 shall the distance from your Eye to
the Tree, Tower, or Steeple, measured in an horizontal or level Line, together
with the height of your Eye above the bottom of it, be equal to the height
thereof.

If either for convenience of sight, or any other reason, you think good to set
the other end of the Diameter to your eye, then the Thread for the trial
aforesaid, must fall upon 135 Degrees* instead of 45. Other ways of doing this work
by this Instrument (or a Quadrant) with the help of Trigonometry, and by other
Instruments, I forbear at present (till I write a second Part) considering
whose benefit is here intended.

CHAP. XX.
Of casting up the Content of Land by a Table.
TO make up the number of my Chapters to an even score, I shall add one at the
desire of my worthy Friend Mr. S. L. before mentioned (to whose Experience and
Communicative^ess I acknowledge my self indebted for the notion of measuring
crooked Lands or Doles at the middle and both ends, marking every where how the
Divisions fall, as is mentioned in the beginning of Chapter 17.) concerning the
use of a Table borrowed out of the 46th Chapter of Mr. Leybourns Complete
Surveyor, second Edition, Page 271, which with the use take as follows.

Links R. P. 1 00000 4 00 90000 3 24 80000 3 08 70000 2 32 60000 2 16 50000 2
00 40000 1 24 30000 1 08 20000 0 32 10000 0 16 8750 0 14 8125 0 13 7500 0 12
6875 0 11 6250 0 10 5625 0 09 5000 0 08 4375 0 07 3750 0 06 3125 0 05 2500 0 04
1875 0 03 1250 0 02 625 0 01

This Table consists of three Columns, the first containing Links, the second
Roods (or Quarters of Acres) the third Perches: and the use of it is thus:

7. 25 5. 50 36250 3625 3625 3. 98750
Suppose a Field to be 7 Chains and 25 Links long, and 5 Chains 50 Links broad,
these by multiplication make 398750 (as here is evident) whereof five Figures
being cut off toward the right hand, the Figure 3 signifies Acres, and the
rest, viz. 98750 denote parts, and to reduce them into Roods and A R P 3 3 24
14 3 3 38 Perches, I first subtract from 98750 the greatest number of Links in
my Table that can be subtracted from it, viz. 90000 (and put down for it 3
Roods, 24 Perches which I find over against it in the annexed Columns) and the
remain being 8750, I look in the Table, and find over against it 14 Perches,
which by addition makes 3 Roods 38 Perches: So is the whole Content of the
Field 3 Acres, 3 Roods, 38 Perches.

But not here, that if the Remainder after the first Subtraction cannot be
found in the Table, you may take the nearest to it, so the error will be but
part of a Perch.

As for Example:

7. 35, being the half Perpendicular, and 9. 23, the Base, give for their
Product 6.78405. The 6 signifies Acres and from the rest 70000 being subducted,
(to which 2 Rood, 32 Perches answer) there rests 8405, which because I cannot
find in my Table, I take the nearest, which is 8125, to which 13 Perches
answer: So the whole Content of that Triangular Close is 6 Acres, 3 Roods and 5
square Perches, and a little better, A R P 6 2 32 13 6 3 05

But Manum de Tabula --

I am at present taking leave of my Countryman, and supposing he brought with
him any competent stock of Natural Capacity, and so much Arithm^tick as enabled
him to add, Subtract, Multiply, and Divide; I dare make him judge, after he
has as faithfully labored to understand me, as I to be understood; whether I
have not performed what I undertook in my Title or elsewhere.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
The Author hereof uses in Winter and Spring Seasons to board young Gentlemen
and others at his Habitation near Dun^am in Cheshire, and to instruct them in
these parts of the Mathematics, viz.

Arithmetic. Vulgar concerning Whole Numbers. Fractions Balancing Accounts.
Artificial by Decimals Logarithms Instruments Symbols or Algebra.



Geometry and therein The Doctrine of plain Triangles. Measuring Superficials,
and particularly Land, by all usual Instruments. Measuring of Solid Bodies.
Gauging of Casks.


The Doctrine and use of Globes and Spherical Triangle^.

The Principles of Astronomy and Navigation.

The Art of Dialling, by Logarithms, Scales, and Geometrical Projection, etc.

Vivat Rex.

Floreat Regnum.

AN APPENDIX CONTAINIMG XII. PROBLEMS TOUCHING Compound Interest and Annuities.
BEING Part of a Letter sent by the Author to his worthy Friend Mr. John Collins
Fellow of the Royal Society. Together with A quick and easy Method to contract
the Works of Fellowship and Alligation alternate.

LONDON Printed in the Year. 1692.

XII. PROBLEMS
Touching Compound Interest and Annuities, expressed in Symbols, to be resolved
by Logarithms; first presented in Twelve short Lines, to the Right Honorable
the Lord Delamer; afterward Explained by the Inventor Adam Martindale, and by
his Consent presented to the Royal Society by Mr. Collins, and now applied to
pertinent Questions in a Practical way, to make them more plain and useful.
THese Problems are distinguished into three Ranks, whose Symbols are thus to
be understood.

p Principal, r Rate, viz. 1 l. with its Rate, t Time,
common to all the three Ranks. a Amount or aggregate, proper to the first Rank.
s Sum of Principal and Arrearages, proper to the second Rank. d Difference of
Principal and Worth, proper to the third Rank.
Their Capitals stand for the Logarithms (...) the Numbers signified by the
small Symbolic^ Letters before mentioned.

D. signifies Data, Q. Quaesita, Prob. Problem Res. Resolution.

The first Rank, concerning Compound Interest for a single Sum of Money.

1. Prob. D p, r, t. Q. a? Res. Rt + P = ^ 2. Prob. D. a, r, t. Q. p? Res. A -
Rt = ^ 3. Prob. D. p, a, t. Q. r? Res. A - P / t = ^ 4. Prob. D. p, a, r. Q. t?
Res. A - P / R = ^
Examples relating to the Four Problems in order.

Quest. 1. What will 15 l. 10 s. amount to i^ 12 yeaps at 6 per Cent. Compound
Interest?

Answ. 31 l. 3 s. 9 d. 1 q. as appears by the work.

R viz. of 1.06 = 0.25306 t = 12 050612 025306 Rt = 0.303672 P 15.5 = 1.190332
A 31.188 = 1.494004
Quest. 2. What is 31 l. 3 s. 9 d. 1 q. due ^^elve years hence worth in ready
money, abating ^^er 6 per Cent. Compound Interest.

Answ. 15 l. 10 s. as here appears.

A 31.182 = 1.494004 R = 0.025306 t 12 050612 025306 Rt = 0.303672 A - Rt = P =
15.5 = 1.190322
Quest. 3. At what Rate of Compound Interest (...) 15 l. 10 s. amount to 31 l.
3 s. 9 d. 1 q. in ^^elve years?

Answ. At 6 per Cent. as here.

A = 1.494004 P = 1.190382 0.303672
12) 0.303672 (0.025306 = 1.0^ 0
Quest. 4. In wha^ time will 15 l. 10 s. amount to 31 l. 3 s. 9 d. 1 q. at 6
per Cent. Compound Interest.

Answ. In 12 years.

A = 1.494004 P = 1.190332
R.025306) 0.303672 (12 = t 0
The second Rank, touching Annuities in arrear, grounded upon these two Axioms.

1. The Annuity and Rate of Interest being given, the Principal correspondent
to that Annuity is in effect given also, being easily found by the Rule of
Three, thus;

As the Interest of any Principal (ex gr. of 1^ 10, 100, 1000, etc.) is to that
Principal: S^ the Annuity of Pension, to its Principal.

2. The Sum of the Principal and Arrearage^ of all the Payments being found,
the Arrearage^ alone may be obtained by subtracting the Principal from that Sum.

1 Prob. D. p, r, t: Q. s? Res. Rt + P = S 2 Prob. D. s, r, t. Q. p? Res. S -
Rt = P 3 Prob. D. p, s, t. Q. r? Res. S - P / t = R 4 Prob. D. p, s, r. Q. t?
Res. S - P / R = t
Examples suited to the first and last of these Four Problems.

Quest. 1. What will 33 l. per annum amount to in 14 years at 6 per Cent.
Compound Interest?

Answ. 693 l. 10 s. as here.

6. 100 33 33 300 300 6) 3300 (.550 30 30 30 00
R = 0.025306 t = 14 0.101224 0.25306 0.354284 Rt = 0.354284 P = 2.740363 S =
3.094647 = 12435 550 6935
Quest. 2 In what time will 33 l. per annu^^ raise a stock of 693 l. 10 s. at 6
per cent. Compound Interest?

Answ. In 14 years, as here is evident.

6. 100 33. 550 550 + 693.5 = 1243.5 = s^ S = 3.094647 P = 2.740263 25306)
0.354285 (14 25306 101224 101224 0
The third Rank of Problems touching Annuities anticipated or bought for a Sum
in hand (o^ that which is equivalent) at compound Interes^ discounted, is
bottomed upon the former of th^^ two Axioms above mentioned, and this that
follows:

Axiom. If the difference of the Principal and Worth be once found, the Worth
is easily obtained by subtracting that difference from the Principal, which is
ever greater, being the Worth of the Annuity at that Rate for ever.

1 Prob. D. p, r, t. Q. d? Res. P - Rt = D 2 Prob. D. d, r, t. Q. p? Res. D +
Rt = P 3 Prob. D. p, d, t. Q. r? Res. P - D / t = R 4 Prob. D. p, d, r. Q. t?
Res. P - / R = t
Examples fitted to the first and fourth of these Problems.

Quest. 1. What is 17 l. 10 s. per annum to continue for 11 years, worth in
present Money, at 8 per cent. Compound Interest allowed to the Pur^^aser?

Answ. 124 l. 18 s. 8 d. as here is showed.

8. 100 17.5? 17.5 500 700 100 8) 1750.0 (218.75 0 (...)
R = 0.033424 11 033424 033424 Rt = 0.367664 P = 2. 339948 Rt = 0.367664 --
21875 D = 1. 972284 = 93817 124933
Note, that if in stead of subducting Rt from P, I had turned Rt into the
Arithmetical Complement 9632335, and added that to the P 2. 339948, it would
have done the same thing in a more convenient manner, (save that it is not so
suited to the letter of the Problems) as here is evident, 10 being rejected (as
in this case it must ever be) from the Index.

0.033424 11 033424 033424 0.367664 9.632335 2.339948 1.972283
Quest. 2. In what time will 17l. 10s. pay off a Debt of 124 l. 18 s. 8 d.
allowing the Creditor after 8 per cent. Compound Interest?

Answ. In 11 years, thus manifest:

8. 100 17.5. 218.75 = p 124.933 93 817 = d
P = 2.339948 D = 1.972284 R = 33424) 0.367664 (11 0
Any one that understands the very Elements of Algebra, may contract these
Twelve Problems into Three; for the First of any Rank will by Reduction,
Application, and Transposition, produce the rest. Then the work of the second
Rank may be performed by the first, if one but understand, that instead of the
Pension, he must take the principal correspondent to it, and work with it till
he have found the Amount, from which the principal must be subducted when the
Arrearages of an Annuity are sought, and so proportionably in the rest of the
Problems.

My Noble Lord Delamer, only noted down for his own use Rt + P = A, and P - Rt
= D: by which and a small Canon of Logarithms he will quickly answer any
Question of this kind. But for the help of young Mathematicians, I have set
them forth thus explicitly.

The only inconvenience of any importance that I can yet discover in this
Method, is, that in both Ranks concerning Annuities, the second and third
Problems are rather for demonstration of the other, and to complete the Rounds
than for any other great use, proceeding upon such. Data as are seldom given
for finding the pensions and rate, (or if they were, the Work would be rendered
useless) yet we are not left without sufficient help to find out pensions or
annuities by plain and proper Data. For in reference to the second Rank, if the
Arrearages (or Stock to be raised) with the rate of Interest and time, be given
for finding out such an Annuity, as at such a rate, and in so much time, will
raise a given Stock by its Arrearages; it is easily found thus:

Suppose an Annuity at pleasure, and by the first Problem of the second Rank,
find out its Arrearages: Then say by the Rule of Three.

As the Arrearages found, to the supposed Annuity: So the Arrearages given, to
the Annuity required.

For clearing whereof, let this be the Example.

Quest. What Annuity will at 6 per cent. comp. Interest, raise a Stock of 693
l. 10 s. in fourteen years.

Answ. 33 l. per annum, as here is manifest.

Suppose 30 l. then the Work goes on thus:

6. 100 30 30 6) 3000 (500 30 000.
R. 0.025306 14 0.101224 0.25306 Rt = 0.354284 2. 698970 S = 3. 053254 =
1130^46 500^ 630^46
630.46.30 693.5^ 30 630.46) 20805.0 (32.999 44046
Here we account 32. 999 for 33, being so much within an inconsiderable trifle.

Likewise in relation to the third Rank, if the Worth (or Price) Rate and Time
be given, and the Pension to be purchased be required; find the worth of any
supposed Pension by the first Problem of the third Rank, then the proportion
stands thus:

As the Worth found, to the supposed Annuity: So the Worth (or price) given, to
the Pension required; as in the Example follow (...):

Quest. What Annuity to continue eleven years will be purchased for 124 l. 18
s. 8 d. at 8 per cent. Comp. Interest.

Answ. 17l. 10s. as here.

Suppose 12 l. Then

8. 100 12? 12 200 100 8)1200 (150 8 40 40 00
R = 0.033424 11 0.033424 0.33424 Rt = 0.367664 P = 2. 176091 Rt = 0.367664 --
150 1. 808427 = 64332 85668 85.668.12 124.933? 12 249866 124933 85.668)
1499.196 (17. 5 60
If the Interval betwixt every two payments (...) less than a year, consider
what part it is; ^hether 1/12 1/13 1/32 1/365, etc. And by the ^enominator of
the Fraction signifying that part, ^ivide the Logarithm of 1 l. and its Rate of
In^rest, (usually called the Logarithm of the Rate) ^en the absolute Number
answering to that ^^otient, being made less by an Unite, will be (...) new
Divisor, whereby dividing the given Pen^on so payable, half, yearly, quarterly,
etc. the ^orrespondent Principal will appear in the Quo^ent, with which you may
proceed, as if the payments were so many yearly ones; as this ^ext Example
shows.

Quest. 1. What is a quarterly Rent of 3 l. 15 s. (...) continue Thirteen Years
and one Quarter, worth in ^^dy Money at 6 per cent. Compound Interest?

Answ. 137 l. 10 s: 1 d: as appears here.

R = 4) 0.025306 0.006326 = 1^01467 -1^ ^01467.01467) 3.75000 (235.623 1059
1/4 R = 0.006326 Number of Quarters 53 0.018978 0.31630 1/4 Rt = 0.335278 Ar.
C. 9^664721 P = 2.407600 -- 255623 2.072321 = 118119 137504
Whereas I multiplied the Fourth part of the Log. of the Rate, viz. 0.006326 by
53 (the Number of Quarters) I might as well have multiplied the whole Log. of
the Rate, viz. 0.025306* by 13.25, i. e. 13 years and 1 quarter, and it would
have been full as exact, or rather more, (two places being cut off from the
Logarithm so multiplied toward the right hand:) I say rather more exact,
because there remained 2 when I quartered the Log. of the Rate.

Quest. 2. What is 5 s. per Week to continue 7 ^ears and three quarters worth
in ready Money at 8 per cent. Compound Interest?

Answ. 75 l. 17 s. 8 d. 2 q.

52) 0.033424 (0.000642 =.00148 40.00148).25000 (168.918 136 R = 0.033424 t =
7.75 0 167120 2 33968 2 33268 Rt = 0.259036.00 Ar. ^9.740960 P = 2.227675 --
168918 1.968638 = 913033 75885
Here I multiplied (not by the Number of Weeks) but by the Number of Years and
Quarters, cutting off two Ciphers from the Product. And I also took the
Arithmetical Complement of 0.259036, viz. 9.740963, and added it to the Log. of
the Principal in stead of substracting the Log. 0.259036 from it.

Lastly, As to the Rate of Interest, according to the sense of Dr. Newton, Mr.
Dary, and others, I see not why this Method may not b^ made use of as well as
any other. This universal Rule being first understood: In Questions belonging
to the Second Rank, the greater Rate (...) Interest, the greater Arrearages;
and the less Rate the less Arrearages. But in Questions belonging to the third
Rank, the greater the Rate of Interest the less the present Worth (or price)
and the less the Rate of Interest, the greater the Worth, and vice versa. I
shall show this in answering the Question following, concerning a yearly
payment of 1 l. because that by bare Multiplication may easily be applied to
any other.

A Field worth 1 l. per annum clearly, is offered to be let 11 years for 15 l.
to be paid at the end of those years: What is the Rate of Interest demanded for
the several payments?

Answ. First, I suppose 6 per cent. and trying it by the first Problem of the
second Rank, it find the Arrearages to be but 19 l. 19 s. 5 d. which is 6 d. 3
q. too little.

Then trying what the Arrearages will amount to at 6. 2 (or 6 l. 4 s.) per
cent. I find 15. 13, or 15 l. 2 s. 7 d. 1 q. Perceiving then I have over-shot
my Mark, I make my third trial at 6.1 (or 6 l.2 s.) per cent. and the Result is
15.05, or 15 l. 1 s. which is pretty near, being but (...) above the truth.

But that I may yet bring it nearer, I first subtract the Result at 6 per cent.
which is 14.971 from the Result of the Arrearages at 6.1. viz. 15.05 (because
these are the Results that come nearest to the truth) and their difference
is.079.

2. I subtract the Rate 6 from the Rate 6.1, and there rests. 1.

3. I substract the nearest Result to 15, viz. 14. 971, from 15 the given
Arrearages, and their difference is.029. Then working by the Rule of Three, I
find (as follows).0367

.079.1 029 1.079).0290 (.0367 7
Which.0367 being added to 6, gives 6.0367, or 6 l.0 s, 8 d. 3 q. per cent.
Compound Interest. And that this Rate exactly fitteth, is plain by the
following work.

6.0367.100 1 1 6.0367) 100.0000 (16.565 20245 R.0.025456 11 0.025456 0.25456
0.280016 1.219191 1.499207 = 31/565 16/565 15/000
But perhaps it will be said, that though in this and all other matters
foregoing, I agree well enough with the learned Authors before mentioned, and
others that have writ of these Subjects; yet in my Country-Almanack for the
Year 1677, the Fourth Problem agrees neither with them, nor what I have here
written, but apparently clasheth with them.

I confess this Charge had been very just, had that Problem been designed for
the same end, and produced a different effect: (for in such a case to differ is
to contradict.) But forasmuch as in my very entrance upon it, I began thus.
There is a Problem in some Learned men's Works, seemingly of the same importance
with this, but indeed much different both in the Design and Effect: And after
in answering Objections show wherein the Design differs; I cannot but admire
the Undertakings of that able Artist, who was so much at leisure as to prove
with a great deal of Pomp, that mine will not attain the end for which I
declared it was never designed, as clearly as words can utter it. A Sword may
be a very good one, yet a very bad Instrument to fell Trees with: But I hear he
is dead, and I shall rather lament the loss of him, and diverse other famous
Mathematicians (which Death has of late deprived us of) than unnecessarily to
expose the impertinence of his Paper to the Public View; or so much as name
him to the prejudice of his Memory. But from henceforth I expect from all
ingenious persons, that they neither take for granted what I professedly deny
and disprove; nor urge mine Objections against my self, without taking notice
of mine Answers.

For understanding of what follows, it were very convenient to have inserted
herein the whole Discourse in the Country-Almanack about this business; but
because this little Paper cannot afford it room, I shall only point briefly at
the Design and Management; and answering all the Objections I ever met with of
any seeming Importance, make things as clear as I can in so narrow a compass.
The Design was to discuss in plain language (suitable to Country-mens
understanding) this practical Question, wherein they are often concerned; viz.
Whether it be more advantage for the Lender to receive for 100 l. in hand,
Compound Interest at 8 per cent. viz. 71 l. 7 s. 7 d. 3 q. at the end of seven
years above the stock of 100 l. supposing it can be legally assured (as in
Ireland it may, and in England by equivalence in Goods or Lands, without
mentioning Interest) Or to enjoy a Farm for seven years in consideration of 100
l. that will clear him just 20 l. per annum?

My Answer was, that the former was the better Bargain (and consequently the
higher Rate of Interest for the whole Stock during the whole term) for which I
gave in these grounds under the feigned persons of A and B.

1. A is to receive (as is said) 171 l.7 s. 7 d. 3 q. and if B, who takes the
Farm, receive not equivalent, his rate of Interests is lower.

2. B receives only 140 l. by 20 l. per annum; only he has the advantage to
improve the several payments from the time they grow due, to the end of the
term.

3. These must be computed at some certain rate of Compound Interest: For to
Compute them at no rate of Interests, or at Simple Interest, or one taken up
arbitrarily, will not suit the case.

4. The Rate tolerated by the Statute, viz. 6 per cent. under which none will
take, and above which none dare expressly bind any to give, and at which any
responsible man may be fitted, is to be preferred before any other.

5. At this Rate the 7 payments will amount but to 167 l. 17 s. 6 d. q.

Of these 5 Pillars, the 132, and 5 th, were never attempted to be shaken by
any that I know of: What assaults have been made against the other two, or
design of the whole Fabric, I shall briefly consider; and I find them (besides
those answered when I first published that Problem) to be these three:

1. Ob. The Question is not at all, how the Receiver improves his Payments, but
what Improvements was made in the Debtors hands, and the same Rate carried on?

Ans. We are agreed that the Rate is not to be computed according to what the
Usurer actually makes of it. If he gives away, loses, or lends freely all the
several Payments: Or if he make new Bargains more oppressive than the Original
one; the true value of the loan of so much Money for such terms, is one and the
same. But I utterly deny that it is to be reckoned, as if the same Rate must be
carried on, and that for unanswerable Reasons (as I suppose them to be) laid
down in my former discourse, or easily colligible from it.

1. The Laws of our Nation prohibit upon severe Penalties, the taking of more
than 6 per cent therefore that is the utmost of the legal worth, which he that
exceeds, runs (as I take it) the hazard of all, and a great fine.

2. If he can evade the penalty, no responsible man needs to give more than 6
per cent. and few are willing to give more than they need.

3. If he get over both these blocks, and make ^ew oppressive Bargains, this is
nothing to the Question as I propounded it; for that was, whether A. or B.
received the highest Interest for his Money, by virtue of the above mentioned
Bargains, not by virtue of occasional after Bargains. When the Debtor has paid
in a years Pension, he has done with it; and if he have ^t not ready, he may
take it up at ordinary Interest, and the proportion is broken off for so much.

2. Object. If we regard Laws in the case, what need we any Rules concerning
Compound Interest, seeing the Laws of the Land allow only simple Interest:

Ans. 1. The Laws are not against Compound Interest, as it may be managed: that
is, the Usurer may receive his simple Interest at the years end, and put out
that as a new Stock, and so undeterminately from time to time; or if you will
call this simple Interest, it is the same to the purse.

2. I am told they have ways in London for putting out very small Sums to mean
Traders upon sufficient security; and then it is both legal and practical,
though I say not how lawful before God; especially as I hear some use it.

3. Object. It ought to be a Question only o^ Art, without dependence upon Laws
and Usages; it being the nature of Art in these kind (...) Questions, not to
show so much what ought (...) ^e done, as what is really done.

Ans. 1. It is one Question, what is the nature of Art, and another how far Art
is concerned that is, whether nothing else save the Rules o^ Art be regardable
in the case; which I deny, because Laws and Usages have a great influenc^ upon
it, hindering the continuance of the proportion.

2. I consider not the Laws as pinching the U^surers Conscience (as to what is
lawful) but (...) tying up his hands, and so obstructing the proportionable
increase of his gain.

3. Whatsoever may b^ said of Art (as Art i^ the strict notion of it) the
Artist must not be such a Slave to the Rules of it, as not to allow for
unavoidable Obstructions and irregularities I hope I may be allowed to tell my
Scholars that learn Navigation, that though the direct cours^^ from one Port to
another be upon such a Point of the Compass; yet other Courses must be steered
sometimes in regard of Rocks, Shallows^ crooked Channels, Currents, Trade-winds
(...) convenience of Harbor, and fresh Supplies (...) Or to avoid Pirates,
Enemies, Forts, and Places where great Customs or Payments will be exacted; and
many such things which the experienced Seaman is better acquainted with, than
I with their Names. And to say to such as learn Merchants Accounts, that though
it were more Artificial and Rational, that Rebates of Interest for Money paid
before ^t be due, should be computed at Compound Interest (as certainly it is:)
yet forasmuch as it is usual with Merchants to allow no more than simple
Interest (as appears by printed Accompt-Books) they must submit to the Laws of
the great Tyrant Custom.

An Artist has not the same liberty of supposition in answering Questions
(especially such such as are real and practical) that he has in proposing
Questions, or receiving them from others, when trial of skill is only or
chiefly intended. I may without absurdity in this latter case demand or find
the Amount or present worth of any single Sum of Money, or yearly Pension for
any terms propounded at any rate of Interest given, though such as is never
likely to come in practice: (ex. gr. at 2, 3, 14, or per cent.) But if I be put
by the nature of my Work, to compute the Amount or present worth of Payments,
no rate of Interest being named, I ought prudently to weigh all Circumstances,
and pitch upon that which is possible and rational. And this is not a work of
Art, but of discreet Judgment, (wherein great respect is to be had to penal
Laws, Usages, and other obstructions) after which Art takes it own Province, in
computing after such a Rate resolved upon.

To make all this plainer (if possible) than I made it at the first
Publication; Let us for once suppose a rare case, viz. That B a Mathematician
turns Usurer, and for 100 l. ready Money, takes a Farm for 7 years, that he
lets to another for 30 l. per annum clearly, knowing before hand he could so
let it: and A his familiar Friend thus accosts him; I wonder to bear you are
grown such an Extortioner, as to receive 20 l. per annum, seven years together
for 100 l. B answers, Before you find fault with the Mote in mine Eye, take the
Beam out of your own: You have bought the Reversion of a piece of Land after
seven years for 100 l. for which I will bona fide give you 172 l. at the time
of your Entrance upon it; which I find by the Rules of mine Art to be 12 s. 4
d. 1 q. above Compound Interest at 8 per cent.

A replies, Learned men, say such a Bargain as yours will clear 9 l. 3 s. 4 d.
per cent. and better. B rejoyns, It Is true they do so, but then they suppose
the same Rate to be continued, (for none will say, that if the Payments lie by
unimproved, or be let out at an under Rate, that in such cases that Rate of
Interest can be answered) and this supposition is really impracticable; or (to
say the least) that which a rational man cannot depend upon. I did accidentally
meet with this Bargain from the hands of a weak man, which yet I durst not have
accepted (the Laws are so strict) if it had been a Rentcharge in Money. And
will you undertake to find me Fools that shall at every years end, take off the
several Payments, yea and all the increase of them as they grow due upon the
same terms that I put out the 100 l. upon, and to let me Land for it? If you
think you can, I will make you a great Bargain, (because I know you to be a
punctual responsible man) you shall receive the first yearly Payment, and at
the end of the second year, pay me simple Interest for it at 6 per cent. as the
Statute allows, and I will instantly return it you, together with the second 20
l. which we will join into one Sum, and you shall take it at the same rate: and
thus we will do every year to the end of the term, still adding that years
growth to what was before, and so keep up all the Accounts to 6 per cent. and
if you can make any more profitable use of it, much good may it do you, and I
will heartily thank you to boot, for helping me so readily to place out my
small parcels without loss. But if you dare not do this, let ingenuity mollify
your charge, and I shall not quarrel with you about your rate of 9 l. 3 s. 4 d.
which perhaps you borrowed (or some one for you:) from Dr. Newton, his
Trigonometria Britannica, P. 37. for I acknowledge it is that and somewhat
more, though not much; but I say (which I desire you to observe) that I receive
no compound Interest after that rate, but only simple: and that not for the
whole Sum during the whole term (as you do compound Interest for all your
Stock) but only for the whole 100 l. for the first year: for you know that if
at the end of that year 20 l. be subtracted from 109 l. 3 s. 4 d. all the
Interest is paid, and so much of the Stock as brings it down to 89 l. 3 s. 4 d.
This 89 l. 3 s. 4 d. being computed at the same rate of Interest, 20 l. abated
from it, clears the Interest again, and brings down the Stock much lower: and
so year by year the Stock is dwindled away, till at last the seventh payment
(if the Rate were absolutely exact, as it is near) clears off (...) Stock and
Interest. And this is all I receive, save only the benefit of the severa^
yearly payments, which I offer you (or any other solvent man) at 6 per cent. as
aforesaid (...) At which rate (abating not a Farthing for loss of time, but
supposing good places ready for eve^ry parcel as it becomes due) it will but
amount^ to 167 l. 17 s. 6 d. q. which being the whole Aggregate of Stock and
Interest, if we substract from its Logarithm, the Log. of 100, and divide their
difference by 7, as we are directed by Mr. Wingan's (...), Chap 5. Prove. 13.
the rate of Interest will appear to be 7 l. 13 s. 7 d. 2 q.

I profess freely, Sir, I cannot withstand B's Arguments; but if any other can,
I shall neither envy his happiness, nor despise, (if fairly and ingeniously
offered) his Animadversions; in that case you shall command a Sheet from me at
any time, in consideration of any thing so objected; but for such injurious and
passionate discourses as are apter to provoke than convince, I confess, it is
such a piece of drudgery to answer them, that (if I could not ease my self by
contempt) I should think it hard measure that my silence should be interpreted
as their Victory.

Sir, You will p^rdon this Prolix Appendix, when it is considered that it is not
intended for such as your self, but for such to whom nothing can be too plain,
by

SIR, Your Friend and Servant, Adam Martindale.

A Compendious Method for working out many Conclusions in Arithmetic, wherein
the Rule of Three is often repeated; long since invented, practiced and taught
by the Author, but never till now published.
IN all Books of Arithmetic that I have had the happiness to peruse, the works
of both Rules ^f Fellowship and Alligation alternate are performed by the Rule
of Three, so often to be repeat^d, as there ere particular proportionable parts
^o be found; which proving intolerable tedious, when the Partners in
Fellowship, or the parcels (...) Alligation are many, caused me to think of ^is
following course, every way as plain and useful, and much more compendious,
which to ^e short is this:

The Rule.

Divide that which is usually made the second Number in the Rule of Three, by
that which is as ^sually made the first and the common Divisor; That Quotient
multiplied severally by the respe^^ive third Numbers, gives the particular
results. ^ut here it will be necessary if you use Decimal Division (which I
judge most convenient) that you continue your Division till either nothing
remain, or you have six places of Decimals in the Quotient, accounting Ciphers
(if there be any) into the number. And if upon the Addition of your Parcels,
the Total amount not just to the Sum expected, but an Unite short in the
Integers, and three more Figures of 9 immediately following, take it for exact,
for so it is within a matter of nothing.

All this will be plain by three Examples whereof the first shall be wrought
(for plainness) both in the old and in this newer way; the other two (for
brevity) this latter way only.

1. Example in Fellowship without time.

A B C
Put into the Common Stock 15 24 33 72
The Sum whereof is 72 l. and their gain 63 l. what is each Man's Part?

The Resolution in the old Method is thus.

A 72.63 15 15 315 63 72) 945 (13.125 Or 13l. 2 s. 6 l.
B 72.63 24 24 252 126 72) 1512 (21 l. 0
C 72.63 33 33 189 189 72) 2079 (28.875 0 Or 28l.17 s. 6 d.
13.125 21. 28.875 63.000
Or thus, 13-02-06 21-00-00 28-17-06 60-00-00


In the new way the work is thus done.

72) 63.0 (.875 A.875 -- 15 0 -- 4375 875 13.125
B. 875 24 3500 1750 21.000
C. 875 33 2625 2625 8.875
I hope by this time mine intelligent Reader is aware, that if the Partners had
been many (as in Voyages and Adventures it often falls out) the difference
betwixt the two Methods would have been yet more signally conspicuous; for one
single Division suffices, be the Partners never so many: Though I confess
there is yet a nearer way by the help of Logarithms; of which I shall present
this Specimen.

63 = 1.79934055 72 = 1.85732250.875 = 1.94201805
.875 = 1.94201805 24 = 1.38021124 21 = 1.32222929
.875 = 1.94201805 15 = 1.17609126 13.125 = 1.11810931
.875 = 1.94201805 33 = 1.51851394 28.875 = 1.46053199
The second Example in Fellowship with time.

A laid in 43 for 8 Months They gained 73l. Q. each Man's part? B 52 5 C 63 7

The Resolution by this new Method is thus.

A 43 8 344
B 52 5 260
C 63 7 441
344 260 441 1045


1045) 73.00 (.069856 480
A..069856 344 279424 279424 209568 24.030464 or 24 l. -- 0 s. -- 7d. -- 2 q.
B.069856 260 4191360 139712 18.162560 or 18 l. -- 3 s. -- 3d. -- 0 q.
C.069856 441 069856 279424 279424 30.806496 l. s. d. q. or 39 l. -- 16 s. -- 1
d. -- 2 q.
Proof
24.030464 18.162560 30.806469 72.999520
or thus
24 l. -- 00 s. -- 7 d. -- 2 q. 18 l. -- 03 s. -- 30 d. 30 l. -- 16 s. -- 1 d.
-- 2 q. 73 l. -- 00 s. -- 0 d. -- 0 q.
The third Example in Alligation alternate.

Suppose a mixture of Wine of 119 Quarts be required, that must be made up of
these several prices 7 d. 8 d. 14 d. and 15 d. so as the whole may be afforded
at 12 per Quart, the parts may be found out in their method (without decimals)
thus.

Having linked 8 to 14, and 7 to 15, and Counterchanged their differences from
the Common price 12d, I find the Sum of their differences to be 14, by which
dividing 119 the Quotient is 8/14 or 8, which for convenience of Multiplication
we shall change into the improper Fraction so ^ 2 the Resolution^ will be thus.

8 2 14 4 7 3 15 5 14
Quarts.
17/2 X 2 = 34/2 = 17 17/2 X 4 = 68/2 = 34 17/2 X 3 = 51/2 = 25 17/1 X 5 = 85/2
= 42 119
Having our just Measure of Wine, let us try the Prices how they suit our
purpose by Alligation medial, for considerable errors may be caused by
misapplication of Prices, when the parts were truly taken; but here-under it is
apparent that each parcel multiplied by its price, the Sum of the Products is
1428 pence, which divided by 119 give 12 for the common price.

17 8 136
34 14 136 34 476
136 476 178 637 1428
25 7 178
42 15 217 42 637
119) 1428 (12 119 238 238 0
This Proof by Alligation medial I do not account a needless curiosity; but
very useful to be thoroughly understood, for experience informs me, that young
Men being defective in Skill, Care and Memory, are apt to mistake in several
points, but especially one: That is so as to esteem the several parcels to be
of the several prices from which the differences (by which they are found) were
originally taken, and not (as the truth is) of the prices to whom in the
counterchange they were annexed.

As to that which seems to look like an unnece^^sary affectation of Novelty, in
linking the pric^ and differences by separate couples; I designed (...) no
higher thing than to free the Printer (if th^^ pass (...) hand) from the
trouble of lookin^ up his dusty Cuts of Semilunes intersecting or enclosing one
another, as in our usual Books of Arithmetic^^ Though the truth is, in such
cases as this before us, no linking at all is needful; but when the common
Quotient is multiplied severally by all the differences, any price above the
common may b^ assigned to any product made by the difference o^ riginally
belonging to an under price, and contr^^rily, so as true couples be observed.
So here (...) might have assigned the price 15 to the parcel 3^ found out by
the difference 4 originally belongi^^ to 8, and the price 14 to the parcel 42,
found b^ multiplying the common Quotient by 5 the difference of 7 from the
common price. But then (...) must be sure to do justice, so as to assign the
pri^^ 8 to the parcel 25 found by 3 the difference o^ 15 from the common price,
and the price 7 to the parcel 17 arising from 2 the difference of 14^ us here
is plain.

17 X 7 = 119 25 X 8 = 204 34 X 15 = 510 42 X 14 = 595 1428
119) 1428 (12 119 238 238 0
FINIS.

