A TREATISE OF The New Heavens and New Earth.

Proved to be Perpetual and Eternal, in that Visible State of both, in the
Restitution, after the destruction of the World by Fire.

Whereunto is added, A true State of the Thousand years-time; proving it to be
before the second Coming of Christ.

As also, the Succinct Order of things from Christ's first Appearing in the
Clouds, unto the Eternal State, after the Day of Judgment.

By T. M. a Lover of TRUTH.

Psalm. 119.162. I rejoice at thy word as one that finds great spoil.

Prove. 25.25. As cold waters to a thirsty Soul, so is good news from a far
country.

Isa. 33.17 Thine eyes shall see the King in his beauty: they shall behold the
land that is very far off.

London, Printed in the year 1680.

A TREATISE OF THE New HEAVENS and EARTH.
THE main Subject of this Treatise is the Mystery of New Heavens and Earth, as
restored in the State of Eternal Glory.

As an Apology for the Impression I must say, The Destruction of this Visible
Heaven and Earth by Fire, is a Truth I was bred up in from a Child, from 2 Pet.
3. though I find diverse question it.

Though it has been pretended many others have wrote of this Subject, I never
yet saw one that Treated mainly, or purposely, or positively on it; and but one
that mentions it at all; and that so by the by, and as probable; that he left
it in doubt.

And moreover, the same Book (and Author) is so erroneous in other points, that
I think it unsafe to commend any Reader to it.

Which Errors have been soundly answered by another; with the harmonious assent
of diverse able Ministers Except about the Sonship of Christ; wherein I humbly
conceive they did not so understand him; though the things they urged against
him in it, were also sound.

In a Word, if this (my) Discovery of the New and Eternal State of the Earth as
well as Heaven, be a Truth, it is no light matter: nor any Infirmities in me
should make it to be despised; But mend that in your own Search after it, that
you conceive desective in mine: I shall be as glad of a further Revelation by
another, as I am of this Degree by my self.

As to the Second Subject of the Thousand Years; I did not make it my
Intention, nor had I writ here of it, Only I was forced to mention and make out
the same, as to the Time of it, that I might distinguish it (in the
Scripture-Representations) not to be confounded nor contemporary with the main
subject Hereof.

For which cause also I was forced to present a Specimem of the Order of things
from Christ's (First) Appearing in the Clouds, to the Eternal State: which also
leads to the Completion of my Design, The New Heavens and Earth, as to be
Eternal.

Which may be comprised in this Position: That after the Destruction of the
Heavens and Earth that now are, by fire: (and after the Day of Judgment) there
will be a glorious Renewed State of both; which shall be the Inheritance of the
Sons of God, and the glorious Kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ for ever and
ever.

Arguments to evidence this;

I. We are taught to Pray, Thy Kingdom come, thy Will be done in Earth as it is
in Heaven, Mat. 6.10. This Prayer is to be performed in all Ages, till the
Kingdom come, and the Will of God be done in Earth as it is now in Heaven: And
we must Petition nothing but according to the Will of God; and therein he will
hear us: See 1 John 5.14, 15.

Now the Will of God shall be done in Earth as it is in Heaven, in 2 Respects:
1. In Heaven it is done infallibly; Not the least failing, Mat. 13.41. This
proves that the Thousand years Reign does not perfectly fulfill this: for a seed
of Evildoers is left in the Kingdom then; who after the 1000 years, make head
against the Camp of the Saints, in the Attempt of Gog and Magog, Rev. 20.8, 9.
Nor yet will the Saints be then perfectly free from Sin, being before the
bodies Resurrection; as page. 2. In Heaven, the Will of God is done by all (and
only) those that are perfect and glorified; Psalm. 103.19, 20, 21. Hebr. 12.23.
So shall it be also in the Resurrection, and world to come, Luke 20.35, 36.
John 1. last. See Page 4.


And consequently, when the Will of God is thus done in Earth; and the Doers of
it thus glorified; It follows that they shall remain upon the Earth; That the
Earth shall be made glorious as Heaven is: And also abide for ever, from the
ensuing Arguments.

II. Argument. Christ shall Reign on the Throne of his Father David; for ever,
and for ever and ever: Luke 1.32, 33. Isa. 9.7. Jer. 23.5. Hebr. 1.8. Rev.
11.15.

To Explain this, consider two things: 1. His Reign now on the right hand of
the Throne of the Majesty in the Heavens (Hebr. 8.1. is on his Fathers Throne;
Rev. 3.21. which Kingdom he is to deliver up at the end, to God again; 1 Cor.
15.24-28. 2. His Kingdom now in the Churches, is indeed the budding of the Horn
of David, Psalm. 132.17. (The New Creature is) a kind of first fruits of his
Creatures; according to purpose ordained for this New Creation: which, as the
Creature it self, so also the Saints having the first fruits of the Spirit,
groan -- for; Romans 8.22, 23. And even now, this true Israel is their David's
Glory, the riches of the Glory of his Inheritance, Ephesians. 1.18. And as it
begins in Regeneration, so it grows up in the World in succeeding Ages, till
the Kingdoms become Christ's, Revel. 11.15. Dan. 7.27. Revel. 20.4. and to be
over all the world for a Thousand years. But after the end of this World by
fire (in the first Death and change upon all Creatures:) As his Kindom (to wit,
on David's Throne) had been sown in this World, so it springs up in the World to
come, in the New heaven and Earth, wherein shall dwell-righteousness, 2 Pet.
3.13. And in this World to come is the everlasting Kingdom, 2 Pet. 1.11. and
the everlasting life, Luke 18, 30. Revel. 21.1, -- 5. the wicked being Judged
and cast into the Lake, Rev. 20. end.


Now, whereas his Kingdom is said to be for ever; and for ever and ever, and
everlasting ^^ though those terms in the Old Testament phrase are temporal, and
but for a set time; yet, in the New Testament, it respects Eternity; 2 John 2.1
These. 4.17. Revel. 1.6. Matthew. 19.29 So Luke 1.32.33. 2 Pet. 1.11, etc.

Now the present Dispensation of his Kingdom as now upon his Fathers Throne in
heaven, Revel. 3.21. being at last to be delivered up again to God; 1 Cor.
15.24. and the Son himself be subject, in that respect; And (yet) his Kingdom
must be everlasting: Therefore it follows, That it shall be in the New heavens
and Earth, Eternally; as unto which he was born (typically and according to the
flesh) King of the Jews, Matt. 2.2. of the Seed of David, and as heir apparent,
to sit upon his Throne, Luke 1.32.33.

And as he is Seed of David in point of Kingly Right, so also the Seed of
Abraham, to whom in a special manner the Promises (of Inheritance) were made;
Which induces, the

III. Argument, Abraham and his Seed are to be heirs of the World, Romans 4.13.
Whereas it is said, These all died in Faith, not having received the Promises,
etc. Hebr. 11.13. Acts 7.5. Inever read that Heaven without the Earth is called
the World. Only, they are not to Inherit the world that now is; (that is
reserved unto fire, 2 Pet. 3.7.) but the world to come, Luke 20.35, 36. in the
renewed State, Hebr. 2.5. Wherein they shall reign upon the Earth, Rev 5.10.

For before the Resurrection and day of Judgment, there is no time (imaginable)
wherein they could be heirs of the world: for they are with the Lord in Glory
till then; And

After the Resurrection of the Just follows the burning up of this World and
the Works thereof, 2 Pet. 3.10. So that No other World remains to the blessed
Seed for an Inheritance but that of New heavens and earth; after the end of all
things (in this world) Rev. 21.1. 2 Pet. 3.13.

IV. Argument, We read Hebr. 2 5 of a World to come; wherein Christ is to have
all in subjection under him, ver. 8. Ephesians. 1.20.21. As to which observe, 1.
That That World is allotted to the time at and after the Resurrection, Luke
20.35, 36. (in a State of perfect Glory) called that World. 2. Hebr. 2. Speaks
of the Dominion in the World to come, as accrewing to Jesus Christ by reason of
his humane Nature; as recovering what was lost in the first Adam; being head
over all things to the Church, (both in heaven above and earth beneath, Phil.
2.10.) both in this World, and that to come, Ephesians. 1.21, 22. 3. Hebr. 2.
Speaks of Man's possession by Creation, Which is the Earth and visible Heaven:
Only upon occasion of Man's fall, the Lord from Heaven, acquaints us with That
Glory also: Yet notwithstanding the heavenly Glory of Christ, he descends to a
state lower than the Angels: put himself into the Case and Place of Gods Elect,
took the seed of Abraham on him, Hebr. 2.16. and so became heir, (as before)
and purchased the possession (that had been sold under the Curse) Ephesians. 1.18.
Revel. 21.3. 4. Hebr. 2.8. It Is said We see not yet all things put under him:
But in Heaven he has all in perfect Subjection from the very first: Therefore
it must be on Earth.


V. Argument. Acts 3.21. The Restitution of all things.

Which must respect the Visible things of the Creation; Spoken of Rom, 8.19,
20, 21, 22. which the Apostle calls the Glory that was to be reavealed in the
Saints; (then alive;) and therefore, not to be till the Resurrection of their
bodies; according to verse. 23. waiting for the Adoption; to wit, the Redemption
of our bodies; Phil. 3.21.

This Restitution will be such as was made under the Law; to wit, A Fifth part
added to the principal, Exodus 22.3, 4. Levit. 6.4, 5. So in this, No Sun, Moon
or Stars in their Courses (for there is no night there, Rev. 21.23, 25.) and no
Temple, ver. 22. But an infinite Glory supplies the place of both. And here I
conceive will be the ultimate fulfilling that saying, Cant. 2.17, etc. till --
the shadows flee away, etc. Whereas now the Lights of this World, being finite
and remote from us, do necessarily cast a Shadow by the Substantial form they
shine upon: So is it Light on the one side, but dark on the other: And so in
the Absence of the sun, the shadows of the Evening draw upon the Earth: But
when the Light shall be omnipresent, there shall be no Shadows any more, No
night there, Revel. 21.25.

Again, though the Thousand years Reign admits of a good Degree of this glory
of the Restitution: yet the time of the Restitution of all things is expressly
reserved to the Revelation of Jesus Christ from heaven, Acts 3.21 and then to
be fulfilled: which if he comes not to restore he comes to Destroy; 2 Pet.
3.10. But he will Restore after he has Destroyed, verse. 13. Revel. 21.1.

VI. Argument, From John 1. last, Verily. verily, I say unto you, hereafter ye
shall see heaven open, and the Angels of God ascending and descending upon the
Son of man.

Observe that the word is open, (and notes a state of Continuance:) and nor
opened; as it was opened to Stephen for a moment; Acts 7.56. And to Peter in a
Trance, Chap. 10.11.

The words allude to Jacobs Dream, Genesis 28. and imports a transcendant union to
be between Heaven and Earth; through the riches of the Grace of Christ; and by
the Recourses of Angels.

By the Manhood of Christ, fallen man is dignified to a fellowship and
equallity with Angels, Luke 20.35, 36. and shall be also Restored to his
created possession, the Earth.

-- The Angels of God ascending and descending, etc.] This cannot be before,
but in the new Heaven and Earth, after there day of Judgment.

For first Christ appears; then the Tribes mourn at the sight of him; then the
dead are raised, then the living Saints are Changed; then all (of them) caught
up to the Lord in the air; then the Earth to be burnt up, etc. then begins the
Judgment. Now in any time before the Judgment what Ascending or Descending of
the Angels as in a fixed state? for the Dead Saints are raised by a Word,
quickly, John 5 28. and the living Saints changed in the ^^inkling of an Eye, 1
Cor^ 5.52.

And in the Judgment it self, the Angels seem otherwise disposed: as being
present Au^i^o^s of Christ's owning and disowning persons; Mark 8.38. Revel.
3.5. and at last bundling the Tures and casting them to the fire, Matthew. 13.30,
40, 41, 42.

And therefore it must be after the Judgment, that the Angels will so ascend
and descend. And this the Lord Jesus proposes to them as the consummation of
the Mystery of Divine Counsel at the end of time: and that the Design of God in
particular lay upon this, to restore the Earth, etc; as being indeed great
things, John 1.50.51.

We ought not, as not too carnally to think hereof, so neither to think the
things themselves are carnal. Christ himself put a greater Marvel upon the
Resurrection of bodies, John 5 28 than that of Regeneration by Faith, ver. 25.
And so John 1. the two last verses.

Again, The Gospel (that brings life and immortality to Light, exhibits the
Eternal Glory in the nature of man, (in Jesus Christ) as the Savior and Object
of Worship; Whereas the invisible God in the Old Testament was adored; but we
do not blame Thomat for saying to Christ my Lord and my God: Neither think it
carnal, because the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily in him; So, the Lord
glorifying the Earth, (as the place of his fect, Isai 60.13) it appears to me
that it will be accommodate and adapt to humane bodies, though glorified, more
than an immaterial visional glory can be (supposed to be.)

VII. Argument, To prove the Earths duration Eternal, as a place of Glory, is,
these Scriptures that appear to assign the Sea's place to be the place of Hell,
hereafter.

Revel. 21.1 Isai. 66.24 compared with Mark 9.43.44. -- there was no more Sea;
but there was a new Earth. -- Isai. 66. They shall go forth and look upon the
Carcases of the men; etc. for their Worm shall not dye; etc. Which Christ
expounds of Hell fire, Mark 9.44, etc.

Now the Argument is this, If they shall go forth to look upon them, then they
do not come down from Heaven to do it. But being upon the Earth, going forth
(so to do) is very proper.

Again, Hell is called a Lake; Revel. 20.10, 14, 15. Chap. 21.8. So are some
Seas (now) called, Luke 5.1. and 8.22.

And though there be many Seas now, and many Islands; yet great Transformations
may pass upon the terrestrial globe by its Conflagration, perhaps to the
reducing the many Seas into one Tophet; and the whole Earth into one entire
Continent; for the Redeemed to walk there, 2 Pet. 3.10, 13.

So Revel. 6, 14. When this day of the Lord is presented to us, it is said, The
heavens departed as a Scroll, -- and every Mountain and Island were moved out
of their places.

Which is called a shaking, Hebr. 12.26, 27. melting, dissolving, burning up, 2
Pet. 3.10, 11. folding up and changing, Hebr. 1.12. But none of these express
an Annihilation, but destroying the form and surface, and the works of men on
the Earth: In order to its passing into a New State, when he that sits upon
the Throne says, behold, I make all things new, Revel. 21.1. -- 5.

Object. But if the Sea shall be Hell hereafter, then there is no Hell now.

Answer. Hell is called a Prison, 1 Pet. 3.19. But being they are spirits only
that as yet are therein, Its a question whether any spacious place be needful
thereunto. Whether they reside now in the deep, or in the air, I leave it: Only
the Damned spirits are in Chains of Darkness, Jude 6.

VIII. Argument. To prove the Immortality and Eternity of this New State; is to
consider, That nothing but sin brings Destruction.

And God will free this New State from both the Cause and Effects of Sin; and
also secure it from both, for the future.

1. Satan, that was the Occasion of the first Sin in the World, is before this
judged to the Lake, -- Rev. 20.10, 14.

2. And there shall be no more Curse, Revel. 21.3.

So that the first Wound by Man's fall is perfectly cured; and the Effect
thereof is no other than a perfect Restitution.

3. Jesus Christ the Lord from Heaven, that (was to) come down thence to help
the sinking Earth, when it sailed in its head, Man; in the manifold Wisdom of
God did not only make peace for man by the blood of his Cross; but also (as
Angels also had faln^ from Heaven:) Reconciled all things in one (in himself)
both things in heaven and things, in catth; Col. 1.20. Enes. 1.10. as hereafter
will be manifest. Yea, the Creature it self (to wit the irrational) shall be
delivered into the glorious liberty of the Children of God, Romans 8.21.

So that I say, Man and the Creation of God have a Restorer Colos. 1.20, but
it is only thee Elect that shall come to this time; (the wicked being judged to
hell before) See the next

IX. Argument, from Ephesians. 1.14. -- Until the Redemption of the purchased
Possession, --

Here it may be Q^aeried, How Heaven (if that were the Possession spoken of)
can or ^eed be redeemed then? It was never under the Curse; tho the Earth is,
and the Creatures subjected in hope to the bondage of Corruption, until their
deliverance at the manifestation of the Sins of God, ver. 19, 20, 21. And
therefore the Redemption of the Possession -- appears to be by way of
Deliverance and Restoration, as the Resurrection of the Saints Bodies from the
dust of Death, is called, ver. 23. the Adoption, the Redemption of their Body.

Christ purchased the Eternal Inheritance; and he is the Heir of all things,
Hebr. 1.2. and the Saints joint heirs with him, Romans 8.17, 18, etc. And what
Inheritance, see Romans 4.13. and page 3.

X. Argument. That as neither the Soul nor Body of man has lost any Essential
part by the Fall; but only depravity and misery in both; so no essential powers
of Heaven or Earth are lost by the Fall; Still the Course of Nature is Lord in
the Universe, in the Vegetation of Plants, Courses of the Luminaries,
procreation of Animals, bounds of the Seas, Tides, etc. Only evil qualities; a
curse instead of a Blessing. And now the promise, There shall be no more curse,
Revel. 22.3. will turn the thorn and brier into pleasant plants; as the tenor
of these Promises in Isai. 55.13. Chap. 41.18, 19. (See page 7.) Though they
have also a spiritual fulfilling in the New Creature, even now, yet when the
Creation it self (as a general good) shall be brought forth, that will be the
absolute and ultimate fulfilling; Or else, what is the meaning of the
Restitution of all things, before spoken to? p. 3, 4.

XI. Argument, To prove the literal and eterral fulfilling the New Heavens and
Earth, is that utter inconsistency of any other sense (to be put upon the words
in 2 Pet. 3.13. and Rev. 21.1.

For 2. Pet. 3.13; Nevertheless we according to his promise look for New
Heavens and a New Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness: this evidently referrs
to that Destruction of this present World by Fire, that he was treating of ver.
10. But the day of the Lord will come as a Thief in the night; in which the
Heavens shall pass away with a great neise, and the Elements shall melt with
fervent heat, the Earth also and the works that are therein shall be burnt up.
Now if this be a literal, visible Destruction, and the Apostle comforts himself
with a New state upon the loss of the Old, as ver. 13. Then, what more
apparent, than that the New shall both be after the Old, and as visible as the
Old had been, in the same way and sense?

And if it be a Visible, material New State, then it shall not be (only)
fulfilled in a Mystical way, in Church and State, in this Life. Besides, after
the Old World is destroyed, there will be no Church or State in being, to
receive such a fulfilling.

And then for Revel. 21.1. it also evidently referrs to Revel. 20.11. where the
visible Earth nd Heaven fled away at Christ's Appearing to Judgment; and Chap.
11.1 Asserts a new Creation of both, in the room thereof; And therefore why not
taken as visibly as the former?

OBJECTIONS against the Literal and Eternal fulfilling of the New Heavens and
Earth; Answered.

1st. Object. It Is expressly sard of this State, Isai 65.17. etc. they shall
live long, and build Houses, plant Vineyards, etc. which plainly belongs to
this Life; Luke 20.35, 36. Andse Revel. 21.24, 26. and Chap. 22.2. Expressions
that must be fulfilled while the Regenerate converse with the Unregenerate;
that is, before the day of Judgment.

Answ. 1. It is usual in the Old Testament, to set out Spiritual Glories by
carnal things, and it may be questioned whether such Expressions in Isai.
65.17, etc. may not be so taken.

2. -- But admit they be taken literally: then indeed it is granted, that they
do belong to the Life that now is.

3. I do assert, that the same Scripture prophecys may possibly, (nay commonly)
have diverse times and ways of Fulfilling; and yet one ultimate fulfilling in a
most eminent manner: As those (before) Isa. 41.19 Isa. 55.13. -- And I will
plant in the wilderness the Cedar, etc. -- In stead of the Thorn shall come up
the Firr-tree, etc. Which are blessed Prornises of Gospel Grace, now in the
midst of Babylons Captivity: And so those of the Amity among the wild Beasts,
Isa. 11.6. etc. Isa. 65.25. which in Gospel times may hold forth blessed Grace,
given to brutish feirce men, that (when the Saints find favor in the Eyes of
the Lord) are made sweetly to live in peace together: and yet all short of the
litteral and principal fulfilling, as the gleanings are of the Harvest; when
the poor-Earth shall spring up in the Glory of blessing; and the Beasts iustead
of terror (to be not only peaceable, but) to become Rays of their Creators
Glory and Majesty; in the Restitution of all things; (as before.)

So, in a word, I take the New Heavens and Earth in Isa. 65. etc. to be in a
civil and Ecclesiastical Sense; and to be fulfilled in a figurative sense, in
this ^ife.

But the New Heavens and Earth, in 2. Pet. 3.13, and Rev. 21.1. to be (also)
properly and literally fulfilled; and that after the Old Heavens and Earth is
destroyed by Fire (as before;) when there will be no place left for any other
fulfilling.

So Christ's last Appearing will Metaphorically be fulfilled before the 7th
Seal, Rev. 6.14.

And to this, that Prophecies have diverse and succinct fulfillings, let me add
that I understand that of the first Resurrection, Rev. 20.5.6. which though a
reality in it self, yet there (to be) in expression figurative, and in allusion
to the Resurrecton of the just; (before that if the unjust;) Acts 24.15 For the
Resurrection to the 1000 years is not the bodily Resurrection; because the 1000
years is before Christ's coming to raise the Saints. But as at the Resurreation
of the just at the last day, the Saints, and none but they shall be raised
first, So in Revel. 20.4. None but the faithful then living, shall be
spiritually Revived to reign with Christ (spiritually) a Thousand years and the
rest of the Dead lived not again till afterward, v. 5. And this first
Resurrection was so discriminating that ^n such the second death had no Power,
ver. 6.

And so I take the Reign it self in the 1000 years, [tho its said Christ
reigned with them yet not in person, but in spiritual Glory; and (I conceive]
in a way of Prediction of that absolute Persection of his Dominion that would
soon succeed after the 1000 years, upon the Destruction and Judgment of this
World.

And because the Opening this matter of the 1000 Years will be a Portal to all
that shall succeed, and clear up the Demonstration thereof, I shall briefly lay
down some Demonstrations that do Evince this for a Truth, that the 1000 years
Reign of the Saints with Christ will be before, and (so) without, his personal
presence on the Earth.

1. Demonstration, The Thousand years is set forth in Scripture (and so
generally understood) to be a time of Peace plenty liberty and rejoicing of the
whole Earth: But when Christ comes in Person, it produces a universal
Destruction, and Astonishment to the World; Revel. 6.15. -- every bondsman and
every freeman crying to the Rocks, etc. so Rev. 1.7. Matthew. 24.30.

2. Demonstration. When Christ comes all the dead Saiuts are raised, and the
living saints changed; and all (together) caught up to meet the Lord in the
Air; and so to be for ever with the Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 4.17, 18. So that from that
time they could no more converse with the unconverted of this World, as the
Thousand years requires: See Luke 20 35, 36.

3. 'Demonstration. When Christ comes, he comes in flaming fire, taking
Vengeance on them that know not God, etc. 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8. Jude 14, 15. And
then also the world and the works that are therein shall be burnt up; 2 Pet.
3.10.

Now all these persons and things being destroyed at that day, if this were at
the beginning of the Thousand years, where were the reign (for a 1000 years
after) of the Saints over the World, in converse with the unregenerate.

Therefore Christ's Coming is after the 1000 years.

4. Demonstration. Upon Christ's coming and raising the Saints, etc. then
follows the Day of Judgment, 2 Timothy 4.1. Which is clearly set down (in the
order of things) to follow the thousand years, Revel. 20.11. to the end. See
page 9, 10.

So that Christ's coming (to Judgment) cannot be but after the 1000 years.

5. Demonstration. Ps. 110.1. Act. 3.21 Christ is to remain at Gods right hand,
till his Enemies be made his footstool: But after the thousand years Gog and
Magog assault the Saints, Revel. 20.8.9. therefore he came not a thousand years
before, while that Enemy was unsubdued.

6. Demonstration. Neither is God his last Enemy, but Death is so called, 1.
Cor. 15, 26. Therefore Christ's coming is not till he comes to swallow up Death
in Victory. (ver. 54.) in the Resurrection of the Saints. See above.

4. Answer to the Objection (that Rev. 21.24, 26. and Chapter 22.2. relate to a
Temporal ( fulfilling in this World.)

It Is granted; but yet conceived, that the ultimate import of the Vision of New
Jerusalem is finally reduceable to the Eternal State, and that on Earth; but as
was asserted before, Prophecies have diverse fulfillings; so to that mistical
sense of New Heavens and Earth in (the purity etc. of) Church and State, must
those Verses in the Objection be reterted: as inte^^exed ^n general, as to a
glorious state of the Saints, but properly belonging to the time of the
Thousand years.

For the Saints Interest is called the beloved City then, Chap. 20.9. And in
this Eternal state called the great City, Cap. 21.10, etc. But still upon
Earth; to which she came down from Heaven, ver. 2. and we read not of her ever
going up again.

Thus in these deep Mysteryes it pleases the Revealer of them to lay them down
in words and methods hard to be understood. 2. Pet. 3.16. And no wonder if the
Prophets them selves were to seek, what and what manner of times the Spirit of
Christ which was in them did signify; 1. Pet. 1.10, 11. 1. Cor. 13.9.

II. Object. The Eternal Inheritance is said to be in Heaven, etc. Colos. 1.5.
Luke 12.33. 2. Cor 5.1.

Answ. 1. It Is true, that Glory is preparing now in Heaven. Joh. 14.2, 3. 2.
Yet will come down from Heaven at the last, Rev. 21.2; 11 And to be brought to
the Saints from thence, 1. Pet. 1.13. Romans 8.21. both they and the whole
Creation groan, for the time when they shall receive the Adoption, (that is)
the Redemption of their Body, from the Grave and the bondage of Corruption,
etc. ver. 21, 22, 23. 3. Yet it is true, That Christ and his Saints will be no
Foreigners to Heaven also: For Christ was the Lord from Heaven (at first,) and
since, made way into the holiest by his own Blood, wherewith he sprinkled the
Mercy Seat: and that power whereby his Elect shall be caught up into the Air to
meet him at his coming, can also take them higher into the third Heavens: (But
these things Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, etc.) But in 2. Pet. 3.13. It Is
the New Heavens as well as the New Earth, that is there proposed as the Object
of Faith and Hope; wherein shall dwell Righteousness.
An APPENDIX touching the Resurrection of the Just and Unjust, Acts 24.15. and
the Judgment of both: In Answer to this
Question, How it is said the Saints must all stand before the Judgment seat of
Christ, Romans 14.10. and give an account (every one of himself) to God, ver. 12,
and receive according to their Deeds; 2 Cor. 5.10. Coloss. 3.24.25. and yet it
is said, That they themselves shall sit upon Thrones judging the World, etc?
Mat. 19.28. 2 cor. 6.2, 3.

Answer. (Consider the sixth and seventh Particulars following, but)

Take a Series of particulars (according to measure) of things to be from
Christ's appearing, unto the Eternal state -- 1. The Appearing of Christ in the
Clouds of Heaven, Matthew. 24.30. Revel. 1.7. 2. The Consternation of the wicked
(great and small) at the seeing of h n. Rev 6.14, 15, 16, 17. Matthew. 24.30. 3.
The Voice of Christ Raising the Saints out of their Graves, John 5.28. 1 Cor.
15.23. this is ( the first Resurrection; the Resurrection of the Just, Luke
14.14. the Living Saints to be changed, 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. 4. Christ sending his
Angels to Gather them (being raised) as Matthew. 24.31. 1 Thessalonians. 4.16, 17. and
(the living Saints being changed) they are all (together) caught up to meet the
Lord in the air, ver. 17. 5. The burning up of the World and its works; and
destroying the ungodly, then found alive, 2 Pet. 3.10. ver. 7. The Righteous
being Caught up before; as Noah and Lot were taken out of the places to be
destroyed, Luke 17.27, 29. 6. Then the Lord Jesus will Sit upon the Throne of
Judgment, to judge his people; as Psalm. 50. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. that were raised
to the Resurrection of Life, Act 24.15. Jo. 5.29. all the unjust continuing in
their Graves till th^s Judgment is over: for they shall not stand in this
Judgment, nor sinners in the Congregation of the righteous, Psalm 1.5. But here
Christ will take an Account of his Servants. And at this time it is, the saints
shall all stand before his Judgment seat, and give their account; and receive
according. But whatever blame may be laid on any in this Judgment, their sins
will all be blotted out then, Acts 3.19. Romans 8.1. Mal. 3.1, 2, 3, 5, 17. Mercy
will here rejoice against judgment; Jude 21. 2 Timothy 1.16, 18. as in the
judgment of the unjust (following) there shall be judgment without mercy, Jam.
2.13.

In this Judgment of the just gracious souls will shine wondrously, 1 Pet. 1.7.
Romans 2.7. 1 These. 2.19, 20. 1 Cor. 4.5.

But where fault is found with any of their works, etc. there will be no
Purgatory, by being punished (for a time) from the Lords presence; For they
must thenceforth be for ever with the Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 4.18.

Tho some may suffer loss, 1 Cor. 3.15. (trouble, 2 Pet. 3.14. shame, 1 John
2.28; grief, Hebr. 13.17.) yet (as in this time, much more then) the saints
judging themselves, shall not be judged of the Lord, (as 1 Cor. 11.31.) to
condemnation, Romans 8.1.

After the saints are thus Judged by the Lord Jesus, and therein Refined, etc.
Mal. 3.2, 3, 4, 5. 1 Cor. 3.15, then, as Malac. 3.5. he will be a swift Witness
to judge the wicked, etc. and in order thereunto

7. He will raise the unjust: and all that are Raised now, not having part in
the first Resurrection of the just; will fall under the second Death: This
being the Resurrection of Damnation, Joh. 5.29. And now in this Judgment it is,
that the saints are to sit on thrones, and judge the world, and Angels; having
given their own accounts before, upon their first Resurrection and Judgment.

It appears Matthew. 19.28. the Twelve Appostles shall judge the 12 Tribes: and
also that the saints in all ages judge their respective Persecutors, 1 Cor.
6.2, 3. See Rev. 2.26, 27.

Then will be fulfilled that Prophecy of Balaam, Number. 24 17.18 -- I shall
behold him but not night: there shall come a Star out of Jacob, etc. and shall
smite the Corners of Moab; (destroy the World and the Wicked by fire:) and
destroy (or unwall, as Mr. Iessey rendered it from the Hebr.) all the children
of Seth; who was the godly Progenitor in Abels room: so that his Children
comprize all the saints, and refers to the first bodily Resurrection and change
that shall pass upon them.

Ver. 18. And Edom shall be a Possession, etc. and Israel shall dovaliantly:
While they are judging their Enemies, and Talents unimproved took from the
Condemned, and given to their Noble Judges, that did improve their own.

8. After the end of this (part of the) Judgment also, then the saints, leaving
their Judgment-seats: (as Christ himself will soon after Deliver up the Kingdom
to God the Father) then (it appears to be,) he will set the Saints, the Sheep
on his right hand, and the Goats on the left; and pronounce the final Sentences
severally upon them; as Math. 25.31, 32, 33, etc. 9. And now all being subdued
unto him, he will Deliver up the Kingdom to God, -- that put all things under
him; That God may be all in all, 1 Cor. 15.24.28. 10. Finally, Rev. 21.5. He
that sat upon the Thrones said, Behold I make all things new: (to wit) a new
Heaven and a new Earth, for the first were passed away, verse. 1.) And (as it
was said of the Earth of old, he Created it not in vain, he formed it to be
inhabited, Isa. 45.18. so) being now thus New Created it is not to be
destroyed; but made a glorious City of Habitation; and the place of that
Kingdom which is not of this World: (That is as to his Personal presence) in
that absolute Glory of Perfection, that will be worthy his Divine Majesty; Who
now dwells in that Light that is unapproachable, 1 Timothy 6.16.


One OBJECTION from these 2 last particulars, viz.

If God will be all in all, upon Christ's delivering up the Kingdom, Then Christ
has no (more a) Kingdom forever.

Answ. This is a mistake of 1 Cor. 15.24.28. which must be understood of the
Kingdom (as now it is) with respect to the present Dispensation: and to confirm
this, Let me Declare a Mystery; Which is this; upon Man's Fall the Enemies of
God increasing, Christ as Mediator (who was with Moses and the Church of old,
Heb. 11.26. 1 Cor. 10.4.) was set up and ruled invisibly over all the World:
but when he was by his Resurrection declared to be the Son of God with Power
and all Power then given him, Math. 28.18 When he Ascended and God set him at
his own right hand in the Heavenly places, Ephesians. 1.20. It was upon this
Account, till he makes his Enemies his Footstool. So that its clear, the whole
Reign of Christ now upon his Fathers Throne. Rev. 3.21.) from his first being
sat down thereon (till he comes from Heaven,) is a Subduing Kingdom (Only a
1000 years Triumph, and then the Enemies break forth again:) And that by God
himself in Honor of his Son; Which Honor doubtless is not to be less when all
is actually and completely subdued to him; for that were to lose the end of God
in making his Foes his Footstool; Only as he owned here on Earth My Father is
greater than I, John 14.28. So, all being subdued to him, and he being Man as
well as God, must still continue, (under that consideration,) his inferiority
to the Father, who is the head of Christ. 1 Cor. 11.3. by becoming Subject,
that God may be all in all; Which is very confistent with his retaining the
Glory of his Everlasting Kingdom among the Sanctified Sons of Men.

Enemies being subdued, there needs no further subbduing power, or the subduing
Kingdom.

Thus God brings Good out of Evil: Israel sinned in d^siring a King, but David
and other Kings were Biessings to them, and Types of this Eternal King: For the
Restitution, as page 3.) will be augmentative by the Experience of fallen man
restored, and by the Glory of the Lord from Heaven, 1 Cor. 15.44.47.48. And so
the Eternal Glory is expressly called a Kingdom; What did man in innocence know
what Kingdom meant? etc. But all things according to the purpose of God,
(before time,) Ephesians. 1.11.

The Conclusion.
1. THat no unsanctified Spirits may trouble themselves herewith, Psalm. 50.16.
unless they truly resolve to turn God. 2. And that none that do belong to God
would be discouraged, if after refreshing hereby, they should find Deadness and
Darkness in these things; which is no strange thing, nor the Truth ever the
worse, the Author is not quite ignorant of his Devices, 2 Car, 2.11. and lest
such should faint under such Trials, let them consider Colos. 3.3.4. 1 John
3.2. 3. If the World (so renewed) shall be the Saints, Let them take the
Council of Joseph to Jacob, Genesis 46.20. Also regard not your Stuff, for the
good of all the Land of Egypt is yours, Be content (in the Faith of this) with
Food and Raiment. 1 Timothy 6.8. Tho like Abraham you have not yet one Foot of
Inheritance in the Land of Promise; Act. 7.5. Tho Strangers now, yet we should
look upon the Earth with comfort, as our proper Possession, hereafter to be
Redeemed, Ephesians. 1.14. Romans 8.20. 4. Lay up a good Foundation against this time
to come, 1 Timothy 6.19. i. e. by doing good to others, See Math. 25.34.35. Luke
14.14. Ephesians. 6.8. The Reward (tho not for the good Deed, yet) will be
proportionable to the works of Virtue and Charity; see 2 Cor. 9.6. Ten Talents
improved redounds to Ten Cities; Five Talents to five Cities, Luke 19.17.19.
(Except what great grace in any will multiply their little, as Mark 12.42, 43.
God is a free Agent, and also Just;) I say there will be Dominion in the World
to come: Ease what means the Crowns promised 2 Timothy 4.8. 1 Cor. 9.25. and a
Kingdom, Luke 22.29. And if every Saint shall Reign in Glory, much more the
King of Saints; notwithstanding his delivering up the Kingdom to God, and
becoming Subject, etc. which therefore must be understood of his delivering up
his Commission to him that had put all things under him; That the Humane Nature
of Christ, as becomes the Creature, (all the great Works of the Mediator being
finishee,) may acquiess in acknowledging the Superiority of the Divine being;
Yet shining Gloricusly through God in the Glory of the Mediatorship
(accomplished;) in the Love and Glory of the Saints, and in all peace and
absolute perfection in the Glory of being King in and amongst them, and they in
him. 5. I would have none Oppose themselves in this Doctrine of the New World,
to think that Heaven is excluded, see page 9. Heaven will be more appropriate
to Man by Christ, than it could have been by the first Man Adam, 1 Cor.
15.47.50. But as Heaven is superadded, so the Earth shall be Restored: and
therefore the New Heavens and New Earth are very consistent.
A Confirmation of the Earths Eternal Duration in the State of Eternal Glory.
1. THE Body of Man is made of the Dust of the Ground, yet made Immortal by
putting on Immortality, 1 Cor. 15.54. So may the Earth be Eternized by Christ
for the Glory and Good of Man. 2. He that will restore it from under the Curse,
can perpetuate that restored State, Rev. 22.3. 3. God that made it of nothing,
can much more uphold it forever, being made. 4. Though the Earth be a material
gross body, yet the Foundations of it are unsearchable and Divine, Job. 38.6.
yea it hangs upon nothing chap. 26.7. the principle of Nature is confounded
here, by that adequate poize of this Terrene Globe* so that (by Divine
Artifice) it is said to be so laid on the Foundations as not to be removed
forever, Psalm. 104.5. And I refer it to consideration, whether these be not the
Foundations in Heb. 11.10. at least by way of Allusion, When all Humane works
will turn over to the Foundations in the day of the Lord, 2 Pet. 3.10. But the
World to come (after that) is for the Children of the Resurrection, Luke 20.35,
36. 5. And whereas some say the Earth will be turned into its first Chaos, and
be a place of Torment; yet how would that suit the Notion of a Lake, (as Hell
is called,) page 5. Besides, this very Tenet grants the thing; For if it be a
place of Torment forever, then it shall abide forever, and that same Divine
power that might uphold it as a place of Fire and ^o^^ent, can much more
preserve it in its Verdure and Glory, as a place of Divine Presence, Happiness
and Glory to the Heirs of Glory.
FINIS.

