A Seasonable Argument To Persuade All the Grand Iuries in England, to Petition
for A New Parliament. OR, A LIST OF THE PRINCIPAL LABORERS in the Great Design
of Popery and Arbitrary Power; Who have Betrayed their Country to the
Conspirators, and Bargained with them to Maintain a Standing Army in England,
under the Command of the Bigoted Popish D. Who by the Assistance of the L. L's
Scotch Army, the Forces in Ireland, and those in France, hopes to bring all
Back to ROME.

Veritas non quaerit Angulos.
Nunc Omnia Romae Venalia.
Amsterdam, Printed in the Year, 1677.

A Seasonable Argument to persuade all the Grand Juries in England, to
Petition for A New Parliament. OR, A LIST of the Principal Laborers in the
Great Design of POPERY and ARBITRARY POWER, etc.
Bedford.
SIR Humphry Winch, Baronet, has from the Court, 500 l. per annum Sallery; and
was of the Council of Trade for Plantations.

Berk-Shire.
Windsor. Sir Thomas Higgons, Knight, has a Pension of 500 l. per annum, and
has had 4000 l. in Gifts; Married to the Earl of Bathes Sister.

Sir Francis Winnington, Knight, Solicitor General to the King, which place is
worth 1500 l. per annum.

Reading. Sir Thomas Doleman has 200 l. per annum Pension; and was assisted by
the Court in the Cheating-Will, whereby he got Quarles his Estate, valued at
16000, now Clerk of the Council, which is worth 500 l. per annum, and is
promised to be Secretary of State.

Richard Aldsvvorth, Esquire, Auditor in the Exchequer, which is worth 400 l.
per annum, he is also the Archbishops Secretary, and has got by Boones, at
several times, 3000 l.

Wallingford. Sir John Bennet, Knight of the Bath, has got of the poor indigent
Cavaliers money 26000 l. and otherwise near 40000 l. more.

Buckingham-Shire.
Sir Richard Temple Commissioner of the Customs, which is worth 1200 l. per
annum.

Buckingham Town. Sir William Smith, as honest as Sir Richard Temple.

Chipping Wicham. Sir Robert Savvyer, a Lawyer of as ill reputation as his
Father, has had for his attendance this Session 1000 l. and is promised (as he
insinuates) to be Attorney General, and Speaker of the House of Commons.

Agmondisham. Sir William Drake, Barronet, under the Command of his Father-in
Law the Chief Barron Montague, who enjoys 1500 l. per annum during the Kings
pleasure.

Cambridg-Shire.
Sir Thomas Hatton a man of no Estate but his Pension.

Sir Thomas Chichley, Master of the Ordnance, and has had 2000 l. given him,
and the Reversion of his Place to his Son.

University. Sir Charles Wheeler, a Foot Captain, who once promised himself to
be Master of the Rolls, now Governor of Mevis.

Town of Cambridge. William Lord Allington, in debt very much, a
Court-Pensioner, and in hopes of a White Staff. A Cully.

Che-Shire.
Thomas Chelmodly, Promised a great Place at Court, but not only deceived, but
laughed at, poor Gentleman.

Chester. Robert Worden, Esquire, a betrayer of the Old Cavaliers (with Willis)
and of Sir George Booth; the Duke of Yorks Creature, and Gentleman of his Bed
Chamber.

Cornwall.
Sir Ionath. Trelavvney, Barronet, one that is known to have sworn himself into
4000 at least in his account of the Prize-Office. Controller to the Duke, and
has got in Gratuities to the value of 10000 l. besides what he is promised for
being an Informer.

Sir John Compton, Barronet, a Commissioner of the Prizes, and besides a
Patentee for setting up Lights upon the Seacoast.

Lanceston. Sir Charles Harbord, Surveyor General has got 100000 l. of the King
and Kingdom; he was formerly a Solicitor of Staples-Inn, till his lewdness and
poverty brought him to Court.

Leskeard. Bernard Greenvil, Esquire, a Bed-Chamber-Man, has got in Boons at
several times 20000 l.

Helston. Sidney Godolphin, Esquire, a Bed Chamber-man.

Sir William Godolophin, Barronet, had 1200 l, per annum out of the Fee-farm
Rents, and Governor of Scilly Island.

Truro. John Arundel, Esquire, his Father from a small fortune, raised to be a
Lord, and has now 2000 l. per annum Pension out of the Excise; and has got in
Boons 20000 l.

Cammelford. Sir William Godolphin, Knight, under Secretary to the Lord
Arlington, now Ambassador in Spain and lately turned Papist; has got in Boons,
30000 l.

VVest-Lovv. John Trelavvny, Esquire, Cup Bearer to the King, Captain to a
Troop of Horse in Ireland, and 200 l. per annum Pension.

John Trelavvny, Esquire, own Son to honest Sir Jonathan Trelavvny.

East-Lovv. Charles Osborn, the Treasurers Brother, has an Office in the
Customs.

Henry Seymour, Esquire, of the Bedchamber, has the Hanaper-Office, and is
Controller of the Customs at London, has got 40000 l. in Duchy Leases, and
other Boons.

Boffing. Robert Roberts, Esquire, Victuals and Protection in White Hall, out
of Privilege Time, and 50 l. a Session.

St. Michael. Francis Lord Havvly, Captain of his Majesty's Troop, Gentleman of
the Bedchamber to the Duke, and Court Buffoon; has got in Boons 20000 l.

St. Mavvs. Arthur Sprye, a Commissioner of the Prizes, 400 l. per annum
Pension; has raised his Estate from 100 per annum to 800 by being a Member.

Sir Joseph Tredenham, the son of an Attorney, and by Marrying the Speakers
Sister has got a considerable Pension.

Kellington. Sir Cyril VVych, Secretary to the Lieutenancy in Ireland; Brother
in Law to the two Earls of Bath, and St. Albans.

Carlisle.
Sir Philip Howard, Captain of the Horse Guards, got in Patents and Boons 4000
l.

Sir Christopher Musgrave, Knight, Captain of a Foot Company 200 l. per annum
Pension, and to succeed his Father in the Government of Carlisle.

Devon-Shire.
Sir Copelston Bampfield, Barronet, much addicted to Tippling, presented to the
King by his pretended Wife, Betty Roberts, the Pall Mall

Exeter. Sir James Smith, Knight, Major of the Kings Regiment, 10000 l. in
Boons. Kinsman to the Duke of Albermarle.

Thomas Walker, Esquire, a Commissioner of the Prizes, where he feathered his
Nest to some purpose; 500 l. this Session, besides preferring his Brother to be
Collector of the Customs of Exeter.

Totnes. Sir Edmond Seymour, Barronet, the Speakers Father, and an Indigent
Pensioner.

Sir Thomas Berry, Knight, a Pensioner of 200 l. per annum, got for him by the
Lord Clifford his Brother in Law.

Plymouth. Sir Gilbert Talbot, Knight, Master of the Jewel Office.

Plimpton. Sir Nicholas Slanning, Knight of the Bath, Sir George Carterets son
in Law, the Kings Carver; 2000 l. in Boons, and Governor of Pendennis in
Reversion.

Honinton. Sir Courtney Pool, first mover of the Chimny-Money, for which he had

Sir Peter Prideux, Knight, the Lord of Baths Brother in Law, constant Court
dinners, and 300 l. per annum Pension.

Beer Alston. Sir John Maynard, Knight, the Kings Sergeant at Law.

Tiverton. Sir Henry Ford, once Secretary for Ireland, a Pension of 300 l. per
annum, which is almost all he has to subsist on.

Dorset-Shire.
Corfe. Lord Latimer, son to the Lord Treasurer.

Lime Regis. Sir John Shavv, once a Vintners Boy, got of the Crown, out of the
Customs, and by other ways, 60000 l.

Waymouth, Sir VVinston Churchil, was a Commissioner of the Court of Claims in
Ireland now one of the Clerks of the Green-Cloth. He preferred his own Daughter
to the Duke of York, and has got in Boons 10000 l. He has published in Print
that the King may raise Money without his Parliament.

Brid-port. George Boreman, Esquire, once an Under-Clerk in the six Clerks
Office, now Master of the Ballast Office (a Place no less Oppressive than
Illegal) worth 1500 l. per annum.

Warham. George Pit, Quondam servant to the Duke of York, but turned out, and
was promised to have the Money it cost him, 2500 l.

Durham.
John Tempest, Esquire, a Papist, a Pensioner and a Court dinner-Man, has got a
Customers Place at Hull for his Son.

Essex.
Harvvich. Thomas King, Esquire, a Pensioner for 50 l. a Session, etc. Meat,
etc. Drink, and now and then a suit of Clothes.

Gloucester.
Sir Baynham Throgmorton, a grant of Kingsvvood-Forrest, and 200 l. per annum.

Malden. Sir Richard Wise Man, a 1000 l. per annum Pension, and keeper of one
of the Treasurers public Parliamentary Tables.

Sir William Wise Man at sir Richards Devotion.

Hant-Shire.
Winchester. Sir Robert Homes, first an Irish Livery Boy, then a High-way-man,
now Bashavv of the Isle of VVight, got in Boones, and by Rapine 100000 l. The
Cursed Beginner of the two Dutch Wars.

Laurence Hide, the Elder, a Pension of 200 l. per annum, and a constant
Court-dinner-man.

Southampton. Sir Richard Ford, Knight, Contriver of the two Dutch Wars, for
which he had 10000 l. and yet is scarce able to live.

Thomas Knovvles, Esquire, the Treasurers Kinsman, 400 l. per annum Pension.

Portsmouth. Sir George Carteret, Baronet, a French Man, Vice-Chamberlain to
the once Treasurer of Ireland, and the Navy, in which two Places he Cheated the
Crown of 400000 l. as upon account was made apparent; He has wisely conveyed
great part of his Estate beyond Sea, therefore deservedly made a Privy
Counselor.

(...). Thomas Neal, Esquire, now turned Brewer (...) a rich Wifes Fortune, and
his own (...) he has a promise his son shall Marry Mall Daveys's daughter, and
to be made a Viscount, and maintaind if his Brewhouse fail. Formerly called
Golden Neal, now, Brazen Groom-Porter.

Stockbridge. Sir Robert Howard, Auditor of the Receipts of the Exchequer,
worth 3000 l. per annum, many great Places and Boons he had had, but his W
Uphill spends all, and now refuses to Marry him.

Robert Philips, Esquire, Bed-chamber-man, got in Gifts 20000 l.

Nevvton in the Isle of VVight. Sir John Holmes, sir Rob. Brother, a Cowardly
baffled sea Captain, twice Boxed, and once Whipped with a Dog-whip, as many
Gentlemen can testify; Chosen in the Night, without the Head Officer of the
Town, and but one Burgess, yet Voted well Elected this last session.

Sir Kingsmil Lucy, Barronet, has had 1000 l. and promised a Court Place.

Hereford.
Thomas Price, Esquire, 500 l. given him, and 300 l. per annum Pension, and
Protection in White Hall during Protogations.

City of Hereford. Herbert VVestphalin, Esquire, 500 l. in money, and an Office
in the Custom-house, worth 150 l. per annum.

VVebley. Sir John Barnaby, Knight, 500 l. given him.

Sir Thomas Williams, once a poor Quack Chemist, now the Kings Chemist, has got
at least 40000 l. by making Provocatives for Letchery, and yet at this time all
his land is under Extent, and his Protection only keeps him out of Prison.

Hartford-Shire.
Sir Richard Franklin, a Pension of 400 l. per annum.

Huntingdon.
Town. Sir John Cotton, a mad man, who cut his own Throat, and now cuts his
Countries by his Vote.

Sir Lionel Walden, 8000l. in the kings debt, a Black Heath Captain, and a
Papist, at present has a Company of Foot, and a 1000 l. given him.

Kent.
Sir Thomas Peyton, the Coal-Farm, worth 2000 l. per annum, has had many Boons,
and yet has spent all, and his own Estate to boot. This is Peyton the Informer.

Canterbury. Sir Edward Masters, Knight, a great Wittal, etc.

Canterbury. Thomas Hardness, Sergeant at Law promised to bea Judge.

Rochester. Sir Francis Clerk, a Commissioner of the Prizes and a constant
Receiver of all Public money, and a constant diner at Court Tables.

Maidston. Thomas Harlackenden, Esquire, whose only livelihood is in his
Pension.

Sir Robert Barnham also.

Quinborough. James Herbert Esquire, is but fifteen years old, but Son in Law
to the Treasurer, and therefore of Age to dispose of the Peoples Money.

Lanca-Shire.
County. Sir Roger Bradshavv, a Papist, has a Lease from the Crown.

Lancaster. Richard Kirby, Esquire, one of a very small Estate, a Captain of
Guards, and a Commissioner for the Hackney-Coaches, has had 500 l. in Boones.

Richard Harrison, Esquire, a small pension proportionable to his understanding.

Preston. Edward Rigby, Esquire, Sergeant at Law, promised to be a Welsh Judge.

Sir John Otovvay, Solicitor of the Duchy, and a consider-Boon in the Fee-Farm
Rents.

Nevvton. Richard Lord Gorges, a Pension of 500 l. per annum.

Clitheroe. Sir John Heath, Attorney of the Duchy, a great Drinker and a
suspected Papist.

Sir Thomas Stringer, a Dancing-masters Son, got 30000 l. under the Duke of
Albarmarle.

Wiggon. Charles Earl of Ancram, a poor Scot, 500 l. per annum Pension.

Sir Ieoffery Shackerly, Governor of Chester, a Pension of 500 l. per annum.

Leichestershire.
County. George Fount, Esquire, 500 l. out of the last Tax, and is a constant
Receiver of all Taxes.

Town. Sir William Hartop, a Pension of 200 l. per annum, and promised to be
Clerk of the Kitchen; threatens to sue his Town for his wages, because he hears
they will choose him no more.

Lincolnshire.
Sir Robert Carr, Barronet, 20000 l. in Boones. Chancellor of the Duchy. Two
Wives living at this time; one, Arlingtons Sister.

Grimsby. William Broxholm, Esquire, an Indigent Papist, has had 5000 l. given
him.

Stamford. Peregrine Bertie, Esquire, the Treasurers Brother in Law, has a
Pension and a Troop of Horse.

Middelsex.
Sir Lancellot Lake, much in debt, has a promise that his Elder Brothers Son
shall not be naturallized, a notorious Cuckold.

Sir Thomas Allen, whose understanding is as great as his honesty; a close
embracer of Rogues, had a Boon of a 1000 l.

Westminster. Sir Philip (...) once Secretary to Archbishop Lavvd, before that
a poor Singing Boy, got artificially from the Treasurer Southampton, and the
King 40000 l. Now Clerk of the Signet. Never lies more than when he professes
to speak the sincerity of his heart.

Sir Richard Everard 500 l. and that being near spent must have more, or seek a
new way to get bread.

Norfolk.
Christopher Ivy, Esquire, a Prisoner in the Kings Bench, an old decrepid
Letcher, has 50 l. a Session.

Norwich. Francis Cory, Esquire, No better than Ivy.

Lin Regis. Robert Cook, Esquire, the Treasurers Son in Law, who by his
privilege protects himself from the payment of the Money ( viz. 8000 l.) that
was spent at his Election.

Robert Wright, Esquire, Pepis his Pensioner, and has 40 s. a day allowed him
by the Sea men, as their Council, but uses them as he does the Nation, viz. betr

Yarmouth. Sir William Doyley, got 7000 l. out of the Dutch Prisoners
allowance, and starved many of them to death, a Pension of 500 l. per annum,
his son is a Teller in the Exchequer.

Thetford. Sir. Allen Apsley, the Kings Falconer, worth 1200 l. per annum, the
Dukes Treasure worth got by Boones and other Acts, 60000 l. a Red Letter man,
if of any Religion.

Sir Joseph Williamson, once a poor Foot Boy, then a Servitor, now Principal
Secretary of State, and Pensioner to the French King.

Castle Rising. Samuel Pepys Esquire, once a Taylour, then serving man to the
Lord Sandvvitch, now Secretary to the Admirally; got by Passes, and other
illigal ways 40000 l.

Northampton.
Town. Henry Lord Obryan, by his Wifes Interest has got of Secretary
Williamson, 1500 l. and the Reversion of Cobham Park, and other Estates that
were in the Crown, worth 13000 l. per annum, his son married the Treasurers
Daughter.

Higham Ferris. Sir Lewis Palmer, a great Trader in Protections, and sells
cheap; his Father was Attorney General.

Brackley. Robert Spencer, Esquire, a Bed-chamber-man to the King, and in Debt
over ears.

Northumberland.
Sir John Fenvvick, a Captain under the Duke of Monmonth, and promised a place
at Court; had 2000 l. given him for his Election.

Sir Ralph Delaval, had 2000 l. gyven him, and has a Pension of 500 l Per annum.

New Castle. Sir Francis Anderson a Pensioner to the Treasurer.

Morpeth. Sir George Dovvning, a poor child, bred upon Charity; like Judas,
betrayed his Master. What then can his Country expect? He drew and advised the
Oath of renonceing the Kings Family, and took it first himself. For his
Honesty, Fidelity, etc. Rewarded by his Majesty with 80000 l. at least, and is
a Commissioner of the Customs, the House-Bell, to call the Courtiers to Vote,
at 6 a Clock at night, an Exchequer teller.

Bervvick. Daniel Collingvvood, Esquire, a Court Janizary, a Pension of 300 l.
per annum, Governor of Holy-Island.

Vicount Dunblain, 15 years old, the Treasurers Son, bribed the Mayor falsely to
return him.

Notingham-Shire.
Sir Francis Leake, Barronet, Governor of the Block-house at Gravesend, a Foot
Company and 500 l. in money.

East-Retford. Sir Edward Dearing, Barronet, Commissioner of the Court of
Claims in Ireland; the Chancellours Brother in Law, promised to be Secretary of
State after Coventry, now Commissioner of the Customs in London, worth 1200 l.
per annum,

Oxfordshire.
University. Lavvrence Hyde, Master of the Robes to the king, has had in Boons
20000 l.

Woodstock. Thomas Howard, Esquire, the Lord of Suffolk's Brother, 400 l. per
annum Pension.

Rultland.
Edward Noel, Esquire, Lord Lieutenant of Hant-shire, Lord Warden of the
Nevv-Forrest, and other great Favors promised him; which he need not doubt
off, being the Treasurers Nephew.

Shrop-Shire.
Sir Francis Lavvley, a Pensioner; one of the Horses in Madam Fontletts Coach.

Ludlovv. Somerset Fox. a Pension of 300 per annum.

Sir Job Charlton Sergeant at Law, Chief Justice of Chesler, a dull Welsh
Judge, 500 l. per annum for his Speakers place.

VVenlock. George Wild, Esquire, a Commissioner of the Excise in Ireland, 2000
l. in money; a declared Enemy to his Country.

Bishops Castle. Edmond Warring Esquire, a Commissioner of the Excise, a
Pension to keep him out of Prison. Sir Job Charltons Brother in Law.

William Oakley, Esquire, Brother in Law to Charlton, and Waring, has a small
Pension.

Somersetshire.
Bath. Sir William Basset. Henry Seymours son in Law 1000 l. given him by
Clifford, he has promise of a place in the Law Act, always drunk when he can
get money,

Wells. Maurice Lord Fitzharding, one of that Family which had from the Crown
in Boons and Places 200000 l. besides the unnatural honor given to the younger
Brother for pimping, which came afterward to the Father, and so to this Lord.
He Is Colonel of Horse in Ireland.

Taunton. Sir William Portman, in hopes to be a Lord, much Priest-ridden.

Bridg-vvater. Sir Edmond Windham, Knight-Marshal, in boons, 5000 l. His Wife
was the Kings Nurse.

Mynhead. Thomas Windham, Esquire, Bed-chamber-man to the King, as also Querry.
He married a Court

Staffordshire.
Randal Edgerton, Esquire, a Captain in the Guards, has had in Boons 10000 l.

Litchfield. Richard Diet, Esquire, a sea Captain, Kinsman to Sir Robert Car,
400 l. per annum Pension.

Walter Chetvvind, courted, treated, and complimented out of his Vote.

Newcastle under Line. Leviston Govver. Esquire, son in Law to the Earl of
Bath, had a great Estate fell to him by chance, but honesty and wit never came
by accident.

Suffolk.
Sir Henry Felton, a Pensioner, and his son a Bed-chamber-man.

Dunvvitch. Sir John Pettus a Pension, of 300 l. per annum, all his Estate is
under Extent.

William Wood, Esquire, Master of the Kings Dock, and his Ship-wright, and a
violent man for Taxes.

Sudbury. Sir Robert Cordel, a poor Gentleman that has almost spent all.

Major Cornvval, a Pension of 200 l. per annum, and a Captain in the Army.

Eye. Sir George Reeves, though of a great Estate, yet content with a small
Pension, and promises that he shall be paid a great sum of money, that he has
in the Bankers hands. Of no Religion.

Robert Reeves, his son, no less than the Treasurers Table is sufficient to
feed his Monstrous Carcass.

Edmunds Bury. Sir John Duncomb, a Pensioner, of 2000 l. per annum; in Boons
20000.

William Duncomb his son, Patrisari.

Surrey.
Sir Adam Brown, Barronet, the Treasurers Cousin-get-man, and the Duke of
Yorks Vassal.

Southvvark. Sir Tho. Bloodvvorth, a Mercenary Alderman, of London, not to be
forgotten for his pissing out the Fire.

Blechingley. Sir William Hayvvard, a Commissioner in the fale of the
Fee-farm-rents, by which he got 2000 l. a Privy-chamber-man, and 2000 l. in
money.

Sir Edv. Byth. King at Arms, 100 a Session, yet very poor.

Rygate. Sir John VVorden, the Duke of Yorks Secretary, a favourer of Popery.

Guilford. Thomas Delinghoy Esquire, a Scotch serving-man, a creature of
Lauderdales, chosen by the Duke of York, who was in Pension at his Election,
and voted for him.

Sir William Morley, Knight of the Bath, a constant Courtdinner man.

Sussex.
Chichester. Richard May, Esquire, a Lawyer, Recorder of Chichester, a
Pensioner, and promised to be Heir to Bap. May, if he Vote.

Horsham. Sir John Covell, Barronet, wheedled with promises, much in debt.

Mid-hurst. Baptist May, Esquire, Privy-Purse, 1000 l. per annum allowance, got
besides in Boons for secret service, 40000 l. This is he that said, 500 l. per
annum was enough for a Country Gentleman to drink Ale, eat Beef, and to stink
with, etc.

Lewis. Sir John Stapely, an Indigent.

Sir Thomas Woodcock, Deputy Governor of Windsor Castle, a Foot Company, 200
l. per annum Pension. He set up a Deed to gain his Neeces Estate, which was
found to be forged by a Jury at the King's Bench Bar, and now stands upon his
Privilege, to prevent a Decree in Chancery to have it canceled.

Staining. Henry Goring, Esquire, 200 l. per annum Pension, and Court dinners.

Bramber. Pierce Goring, Esquire, 200 per annum Pension.

Nevvshoram. Henry Goring, Esquire. 500 l. and promised a Pension.

East-Grimstead. Edward Sackvil, Esquire, Lieutenant to the Yeoman of the
Guard.

Arrendel. Roger, Earl of Orrery, President of Munster, and a Regiment of Horse
in Ireland.

Francis Vicount Langford, formerly Treasurer of Ireland, which he sold for
14000 l. now a Pension of 500 per annum.

Warwickshire.
Sir Robert Holt, Barronet, 1000 l. given him and, Protection from his
Creditors; brought out of Goal this last Session, when outlawed after Judgment.

Sir Henry Puckering, alias Nevvton, Play Master to the Popish standing-Army,
and allowance for keeping a Table every Session.

VVarvvick Town. Sir Francis Compton Knight, Captain of a Troop of House.

Westmerland.
Sir Philip Musgrave, Barronet, a Regiment of Foot, Governor of Carlisle; given
him in Fee-farm-Rents 6000 l.

Appleby. Thomas Tufton, Esquire, Bed-chamber-man to the Duke of York.

Wilt-Shire.
Nevv-Sarum. Sir Stephen Fox, from a poor Footboy, and then singing-boy, has
got in places by the Court 150000 pounds. Clerk of the Green Cloth.

Wilton. Sir John Berkenhead, a poor Alehouse-keepers Son, got by lying, to be
one of the Masters of the Request and Faculty Office; in Boons 3000 l.

Hindon. Edward Seymour had for four year 2000 l. Pension to betray the
Country Party, for which he then appeared. But since he has shown himself
barefaced, and is Treasurer of the Navy, and Speaker; one of the Commissioners
of the Admiralty, and of the Popish Cabal.

Robert Hyde, Esquire, had sold his Vote before he came into the House, and had
1000 l. for this last (his first) Session.

Westbury. Thomas Wanklin, Esquire, once a poor serving-man, now one of the
Commissioners of the Excise in Ireland, and 50 l. a Session. Kept an Inn at
Kingston three years, now keeps a Tavern in Essex Buildings in the Strand.

Devizes. George Johnson, Esquire, a Lawyer, and a Welsh Judge, the Treasurers
Solicitor, and an impudent has the Reversion of the Master of the Rols, but
some say, that's only in trust for Baron Bertie.

Chipenham. Francis Gvvyn, Esquire, one of the Commissioners of the Excise in
Ireland, had 500 l. given him.

Malmsbury. Philip Howard Esquire, of the Dukes Bedchamber, 300 l. per annum
Pension.

Sir Thomas Escourt, Reversioner of the Judge of the Marshalsie, his Fathers
own son, converted to the Church of Rome by his young handsome Mother in Law,
with whom he is very inward.

Crecklade. Sir John Earnley, a Commissioner of the Navy, and Chancellor of
the Exchequer, always Votes as directed.

Bedvvin. Henry Clerk, an Indigent Commissioner of the Prizes; and a place in
the Custom House at Bristol worth 200 l. Per anum.

Ludgarshal. Daniel Finch, Esquire the Chancellors son.

William ^^shburnham, Esquire, got by the Court 50000 l. Cofferer.

George Leg, Esquire, supposed to be a Papist; of the Dukes Bedchamber, and
Governor of Portsmouth, in Boons 40000 l.

Old Sarum. Sir Edward Nicholas, Knight, got by the Court 10000 l.

Malborough. Sir John Elvves, Knight, very poor but a place in Ireland of 300
l. per annum; a Court Admirer.

Worcestershire.
Sam. Sandys senior, Esquire, a boon given him in the Excise which he sold for
13500.

Worcester. Thomas Street, Esquire. a Welsh Judge, promised other preferments; had
500 given him.

Dailvvich. Sam. Sandys, junior, Esquire. son of 13500 l.

Henry Coventry, Secretary of State, the breaker of the Tripple-League, as he
himself affirmed when he went to Sweden.

Evesham. Sir John Hanmer, a prodigal Gentleman of the Horse to the Master of
the Horse; Commissioner of the Excise in Ireland, and a Troop of Horse in
Ireland, 2000 l. given him in money.

Yorkshire.
Conyers Darcy, Esquire, assisted by the Court in stealing the Lord Lexingtons
sister from her Guardian for his son.

Sir Thomas Slingsby, Governor of Scarborough Castle, never gave his Country
one Vote, who voted all for him when chosen Knight of the Shire.

Knaesborough. Valiant sir John Talbot, a Foot Company, a Company of Dragoons,
a Commissioner of the Prizes, of the Excise, and for the sale of
Fee-farm-rents; 800 l. per annum out of the Wiltshire Excise, the Reversion of
the Jewel Office.

Rippon. Sir John Nicholas, Knight of the Bath, Clerk of the Council, got by
the Court 40000 l.

Sir Edmond Iennings, made High Sheriff of Yorkshire (against a Vote of
Parliament) which is worth 1000 l. Promised a Pension, and place at Court.

Heddon. Henry Guy, Esquire. Groom of the Bed chamber.

Alborough. Sir Solomon Svvayl, Barronet, one whose word will not pass for 3 d.
where he is known, got by the Court 600 l. an old Papist, if not Priest, but
his Bald Pate excuses his Tonsure; a forger of Wills.

Sir John Risby, the Treasurers Creature; sold himself and Country, to him.

Thrisk. Sir William Wentvvorth, sir Allen Apsleys son in Law, much in Debt;
His Wife has a place under the Duchess of York, he a Pension of 500 per annum,
in boons 3000 l. North-Allerton. Sir Gilbert Gerrard, a Soldier of Fortune, he
has got by the Court, and the late Bishop of Duxham (whose Daughter he Married)
30000 l. but at present it is most spent; but he hopes his Friend the Treasurer
will repair all Breaches.

Pontefract. Sir William Lovvther, Commissioner of the Customs, a man whose
Honesty and Integrity oftener fails him than his Wit.

Cinque Ports.
Hastings. Sir Dennis Ashburnham, Married Mr. John Ashburnhams Daugher; got in
Places 10000 l.

Rye. Sir John Robinson, Barronet, Lieutenant of the Tower, got in Places and
Gifts, by his Wifes Interest and otherwise 40000 l. Sheriff of London at the
Execution of Dr. Hevvit, and a Notorious R. in the late Times.

Hithe. John Harvey, Esquire, the Queens Treasurer, that told the King, He had
been Voting against his Conscience to serve his Majesty.

Sir Leolin Ienkins, son of a Taylour, Judge of the Admiralty; was in hopes to
be Archbishop of Canterbury; employed in Four Embassies; and whose
indefatigable industry in promoting a Peace for France, has been our --; He
affirmed in the House of Commons, That upon necessity the King might raise
Mones without Act of Parliament.

Dover. George Montague, Esquire, Abbot Montagues Brother, Master of St.
Katherines Hospital; in gifts 3000 l.

Sandvvitch. John Stroud, Governor of Dover, Commissioner of the Prizes got by
several indirect ways, from the King and Kingdom, 10000 l.

Bevv-Morris. John Robinson, Esquire, 400 l. per annum Pension.

Wales.
Brecknock. Sir Herbert Price, Barronet, Master of the Household, got in Boons
10000 l.

Cardiganshire. Sir Charles Cotterel, Master of the Ceremonies, got in gifts,
11000 l.

Carmarthen-Tovvn. John Lord Vaughan, Governor of Iamaica; 1000 l. per annum
Pension.

Robert Lord Buckly, the Chancellours Brother in Law, by whose means he is
Guardian to sir William Williams; worth 1000 l. per annum to him.

Denby-shire. John Wyn, Esquire, 400 l. given him in money.

Flint-Shire. Sir Thomas Hanmer, Barronet, 500 per annum Pension.

Flint. Roger Wheatly, Esquire, Knight Harbenger, Farmer of the Post Office, by
which he has got a vast Estate.

Merioneth. Andrew Nevvport, Esquire, 400 l. per annum Pension; a Squire of
the Body.

THE Publisher beggs pardon of those Gentlemen here named, if he has for want
of better Information, undervalued the price and merit of their Voices; which
he shall be ready upon their Advertisement to amend: But more particularly he
must beg the Excuse of many more Gentlemen, no less deserving, whom he has
omitted; not out of any Malice, or for want of good Will, but of timely notice;
But in general, The House was, if they please to remember, this last Session,
by three of their own Members told, That their were several Papists, Fifty
Outlavvs, and Pensioners without number; So that upon examination, they may
arrive at a better knowledge amongst themselves, and do one another more right,
then we (howsoever well affected) can possibly do without doors.

FINIS.

