A Common-place-Book Out of the REHEARSAL TRANSPROSED, Digested under these
several Heads: Viz. His Logic, Chronology, Wit, Geography, Anatomy, History,
Loyalty.
With Useful Notes.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom, at the Gun at the West end of St. Paul's. M.
DC. LXXIII.

The Reason of publishing these Papers.
I had purposed once to have laid by these Papers, esteeming them like such
which menscrible in a Common-place-book, especially when I heard there was an
Answer to the Rehearsal Transprosed in Booksellers hands. The Answer is now
known by the Title of Rosemary. A grave and serious Piece, that is the greatest
opposition which it maintains against the Transproser, excepting that once he
ventures at Wit like an Apothecarie, as far as his Herbal can furnish him with
the qualities of Nettles and Archangel.

You may lay a Wager on his Name at once reading, if you observe how he prides
himself in squirting at the Royal Society, like Culpeper against the College
of Physicians: How he strikes at all in his reach, how he nips Rosemary with
the long nails of his left hand, and tears Bays with his right hand and teeth.
But to give him his due commendation, he and one more, who has Natural wit,
though no Reading parts, would make a good Writer. It may (I think) serve as an
account why this is published, that upon considering the Performances of the
Common Enemy to both, I did not perceive my Labor was saved, or that this
small Trifle was forestalled.

A Common-Place-Book Out of the REHEARSAL TRANSPROSED.
Concerning his Title Page.
THe Worthy Author, that he might not seem a Plagiary, does with much modesty
call his Book, The Rehearsal, willing to intimate, that, whatever may be
accounted any thing in it, was taken from others; and that he may more
particularly own whence he received all his Flowers (excepting what he calls
the Rapping-flower) he lets it still keep the old name of the Farce. So that a
Rehearsal it is, and more than so, Transprosed. If you ask why Transprosed? I
say in his behalf he did it like a Prince, to show the Authority he had to mint
words, and with an Or, to show what this must pass for. But you will say, why
does he then discourage Kings from the like Sovereignty? If you know not that,
you are not fit to talk with a Senator. It was that he might enjoy the whole
peculiar Jurisdiction to himself; just as the man dissuaded his rich neighbors
from the Sin of Usury, that he might have the sole Trade of Extortion. He is so
kind, as to bestow the Impression on the Assigns of John Calvin and Theodore
Beza. It is a valuable Gift, and will bring good profit, as other Books which
are written against Government, or printed in a Corner. I hope the Assigns of
these first Fathers of the Church are not Ministers, if they be, Happy had it
been for the Nation, happy for themselves if they had never been so enriched,
seeing he observes so many mischiefs that happen by reason of the flourishing
condition of Churchmen. But he meant it kindly, and has thanks due for his
bounty, the more because he is not wholly of their Church: yet is he not at all
of that Church which was Mother to Sibthorp and Mainwaring. Now that the
Assigns may have sale for the Book, these are to give notice that you may buy
it at the Sign of the Kings Indulgence. What! do you not understand him? you
look as strange and simply, as if he had told you of the sign of the
Counter-Tenor-Voice, or of the Noise in the Air: whereas the Sign is a fair
double Sign: The Indulgence is a sign of the Kings Goodness, more than their
deserts. It was a conjectural Sign too, of what would follow, to wit, Preaching
and Praying against the established Church, though this was strictly forbidden.
Upon the same Sign-post is drawn the Posture of a Garrison almost forced to a
surrendry; at last obtraining a Cessation of Arms, and in that time fitting it
self to repel the Besiegers. The sign is large, and has more than that in the
Strand containing the several Coats of the 13 Cantons of Switzerland. But still
you are never the better, except you know at what Market Town this new Sign is
hung up. It is on the South side of the Lake Lemane: the Town is better known
by the Name of Pure Geneva.

But now I have told you, it is ten to one against you, that you find it not.
It is like Delos, a pretty spot of floating Ground, only it is not so bold as
that, to lanch out into the Deep; but like a little sneaking By-lander, it
creeps and coasts about the Shore of the Lake; now it is South, but by then as
you can read about 50 Pages of the Rehearsal, Whip, it is got to the West side
of the Lemane; but the next time we take it there, we will get an Archimedes,
or some Cunning Man, to remove and fix it on the South. Still I am glad to hear
the Kings Indulgence is at Geneva, for then his Supremacy must be in the same
place: and who knows but his best Subjects may do what the rest cannot, and
prevail with their Dear Brethren: but the Project is not worth pursuing, it is a
bad Air for Kings, and would kill them sooner than the infamous Hundreds, or
Sheerness. But if Monarchy cannot have health, yet Indulgence surely will make
a good shift among them, it is not to be doubted. They will indulge themselves,
and all others who profess the single and only Religion of their City; but no
other can be suffered to be believed and discoursed; for they look upon
themselves as the True Protestant Dominicans, and as the Popish part of that
Order have by an old Prescription the principal Power of the Inquisition, by
the same right does the other exercise this Authority over all within their
reach, who believe not that Presbytery is the Government, that the Pope is the
Antichrist, and that a Man is almost no Man.

They can further justify themselves by their own great Principle, and affirm
that they ought not to show any favor to differing Opinions, no though the
doubting Persons should come both to their Churches and Sacraments. This
befitting Gentleness is called a halting betwixt God and Baal; a cursed
Neutrality, a Laodicean Luke-warmness, and far from an Ardent Zeal for the
Cause of God. The Reason upon which they proceed so, is this; Religion, which
is an imitation of Him whom they profess to worship, requires that they should
make their Decrees against men in such a manner as the Dominicans and they do
(much what alike,) believe that God enacts in the Case of Absolute Reprobation:
which Sanction is so far from any Tenderness or Indulgence, that Calvin
himself calls his own Doctrine in this Article, The Horrid Decree. But I had
almost forgot one Piece of Toleration, which the Rehearser and others report;
Though there is no Toleration in the Genevian Church, yet after Church time on
Sundays, they tolerate Sports. This Liberty is not (I suppose) desired by the
Indulged; no, they have more Loyalty sure; they have heard it Preached, that it
was the Wicked Book of Sports (not a word of Rump and Army) that brought the
King to the Block. As for Geneva, had it not been that Democracie both in
Church and State had made some amends, you had been told ere now that it
tumbled into the Lemane Lake, or that it had been destroyed like Sodom and
Gomorrah. By this time, without doubt, you have enough for a Title Page, now
make room for the Rehearsal or Animadversions.

The Book begins like a Course of University-Studies, with Logic, and before
he has done, you will find him as Universally learned as the Renowned Knight
in our English Poet.

You have Page 1. a Dilemma against the Preface for being written after
Declaration that he would write no more. Now a Dilemma is otherwise called, A
two-horned Argument; whereas most men would have believed that he could have
made neither two horns nor one, since he left the College, but here they are;
Beware of a cu^s'd Ox, though his horns be short. It had been unmannerly and
false to call so great a Master of Wit a Bull. Now you wi^h your Preface look
to your self, What can you say in your own defense? Do you plead with the
Casuists, that any man may dispense with his own Promise, where the
Nonperformance prejudices no one? According to this Rule you are gone, for by
writing again, you have offended the sweet-temper'd Author of Evangelical Love.
You have affronted Atheism, which is accounted by Ricaut a considerable Sect
amongst the fatal Turks, and which in this Town, under the like Patronage of
Leviathan and Absolute Necessity, is not of a despicable strength. But this is
not all; You have hereby provoked my Author to waste much precious time in an
Answer: For he like the Humorous Lieutenant, was taken up in great and
Important Affairs of State: The Parliament may sit in February, and then the
GOOD OLD CAUSE, and The Work of all the Faithful in the Land, require his
Counsel in Cabals, and his Speeches in Public, as the most sufficient
Statesman and exact Orator that their Party does afford. Now would it not vex
a man to be thus unseasonably diverted from the weightiest Business of this
Nation, and of one or two besides? Certainly he has cause ^o complain in the
words of his Old Masters Wife, after the death of her Husband, That the burden
of three Commonwealths lies upon those shoulders.

I hope, Sir, he has paid you off with his Logic; and to show you that he is
good at more Weapons than one, have at you with his Chronology. Page 5. The
Press, that Villainous Engine, invented much about the same time with the
Reformation. I suppose by his former kindness, that he intends the Honor of
the Reformation for Mr. Calvin, who is placed in the Tables of Chronology to
the Year 1550, and the Press was invented 1440; a Villainous Engine, that it
should be so much before the Reformer. Now, though we had but few hundreds to
turn in, we should have brought Press and Reformation nearer together than, as
at present they stand, 1^0 years distant; but for one sinister Accident, had
not that hindered, the Reformation should have been attributed to Luther; who,
though he still took his Commons in a Monastery, wrote against Indulgences in
the Year 1517. Let not the weak Brethren mistake, as if he had been a
Persecutor of the Sober Party: it was only against the Popes Indulgence, which
was a sort of good natured Liberty of Conscience for men to sin Scot-free,
paying only for it a small Rent of Acknowledgment to his Holiness. That which
must for ever exclude Luther from this glorious Title of Reformer, is, That he
was not contented, Page 295. with three Ceremonies, but he had the Table se^
Altar-wise, and to be called an Altar, Candles, Crucifixes, Paintings, etc. so
that Calvin is your Man, so useful an Instrument that I could wish, for the
sake of my Author, he had been heard of but one hundred years sooner. But if
you make the worst of it, what signifies this in comparison of so many
thousands as the World is old: and if you set it over against Eternity, he is
not so much as one moment out in his Computation. But since this Chronology is
a dry Study, and Printing very laborious, he makes a facetious transition from
the Printing Press to the Wine Press.

If his thirsty Wit be so pretty, what may we expect from his new Wine? Here it
comes, Page 64. He was the Cock Divine and Cock-Wit, and walked among the Hens.
Oh how I love to see much made of a little! Some pretending Wits are so lazy
that they will take no pains with a Joke, except it will come easily they let
it alone; they, like unskilful Carvers of a Calves head, cannot find the best
bits; but our Author rather than miss any, will break his own brain. He is in
splitting Jests as famous as those celebrated men in their several Professions,
of whom one is called Doctor Tear-Text, the other the Pick-Lock of the Law.

Another Piece of the same Wit, is Page 10. where he tells us of contrary
Assignations, where the Fancy is up and Breeches down; with the rest, of
which Modesty forbids to make a Rehearsal, his excuse must be that of Hilkiah
the Quaker for his plain Song of Window-woing, He said it when the vain Spirit
was upon him. Whatever he says ill now, he recants Page 65. He declares that he
does not hear for all this, that he practiced upon the Honor of Ladies. This
is very charitable and true: but if this accusation had been just, the candor
of the Vindication had been wonderful. The jealous Fellow in Green-street was
not so favorable to the Blew-Gown, whom he caught in that Posture with his
Wife; for like an ill-bred Clown he used him untowardly, and so that it is a
shame to tell. Thus far my Author has showed a kind of Apothegmatical short
Wit; now to show that he can offer somewhat more stately and large, he performs
the fear of Aristotle's Rarefaction, that is, he gives you much of extension
upon a little of matter. He takes but two letters I. O. and with these alone he
writes from Page 80. to 91. Never did Bow-Bells ring more Changes than these
well tuned two. Say but what you would have, and here it is. I. O. is a
Talisman, though the Owner thereof is neither Conjurer nor Cunning Gypsy; I.
O. is Paean, Daughter of Inachus, Judicious, Jealous, Oraculous, Obscure. This
is an Abridgement of the Design carried on through 10 Pages, excepting some
straggling digressions, One is his advice to the Alphabet to fetch a Warrant
from Justice Bales against the Prefacer. I think he had better advised them to
another, except they meet with his Clerk at home, for since the Justice left
practicing Law, he has almost quite forgot these Clients. Further, If this
Alphabet should join its whole stock and lay it out to most advantage, it can
only give words, which is the same as to deceive: besides that, at the best,
bare words are but slender pay for a Suburb-Justice. When all is done, it is
(methinks) a dishonorable and cowardly trick for four and twenty to swear the
Peace against one, and to desire to have a man bound who wears no Sword. The
Letters, I am sure, had more courage in the Roman Empire: A few of them is
those days put Augustus to flight, though he was one of the most victorious
Emperors that the World ever saw. It shows a strange degeneracie, and is of
ill consequence; for if the Letters are so timorous, they may in time shun the
acquaintance of my worthy Author; but they have not served him so yet; for in
stead hereof they have furnished him with some words which are so much his
Propriety, that no man has been acquainted with them besides himself; they are
great rarities every where but with him: I will give you some of them,
Super-inducing Ornaments, Page 40. Vnhoopable Jurisdiction, 246. Pick-thankness
of the Clergy, 284.

I have not yet sufficiently admired his mighty Parts, how wonderfully they lie
toward Amplifications. A necessary Figure if a man were to manage a
Parliamentary debate till three in the Afternoon, in spite to a Dinner
bespoke at the Cock or Quakers: for by making sure of two ribs of cold Mutton,
and a Speech measured by a Brewers Glass, you may perform wonders, and earn a
Congregational Supper. He who is now Rehearser of the Farce, anon of the Close
Committee, and, for length-sake of himself again, is as tough and lasting as a
Stone-horse in a race; yet I have heard those who use the Newmarket-Course say
that the Colingwood-Gelding would hold it out to the end as true as the best.
This Gentleman formerly loved the sport, and thereupon I hope he will not count
it an impertinent Tale Another Excellency or Flower in his Book, is a
particular happiness in synonymous Expressions. As for example, Page 18. I knew
but lately, and now learn, the sense of this, if any, is, that his knowledge is
such, of which Metaphysics speak, wherein past and present is all one, but
they except his, and tell us that this sort of knowledege (...) only to the
(...) (...); or else the meaning is, that his Knowledge and Learning are two
things. In this our Author was very lucky, but quickly you shall se^ him in
full triumph, having utterly routed his Adversary Page 50. what a Bramble that
had Agents abroad and an Indefatigable Bramble, who ever heard the like? for my
part not I, excepting once, and that was in an old Piece, called the Book of
Judges, where one Iothum speaks of a Pragmatical Fellow, by name Abimelech,
whom he represents to be a Bramble, and brings in this Bramble making a Speech;
now that he was an indefatigable Bramble, will appear if you can but meet with
the Book. I have heard Hugh Peter's preach in Noll's days at Cambridge upon this
Parable, endeavoring to prove that the the Bramble-Government was better then
none at all. I begin to think that you are alike displeased with the Comparison
in both places. It may be you are no friend to Iotham the rightful King of
Sechem, but rather have an honor for the memory of Abimelech the Usurper.

What if your Adversary should find a patched hole about you? Page 49. You must
be conjured upon the Stage as often as Mr. Bays will ferret you. This one line
has Witchcraft, Play Houses and catching of Rappads. O delightful variety, how
soon he changes scents and hunts a fresh Metaphor! There shall be no Conjuring
Shows (fear not) at the Playhouse, if the Devil can hinder; lest one of the
Poets should be persuaded that there are Spirits. But still Mr. Bays will be a
Ferret, for he bites keenly: what will you then make of your self, one that
mumps with a pretty seeming Innocence, yet scratches and undermines the Ground
on which we tread? Well, now you had best carry the War into the Enemies
Country, and assault the Town at the Lemane Lake. This Town surely was designed
for more Controversies, besides those in Religion and Government: it is strange
that it should set men together by the ears about its situation; that this
Contention, like the Leprosie' crept into the Walls, should infect the very
Geographical Charts, you may see them divided like Hostile Sails, some standing
Southerly, and others West and by North. But if the old Report of Atlas be
true, that he holds the World to rights, this Geneva stands to the South of the
Lake.

If you ask who this Atlas is, know that he speaks English, and discourses
particularly of the Lemane Lake, and taught Heylin his skill; he has been
shown publicly by Mercator, and is still to be seen at Moxon's. I know some
Arbitrators who would serve you in this Controversy, and award that the
Transproser should place it on what side the Lake he pleases, provided that he
do not Trans -- it to this side of our Herring-pool. My Author next presents
you with his skill in Anatomy, which, with great pain, he learned at the
University: Page 50, 51. Smiling and frowning are performed in the face with
the same Muscles, very little altered. If this should prove false, he is to be
excused, seeing he meant it for a good comparison, which, except you be
charitable, will be quite spoiled; it may be his Muscles are quite different
other men's, he being an extraordinary production of Nature, who, as appears by
his Book, smiles and frowns in such quick interchanges, that for more
expedition, the same instruments were made on purpose for him to serve both
uses: but he seems to say it of the Adversary, who, notwithstanding the strange
Bill of Fare brought in for him, has a Face like other men, and (I believe)
just such Muscles. In short then the mistake is this. He had read of the
Muscles of the temples descending down to the lower Jaw, and there giving
motion. He had likewise read in the Latin Poets the two words for Temples and
Forehead used often promiscuously, as Raphe and Ralpho for the Verse sake; but
he never considered that Anatomy was more distinct than Poetry; and that the
forehead had Muscles of its own, whereby we frown at pleasure, and that these
end in the eyebrows. For all this the Gentleman is not discountenanced, but he
gives anotrial of Anatomical knowledge, Page 67. his Cerebellum was so dried
up, that there was more brains in a Wallnut, and both their shells were thin
and brittle; here the Cerebellum and the shell of the Wallnut are compared: it
is likely he means it of a Wallnut not yet fit to gather, then it is green and
unripe, and such, as he would persuade, is the head of his Adversary; but it
had been more according to Art, to have made the resemblance betwixt the
Cerebellum and the Kernel, save only that the Cerebellum is much the softer
substance, but agrees in this, that it is covered like the Kernel; but since he
is displeased with the thin shell about the Brain, which I thought had been a
sign of a good Head, as it is of a good Nut; I with him much joy of a thick
Scull. The Author, being aware that the Cerebellum was empty, raises the
Hypochondria Page 50. into the Region of the Brain. Beware, Sir, left some
Quibler and Anatomist, like one you know, shall say, that he has then guts in
his Brains: a Proverb expressing a Man of Wit and Parts. I should propound
another considerable Instance of your Learning, but that I am afraid of setting
the Anti-Mathematician on your back. I will only give such a hint as you and I
and no other can understand. You remember the Square-Cap, Colledge-Quadrangle,
Round World, and Quadrature of Circle. How would Mr. Hobbs take it, to be thus
robbed of his late Glorious Achievements, that an University Capper, or any
idle Fellow that turns or drinks about till the ground runs round with him,
should, as truly as he, discover the Quadrature of the Circle.

Next come your Reports out of History, which are choice like your newfound
words, Page 123. Julian himself, who I think was first a Reader, and held forth
in the Christian Churches, before he turned Apostate, etc. Well, Sir, if you
miscarry in History, as you had a casual slip in Anatomy, I would advise you to
renounce the use of all in Writing, except Fancy and Censure. It might be
doubted, whether Julian were a Reader in the Church: Socrates Scholasti^us says
he was designed; Sozomen, that he was judged fit; though Theodoret affirms,
that he did publicly Read the Scriptures; but except this be preaching and
holding forth, which certainly will not pass with you for a Sermon, Julian was
never a Holder-forth. To be a Reader as he was, is no more than to be a
Lay-Clerk in a Cathedral. The business of Preaching was scarce permitted to
Priests in the Primitive Church; for though we find that the Readers at
Alexandria did Interpret, that is, Translate to them the Scripture; yet the
Historian who relates this, to wit, Socrates, adds that Arius was the first
Priest who did ever in that City preach to the Assemblies of Christians: but it
may be Julian did it in the Independent way, as a Gifted-Brother, and that
would please your Client I. O. or else as a Reader, he was of the Clergy, and
in Holy Order, and thereby you gratify the Papists. It will do good service
which way so ere it falls, seeing both of them oppose the Common Enemy; the
Church of England. But if you could place this Julian in some Cure of Souls,
and had once discovered that he was either Parson or Vicar, you would easily
conclude that he did Holdforth. You may conclude that you have done the
business by the authority of Ammianus Marcellinus, who in his 22. Book having
spoken of the Christians immediately before, adds, Iulianus quinetiam Exvicario
earundem partium nimius fautor, etc. which you thus construed, Julian from
being a Vicar, became too great a Favourer of that Party. O brave Merry Andrew!
this i will warrant it pleases you. But what pity it is, in that Age of the
Church there were neither Vicaridges, nor Impropriations. And further, this
Julian was not the Apostate, but a Deputy under Constantius, turned out by
Julian the Emperor, as is signified by Exvicario, which word is by Marcellinus
barbarously set as the Nominative in apposition to Iulianus; as is evident in
the next line, where he calls Artemias the Exduce Egypti: so that he seems to
have learned his Accidence, but not Grammar; he thinks that wherever he meets
with the Preposition Ex, the next Nown, though part of the same word, must
always be the Ablative Case. But I am now quite tired with these petty
Criticisms, so that for your farther satisfaction in the Grammatical part I
refer, you next see him, to blind M. who teaches School about M^re-fields. What
think you of this sorry Latinist, Marcellinus? was he not fit to have served as
Latin Secretary about those Times when the Super-Reformists intended to have
made Masters and Fellows of Colleges like Reformed Officers? when the Gustices
(with a G) of B -- shire set their marks to a Petition for suppressing
Universities; doubtless at that time when Latin was the Language of the Beast,
he might have kept in Office, because what he wrote differed much from what the
Beast bellowed.

If you are not weary of hearing, he shall present you with more History; Page
204. He would not, as Heliodorus Bishop of Trissa, I take it, that renounced
his Bishopric rather than his Title to the History of Theagenes and Chariclea.
If you dare believe a faithful Historian, ancienter than any who affirms the
contrary, the Author of the Aethiopicks or the History of Theagenes and
Chariclea was not Heliodorus, but Theodorus, not a Bishop, but at large a
Clergyman, which by his Translator is rendered a Priest, not of Trissa but of
Triva; this account is given by Socrates, but he says not a word of his
renouncing his Office in the Church: He only notes that he was the Ringleader
of that peculiar Custom in Thessaly that Priests should renounce their wives.
The first, who affirmed that he preferred his Book above his Clergy, was the
fabulous Nicephorus; one, who when he does not steal, invents either gross
scandals, or feigned Miracles: so that you may put up your Trumpery, this Ware
will not pass, except with those who endure not to read the History of the
Primitive Church, because it is so unlike their own, however it will make chat
among the Brotherhood. Julian the Apostate, formerly a Preacher of a National
Church, exchanged his Faith for Idolatry; and Bishop Heliodore chose rather to
be silenced, than condemn his vain and frothy Romance. But you afford your
Friends better entertainment in pointing at some of the Church of England
lately dead, as if they were Popishly affected. He who begs the Requiem, had
good cause, it seems, to bespeak the favor, that his memory might be blessed,
as it is hoped he is, and that his good name might be at rest as well as his
body: for you have laid the greatest blemish in the World on him, that he
should accuse a Church of Schism before God, and still live in the Communion
and Ministry of the same; it had been better that you had writ his own words
immediately from his Book; he says it with an If, etc. which he endeavors to
disprove to be the reason of the Separation; your leaving out the supposition,
and affirming it as an absolute assertion, inverts his meaning utterly, so that
the accusation is like that of Serapion to St. Chrysostom against Severianus,
for saying that Christ was never incarnate: whereas his words were, that if
Severianus died a Christian, Christ was never incarnate.

But something is the matter that he is so offended with these Episcopal men:
he tells you Page 209. It Is a shame they should keep such a pudder for
symbolical Ceremonies. He could have endured if they had signified nothing, for
then they had been like his writing against them. O but they are made
Sacraments, says he, yet he affirms not that any pretend in their behalf, eiher
a bestowal of Grace, or a Divine Institution: So that it is not the Church but
he that makes them Sacraments; and on such terms he needs not quarrel with the
7 Sacraments, but may multiply them to 77. He would have it be in the Church as
of late in the Commonwealth, that those who are placed in subjection might
choose whether they will obey or not. I doubt if he might have a Child, he would
not reckon it his duty to yield to the Tender weak one, when his Commands are
disputed, of how small moment or indifferency soever they be in themselves. Let
me advise him as Lycurgus did the Petitioner for Democracy in Sparta, to
practice it first in his own Family. Thus he takes away all Power in the
Church, even in the least things, not leaving as much as any petty Corporation
enjoys, to make Bylaws not contradictory to the Public; no, in this the thing
is incapable, and in others the persons are.

Page 300 he whispers though he looks another way, That the Clergy are not so
well fitted as others by education for Political Affairs. I confess indeed,
they want one or two pieces of fitness with which this Gentleman is plentifully
furnished, Ambition and Conceitedness of Sufficiency. But as to the rest, it
may be said, that there were no notorious Misfortunes that in former Ages befell
their State-Ministeries; they have been both employed and approved by the
wisest Princes in Christendom at their Council-Boards, and in weighty
Embassies; and at this day it cannot be perceived that the Order, either by
Natural Endowments, or Education, is more incapable than their Predecessors.
But now he is making his approaches to fall upon the Government of King Charles
I. and according to old Custom, the Guard of Churchmen must feel the first
blows. How unfortunate on Earth still is this blessed ROYAL MARTYR? that when
his Enemies are forgiven, he cannot from them obtain a pardon for his
Innocence, though he sought and di'd for Religion and Liberty of his Subjects,
yet to depose and murder him again his Rebels deprive him of this glory of his
present Crown. Now, Sir, you shall excuse me, if I cannot so smoothly pass over
your want of due Loyaly, as I have your mistaken well wishes to Learning.

Before he comes to his Apology for the Rebellion, he begins to throw dirt at
the most resolute opposer of its contrivance, the truly Great and Worthy
Archbishop LAUD: Page 301 Though so learned, so pious, so wise a Man, he seemed
to know nothing beyond Ceremonies, Arminianism, and Manwaring. Dull and
unmannerly! Does it (think you) become the Son of Vicar to prate thus of an
Archbishop? it is done like a Ianizary, who though he be the Son of a Christian,
is the worst Enemy to the Profession. Is this your Complement, to embrace him,
that you may stab him? Is it your Protection for railing whole Pages, that you
Preface the Libel with his just Titles of Pious, Learned, and Wise? Do you
think the World so dim-sighted, that they cannot discern what is under so thin
a Veil? Such as you, have need of a good memory; for your little cunning and
pernicious malice put you upon flat contradictions in the same period. Though
he was Pious, Learned, and Wise, yet he seemed to understand nothing beyond
Ceremonies, etc. What, nothing more! seemed he to know nothing of the Primitive
Religion Restored? Nothing how to root out, both by Disputation and Discipline,
the abuses and encroachments of the Church of Rome? was he ignorant of these,
or is all this nothing? He knew too the dangerous Correspondence between the
seditious Projectors of a War at home, and in Scotland: to this Design he put a
stop, and had, if others would have done their parts, put a happy end.

Another of your Inconsistencies is, Page 301. I am confident the Bishop
studied to do both God and his Majesty good service: yet p. 302. resolved what
ever came on it to make the best of him. Though you change the number, yet the
whole process of the Discourse convinces, that the Archbishop is not excepted.
How do these agree? to study to do his Majesty good service, and to resolve
what e're came on it, whether to his advantage or not, to be gainers, and make
the best of him. No such matter. He was assured that the advice which he and
the Noblest Temporal Lords gave the King, was for the interest of Religion and
Peace. And he was in like manner sensible, that thereby he did expose himself
to a storm, foretelling his Friends that he saw it hanging over his head. You
know not what it is to serve your Prince for Conscience Sake, nor what
undesigning Generosity lodged in his breast, who could propound no greater
reward to himself, than the satisfaction of doing his duty aright. To make the
best of a Master, is a Character better befitting a little Fellow, who had
formerly been a whissling Clerk to a Usurper, and afterward turned Broker for
all Phanatick Ware. Now you come closer to the Point, and begin the War again
with a Declaration of the Causes drawn with as much tenderness as if it had
been penned by a Committee of the Long Parliament; having first imposed silence
on those who renew the memory of what has been done against the Old King, you
will have the Case argued only in behalf of his Enemies. What is this but to
muzzle the Dogs while the Wolfs do range? Would you have the Indictment
confessed by standing MUTE, when as the Witnesses are the only Malefactors?
Your account of the Original of the War which was lately, is (thereby) known to
be untrue: however you deserve a salary from the Impenitent Rout of
Sequestrators and Army Officers. Alack, Dear Hearts! Harmless Good men! they
would not have wronged a Worm with their good will! they had never lift up a
hand against the King, or injured any of his Friends to the value of an English
Penny, but that they were constrained to do what they did, or else lose their
Religion and Liberty! So that henceforth they ought not to be troubled, for the
Act of Indemnity has acquit them from punishment, and the Rehearsal, has
absolved them from suspicion of Guilt: This is the certain meaning of that sly
insinuation, Page 303. Whether it were a War of Religion or of Liberty, is not
worth the labor to enquire, which soever was at the top, the other was at the
bottom. Now let his Party get this Clause without Book, and by Authority
hereof, boldly to the very teeth call all the Old Royalists Fighters against
God, Plotters against Public Welfare, and undeserving of that which they
endeavored to overthrow; but if they will please in this accusation to pass by
the Chief person that ever appeared in Arms against them, they expect to have
the Civility acknowledged by his Heir. But it may be thought perhaps that I am
too severe and uncharitable to the Author, and put too harsh a sense upon his
words: as if he were an Advocate, when he only plays the Historian; that he
only tells us their pretenses, not as if they were just grounds: or that he
defends these things as a good Cause of War. It Is true indeed, he says only,
that it was too good a Cause to be fought for. Now, according to Natural
Logic, whatsoever is too good, is good enough, and more to spare. As if I
should say of the Transproser, in the course way of speaking wherein he treats
others, that he was too much a Knave to be trusted with any Office in the
Kingdom; this would include that he was Knave enough.

Now we speak of employment in the Commonwealth, he is sure to be excluded from
many places, for refusing to declare that it is not lawful upon any cause
whatsoever (yea, though it be too good a cause) to take up Arms against the
King. But to sweeten the harshness of what he last gave, he adds, the Arms of
the Church are Prayers and Tears; It is true indeed, but the Adversaries of the
Church have other Arms, yet they use the saying to good purpose, and sing this
in men's ears till they have lulled them asleep; where they intend to make an an
onset. It has been observed that this very sentence was the subject of a
Papist's Book in Q. Elizabeth's reign, to make the Governors more secure,
whilst they were restless. Yet this Author pretends so much respect to
Government, that he fairly warns Princes of the danger which may ensue again,
if they invade Religion and Liberty. Page 304. The fatal Consequences of that
Rebellion can only serve as Sea-marks unto wise Princes to avoid the Causes. It
only serves for Princes, he was not sensible that the People were losers. For
his own part he does not find that he had cause then to complain, but as for
Princes, to them they stand as Sea-marks, they show that if they touch there
abouts. they shall be split as sure as if they dashed upon a Rock: as they love
themselves, let them avoid giving the People these Causes of a War. What if
they will not take fair warning? why then they must take what comes. How much
better might he have assigned, as the cause of the War, A wanton Pride of the
People, bred out of Prosperity and long ease, infected with a touch of
Levelling Principles, derived over to their Politics from the New Models of
Church Government. He might farther have demonstrated, that these materials
were wrought by Aemulation and Covetousness. Not forgetting that some Grandees
ordered the Puritan Lecturers, like Apothecaries, to make up, according to
their prescriptions, a Bolus with some counterfeit drops of Gods Glory, that
the Well-meaning multitude might more glibly swallow the Poison.

I have now upon the matter done with you: Let me only advise you as a Friend,
suddenly to clap up a Peace with the Government upon this single Article, that
neither might suffer by the other. As to what you have wrote against the Author
of the Preface, the most part has either been answered to your Principal I. O.
or else needs none. Or if it seem so to require, it carries a solution near the
difficulty. What you object against the Church of England, is Rehearsal; and as
it has been repeated often by several, so has it been oftener confuted.

Let me leave you with a passage in History, and the consideration in how many
Circumstances this is, and may be your case. The short of it is thus; Eutropius
the Eunuch was a busy Solicitor with the Civil Magistracy, to have a Law made
against the Privileges and Power of the Church, not long after it happened
that he was utterly ruined by the very same contrivance, which his malice
against Ecclesiastical Polity had framed.

THE END.

