Mr. SMIRKE; OR, THE DIVINE in MODE: BEING Certain Annotations, upon the
Animadversions on the Naked Truth.

Together with a Short Historical Essay, concerning General Councils, Creeds,
and Impositions, in Matters of Religion.

Nuda, sed Magna est Veritas, and praevalebit.

BY ANDREAS RIVETUS, Junior, Anagr. RES NUDA VERITAS.

Printed Anno Domini MDC LXXVI.

To the CAPTIOUS READER.
ALL that I have to require of thee is, That wheresoever my Style or Principles
Strike out, and keep not within the same Bounds, that the most Judicious Author
of the Naked Truth has all along observed; he may not therefore be traced. He
could best have writ a Defense proportionable to his own Subject; had he
esteemed it neeessary, or that it was decent for him to have entered the Pit
with so Scurrilous an Animadverter. But I thought it a piece of due Civility
from one of the Laities, to interesse my self for one of the Clergy, who had so
highly obliged the People of England. And I will answer for mine own faults, I
ask thee no pardon. Nor therefore is either the Author, or any other particular
Person, or any Party, to be accused, or misrepresented upon my Private
Account. For the rest, neither let any particular Man, or Order, enlarge my
meaning against themselves, further than in Conscience they find they are
guilty. Nor let the body of Chaplains think themselves affronted. None more
esteems them, nor loves their Conversation better than I do. They are the
succeeding hope of our Church, the Youth of our Clergy; and the Clergy are the
Reserve of our Christianity. Some of them, whom I know, have indeed, and do
continue daily to put very Singular Obligations upon me; but I write to a
Nobler (...), than to revenge my Petty Concernments.

Adien.

The Errata's are too many to be Corrected; But p. 7. l* ult. Eighth is to be
struck out.

Mr. SMIRKE, Or the Divine in Mode.
IT has been the Good Nature (and Politicians will have it the Wisdom) of most
Governors to entertain the people with Public Recreations, and therefore to
encourage such as could best contribute to their Divertisement. And hence
doubtless it is, that our Ecclesiastical Governors also (who as they yield to
none for Prudence, so in good Humor they exceed all others,) have not disdained
of late years to afford the Laity no inconsiderable Pastime. Yea so great has
been their condescension that, rather then fail, they have carried on the
Merriment by men of their own Faculty, who might otherwise by the gravity of
their Calling, have claimed an exemption from such Offices. They have Ordained
from time to time several of the most Ingenious and Pregnant of their Clergy to
supply the Press c^nually with new Books of ridiculous and facetious argument.
Wherein diverse of them have succeeded even to admiration: in so much that by
the reading thereof, the ancient Sobr^ety and Seriousness of the English Nation
has been in some good measure discussed and worn out of fashion. Yet, though
the Clergy have hereby manifested that nothing comes amiss to them, and
particularly, that when they give their minds to it, no sort of men are more
proper or capable to make sport for Spectators; it has so happened by the
rewards and Promotions bestowed upon those who have labored in this Province,
that many others in hopes of the like P^ferment, although otherwise by their
Parts, their Complexion and Education unitted for this Jocular Divinity, have
in order to it wholly neglected the more weighty cares of their Function. And
from hence it proceeds, that to the no small scandal and disreputation of our
Church, (...) great Arcanum of their State has been discovered and div^ged:
That, albeit Wit be not ^nconsistent and incompatible with a Clergyman, yet
neither is it inseparable from them. So that it is of concernment to my Lords
the Bishops henceforward to repress those of 'em who have no Wit from Writing,
and to take care that even those that have, do husband it better, as
not-knowing-to what exigency they may be reduced: But however that they the
Bishops ^e not too forward in Licensing and perfixing their venerable Names to
such Pamphlets. For admitting, though I am not too positive in it, that our
Episcopacy is of Apostolical Right, yet we do not find that among all those
gifts then given to men, that which we call Wit is enumerated: nor yet among
th^se qlifications requisite to a Bishop* And therefore should they out o^
Comp^cy for an Author, o^ Deli^ht in the Argument, or (...) of (...) of a ^ll
Book, their own understandings will be answerable, and irreverent people, that
cannot distinguish, will be ready to think that such of them differ from men of
Wit, not only in Degree, but in Or^* For all are not of my mind, who could
never see any one ele^ted to that Dignity, but I presently conceived a greater
opinion of his Wit then ever I had formerly. But some do not (...) to (...)
that even they, the Bishops, come by their^ not by Inspiration, (...) by
Teaching, but even as the poo^ Laity do sometimes light upon i^, by a good
Mother? Which has ^sioned the homely Scotch* Proverb that, An Ounce of Mother
^it is worth a Pound of Clergy* And as they come by it as do other men, so they
possess it on the same condition* That they cannot transmit it by breathing,
touching, or any natural (...) to other persons^ not so much as to their most
Domes^ Chaplain* or to the closest Re^identiary. That the King himself, who is
no (...) the Spring of That, then he is the Fountain of Honor, yet has never
used the Dubbing or Creating of Wits as a Flower of his Prerogative: much less
can the Ecclesiastical Power confe^re it with the same case as they do the Holy
Orders. That whatsoever they can do of that kind is, at uttermost, to (...)
power men by their authority and commission, no other (...) in the (...) of
Midwives o^ Physicians. But that a^ to their collating of any internal talent
or ability, they could never p^tend to it* their grants and their prohibitions
are alike invalids, and they can neither capacitate one man to be Witty, nor
hinder another (...) being so, further then as the Press is at their Dev^ (...)
which if i^ be the Case, they cannot be too (...), and should be very
exquisite, seeing this way (...) w^iting is ^und so necessary, in making choice
of ^it (...). The Churches credit is more interested in a^ Ecclesia^ (...) then
i^ (...) Lay Chancellor. It is no small ^rust (...) to whom the Bishop shall
commit: Omne and omnimodum suum Ingenium tam Temp^rale quam Spirituale: And,
however it goes with Excommunication, they should take good heed to what manner
of person they delegate the Keys of Laughter. It is not every man that is
qualified to sustain the Dignity of the Churches Jester: and, should they take
as exact a scrutiny of them as of the Non-conformists through their Diocesses,
the number would appear inconsiderable upon this Easter Visitation. Before men
be admitted to so important an employment, it were fit they underwent a severe
Examination; and that it might appear, first, whether they have any Sense: for
without that how can any man pretend, and yet they do, to be ingenious? Then,
whether they have any Modesty: for without that they can only be scurrilous and
impudent. Next, whether any Truth: for true Jests are those that do the
greatest execution. And Lastly, it were not amiss that they gave some account
too of their Christianity: for the world has always hitherto been so uncivil as
to expect something of that from the Clergy* in the design and style even of
their lightest and most uncanonical Writings. And though I am no rigid Imposer
of a Discipline of mine own devising, yet had any thing of this nature entered
in to the minds of other men, it is not impossible that a late Pamphlet,
published by Authority and proclaimed by the Gazette, Animadversions upon a
late Pamphlet, entit^led the Naked Truth, or, the true state of the Primitive
Church, might have been spared.

That Book so called The Naked Truth, is a Treatise, that, were it not for this
its Opposer, needs no commendation: being writ with that Evidence and
Demonstration of Spirit, that all sober men cannot but give their Assent and
Consent to it, unasked. It is a Book of that kind, that no Christian scarce can
peruse it without wishing himself had been the Author, and almost imagining
that he is so: the Conceptions therein being of so Eternal an Idea, that every
man finds it to be but the Copy of an Original in his own Mind, and though he
never read it till now, wonders it could be so long before he remembered it.
Neither, although there be a time when as they say all truths are not to be
spoken, could there ever have come forth any thing more seasonable. When the
sickly Nation had been so long indisposed and knew not the Remedy, but (having
Taken so many things, that rather did it harm then good,) only longed for some
Moderation, and as soon as it had tasted this, seemed to it self sensibly to
recover. When their Representatives in Parliament had been of late so frequent
in consultations of this nature, and they the Physicians of the Nation, were
ready to have received any wholesome advice for the Cure of our Malady: It
appears moreover plainly that the Author is Judicious, Learned, Conscientious,
a sincere Protestant, and a true Son, If not a Father, of the Church of
England. For the (...)* the Book cannot be free from the imperfections in^ident
to all humane endeavors, ^t those so small, and guarded every where with so
much Modesty, that it seems here was none left for the Animadverter, who might
otherwise have blushed to reproach him. But some there were that thought Holy
Church was concerned in it, and that no true born Son of our Mother of England
but ought to have it in detestation. Not only the Churches but the
Coffee-Houses rung against it, they itinerated like Excise-^pyes from one house
to another, and some of the Morning and Evening Chaplains burnt their lips with
perpetual discoursing it out of reputation, and loading the Author, whoever he
were, with all contempt, malice and obloquy. No^ could this suffice them, but a
lasting Pillar of Infamy must be erected to eternize his Crime and his
Punishment. There must be an answer to him, in Print, and that not according to
the ordinary rules of civility, or in the sober way of arguing Controversy,
but with the utmost extremity of J^ere, Disdain, and Indignation: and happy the
man whose lot it should be to be deputed to that performance. It was
Shrove-Tuesday with them, and, not having yet forgot their Boyes-play, they had
set up this Cock, and would have been contet some of them to have ventured
their Coffee-Farthings, yea their Easter-Pence by advance, to have a sting at
him. But there was this close youth who treads always upon the heels of
Ecclesiastical Preferment, but has come nearer the heels of the Naked Truth
then were for his service, that rather by favor the^ any tolerable sufficiency
^ied away this employment, as he has done many others from them. So that being
the man pitched upon, he took up an unfortunate resolution that he would be
Witty. Unfortunate I say, and no less Criminal: for I dare aver that never any
person was more manifestly guilty of the sin against Nature. But however to
write a Book of that virulence, and at such a season was very improper: even in
the Holy time of Lent when, whether upon the Sacred account, it behoved hi^
^ther to have subjugated and mortified the swelling of his passions* or whether
upon the Political reason, he might well have forborne his young Wit, as but
newly Pigg'd or Calv'd, in order to the growth of the yearly summer provisions.
Yet to work he fell, not omitting first to ^m himself up in the whole wardrobe
of his Function* as well because his Wit consi^ing wholly in his Dres^e, he
would (and 'twas hi^ concernment (...)) have it all about him* as to the end
that being hu^'d up in all his Ecclesiastical (...), he might appear more
formidable, and in the pride of his Heart and Habit out- ^niface an Humble
M^derator. So that there was (...) to do in ^quipping of Mr. Smirke then there
is about (...), and the Di^ine is M^de ^ight have vyed with Sir Fopling
Flutter. The Vestry and the Tir^ng-Roome were both exhausted, and it is hard to
say whether there went more attendants toward the Composing of Himself, or of
his Pamphlet. Being thus dressed up, at last forth he comes in Print. No Poet
either the First or the Third day could be more concerned, and his little
Party, like men hired for the purpose, had posted themselves at every corner to
feign a more numerous applause: but clapped out of time, and disturbed the
whole Company.

Annotations upon his Animadversions on the Title, Dedication, etc.
AT first bolt in his Animadversions on the Title, the Dedication, and the
Epistle to the Reader, he denounces sentence before inquiry but against the
Book it self, forgetting already his subject, so early his brain circulates;
and says, that, Having perused the Book thoroughly he is abundantly satisfied
not only from his Style, which is something Enthusiastic (his speech bewrays
him) but from his matter and Principles if he stick to any, that the Author is
a borderer upon Fanaticis^e and does not know it. Even as the Animadverter is
upon Wit and Reason; for I have heard that Borderers for the most part, are at
the greatest distance, and the most irreconcilable. What the Style is of a
Title, and what the Principles of a Dedication and Epistle to the Reader (for
these, if any, the Animadverter ought here to have stuck to) it is indeed a
weighty disquisition fit for a man of his Talent. But I have read them over,
and so have others of better judgment, and find every sentence therein poised
with so much reverence, humility, and judicious Piety, that from an humane pen
(allowing the Reader any tolerable share too of Humanity) I know not what more
could have been expected. And as to the Matter, it seems to be but a Paraphrase
upon the Principles of the Song of the Angels; Glory to God on high, on Earth
Peace, Good Will toward men. If to speak at that rate, and upon such a subject,
with so good an intention, be to have an Enthusiastic Style or Fanatical
Principles, it is the first crime of which I should be glad to be guilty. What
in the mean time shall we say to these men, who out of a perverse jealousy they
have of the Non-conformists, ru^, which few wise men do into the contrary
extreme, affixing such odious names to every word or thing that is sober and
serious, that with their good will they would render it impracticable for men
even to discourse pertinently concerning Religion or Christianity? Put it upon
this short issue: If the style of the Epistle before the Naked Truth be
Enthusiastic and Fanatical, the style of the Animadverter is presumed, and so
allowed of, as Spiritual, Divine, and Canonical.

The first Evidence that he produces after so hasty a sentence against the
Author, is out of the Book too, not out of the Title, Dedication, or Epistle;
that he has said p. 17. In the Primitive times when the whole world of Jews and
Gentiles were enemies to the Church and not one of your Ceremonies to preserve
it, the simple Naked Truth without any Surplice to cover it, without any
Ecclesiastical Policy to maintain it, overcame all, and so it would do now did
we trust to it, and the Defender of it. And upon this he runs division. The
Defender in Heaven, God; the Defender of the Faith His Majesty; and the many
Defenders (among whom I suppose he reckons himself of the Principal) who may be
trusted, This is all fooling, whereas the Author does manifestly intend it of
God Almighty, and could not otherwise. For though His Majesty may well be
trusted for his Reign with the Defense of the Naked Truth, yet most of us know
that in the Primitive Times, His Majesty was too young for that employment, and
that it was God alone who could then protect it, when the Defenders of the
Faith were all Heathens, and most of them Persecutors of Christianity. He then
descants no less upon Naked Truth; The Naked Truth of our Cause, or the Naked
Truth of the Pamphlet, or, he knows not what Naked Truth. But he says it
should have been Truth Fle'd (so he had the Butchery of it) Which is like
Pilate and no worse man, who when our Savior told him, he came into the world
John 18. 37. That he might bear witness to the Truth, asked him, What is Truth?
and then though he confessed he found no evil in this man, delivered him over,
against his Conscience, to be Stripped, Scourged, Fley'd, and afterward
Crucified. Such like also is his talking, that this is Stripping the Church to
skin, nay skin and all, and skin for skin: so wretchedly does he hunt
over hedge and ditch for an University Quibble. The casual progress and leaping
consequences of any man's memory are more rational then this method of his
understanding, and the Non-Conformists Concordance is a Discourse of more
coherence then such Ammadversions: I have heard a mad man having got a word by
the end ramble after the same manner: in this only he is true to himself, and
candid to the Author, having avowed that he had s^nn'd the Book through, this
hacking and vain repetition being just like it, when we were at our

Montibus inquit erant and erant, sub montibus illis:
Rifit Atlantiades, and, me mihi perfide prodis,
Me mihi prodis, ait.
For as I remember this Scanning was a liberal Art that we learned at
Grammar School; and to Scann Verses as he does the Authors Prose, before we
did, or were obliged to understand them. But his tugging all this while at
skin, and skin for skin, and all that he has he will give for his life, merely
to hale in an ill favored Jeer at the Author, and truly with some profaneness,
for proposing the Naked Truth as necessary for the self preservation of our
Church, and an expedient against Popery; is, (whatsoever the Animadverters
judgment be) a retchlesness and mockery ill becoming his Character. And it
savors of the Liquorishness of a Trencher-Chaplain, little concerned in the
Cura Animarum, so he may but Curare Cuticulam.

But as to his fastidious reproach of the Authors seeking of God, his Fasts and
his Prayers, the Animadverter is more excusable, having doubtless writ his
Pamphlet without practicing any of these Fanatical Superstitions, as neither
was it requisite; But if he had, 'twas such an answer to his Prayers as never
before came from Heaven. The Animadverter is proof against all such Exorcismes
and although our Savior prescribed these remedies against the most obstinate
Devils, this man it seems is possessed with a superior spirit which is not to
be cast out, no not by Prayer and Fasting, but sets them at defiance.

Nor had the Animadverter, when he considered himself, less reason to blame the
Author for deliberating so long before he published his Book, and for doing it,
then with so much Modesty. These are Crimes of which the Animadverter will
never be suspected or accused by any man at least they will do him very much
wrong, but however it will be impossible ever to convict him of them. But to
word it too so superciliously! This has been the Travel of his mind, since he
had these thoughts, which he has been humbly conceiving these two years; time
enough for an Elephant to bring forth in. Why there is, it is true, a winged
sort of Elephant, has a peculiar Trunk too like the other, is not so docile
and good-natured; but impudent flying in every man's face, and sanguinary
thirsting always after blood, and as if it were some considerable Wild-Beast,
makes a terrible Buzze; but in conclusion it is a pitiful, giddy, blind,
troublesome Insect, ingendered in a nights time in every Marish, can but run a
Pore through and give a skinne-wound, and the least touch of a man's finger will
crush it. In the Naked Truth it is but a Gnat: and such is the Animadverter
compared with the Author.

But in this next Paragraph the Animadverter seems to have outshot himself,
that not content with having passed his own Ecclesiastical Censure upon the
Author, he forges too in his mind a sentence of the Lords and Commons assembled
in Parliament: who, he believes and it is probable, would have doomed the Book
to be burnt by the Hangman. In this he has meddled beyond his last: but it is
some men's property: yet neither is it so likely they would have done it, at the
same time when they were about passing an Act for the easing all Protestant
dissenters from Penalties, had he vouched for the Convocation, his Belief, or
his probability might have been of more value.

But what has he to do, (yet they have a singular itch to it) with Parliament
business: or how can so thin a scull comprehend or divine the results of the
Wisdom of the Nation? Unless he can, as in the Epilogue.

Legion his name, a People in a Man,
And, instead of Sir Fopling Flutter, he Mr. Smirke.

Be Knight oth'-Shire and represent them all.
Who knows indeed but he may, by some new and extraordinary Writ, have been
summoned upon the Emergency of this Book, to Represent in his peculiar person
the whole Representative? Yet by his leave, though he be so, he ought not to
Undertake before he be Assembled. I know indeed he may have had some late
Precedents for it, and for some years continuance, from men too of his own
Profession. And if therefore he should Undertake, and to give a good Tax for
it, Yet what security can he have himself, but that there may rise such a
Contest between the Lords and Commons within him, that, before they can agree
about this Judicial Proceeding against the Book, it may be thought fit to
Prorogue him.

The Crimes indeed are heinous, and if the Man and Book be guilty, may when
time comes, furnish special matter for an Impeachment. That he has made a
breach upon their Glorious Act of Unniformity, Violated their Act, their most
necessary Act (the Animadverter has reason by this time to say so) against
Printing without a License: and I suppose he reserves anotherfor aggravation in
due time; the Act against seditious Conventicles. For these three are all of a
piece, and yet are the several Pieces of the Animadverters Armor: and are
indeed no less, nor no more then necessary: For considering how empty of late
the Church Magazines have been of that Spiritual Armor, which the Apostle
found sufficient against the assaults of whatsoever enemy, even of Satan; what
could men in all humane reason do less, then to furnish such of the Clergy as
wanted, with these Weapons of another Warfare? But, although these Acts were
the true effects of the Prudence and Piety of that season, yet it is possible
(but who can provide for all cases?) that, if there have not already, there may
arise thereby in a short time some notable inconvenience. For suppose that
Truth should one day or other come to be Truth and every man a Liar, (I mean of
the humor of this Parliamentum Indoctum, this single Representativer, this
Animadverter) you see there is no more to be said, as the Case stands at
present, but Executioner do your Office. Nor therefore can it ever enter into
my mind, as to that Act particularly of Printing, that the Lawgivers could
thereby intend to allow any man a promiscuous Licenciousness, and Monopoly of
Printing Pernicious Discourses, tending to sow and increase dissension through
the Land (of which there is but too large a crop already;) as neither of
Prohibiting Books dictated by Christian meekness and charity for the promoting
of Truth and Peace among us, and reconciling our Differences; no nor even of
such as are writ to take out the Blots of Printing-Inke, and wipe off the
Aspersions which diverse of the Licensed Clergy cast upon men's private
Reputations: and yet this is the use to which the Law is sometimes applied. And
this Animadverter, who could never have any rational confidence or pretense to
the Press or Print, but by an unlucky English saying men have, or by the
Text-Letters of his Imprimatur, arraignes this worthy Author for Printing
without Allowance, as if it were a sin against the Eleventh Commandment. Though
a Samaritan perhaps may not practice Physic without a License, yet must a
Priest and a Levite always pass by on the other side and if one of them, in an
Age, pour Oil and Wine into the Wounds of our Church (instead of Tearing them
Wider,) must he be Cited for it into the Spiritual Court and incur all
Penalties? This high Charge made me the more curious to inquire particularly
how that Book The Naked Truth was published, which the Animadverter himself
pretends to have got a sight of with some difficulty. And I am credibly
informed that the Author caused four hundred of them and no more to be Printed
against the last Session but one of Parliament. For nothing is more usual then
to Print and present to them Proposals of Revenue, Matters of Trade, or any
thing of Public Convenience; and sometimes Cases and Petitions, and this,
which the Animadverter calls the Authors Dedication, is his humble Petition to
the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament: And understanding the Parliament
inclined to a Temper in Religion, he prepared these for the Speakers of both
Houses and as many of the Members as those could furnish. But that, the
Parliament rising just as the Book was delivering out and before it could be
presented, the Author gave speedy order to suppress it till another Session.
Some covetous Printer in the mean time getting a Copy, surreptitioufly
Reprinted it, and so it flew abroad without the Authors knowledge, and against
his direction. So that it was not his, but the Printers fault to have put so
great an obligation upon the public. Yet because the Author has in his own
Copyes, out of his unspeakable Tenderness and Modesty begged pardon of the
Lords and Commons, in his Petition, for transgressing their Act against
Printing without a License, this Indoctum Parliamentum mistaking the Petition
as addressed to himself, will not grant it, but insults over the Author and
upbraids him the rather as a desperate offender, that sins on he says, goes on
still in his wickedness, and has done it against his own Conscience. Now truly
if this were a sin, it was a sin of the first Impression. And the Author
appears so constant to the Church of England, and to its Liturgy in particular,
that, having confessed four hundred times with an humble, lowly, penitent, and
obedient heart, I doubt not but in assisting at Divine Service he has
frequently since that received Absolution. It is something strange that to
publish a good Book is a sin, and an ill one a virtue; and that while one comes
out with Authority; the other may not have a Dispensation. So that we seem to
have got an Expurgatory Press, though not an Index, and the most Religious
Truth must be expunged and suppressed in order to the false and secular
interest of some of the Clergy. So much wiser are they grown by process of time
then the Obsolete Apostle that said, We can do nothing against the Truth. But
this has been of late years the practice of these single Representers of the
Church of England, to render those Peccadillioes against God as few and
inconsiderable as may be, but to make the sins against themselves as many as
possible, and these to be all heinous and unpardonable. In so much that if we
of the Laity would but study our Self-Preservation, and learn of them to be as
true to our separate interest as these men are to theirs, we ought not to wish
them any new Power for the future, but after very mature deliberation.
Forasmuch as every such Act does but serve, as some of them use it, to make the
good people of England walk in peril of their Souls, to multiply sin and
abomination through the Land, and by engaging men's minds under spiritual
Bondage, to lead them Canonically on into Temporal slavery. Whereas the Laity
are commonly more temperate and merciful (I might say more discreet) in the
exercising of any Authority they are entrusted with, and what Power they have,
they will not wear it thread bare: so that if I were to commit a fault for my
life, (as suppose by Printing this without a License) I would choose to sin
against good Mr. Oldenburg.

But this Animadverter is the genuine example of Ecclesiastical Clemency, who
proceeding on cannot bear that the Author should use the Title of an Humble
Moderator (he thinks him sure guilty herein Lasae Majestatis Ecclesiasticae,
and that both these Qualities are incompatible with one of their Coat, and
below the Dignity of any man of the Faculty) much less will he endure him when
he comes, in the following discourse, to justify his Claim to that Title, by
letting his Moderation according to the Apostles precept, be known to all men,
for the Lord is at hand. But he says that the Author Assumes, Imposes, and
Turns all upside down, and witnesses an Immoderate Zeal for one (that is the
Non-Conformists) Party: then which the Animadverter could never have invented a
more notorious, studied, and deliberate Falsehood, to prepossesse and mislead
the gentle Reader: Wherein does he Assume? He speaks like a Man, a Creature to
which Modesty and Reason are peculiar; not like an Animadverter, that is an
Animal which has nothing Humane in it but a Malicious Grinne, that may Provoke
indeed, but cannot Imitate so much as Laughter. Wherein does he Impose? In
nothing but by declaring his Opinion against all unreasonable Imposition? And
though it appears natural to him to speak with Gravity, yet he usurps not any
Authority further, then as any man who speaks of a Truth which he thoroughly
understands, cannot with all his Modesty and Humility hinder others from paying
a due Reverence to his Person and acquiescing in his Doctrine. But wherein does
he Turn all upside down? This has been a common Topic of Ecclesiastical
Accusation. Our Savior was accused that he would Destroy the Temple. The first
Martyr Steven was stoned as a Complice. And Saint Paul (as ill luck would have
it) was made odious upon the same Crimination of the Animadverters, Acts 17. v.
5, 6. For, certain Lewd-fellows of the baser sort, set all the City in an
uproar, crying those that have turned the world Up-side-down are come hither
also. And yet notwithstanding all these Calumnies, The Naked Truth,
Christianity, has made a shift, God bethanked, to continue till this day: and
there will never want those that bear testimony to it, even to the Primitive
Christianity, maugre all the arts that the men of Religion can contrive to
misrepresent and discountenance it. But as for the Turning all up-side-down,
the Animadverter is somewhat innocent, if by the defect of his Organt, as it
fares with those whose Brain turns round, ('So we vulgarly express it) he
have imagined that the world is tumbling headlong with him. But as to the
Prejudice, which he therefore reserved as the most effectual and taking to
undo the Author by, that he is Immoderately Zealous for the Non-Conformists;
it is the effect of as strong a Fancy, or as Malicious an Intention as the
Former; it being scarce possible to open the Book in any place without chancing
upon some passage where he makes a firm Profession, or gives a clear proof of
his real submission and Addiction to the Church of England: all his fault for
ought I see being, that he is more Truly and Cordially concerned for our Church
then some men's Ignorance is capable of, or their corrupt interest can comply
with. But therefore whoever were the adviser it is not well done to use him in
this dirty manner. There is no prudence in it, nor whereas the Author, in
excuse that he sets not his name, says it is, because he is a man of great
Passions, and not able to bear a Reproach (The Animadverter had done fairer to
cite the whole, or Commendations: my small Ability puts me out of danger of the
last, but in great fear of the former.) Therefore to resolve thus (whereas they
might have undone him you see by Commendation) the rather to Reproach him, now
they have learned his Feeble Holy Church, I can tell you has suffered upon
that account so of ten that it were time for her to be wiser. For by
exasperating men of Parts, who out of an ingenious love of Truth have
temperatly Writ against some abuses, She has added Provocation to men's Wit to
look still further; insomuch that at last it has sometimes produced (then
which nothing can be more dangerous to the Church) a Reformation. Therefore,
though Christ has commanded his Followers (so it be not I suppose out of his
Way) that if any man press them to go one mile, they should go two; yet it is
not wisdom in the Church to pretend to, or however to exercise, that Power of
Angariating men further then their occasions or understandings will permit. If
a man cannot go their Length it is better to have his company in quiet as far as
his Road lies. For my part I take the Church of England to be very happy in
having a Person of his Learning and Piety so far to comply with Her; and, if my
advice might be taken, She should not lose one inch more of him by handling him
irreverently. For if once She should totally lose him, God knows what an
Instrument he might prove, and how much good he might do in the Nation, more
then he ever yet thought of. What a shame it is to hear the Animadverter abuse
him (who by the very Character of his Style appears no Vulgar Person, and by
how much he has more of Truth, has more of Gods Image, and should therefore
have imprinted that Awe upon him that Man has over most Brutes:) he to trifle
with so worthy a person at that rate, that one would not use the meanest
Varlet, the dullest Schoolboy, the rankest Idiot, no nor the veryest
Animadverter! However he says, the Author has done himself and him the
Animadverter a great favor, by concealing his Name, in making it impossible
for him to reflect upon his Person (otherwise it seems he should have had it
home) which he knows no more then the Man in the Moon. But therefore I am the
rather jealous he did know him: for the Animadverter having a Team of Gnaz'as
always a his devotion, and being able if any one tired by the way to relieve
it and draw in person, never think that he would want intelligence in that
Region. Come 'twas all but an affected ignorance in the Animadverter, and he
had both inquired and heard as much as any of us who was the probable Author:
and all the Guard that he Lies upon is, because the Author had not given him
legal notice that he Writ it. And this was even as the Animadverter would have
wished it. For if a Reverend Person had openly avowed it, he could not have
been saucy with so gooda Grace: But under the pretense of not knowing, Sir,
that it was you, but only, Sir, as you were the Patron of so vile a Cause, many
a dry bob, close gird, and privy nip has he given him. Yet he says, the Author
would have done well, and a piece of Justice to have named himself, so to have
cleared others: for it has been confidently laid to the charge of more then
one Reverend Person (how slily!) who (I have great reason to believe, and am
several ways assured) had no hand in it. Truly the Animadverter too would have
done a piece of Justice to have named himself; for there has been more then one
Witty person traduced for his Pamphlet, and I believe by this time he would
take it for a great favor if any man would be such a Fool as own it for him.
For he very securely reproaches the Author, and yet I have been seeking all
over for the Animadverters name, and cannot find it. Not withstanding that he
writes forsooth in desence of the Church of England; and against so vile a
Cause, as he styles it, and under the Public Patronage. Which is most
disingenuously done, as on other accounts, so in respect of my Lord Bishop of
London, whom he has left in the lurch to justify another man's Follyes with his
Authority. But however that venerable Person, who has for Learning, Candor, and
Piety, as he does for Dignity also, outstripp'd his Age and his Fellows, have
been drawn in to License what certainly he cannot approve of, it was but his
First Fruits, and a piece of early liberality, as is usual, upon his new
Promotion, and I am given to understand that, for the Animadverters sake, it is
like to be the last that he will allow of that nature. But this is not only a
Trick of the Animadverters, but ordinary with many others of them, who while we
write at our own peril, and perhaps set our names to it, (for I am not yet
resolved whether I can bear Reproach or Commendation) they that rail for the
Church of England, and under the Public License and Protection, yet leave men,
as if it were at Hot-Cockles to guess blindfold who it is that hit them. But
it is possible that some of these too may lie down in their turns. What should
be the reason of it? sure theirs is not so Vile a Cause too that they dare not
abide by it. Or are they the Writers conscious to themselves that they are such
Things as ought not once to be Named among Christians? Or is it their own sorry
performance that makes them ashamed to avow their own Books? Or is there some
secret force upon them that obliges them to say things against their
Conscience? Or would they reserve a Latitude to themselves to turn
Non-Conformists again upon occasion? Or do they in pure honesty abstain from
putting a single Name to a Book, which has been the workmanship of the whole
Diocese?

But though he know not his Name, seeing he has vented his own Amusements to
the Churches great and real prejudice he says, (and that is this Case) he must
not think to escape for the Godliness of his Style: Impious and most unmerciful!
Poor David was often in this Case. Psalm. 22. They gaped upon him with their
Mouth. He trusted, said they, in the Lord that he would deliver him, let him
deliver him seeing he delighted in him. And Psalm. 71. 11. Persecute and take
him, there is none to deliver him. And yet there are many places too in
Scripture, where God spared men even for their outward Formalities, and their
Hypocrisy served to delay his Judgments; and should he not still do so, the
Church might rereceive greater prejudice. But the Church, and God are two
things, and are not it seems oblidged to the same Measures: insomuch that even
the sincerity of one Person, which might perhaps atone for a whole Order and
render them acceptable both to God and Man, yet cannot hope for his own pardon.

Neither must be think to scope for a Man of good Intentions: yet sure he is,
else would not give the Devil so much more then his due, saying he would never
condemn any good action though done by the Devil, As if says the
Animadverter, be supposed the Devil might do some such. Here he thinhs he has a
shrewd hit at him, and this if a man had leisure might beget a Metaphysical
Controversy: but I desire him rather to comment on that Text: Do thou
Believe? thou do well, the Devils also Believe and Tremble. Whereas he goes
on to mock at the Authors Good Intentions, and tells him pleasantly that, Hell
it self is full of such as were once full of Good Intentions: it is a Concluding
piece of Wit, and therefore, as well as for the Rarity, should be civilly
treated and encouraged; so that I shall use no further (...) there, that if
this be the qualification of such as go to Hell, the Animadverter has secured
himself from coming there and so many more as were his Partners. And thus much
I have said upon his Animadversions on the Title, etc. Wherein, he having
misrepresented the Author and prejudicated the Reader against him by all
disingenuous methods, and opened the whole Pedlers-pack of his malice, which he
half-p -- worths out in the following discourse to his petty Chapmen, I could
not properly say less, though it exceeds perhaps the number of his Pages. For
it is scarce credible how vuluminous and pithy he is in extravagance: and one
of his sides in Quarto, for Falsehood, Insolence, and Absurdity contains a Book
in Folio. Besides, the Reader may please to consider how much labor it costs
to Bray even a Little Thing in a Mortar: and that Calumny is like London-dirt,
with which though a man may be spatter'd in an instant, yet it requires much
time, pains, and Fullers-earth to scour it out again.

Annotations upon the Animadversions on the first Chapter, concerning Articles
of Faith.
THe Play begins. I Confess (Do so then and make no more words) when first I
saw this Jewel of a Pamphlet, and had run over two or three pages of this
Chapter, I suspected the Author for some Youngster that had been Dabbling
amongst the Socinian Writers, and was ambitious of showing us his Talent in
their way. I was quickly delivered from this Jealousy, by his Orthodox
Contradictory expressions in other places. That word Jewel is commonly used in
a good sense, and I know no reason why this Book of the Authors might not be
properly enough called so, though the Animadverter has debased the meaning of
the word to deprave and undervalue the worth of the Treatise. For I perceive
that, during his Chaplainship, he has learnt it in conversation with the
Ladies, who translate it frequently to call Whore in a more civil and refined
signification. But to say thus, that he suspected him at first for a Socinian,
yet was quickly cured of his Jealousy, because he found the Author was Honest
and Orthodox. Why should he vent his own Amusements thus to the great and real
prejudice of any worthy person? It is indeed a piece of second Ingenuity for a
man, that invents and suggests a Calumny of which he is sure to be convict in
the instant, therefore with the same breath to disclaim it: but it manifests in
the mean time how well he was inclined if he thought it would have passed upon
the Author; and that could the Animadverter have secured his Reputation, he
would have adventured the Falsehood. What would he not have given to have made
the world believe that he was a Socinian! In this beginning you have a right
Pattern of the Animadverters whole Stuff, and may see what Measure the Author
is to expect all through.

But he finds, he faith, that he is one of the Men of the second Rate, (as he
takes leave to style them) that scarce ever see to the second Conseqnence. At
first I suspected from this expression that the Animadverter had been some
Ship-Chaplain, that had been Dabbling in the Sea-Controversies, a Tarpawlin of
the Faculty: but I was quickly delivered from this Jealousy by his Magisterial
Contradictions, that show him to be a man of more Consequence, one of them
whose Eccleastical Dignities yet cannot wean them from a certain hankering
after the Wit of the Laity, and applying it as their own upon (or it is no great
matter though it be without) occasion. Yet therefore once for all he Protests,
too, that he does not charge him with any of his own most obvious Consequences
as his Opinions (for who would believe the one or other that reads the Author?)
for it is plain that he does not (nor any man that has Eyes) discern them.
This is a Candor pregnant with Contempt. But in the mean time he thinks it
ingenuous to load this second Rate Frigate, (that was fitted out for the Kings
and the Nations service) so deep that she can scarce swim, with a whole Cargo
of Consequences which are none of the Authors, but will, upon search, be all
found the Animadverters proper goods and Trade, his own Inconsequences and
Inanimadversions. So men with vicious Eyes see Spiders weave from the Brim of
their own Beavers.

As for example. p. 1. He says that this Chapter does admirably serve the turn
of the rankest Sectarian. That in his two or three first pages he appeared a
Socinian. p. 12. That his Pique at the new word Homoousios carries such an ugly
reflection upon the Nicene Creed, that be, the Animadverter, scarce dares
understand him. p. 6. The Author speaking against introducing new Articles of
Faith, the Adversary tells him; he hopes he does not mean all our Thirty Nine
Articles; and defends them as if they were attaqued. That he does implicitly
condemn the whole Catholic Church both East and West for being so
presumptuous in her Definitions. p. 9. That upon his Principles the Prime and
most necessary Articles of Faith will be in danger. The old dormant Heresies,
Monothelites, Nestorians, etc. May safely revive again. p. 13. That his are the
very Dreggs of Mr. Hobbs his Divinity, and worse, p. 14. That he would have
some men live like Pagans and go to no Church at all, p. 16. So for ought we
know this Author is a Jesuit, and writes this Pamphlet only to embroile us
Protestants. p. 25, That he is guilty of unthought, of Popery. p. 33. That our
Author like her (the foolish woman) in the Proverbs, plucks down our Church
with his own hands and that she had need therefore be upheld against such as he
is. Of these Inferences which, not being natural, must have required some
labor, he is all along very liberal to the Author; but the vile and insolent
language costs him nothing, so that he lays that on prodigally and without all
reason. Now whether a man that holds a true Opinion, or he that thus deduces
ill Consequences from it, be the more blameworthy, will prove to be the Case
between the Animadverter and the Author. And (to show him now from whence he
borrowed his Wit of the second Rate, and at the second Hand)

-- all the subject matter of debate,
Is only who is the Knave of the First Rate.
But he says, because of these things, the Mischief being done, to undo the
Charm again it is become a Duty to Expose him. Alas what are they going to do
with the poor man? What kind of death is this Exposing? But sure, considering
the Executioner, it must be some Learned sort of Cruelty. Is it the Taeda, in
which they candled a Man over in Wax, and he instead of the wick, burnt out to
his lives end like a Taper, to give light to the Company? Or is it the Scapha,
wherein a man, being stripped Naked and Smeared with Honey, was in the
scorching Sun abandoned to be stung and Nibbled by Wasps; Hornets, and all
troublesome Insects till he expired? Or is it rather ad Bestias, turning him
out unarmed to be bated, worryed, and devoured, by the wild Beasts in the
Theater? For in the Primitive Times there were these and an hundred laudable
ways more to Expose Christians; and the Animadverter seems to have studied
them. But the Crime being of Sorcery, and that there is a Charm which has
wrought great Mischief and it not to be undone but by Exposing the Malefactor
(Charm he never so wisely) it is more probable that it may be the Punishment
usual in such Cases. And indeed the Animadverter has many times in the day
such Fits tale him, wherein he is lifted up in the Air that six men cannot
hold him down, tears, raves, and foams at the mouth, casts up all kind of
trash, sometimes speaks Greek and Latin, that no man but would swear he is
bewitched: and this never happens but when the Author appears to him. And
though in his Animadversions on the Title etc. He has so often scratched and
got blood of him (the infallible Country Cure) yet he still finds no ease by
it, but is rather more tormented. So that in earnest I begin to suspect him for
a Witch, or however, having writ the Naked Truth, it is manifest he is a
Sooth-sayer, that is as bad. Many persons besides have for trial run needless up
to the Eye in several remarkable places of his Naked Truth, that look like
moles or warts upon his body, and yet he, though they prick never so much,
feels nothing. Nay some others of the Clergy, whereof one was a Bishop, have
tied him hand and foot and thrown him into the Thames betwixt White Hall and
Lambeth, for experiment; laying so much weight too on him as would sink any
ordinary man, and nevertheless he swims still and keeps above Water. So
dangerous is it to have got an Ill Name once, either for speaking Truth or for
Incantation, that it comes to the same thing almost to be Innocent or Guilty:
for if a man swim he is Guilty, and to be Burnt; if he sink, he is Drowned,
and Innocent. But therefore this Exposing must surely be to condemn the
Author, as he has done his Book already, to the Fire, (for no man stands fairer
for it as being first Heretic, and now Witch by Consequence) and then the Devil
sure can have no more power over the Animadverter. Yet when I considered better
that he does not accuse him of any harm that he has suffered by him in person,
but that it is the Church which may justly Complain of him, and having done her
so much mischief, therefore it is become a Duty to Expose him, I could not but
imagine that it must be a severer Torment. For if our Church be bewitched, and
he has done it,

Huic mites nimium Flammas, huic lenta putassem,
Flumina, fumiferi potasset nubila Peti.
Though I never heard before of a Church that was Bewitched except that of the
Galatians, Gal. 3. 1. Whom Saint Paul asks O foolish Galatians who has
Bewitched you? taking it for evident that they were so, because (they are his
very next words) they did not obey the Truth. (And that was a Naked Truth with
a Witness, the Apostle teaching, that Christ is become of none effect to them,
that from their Christian Liberty returned to the Jewish Ceremonies. Gal. 5.
4.) But therefore I looked over the Canons, the Rational, the Ceremonial, the
Rubric, imagining the Exposing mentioned, must be some new part of our
Ecclesiastical Discipline, that I had not taken notice of before, and I should
find it in one or other of the Offices. But I lost my labor, and 'twas but
just I should, for being so simple, as not to understand at first that to
Expose a man, is to write Animadversions upon him. For that is a crueller
Torment then all the Ten Persecutors (and which none but this Clergyman, could
have) invented. To be set in the Pillary first, and bedawb'd with so many Addle
Eggs of the Animadverters own Cakle as he pa^ts him with! How miserable then is
the man that must suffer afterward, sub (...) le^to Ingenio! To be raked and
harrowed through with so ^usty a Saw! So dull a Torture that it contains all
other in it, and which even the Christian Reader is scarce able to endure with
all his Patience! Had he been a man of some accuteness, the pain would have
been over in an instant: but this was the utmost inhumanity in whoever it was
that advised (whereas several witty men, were proposed that would have been
glad of the the employment) to choose out on purpose the veryest (Animadverter)
in all the Faculty. This it is to which the Author is condemned. And now that I
know it, and that it is an Office a Duty to which our Church it seems has
advanced the Animadvertur; I wish him Joy of his new Preferment, and shall
henceforward take notice of him as the Church of Englands's Exposer, for I can
never admit him by any Analogy to be an Exposito^.

It is no less disingenuously, then constantly done of the Exposer in this
same; p. 1. To concern the Author in the Non-Conformists, that may have
reflected any where, as if there were Socinian, or Pelagian Doctrines; Allowed
to be preached and maintained in the City Pulpits. For the Author has not in
his whole Book the least syllable that can be wrested to any such purpose. Only
it serves the Adversaries turn, as he thinks, to preingage the whole Clergy and
Church of England against him, if they were so simple, and by giving him an
odious Badge and jumbling them altogether, to involve him in all the prejudices
which are studioufly advanced against that party. But neither have I any thing
to urge of that nature further then, because he will out of season mention
these matters, to observe that our Church seems too remiss in the Case of
Socinus and Volkelius, who had many things to great value stolen from them by a
late Plagiary, but as yet have not obtained any Justice or Restitution.

But seeing the Exposer is thus given to transform not only the Author, but
his words and his meaning; it is requisite to state this Chapter in his own
Terms: as men set their Arms on their Plate, to prevent the nimbleness of such
as would alter the property. The sum of what he humbly proposes is: That
nothing has caused more mischief in the Church, then the establishing New and
Many Articles of Faith, and requiring men to assent (...) them with Divine
Faith. For the imposing such on Dissenters, has caused furious Wars and
lamentable Bloodshed among Christians. That it is irrational to promote the
Truth of the Gospel by Imposition, which is contrary to the Laws of the Gospel,
and break an evident Commandment to establish a doubtful Truth. For if such
Articles be not fully expressed in Scripture w^ds, it is Doubtful to him upon
whom it is Forced, though not to the the Imposer. If it be fully expressed in
Scripture Words, there needs no new Articles: but if not so, and that it be
only Deduced from Scripture Expressions, then men that are as able and knowing
as the Imposer, may think it is not clearly Deduced from Scripture. But there
is nothing more Fully Expressed, or that can be more clearly Deduced from
Scripture, nor more suitable to Natural Reason, then that no man should be
Forced to Believe. Because no man can Force himself to believe, no not even to
believe the Scriptures. But Faith is a work of peculiar Grace and the Gift of
God. And if a man Believe what is Clearly Contained in Scripture, he needs not
believe any thing else with Divine Faith. To add to, or deminish from the
Scripture, is by it unlawful, and liable to the Curse in the Revelation. If the
Imposer answer, he requires not to Believe it as Scripture, he does, if he urge
it to be believed with Divine Faith. If he say he requires it not to be
Believed with Divine Faith, he does, if he make it necessary to Salvation.
There is no Command nor Countenance given in the Gospel to use Force to cause
men Believe. We have no Comprehensive Knowledge of the Matters declared in
Scripture, that are the Prime and Necessary Articles of Faith, therefore it is
not for any man to Declare one Tittle more to be Believed with Divine Faith,
then God has there Declared. He cannot find the least hint in the Word of God
to use any Force to Compel men to the Churches established Doctrine or
Discipline: and from Reason there can be no motive to be Forced beyond their
Reason. To attempt any such Force, though to the True Belief, is to do Evil
that Good may come of it. But the Pastor ought first by plain and sound
Doctrine to stop the Mouths of Gainsayers. When the Ministers have Preached and
Prayed, they have done all they can in order to men's Believing, the rest must
be left to the Justice or Mercy of God. But if turbulent spirits broach New
Doctrines, Contrary to Scripture, or not Clearly Contained in the Gospel, and
neither by Admonitions nor Entreaties will be stopped, the Pastors may proceed to
the Exeroise of the Keys. Which if it were duly performed as in the Primitive
Times, and not by Lay Chancellors and their surrogates, would be of great
effect. The Magistrate ought to sili^ce and oppose such at preach what is
Contrary to or not Clearly Contained in the Gospel, and if they persevere in
their perversuess, he may use his power with Christian Moderation. For his
power reaches to Punish Evil Doers, who Publi^ or Practice something to subvert
the Fundamentals of Religion, or to Disturb the Peace of the State, or to
Injure their Neighbors: but not to Punish Evil Believers. But if the
Magistrate shall conceive he has power also to punish Evil Believers, and on
that pretense shall punish. True Believers, the Subject is bound to submit and
b^ar it, to the loss of Goods, Liberty or Life. The Reader will excuse this one
long Quotation, for it will much shorten all that follows.

But now for which of these is it that it is become a Duty to Expose him? What
is there here that seems not, at first sight, very Christian, very Rational?
But however, it is all delivered in so Grave and Inoffensive manner, that there
was no temptation to alter the style into Ridicule, and Satyr. But like some
Carle, the Animadverter, may browze upon the Leaves, or Peel the Bark, but he
has not teeth for the Solid, nor can hurt the Tree but by accident. Yet a man
that sees not into the second, but the Thirteenth Consequence that is one of
the Disputers of this World, and ought to be admitted to these Doubtful
Disputations (from which he ironically by St. Paul's rule forsooth excludes the
Author) what is there that such an one, so subtle so piercing, cannot
distingish upon and Controvert? Truth it self ought to sacrifice to him that he
would be propitious. For if he appear on the other side, it will go against her
unavoidably.

In his 27. P. he is ravished in Contemplation how Rarachose it is, to see or
hear a material Question in Theology defended in the University-Schools, where
one stands a Respondent, enclosed within the Compass of his Pen, as Popilius
the Roman Ambassador, made a Circle with his Wand about Antiochus, and bid him
give him a determinate answer before he went out of it; a most apt and learned
resemblance, and which shows the Gentleman's good reading! But it is, I confess
a noble spectacle, and worthy of that Theater which the munificence of the
present Archbishop of Canterbury has dedicated in one (may it be too in the
other) of our Universities; where no Apish Scaramuccio, no Scenical Farces, no
Combat of Wild-Beasts among themselves, or with men condemned, is presented to
the People; but the modest Skirmish of Reason, and which is usually performed
so well that it turns to their great honor, and of our whole Nation. Provided
the Chair be well filled, with an Orthodox Professor, and who does not by
Solaecismes in Latin, or mistake of the Argument, or Question, render the
thing ridiculous to the Bystanders. That the Pew be no less fitted with a
Respondent, able to sustain and answer in all points the expectation of so
Learned an Auditory: That the Opponent likewise exceed not the terms of
Civility, nor Cavil where he should Argue; and that the Questions debated be so
discreetly chosen; as there may be no danger, by Controverting the Truth, to
unsettle the minds of the Youth ever after, and innure them to a Disputable
Notion about the most weighty points of our Re-Religon; by which sort of
subtilizing the Church has in former Ages much suffered, nor has Ours in the
Latter wholly escaped. Now, seeing the Exposer seem^ to delight so much (as men
use in what they excel) in this Exercise, he and I, because we cannot have the
convenience of the Schools and Pew, will play as well as we can in Paper, at
this new Game of Antiochus and (Popilius. I must for this time be the Roman
Senator, and he the Monarch of Asia^ for by the Rules of the Play, he always
that has writ the last Book is to be Antiochus, until the other has done
replying. And I hope to gird him up to close with in his Circle, that he shall
appear very slender. For I am sensible, yet could not avoid it, how much of the
Readers and mine own time I have run out in examining his Levity; but now I am
glad to see my labor shorten: for, having thus plumed him of that puff of
Feathers, with which he buoyed himself up in the Air, and flew over our heads,
it will, almost by the first Consequence, be manifest in his Argument, how
little a Soul it is, and Body, that henceforward I am to deal with.

The Author having said that, That which we commonly call the Apostles Creed,
is, and was so received by the Primitive Church, as the sum Total of Christian
Faith, necessary to Salvation. Why not now? Is the state of Salvation altered?
If it be Complete, what need other Articles? The Exposer p. 2. answers. There
may have been needful heretofore, not only other Articles, but other Creeds for
the further Explication of these Articles in the Apostles Creed: and yet in
those New Creeds not one New Article. It Is safely and cautiously said, there
May, and not there Were other Articles and other Creeds needful. But the whole
Clause besides is so drawn up, as if he affected the Academical glory of
justifying a Paradox: nor is it for the reputation of such Creeds, whatever
they be, to be maintained by the like Methods. But seeing he disdains to
explicare further, how there can be a New Creed, and yet not one New Article; I
will pres^ to understand him, and then say, that in such Creeds, whatsoever
Article does either explain the Apostles Creed Contrary to, or Beside the
Scripture, or does not contain the same Express Scriptural Authority (which
only makes this that is called the Apostles Creed to be Authentic) that is a
New Article to every man that cannot conceive the necessary Deduction. But then
he galls the Author. The Apostles Creed is the sum of the Christian Faith True.
Yet I hope he will not think the Nicene, the Constantinopolitan, and the
Athanasian) Creed Superfluous and and unnecessary. First, it is not necessary
to take all those Three in the Lump, as the Exposer puts it: for perhaps a man
may think but one, or but two of them to have been superfluous, and
unnecessary. Next it is an hard thing for the Exposer, who ought rather to have
proved that they were necessary to shift it back thus upon the Author. I have
not spoke with him, nor know whether I shall as long as I live, (though I
should be glad of the opportunity,) to know his mind. But suppose he should
think them, One, Two, or Three Unnecessary, who can help it? But so much I
think, upon the State or sum of this Controversy in his own (...), I may
adventure for him; that (...) Confessions of Faith he does not disapprove them,
(taking it granted there is nothing in any of them flatly against the Word of
God) but that if any thing be therein drawn up in such or such an exact Form
of Words, not Expressed in Scripture, and required to be Believed with Divine
Faith, as necessary to a Man's own Salvation, and without Believing which he
must Declare too that no Man else can be saved that this is Dangerous, and the
imposing of it is Unwarrantable by Reason or Scripture, He adds in this same
Paragraph, that the Authors Censure upon Constantine is so bold and upon some
Godly Bishops, (whom he conceives more Zealous then Discreet, and so do some
Godly Bishops conceive of this Author) and his Pique at the New Word Homoousios
carries such as ugly reflection upon the Creed, that he scarce (...) understand
him, And I on the other side take his Fears and his Hopes to be alike
inconsiderable. His words are p. 6. I am confident had the most prudent and
pius Constantine, the First and Best of Christian Emperors pursued his own
intention, to suppress all Disputes, and all new Questions about God the Son,
both Homoousian, and Homoiousian, and commanded all to acquiesce in the very
Scripture Expressions, without any addition, that the Arrian Heresy had soon
expired. I note that the Exposer very disingenuously, and to make it look more
ugly, take not the least notice of his Pique against (...) too and the Arrian
Heresy. But what is there here to fright the understanding Animadverter out of
his Wits, or what to make some Godly Bishops (who it seems must be numberless
or nameless) to conceive the Author (...) Zealous then Discreet? But for this
Censure of the Author, as well as for the Godliness of the Bishops, we must
acquiesce it seems upon the Credit, or Gratitude of one Nameless Exposer.

He then blames the Author p. 3. for saying p. 1. that he would have men
improve in Faith rather Intensive, then Extensive, to confirm it, rather then
enlarge it. Still and always, to make things a little more ugly and of less
value, he clips the Authors good English. You would have men improve in Faith,
so would I, but rather Intensive then Extensive. It Is good to know all Gospel
Truths, no doubt of that, the more the better still; but the Question is not
what is Good, but what is Necessary. This is a pious and undonbred Truth and
confirmed by the Author out of several Places of Scripture: May I add one Mark
the 9. 17. Where one brought his Son, being troubled with a Dumb Spirit to our
Savior. v. 23. Jesus says to the Father, if thou can Believe, all things
are possible to him that Believes. The Father coyes out with tears, Lord I
Believe, strengthen thou my Unbelief. And this Confession of the Intensive
Truth of his Faith, with his relyance upon Christ for the strengthening of it,
was sufficient to cooperate with our Savior toward a Miracle, and throwing
that Dumb and Deaf Spirit out of a third Person. Whoever indeed will deny this
Truth, must go against the whole current of the New Testament. But the Exposer
is Deaf to that, it is all one to him. Yet he is not Dumb, though as good he
had, for all he has to say to it is: And yet it is certain that all formal and
mortal Heretics, that are not Atheists, are justly condemned for want of due
extension in their Faith. What pertinence! But there goes more Faith I see to
the ejecting of a Talkative then of a Dumb Spirit. There is no need of further
answer to so succinct a Bob, then that it had been well those terms of Formal,
and Mortal, and Heretics, and no less that of Condemned had in this place been
thoroughly explained. For we know that there was a time when the Protestants
themselves were the Format, and, to be sure, the Mortal Heretics, even here in
England, and for that very crime too, For want of due extention in their Faith,
they were Condemned, whether justly or no it is in the Exposers power to
determine. For some of our Ruling Clergy, who yet would be content to be
accounted good Protestants, are so loath to part with any hank they have got,
at what time soever, over the poor Laity, or what other reason, that the Writ
de Haeretico Comburendo, though desired to be abolished, is still kept in force
to this day. So that it is of more concernment then one would at first think,
how far men's Faith (least afterward for Believing short their Persons and
Estates) be Extended, or taken in Execution.

He proceeds page the 3. and several that follow, to quarrel the Author for
quoting to this purpose Acts 8. and then saying: I pray remember the Treasurer
(the Exposer will do it I warrant you, and the Chancellor too, without more
entreaty) to Candace Queen of Ethiopia, whom Philip instructed with in the
Faith. His time of Catechizing was very short and soon proceeded to Baptism.
But Philip first required a Confession of his Faith, and the Eunuch made it,
and I beseech you observe it. I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God,
and straight way he was Baptized: How, no more then this? No more. This little
Grain of Faith, being sound, believed withal his heart, purchased the Kingdom
of Heaven. It Is not the Quantity but the Quality of our Faith God requires.
Here the Exposer, pretending now to be a learned Expositor, hopes to win his
Spurrs, and lays out all his ability to prove that Philip (in a very short
time for so much work as he finds him) had instructed the Treasurer through the
whole Athanasian Creed; concerning the Equality, Inseparability, Coeternity of
the Three Persons in the Trinity. For, says the Ezposer, the very Form of
Baptism, if thoroughly explained, is a perfect Creed by it self: In the Name of
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost: For it seems the name of the Son, was
by a Divine Criticisme interposed between the other two Persons, whose Godhead
was confessed and acknowledged by the Jewish Church, rather then that of the
Word, to de^te the second Person, etc. I should be glad to know where the
Exposer learnt that the Jewish Church acknowledged the Godhead of the Holy
Ghost, as of a Distinct Person; which if he cannot show, he is very far out in
the Matter, as he is in that Expression of Divine Criticisme. Therefore he may
do well to Consider. But it is simply, to say no worse, done of him, to call
that Form of words as it is ordered by our Savior himself, a Divine
Criticisme, as if Christ had therein affected that Critical glory, which the
Exposer himself in so subtle a Remarke doubtless pretends to. But the Exposer
will not only have Philip to have instructed the Treasurer in this Criticisme,
but to have read him so long a Lecture upon Baptism, as must for certain have
been out of the Assemblies, and not Noel's Catechism: acquainting him and
instructing him abundantly, in those great Points of Faith, the Dying, Burying,
and Rising again of Christ for our Justification from our sins, together with
the Thing signified, Death unto sin, Mortification, the New Birth unto
Righteousness, then the Mystery of the First and Second Covenant, Original sin,
how thereby he was a Son of Wrath, had hereby Forgiveness; of sins, Adoption,
being made a Child of Grace, Co-Heire with Christ, to live with him in the
Communion of Saints, after the Resurrection, in Life Everlasting; I am glad to
see that, at least when it serves to his purpose, this Exposer will own all the
Doctrines, which another Exposer would have called so many Stages of
Regeneration, and have thought them too many to have drove over in one days
journey, but would rather have turned out of the Road, and laid short all
night somewhere by the way. Here is a whole Calvinistical Systeme of Divinity,
that, if the Treasurer had been to be Baptized in the Lake of Geneva, more
could not have been expected. And he has in a trice made him so perfect in it,
that, as soon as the Christ'ning was over, he must have been fit to be received
not only ad Communionem Laecam, but the Clericam also, if it were then come
into fashion. These Exposers are notable men, they are as good as Witches, they
know all things, and what was done, and what was not done equally. In earnest,
he has made us as formal a sto^y of all Ppilip said, and the Treasurer
believed; as if he had sat all the while in the Coock-boot, and knows how long
the discourse lasted, as well, as if he had set his Watch when they began, and
looked upon it just as the Spirit caught up Philip to Azotus. But (suppose, for
the Exposers sake, that the Treasurer) were in a Coach, discourse, and for all
the rumbling, so distinctly and thoroughly, in so short a time too, if it had
been, which is the uttermost, a days passage Catechumeniz'ed) it came to this
short Print between them: The Treasurer desires to be Baptized, Philip replys;
If thou believe with all thine heart thou may, which can never signify
otherwise then with all the Intention of our Spirit, as when we are said to
love God wi^h all our Heart: The Treasurer replies, and that is all, I believe
that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. Now it is worth the Readers observation,
that out of a desire of C^villing and the luxury the Exposer takes in it, he
has quite forgot the matter he brought in Controversy. For the Dispute is
concerning New Creeds, Imposed beyond clear Scripture: the Authors arguments
and proofs tended wholly thither, and to that purpose he urged this passage of
Philip, to prove that God considers both, but rather the Quality, then Quantity
of our Faith. The Exposer amuses himself and us, to tell what Philip preached
to the Treasurer, but never minds that, let that have been as it will, and the
Eunuch have believed all that this man can imagine, yet all the Creed demanded,
and all that he professes is no more then those formal words, believed with all
his heart. I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, Wherein the Author
has clearly carried, and the Exposer thus far lost the Question. And indeed
Antiochus, you are much too blame to have put the Romans to all this trouble,
to no purpose. But any thing to stuff out the Dimensions of a Book, that no
man may imagine he could have said so little, in so much (which is the new way
of Compendiousness found out by the Exposer) whereas he might have known, that,
not God only, but even men always do respect the Quality of any Thing, of a
Book, rather then the Quantity. One Remarke I must make more, before I take
leave of this page, how, having thus liberally instructed both Philip and the
Treasurer, he immediately chops in p. 5.

Now this Author may see what Use and Need
There was of the Constantinopolitan Creed.
That puts in one Baptism for the Remission of Sins. I read it over and over,
for there was something in it very surprising, beside the elegancy of the
Verses. For the Now in that place is a word of immediate Inference, as if it
appeared necessarily, from what last preceded, that he had notably foiled the
Author in some Arguments or other, and therefore exulted over him. To any man
of common sense it can signify neither more nor less then that, (whereas I
upon prospect of this spoke merrily of the Athanasian Creed, Noel's and the
Assemblies Catechism, etc. wherein Philip instructed the Treasurer) the
Exposer means in good earnest (if men mean what they say) that Philip, having
studied the Constantinopolitan Creed himself very ex^ctly, explained every
Article of it thoroughly to the Eunuch, and in especial manner that of Baptism
for the Remission of Sins: Which happening to have been so many hundred years
before that Council was in being, must needs be an extraordinary civility in
Philip, and which he would scarce have done, but for the particular
sa^isfaction of so great a personage, that had the whole manage of the Revenue
of the Queen of Ethiopia. I am sure it is more then our Church will vouchsafe
in Baptism, (...) of Infan^s or those of Riper Years, with their Godfathers,
but fobbs them of with the plain Apostles Creed: And truly the easier the
better, if afttr that, and by powering water upon them, these persons be
without any more ado (as the Priest according to our Rubric, shall then say)
Regenerate.

To as little purpose does he trouble in this same 5. p. Another Scripture the
first of John 4. 2. Every Spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in
the Flesh, is of God: Which the Author urges in confirmation of what he said
before concerning the Intention of Faith. But, says the Exposer, Will a
Mahumetan, or a Socinian Confession of Faith suffice? This is I trow what they
call reducing a man ad Absurdum, and I doubt he has hampered the Author
mischievously. No it will not suffice in the Mahumetam or Socinian
interpretation: but a Confession according to the true sense of this, and the
clear express words of Scripture in other places will do it, especially if St.
John, as most men are of opinion, writ his own Gospel. Nay, though the Exposer
contends against this place, he admits another concerning Peter, that is not
much more pregnant. All the few primary Fundamentals of Christianity, says he,
were virtually contained in St. Peter's short Confession of Faith. Thou art
Christ the Son of the living God: For which Confession he was blessed, and upon
which Faith Christ declared that he would build his Church as upon a Rock. In
conclusion I see Antiochus has ex mero motu and certa Scientia, and Prince --
like Generosity, given us the Question: For I would not suspect that he has
hunted it so long till he lost it, or let it go of Necessity, because he could
hold it no longer. For the Extention as well as Intention of Peter's Faith, was
terminated in these few words. For it is no irreverence to take notice how
plain the Apostles were under that dispensation. The same John the Apostle and
Evangelist C. 14. V. 26. and in the following Chapters, shows how little it
was, and in how narrow a compass, that they knew and believed, and yet that
sufficed. Insomuch that where C. 16. V. 17. Our Savior promises the Holy
Ghost, to instruct them further, he says only, It is Expedient for you that I
go away, for if I go not away, the Comforter will not Come to you. He says not
it is Necessary. For that Measure of true Belief would have sufficed for their
own Salvation, but there was a larger Knowledge requisite for the future work
of their Apostleship, In how many of them, and St. Peter himself as much as
any, were there such Ignorances, I humbly use the word, in matters of Faith,
that our Savior could not but take notice of it and reprove them! As for
Peter, when our Savior was so near his Death as to be already be^ray'd, yet
he, Upon whose Faith he built his Church as on a Rock, knew not the effect of
his Passion, but was ready with his sword, against Christ's Command and example,
to have interrupted the Redemption of Mankind. And this short confession, in
which all the Fundamentalls were virtually contained (as the Exposer here
teaches us, and so has reduced himself to that little Grain of Faith, against
which he contends with the Author) was upon occasion of our Saviors question;
when Peter doubtless did his best, to answer his Lord and Master, and told him
all he knew. For that similitude, taken from so small a G^aine by our Savior,
did equal the proportion of Faith then attainable and requisite. And as in a
Seed, the very Plain and Upright of the Plant is indiscernably expressed,
though it be not branched out to the Eye, as when it ge^minates, spreds,
blossoms, and bears fruit; so was the Christian Faith seminally straightened in
that virtual sincerity, Vital Point, and Central vigor of Believing with all
the heart that Jesus Christ was come in the Flesh, and was the Son of the
Living God. And, would men even now Believe that one thing thoroughly, they would
be better Christians, then under all their Creeds, they generally are both in
Doctrine and Practice. But that gradual Revelation, which after his death and
Resurrection shined sorth in the Holy Ghost, must now determine us again within
the Bounds of that saving Ignorance by Belief according to the Scriptures,
until the last and fu^l Manifestation. And the Intention of this Faith now
also, as it has been explained by the Inspiration of the Holy Spirit in the
Sacred Writers, is sufficient for Salvation, without the Chcianrey and
Conveyancing of humane Extentions. And the Controverter himself has, if not by
his own confession, yet, by his own Argument all along hitherto proved it.

In the 6. p, he says that, where the Author charges some with introducing
Many and New Articles of Faith, He^ hopes he does not mean all our Thirty nine
Articles. If he hopes so, why does he raise the suspicion, for which indeed
there is no cause imaginable, but the E^posers own disingenuity; the Author
appearing through his whole Book a True Subscriber to Then^e, without that
Latitude of Equivocation which some others use, or else they would not Publish
those Doctrines they do, and be capable nevertheless of Ecclesiastical Places?
But here, as though any man had meddled with those Articles, he explica^es his
Learning out of Bishop L^y and of the Communio Laica, which is but his harping
upon one string and his usual Scanning on his fingers. For the Author having
named many and neew Articles of Faith, the Exposer revolves over in his mind
Articles, Articles of -- and, the word not being very pregnant, he hits at last
upon the Thirty nine Articles of the Church of England: which yet the Exposer
says himself, are Articles of Peace and Consent not of Faith and Communion.
Why then does he bring them by head and shoulders, when the Author he knows was
only upon Articles, of Faith? He might as well have sa^ the Lords of the
Articles. But this, he says is one, as he takes it, of our Churches greatest
Ecclesiastical Policyes, that she admits the many in thousands and hundred
thousands, without any subscription, ad Communionem Laicam. Truly she is very
civil, and we are an hundred thousand times oblidged to Her. But I know not
whether she will take it well of him, that he, not being content with so good
an Office as that of her Exposer, should pretend to be her Ecclesiastical
Politician, over an other man's head that is fitter for both, and not expect the
Reversion. And she cannot but be offended, that he should thus call her Fool by
craft, assigning that for her greatest Ecclesiastical Policy, when to have done
otherwise would have been the greatest Impertence and Folly. But who are these
the many, whom she so graciously receives Communionem Laicam without
subscription? Truly all of us whom she trusts not with Teaching others or with
University Degrees. The whole body of the Laity. (There again is another name
or us, for we can scarce speak without affronting our selves with some
contemptuous name or other that they (forsooth the Clergy) have affixed to us.

Nos Numerus sumus the many, and fruges consumere nati.
Even his Majesty too, God bless him, is one of the many, and she asks no
su^scription of him neither, although I believe he has taken his Degree in the
University. Well we must be content to do as we may: we are the many, and you
are the few, and make your best of it. But now, though I am none of you, yet, I
can tell you a greater Ecclesiastical Policy, then all this you have been
talking of. It is a hard Word, and though it be but one Syllable, I cannot well
remember it, but by good luck it was burnt by the hand of the Hangman, about
that time that the Naked Truth was Printed. And had that Policy succeeded, the
many must have taken not only all the Thirty Nine Articles, but all the
Ecclesiastical Errors and Encroachments that escaped notice, all in the mass
at once, as if they had been Articles of Faith, infallible, unalterable; but
the State of the Kingdom had been apparently changed in the very Fundamentals.
For a Few of the Few, for above these forty years, have been carrying on a
constant Conspiracy to turn all Upside-down in the Government of the Nation:
But God in his mercy has always hitherto, and will; I hope, for ever
frustrate all such Counsels.

In his 7. p. it is that he says, the Author in his 4. p. implicitly condemns
the whole Catholic Church, both East and West for being so Presumptuous in her
Definitions. However if he does it but Implicitly, the Exposer might have been
so Ingenuous or Prudent as not to have Explicated it further, but concealed it
least it might do more harm, but at least not to have heigh^en'd it so; the
whole Catholic Church, and not only so, but, the whole Catholic Church both
in the East and West too (why did he not add in the North and South too?) for
being so Presumptuous, a term far beyond and contrary to the Modesty and
Deference of the Authors expressions. But this is the Art and Duty of Exposing,
Here it is that he brandishes the whole dint of his Disputative Faculty, and if
it be not the most rational, I dare say (and yet I should have some difficulty
to persuade men so) that it is the most foolish passage in the whole Pamphlet.
It is impossible to clear the Dispute but by transcribing their own words. In
the mean time therefore I heartily recommend my self to the Readers patience.
The Author, pursuing his point how unsafe and unreasonable it is to Impose New
Articles of Faith drawn by humane Inferences beyond the Clear Scripture
Expressions; instanceth in several of the Prime and most Necessary Principles
of the Trinity, especially that of the Holy Ghost. Are they not things, says
he, far above the Highest Reason and sharpest understanding that ever man had?
Yet we Believe them because God, who cannot lie, has Declared them. Is it not
then a strange thing for any man to take upon him to Declare one title more of
them then God has Declared? seeing we understand not what is Declared, I mean
we have no Comprehensive Knowledge of the Matter Declared, but only a Believing
Knowledge? To which the Exposer will have it that, if the Author be here bound
up to his own words, (and it is good reason he should) he has said that we
understand not that the matter is Declared, and moreover he says that he is
sure he has done him no wrong in fixing this meaning to the Authors words. No,
it is no wrong, it seems then, to say that to understand That, and to
comprehend What is the same thing, As for example, (if our Ignorance may be
allowed in things so infinitely above us, to allude to things as far below us)
because I understand That the Exposer here speaks Nonsense; I must therefore be
able to Comprehend What is the meaning of his Nonsense, and be capable to raise
a Rational Deduction from it. I am sure I do the Exposer right in this
Inference, and should be glad he only would therefore wear it for my sake, for
it will fit none but him 'twas made for. But let us come down to the
particular, The Scripture, says the Author, plainly tells, that the Holy Ghost
proceeds from the Father, and That he is sent also by the Father, That he is
sent also by the Son: but whether he Proceeds From the Son, or By the Son, the
Scripture is silent. I grant that by Rational Deduction, and Humane way of
Argument it is probable that the Holy Ghost Proceeds from the Son, as from the
Father. But we understand not What the Procession or Mission of the Holy Ghost
is, and therefore we cannot prove they are Both one. And therefore to determine
it or any such Divine and high Mysteries by Humane Deductions, in Humane Words,
to be Imposed and Believed with Divine Faith is Dangerous: And much more the
Author adds demonstratively to the same purpose,, but the Exposer culls out, by
the Duty of his Place, what may best serve for his, neither will that do the
turn unless he also pervert it. Here again is the That and the What the same
things, Is it the same thing to say or understand That the Holy Ghost is sent
by the Son (which is Declared in Scripture) and to understand and comprehend
What the Nature of that Mission is, or What the Nature of Procession that a man
may safely say that he Proceeds From or By the Son, as from the Father (which
is not Declared in Scripture but by Humane Deduction) and exact the Divine
Belief thereof under Eternal and Temporal Penalties? Yet this is the Exposers
Logic. And away he goes with it, as if the world (as this inference is) were
all his own, and knocks all on the head with a killing Instance which that I
may still open more visibly to the Readers, I must beg pardon that I am
necessitated to repeat over again their own Words sometimes upon occasion. The
Exposer says, But he means we have no Comprehensive knowledge. His meaning is
good and true but his inference is stark naught, if he means therefore we
understand not at all that this or that is Declared. But the Author neither
says nor means any such thing, and the Exposer does him notwit^hstanding his
ave^ment to the Contrary, the most manifest wrong imaginable: for as much as he
would not only fix a false meaning upon the Authors words which I first
mentioned in the beginning, but upon these other words also which, contrary to
their plain signification, he produces for proof against him. They are by the
Exposers own relation, If then our Reason understand not what is Declared
(which is the very Equipollent of what the Author had said, that we have no
Comprehensive knowledge of the matter Declared) how can we by reason make any
Deduction by way of Argument from that which we understand (...)? No more. From
whence it is evident from that virtual repetition and natural reflection that
every Conclusion has of and upon its Premises, that the full sense of the
words must be -- from that which we understand not, Comprehensive, And yet he
says that he does him no wrong, he is sure he does not in affixing this
meaning unto those words. And proceeds, Is it even so? Then let us put the Case
with reverence that Almighty God, who assuming I suppose, the shape of an
Angel, treated with Abraham face to face, as a man does with his Friend. Should
for once have spoken in the same manner, to Arrius or Socinus, and made this
one Declaration, that the Catholic Churches Doctrine of the Trinity was true,
and his false: then I demand, would not this have been demonstration enough of
the Faith which we call Catholic either to Socinus or Arrius? And yet all
these contradictory Arguments which either of them had once fancied so
insolable, supposing them not answered in particular, would remain against it,
and stand as they did before, any such declaration, and yet all this without
giving him any comprehensive knowledge. This instance is made in Confutation of
his own false supposition that the Authors words, if then our reason understand
not with comprehensive knowledge what is declared, how can we then make any
deduction by way of Arguments from that which we understand not, did in their
true meaning signify how can we by reason make any deduction by way of
Argument, from that which we understand not to have been declared, or, that I
may p^t it the furthest I can imaginable, to the Exposers purpose or service,
how can ^e by reason understand that it is declared, which is to impose a most
ridiculous and impossible sense upon the Authors plain words; for if we neither
understand That nor What, there is an end of all understanding. Yet admitting,
here, says the Exposer, I have stated you a Case which proves the contrary,
for here Arrius or Socinus have no comprehensive knowledge of what is declared,
and yet they understand that it is declared; and doubtless the Author would say
so too, without ever meaning the Contrary: yea and that this revelation would
have been demonstration enough of that Faith, which we call Catholic. But what
would become of their former Contradictory Arguments which the Exposer says,
would stand as they did before, and remain against it. I cannot vouch for the
Author, that he would be of the same opinion. For I cannot comprehend though
God had not answered those Arguments of theirs, in particular as the Exposer
puts it, that those Arguments would or could remain against it, and stand as
they did before any such declaration, to Arrius and Sacinus after they had
received a sufficient demonstration from Gods own mouth by New Revelation. They
would indeed remain against it, and stand as they did before to Mr. Sherlocke.
But when I have thus given the humorous Exposer his own will and swing in every
thing, yet this superlunary instance does not serve in the least to confirm
his Argument that he makes against the Authors words, after his transforming
them: For here Arrius and Socinus only bring their sense of hearing, and having
heard this from God, do not by Reason make any Deduction by way of Argument,
but by a believing knowledge do only assent to this, second further Revelation:
Nor can they then from this second Revelation make any third step of Argument
to extend it beyond its own tenor, without incurring the Authors just and wise
Argument again, that seeing our reason understands not what is declared, I mean
we have no comprehensive knowledge of this Doctrine of Trinity. (which the
Exposer supposes to be declared) how can we by reason make any deduction by way
of Argument from that which we understand not, to wit, not comprehensively? As
I have abundantly cleared. But this instance was at first extinguished, when I
showed in the beginning that he did impertinently tradnce the Authors words,
and forge his meaning.

In the mean time, though he says put the Case with Reverence, when the Case
so put cannot admit it, I cannot but at last reflect, upon the Exposers
unpardunable indiscretion, in this more then absurd and monstrous
representation of God almighty, assuming the shape of an Angel as he says he
treated with Abraham face to face as a man does with his friend, to Discourse
with Arrius and Socinus. These are small escapes wi^h which he aptly introduces
such an interview and conference, that he treated our 4th. Abraham face to
face, as a man does with his friend: for it is true Abraham is Styled the
friend of God, and that God spoke to him; but it is never said in Scripture
that God did Treat, that is a word of Court, not of Scripture: No nor that God
spoke to him face to face. But it is said in Sripture only of Moses, Exodus 33.
11. The Lord spoke to him face to face as a man speaks unto his friend. But
that was a privilege peculiar to Moses. Numbers 12. 5. And the Lord came down
in a Pillar of Cloud, and stood in the door of the Tabernaele of the
Congregation, and called Aaron and Miriam, and they both came forth, and he
said, hear now my words if there be a Prophet among you, I the Lord will make
my self known to him in a Vision, and will speak unto him in a Dream: my
servant Moses is not so who is faithful in all my house, with him will I speak
mouth to mouth even apparently and not in dark Speeches, and the similitude of
the Lord shall he behold, wherefore then were not you afraid to speak against
my Servant Moses? (the Exposer is not afraid to do him manifest injury.) for
Deuteronomy. 34. 10. And there arose not in Israel a Prophet like unto Moses, whom the
Lord knew face to face, etc. And much more might be said of this matter, were
the man capable of it: But I perceive he neither reads nor understands
Scripture, and one Divine Criticism is stock enough it seems to set up an
Exposer. Neither is it so notorious an error that he says God assumed the
shape of an Angel to treat with him. I would be glad to know of the Exposer,
seeing he is so Cherubick* what is the shape of an Angel? Some humane Critics
have told me that it was the similitude of a Calfe. But Gods appearing in a sha
e to Abraham, when he treated with him face to face was in the shape of a man.
Genesis 18 1. The Lord appeared to him in the Plane of Mamre as he sat in the
Tent door, and so three men stood by him, etc. These are easy slips and he
that stumbles and falls not, gains a step. Yet for one as he mocks the Author
p. 2. That appears as one dropped down from Heaven, vouching himself a Son of
the Church of England, teaching as one having authority like a Father, to trip
in this manner, is something indecent. But to bring God in to so little a
purpose, contrary to all rules, that I have seen one with a better grace
brought down by a Machine to treat with Arrius and Socinus, no other Company,
those who have contended against the Son of God and his Holy Spirit, whose
Opinions have been the Pest of the Clergy for so many Ages, to have them now at
last brought in as Privado's to the Mysteries of Heaven, and the Trinity; what
Divine in his Wits but would rather have lost an Argument! What will the
Gentleman I last named say, to see such a reconciliation, to behold Arrius and
Socinus in so close Communion with God, as to be admitted even to single
Revelation: He cannot then avoid thinking, what he lately printed, and now with
more reason: That God is all Love and Patience when he has taken his fill of
Revenge, as others use to say the Devil is good when he is pleased. What a
shame is it to have men like the Exposer, who are dedicated to the service of
the Church, and who ought as in the place quoted by the Author in the present
Argument, they of all other to hold fast the form of sound Words, thus by their
rash levity administer so much occasion upon the most revered subject, that one
can scarce answer them in their own dialect without seeming though never so
averse to border upon their Profaneness. But those are the Divines in Mode, who
being by their Dignities and Preferments plump'd up beyond humane proportion,
do whether for their Pride or Ignorance, neither understand to speak of God,
which ought to be their study, with any tolerable Decorum; These are the great
Animadverters of the times, the Church-respondents in the Pew, Men that seem to
be members only of Chelsey College, nothing but broken Windows, bare Walls,
and rotten Timber. They with a few Villainous words, and a s^ared Reason, are
the only Answerers of good and serious Books: But then they think a Book to be
sure fully answered, when as the Exposer has by an humane Criticisme, they
write or scribble the same number of pages. For the Authors Book of the Naked
Truth, chancing to be of sixty six pages, the Exposer has not bated him an Ace,
but paid him exactly, though not in as good Billet, yet in as many Notches.
This being done, then the Exposer ubiquits himself, peeping at the Key-holes,
or picking the Locks of the Bed-chambers of all the great Ministres, and though
they be reading Papers of State* or at the Stool, more seasonably obtrudes his
Pamphlet. Next he sends it by an express to his friends at the Universities,
but especially to his own College, and can scarce refrain from recommending it
to the Tutors to instruct their Pupills, reading it to them in lieu of their
Lectures. But they are laid in for provision by the Manciple and Butler, and
that Quarter few escape without being sconc'd for an Animadversion. The Country
Cathedralls learn it latest, and arrive by flower degrees to their
understanding, by the Carrier. It grows a business of Chapter, and they admire
it in body as a profound Book of Theology. Those of 'em that can confide in one
another, discourse it over in private, and then it is odds, but, before the
Laity get notice of it, they first hear it preached over by him whose turn it
is next Sunday in the Minster, the rest conceal the Fraud for the reputation of
the Diocese. After the Book is grown common the plagiary wonders how, but that
proportionable Wits jump together, the Exposer could hit so right upon his
Motions. But if the Dean foresee that it is a very vendible Book, he you may
imagine forestalls the Market, and sends up for a whole Dicker of 'em to
retaile at his last advantage. All this while the little Emissaryes here in
town are not idle, but hawk about from London to Westminster with their
Britches stuffed with the Copyes, and will sell them to any one for Commendation.
Nor do the grudge this drudgery out of the hope and vision that they themselves
also may, at some happy hour or other, be received into the band of Answerers,
and merit the same Applause and advancement. But if they found it so hard a
task as I do this, sure they would be better advised. It Is a great pain to
answer, even an Animadverter; they are much happyer of the rwo it is better by
far Preaching, and a Sermon is soon curryed over. Yet sometimes it happens the
Printing of a Sermon is toilsome afterward and hazardous: for even one that
was preached before His Majesty, and by his special command to be Printed, is
it seems making over again, there having been sure some error in the Font, and
has laid several months in disobdience. But when it shall come out new vamp'd
and refitted, it will be a question worthy the Schools, whether it be the same
Sermon, and whether he has not prevaricated against his Majesty's special
Command, and Sinned on, by Printing without a License. Yet I rather expect that
after all, it will incur the same fate with that memorable Sermon preached
before the House of Commons, at their receiving the Sacrament upon the first
opening of the Parliament: Which for some dangerous opinions there vented, was
so far from ever coming forth, that one might sooner have obtained His
Majesty's special Command against over Printing it. But to return to the
Exposer, who by this impertinence has forced an occasion upon me to effect on
some Few who are guilty of the same, and may thank him for the favor. May not,
with more reason p. 1. then he says it of the Author, the Church justly
complain of him for thrusting out such crude indigested matter, without
communicating these conceptions of his to some that would have showed him the
weak and blind sides of them? I profess after those passages of his that I have
already taken notice of, and this egregious one the last, wherein by so few
lines he has so amply molested the Judicious Reader, I do not think I ow him
the patience to consider what remains with the same exactness, every thing that
he adds henceforward growing methodically slighter and worse as it hastens to,
the Center of Levity, the Conclusion of his Pamphlet. Yet something I will reply
all along, with more justice then he practices toward the Author, for whereas
he picks out here and there what he thinks; tenderest in him to tire upon, and
render it by his affected misrepresentation obnoxious, but shuts his eyes as
not being able to endure the resplendence of those evident Truths which he
delivers with great demonstration; I shall in the Exposer only observe and deal
with what seems the least impertinent. Only I may not perhaps think him worth
the transcribing so punctually as I have done hiterto, but for brevity more
often refer to his own pages.

Therefore be pleased to look on his p. 7. where, relating to what the Author
had said p. 4. of the Procession of the Holy Ghost, wherein the Greek Creed and
ours differ, he muffles it all up with saying that yet this breaks (...)
Communion between us, the difference arising only from the Inadequation of
Languages. Which is a Mathematical and more Civil way, either of owning his
Ignorance in so weighty a point, or confessing that he cannot answer what the
Author has said upon it. If by reason of the Inadequation of Languages a
mystery so inexplicable could not be expressed why did either our Church or
theirs meddle in it beyond the Scripture? There is no Inadequation between the
Languages, in speaking of it, Dia and Apo a Patre Filioque, and a Patre per
Filium: From the Father and Son, or From the Father By the Son: Proceeding or
Sending: But no language can reach the nature of Profession or Mission, nor to
represent to humane understanding how they can both be the same, or wherein
they may differ. He does in this as the Arrian Bishops in their subscription of
the Nicene Creed to Jovianus Socr. l. 3. c. 21. which now they said they could
do with a good Conscience, understanding neque vocabulum substantiae apud
sanctos Patres ad consuetudinem Graeci Sermonis capi. It Is an happy thing I see
to find our Church in good humor, else she might have made more ado about an
Article of Faith, as she does about much lesser matters. It Is not strange that
the Exposer finds no greater difference or distinction between terms so
distant, seeing in the last Paragraph above, he was so dull that he understood
not What is What. But he most aptly concludes how Demosthenes once answered the
Orator Aeschines, who kept much ado about an improper word. The Fortunes of
Greece do not depend upon it. So trivial a thing it seems does the Exposer
reckon it, to have improper words obtruded upon Christians in a Creed, without
believing of which no man can be saved, and whereupon the Eastern and Western
Churches divided with so much concernment. But how proper and ingenious a
contrivance was it of the Author (who is the very Cannon of Concinnity) to
bring in Demosthenes and Aeschines, as being doubtless both of the Greek
Church, to decide the matter in Controversy of the Procession or Mission of the
Holy Ghost between them and the West. Antiochus, whenever you take the Pew
again, be sure you forget not Demosthenes and Aeschines: For it will be to you
as good as current Money, which answers all things. The Exposer, though here so
gentle, yet, in the very page before this was as dogged, to as good men as the
Greeks some of them, the Papists, Lutherans, and Calvinists. The Author, he
says, may make as bold with them as he pleases, for we are none of these, I am
not bound to make War in their vindication. But if he should once Kyrie
Elieson, what would become of us? Good Mother Church of England maintain this
humor through, carrey it on, but above all things make much of this thy Exposer;
give him any thing, think nothing too good for him, Happy the Church that has,
and miserable that wants such a Champion!

But I must find some more expeditious way of dealing with him, and walk
faster, for really I get cold. The force of all that he ^aith in the 8, and 9,
pages, is to represent the Author ^idiculously and odiously, as if upon his
wishing that Constantine had commanded both parties Homoousian, and Homoiosian
to acquiece in the very Scripture Expressions, without any addition, whereby he
is contident the Arrian He esie had soon expired, he did by consequence cut,
Poe-dike to let in a Flood of Heresies, upon the Fenns of Christianity. But the
words with which he cuts the Author down, are Why this was the design of the
Arrians themselves, that which they drove at Court, that silence might be
imposed on both Parties. Well, and 'twas very honestly done of them, and
modestly, and like Christians, if the Controversy arose, as men think, about
the Imposing of a Creed, or Article co^ncerning a Question so fine, in Words so
Gross, which yet a man must Believe that without Believing it, no man can be
Saved; though no humane understanding can comprehend the subject of the
Question, nor the Scripture Expressions, as they conceived, did reach it. There
is field enough for Faith in the Scriptures, without laying out more to it; and
to resign their Reason to be silenced in a Question, stirred up by others,
that Peace might be established in the Church, was Ingenuity in them: and the
contrary proceeding of the Church, was the occasion of many other Heresies that
else had never been heard of. But the Exposer had said something, if he could
have divined that they would have used this silencing the disputes by
Constantine as the Arminians (so they were at that time called) did the same in
the Reign of his late Majesty, who procuring a command from him to prohibit
all writing or preaching about those points, having thereby gagged their
Adversaries, did let the Press and the Pulpit loose more then ever to propagate
their own Doctrines. That which the Exposer drops in the ardour of this
Argument. p. 9. How many terms in the Athanasian Creed, which to seek for in
the Apostles Creed, or in the whole Bible, were to as much purpose as it was
for the old affected Ciceronian in Erasmus, to labor and toil his Brains to
turn that Creed into Ciceronian Latin. Yet these are the terms in which the
Catholic Church thought she spoke safely in these Divine matters; is totidem
verbis, either to beg the Question, or make a formal resignation of it. And our
Church (howsoever else he may have oblidged her) has reason to resent this
indiscretion. Why was she her self so indiscreet to admit such a Blab into her
secrecies? How if no man else ought to have known it? It is an ill matter to
put such things in men's minds, who otherwise perhaps would never have thought
of it. It Is enough to turn a man's stomach that is not in strong health, not
only against the Athanasian Creed, but against all others for its sake. He
says p. 8. Scoffingly that the Author is one of those whom St. Paul forbids to
be admitted to any doubtful disputations: But let the Exposer see whether it be
not himself rather that is there spoken of. And withal that he may make some
more proper use of the place, which he warily cites not, I recommend it to him
in order to his dispute about future Ceremonies: It Is the 14. Romans v. 7. Where
St. Paul calls them that contend for him the Weak Brother, Weak in the Faith;
and such therefore the Apostle excludes from doubtful Disputations, so that one
gone so far in Ceremony as the Exposer, had no License from him to Print
Animadversions.

As to what he patches in p. 10. upon the matter of School Divinity, as if the
Author poured contempt upon the Fathers, I refer it to the Animadversions on
the Chapter about preaching, and should I forget, I desire him to put me in
mind of it. And p. 11. and 12. where the Author having in his 2. and 3. p. said
that, None can force another to believe, no more then to read where the Candle
does not give good light, and more very significantly to that purpose; the
Exposer flying giddily about it, burns his wings with the very similitude of a
Candle. Sure if a man went out by night on Traveling, or Bat-fowling, or
Proctoring, he might catch these Exposers by Dozens. But the force of his
Argument is p. 13. Whereas the Author says, you can force no man's sight, nor
his Faith. ^he replies, If it be not in any man's truth to Discern Fundamental
Truths, (of which this Chapter treats) when they are laid before his Eyes when
there is a sufficient proposal, then it is none of his fault. Yet this is as
weak as water: For, supposing a Fundamental Truth clearly demonstrated from
Scripture, though a man cannot force himself to believe it, yet there is enough
to render a man inexcusable to God. God has not been wanting (one of the
Exposers scraps) in necess^iries: but I hope he will not compel God too, but
that he may dispense his saving and efficatious influence (without which all
that sufficient Proposal he speaks of will have been insufficient,) only to the
minds of whom he pleases. The Animadverter in defending that a man can force
himself to believe, argues against Experimental Demonstration (try it in any
man, in every man) but raises only a malign ignorant and Caviling dispute,
herein to reduce the Author to the Dreggs, forsooth, of Mr. Hobb's his
Divinity, I. e. It is not in the man's fault says he, if he cannot believe
after a sufficient Proposal, He says, he is sure, too it is not then the man's
fault (so in the Dispute lately about That and What, he said, he was sure he
did the Author no wrong) But I desire him first to read Romans 3. the 4, 5, 6.
verses, with the Context: But especially Romans 9 from the 13. to the 22.
verse, where the Apostle introduces a man objecting in the same words to the
same purpose, Thou will say unto me why does God yet find fault, etc. And if
the Exposer will not take the Apostles Answer, but be sure of the contrary,
then he too cannot, it seems force himself to believe after what he ought to
have allowed for a sufficient Proposal. But where the Author supposes that any
man does clearly or sufficiently demonstrate a Fundamental Truth from
Scripture: yet unless a man's Brains be clear it is to him no demonstration. You
suppose that all of you do clearly demonstrate, so that if they don't Believe
you may justly open their Eyes with a pair of Pincers. Whereas there are some
Few among the Few, such Spermologers, that unless a grain of Faith fall down,
by the by, from Heaven your seed is Barren. I do not reckon much upon a Church
Historical devilish belief. Unless a thing be in the Express words of
Scripture, there are some of the Laity to whom a Counsel cannot demonstrate
clearly, a Preacher cannot demonstrate, sneezing Powder cannot demonstrate, no
Earthly can do it. Christ used Clay indeed, but it was his Spittle that gave
the healing quality, and cured the Blind man. Alas you are so wise in your own
conceit, that you cannot conceive how simple some poor men are. He says, the
Reason which helps every man to see these Fundamental Truths, at least when
they are showed and pointed out to him (such Truths you must conceive as the
Creed Doctrines of the Trinity) is a vulgar and popular thing (what need then
so many Disputes in the Councills? and sure the Author, that he may not admit
any man's hypocrisy and wilfulness to be gross and palpable, imagins there are
a world of Idiots. So the exposer would now cokes the Lay-multitude, whom
before he called the hundred thousands, and the many, and for their simplicity
excusable from subscribing the 39. Articles, to be grown on the sudden so very
wise men, that he may with justice therefore compel them by corporal
punishments or penalties to believe in spite of their Teeth or their
understandings. Alas if any men consider those Fundamental Truths, so subject
he says to vulgar and popular reason, it is one of the difficultest things in
the world, and yet more to those who are most removed from being Idiots to
believe them; and some men by their clear Demonstrations, by their sufficient
Proposals, by their Creeds have rendered it still more difficult. Why have I
wasted all this on the Exposer who, (whether it be his fault or no) yet cannot
force himself to Believe even the Naked Truth, though so clearly demonstrated
from Scripture (and the Exposer I suppose believes the Scripture*) though so
Consonant and obvious to the most vulgar and popular reason, but Believes his
own Animadversions, against the most vulgar and popular Reason, to be a
sufficient Proposal to the Contrary? In the 13. and 14. p. speaking of that
place Gal. 5. 12. which the Author understands of the Magistrates Power, but
the Exposer will have to be Excommunication; I crave leave to dissent from both
of them, humbly conceiving that the Word there of Cutting off is rather meant
in the usual sense* of Scripture in a multitude of places, for Gods taking them
of by his hand. But whatsoever it be, I desire the Exposer for his own sake to
take good heed that, whether it be Executing, or Punishing, or Banishing, or
Excommunicating, or taking them away Gods hand of Justice, the Apostle speaks
of such as taught for Circumcision, and alluding to the word wishes that they
were rather cut aff, who trouble the Galatians about the retaining of that, and
who would oblidge them contrary to their Christian Liberty to such Jewish
Ceremonies.

For what he ha^es in of the great and notable effect p. 14. of conferences,
wishing that there were such held publicly or privately to satisfy the
Non-conformists; truly though they be no great men; yet perhaps it were fit
they were first satisfied what kind of Reception they should meet with. But I
doubt such Conferences in Public are but the Resemblance and Epitome of
General Councils. For that of the Savoy in which he instances it might almost
as well have heen in Piemont. A man disintessed either way, might make a
pleasant story of the Anecdota of that Meeting, and manifest how well his
Majesty's Gracious Declaration, before his return, and his Broad-Seal*
afterward were pursued. But it is not my present business. But for shortness
sake, as to his desire That he that does not believe the notable effect of them
would but read what my Lord Bishop of Winchester printed of that Conference,
where the Adverse Party was driven immediately to assert that whatsoever may be
the occasion of sin to any must be taken away: I shall as civilly as I can,
though I defer much to his extraordinary veracity, tell the Exposer I do not
believe him.

I come now to what he p. 14, 15, 16, 17. and in other places declares to be
his Judgment, as to Compulsion in matter of Faith and Religion. The Authors
opinion appears in the beginning, where I stated his own words through this
Chapter. The expose does beat the air. p. 14. concerning the Donatists, a must
seditious and turbulent sect. who says the Author (as it is objected by those
that would have Force used) some of them came to St. Augustine and gave thanks,
that the Civil Power was made use of to testraine them, confessing that was the
means that brought them to consider more calmly their own former extravaga^
opinions, and so brought them home to the true Church. But he quarrels the
Author for his four answers, against the Magistrates using that as a Precedent.
The first, our Case is not in repressing seditious Practices, but enforcing a
Confession of Faith. I will return straight to the Exposers Answer to this. The
Authors second is; unless it can be evidenced that their hearts were changed as
well as their Profession (a thing impossible to prove) all this proves nothing.
Neither does it. For the dispute now betwixt the Author and his Adversary is,
whether it be possible to compel a man to believe. This instance proves only
that those Donatists were forced to come to Church. Therefore there cannot be a
more uncharitable and disingenuous thing invented, then for the Exposer to
upbraid him with such a retort, for ought he knows they were Hypoorites: (the
Author does say so) so for ought we to know this Author is all this while a
Jesuit, and writes this Pamphlet only to imbroile us Protestants. But he must
make some sputter, rather then be held to the terms of the Question: and truly
I perceive. Antiochus is very weary and shifts like a Crane (not to instance in
a worse Bird) first one foot and then another to rest on, being tired to stand
so long within so close a Circle. For thirdly the Author answers, Put the case
their hearts were really changed, as to matter of Belief, it is evident their
hearts were very worldly still, grovelling on earth not one step nearer Heaven:
He will not be candid without Compulsion, but leaves out what follows; and sure
their heart was evil, which was far m^re moved for the quiet enjoyment of this
worlds good, then for the blessed enjoyment of Christ. In earnest I begin to
think an Exposer is a Rational Creature. For had he not on pu^pose left these
last words out, he could not have cried, A horrible (...) saying! We may
forgive the Author any thing after this; which is all the Answer he gives: so
charitable is the Exposer grown to the Donatists, for every man that will come
to Church is ipso facto with him, a true Believer. But it did in truth appear
to have been so, and there is not the least uncharitableness in this that the
Author has said. For by those Donatists own confession, it was not any love to
that which they now owned for the Truth to St. Austin, not any Convicton of
Conscience, not so much as even (...) inclination to obey the Magistrate; but
mere fine force and fear of Punishment that brought them to Church, and
whatsoever good came on it was by accident. Whether might not a man add that
their giving thanks for that force, and so owning that Principle of Compulsion,
was a further evidence that their heart was naught still, even while they were
with St. Augustine? I think a man might, until I be better informed. But the
Author having given a fourth answer, that, suppose they were now really brought
over to the Truth of the Church of Belief, and Religion by the Magistrates
severity, (I express it thus that I may with the Exposer trifle about the Jews
care) yet St. Paul has said, God forbid we should do evil that good may come
of it? This is answer enough for a man of understanding. For it is not lawful,
suppose for St. Austin himself, to beguile any man even into Christianity:
unless as St. Paul perhaps, 2 Cor. 12. 16. Being crafty, caught the Corinthians
with guile, by preaching the Gospel without being Burdensome to the People. No
man ought to cheat another though to the true belief: Not by Interlining the
Scripture. Not by false Quotation of Scripture, or of a Father. Not by forging
a Heathen Prophecy, or altering an Author. Not by false Syllogism: Not by
telling a lie for God. And if no Pety Fraud much less can a Pia Vis be allowed,
to compel them to Faith, to compel them to a Creed, seeing it were to do evil
that grod may come of it: much less to a Creed not perfectly Scriptural, and,
instead of being enforced, indeed weakened by compulsion, seeing it is
impossible to compel a man to believe, and some Divines teach us to believe
(though I suspend,) that even God himself cannot, or does not Compel men to
Believing. But now it falls in naturally to me to be as good as my word, to
consider what the Exposer replies to the Author's first answer concerinig the
Donatists, that our Case is of enforcing a Confession of Faith, not concerning
seditious Practices, of which the Donatists were notoriously guilty, in which
Case he had shown before, that the Civil Magistrate may proceed to Punishment.
Wherein the Author reasons with his usual justness, and I though a very slender
accession, cannot but come into him. For St. Paul, in the 13. Chapter of the
Romans, laying out the Boundaries of the Duty of Christian subjects and the
Magistrates Power; says, Rulers are not (ought not to be) a terror to good
works, but to evil, and so forward: but to the Christian people he says, they
must be subject not only for wrath as those Donatists were afterward, but for
Conscience sake. And the subjection he defines is in doing good, walking
up^ightly, keeping the Moral Law, Fearing, Honoring, and Paying Tribute to the
Magistrate. But not one word says the Apostle of forbearing to Preach out of
that Obedience; saying in another place Necessity is laid upon one and woe is
unto me if I preach not the Gospel: (and that supposes too meeting) and as
little of Compelling to hear. For in those times and a great while after, there
was no enforcing to Christianity. It was very long before that came in fashion:
And, writing on the sudden, I do not well remember whether it did ever before
the days of Picarro and Almagro, the Apostles of the Indians. yet upon
recollection it was sooner. But what says the Exposer to this of the
Donatists, whom the Author allows only to have been punishable only for
seditious Practices, having before declared that for such as only refuse to
conform to the Churches established Doctrine and Discipline (pardon him if he
say really he cannot find any warrant or so much as any hint from the Gospel to
use any Force to compel them: and from Reason sure there is no motive to use
force, because as he showed before, Force cannot make a man believe your
Doctrine, but only as an Hypocrite, Profess what be believes not. I expect that
the Exposer, in this place above all other, which I guess was his greatest
motive to this Employment, should ply and overlay him now with Reason, but
especially with Scripture, let us hear how he answers. I say only this p: 5.
(for he speaks now of our Non-Conformists) the very Act against them calls them
Seditious Conventicles, and openly to break so many known Laws of the Land,
after so many reinforcements, is not this to be turbulent? This now you must
understand to be Reason, and not Scripture: That I suppose as the strongest is
reserved for the Rear. Truly, (as far as a man can comprehend by comparing that
with other Acts of this Parliament,) they did only appoint that the Penalty of
Sedition should ly against those that frequent such Meetings: as in the Act
against Irish Catel, if it be not in it self a Nuisance no Lawgivers can make
it so. Nor can any Legislators make that to be Sedition which is not Sedition
in its own nature. So Prohibitions of that kind operate no more as to the
intrinseque Quality, then a public. Allowance of taking away any honest men's
Goods by violence and giving it another name, would extinguish the Robbery. It
was the King and Parliaments prudence to make such Laws, and as long as they
shall continue of that mind, it is reason the Non-Conformists should lie under
the Penalty, which I humbly conceive is all that could be intended, But the
Exposer rivets this with Reason again, not Gospel. And was it not ever
understood so in all Religions; even in Heathen Rome? The most learned P.
Aerodius tells us (Does he so? What is it I beseech you) that the Roman Senate
(the Exposer quotes it at large as a story of great use and not to be hudled
over; I must be glad to contract it) made an Act against the Conventicles of
certain Innovators in their Religion; if any particular person judged such a
sacrifice to be necessary, he must repair first to the Praetor, he to the
Senate, where the Quorum must be an hundred, and they must not neither give him
leave if at all to have above five persons present at the Meeting. The self
same number, beside the Dissenters own Family, is so far forth endured by an
Act of this present Parliament, that there must be more then Five to make it a
Conventicle. This is a very subtle Remarke that he has made, as if it were one
of those Witty accidents of Fortune, or an extraordinary hand of Providence,
that the Senate of Rome and the Parliament of England should hit so put, upon
an Act of the same nature: And upon that number of Five. However they are
obliged to him, and he deserves the public Thanks for furnishing them, so
long after, with a Precedent. I confess I always wondered they would allow
them so many as Five, for fear when, not two or three, but Five of them were
gathered together God should bear their request: and it seemed therefore to me
a Formidable Number. But where has the Example been hid so long? I believe the
Exposers study has laid much this way. But this was so deep an Arcanum that was
fit for none but an Archbishops Closer. I wish he have come honestly by it.
But Murder I see and Theft will out, and so this comes to light by a blabbing
Animadverter, that cannot keep counsel, but will violate the Ecclesiastical
secret rather then lose the Leachery of his Tattle and the vainglory of his
Pedantry. I could be glad to know what complexion this Exposer is of. I am
persuaded, whatsoever he may be now, he was once extreme fair: for I remember
since I was at School: that the learned P. Ovidius told me, that the Crow was
once a white Bird, and much in Apollo's favor till for telling of Tales,

Sperantem non falsae praemia linguae,
Inter aves albas vetuit consistere Corvum.
And of another, the fairest thing that ever eyes were laid on, but for
carrying of Stories, was turned into a Jackdaw, and grew as black as a Crow,
Filching, and Kaw me and I Will Kaw thee, ever after.

And that which sure must make him more black, more a Jack-daw, and like it,
worthy to be expelled from the guard, and from the protection of Minerva, and
who henceforward

-- Ponatur post Noctis avem,
is, that he does with open mouth proclaim the Naked design of all the Few that
are of his Party. p. 12. The Jews in Rome are constrained once a week to hear a
Christian Sermon. The same p. 12. We that would oblidge him to open his Eyes
whether he will or no. p. 14. Iean only wish for the present, that by forcing
them into our Churches, they may hear our defenses, p. 17. I speak nothing more
against them then that they may he brought to our Churches, etc. All this as
the last result and greatest condescension of his Ecclesiastical Clemency. In
conclusion he declares he would have them forced: and for what manner of force,
violence, punishent or penalty he leaves it all open, go as high as men will.
These things still are not Scripture neither, but Reason. His first was an
Heathenish Reason in one sense, and this a Jewish in another. For I confess it
is a very pregnant and adequate example, and of great authority for us to
imitate; that the Jews in Rome are constrained once a week to hear a Christian
Sermon. What could there be more proportionable, then to resemble the
proceeding with Christians among themselves here in England, not differing in
any point of Faith, with the proceeding at Rome against the Jews? But that the
Exposer should implicitly liken and compare our Bishops to the Pope, may
perhaps not be taken well by either Party. So that I dare say, had he consulted
with his usual Prudence, he would not have disoblidged both sides at once. But
for the Precedent, I have nothing to oppose to this more then the first, it
being doubtless of notable effect, as notable as that of the Piemont
conference. Only out of the affection I have for him, I would wish him to
correct here one slip, if I be rightly informed; for some that have been abroad
say his Intelligence from Rome has failed him, for that it is not once a week,
but once a year that the Jews at Rome are, oblidged, forced, to hear a
Christian Sermon. And therefore, when the Parliamentum Indoctum sits again, I
would advise him not to make his Act too severe here upon this mistake, then it
is against those Judaick Non-Conformists at Rome.

But the next Reason would be so extraordinary troublesome to the Few, that are
of the Exposers party and to himself, that, if he had thoroughly considered it, I
question whether he would have been so charitable to the Fanatics, that he
would oblige them to open their Eyes whether they will or no. For it would
require two of the Church of England to every Nonconformist, unless 'twere
here and there one that had lost an Eye in the Service. Less would not do the
business decently, and those two also must be well in order, to open the
Non-conformists Eyes both at once, lest one Eye should be of one and the other
Eye of a contrary opinion. And then they should in humanity, give them some
interval for winking. Else they had as good cut off their Eyelids, as the
Episcopal Carthaginians used the Presbyterian Regulus, for keeping in the true
sense to his Covenant. But on the other side, it would look too big for a
Company of beggarly Fanatics, to be waited upon in as much Majesty as
Obeshankanogh the King of Virginia, that had two Squires of the Body in
constant attendance, to lift up his Eyelids as often as he conceived any man
worthy to be looked upon. But let the Exposer order it as he pleases, I am not
bound to be any of his Sight-supporters. Only this, it would be very improper
for him to choose any one that is blind to that employment. For his several
times repeated wish, that they might be forced to come to Church to give them a
fair hearing, and to bear their discourses: truly I believe they know the Lion
by the Claw, there is a great part of Oratory consists in the choice of the
Person that is to persuade men. And a great Skill of whatsoever Orator is, to
persuade the Auditory first that he himself is an honest and a fair man. And
then he is like to make the more impression on them too, if he be so prudent as
to choose an acceptable subject to speak on, and manage it decently, with fit
arguments and good language. None but the very rabble love to hear any thing
scurrilous or railing; especially if they should hear themselves railed on by
him, they would be ready to give him the due applause of Petronius his Orator,
with fl^ging the stones about his ears, and then leaving him to be his own
Auditory. Now, they have had so ample experiment of the Exposer as to all these
points, in his Defense against the Naked Truth, that I doubt his persuasion to
this coming to hear him or others, will be of little force with them, and
nothing would oblige these Donatists to it, but the utmost extremity; nor then
would they find themselves one step nearer heaven. His Book is as good to them
as a Sermon, and no doubt he has preached as well as printed it, and took more
pains in it than ordinary; did his best. Must they, will they think, be
compelled to make up the pomp of his Auditory? Must they, while the good Popish
Fathers suffered those of Chiapa to come to Church with their (...) pots, to
comfort their hearts, be enforced to come to Church by him, to have Snush
thrust up their Noses, to clear their Brains for them It Is the only way to
continue and increase the Sch^sme. But in good sober earnest, it is happy that
some or other of this Few chances ever and a non to speak their minds out, to
show us plainly what they would be at. Being conscious of their own
unworthiness, and hating to be reformed, it appears that they would establish
the Christian Religion by a (...) way, and gather so much Force that it might
be in their power, and we lie at their mercy, to change that Religion into
Heathenisme Judaisme, Turcisme, any thing. I speak with some emotion, but not
without good reason, that I question whether, which way soever the Church
Revenues were applied, such of them would not betake themselves to that side as
nimbly as the Needle to the Load stone. Have they not already, ipso facto
renounced their Christianity, by avowing this Principle, so contrary to the
Gospel? Why do not they Peter Hermit it, and stir up our Prince to an Holy War
abroad, to propagate the Protestant Religion, or at least our Discipline and
Ceremonies, and they take the Front of the Battle? No it is much better lurking
in a fat Benefice here, and to domineer in their own Parishes above their
Spiritual Vassals, and raise a kind of Civil War at home, but that none will
oppose them. Why may they not, as well as force men to Church, eram the Holy
Supper too down their Throsts (have they not done something not much unlike it)
and drive them into the Rivers by thousands to be baptized or drowned? And yet
this, after the King and Parliament by his, their, Gracious Indulgence have
enacted a Liberty for Five beside their own Family to meet together in their
Religious Worship: and could not therefore in end at the same time to force
them to go to Church with the utmost or any severity. What can be the end of
these things, but to multiply Force with Force, as one absurdity is the
consequence of another, till they may again have debased the Reason and Spirit
of the Nation, to make them fit for Ignorance and Bondage? Is it not reason, if
they had care or respect to men's souls (which they only exercise it seems the
cure of, perhaps not that neither, but evacuate one Residence by another) to
allow that men should address themselves to such Minister as they think best
for their souls health? Men are all infirm and indisposed in their spiritual
condition. What sick man, but, if a Physician were enforced upon him, might in
good prudence suspect it were to kill him, or that, if the next Heir and the
Doctor could agree, he would certainly do it? I shall conclude this reasonable
transport with remarking that although the Author did modestly challenge any
man to show him a warrant or color or hint from Scripture, to use Force to
constrain men to the Established Doctrine and Worship, and offered to maintain
that nothing is more clear to be deduced or is more fully expressed in Scripture,
nor is more suitable to Natural Reason, than that no man be forced in such
Cases; the Exposer took notice of it, yet has not produced one place of
Scripture, but only made use of Force at an Invincible Reason; so that upon
supposal, which none granted ^m, that all his Few do clearly demonstrate from
Scripture, what is at best therefore but deducible from Scripture, she thinks
it reasonable to oblige all men by force to come to all their Parishes. And yet
he himself who does (I suppose it only for the Cases sake) believe the
Scripture, although he cannot produce one place of Scripture for using this
force, and though the Author has produced so many, and urges the whole
Scripture that such force is not to be used, has his brains nevertheless so
confused, or so obdurate, that he cannot force himself to believe the Author:
but persists in his unchristian and unreasonable desire that men may be
compelled, and hereby deserves to be made an Example of his own Principle. For
herein he exceeds Phara^h, who had ten sufficient Proposals, and yet his heart
was so hardened, that he would not let Israel go out of Egypt, but was proof
against Miracles. But He only would imagine that the Israelites were idle, and
would therefore force them to make Brick without Straw: but the Exposers heart
and brains are so hardened, that he will conceive all the Nonconformists to be
obstinate fools or hypocrites, and therefore will compel them all to go to all
their Parish Churches, and to make therefore Faith without Reason. And hence it
is not only probable but demonstrable, if they were compelled to go and hear
him and the Few of his Party, how well he or they would acquit themselves too,
in clearly demonstrating from Sciprture the Prime Articles of Faith, as it is
extended in all the Creeds, of which it was treated in this Chapter that I have
now done with, and truly almost with those remaining.

For I had intended to have gone Chapter by Chapter, affixing a distinct Title,
as he does to every one of them (that men may believe he has animadverted
thoroughly without reading) except that concerning the difference between Bishops
and Presbyters, which, as being the most easy to be answered, he therefore
referred to a Bishop. But in good earnest, after having confider'd this last
Chapter, so Brutal whether as to Force or Reason, I have changed my resolution.
For he argues so despicably in the rest; that even I, who am none of the best
Disputers of this World, have conceived an utter contempt for him. He is a mere
Kitchin-plunderer, and attacks but the Baggage, where even the Suttlers would
be too hard for him. P. 18. Does the Exposer allow that under Constantinus
Pogonatus to have been a free General Council? In the same page, If the Exposer
would have done any thing in his, Dic Ecclesiae, he should have proved that a
General Council is the Church, that there can be such a General Council, or
has been; that the Church can impose new Articles of Faith beyond the Express
Words of Scripture; that a General Council cannot err in matters of Faith;
That the Church of his making cannot err in matters of Faith; Whereas our
Church, Article 19. says thus far, The Church of Jerusalem, Alexandria, and
Antioch, have erred, so also the Church of Rome has erred, not only in their
living and manner of Ceremonies, but also in matters of Faith. This is an
Induction from Particulars, and remark the Title of the Article, being of the
Church, Ours defines it, The Visible Church of Christ is a Congregation of
faithful men, in which the pure Word of God is preached, and the Sacraments be
duly ministered, according to Christ's Ordinance in all those things that of
necessity are requisite to the same. And then, if the Reader please to look on
the 20. and 21. Articles following, one of the Authority of the Church, the
other of the Authority of General Councils, unless a man will industriously
mis-apply and mis-construe them, those three are a Compendious and irrefragable
Answer, not only to wh^ he says here upon the Appendix, but to his whole
Book, from one end to the other, p. 19. I ask him when the Greek Church is
excommunicate by the Roman, when the Protestants left the Roman Church, when we
in England are neither Papists, Lutherans, nor Calvinists, and when in Queen
Mary's time we returned to the Roman Church, what and where then was the
Catholic Church, that was indefectible and against which the Gates of Hell did
not prevail? Was it not in the Savoy? Moreover I ask him what hinders but a
General Council may err in matters of Faith, when we in England, that are
another World, that are under an Imperial Crown, that are none of them, as the
Exposer words it, but have a distinct Catholic Faith within our Four Seas, did
in the Reign before mentioned (and reckon how many in that Convocation those
were that dissented) again make our selves one of them? unless he has a mind to
do so too, which would alter the Case exceedingly. P. 20. He quotes the Act I
Eliz. cap. I. let him mind that clause in it, by the express and plain words of
Canonical Scripture* and then tell me what service it has done him: whether he
had not better have let it alone, but that it is his fate all along to be
condemned out of his own mouth, which must always succeed so, when man urges a
Real Truth against a Real Truth. P. 23. I have reason to affirm and he will
meet with it (and has already in the Author) that those General Councils
howsoever called, were no Repraesentatio totius nominis Christiani, but
nominally: yea that such a Representation could not be. P 22. He expounds
Scriptures here, and thinks he does wonders in it, by assuming the Faculties of
the whole Body to the Mouth, which Mouth, he says (and in some sense it is very
true, if a man would run over the Concordance) is the Clergy. But I know not
why the Mouth of the Church should pretend to be the Brain of the Church, and
understand and will for the whole Laity. Let every man have his word about, and
it is reason. We are all at the same Ordinary, and pay our souls equally for the
Reckoning. The Exposer's Mouth, which is unconscionable, would not only have
all the Meat but all the Talk too, not only at Church, but at Council Table.
Let him read Bishop Tailor of Liberty of Prophecy. P. 25 The Exposer, that
always falsely Represents his Adversary, as an Enemy to Creeds, to Fathers, (as
afterward he does to Ceremonies, to Logic, to Mathematics, to every thing
that he judiciously speaks and allows of) here. P. 25. says the Author (who
delivers but the Church of Englands Doctrine herein, and would not have Divine
Faith imposed upon, nor things pressed beyond Scripture) in this matter of
General Councils is guilty of unthought of Popery, for the Papists (really I
think he partly slanders them herein) cannot endure Councils, General and Free.
They allow many a General Council more than we do. If the Pope do not, for some
reason or other, delight in some that are past, or in having new ones; it does
not follow that the Papists do not. I think those were Papists that ruffled the
Pope too here in the West, and that at the Council of Constance burnt John Hus
and Hierome of Prague, and resolved that Faith was not to be kept with
Heretics. But pray Mr. Exposer, if we must give divine Faith to General
Councils, let the Author ask you in his turn which are those General Councils?
How shall we know them? Why, only such as accord with Scripture. Why, then we,
I mean you Mr. Exposer, make our selves, you still, Judges of the General
Councils, the fault you so much condemn the Author for. But what Popery,
thought or unthought of, are you, in the very next line, guilty of, that call
the Popes Supremacy the Quintessence of Popery? So that it seems the
Quintessence of the Controversy betwixt ou^ Church and theirs, is only which
shall be Pope: for the Articles of (...) compulsion, though the Non-conformists
may. I thank you, Mr. Exposer, for your News: I had often heard it before, I
confess, but till now I did never, and scarce yet can, believe it; it is rather
to be wished then hoped for, a thing so surprizingly seasonable. But for the
good news, Mr. Exposer, I will give you four Bottles (which is all I had by me,
not for mine own use, but for a friend upon occasion) of the First, Second,
Third, and Fourth Essence. But the Quintessence I doubt would be too strong for
your Brain, especially in the morning when you are writing Animadversions. P.
28. of Ceremonies he sports unworthily, as if the Author spoke Pro and Con,
Contradictions: while, as a Moderator, he advises our Church to Condescension
on the right, and the Dissenters to submission on the left (how are men else to
be brought together?) He had as good call every man, because he has two hands,
an Ambidexter. He would turn every man's Stomach, worse than the Singing-mens
dirty Surplices, to hear him defend it so foolishly. P. 29, 30, 35, 36. The
best of his reasons for it are the Apparitions in white, in the Evangelists.
The Transfiguration. The Saints in white Linen. The Purity of a Minister, Why
then does he not wear it all the Week? The Bishop Sisynnius did so, and a
Churchman asking him, why not in Black? as 'twas then the mode, he gave the
same reasons; and I believe Gurnay the Nonconformist, if, as they say, he went
to Market in it, learned them of him. Why does not the Exposer (there is more
reason in Scripture. Col. 4 6. Let your speech be always seasoned with Salt,
that ye may know how ye ought to answer every man) carry a Salt-box always in
his Pocket, to be tasting of? for I doubt he is of the Salt that has lost his
savor: however I am sure he is very insip^d, and this might correct it: beside
it must have been of great virtue, when he was to animadvert on the Naked
Truth, that he might have known how to answer him. See Fox Vol. 3. p. 500. col.
2. what the Martyr, the Conformable Bishop Ridley says, would not be forced to
wear it, he was no Singer. See as to all these thing, his beloved Tertullian,
de Cor. Mil. Si ideo dicatur Coronari licere, quia non prohibeat Scriptura,
aeque retorquebitur, ideo Coronari non licere, quia Scriptura non jubeat.
Bishop Chrysostom Or. 1. adversus Judaeos, Ostendite cos ex Dei sententi^
jejunare Quod ni id fiat q^vis eb^ietate sceleratius est jejunium. Etenim
contra-quod fit praeter Dei voluntatem est omnium p^ssimum. Non enim ipsa little
quae fiunt natura, sed Dei voluntas ac Decretum essicit ut eadem vel bona sint
vel mala. P. 33. (...) jeering at the Authors Oh my Fathers, is inhumane and
impious: but Ch the pity of it that twenty such Oh's will not amount to one
Reason They will, Heb. 4. 12, 13. that day, which the Devils believe and
tremble, when all things shall be naked and bare before the Word of Truth. P.
37. he is scarce proper to come in a Pulpit, after what he says, that the
Apostles received not the Sacrament sitting; much less after p. 41. he has
said, We read that our Savior kneeled in several places, much less after p.
59. where of preaching he says, He knows not what the Author means by the
Demonstration of the Spirit, unless to speak as he does, magisterially. He
never read 1 Cor. 2. 4. of preaching in demonstration of the spirit, nor Mat.
7. 29. how Christ taught as one having authority; there is such an Art if he
knew it. P. 42. he can never answer the Author upon Romans 14. where the zeal us
Observer of Ceremonies is the weak Brother. He whiffles, those were the Jewish
Ceremonies. The Jews had a fairer pretense than we: for theirs were instituted
by God himself, and they know not they were abrogate.

His intolerably ridiculous Story out of Scholtus p. 15. of contriving a pair
of Organs of Cats, which he had done well to have made the Piggs at Hogs Norton
play on, puts me in mind of another Story to quit it, relating as his does to
screwing the Non-conformists into Church; and I could not possibly miss of the
rencounter, because the Gentleman's name of whom it is told, is the
Monosyllable voice with which Cats do usually address themselves to us. 'Twas
(you have it as I had it) the Vice Chancellor of one of our Universities, but
now a Bishop, October. 22. 1671. and 12. Febr. 1669, He came to a Fanatics
house, they not being then at Worship, yet one of 'm said, They were come to
pray to the God of Heaven and Earth; he said, Then they were within the Act. He
would force them to Church to Saint Mary's, himself laid hands on'm. He
commanded them to follow him in the Kings name. His Beadle told them, He would
drive them thither in the Devils name. The Vice Chancellor said he had
converted hundreds so at Reading. They spoke of Queen Mary's days, he said, he
could burn them too now, if the Law required it. There was old tugging, he had
the victory. They were placed in Saint Mary's, with Beadles to attend them. As
he carried them in he quoted Luke 14 23 Compel them to come in. What pity it is
the Exposer knew not of this Text, that he might have had one Scripture for his
Doctrine of Compulsion! But it chanced the Minister there preached one time
Acts 5. 41. the other time Mat. 10. 16. Afterward he took the penalty
nevertheless for not having been at Church that same Sunday that he had hurried
them thither. P. 62. He speaks of Bishop Morton, whose industrious Brain made
up the fatal breach between the two Houses of York and Lancaster. Much good do
the Clergy with their Lay Offices He coggs p. 7. with the Bishop of Ely for his
short Syllogism: he made a longer of the Holiness of Lent. He complements (I
said he would not forget him) my Lord Chancellor the Christian Cicero. It Is
true of him, but contradictorily expressed. Ps. 35. 16. With the flatterers were
busy mockers, that gnashed with their teeth. The Exposer has commenced in both
Faculties. But the Printer calls: the Press is in danger. I am weary of such
stuff, both mine own and his. I will rather give him this following Essay of
mine own to busy him, and let him take his turn of being the Popilius.

A short Historical Essay, touching General Councils, Creeds, and Imposition in
Religion.
THE Christian Religion, as first Instituted by our Blessed Savior was the
greatest security to Magistrates by the Obedience which it taught, and was
fitted to enjoy no less security under them by a Practice conformable to that
Doctrine. For our Savior himself, not pretending to an Earthly Kingdom, took
such care therefore to instruct his followers in the due Subjection to
Governors; that, while they observed his Precepts, they could neither fall
under any Jealousy of State as an ambitious and dangerous Party, nor as
Malefactors upon any other account deserve to suffer under the Public
Severity: So that in this only it could seem pernicious to Government that
Christianity, if rightly exercised upon its own Principles, would render all
Magistracy useless. But although he, who was Lord of all, and to whom all Power
was given both in Heaven and in Earth, was nevertheless contented to come in
the form of a Servant, and to let the Emperors and Princes of the World alone
with the use of their Dominions; he thought it good reason to retain his
Religion under his own cognizance and exempt its Authority from their
jurisdiction. In this alone he was imperious, and did not only practice it
himself against the Laws and Customs then received, and in the face of the
Magistrate; but continually seasoned and hardened his Disciples in the same
confidence and obstinacy. He tells them, They shall be brought before Kings and
Governors for his name but fear them not, he will be with them, bear them out
and justify it against all Opposition. Not that he allowed them hereby to
violate their duty to the Public by any resistance in defiance of the
Magistracy; but he instructed and animated them in their duty to God, in
despite of Suffering.

In this manner Christianity did at first set out and accordingly found
reception. For although our Blessed Savior, having fulfilled all Righteousness
and the time of his Ministry being completed, did by his Death set the Seal
to his Doctrine, and show the way toward Life and Immortality to such as
Believing imitate his Example: yet did not the Heatken Magistrate take the
Government to be concerned in the point of Religion or upon that account
consent to his Execution. Pontius Pilate, then Governor of Judaea, though he
were a man unjust and cruel by Nature, and served Tiberius, the most tender,
jealous, and severe in point of State or Prerogative, of all the Roman
Emperors; though he understood that great Multitudes followed him, and that he
was grown the Head of a new Sect that was never before heard of in the Nation,
yet did not be intermeddle. But they were the men of Religion, the
Chief-Priests, Scribes and Elders and the High Priest Caiapkas. And yet,
although they accused him falsely, That he taught that Tribute was not to be
given to Caesar that he was a Fifth Monarch and made himself a King, and (as it
is usual for some of the Clergy to terrify the inferior Magistrates out of
their duty to Justice under pretense of Loyalty to the Prince) threatened Pilate
that if he let that man go he was not Caesar's friend; he understanding that
they did it out of Envy, and that the Justice and Innocence of our Savior was
what they could not bear with, would have adventured all their Informing at
Court, and first have freed him and then have exchanged him for Barrabas;
saying, that he found no fault in him: but he was overborne at last by humane
weakness and poorly imagined that by washing his own hands he had expiated
himself and wiped off the guilt upon those alone who were the occasion. But, as
for Tiberius himself, the growth of Christianity did never increase his cares
of Empire at Rome, nor trouble his sleep at Capreae: but he both approved of
the Doctrine, and threatened the Informers with Death; nor would have staid
there, but attempted, according to the way of their Superstition, upon the
intelligence he had from Pilate, to have received Christ into the number of
their Deities. The Persecution of the Apostles after his Death, and the
Martyrdom of Stephen happened not by the interposing of the Civil Magistrate
in the matter of Religion, or any disturbance occasioned by their Doctrines:
but arose from the High Priest and his emissaries, by suborned Witnesses,
stirring up the rabble in a brutish and riotous manner to execute their
cruelty. How would the modern Clergy have taken and represented it, had they
lived in the time of St. John Baptist and seen Jerusalem, Judaea and all the
Region round about Jordan go out to be baptized by him! Yet that Herod, for any
thing we read in Scripture, though he wanted not his instillers, apprehended no
Commotion: and had not Calig^la banished him and his Herodias together, might
in all appearance have lived without any change of Government. 'Twas she that
caused John's Imprisonment for the convenience of her Incest, Herod indeed
seared him, but rather reverenced him, as a just man, and an holy, observed him
and when he heard him he did many things and heard him gladly. Nor could all
her subtilty have taken off his Head, but that Herod thought himself under the
obligations of a Dance and an Oath, and knew not in that Case they ought both
to be dispensed with. But he was exceeding sorry at his death, which few
Princes are if men have lived to their jealousy or danger. The Killing of
James and Imprisonment of Peter by that other Herod was because he saw he
pleased the people; when the Priests had once set them on madding: a
Complaisance to which the most innocent may be exposed, but which partakes more
of guile than Civility or Wisdom.

But, to find out what the disinteressed and prudentmen of those days took to
be the wisest and only justisiable way for the Magistrate to proceed in upon
matters of Religion, I cannot see any thing more pregnant than the concurrent
Judgment of three Persons, of so different Characters, and that lived so far a
sunder, that there can be no danger of their having corrupted one another
Understanding in favor to Christianity. Gamaliel, the Deputy of Achaia, and
the Town clerk of Ephesus; The first a Jewish Doctor, by Sect a Pharisee, one
of the Council, and of great Authority with the People, who (when the
Chief-Priest had cast the Apostles in Prison, and charged them for Preaching
against the Command he had before laid upon them) yet gave this advice,
confirming it with several fresh precedents, Acts 5. That they should take keed
to themselves what they intended to do with those men and let them alone, for
if this counsel, says he, or this work be of men, it will come to naught, but
if it be of God you cannot overthrow it, lest ye be found fighting with God. So
that his Opinion grounded upon his best experience, was that the otherwise
unblameable Sect of Christianity might safely and ought to be left to stand or
fall by Gods Providence under a free Toleration of the Magistrate. The Second
was Gallio, Acts 18. A Roman, and Deputy of Achaia. The Jews at Corinth hurried
Paul before his Tribunal, laying the usual charge against him. That he
persuaded men to Worship God contrary to the Law: which Gallio looked upon as
so slight and without his Cognizance, that, although most Judges are willing to
increase the jurisdiction of their Courts, He drove them away, saving Paul the
labor of a defense, and told them, If it were a matter of wrong or wicked
lewdness* reason would that he should bear with them, but if it be a question
of words and names and of your law, look ye to it I will be no judge of such
matters: and when he had so said, Paul was released, but the Greeks that were
present took Barrabas, and before the Judgment Seat beat So^henes the Chief
Ruler of the Synagogue, and Ring leader of the Accusers. His Judgment therefore
was that, to punish Christians merely for their Doctrine and Practice, unless
they were Malefactors otherwise, was a thing out of the Magistrates Province
and altogether unreasonable. The Third case was no less remarkable. For one
Demetrius, that was a Silver-smith by trade and made shrines for Diana, stirred
up all the Free men of his Company against Paul, and indeed he stated the
matter very fairly and honestly, assigning the true Reason of most of these
Persecutions: Ye know that by this craft we have our wealth, but that by Paul's
Preaching that they be no Gods which are made with hands, not only our Craft is
in danger to be set at naught, but also the Temple of the great Goddess and her
Magnificence, whom all Asia and the World Worship, should be despised and
destroyed. And it is considerable that even the Jews, though of a contrary
Religion yet, fomented, as it usually chances, this difference and egged the
Ephesians on against the Apostle and his followers. But when they had brought
Alexander, one of Paul's Companions into the Theater, the Recorder of Ephesus
(more temperate and wise than some would have been in that Office) would not
make any Inquisition upon the matter, nor put Alexander upon his trial and
defense, but, (although he himself could not have born that Office without
being a great Dianist, as he declared too in his discourse) he tells the
People, They had brought those men which were neither robbers of Churches nor
Blasphemers of their Goddess, (for that Judge would not Condemn men by any
inferences or expositions of old Statutes which long after was Julian's
practice and since imitated) and therefore if Demetrius and his Crafts-men had
any matter against them the Law was open, and it should be determined in a
Lawful Assembly, but that the whole City was in danger to be called in question
for that uproar, there being no cause whereby they might give account of that
concourse. And by this he plainly enough signified, that if Paul and his
Companions had stolen the Church-Plate they might well be i^ed, but that
Demetrius had no more reason in Law against them, then a Chandler might have
had, if by Paul's Preaching Wax tapers, as well as Silver-Candlesticks had
grown out of fashion. That it is matter of right and wrong betwixt man and man
that the Justice of Government looks too: but that, while Christianity was
according to its own Principle carried on quietly, it might so fall that the
disturbers of it were guilty of a Riot and their great City of Ephesus deserve
to be fined for it. And taking this to have been so, he dismissed the Assembly,
Acts 19.

After these Testimonies which I have collected out of the History of the Acts,
as of greatest Authority, I shall only add one or two more out of the same
Book, wherein Paul likewise was concerned before Heathen Magistrates of greater
eminence, Acts 23. Ananias the High Priest (these always were the men) having
countenanced and instigated the Jews to a Conspiracy, in which Paul's Life was
endangered and aimed at Lysias the chief Captain of Jerusalem interposes and
sends him away to Foelix then Governor of Judaea; signifying by Letter That he
had been accused only of questions of their Law, but he found nothing to be
said to his Charge worthy of Death or of Bonds. Whereof Foelix also, though the
High Priest was so zealous in the Prosecution that he took the journey on
purpose, and had instructed an exquisite Orator Tertullus to harangue Paul out
of his Life, as a Pestilent-fellow, a mover of Sedition and Ringleader of the
Sect of the Nazarenes, not omitting even to charge Lysias for rescuing him by
great violence from being Murdered by them, was so well satisfied of the
contrary upon full hearing, that he gave him his Libery and a Centurion for his
guard, with command that none of his acquaintance should be debarred from
coming and Ministering to him. But being indeed to leave his Government
afterward; left him in Prison, partly to show the Jews and their High Priest
another piece of complaisant Policy, which; it is possible they paid well for,
seeing the other reason was, because though he had sent for Paul the oftener and
communed with him, in hopes that he would have given him money to be
discharged, there came nothing of it. Which was so base a thing in so great a
Minister, that the meanest Justice of the Peace in England would scarce have
the face to do so upon the like occasion. But his Successor F^stus, having
called Agrippa and Berenice to hear the Cause, they and three were of Opinion
that 'twas all on the Jews side calumny and impertinence, but that Paul had
done nothing worthy of death or of Bonds, and might have been set free but that
having appealed to Caesar he must be transmitted to him in safe Custody. Such
was the sense of those upon whom the Emperors then relied for the Government
and security of their Provinces: and so gross were their Heathen
understandings, that they could not yet comprehend how quietness was Sedition,
or the innocence of the Christian Worship could be subject to forfeiture or
penalty. Nay, when Paul appeared even before Nero himself and had none to stand
by him but all forsock him: he was by that Emperor acquitted, and permitted a
long time to follow the work of his Ministry. It Is true that afterward this
Nero had the honor to be the First of the Roman Emperors that Persecuted
Christianity; whence it is that Tertullian in his Apologetick says; We glory
in having such an one the first beginner and Author of our punishment, for
there is none that has read of him, but must understand some great good to
have been in that Doctrine, otherwise Nero would not have Condemned it.

And thence forward Christianity for about Three hundred Years lay subject to
Persecution. For the Gentile Priests could not but observe a great decay in
their Parishes, a neglect of their Sacrifices and diminution of their Profits
by the daily and visible increase of that Religion. And God in his wise
Providence had so ordered that, as the Jews already so, the Heathens now having
filled up their measure with iniquity, Sprinkling the Blood of his Saints among
their Sacrifices, and the Christians having in a severe Apprentiship of so many
Ages Learned the Trade of Suffering, they should at last be their own Masters
and admitted to their Freedom. Neither yet, even in those times when they lay
exposed to Persecution, were they without some Intervalls and catching seasons
of Tranquillity, wherein the Churches had leisure to reap considerable
advantage, and the Clergy too might have been inured, as they had been
Exemplary under Affliction so, to bear themselves like Christians when they
should arrive at a full prosperity. For as often as there came a just Heathen
Emperor and a lover of Mankind, that either himself observed, or understood by
the Governors of his Provinces, the innocence of their Religion and Practices,
their readiness to pay Tribute, their Prayers for his Government and Person,
their faithful Service in his Wars, but their Christian valor and contumacy to
Death, under the most exquisite Torments, for their holy profession; he
forthwith relented, he rebated the Sword of the Executioner, and could not find
in his heart or in his power to exercise it against the exercise of that
Religion. It being demonstrable that a Religion instituted upon Justice betwixt
man and man. Love to one another, yea even their Enemies, Obedience to the
Magistrate in all Humane and Moral Matters, and in Divine Worship upon a
constant exercise thereof and as constant Suffering in that Cause, without any
pretense or latitude for Resistance, cannot, so long as it is true o it self in
these things, fall within the Magistrates Jurisdiction.

But as it first was planted without the Magistrates hand, and the more they
plucked at it, so much the more still it flouricted, so it would be to the end
of the world, and whenever Governors have a mind to try for it, it will by
the same means and method sooner or later foil them, but, if they have a mind
to pull up that Mandrake it were advisable for them not to do it themselves,
but to choose out a Dog for the Employment. I confess whenever a Christian
transgresses these bounds once, he is impoundable or like a wafe and stray
whom Christ knows not, he falls to the Lord of the Manor. But otherwise he
cannot suffer, he is invulnerable by the sword of Justice: only a man may swear
and damn himself to kill the first honest man he meets, which has been, and is
the case of all true Christians worshipping God under the power and violence of
their Persecutors.

But the Truth is that, even in thosetimes which some men now, as often as it is
for their advantage, do consecrate under the name of Primitive, the Christians
were become guilty of their own punishment, and had it not been, as is most
usual, that the more Sincere Professors suffered promiscuously for the Sins and
Crimes of those that were Carnal and Hypocrites, their Persecutors may be
looked upon as having been the due Administrators of God's Justice. For (not to
go deeper) if we consider that which is reckoned the Tenth Persecution under
Dioclesian, so incorrigable were they after nine preceding, what other could be
expected when Eusebius l. 3. c. 1. sadly laments having related how before that
the Christians lived in great trust and reputation in Court, the Bishops of
each Church were beloved, esteemed and reverenced by all mankind and by the
Presidents of the Provinces, the Meetings in all the Cities were so many and
numerous, that it was necessary and allowed them to erect in every one spacious
and goodly Churches, all things went on prosperously with them, and to such an
height that no envious man could disturb them, no Devil could hurt them, as
long as walking yet worthy of those mercies they were under the Almighty's cure
and protection: after that our affair by that too much Liberty, degenerated
into Luxury and Laziness, and some prosecuted others with Hatred, Contumely,
and almost all of us wounded our selves with the weapons of the Tongue in ill
language when Bishops set upon Bishops, and the people that belonged to one of
them stirred Sedition against the people of another; then horrible Hypocrisy
and Dissimulation sprung up to the utmost extremity of Malice, and the
Judgment of God, while yet there was liberty to meet in the Congregations, did
sensibly and by steps begin to visit us, the Persecution at first discharging
it self upon our Brethren that were in the Army. But having no feeling of the
hand of God, not endeavoring to make our peace with him, and living as if we
believed that God did neither take notice of our Transgressions nor would visit
us for them, we heaped up Iniquity upon Iniquity. And those which seemed to be
our Pastors, kicking under foot the rules of Piety, were inflamed among
themselves with mutual Contentions, and while they minded nothing else but to
exaggetate their Quarrels, Threats, Emulation. Hatred and Enemies, and
earnestly each of them pursued his particular Ambition in a Tyrannical manner,
then indeed the Lord, then I say, according to the voice of the Prophet J^emy,
he covered the Daughter of Zion with a cloud of his anger, and (...) down from
Heaven unto earth the beauty of Israel; and remembered not his footstool in the
day of his anger. And so the Pious Historian Pathetically goes on, and deplores
the Calamities that (...), to the loss of all that stock of Reputation,
Advantage, Liberty and Safely, which Cristian people had by true Piety and
adhering strictly to the Rules of their Profession formerly acquired and
enjoined, but had now forfeited and smarted deservedly under Dioclesian's
persecution. And it was a severe one, the longest too that ever happened, ten
years from his beginning of it and continued by others: by which (...) one
might have thought the Church would have been sufficiently winnowed, and
nothing left but the pure Wheat, whereas it proved quite contrary, and the
holiest and most constant of the Christians bing blown away by Martyrdom, it
seemed by the succeeding times as if nothing but the Chaff and the Ta^es
remained. But there was yet such a Seed le^, and notwithstanding the defection
of many, so internal a virtue in the Religion it self, that Dioclesian could no
longer stand against it, and tired out in two years time, was glad to betake
himself from rooting out Christianity, to gardening and to sow Pot Herbs at
Salona. And he with his partner Maximi^s, resigned the Empire (...) Galer^s and
Constan^, the excellent Father of a more glorious and Christian Son,
Constantine the G^a, who in due season succeeded him, and by a chain of Gods
extraordinary providence seemed to have been (...) down from Heaven to be
Emperor of the whole World, and as I may say, the Universal Apostle of
Christianity.

It is (...) pressible the virtue of that Prince, his Care, his Indulgence, his
Litera^y his own Example, every thing that could possibly tend to the promotion
and encouragement of true Religion and Piety. And in order to that he though
(...) not do better* neither indeed could he, then to show a, (...) respect o^
the Clergy and Bishops, providing largely for their subsistence and they too on
their part behaved themselves worthy of their High (...) are known to make
right use of the advantages of his Bounty to the same ends that they were by
him intended. For if the Apostle (...) Tim. 5. 17. re^uires that an Elder,
provided he rule well, be accounted worthy of Double Honor, especially those
who lab^ing in the Word and Doctrine, it excludes not a (...) any further
proportion, and indeed these cannot be too high a value (...) upon such a
Person: and God forbid too that any measure of wealth should render a Clergy
man Uncanonical. But alas, Bishops were already grown another Name and Thing,
then at the Apostles Institution; and had so (...) their (...), that Paul would
have had much difficulty by all the marks in the (...) Tim. (...). to have
known them. They were ill enough under persecution many of them, but that long
and sharp Winter under Dioclesian, being seconded by so warm a Summer under
Constantine, produced a Pestilence, which as an Infection that seizes sometimes
only one sort of (...)* Diffused it self (...) remarkably through the whole body
of the Clergy. From his reign the most sober Historians date that New Disease
which was so generally propagated then, and ever since transmitted to some of
their Successors, that it has given reason to inquire whether it only happened
to those men as it might to others, or where not inherent to the very Function.
It showed it self first in ambition, then in Contention, next in Imposition,
and after these Symptoms broke out at last like a Plague Sore in open
Persecution. They the Bishops who began to vouch themselves the Successors of
Christ, or at least of his Apostles, yet pretended to be H^irs and Executors of
the Jewish Hiah-Priests and the Heathen Tyrants, and were ready to move the
Will. The Ignorant Jews and Infidels understood not how to Persecute, had no
Commission to meddle with Religion, but the Bishops had studied the Scriptures,
knew better things, and the same, which was Cruelty and Tyranny in the
Heathens, if done by a Christian and Ecclesiastical hand, was hallowe^ to be
Church Government and the care of a Diocese. But that I may not seem to speak
without book or outrun the History, I shall return to proceed by those degrees
I newly mentioned whereby the Christian Religion was usurped upon, and those
things became their crime which were their duties.

The first was the Ambition of the Bishops, which had even before this taken
its rise when in the intervals of the former Persecutions the Piety of the
Christians had laid out ample provisions for the Chuch, but when Constantine
not only restored those which had been all (...) under Dioclesian, but was
every day adding some new Possession, Privilege, or Honor, a Bishopric became
very (...), and was not only a Good Work but a Good Thing, especially when
there was now no danger of paying as it was usual, formerly their First Fruits
to the Emperor by Martyrdom. The Arts by which Ambition c^mes, are Calumny,
Dissimulation, Cruelty, Bribery, Adulation, all applied in their proper places
and seasons; and when the man has attained his end he ordinarily shows himself
then in his colors, in Pride, Opiniastry, Contention, and all other requisite
or incident il Qualities. And if the Clergy of those times had some more
dextrous and innocent way then this of manaing their Ambition, it is to be
lamented inter Arts (...), or lies enviously hid by some musty Book-worm in
his private Liberary. But so much I find that both before and then and after,
they cast such Crimes at one another, that a Man would scarce think he were
reading an History of Bishops, but a Legend of Devils: and each took such are
to blacken his adversary, and he regarded not how he smutted himself thereby
and his own Order, to the Laughter or Horror of the bystanders. And one thing
I remark particularly, that as Son of a Whore is the modern Word of Reproach
among the Laity, of the same use then among the Clergy was Heretic. There were
indeed Heretics as well as there are Bastards, and perhaps it was not their
fault, (neither of (...) could help it) but the Mothers o^ the Fathers, but
they made so many Heretics in (...) days, that (...) hard to think they really
believed them so; but adventured the Name only to pick a Quarrel And one thing
that makes it very suspicious, is, that in the Ecclesiastical History the
Ringleaders of any Heresy for the most part accused of having a mind to be a
Bishop, though it was not the way to come to it. As here was the damnable
Heresy of the Novatians, against which Constantine, not withstanding his
Declaration of general Indulgence at his coming in, was shortly after so
incensed, that he published a most severe Proclamation against them; Cognoscite
jam per legem hanc que in me sancita (...) O Nova iam etc. prohibiting all
their meetings, not only in Public but in their own Private Houses, and that
all such places where they assembled for their worship, should be rased to the
ground without delay or controversy, etc. Eus. l. 3. c. 62. de vita
Constantini. Now the story the Bishops tell of Novatus the Author of that Sect.
Eusebius. l. 6. c. 24. is in the words of Cornelius the Bishop of Rome, the very
first line. But that you may know that this brave Novatus did even before that
affect to be a Bishop (a great crime in him) that he might conceal that
petulant Ambition, he for a better cover to his arrogance, had got some
Confessors into his Society, etc. and goes on calling him all to naught, but
then, says he, be came with two Reprobates of his own Heresy into a ^uite, the
very least, Shire of Italy and by their means seduced three most simple high
shoon Bishops, wheedling them that they must with all speed go to Rome and
there meeting with other Bishops all Matters should be reconciled. And when he
had got thither these three Silly Fellows, as I said, that were not aware of
his cunning, he had prepared a company of Rogues like Himself, that treated
them in a private room very freely, and having thwack'd their bellies and heads
full with meat and drink, compelled the poor drunken Bishops by an imaginary
and vain Imposition of Hands, to make Novatus also a Bishop. Might not one of
the same Order now better have concealed these things had they been true, but
such was the discretion. Then he tells that one of the three returned soon
after, repenting it seems next morning, and so he received him again into the
Church unto the Laick Communion. But for the other two he had sent Successors
into their places. And yet after all this ado, and the whetting of Constantine,
contrary to his own Nature and his own Declarations against the Navatians, I
cannot find their Heresy to have been other then that they were the Puritans of
those times, and a sort of Non-conformists that could have subscribed to the
Six and thirty Articles, but differed only in those of Discipline: and upon
some inormities therein separated, and (which will always be sufficient to
quality an Heretic) they instituted, Bishops of their own in most places. And
yet afterward in the times of the best Homotusian Emperors, a sober and
strictly Religious People did so constantly adhere to them, that the Bishops of
the Church too found meet to give them fair quarter; for as much as they
differed not in Fundamentals, and therefore were of use to them against
Heretics that were more dangerous and diametrically opposite to the Religion.
Nay in so much, that even the Bishop of Constantinople, yea of Rome, not
withstanding that most tender point and interest of Episcopacy, suffered the
Novatian Bishops to walk cheek by joul with them in their own Diocese; until
that, as Secr. l. 7. c. 11. the Roman Episcopacy having as it were passed the
bounds of Priesthood, slipped into a Secular Principality, and thenceforward
the Roman Bishops would not suffer their Meetings with Security, but, though
they commended them for their Consent in the some Faith with them, yet took
away all their Estates. But at Constantinople they continued to fare better,
the Bishops of that Church embracing Novatians and free liberty to keep their
Conventicles in their Churches. What, and to have their Bishops too, Altar
against Altar? A Condescension which as our Non-conformists seem not to desire
or think of, so the Wisdom of these times would, I suppose, judge to be very
unreasonable, but rather that it were fit to take the other course, and that
whatsoever advantage the Religion might probably receive from their Doctrine
and party, it is better to suppress them, and make havoc both of their Estates
and Persons. But however the Heretics in Constantine's time had the less
reason to complain of ill Measure, seeing it was that the Bishops meated by
among themselves. I pass over that controversy betwixt Cecilianns, the Bishop
of Carthage and his adherents, with another set of Bishops there in Africa,
upon which Constantine ordered ten of each party to appear before Mil^iades the
Bishop of Rome and others to have it deceived. Yet after they had given
sentence, Constantine found it necessary to have a Council for a review of the
business, as in his Letter to Chrestus the Bishop of Syracusa, Eusebius. l. 10. c.
6. Wrensas several have formerly separated from the Catholic Heresy, (for that
word was not yet so ill natured but that it might sometimes be used in its
proper and good Sense:) and then relates his Commission to the Bishop of Rome
and others; But for as much as some having been careless of their own
salvation, and forgetting the reverence due to that most holy Heresy (again)
will not yet lay down their enmity, nor admit the sentence that has been
given, obstinately affirming that they were but a few that pronounced the
Sentence, and that they did it very precipitately, before they bad duly
inquired of the matter: and from hence it has happened that both they who
ought to have kept a brotherly and nuanimous agreement together, do abominably
any flagitiously dissent from one another, and such whose minds are alienated
from the most holy Religion, do make a mockery both of it and them. Therefore
1, etc. have commanded very many Bishops out of innumerable places to meet at
Arles, that what ought to have been quieted upon the former Sentence
pronounced, may now at least be determined, etc. and you to be one of them, and
therefore I have ordered the Prefect of Sicily to furnish you with one of the
public Stage-Coachers and so many Servants etc.

Such was the use then of Stage Coaches, Post Horses, and Councills, to the
great disappointment and grievance of the many: both Men and Horses and Leather
being hackneyd-jaded and worn out upon the errand of some contentious and
obstinate Bishop, So went the Affairs hitherto, and thus well disposed and
prepared were the Bishops to receive the Holy Ghost a second time at the great
and first general Council of Nice, which is so much Celebrated.

The occasions of calling it were two. The first a most important question in
which the Wit and Piety of their Predecessors and now their successively had
been much exercised and taken up: that was upon what day they ought to keep
Easter, which though it were no point of Faith that it should be kept at all,
yet the very calendiny of it was controverted with the same zeal, and made as
heavy a do in the Church as if both parties had been Heretics. And it is
reckoned by the Church Historians as one of the chie^ felicities of
Constantines Empire to have quieted in that Council this main controvesie. The
second cause of the assembling them here was in seed grown, as the Bishop had
ordered it, a matter of the greatest weight and consequence to the Christian
Religion, one Arrius having as is related, to the disturbance of the Church,
started a most pernicious opinion in the point of the Trinity. Therefore from
all parts of the Empire they met together at the City of Nice, two hundred and
fifty Bishops, and better, says Eusebius, a goodly company, three hundred and
eighteen say others, and the Animadverter too, with that pithy remark, pa. 23.
Equal almost to the number of servants bred up in the b^se of Abraham. The
Emperor had accommodated them every where with the posts, or laid Horses all
along for the convenience of their journey thither, and all the time they were
their supplied them abundantly with all sorts of provision at his own charges.
And when they were all first assembled in Council, in the great Hall of the
Imperial Palace, he came in having put on his best clothes to make his guests
welcome; and saluted with that profound humility as if they all had been
Emperor, nor would sit down in his Throne, no it was a very little and low
stool, till they had all beckoned and made signs to him to sit down. No wonder
if the first Council of Nice run in their heads ever after, and the ambitious
Clergy, like those who have been long a thirst, took so much of Constantinus
kindness, that they are scarce come to themselves again after so many Ages. The
first thing was that he acquainted them with the causes of his summoning them
thither, and in a grave and most Christian discourse exhorted them (to keep the
peace or) to a good agreement as there was reason. For (says Ruffin L. 1. c.
2. the Bishops being meet here almost of all parts, and as they use to do,
bringing their quarrels about several matters along with them, every of them
was at the Emperor, offering him Petitions, laying out one another faults,
(for all the good advice he had given them) and were more ^tent upon these
things then upon the business they were sent for. But he, considering that by
these scoldings and Bickerings the main affair was frustrated, appointed a
setday by which all the Bishops should bring him in whatsoever complaint they
had against one another. And they being all brought, he made them that high
Asiatick complement * God has made you Priests, and has given you power to
judge me, and therefore it is in you to judge me righteously, But you cannot be
judged by any men. It is God only can judge you, and therefore reserve all your
quarrels to his Tribunal. For you are as Gods to me, and it is not convenient a
man should judge of Gods, but he only of whom it is written, God stands in
the Congregation of the Gods, and discerns in the midst of them. And
therefore setting these things aside, apply your minds without any contention
to the concernments of God's Religion. And so without opening or reading one
Petition commanded t^m all together to be burnt there in his presence. An
action of great Charity and excellent Wisdom, had but some of the words been
spared. For doubtless, though they that would have complained of their
brethren, grumbled a little; yet those that were accusable were all very well
satisfied: and those expressions, you can judge me righteously, and you cannot
be judged by any man, and God only can judge you. You are Gods to me, etc. were
so extremely sweet to some of the Bishops palats, that they believed it, and
could never think of them afterward* but their teeth wa^ered* and they
ruminated so long on them that Constantine's Successors came too late to repent
it. But now the Bishops, having mist of their great end of quarrelling one with
another, betake themselves though somewhat aukwardly to business. And it is
necessary to mind, that as shortly as possible for the understanding of it, I
give a curiory account of Alexander and Arrius, with some few others that were
the most interessed in that general and first great revolution of
Ecclesiastical affairs, since the days of the Apostles. This Alexander was the
Bishop of Alexandria, and appears to have been a pious old Man, but not equally
prudent, nor in Divine things of the most capable, nor in conducting the
affairs of the Church, very dextrous; but he was the Bishop. This Character
that I have given of him, I am the more confirmed in from some passages that
follow, and all of them pertinent to the matter before me. They were used Sozom
l. 2. c. 16. at Alexandria to keep yearly a solemn Festival to the memory of
Peter one of their former Bishops, upon the same day he suffered. Martyrdom,
which Alexander having Celebrated at the Church with public Devotion, was
sitting after at home expecting some guests to dine with him, Sozom. l. 2. c.
16. As he was alone and looking toward the Sea side he saw a pri^y way of the
Boys upon the beach, at an old Recreation, imitating it seems the Rites of the
Church and office of the Bishops, and was much delighted with the sigh^ ^s long
as it appeared an innocent and harmless representation: but when (...) them at
last how they acted, the very administration of the Sacre^ Mysteries, he was
much troubled, and sending for some of the chief of his Clergy, caused the Boys
to be taken and brought before him. He asked them particularly what kind of
sport they had been at, and what the words, and what the actions were that they
had used in it. After their fear had hindered them a while from answering, and
now they were afraid of being silent, they con^essed that a Lad of of their
play-fellows, one Athanasius, had baptized some of them that were not yet
initiated in those Sacred Mysteries: Whereupon Alexander inquired the more
accurately what the Bishop of the game had said, and what he did to the boys
he had baptized, what they also had answered or learned from him* At last, when
Alexander perceived by them that his Pawn Bishop had made all his removes
right; and that the whole Ecclesiastical Order and Rites had been duly
observed in their interlude, he by the advice of his Priests about him approved
of that Mo^k Baptism and determined that the boys, being once in the simplicity
of their minds dipped in the Divine Grace, ought not to be Rebaptized, but he
perfected it with the remaining Mysteries, which it is only lawful for the
Priests to administer. And then he delivered Athanasius and the rest of the
boys that had acted the parts of Presbyters and Deacons to their Parents
calling God to witness that they should be educated in the Ministry of the
Church, that they might pass their lives in that calling which they had chosen
by imitation. But as for Athanasius, in a short while after Alexander took him
to live with him and be his Secretary, having caused him to be carefully
educated in the Schools of the best Grammarians and ^hetoricians: and he grew
in the opinion of all that spoke with him a discreet and eloquent person, and
will give occasion to be more then once mentioned again in this Discourse, I
have translated this in a manner word for word from the Author. This good
natured old Bishop Alexander that was so far from Anathemising, that he did not
so much as whip the boys for profanation of the Sacrament against the
Discipline of the Church, but without more doing, le^ them, for ought I see, at
liberty to regenerate as many more Lads upon the next Holyday as they thought
convenient: He Socr. l c. 3. being a man that lived an easy and gentle life,
had one day called his Friests and the rest of his Clergy together, and fell on
Philosophying divinely among them, but something more subtly and curiously
(though I dare say he meant no harm) then was usual, concerning the Holy
Trin^ty. Among the rest, one Arrius a Priest too of Alexandria was there
present, a Man who is described to be a good Disputant, and others add, (the
Capital accusation of those times) that he had a mind to have been a Bishop and
bore a great pique at Alexander, for he having been preferred before him to the Sea of Alexandria: but more are silent of any such matter, and Soz m l. 1. c.
14. says he was in a great esteem with his Bishop. But Arrius Socr. l. 1. c.
3. hearing her discourse about the Holy Trinity and the Unity in the Trinity
conceived that, as the Bishop stated it, he had reason to suspect he was
introducing afresh into the Church the Heresy of Sabellius the African who
Fate^atur unum esse Deum and eta in unam essentiam Trinitatem adducebat, ut
assereret in nullam esse vere subjectam proprietatem personis, sed nomina
maturi pro eo atque usus poscant, ut nunc de illo ut patre, nunc ut filio, nunc
ut spiritu sancto disseratur: and thereupon it seems Arrius argued warmly for
that opinion which was directly contrary to the Africane, driving the Bishop
from one to a second, from a second to a third, seeming absurdity; which I
studiously avoid the relation of, that in all these things I may not give
occasion for Men's understandings to work by their memories, and propogate the
same errors by the same means they were first occasioned. But hereby Arrius was
himself blamed as the maintainer of those absurdities which he affixed to the
Bishops opinion, as is usual in the heat and wrangle of Disputation. Whereas
Truth for the most part lies in the middle, but men ordinarily seek for it in
the extremities. Nor can I wonder that those ages were so fertile in what they
called Heresies, when being given to meddling with the Mysteries of Religion
further then humane apprehension or divine revelation did or could lead them,
some of the Bishops were so ignorant and gross, but others so speculative,
acute and refining in their conceptions, that, there being moreover a good fa^t
Bishopric to boot in the case, it is rather admirable to me how all the Clergy
from one end to the other, could escape from being or being accounted Heretics.
Alexander hereupon Soz. l. 1. c. 140. instead of stilling by more prudent
Methods this new Controversy, took, doubtless with a very good intention, a
course that has seldom been successful: makes himself judge of that wherein he
had first been the Party, and calling to him some others of his Clergy, would
needs sit in public to have a solemn set Disputation about the whole Matter.
And while Arrius was at it Tooth and Nail against his opposers, and the
Arguments flew so thick that they darkened the Air, and no Man could yet judge
which side should have the victory; the good Bishop for his part sat hay now
hay, neither could tell in his Conscience of a long time which had the better
of it; but sometimes he leaned on one side and then on the other, and now
encouraged and commended those of one party, and presently the contrary, but at
last by his own weight he cast the Scales against Arrius. And from thence
forward he excommunicating Arrius for obstinacy, and Arrius writing in behalf
and his followers to the Bishops, each one stating his own and his adversaries
case with the usual candor of such men in such Matters; the Bishops too all
over began to divide upon it, and after them their people. Insomuch that
Constantine out of a true paternal Sense and care, found necessary to send a
very prudent and eminent Person to Alexandria, to try if he could accommodate
the matter, giving him a Letter to Alexander and Arrius; how discreet, how
Christian-like, I never read any thing of that nature equal to it! It is too
long for me here to insert, but I gladly recommend my Reader to it in the 20
Eus. de vita Constable. c. 67. where he begins I understand the foundation of the
controversy to have been this, that thou Alexander did inquire of thy Priests
concerning a passage in the Scripture, nay did ask them concerning a
frivolous quillet of a question what was each of their opinions: and thou
Arrius did inconsiderately babble what thou neither at the beginning could
conceive, and if thou had conceived so, oughtst not to have vented, etc.

But the Clergy having got this once in the wind, there was no beating them off
the scent. Which induced Constantine to think the convening of this Council the
only remedy to these Disorders. And a woeful ado he had with them when they were
met to manage and keep them in any tolerable decorum. It seemed like an
Ecclesiastical Cockpit, and a man might have laid wagers either way: the two
parties contending in good earnest either for the truth or the victory, but the
more unconcerned, like cunning Betters, sat judiciously hedging, and so
ordered their matters that which side soever prevailed, they would be sure to
be the Winners. They were indeed a most venerable Assembly, composed of some
holy, some grave, some wise, and some of them learned Persons: and Constantine
had so charitably burnt the accusations they intended against one another,
which might otherwise have depopulated and dispirited the Council, that all of
them may be presumed in one or other respect to have made a great Character.
But I observe Soz. l. 1. c. 16. that these great Bishops, although they only
had the decisive voices, yet thought fit to bring along with them certain men
that were cunning at an Argument, to be auxiliary to them when it came to hard
and tough Disputation; beside that they had their Priests and Deacons ready at
a dead lift always to assist them: So that their understandings seemed to be
sequestered, and for their daily Faith, they depended upon what their Chaplains
would allow them. And in that quality Athanasius there waited upon Alexander,
being his Deacon, (for as yet it seems Archbishops nor Archdeacons were
invented.) And it is not improbable that Athanasius having so early personated
the Bishop, and seeing the declining age of Alexander, would be careful that
Arrius should not step betwixt him and home upon vacancy, but did his best
against him to bar up his way, as it shortly after happened; Athanasius
succeeding after the Council in the Sea of Alexandria. In the mean time you may
imagine that Hypostasis, Persona, Substantia, Subsistentia, Essentia,
Coessentialis, Consubstantialis, Ante saecula Coaeternus, etc. were by so many
disputants picked to the very bones, and those too broken afterward to come to
the marrow of Divinity. And never had Constantine in his life so hard a task as
to bring them to any rational results: meckly and patiently, Eusebius. L. 3. c.
13. de vita Constable. listening to every one, taking each Man's opinion and
without the acrimony with which it was delivered, helping each party where they
disagreed, reconciling them by degrees when they were in the fiercest
Contention, conferring with them a part courteously and mildly, telling them
what was his own opinion of the matter: Which though some exceptious persons
may allege to have been against the nature of a Free Council, yet truly
unless he had taken that course, I cannot imagine how possibly he could ever
have brought them to any conclusion. And thus this first, great, General
Council of Nice, with which the world had gone big so long, and which looked so
big upon all Christendom, at last was brought in bed, and after a very hard
labor delivered of Homoousios.

They all subscribed to the New Creed, except some seventeen, who it seems had
rather to be Heretics then Bishops. For now the Anathema's were published, and
whoever held the contrary was to be punished by Deprivation and Banishment, all
Arrian books to be burned, and whoever should be discovered to conceal any of
Arrius his writings, to dye for it. But it fared very weil with those who were
not such fools as to own his opinion. All they were entertained by the Emperor
at a magnificent Feast, received from his hand rich Presents, and were
honorably dismissed, with Letters recommending their great Abilities and
performance to the Provinces, and injoyning the Nicene Creed to be henceforth
observed. With that stroke of the Pen: Socr. l. 1. c. 6. For what threo hundred
Bishops have agreed on, (a thing indeed extraordinary) ought not to be
otherwise conceived of then as the decree of God Almighty, especially seeing
the Holy Ghost did sit upon the minds of such and so excellent men, and opened
his divine will to them. So that they went I trow with ample satisfaction; and,
as they could not but take the Emperor for a very civil, generous, and obliging
Gentleman, so they thought the better of themselves from that day forward. And
how budge must they look when they returned back to their Diocesses, having
every one of 'm been a principal limn of the Aecumenical, Apostolical,
Catholic, Orthodox Council! When the Ca^achrestical titles of the Church and
the Clergy were so appropriate to them by custom, that the Christian people had
relinquished or forgotten their claim; when every Hare that crossed their way
homeward was a Schismatic or an Heretic, and if their Horse stumbled with one
of them, he incurred an Anathema. Well it was that their journeys laid so many
several ways, for they were grown so cumbersom and great, that the Emperor's
highway was too narrow for any two of them, and there could have been no
passage without the removal of a Bishop. But soon after the Council was over,
Eusebius the Bishop of Nicomedia, and Theognis the Bishop of Nice, who were
already removed both by banishment and two others put in their places, were
quickly restored upon their petition: wherein they suggested the cause of their
not Signing to have been only, because they thought they could not with a safe
conscience subscribe the Anathema against Arrius, appearing to them both by his
writings, his discourses, and Sermons that they had been auditors of, not to be
guilty of those errors. As for Arrius himself, the Emperor quickly wrote to
him. It is now a considerable time since I writ to your Gravity to come to my
Tents, that you might enjoy my countenance; so that I can scarce wonder
sufficiently why you have so long delaid it: therefore now take one of the
public Coaches and make all speed to my Tents, that, having had experience of
my kindness and affection to you, you may return into your own Country. God
preserve you most dear Sir. Arrius hereupon (with his comarade Euzoius) comes
to Constantine's Army, and offers him a petition, with a confession of Faith
that would have passed very well before the Nicene Council, and now satisfied
the Emperor Socr. l. 1. c. 19. and 20. insomuch that he writ to Anathasius, now
Bishop of Alexandria, to receive him into the Church: but Anathanasius was of
better mettle then so and absolutely refused it. Upon this Constantine writ him
another threatening Letter: When you have understood hereby my pleasure, see
that you afford free entrance into the Church to all that desire it: for if I
shall understand that any who desires to be admitted into the Church should be
either hindered or forbidden by you, I will send some one of my Servants to
remove you from your Degree, and place another in your stead. Yet Athanasius
stood it out still, though other Churches received him into Communion: and the
Heretic Novatus could not have been more unrelenting to lapsed Christians then
he was to Arrius. But this, joined with other crimes which were laid to
Athanasius his charge, at the Council of Tire, (though I suppose indeed they
were forged) made Athanasius glad to fly for it, and remain the first time in
exile. Upon this whole matter it is my impartial opinion that Arrius or
whosoever else were guilty of teaching and publishing those errors whereof he
was accused, deserved the utmost Severity which consists with the Christian
Religion. And so willing I have been to think well of Athanasius and ill of the
other, that I have on purpose avoided the reading, as I do the nameing, of a
book that I have heard tells the story quite otherwise, and have only made use
of the current Historians of those times; who all of them tell it against the
Arrians. Only I will confess, that as in reading a particular History at
adventure a Man finds himself inclinable to favor the weaker party, especially
if the Conqueror appear insolent; so have I been affected in reading these
Authors: which does but resemble the reasonable pity that men ordinarily have
too for those who though for an erroneous conscience suffer under a Christian
Magistrate. And as soon as I come to Constantius, I shall for that reason
change my compassion and be doubly engaged on the Orthodox party. But as to the
whole matter of the Council of Nice, I must crave liberty to say, that from one
end to the other, though the best of the kind, it seems to me to have been a
pityful humane business, attended with all the ill circumstances of other
worldly affairs, conducted by a spirit of ambition and contention, the first
and so the greatest Aecumenical blow that by Christians was given to
Christianity. And it is not from any sharpness of humor that I discourse thus
freely of Things and Persons, much less of Orders of men otherwise venerable,
but that where ought is extolled beyond reason and to the prejudice of
Religion, it is necessary to depreciate it by true proportion. It is not their
censure of Arianism, or the declaring of their opinion in a controverted point
to the best of their understanding, (wherein to the smalness of mine they
appear to have light upon the truth, had they likewise upon the measure,) that
could have moved me to tell so long a story, or bring my self within the danger
and aim of any captious Reader, speaking thus with great liberty of mind but
little concern for any prejudice I may receive, of things that are by some men
I dolized. But it is their Imposition of a new Article or Creed upon the
Christian world, not being contained in express words of Scripture, to be
believed with Divine Faith, under Spritual and Civil Penalties, contrary to the
Privileges of Religion and their making a Precedent followed and improved by
all succeeding ages for most cruel Persecutions, that only could animate me. In
digging thus for a new Deduction they undermined the fabric of Christianity;
to frame a particular Doctrine they departed from the general Rule of their
Religion; and for their curiosity about an Article concerning Christ, they
violated our Savior's first Institution of a Church not subject to any
Addition in matters of Faith, nor liable to Compulsion either in Belief or in
Practice. Far be it from me in the event as it is from my Intention, to
derogate from the just authority of any of those Creeds or Confessions of Faith
that are received by our Church upon clear agreement with the Scriptures: nor
shall I therefore, unless some men's impertinence and indiscretion hereafter
oblige me, pretend to any further knowledge of what in those particulars appears
in the ancient Histories. But certainly if any Creed had been Necessary, or at
least Necessary to have been Imposed, our Savior himself would not have left
his Church destitute in a thing of that moment. Or however, after the Holy
Ghost, upon his departure, was descended upon the Apostles, and They the Elders
and Brethren (for so it was then) were assembled in a legitime Council at
Jerusalem, it would have seemed good to the Holy Ghost and them to have saved
the Council of Nice that labor, Or at least the Apostle Paul 2 Cor. 12. 2. and
4. who was caught up into Paradise, and heard unspeakable words, which it is
not lawful for any man to utter, having thereby a much better opportunity then
Athanasius to know the Doctrine of the Trinity, would not have been wanting,
through the abundance of that revelation, to form a Creed for the Church,
sufficient to have put that business beyond controversy. Especially seeing
Heresies were sprung up so early, and he foresaw others, and therefore does
prescribe the method how they are to be dealt with, but no Creed that I read of.

Shall any sort of men presume to interpret those words, which to him were
unspeakable, by a Gibbrish of their Imposing, and force every man to Cant after
them what it is not lawful for any man to utter? Christ and his Apostles speak
articulately enough in the Scriptures, without any Creed, as much as we are or
ought to be capable of. And the Ministry of the Gospel is useful and most
necessary, if it were but to press us to the reading of them, to illustrate one
place by the authority of another, to inculcate those duties which are therein
required, quickening us both to Faith and Practice, and showing within what
bounds they are both circumscribed by our Savior's Doctrine. And it becomes
every man to be able to give a reason and account of his Faith, and to be ready
to do it, without officiously gratifying those who demand it only to take
advantage: and the more Christians can agree in one confession of Faith the
better. But that we should believe ever the more for a Creed, it cannot be
expected. In those days when Creeds were most plenty and in fashion, and every
one had them at their fingers-ends, 'twas the Bible that brought in the
Reformation. It Is true, a man would not stick to take two or three Creeds for a
need, rather then want a Living, and if a man have not a good swallow, it is but
wrapping them up in a Liturgy, like a wafer, and the whole dose will go down
currently; especially if he wink at the same time and give his Assent and
Consent without ever looking on them. But without jesting, for the matter is
too serious. Every man is bound to work out his own Salvation with fear and
trembling, and therefore to use all helps possible for his best satisfaction:
hearing, conferring, reading, praying for the assistance of God's Spirit; but
when he has done this, he is his own Expositor, his own both Minister and
People, Bishop and Diocese, his own Council; and his Conscience excusing or
condemning him, accordingly he escapes or incurs his own internal Anathema. So
that when it comes once to a Creed, made and I^ posed by other men as a matter
of Divine Faith, the Case grows very delicate; while he cannot apprehend,
though the Imposer may, that all therein is clearly contained in Scripture, and
may fear being caught in the expressions to oblige himself to a latitude or
restriction, further then comports with his own sense and judgment. A Christian
of honor, when it comes to this once, will weigh every word, every syllable,
nay further, if he consider that the great business of this Council of Nice was
but one single Letter of the Alphabet, about the inserting or omitting of an
Iota. There must be either that exactness in the Form of such a Creed, as I
dare say, no men in the world ever were or ever will be able to modulate: or
else this scrupulous private judgment must be admitted, or otherwise all Creeds
become mere instruments of Equivocation or Persecution. And I must conf^ss,
when I have sometimes considered with my self the dullness of the
Non-conformists, and the acuteness on the contrary of the Episcoparians, and
the conscienciousness of both; I have thought that our Church might safely wave
the difference with them about Ceremonies, and try it out upon the Creeds,
which were both the more honorable way, and more suitable to the method of the
ancient Councils, and yet perhaps might do their business as effectually. For
one that is a Christian in good earnest, when a Creed is Imposed, will sooner
eat fire then take it against his judgment. There have been Martyrs for Reason,
and it was manly in them: but how much more would men be so for reason
Religionated and Christianized! But it is an inhumane and unchristian thing of
those Faith-stretchers, whosoever they be, that either put men's Persons or
their Consciences upon the torture, to rack them to the length of their
Notions: whereas the Bereans are made Gentlemen and Innobled by Patent in the
Acts, because they would not credit Paul himself, whose writings now make so
great a part of the New Testament, until they had searched the Scripture daily
whether those things were so, and therefore many of them believed. And
therefore, although where there are such Creeds, Christians may for peace and
conscience sake acquiesce while there appears nothing in them flatly contrary
to the words of the Scripture: yet when they are obtruded upon a man in
particular, he will look very well about him and not take them upon any Humane
Authority. The greatest Pretense to Authority is in a Council. But what then?
shall all Christians therefore take their Formularies of Divine Worship or
Belief, upon trust, as writ in Tables of Stone, like the Commandments,
delivered from Heaven and to be obeyed in the instant not considered: because
three hundred and eighteen Bishops are met in Abraham's great Hall, of which
most must be servants and some children, and they have resolved upon it in such
a manner? No, a good Christian will not, cannot atturn and indenture his
conscience over; to be Represented by others. It is not as in Secular matters,
where the States of a Kingdom are deputed by their fellow Subjects to transact
for them, so in spiritual: or suppose it were, yet 'twere necessary, as in the
Polish constitution, that nothing should be obligatory as long as there is one
Dissenter, where no Temporal Interests, but every man's Eternity and Salvation
are concerned. The Soul is too precious to be let out at interest upon any
humane security, that does or may fail, but it is only safe when under God's
custody, in its own Cabinet. But it was a General Council. A special general
indeed if you consider the proportion of three hundred and eighteen, to the
body of the Christian Clergy, but much more to all Christian Mankind. But it
was a general Free Council of Bishops. I do not think it possible for any
Council to be free that is composed only of Bishops, and where they only have
the Decisive Voces. Nor that a Free Council that takes away Christian Liberty.
But that, as it was founded upon Usurpation, so it terminated in Imposition.
But it is meant that it was Free from all external Impulsion. I confess that
good meat and drink, and lodging, and money in a Man's purse, and coaches and
Servants, and horses to attend them, did no violence to 'm, nor was there any
false Article in it. And discoursing now with one and then another of 'm in
particular, and the Emperor telling them this is my opinion, I understand it
thus, and afterward declaring his mind frequently to them in public; no force
neither. Ay! but there was a shrewd way of persuasion in it. And I would be
glad to know when ever and which free general Council it was that could
properly be called so: but was indeed ameer Imperial or Ecclesiastical Machine,
no free agent, but wound up, set on going, and let dow by the direction and
hand of the Workman. A General Free Council is but a word of Art, and can never
happen but under a Fifth Monarch, and that Monarch too, to return from Heaven.
The Animadverter will not allow the second General Council of Nice to have been
Free, because it was over awd by an Empress, and was guilty of a great fault
(which no Council at liberty he says could have committed) the Decree for
worshipping of Images. At this rate a Christian may scuffle however for one
point among them, and choose which council he likes best. But in good earnest I
do not see but that Constantine might as well at this first council of Nice,
have negotiated the Image worship, as to pay that superstitious adoration to
the Bishops, and that Prostration to their Creeds was an Idolatry more
pernicious in the consequence to the Christian Faith, then that under which
they so lately had suffered Persecution. Nor can a council be said to have been
at liberty which laid under so great and many obligations. But the Holy Ghost
was present where there were three hundred and eighteen Bishops, and directed
them or three hundred. Then, if I had been of their counsel, they should have
sat at it all their lives, least they should never see him again after they
were once risen. But it concerned them to settle their Quorum at first by his
Dictates; otherwise no Bishop could have been absent or gone forth upon any
occasion, but he let him out again: and it behoov'd to be very punctual in the
Adjournments. It Is a ridiculous conception, and as gross as to make ^m of the
same Substance with the Council. Nor needs there any strong argument of his
absence, then their pretense to be actuated by him, and in doing such Work. The
Holy Spirit! If so many of them when they got together, acted like rational
Men, 'twas enough in all reason and as much as could be expected.

But this was one affectation, among many others, which the Bishops took up so
early, of the style, privileges, powers, and some actions and gestures
peculiar and inherent to the Apostles, which they misplaced to their own behoof
and usage: nay, and challenged other things as Apostolical, that were directly
contrary to the Doctrine and Practice of the Apostles. For so because the Holy
Spirit did in an extraordinary manner preside among the Holy Apostles at that
Legitime Council of Jerusalem, Acts. 15. they, although under an ordinary
Administration, would not go less whatever came on it: nay, whereas the
Apostles, in the drawing up of their Decree dictated to them by the Holy
Spirit, said therefore no more but thus: The Apostles, Elders, and Brethren,
send greeting unto the Brethren of, etc. Forasmuch as, etc. It seemed good to
the Holy Ghost and us to lay upon you no greater burden then these necessary
things: that ye abstain from, etc. from which if ye keep your selves, you shall
do well. Fare ye well.

This Council denounces every invention of its own; (far from the Apostolical
modesty, and the style of the Holy Spirit) under no less then an Anathema. Such
was their arrogating to their inferior degrees the style of Clergy, till custom
has so much prevailed, that we are at a loss how to speak properly either of
the name or nature of their function. Whereas the Clergy, in the true and
Apostolical sense, were only those whom they superciliously always call the
Laity: The word Clerus being never but once used in the New Testament, and in
that signification, and in a very unlucky place too, Peter 1. 5. 3. where he
admonishes the Priesthood, that they should not Lord it or domineer over, the
Christian People, Clerum Domini or the Lord's Inheritance. But having usurped
the Title, I confess they did right to assume the Power. But to speak of the
Priesthood in that style which they most affect, if we consider the nature too
of their Function, what were the Clergy then but Laymen disguised, dressed up
perhaps in another habit? Did not St. Paul himself, being a Tent-maker, rather
then be idle or burthensom to his People, work of his trade, even during his
Apostleship, to get his living? But did not these, that they might neglect
their holy vocation, seek to compass secular employments, and Lay Offices? Were
not very many of them, whether one respect their Vices or Ignorance, as well
qualified as any other to be Laymen? Was it not usual as often as they merited it
to restore them, as in the case even of the three Bishops, to the Laycommunion?
And whether, if they were so peculiar from others, did the Imposition of the
Bishops hands, or the lifting up the hands of the Laity conferr more to that
distinction? And Constantine, notwithstanding his complement at the burning of
the Bishops papers, thought he might make them and unmake them with the same
power as he did his other Lay-Officers. But if the inferior degrees were the
Clergy, the Bishops would be the Church: although that word in the
Scripture-sense is proper only to a congregation of the Faithful. And being by
that title the only men in Ecclesiastical councils, then when they were once
assembled they were the Catholic Church, and, having the Holy Spirit at their
devotion, whatsoever Creed they light upon, that was the Catholic Eaith,
without believing of which no man be saved. By which means there rose
thenceforward so constant persecutions till this day, that, had not the little
invisible Catholic Church and a People that always searched and believed the
Scriptures, made a stand by their Testimonies and sufferings, the Creeds had
destroyed the Faith: and the Church had ruined the Religion. For this General
council of Nice and all others of the same constitution, did, and can serve to
no other end or effect, then particular order of menby their usurping a trust
upon Christianity, to make their own Price and Market of it, and deliver it up
as often as they see their own Advantage.

For scarce was Constantine's Head cold, but his Son Constantius, succeeding
his Brothers, being Influenced by the Bishops of the Arrian Party, turned the
wrong side of Christianity outward, inverted the Poles of Heaven, and Faith (if
I may say so) with its Heels in the Air, was forced to stand upon its Head, and
play Gambols, for the Divertisment and Pleasure of the Homoiousians. Arrianism
was the Divinity then in Mode, and he was an ignorant and ill Courtier, or
Church man, that could not dress, and would not make a new Suit for his
Conscience in the Fashion. And now the Orthodox Bishops (it being given to
those Men to be obstinate for Power, but flexible in Faith;) began to wind
about insensibly, as the Heliotrope Flower that keeps its ground, but wrests
its Neck in turning after the warm Sun, from Daybreak to Evening. They could
look now upon the Synod of Nice with more indifference, and all that pudder
that had been made there betwixt Homoousios and Homoiousios, etc. began to
appear to them as a Difference only arising from the Inadequation of Languages:
Till by degrees they were drawn over, and, rather than lose their Bishoprics,
would join, and at last be the Headmost in the Persecution of their own former
Party. But the Deacons, to be sure, that steered the Elephants, were
thorow-paced; Men to be reckoned and relied upon in this or any other occasion,
and would prick on to render themselves Capable and Episcopable, upon the first
Vacancy. For now the Arrians in grain, scorning to come behind the Clownish
Homoousians, in any Ecclesiastical Civility, were resolved to give them their
full of Persecution. And it seemed a piece of Wit rather than Malice, to pay
them in their own Coin, and to Burlesque them in earnest, by the repetition and
heightning of the same Severities upon them, that they had practiced upon
others. Had you the Homoousians a Creed at Nice? We will have another Creed for
you at Ariminum, and at Seleucia. Would you not be content with so many several
Projects of Faith consonant to Scripture, unless you might thrust the new word
Homoousios down our throats, and then tear it up again, to make us confess it?
Tell us the word, ('it was Homoiousios) we are now upon the Guard, or else we
shall run you through. Would you Anathemize, Banish, Imprison, Execute us, and
burn our Books? You shall taste of this Christian Fare, and as you relish it,
you shall have more on it provided. And thus it went, Arrianism being
Triumphant, but the few sincere or stomachful Bishops, adhering constantly, and
with a true Christian Magnanimity, especially Athanasius, through all Sufferings
unto their former Confessions; expiated so in some measure, what they had
committed in the Nicene Council.

Sozom^ne, l. 4. c. 25. First tells us a story of Eudoxius, who succeeded
Macedonius, in the Bishopric of Constantinople; that in the Cathedral of
Sancta Sophia, being mounted in his Episcopal Throne, the first time that they
Assembled for its Dedication, in the very beginning of his Sermon to the People
(those things were already come in Fashion) told them: Patrem i^ esse, Filium
(...) pium; at which when they began to bustle, Pray be quiet, says he; I say,
Patrem impium esse, quia Colit neminem, Filiem vero Pium quia colit Patrem; at
which they then Laughed as heartily, as before they were Angry. But this I only
note to this purpose, that there were some of the greatest Bishops among the
Homoiousians, as well as the Homoousians, that could not reproach one another
Simplicity, and that it was not impossible for the Many, to be Wiser and more
Orthodox than the Few, in Divine Matters. That which I cite him for as most
Material, is, his Remark upon the Imposition then of contrary Creeds: Which
verily, faith he, was plainly the beginning of most great Calamities, for as
much as hereupon there followed a Disturbance, not unlike those which we before
recited over the whole Empire; and likewise a Persecution equal almost to that
of the Heathen Emperors, seized upon all of all Churches. For, although it
seemed to some more gentle for what concerns the Torture of the Body, yet to
prudent Persons it appeared more bitter and severe, by reason of the Dishonor
and Ignominy. For both they who stirred up, and those that were afflicted with
this Persecution, were of the Christian Church. And the Grievance therefore was
the greater and more ugly, in that the samethings which are done among Enemies,
were Executed between those of the same Tribe and Profession: But the Holy Law
forbids us to carry our selves in that manner, even to those that are Without,
and Alien's. And all this Mischief sprung from making of Creeds, with which the
Bishops, as it were at Tilting, aimed to hit one another in the Eye, and throw
the opposite Party out of the Saddle. But if it chanced that the weaker side
were ready to yield, (for what sort of Men was there that could better Manage,
or had their Consciences more at command at that time than the Clergy?) Then
the Arrians would use a yet longer, thicker, and sharper Lance for the purpose,
(for there were never Vacancies sufficient) that they might be sure to run them
down, over, and through, and do their Business. The Creed of Ariminum was now
too short for the Design, but, says the Historian, they affixed further
Articles like Labels to it, pretending to have made it better, and so sent it
through the Empire with Constantius his Proclamation, that whoever would not
Subscribe it, should be banished. Nay, they would not admit their own beloved
Similis Substantia, but, to do the Work thoroughly, the Arrians renoune'd their
own Creed for Malice, and made it an Article; Filium Patri tam substantia, quam
Voluntate, Dissimilem esse. But that is a small matter with any of them,
provided thereby they may do Service to the Church, that is their Party. So
that one (seriously speaking) that were really Orthodox, could not then defend
the Truth or himself, but by turning old Arrian, if he would impugn the new
ones; such was the Subtilty. What shall I say more? As the Arts of Glass
Coaches and Perriwags illustrate this Age, so by their Trade of Creed-making,
then first Invented, we may esteem the Wisdom of Constantine's, and Constantius
his Empire. And in a short space, as is usual among Tradesmen, where it appears
Gainful, they were so many that set up of the same Profession, that they could
scarce live by one another. Socr. l. 2. c. 32. Therefore uses these words: But
now that I have tandem aliquando, run through this Labyrinth of so many Creeds,
I will gather up their number: And so reckons Nine Creeds more, besides that of
Nice, before the death of Constantius, (a blessed Number.) And I believe, I
could for a need, make them up a Dozen, if Men have a mind to buy them so. And
hence it was that Hilary, then Bishop of Poictiers, represents that state of
the Church pleasantly, yet sadly, Since the Nicene Synod, says he, we do
nothing but write Creeds. That while we fight about words, whilst we raise
Questions about Novelties, while we Quarrel about things doubtful, and about
Authors, while we contend in Parties, while there is difficulty in Consent,
while we Anathematize one another, there is none now almost that is Christ's.
What a Change there is in the last years Creed? The first Decree commands, that
Homoousios should not be mentioned. The next does again Decree and Publish
Homoousios. The third does by Indulgence excuse the Word Ousia, as used by the
Fathers in their simplicity. The fourth does not Excuse, but Condemn it. It is
come to that at last, that nothing among us, or those before us, can remain
Sacred or inviolable. We Decree every Year of the Lord, a new Creed concerning
God: Nay, every Change of the Moon our Faith is altered. We repent of our
Decrees, we defend those that repent of them; we Anathemize those that we
defended, and while we either condemn other Men's Opinions in our own, or our
own Opinions in those of other Men, and bite at one another, we are now all of
us torn in pieces. This Bishop sure was the Author of the Naked Truth, and
'twas he that implicitly condemned the whole Catholic Church, both East and
West, for being too presumptuous in her Definitions.

It is not strange to me, that Julian, being but a Reader in the Christian
Church, should turn Pagan: Especially when I consider that he succeeded Emperor
after Constantius. For it seems rather unavoidable that a Man of great Wit, as
he was, and not having the Grace of God to direct it, and show him the Beauty
of Religion, through the Deformity of its Governors and Teachers; but that he
must conceive a Loathing and Aversion for it, Nor could he think that he did
them any Injustice, when he observed that, beside all their Unchristian
Immorality too, they Practiced thus, against the Institutive Law of their
Galilean, the Persecution among themselves for Religion. And well might he add
to his other Severities, that sharpness of his Wit, both Exposing and
Animadverting upon them, at another rate than any of the Modern Practitioners
with all their Study and Inclination, can ever arrive at. For nothing is more
punishable, Contemptible, and truly Ridiculous, than a Christian that walks
contrary to his Profession: And by how much any Man stands with more advantage
in the Church for Eminency, but disobeys the Laws of Christ by that Privilege,
he is thereby, and deserves to be the more Exposed. But Julian, the last
Heathen Emperor, by whose Cruelty it seemed that God would sensibly Admonish
once again the Christian Clergy, and show them by their own Smart, and an
Heathen Hand, the nature and odiousness of Persecution, soon died, as is usual
for Men of that Employment, not without a remarkable stroke of God's Judgment.

Yet they, as if they were only sorry that they had lost so much time, upon his
death strove as eagerly to redeem it, and forthwith fell in very naturally into
their former Animolities. For Jovianus being chosen Emperor in Persia, and
returning Homeward, Socr. l. 3. c. 20. the Bishops of each Party, in hopes that
theirs should be the Imperial Creed, strait to Horse, and Rode away with Switch
and Spur, as if it had been for the Plate, to meet him; and he that had best
Heels, made himself cock-sure of winning the Religion. The Macedonians, who
dividing from the Arrians, had set up for a new Heresy concerning the Holy
Ghost, (and they were a Squadron of Bishops) Petitioned him that those who
held, Filium Patri dissimilem, might be turned out, and themselves put in their
places: Which was very honestly done, and aboveboard. The Acacians, that were
the refined Arrians, but, as the Author says, Had a notable faculty of
addressing themselves to the Inclination of whatsoever Emperor, and having good
Intelligence that he balanced rather to the Consubstantials, presented him with
a very fair Insinuating Subscription, of a considerable number of Bishops to
the Council of Nice. But in the next Emperor's time they will be found to yield
little Reverence to their own Subscription. For in matter of a Creed, a Note of
their Hand, without expresting the Penalty, could not it seems Bind one of
their Order. But all that Jovianus said to the Macedonians, was; I hate
Contention, but I lovingly embrace and reverence those who are inclined to
Peace and Concord. To the Acacians, who had wisely given these the precedence
of Application, to try the truth of their Intelligence, he said no more (having
resolved by sweetness and persuasions to quiet all their Controversies) but,
That he would not molest any Man whatsoever Creed be followed, but those above
others he would Cherish and Honor, who should show themselves most forward in
bringing the Church to a good Agreement. He likewise called back all those
Bishops who had been Banished by Constantius and Julian, restoring them to
their Sees. And he writ a Letter in particular to Athanasius, who upon Julian's
death, had entered again upon that of Alexandria, to bid him be of good
Courage. And these things coming to the Ears of all others, did wonderfully
assuage the Fierceness of those who were Inflamed with Faction and Contention:
So that, the Court having declared it self of this Mind, the Church was in a
short time in all outward appearance peaceably disposed; the Emperor by this
Means having wholly repressed all their Violence. Verily, concludes the
Historian, the Roman Empire had been prosperous and happy, and both the State
and the Church (he puts them too in that Order) under so good a Prince, must
have exceedingly flourished, had not an Immature death taken him away from
managing the Government. For after seven Months, being seized with a mortal
Obstruction, he dparted this Life. Did not this Historian, trow you, deserve to
be handled, and is it not, now the Mischief i^ done, to undo the Charm, become
a Duty, to Expose both him and Jovianus? By their ill chosen Principles what
would have become of the Prime, and most necessary Articles of Faith? Might not
the old Dormant Heresies, all of them safely have Revived?

But that Mortal Obstruction of the Bishops, was not by his death (nor is it by
their own to be) removed. They were glad he was so soon got out of their way,
and God would yet further manifest their intractable Spirit, which not the
Persecution of the Heathen Emperor Julian, nor the Gentleness of Jovianus the
Christian, could allay or mitigate by their Afflictions or Prosperity. The
Divine Nemesis executed Justice upon them, by one another Hand: And so heinous
a Crime as for a Christian, a Bishop, to Persecute, stood yet need, as the only
equal and exemplary Punishment, of being Revenged with a Persecution by
Christians, by Bishops* And whoever shall seriously consider all along the
Succession of the Emperors, can never have taken that Satisfaction in the most
judicious Representations of the Scene, which he may in this worthy Speculation
of the great Order and admirable conduct of Wise Providence, through the whole
contexture of these Exterior, seeming Accidents, relating to the
Ecclesiasticals of Christianity.

For to Jovianus succeeded Valentinian, who in a short time took his Brother
Valens to be his Companion in the Empire. These two Brothers, did as the
Historian observes, Socr. l. 4. c. 1. (alike, and equally take care at the
beginning, for the Advantage and Government of the State) but very much
disagreed, though both Christians, in matter of Religion: Valetinianus the
Elder being an Orthodox, but Valens an Arrian, and they used a different Method
toward the Christians. For Valentinian (who chose the Western part of the
Empire, and left the East to his Brother) as he embraced those of his own
Creed, so yet he did not in the least molest the Arrians: But Valens not only
Labored to increase the number of the Arrians, but Afflicted those of the
contrary Opinion with grievous Punishments. And both of 'm, especially Valens
had Bishops for their purpose. The particulars of that heavy Persecution under
Valens, any one may further satisfy himself of in the Writers of those Times:
And yet it is observable, that within a little space while he pursued the
Orthodox Bishops, he gave Liberty to the (...) (who were of the same Creed, but
separated from them, as I have said, upon Discipline, etc.) and caused their
Churches, which for a while were shut up, to be opened again at Constantinople.
To be short, Valens (who outlived his Brother, that died of a natural Death,)
himself in a battle against the Goths, could not escape neither the fate of a
Christian Persecutor. For the Goths having made Application to him, he, says
Socrates, not well foreseeing the Consequence, admitted them to Inhabit in
certain places of Thracia, pleasing himself that he should by that means,
always have an Army ready at hand against whatsoever Enemy; and that those
Foraign Guards would strike them with a greater Terror, more by far than the
Militia of his Subjects. And so, slighting the ancient Veterane Militia, which
used to consist of Bodies of Men raised proportionably in every Province, and
were stout Fellows that would Fight Manfully; instead of them he levied Money,
rating the Country at so much for every Soldier. But these new Inmates of the
Emperors soon grew Troublesome, as is customary, and not only infested the
Natives in Thracia, but Plundered even the Suburbs of Constantinople, there
being no armed Force to repress them: Hereupon the whole People of the City
cried out at a public Spectacle, where Valens was present neglecting this
matter, Give us Arms and we will manage this War our selves. This extremely
provoked him, so that he forthwith made an Expedition against the Goths: But
Threatened the Citizens if he turned in safety, to be Revenged on them both for
those Contumelies, and for what under the Tyrant Procopius, they had committed
against the Empire, and that he would Raze to the Ground, and Plow up the City.
Yet before his departure, out of fear of the Foraign Enemy, he totally ceased
from persecuting the Orthodox in Constantinople. But he was killed in the
Fight, or Flying into a Village that the Goths had set on fire, he was there
burnt to ashes: to the great grief of his Bishops, who, had he been Victorious,
might have revived the Persecution. Such was the end of his Impetuous Reign and
rash Counsels both as to his Government of State, in matters of Peace and War,
and his Manage of the Church by Persecution.

His death brings me to the Succession of Theodosius the Great, then whom no
Christian Emperor did more make it his business to Nurse up the Church, and to
Lull the Bishops, to keep the House in quiet. But neither was it in his power
to still their Bawling, and Scratching one another, as far as their Nails
(which were yet more tender, but afterward grew like Tallons) would give them
leave. I shall not further vex the History, or the Reader, in recounting the
Particulars; taking no delight neither my self in so uncomfortable Relations,
or to reflect beyond what is necessary upon the Wolfishness of those which then
seemed, and ought to have been, the Christian Pastors, but went on scattering
their Flocks, if not devouring; and the Shepherds smiting one another. In his
Reign, the second General Council was called, that of Constantinople, and the
Creed was there made which took its name from the place: The rest of their
business, any one that is further curious, may observe in the Writers. But I
shall close this with a short touch concerning Gregory Nazianzen, then living,
than whom also the Christian Church had not in those times (and I question
whether in any succeeding) a Bishop that was more a Christian, more a
Gentleman, better appointed in all sorts of Learning requisite, seasoned under
Julian's Persecution, and exemplary to the highest pitch of true Religion, and
Practical Piety. The eminence of these Virtues, and in special of his Humility
(the lowliest but the highest of all Christian Qualifications) raised him under
Theodosius, from the Parish-like Bishopric of Nazianzum, to that of
Constantinople, where he filled his place in that Council. But having taken
notice in what manner things were carried in that, as they had been in former
Councils, and that some of the Bishops muttered at his promotion; he of his own
mind resigned that great Bishopric, which was never of his desire or seeking,
and, though so highly seated in the Emperors Reverence and Favor, so acceptable
to the People, and generally to the Clergy, whose unequal Abilities could not
pretend or justify an envy against him; retired back far more content to a
Solitary Life to his little Nazianzum. And from thence he writes that Letter to
his Friend Procopius, wherein, p. 814. upon his most recollected and serious
reflection on what had fallen within his observation, he uses these remarkable
words: I have resolved with my self (if I may tell you the Naked Truth,) never
more to come into any assembly of Bishops: for I never saw a good and haypy end
of any Council, but which rather increased then remedied the mischieves. For
their obstinate Contentions and Ambition are unexpressible.

It would require too great a Volume to deduce, from the death of Theodosius,
the particulars that happened in the succeeding Reigns about this matter. But
the Reader may reckon, that it was as stated a Quarrel betwixt the Homoousians,
and the Homoiousians, as that between the Houses of York and Lancaster: And
there arose now an Emperor of one Line, and then again of the other. But among
all the Bishops, there was not one Morton, whose industrious Brain could or
would (for some Men always reap by Division) make up the fatal Breach betwixt
the two Creeds. By this means every Creed was grown up to a Test, and, under
that pretense, the dextrous Bishops step by step hooked within their Verge, all
the business and Power that could be catched in those Turbulences, where they
mudled the Water and Fished after. By this means they stalked on first to a
Spiritual kind of Dominion, and from that incroached upon and into the Civil
Jurisdiction. A Bishop now grew terrible, and, (whereas a simple Layman might
have frighted the Devil with the first words of the Apostles Creed, and I defy
thee Satan) one Creed could not protect him from a Bishop, and it required a
much longer, and a double and treble Confession, unless himself would be
delivered over to Satan by an Anathema. But this was only an Ecclesiastical
sentence at first, with which they marked out such as sinned against them, and
then whoop'd and hollowed on the Civil Magistrate, to hunt them down for their
Spiritual Pleasure. They crept at first by Court Insinuations and Flattery into
the Princes favor, till those generous Creatures suffered themselves to be
backed and ridden by them, who would take as much of a free Horse as possible:
but in Persecution the Clergy as yet, wisely interposed the Magistrate betwixt
themselves and the People, not caring so their end were attained, how odious
they rendered him: And you may observe that for the most part hitherto, they
stood crouching and shot either over the Emperors back, or under his belly. But
in process of Time they became bolder and open-fac'd, and Persecuted before the
Sun at Midday. Bishops grew worse, but Bishoprics every day better and
better. There was now no Eusebius left to refuse the Bishopric of Antiochia,
whom therefore Constantine told, That he deserved the Bishopric of the whole
World for that Modesty. They were not such Fools as Ammonius Parotes, I warrant
you, in the time of Theodosius. He, Socr. l. 6. c. 30. being seized upon by
some that would needs make him a Bishop, when he could not persuade them to the
contrary, cut off one of his Ears, telling them that now, should he himself
desire to be a Bishop, he was by the Law of Priesthood incapable: but when they
observed that those things only obliged the Jewish Priensthood, and that the
Church of Christ did not consider whether-a Priest were sound or perfect in
limb of Body, but only that he were entire in his manners; they returned to
seize on him again: But when he saw them coming, he swore with a solemn Oath,
that, if to Consecrate him a Bishop they laid violent hands upon him, he would
out out his tongue also; whereupon they, fearing he would do it, desisted. What
should have been the matter, that a man so Learned and Holy, should have such
an aversion to be promoted in his own Order; that, rather than yield to be a
Compelled or Compelling Bishop, he would inflict upon himself as severe a
Martyrdom, as any Persecutor could have done for him? Sure he saw something more
in the very Constitution, than some do at present. But this indeed was an
Example too Rigid, and neither fit to have been done, nor to be imitated, as
there was no danger. For far from this they followed the precedent rather of
Damasus, and Ursinus, which last, Socr. l. 4. c. 24. In Valentinian 's time,
persuaded certain obscure and abject Bishops (for there were it seems of all
sorts and sizes) to create him Bishop in a Corner, and then (so early) he and
Damasus, who was much the better Man: waged War for the Bishopric of Rome, to
the great scandal of the Pagan Writers, who made Remarks for this and other
things upon their Christianity, and to the Bloodshed and Death of a multitude
of the Christian People. But this last I mentioned, only as a weak and
imperfect Essay in that time, of what it came to in the several Ages after,
which I am now speaking of, when the Bishops were given, gave themselves, over
to all manner of Vice, Luxury, Pride, Ignorance, Superstition, Covetousness,
and Monopolizing of all secular Employments and Authority. Nothing could escape
them: They meddled, troubled themselves and others, with many things, every
thing forgetting that one, only needful. Insomuch that I could not avoid
wondering often that, among so many Churches that with Paganick Rites, they
dedicated to Saint Mary, I have met with none to Saint Martha. But above all,
Imposition and Cruelty became inherent to them, and the power of Persecution
was grown so good and desirable a thing, that they thought the Magistrate
scarce worthy to be trusted with it longer, and a mere Novice at it, and either
wrested it out of his hands, or gently eased him of that and his other burdens
of Government. The Sufferings of the Laity were become the Royalties of the
Clergy; and, being very careful Christians, the Bishops, that not a word of our
Saviors might fall to the Ground, because he had foretold how Men should be
Persecuted for his Names sake, they undertook to see it done effectually in
their own Provinces, and out of pure zeal of doing him the more Service of this
kind, enlarged studiously their Diocesses beyond all proportion. Like
Nostradamus his Son, that to fulfill his Father's prediction of a City in
France, that should be Burned; with his own hands set it on fire. All the
calamities of the Christian World in those Ages, may be derived from them,
while they warmed themselves at the Flame; and, like Lords of Misrule, kept a
perpetual Christmas. What in the Bishop's name is the matter? How came it about
that Christianity, which approved it self under all Persecutions to the Heathen
Emperors, and merited their Favor so far, till at last it regularly succeeded
to the Monarchy, should under those of their own Profession be more distressed?
Were there some Christians then too, that feared still lest Men should be
Christians, and for whom it was necessary, not for the Gospel reason that there
should be Heresies. Let us collect a little now also in the conclusion what at
first was not particularized, how the reason of State and Measure of Government
stood under the Roman Emperors, in aspect to them. I omit Tiberius, mentioned
in the beginning of this Essay. Trajane, after having persecuted them, and
having used Pliny the second in his Province to that purpose, upon his relation
that they lived in conformity to all Laws, but that which for bad their
Worship, and in all other things were blameless, and good men, straightly by his
Edict commanded that none of them should be farther enquired after. Hadrian, in
his Edict to Minutius Fundanus, Pro-consul of Asia, commands him that, If any
accuse the Christians, and can prove it, that they commit anything against the
State, that then he punish them according to the crime: but if any man accuse
them, merely for calumny and vexation, as Christians, then t'saith let him
suffer sor't, and take you care that he ^eel the smart of it. Antoninus Pius
writ his Edict, very remarkable if there were place here to recite it, to the
States of Asia assembled at Ephesus; wherein he takes notice of his fathers
command that, unless the Christians were found to act any thing against the
Roman Empire, they should not be molested and then commands that, if any man
thereafter shall continue to trouble them, tanquam tales, as Christians, for
their Worship, in that case he that is the Informer should be exposed to
punishment, but the accused should be free and discharged. I could not but
observe that among other things in this Edict, where he is speaking, It is
desirable to them that they may appear, being accused, more willing ^dy for
their God then to live, he adds. It would not be amiss to admonish you
concerning the Earthquakes which have, and do now happen, that when you are
afflicted at them, you would compare our affairs with theirs. They are thereby
so much the more encouraged to a confidence and reliance upon God, but you all
the while go on in your ignorance, and neglect both other gods, and the
Religion toward the immortal, and banish and persecute them unto death. Which
words of that Emperors, fall in so naturally with what, it seems, was a common
observation about Earthquakes, that I cannot but to that purpose take further
notice, how also Gregory Nazianzen, in Or. 2d. contra Gentiles, tells, besides
the breakings in of the Sea in several places, and many fires that happened, of
the Earthquakes in particular, which he reckons as Symptoms of Julian's
Persecution. And to this I may add. Socr. l. 3. c. 10. who in the Reign of
Valens, that notorious Christian Persecutor, says, at the same time there was
an Earthquake in Bithynia, which ruined the City of Nice, (that same in which
that general Counsel was held under Constantine) and a little after there was
another. But although these so happened, the minds of Valens and of Eudoxius,
the Bishop of the Arrians were not at all stirred up unto Piety, and a right
opinion of Religion: For neverthless they never ceased, made no end of
persecuting those who in their Creed dissented from them. Those Earthquakes
seemed to be certain indications of tumult in the Church. All which put
together, could not but make me reflect upon the late Earthquakes, great by how
much more unusual, here in England, through so many Counties since Christmas, at
the same time when the Clergy, some of them, were so busy in their Cabals, to
promote this (I would give it a modester name then) Persecution, which is now
on foot against the Disfenters; at so unseasonable a time, and upon no occasion
administered by them, that those who comprehend the reasons, yet cannot but
wonder at the wisdom of it. Yet I am not neither one of the most credulous
nickers or applyers of natural events to humain transactions: but neither am I
so secure as the Learned Dr. Spencer, nor can walk along the world without
having some eye to the conjunctures of God's admirable Providence. Neither was
Marcus Aurelius (that I may return to my matter) negligent as to this
particular. But he, observing, as Antoninus had the Earthquakes, that in an
expedition against the Germans, and Sarmatians: his Army being in despair
almost for want of water, the Melitine (afterward from the event called the
Thundering) Legion, which consisted of Christians, kneeled down in the very heat
of their thirst and fight, praying for rain, which posture the enemies wondering
at, immediately there brake out such a thundering and lightning as together with
the Christian valor, routed the adverse Army, but so much rain fell therewith,
as refreshed Aurelius his Forces that were at the last gasp for thirst, he
thence forward commanded by his Letters; that upon pain of death none should
inform against the Christians, as Tertulian in his Apology for the Christians
witnesses. But who would have believed that even Commodus, so great a Tyrant
otherwise, should have been so favorable as to make a Law, that the informers
against Christians should be punished with Death? Yet he did, and the Informer
against Apollanius was by it executed. Much less could a man have thought that,
that prodigy of cruelty Maximine, and who exercised it so severely upon the
Christians, should, as he did, being struck with God's hand, publish when it
was too late Edict after Edict, in great favor of the Christians. But above
all, nothing could have been less expected then that, after those Heathen
Emperors, the first Christian Constantine should have been seduced by the
Bishops, to be, after them, the first occasion of Persecution, so contrary to
his own excellent inclination: 'Twas then that he spoke his own mind, when he
said, Eus. de vita Consti. 60. You ought to retain within the bounds of your
private thoughts those things, which you cunningly and subtly seek out
concerning most frivolous questions. And then much plainer, c. 67. where he
says so wisely. You are not ignorant that the Philosophers all of them do
agree in the profession of the same Discipline, but do oftentimes differ in
some part of the opinions which they dogmatize in: but yet, although they do
dissent about the Discipline that each several Sect observes, they
nevertheless reconcile themselves again for the sake of that common Prosession
to which they have concurred. But against compulsion in Religious matters so
much every where, that it is needless to insert one passage. And he being of
this disposition, and universally Famous for his care and countenance of the
Christian Religion. Eusebius says these words: While the people of God did
glory and heighten it self in the doing of good things, and all fear from
without was taken away, and the Church was fortified as I may say, on all sides
by a peaceable and illustrious tranquillity, then Envy lying in wait against our
prosperity, craftily crept in, and began first to dance in the midst of the
company of Bishops: so goes on, telling the History of Alexander and Arrius. I
have been before large enough in that relation, wherein it appeared that,
contrary to that great Emperors pious intention, whereas Envy began to dance
among the Bishops first, the good Constantine brought them the Fiddles. But it
appeared likewise how soon he was weary of the Bal, and toward his latter end,
as Princes often do upon too late experience, would have redressed all and
returned to his natural temper. Of the other Christian Emperors I likewise
discoursed, omitting, that I might insert it in this place, how the great
Heathen Philosopher Themistius, in his Consular Oration, celebrated Jovianus
for having given that toleration in Christian Religion, and thereby defeated
the flattering Bishops, which fort of men, says he wittily, do not worship
God, but the Imperial Purple.

It was the same Themistius that, only out of an upright natural apprehension
of things, made that excellent Oration afterward to Valens, which is in Print,
exhorting him to cease Persecution: wherein he chances upon, and improves the
same notion with Constantine's, and tells him: That he should not wonder at the
Dissents in Christian Religion, which were very small, if compared with the
multitude and crowd of Opinions among the Gentile Philosophers; for there were
at least three hundred differences, and a very great dissension among them
there was about their resolutions, unto which each several Sect was as it were
necessarily bound up and obliged: and that God seemed to intend more to
illustrate his own glory by that diverse and unequal variety of Opinions, to
the end every each one might therefore so much the more reverence his Divine
Majesty, because it is not possible for any one accurately to know him. And
this had a good effect upon Valens, for the mitigating in some measure his
severities against his fellow Christians. So that after having cast about, in
this Summary again, (whereby it plainly appears that according to natural right
and the apprehension of all sober Heathen Governors, Christianity as a
Religion, was wholly exempt from the Magistrates jurisdiction or Laws, farther
than any particular person among them immorally transgressed, as others, the
common rules of humain society) I cannot but return to the Question with which
I begun. What was the matter? How came it about that Christianity, which
approved it self under all Persecutions to the Heathen Emperors, and merited
their favor so far, till at last it regularly succeeded to the Monarchy,
should, under those of their own profession, be more distressed? But the Answer
is now much shorter and certainer, and I will adventure boldly to say, the true
and single cause then was the Bishops. And they were the cause against reason.
For what power had the Emperors by growing Christians, more then those had
before them? None. What obligation were Christ an Subjects under to the
Magistrate more then before? None. But the Magistrates Christian authority was,
what the Apostle described it while Heathen, not to be a terror to good works,
but to evil. What new Power had the Bishops acquired, whereby they turned every
Ponti^ into a Gaiaphat? None neither? 2 Cor. 10. 8. Had they been Apostles, The
Lord had but given them Authority for edification, not for destruction. They,
of all other, ought to have Preached to the Magistrate, the terrible
denunciations in Scripture against usurping upon and persecuting of Christians.
They, of all others, ought to have laid before them the horrible Examples of
God's ordinary Justice against those that exercised Persecution. But, provided
they could be the Swearers of the Prince to do all due Allegiance to the
Church, and to preserve the Rights and liberties of the Church, however they
came by them, they would give him as much scope as he pleased in matter of
Christianity, and would be the first to solicit him to break the Laws of
Christ, and ply him with hot places of Scripture in order to all manner of
Oppression and Persecution in Civils and Spirituals. So that the whose business
how this unchristian Tyranny came and could entitle it self among Christians,
against the Christian privileges, was only the case in Zech. 13. 6. 7 And one
shall say unto him, what are these wounds in thy hands? then he shall answer,
those with which I was wounded in the house of my friends. Because they were
all Christians, they thought forsooth they might make the bolder with them,
make bolder with Christ, and wound him again in the hands and feet, of his
members. Because they were friends they might use them more coursly, and abuse
them, against all common civility, in their own house, which is a Protection to
Strangers. And all this to the end that a Bishop might sit with the Prince in a
Junto, to consult wisely how to preserve him from those people that never meant
him any harm, and to secure him from the Sedition and Rebellion of men that
seek, nor think, any thing more but to follow their own Religious, Christian
Worship. It was indeed as ridiculous a thing to the Pagans to see that work, as
it was afterward in England to strangers, where Papists and Protestants went
both to wrack at the same instant, in the same market, and when Erasmus said
wittily, Quid agitur in Auglia? Consulitur he might have added though not so
elegantly Comburitur) de Religione. Because they knew that Christian Worship
was free by Christ's institution, they procured the Magistrate to make Laws in
it concerning things unnecessary; As the Heathen Persecutor Julian introduced
some bordering Ragan Ceremonies, and arguing with themselves in the same manner
as he did, Soz. l. 5. c. 16. That if Christians should obey those Laws they
should be able to bring them about to something further which they had
designed. But if they would not, then they might proceed against them without
any hope of pardon, as breakers of the Laws of the Empire, and represent them
as turbulent and dangerous to the Government. Indeed, whatsoever the
Animadverter says of the Act of Seditious Conventicles hero in England, as if
it were Anvill'd after another of the Roman Senate, the Christians of those
Ages, had all the finest tools of Persecution out of Julian's Shop, and
studied him then as curiously as some do now Machiavel. These Bishops it was
who, because the Rule of Christ was incompatible with the Power that they
assumed, and the Vices they practiced, had no way to render themselves
necessary or tolerable to Princes, but by making true piety difficult, by
Innovating Laws to revenge themselves upon it, and by turning Makebates between
Prince and People, instilling dangers of which themselves were the Authors.
Hence it is that having awakened this jealousy once in the Magistrate against
Religion, they made both the Secular and the Ecclesiastical Government so
uneasy to him, that most Princes began to look upon their Subjects as their
Enemies, and to imagine a reason of State different from the Interest of their
People: and therefore to weaken themselves by seeking unnecessary and grievous
supports to their authority. Whereas if men could have refrained this cunning,
and from thence forcible, governing of Christianity, leaving it to its own
simplicity, and due Liberty, but causing them in all other things to keep the
King's and Christ's peace among themselves and toward others, all the ill that
could have come of it would have been that such kind of Bishops should have
proved less implemental, but the good that must have thence risen to the
Christian Magistrate and the Church, then and ever after, would have been
inexpressible.

But this discourse having run in a manner wholly upon the Imposition of
Creeds, may seem not to concern (and I desire that it may not reflect upon) our
Clergy, nor the Controversies which have so unhappyly vexed our Church, ever
since the reign of Edward the Sixth unto this day. Only, if there might
something be picked out of it toward the Compromising of those differences
(which I have not from any performance of mine the vanity to imagine) it may
have use as an Argument a Majori ad Minus, their disputes having risen only
from that of Creeds, ours from the Imposition only of Ceremonies, which are of
much inferior consideration. Faith being necessary, but Ceremonies Despensable.
Unless our Church should lay the same weight upon them as the Animadverter has
done through his whole Studious Chapter on that Subject, and because p. 34. this
is the time of her settlement, that there is a Church at the end of every Mile,
that the Sovereign Powers spread their wings to cover and protect her, that
Kings and Queens are her Nursing Fathers and Nursing Mothers, that she has
stately Cathedrals, there he so many arguments now to make Ceremonies
Necessary: which may all be answered with one Question that they use to ask
Children. Where are you proud? But I should rather hope from the wisdom and
Christianity of the present guids of our Chruch, that they will (after an age
and more, after so long a time almost as those Primitive Bishops I have spoke
of, yet suffered the Novatian Bishops in every Diocese) have mercy on the
Nation, that has been upon so slender a matter as the Ceremonies and Liturgy
so long, so miserably harassed. That they will have mercy upon the King, whom
they know against his natural inclination, His Royal Intention, his many
Declarations, they have induced to more Severities, then all the Reigns since
the Conquest will contain if summed up together: who may, as Constantine among
his Private Devotions put up one Collect to the Bishops. Eusebius. de vita Constable.
c. 70. Date igitur mihi Dies tranquillos and Noctes curarum expertes. And it
runs, thus almost altogether verbatim in that Historian. Grant, most merciful
Bishop and Priest that I may have calm days, and nights free from care and
motestation, that I may live a peaceable life in all Godlyness and honesty for
the future by your good agreement; which unless you vouchsafe me, I shall wast
away my Reign in perpetual sadness and vexation. For as long as the people of
God stands divided by so unjust and pernicious a Contention, how can it be that
I can have any ease in my own Spirit. Open therefore by your good agreement the
way to me, that I may continue my Expedition toward the East; and grant that I
may see both you and all the rest of my people, having laid aside your
animosities, rejoicing together, that we may all with one voice give laud and
glory, for the Common good agreement and liberty, to God Almighty for ever.
Amen. But if neither the People, nor his Majesty enter into their
consideration. I hope it is no unreasonable request that they will be merciful
unto themselves, and have some reverence at least for the Naked Truth of
History, which either in their own times will meet with them, or in the next
age overtake them: That they, who are some of them so old that, as Confessors,
they were the Scarrs of the former troubles, others of them so young, that they
are free from all the Motives of Revenge and Hatred, should yet join in
reviving the former persecutions upon the pretenses, yea even themselves in a
turbulent, military, and uncanonical manner execute Laws of their own
procuring, and depute their inferior Clergy to be the Informers. I should
rather hope to see not only that Controversy so scandalous abolished, but that
also upon so good an occasion as the Author of the Naked Truth has administered
them, they will inspect their Clergy, and cause many things to be corrected,
which are far more ruinous in the Consequence then the dispensing with a
Surplice. I shall mention some too confusedly, as they occur to my Pen, at
present, reserving much more for better leisure. Methinks it might be of great
edification, that those of them who have ample possessions should be in a good
sense. Mult as inter opes inopes. That they would inspect the Canons of the
ancient Councils, where are many excellent ones for the regulation of the
Clergy. I saw one, looking but among those of the same Council of Nice, against
any Bishops removing from a less Bishopric to a greater, nor that any of the
Inferior Clergy should leave a less living for a fatter. That is methinks the
most Natural use of General or any Councils to make Canons, as it were Bylaws
for the ordering of their own Society, but they ought not to take out, much
less forge any Patent to invade and prejudice the Community. It were good that
the greater Churchmen relied more upon themselves, and their own direction, not
building too much upon stripling Chaplains: that men may not suppose the Master
(as one that has a good Horse or a Fleethound) attributes to himself the
virtues of his Creature. That they inspect the Morals of the Clergy: the Moral
Heretics, do the Church more harm then all the Non-conformists can do, or can
wish it. That before they admit men to subscribe the Thirty nine Articles for a
Benefice, they try whether they know the meaning. That they would much
recommend to them the reading of the Bible. It Is a very good book, and if a man
read it carefully, will make him much wiser. That they would advise them to
keep the Sabbath: if there were no morality in the day, yet there is a great
deal of prudence in the observing it. That they would instruct those that came
for Holy Orders and Livings, that it is a terrible vocation they enter upon,
but that has indeed the greatest reward. That to gain a Soul is beyond all the
acquists of Traffic, and to convert an Atheist more glorious then all the
Conquests of the Soldier. That, betaking themselves to this Spiritual Warfare,
they ought to disintangle from the World. That they do not ride for a Benefice
as if it were for a Fortune or a Mistress, but there is more in it. That they
take the Ministry up not as a Trade, and, because they have heard of
Whittington, in expectation that the Bells may so chime that they come in their
turns to be Lord Mayors of Lambeth. That they make them understand, as well as
they can, what is the Grace of God. That they do not come into the Pulpit too
full of Fustian or Logic, a good life is a Clergy man's best Syllogism, and
the quaintest Oratory: and till they outlive 'm they will never get the better
of the Fanatics, nor be able to preach with Demonstration of Spirit or with
any effect or Authority. That they be Lowly minded, and no Railers.

And particularly, that the Archdeacon of Canterbury being in ill humor upon
account of his Ecclesiastical Policy, may not continue to revenge himself upon
the innocent Walloons there, by ruining their Church which subsists upon the
Ecclesiastical Power of His Majesty and so many of His Royal Predecessors.

But these things require greater Time, and to enumerate all that is amiss,
might perhaps be as endless as to number the People: nor are they within the
ordinary sphaere of my Capacity, and our Exposer will think I have forgot him,
I shall take my leave of him for the present, being only troubled to find out a
Complement for so civil a Person. It must be thus.

I will not say as Popilius said to Antiochus, nor as Demosthenes said to
Eschines, nor as the most Learned P. Aerodius, or the Jesuit Gaspar Schottus
said to the Animadverter, nor as Dolubella said to Cicero, nor as the Christian
Cicero said to the English Parliament, nor as the Roman Centurion said to the
Roman Ensign: but I will say something like what Leonas (that presided from
Constantius at the Council at Seleucia, when they made an endless Disputing to
no purpose) said to them: not, Abi^e igitur and in Ecclesia nugas agite, but,
good Mr. Exposer, what do you Loytering like an idle Scholar, and
Animadverting here in Town? get you home again, or it were better for you, and
Expose and Animadvert, as long as you will, at your own College.

But as to a new Book fresh come out, Entitled, the Author of the Naked Truth
stripped Naked (to the Fe^, or to the skin) that Hieroglyphical Quibble of the
Great Gunn, on the Title Page, will not excuse Bishop Gunning. For his Sermon
is still expected.

But to the Judicious and Serious Reader, to whom I wish any thing I have said,
may have given no unwelcom entertainment, I shall only so far justify my self,
that I thought it no less concerned me to vindicate the Laity from the
Impositions that the Few would force upon them, then him to defend those
Impositions on behalf of the Clergy. And moreover I judged my self most proper
for the work, it not being fit that so slight a Pamphlet as his should be
answered by any Man of great abilities. For the rest I take the Naked Truth to
have been part of that effect which Reverend Mr. Hooker foretold Praef. to E^l.
Policy. p. 10. The time will come when Three words, uttered with Charity and
Meekness, shall receive a far more blessed reward, then Three thousand Volumes
written with disdainful sharpness of Wit. And I shall conclude with him in his
close. I trust in the Almighty that with us Contentions are now at the highest
float, and that the day will come (for what cause is there of Despair) when the
Passions of former enmity being allaid, men shall with ten times redoubled
tokens of unfainedly reconciled Love, show themselves each to other the same
which Joseph and the Brethren of Joseph were at the time of their Enterview in
Egypt. And upon this condition, let my Book also (yea my self if it were
needful) be burnt by the hand of the, Animadverter.

FINIS.

