A LATE VOYAGE TO St. KILDA, The Remotest of all the HEBRIDES, OR Western Isles
of SCOTLAND. WITH A History of the Island, Natural, Moral, and Topographical.
Wherein is an Account of their Customs, Religion, Fish, Fowl, etc. As also a
Relation of a late IMPOSTOR there, pretended to be Sent by St. John Baptist.

By M. MARTIN, Gent.

LONDON: Printed for D. Brown, and T. Goodwin: At the Black Swan and Bible
without Temple Bar; and at the Queen's Head against St. Dunstan's Church in
Fleetstreet. MDCXCVIII.

A LATE VOYAGE TO St. Kilda, etc.

To the Right Honorable Charles Montague, Esquire. Chancellor of His MAJESTY'S
Exchequer, President to the Royal Society etc.
SIR,
THE Royal Society (in which you so worthily at this time Preside) having
formerly done me the Honor to publish some of my Observations in their
Celebrated Transactions, it has now encouraged me to presume on your Patronage,
and made me prefix Your Great Name to this little Essay.

The World is in general so well acquainted with those noble Endowments and
great Abilities, for which our most Wise and Discerning Monarch so early raised
You to the highest Places of Trust and Dignity, that only these poor Islanders
of whom I Write, seem to be unhappily excluded from the knowledge of those many
rare and excellent Virtues, which under Your Administration do so signally
Bless Mankind; of all which no One seems so necessary for me to implore, as
that of Your extraordinary Goodness; which, I hope, will incline You to accept
of this plain and humble Address, as also to pardon the presumption of,

SIR, Your most Humble and Obedient Servant, M. MARTIN.

The PREFACE.
MEN are generally delighted with Novelty, and what is represented under that
plausible invitation seldom fails of meeting with acceptance. If we hear at any
time a Description of same remote Corner in the Indies Cried in our Streets, we
presently conclude we may have some Divertisement in Reading of it; when in the
mean time, there are a Thousand things nearer us that may engage our thoughts
to better purposes, and the knowledge of which may serve more to promote our
true Interest, and the History of Nature. It is a piece of weakness and folly
merely to value things because of their distance from the place where we are
Born: Thus Men have Traveled far enough in the search of Foreign Plants and
Animals, and yet continue strangers to those produced in their own natural
Climate. Therefore I presume that this following Relation will not prove
unprofitable or displeasing, unless the great Advantages of Truth and
unaffected plainness may do it a prejudice, in the Opinion of such as are more
nice and childish than solid and judicious.

The Ingenious Author of this Treatise is a Person whose Candor and Integrity
guard him against all Affectation and Vanity; and his great desire to propagate
the Natural History of the Isles of Scotland, makes him relate, without any
disguise, the several particulars that fell under his accurate Observation. He
was prompted by a generous Curiosity to undertake a Voyage through several
Isles to St. Kilda (the particular account whereof you have in the following
Treatise) and that in an open Boat, to the almost manifest hazard of his life,
since the Seas and Tides in those Rocky Islands are more inconstant and raging
than in most other places. There is nothing related in the following Account,
but what he vouches to be true, either from his own particular Observation, or
else from the constant and harmonious Testimony that was given him by the
Inhabitants; and they are a sort of People so Plain, and so little inclined to
Impose upon Mankind, that perhaps no place in the World at this day, knows such
Instances of true primitive Honor and Simplicity; a People who abhor lying
Tricks and Artifices, as they do the most poisonous Plants, or devouring
Animals.

The Author, perhaps, might have put these Papers into the Hands of some who
were capable of giving them the politest turns of Phrase, and of making some
pretty Excursions upon several passages in them; but he thought the Intelligent
and Philosophic part of Mankind would value the Truth more in such Accounts,
than any thing that can be borrowed from Art, or the advantages of more refined
Language; and such do Contemplate the Books of Nature with so much diligence
and application that they may admire the original spring of Power and Wisdom,
that first set Nature it self in Motion, and preserves its regular course in
all its wonderful and Various Phenomena; and therefore it may reasonably be
hoped, that the meanness of its dress will not be made use of as any
considerable Objection against this preliminary Essay.

He himself was Born in one of the most spacious and fertile Isles in the West
of Scotland; and besides his Liberal Education at the University, had the
advantage of feeing Foreign Places, and the honor of Conversing with some of
the Royal Society, who raised his natural Curiosity to survey the Isles of
Scotland more exactly than any other; in prosecution of which design he has
already brought along with him several curious Productions of Nature, both rare
and beautiful in their kind, which were never seen nor known here before; and,
perhaps, there be few that have the same advantages of doing it to purpose, he
being generally acquainted with most of the better sort, and nearly concerned
in such as would very willingly encourage Endeavors of this and the like
Nature.

A VOY.

The CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. THE Motives for the Voyage; Signs of a Storm; the Changes of the
Wind; the Consequence of their Change; the Flight of the Fowls; how serving the
Natives as well as a Compass; a Fight betwixt Two Solan Geese; the way the
Inhabitants walk among the Rocks; the manner of Landing; the Number of Eggs
consumed in Three Weeks; various Names of the Isle; Latitude, Climate, Seasons,
Length and Breadth of it; the Bay; Force of the Sea; Four Arches, or Vaults;
Crystal, how it grows; a Female Warrior's House; Fountains; Marks on the
Cattle, etc. Fishes, Baits; Amphibia. P. 1. CHAP. II. Of the inferior Isles and
Rocks, their Product. Solan Geese, how Killed. A branch of the Officer's
Salary, Staller-house, Pyramids. Policy of the Inhabitants. An Earthquake. A
Fountain. The taking away, or leaving the Eggs in the Nests by the Inhabitants,
advances or retards the hatching of the Fowls by the space of Eighteen Days,
sooner or later. Our progress to Borera. Every Solan Goose caught, is
presently marked on the Foot by the Owner. Of Eddies. Tides. Land and
Sea-Fowls, their description, various Properties, Seasons for their coming, and
going away: Their Prognostics of Winds, Storms, Calms, etc. Barren Tribe of
Solan Geese. The Solan Geese's Sentinels. Fulmar Oil, its properties. Eggs,
their various Properties and Effects. p. 33. CHAP. III. Of the Inhabitants.
Their Pedigree: Completion: Strength: Diseases: Cures: Plants: Religion: Notion
of Spirits. Festivals: Anniversary Cavalcade: Chapels: Crucifix: Lots:
Marriage: Baptism. Proprietor: Omer: Cubit. Envoy, his Salary, Entry. Steward's
Retinue: His Residence: How far Limited. Tributary Cake. Mutton furnished by
the Officer to the Steward every Sunday. Number of the Inhabitants: Their Kiln
by turns. The Officer: His Precedence: Notion of Honor: The danger attending
this Notion. Dexterity in Climbing. Language. Habit. Burials. Ale, how Brewed.
Fowls preserved. A Calculation of the Solan Geese consumed by the Inhabitants
last Tear. Five hundred Stone-Pyramids for several uses. The Inhabitant's Food.
Great lovers of Tobacco. Their Boat, how nicely divided. Fire-Penny: Pot-Penny.
No Money used here. The Rock-Fowl: How presented by a Lover to his Mistress.
The Mistress-Stone. Notions of all Foreign Objects. Divertisements. p. 69. An
Account of one Roderick, supposed to have had Conversation with a Familiar
Spirit, and pretending to be Sent by St. John the Baptist with New Revelations
and Discoveries. p. 135.
map of St. Kilda St Kilda


A VOYAGE TO St. KILDA, etc.
CHAP. I.
The Motives for the Voyage; Signs of a Storm; the Changes of the Wind; the
Consequence of their Change; the Flight of the Fowls; how serving the Natives
as well as a Compass; a Fight betwixt two Solan Geese; the way the Inhabitants
walk among the Rocks; the manner of landing; the Number of Eggs consumed in
Three Weeks; various names of the Isle; Latitude, Climate, Seasons, Length and
Breadth of it; the Bay; Force of the Sea; Four Arches or Vaults; Crystal, how
it grows; a Female Warrior's House; Fountains; Marks on the Cattle, etc.
Fishes, Baits; Amphibia.

THE various Relations concerning St. Kilda, given by those of the Western
Isles, and Continent, induced me to a narrow Enquiry about it: For this End I
applied my self to the present Steward, who by his Description, and the
Products of the Island, which were brought to me, together with a Natural
Impulse of Curiosity, formed such an Idea of it in my Mind, that I determined
to satisfy my self with the first Occasion I had of going thither; it being
never hitherto described to any purpose; the Accounts which are given by
Buchanan and Sir Robert Murray, being but Relations from Second and Third
Hands, neither of them ever having the Opportunity of being upon the Place;
which I attempted several times to visit, but in vain; until last Summer, the
Lord of Mack-Leod heartily recommending the Care of the Inhabitants of St.
Kilda to Mr. John Campbel, Minister of Harries, who accordingly went to St.
Kilda. This Occasion I cheerfully embraced; and accordingly we embarked at the
Isle Esaias in Harries the 29th. of May, at Six in the Afternoon, 1697. the Wind
at S. E.

We set Sail with a gentle Breeze of Wind, bearing to the Westward, and were
not well got out of the Harbor, when Mr. Campbell observing the Whiteness of
the Waves attended with an extraordinary Noise beating upon the Rocks,
expressed his Dislike of it, as in those Parts a never-failing Prognostic of
an ensuing Storm; but the same appearing sometimes in Summer, before excessive
Heat, this was slighted by the Crew. But as we advanced about two Leagues
further, upon the Coast of the Isle Pabbay, the former Signs appearing more
conspicuously, we were forced unanimously to conclude a Storm was approaching,
which occasioned a Motion for our Return; but the Wind and Ebb-Tide concurring,
determined us to pursue our Voyage, in hopes to arrive at our desired Harbor,
before the Wind or Storm should rise, which we judged would not be suddenly:
But our fond Imagination was not seconded with a good Event, as appears by the
Sequel; for we had scarce sailed a League further, when the Wind inclined more
Southerly, and altered our Measures; we endeavored by the help of our Oars to
reach the Haw-sker Rocks, some Four Leagues to the South-Coast, which we were
not able to effect, tho we consumed the Night in this vain expectation. By this
time we are so far advanced in the Ocean, that after a second Motion for our
Return, it was not found practicable, especially since we could not promise to
fetch any Point of Scotland; this obliged us to make the best of our way for
St. Kilda, though laboring under the Disadvantages of Wind and Tide almost
contrary to us. Our Crew became extremely fatigued and discouraged without
sight of Land for Sixteen Hours; at length one of our Number discovered several
Tribes of the Fowls of St. Kilda flying, holding their Course Southerly of us,
which (to some of our Crew) was a demonstration we had lost our Course, by the
Violence of the Flood and Wind both concurring to carry us Northerly, though we
steered by our Compass right West.

The Inhabitants of St. Kilda take their Measures from the Flight of those
Fowls, when the Heavens are not clear, as from a sure Compass, Experience
showing that every Tribe of Fowls bends their Course to their respective
Quarters, though out of sight of the Isle; this appeared clearly in our gradual
Advances; and their Motion being compared, did exactly quadrate with our
Compass. The Inhabitants rely so much upon this Observrtion, that they prefer
it to the surest Compass; but we begged their Pardon to differ from them,
though at the same time we could not deny but their Rule was as certain as our
Compass. While we were in this state, one of our Number espied the Isle Borera,
near Three Leagues North of St. Kilda, which was then about Four Leagues to the
South of us; this was a joyful Sight, and begot new Vigor in our Men, who being
refreshed with Victuals, lowering Mast and Sail, rowed to a Miracle: While they
were tugging at the Oars, we plied them with Plenty of Aqua Vitae to support
them, whose borrowed Spirits did so far waste their own, that upon our Arrival
at Borera, there was scarce one of our Crew able to manage Cable or Anchor: We
arrived there, and put in under the hollow of an extraordinary high Rock, to
the North of this Isle, which was all covered with a prodigious Number of Solan
Geese hatching in their Nests; the Heavens were darkened by those flying above
our heads; their Excrements were in such quantity, that they gave a Tincture to
the Sea, and at the same time sullied out Boat and Clothes: Two of them
confirmed the Truth of what has been frequently reported of their stealing from
one another Grass wherewith to make their Nests, by affording us the following
and very agreeable diversion, and 'twas thus; One of them finding his
Neighbor's Nest without the Fowl, lays hold upon the opportunity, and steals
of it as much Grass as he could conveniently carry, taking his flight toward
the Ocean; from thence he returns after a short turn, as if he had made a
foreign Purchase, but it does not pass for such, as Fate would have it; for the
Owner discovered the fact, before this Thief got out of sight, and being too
nimble for his cunning, waits his return, all armed with fury, engages him
desperately; this bloody Battle was fought above our heads, and proved fatal to
the Thief, who fell dead so near our Boat, that our Men took him up, and
presently Dressed and Eat him; which they reckoned as an Omen and Prognostic
of good Success in this Voyage.

We proposed to be at St. Kilda next day, but our expectation was frustrated by
a violent Storm, which did almost drive us to the Ocean; where we had incurred
no small risque, being no ways fitted for it; our Men laid aside all hopes of
life, being possessed with the belief that all this Misfortune proceeded from
the Impostor (of whom hereafter) who they believed had employed the Devil to
raise this extraordinary Storm against Mr. Campbel, Minister, who was to
counteract him. All our Arguments, whether from Natural Reason, or the
Providence of God, were not of force enough to persuade them to the contrary,
until it pleased God to command a Calm the day following, which was the First
of June, and then we rowed to St. Kilda; as we came close upon the Rocks, some
of the Inhabitants, who were then employed in setting their Gins, welcomed us
with a God save you, their usual Salutation, admiring to see us get thither
contrary to Wind and Tide; they were walking unconcernedly on the side of this
prodigious high Rock, at the same time keeping pace with our Boat, to my great
admiration, insomuch that I was quickly obliged to turn away mine Eyes, lest I
should have had the unpleasant spectacle of some of them tumbling down into the
Sea; but they themselves had no such fears, for hey outrun our Boat to the
Town, from thence they brought the Steward and all the Inhabitants of both
Sexes to receive us; we approached the outmost part of the low Rock, called the
Saddle; a parcel of the Inhabitants were mounted upon it, having on their Feet
the usual dress on such occasions, i. e. Socks of old Rags sowed with Feathers
instead of Thread; our Boat being come pretty near, it was kept off this Rock
with long Poles; some of their number coming by Pairs into the Sea received Mr.
Campbel and me upon their Shoulders and carried us to Land, where we were
received with all the demonstrations of joy and kindness they were able to
express; the Impostor endeavoring to outdo his Neighbors, and placing himself
always in the front of our Attendants, discovered his Hypocrisy, of which an
Account shall be given in the Conclusion. All of us walking together to the
little Village where there was a Lodging prepared for us, furnished with Beds
of Straw, and according to the ancient Custom of the place, the Officer, who
presides over them (in the Steward's absence) summoned the Inhabitants, who by
concert agreed upon a daily Maintenance for us, as, Bread, Butter, Cheese,
Mutton, Fowls, Eggs, also Fire, etc. all which was to be given in at our
Lodging. Twice every day; this was done in the most regular manner, each Family
by turns paying their Quota proportionably to their Lands. I remember the
allowance fot each Man per diem, beside a Barley Cake, was Eighteen of the Eggs
laid by the Fowl called by them Lavy, and a greater Number of the lesser Eggs,
as they differed in Proportion; the largest of these Eggs is near in bigness to
that of a Goose, the rest of the Eggs gradually of a lesser Size.

We had the curiosity after Three Weeks residence, to make a Calcule of the
number of Eggs bestowed upon those of our Boat, and the Stewart's Birlin, or
Galley, the whole amounted to Sixteen thousand Eggs; and without all doubt the
Inhabitants, who were tripple our Number, consumed many more Eggs and Fowls
than we could. From this it is easy to imagine, that a vast number of Fowls
must resort here all Summer, which is yet the more probable if it be
considered, that every Fowl lays but one Egg at a time, if allowed to hatch.

The Inhabitants live together in a little Vilage, which carries all the signs
of an extreme Poverty; the Houses are of a low form, having all the Doors to
the North-East, both on purpose to secure them from the shocks of the Tempest
of the South-West Winds. The Walls of their Houses are rudely built of Stone,
the short Couples joining at the ends of the Roof, upon whose sides small ribs
of Wood are laid, these being covered with Straw; the whole secured by Ropes
made of twisted Heather, the extremity of which on each side is poised with
Stone to preserve the Thatch from being blown away by the Winds. This little
Village is seated in a Valley surrounded with Four Mountains, which serve as so
many Ramparts of defense, and are Amphitheatres, from whence a fair prospect of
the Ocean and Isles is to be seen in a fair day.

This Isle is by the Inhabitants called Hirt, and likewise by all the Western
Islanders; Buchanan calls it Hirta; Sir John Narbrough, and all Seamen, call it
St. Kilda; and in Sea Maps St. Kilder, particularly in a Dutch Sea Map from
Ireland to Zeland, published at Amsterdam by Peter Goas in the Year 1663,
wherein the Isle of St. Kilda is placed due West betwixt Fifty and Sixty Miles
from the middle of the Lewis, and the Isle answers directly to the Fifty Eighth
Degree of Northern Latitude, as marked upon the ends of the Map, and from it
lies Rokol, a small Rock Sixty Leagues to the Westward of St. Kilda; the
Inhabitants of this place call it Rokabarra; this Map contains the soundings of
some places near St. Kilda; these not exceeding Twenty or Thirty Fathom, it
contains only the larger Isle, and a part of the Lesser Isles; this Island is
also called St. Kilda, by a Company of French and Spaniards, who lost their
Ship at Rokol in the Year 1686, which they Named to the Inhabitants of St.
Kilda, whose Latitude is Fifty seven Degrees and Three Minutes.

The Air here is sharp and wholesome; the Hills are often covered with ambient
White Mists, which in Winter are Forerunners of Snow, if they continue on the
Tops of the Hills; and in Summer, if only on the Tops of the Hills, they
prognosticate Rain; and when they descend to the Valleys it is a Prognostic of
excessive Heat. The Night here about the time of the Summer Solstice exceeds
not an Hour in length, especially if the Season is fair, then the Sun
disappears but for a short space, the Reflex from the Sea being all the time
visible; the Harvest and Winter are liable to great Winds and Rain, the
South-West Wind annoying them more than any other; it is commonly observed to
blow from the West for the most part of, if not all July.

St. Kilda is Two Miles long from East to West; from South to North One Mile in
breadth; Five Miles in Circumference, and is naturally fenced with one
continued Face of a Rock of great height, except a part of the Bay, which lies
to the South-East, and is generally well fenced with a raging Sea: This Bay is
one Half Mile in length, and another in breadth; it is not ordinary for any
Vessels to Anchor within this Bay, in case of a Storm, for this might endanger
them; therefore they drop Anchor without at the Entry, judging it the securest
place: The only place for landing here, is on the North side of this Bay, upon
a Rock with a little declination, which is slippery, being clothed with
several sorts of Sea-Weeds; these, together with a raging Sea, render the Place
more inaccessible, it being seldom without a raging Sea, except under favor of
a Neap Tide, a North-East or West Wind, or with a perfect Calm; when these
Circumstances concur, the Birlin or Boat is brought to the side of the Rock,
upon which all the Inhabitants of both Sexes are ready to join their united
Force to hale her through this Rock, having for this end a Rope fastened to the
Forepart; a competent Number of them are also employed on each side; both
these are determined by a Crier, who is employed on purpose to warn them all at
the same Minute, and he ceases when he finds it convenient to give them a
breathing.

At the Head of the Bay there is a plain Sand, which is only to be seen in
Summer, the Winter-Sea washing it all off the Stones; there is no landing upon
this place with safety, which the Steward has learned to his Cost. There is a
little Bay on the West side of this Isle, all faced with an Iron-colour'd Rock;
some Vessels take shelter here, when the Wind is at South or North-East; there
is a place of the Rock here on the South Side the Rivulet, where you may land,
if a Neap-Tide or Calm offer. The Sea is very impetuous every where about this
Isle; they showed me big Stones which were lately removed out of their place,
and cast into the Galleys Dock; I measured some of them which were in length
seven, others eight Foot, and three or four broad.

There is a little old ruinous Fort on the South Part of the South-East Bay,
called the Down. It is evident from what has been already said, that this
Place may be reckoned among the strongest Forts (whether Natural or Artificial)
in the World; Nature has provided the Place with store of Ammunition for acting
on the Defensive; that is, a heap of loose Stones in the Top of the Hill
Oterveaul, directly above the Landing-place; it is very easy to discharge
Vollies of this Ammunition directly upon the place of Landing, and that from a
great height almost Perpendicular; this I my self had occasion to demonstrate,
having for my Diversion put it in practice, to the great satisfaction of the
Inhabitants, to whom this Defense never occurred hitherto. They are resolved to
make use of this for the future, to keep off the Lowlanders, against whom of
late they have conceived Prejudices. A few hands may be capable of resisting
some hundreds, if the abovementioned Weapons be but made use of. Those Four
Mountains are faced on that side which regards the Sea, with Rocks of
extraordinary height; the Hill Conagir on the North side, is about Two hundred
Fathom height, perpendicularly above the Sea.

There are round this Isle Four Arches or Vaults, through which the Sea passes,
as does the Daylight from either side, which is visible to any, though at a
good distance; some of them representing a large Gate: Two of these look to the
South, and two North-West; that on the Point of the West Bay is six Fathom high
above Water, four in breadth, fifty Paces in length, the top two Fathom thick,
and very strong, the Cattle feeding upon it.

There are several Veins of different Stone to be seen in the Rocks of the
South-East Bay; upon the North side of this Rock is one as it were cut out by
Nature, resembling a Tarras-Walk. The Crystal grows under the Rock at the
Landing-place; this Rock must be pierced a Foot or two deep, before the
Crystal can be had from the Bed of Sand where it lies; the Water at the bottom
is of a black Color; the largest Piece is not above four Inches long, and
about two in Diameter, each Piece Sexangular.

Upon the West side of this Isle there is a Valley with a Declination toward
the Sea, having a Rivulet running through the middle of it, on each side of
which is an Ascent of half a Mile; all which Piece of Ground is called by the
Inhabitants, The Female Warrior's Glen: This Amazon is famous in their
Traditions: Her House or Dairy of Stone is yet extant; some of the Inhabitants
dwell in it all Summer, though it be some Hundred Years old; the whole is built
of Stone, without any Wood, Lime, Earth, or Mortar to cement it, and is built
in form of a Circle Pyramid-wise toward the Top, having a Vent in it, the Fire
being always in the Center of the Floor; the Stones are long and thin, which
supplies the defect of Wood: The Body of this House contains not above Nine
Persons sitting; there are three Beds or low Vaults that go off the side of the
Wall, a Pillar betwixt each Bed, which contains five Men apiece; at the Entry
to one of these low Vaults is a Stone standing upon one end fixed; upon this
they say she ordinarily laid her Helmet; there are two Stones on the other
side, upon which she is reported to have laid her Sword: She is said to have
been much addicted to Hunting, and that in her time all the space betwixt this
Isle and that of Harries, was one continued Tract of Dry Land. There was some
years ago a Pair of large Deers-horns found in the top of Oterveaul Hill,
almost a Foot under Ground; and there was likewise a Wooden Dish full of Deer's
Grease found in the same Hill under Ground. It Is also said of this Warrior,
that she let loose her Greyhounds after the Deer in St. Kilda, making their
Course toward the opposite Isles. There are several Traditions of this famous
Amazon, with which I will not further trouble the Reader.

In this Isle there are plenty of excellent Fountains or Springs; That near the
Female Warrior's House is reputed to be the best, the Name of it, Toubir-nim
buey, importing no less than the Well of Qualities or Virtues; it runs from
East to West, being sixty Paces Ascent above the Sea: I drank of it twice, an
English Quart at each time; it is very clear, exceeding cold, light, and
diuretic; I was not able to hold my hands in it above a few Minutes, in regard
of its Coldness; the Inhabitants of Harries find it effectual against
Windy-Chollicks, Gravel, Headaches; this Well has a Cover of Stone.

There is a very large Well near the Town, called St. Kilder's Well; from which
the Island is supposed to derive its Name; this Water is not inferior to that
abovementioned; it runs to the South-East from the North-West.

There is another Well within half a Mile of this, named after one Conirdan, an
hundred Paces above the Sea, and runs from North-West toward the
South-East, having a Stone Cover.

Within twelve Paces of this is a little and excellent Fountain, which those of
Harries and St. Kilda, will needs call by the Author's Name, and were then
resolved to give it a Cover of Stone, such as is above described.

There is a celebrated Well issuing out of the Face of a Rock on the North-side
of the East Bay, called by the Inhabitants and others, The Well of Youth, but
is only accessible by the Inhabitants, no Stranger daring to climb the steep
Rock; the Water of it is received, as it falls, into the Sea; it runs toward
the South-East. The Taste of the Water of those Wells was so pleasant, that for
several Weeks after, the best Fountains in the adjacent Isles did not relish
with me. There is a Rivulet runs close by the Town, and another larger
beyond Kilder's Well; this last serves for washing Linen, which it does as
well without Soap, as other Water does with it; of this we had Experience,
which was a Confirmation of what had been reported to us concerning this Water:
We searched if in the Brinks we could discover any Fullers-Earth, but found
none; we discovered some Pieces of Iron-Ore in several places of it; this
Rivulet drops from the Mossy Ground in the top of the Hills.

The whole Island is one hard Rock, formed into four high Mountains, three of
which are in the middle; all thinly covered with black or brown Earth, not
above a Foot, some places half a foot deep, except the top of the Hills, where
it is above three Foot deep, and affords them good Turf; the Grass is very
short but kindly, producing plenty of Milk; the number of Sheep commonly
maintained in St. Kilda, and the two adjacent Isles, does not exceed Two
thousand, and generally they are Speckled, some White, some Philamort, and are
of an ordinary size; they do not resemble Goats in any thing, as Buchanan was
informed, except in their Horns, which are extraordinary large, particularly
those in the lesser Isles.

The number of Horses exceeds not Eighteen, all of a Red Color, very low, and
smooth Skinn'd, being only employed in carrying their Turf and Corn, and at the
Anniversary Cavalcade, of which hereafter. The Cows that are about Ninety Head,
small and great, all of them having their Foreheads White and Black, which is
discernable at a great distance, are of a low stature, but fat and sweet Beef;
the Dogs, Cats, and all the Sea-Fowls of this Isle are Speckled.

The Soil is very grateful to the Labourer, producing ordinarily Sixteen,
Eighteen, or Twenty Fold sometimes; their Grain is only Bear, and some Oats;
the Barley is the largest produced in all the Western Isles; they use no Plough
but a kind of crooked Spade; their Harrows are of Wood, as are the Teeth in the
front also, and all the rest supplied only with long tangles of Sea-ware tied
to the Harrow by the small ends; the Roots hanging loose behind, scatter the
clods broken by the Wooden Teeth; this they are forced to use for want of Wood.
Their Arable Land is very nicely parted into Ten Divisions, and these into
Subdivisions, each Division distinguished by the Name of some Deceased Man or
Woman, who were Natives of the Place; there is one spot called Multa Terra,
another Multus Agris. The chief ingredient in their Composts is Ashes of Turf
mixed with Straw; with these they mix their Urine, which by experience they
find to have much of the Vegetable Nitre; they do not preserve it in quantities
as elsewhere, but convey it immediately from the Fountain to the Ashes, which
by daily practice they find most advantageous; they join also the Bones, Wings,
and Entrails of their Sea-Fowls to their Straw; they Sow very thick, and have a
proportionable growth; they pluck all their Bear by the Roots in handfuls, both
for the sake of their Houses, which they thatch with it, and their Cows which
they take in during the Winter; the Corn produced by this Compost is perfectly
free of any kind of Weeds; it produces much Sorrel where the Compost reaches.

The Coast of St. Kilda, and the lesser Isles, are plentifully furnished with
variety of Fishes, as Cod, Ling, Mackarell, Congars, Braziers, Turbat,
Graylords, Sythes; these last two are the same kind, only differing in bigness,
some call them Black Mouths; they are large as any Salmon, and somewhat longer;
there are also Laiths, Podloes, Herring, and many more; most of these are
Fished by the Inhabitants upon the Rock, for they have neither Nets nor long
Lines. Their common Bait is the Lympets or Patellae, being par-boil'd; they use
likewise the Fowl called by them Bowger, its Flesh raw, which the Fish near the
lesser Isles catch greedily; sometimes they use the Bowger's flesh, and the
Lympets Patellae at the same time upon one Hook, and this proves successful
also. In the Month of July a considerable quantity of Mackarell run themselves
ashore, but always with a Springtide. The Amphibia seen here, are the Otters
and Seals; this latter the Inhabitants reckon very good Meat; there is no sort
of Trees, no, not the least Shrub grows here, nor ever a Be seen at any time.

CHAP. II.
Of the inferior Isles and Rocks, their Product. Solan Geese, how Killed. A
branch of the Officer's Salary, Staller-house, Pyramids. Policy of the
Inhabitants. An Earthquake. A Fountain. The taking away, or leaving the Eggs in
the Nests by the Inhabitants, advances or retards the hatching of the Fowls by
the space of Eighteen Days, sooner or later. Our progress to Borera. Every
Solan Goose caught, is presently marked on the Foot by the Owner. Of Eddies.
Tides. Land and Sea-Fowls, their description, various Properties, Seasons for
their coming, and going away: Their Prognostics of Winds, Storms, Calms, etc.
Barren Tribe of Solan Geese. The Solan Geese's Sentinels. Fulmar Oil, its
properties. Eggs, their various Properties and Effects.

LEVINIS, a Rock about Fourteen Paces high, and Thirty in circumference,
narrower at the top; it stands about half a League to the South-East Bay, and
is not covered with any kind of Earth or Grass; it has a Spring of Fresh Water
issuing out at the side; this Rock, by an ancient Custom, belongs to the
Galley's Crew, but the abovementioned allowance disposes them to undervalue
it. Betwixt the West point of St. Kilda, and the Isle Soa, is the famous Rock
Stackdonn, i. e. as much, in their Language, as a Mischievous Rock, for it has
proved so to some of their Number, who perished in attempting to climb it; it
is much of the Form and Height of a Steeple; there is a very great dexterity,
and it is reckoned no small gallantry to climb this Rock, especially that part
of it called the Thumb, which is so little, that of all the Parts of a Man's
Body, the Thumb only can lay hold on it, and that must be only for the space of
one Minute; during which time his Feet have no support, nor any part of his
Body touch the Stone, except the Thumb, at which Minute he must jump by the
help of his Thumb, and the Agility of his Body concurring to raise him higher
at the same time, to a sharp point of the Rock, which when he has got hold of,
puts him above danger, and having a Rope about his Middle, that he casts down
to the Boat, by the help of which he carries up as many Persons as are designed
for Fowling at this time; the Foreman, or Principal Climber has the Reward of
Four Fowls bestowed upon him above his proportion; and, perhaps, one might
think Four thousand too little to compensate so great a danger as this Man
incurs; he has this advantage by it, that he is Recorded among their greatest
Heroes; as are all the Foremen who lead the Van in getting up this Mischievous
Rock.

Within Pistol shot from this place is the Isle Soa, a Mile and an half in
circumference, but contracted narrower toward the top, being a full half Mile
in difficult Ascent all round, most of it bare Rock, some parts of it covered
with Grass, but dangerous to ascend; the Landing is also very hazardous, both
in regard of the raging Sea, and the Rock that must be climbed; yet the
Inhabitants are accustomed to carry Burdens both up it and down, and of this I
was once a Witness. There is scarce any Landing here, except in one place, and
that under favor of a West Wind and Neap-Tide; the Waves upon the Rock
discover when it is accessible; if they appear White from St. Kilda, the
Inhabitants do not so much as offer to launch out their Boat, in order to Land
in Soa, or any other Isle or Rock, though their Lives were at the stake: This
little Isle is furnished with an excellent Spring; the Grass, being very sweet,
Feeds Five hundred Sheep, each of them having generally Two or Three Lambs at a
Birth, and every Lamb being so fruitful, that it brings forth a Lamb before it
self is a Year old. The same is also observed of Lambs in the little Isles
adjacent to the Isles of Harries and North-Wist. The Sheep in this Isle Soa are
never Milk'd, which disposes them to be the more prolifick: There are none to
catch them but the Inhabitants, whom I have seen pursue the Sheep nimbly down
the steep descent, with as great freedom as if it had been a plain Field.

This Isle abounds with infinite numbers of Fowls, as Fulmar, Lavy, Falk,
Bowger, etc.

There was a Cock-boat some Two years ago came from a Ship for Water, being
favored by a perfect Calm; the Men discerned an infinite number of Eggs upon
the Rocks, which charmed them to venture near the place, and at last purchased
a competent number of them; so careful was one of the Seamen as to put them
into his Breeches, which he put off on purpose for this use; some of the
Inhabitants of St. Kilda happened to be in the Isle that day; a parcel of them
were Spectators of this diversion, and were offended at it, being done without
their consent, therefore they devised an Expedient, which at once robbed the
Seamen of their Eggs and Breeches; and 'twas thus: They found a few loose
Stones in the Superficies of the Rock, some of which they let fall down
perpendicularly above the Seamen, the terror of which obliged them quickly to
remove, abandoning both Breeches and Eggs for their safety; and those Tarpawlin
Breeches were no small Ornament there, where all wore girded Plaids.

About Two Leagues and a half to the North of St. Kilda, is the Rock Stack-Ly,
Two hundred Paces in circumference, and of a great height, being a perfect
Triangle turning to a point at the top; it is visible above Twenty Leagues
distant in a fair day, and appears Blew; there is no Grass nor Earth to cover
it, and it is perfectly White with Solan Geese sitting on and about it. One
would think it next to impossible to climb this Rock, which I expressed, being
very close by it; but the Inhabitants assured me it was practicable, and to
convince me of the truth of it, they bid me look up near the top, where I
perceived a Stone Pyramid-house, which the Inhabitants Built for Lodging
themselves in it in August, at which time the Season proves inconstant there;
this obliges the Inhabitants in point of prudence to send a competent number of
them to whose share the Lots fall; these are to Land in this Rock some days
before the time at which the Solan Geese use to take Wing, and if they
neglected this piece or foresight, one Windy day might disappoint them of Five,
Six, or Seven thousand Solan Geese, this Rock affording no less yearly; and
they are so very numerous here, that they cannot be divided with respect to
their Lands, as elsewhere; therefore this is the reason why they send here by
Lots, and those who are sent act for the public Interest, and when they have
knocked on the head all that may be reached, they then carry them to a sharp
Point, called the Casting-Point, from whence they throw them into the Sea, (the
height being such that they dare not throw them in, but near the Boat) until
the Boatmen cry, Enough; lest the Sea, which has a strong Current there should
carry them off, as it does sometimes, if too many are thrown down at once; and
so by degrees getting all in, they return home; and after their Arrival every
Man has his share proportionable to his Lands, and what remains below the
number Ten, is due to the Officer as a branch of his yearly Salary. In this
Rock the Solan Geese are allowed to Hatch their first Eggs, but it is not so in
the Rocks next to be described; and that for this reason, That if all were
allowed to Hatch at the same time, the loss of the product in one Rock would at
the same time prove the loss of all the rest, since all would take Wing almost
at once.

The Isle Borera lies near half a League from Stack-Ly, to the North-East of
it, being in circumference One Mile and an half; it Feeds about Four hundred
Sheep per Annum, and would Feed more, did not the Solan Geese pluck a large
share of the Grass for their Nests.

This Isle is very high and all Rock, being inaccessible except in a Calm, and
there is only one place for Landing, looking to the South: In the West end of
this Isle is Stallir-House, which is much larger than that of the Female
Warrior in St. Kilda, but of the same Model in all respects; it is all Green
without like a little Hill; the Inhabitants there have a Tradition that it was
Built by one Stallir, who was a Devout Hermit of St. Kilda; and had he
Traveled the Universe he could scarcely have found a more Solitary place for a
Monastic Life.

There are about Forty Stone Pyramids in this Isle, for drying and preserving
their Fowls, etc. These little Houses are all of loose Stones, and seen at some
distance; there is also here a very surprising number of Fowls, the Grass as
well as the Rocks filled with them. The Solan Geese possess it for the most
part; they are always Masters wherever they come, and have already banished
several Species of Fowls from this Isle.

There was an Earthquake here in the Year 1686, which lasted but a few Minutes;
it was very amazing to the poor People, who never felt any such Commotion
before, or since.

To the West of Borera lies the Rock Stack-Narmin, within Pistol-Shot; this
Rock is Half a Mile in circumference, and is as inaccessible as any the
abovementioned; there is a possibility of Landing only in two places, and that
but in a perfect Calm neither, and after Landing the Danger in Climbing it is
very great. The Rock has not any Earth or Grass to cover it, and has a
Fountain of good Water issuing out above the middle of it, which runs
Easterly: This Rock abounds with Solan Geese and other Fowls; here are several
Stone Pyramids, as well for Lodging the Inhabitants that attend the Seasons of
the Solan Geese, as for those that preserve and dry them and other Fowls, etc.
The Sea rises and rages extraordinarily upon this Rock: We had the curiosity,
being invited by a fair day, to visit it for pleasure, but it was very
hazardous to us; the Waves from under our Boat rebounding from off the Rock,
and mounting over our Heads wet us all, so that we durst not venture to Land,
though Men with Ropes were sent before us; and we thought it hazard great
enough to be near this Rock; the Wind blew fresh, so that we had much
difficulty to fetch St. Kilda again; I remember they brought 800 of the
preceding year's Solan Geese dried in their Pyramids; after our Landing, the
Geese being cast together in one heap upon the Ground, the Owners fell to share
out each Man his own, at which I was a little surprised, they being all of a
Tribe; but having found upon Enquiry that every Goose carried a distinguishing
Mark on the Foot, peculiar to the Owner, I was then satisfied in this piece of
singularity.

There is a violent Current, whether Ebb or Flood, upon all the Coasts of St.
Kilda, lesser Isles and Rocks. It is observed to be more impetuous with Spring
than Neap Tides; there are Eddies on all the Coasts, except at a sharp Point
where the Tides keep their due course; the Ebb Southerly, and Flood Northerly.

A S. E. Moon causes high Tide; the Spring-Tides are always at the Full and
New Moon; the two days following they are higher, and from that time decrease
until the increase of the Moon again, with which it rises gradually till the
second after the Full Moon. This Observation the Seamen find to hold true
betwixt the Mule of Kantyre, and the Farrow Head in Strathnaver.

The Land-Fowls produced here are Hawks extraordinary good, Eagles, Plovers,
Crows, Wrens, Stone-Chaker, Craker, Cuckoo; this last being very rarely seen
here, and that upon extraordinary Occasions, such as the Death of the
Proprietor Mack-Leod, the Steward's Death, or the Arrival of some Notable
Stranger. I was not able to forbear laughing at this Relation, as founded upon
no reason but fancy; which I no sooner expressed, than the Inhabitants wondered
at my Incredulity, saying, that all their Ancestors for a Series of several
Ages had remarked this Observation to prove true, and for a further
confirmation, appealed to the present Steward, whether he had not known this
Observation to have been true, both in his own and his Father's time, who was
also Steward before him; and after a particular enquiry upon the whole, he told
me, that both in his own and Father's lifetime the truth of this Observation
has been constantly believed, and that several of the Inhabitants now living
have observed the Cuckoo to have appeared after the Death of the two last
Proprietors, and the two last Stewards, and also before the Arrival of
Strangers several times; it was taken notice of this Year before our Arrival,
which they ascribe to my coming there, as the only Stranger; the Minister
having been there before.

The Sea-Fowls are, first, Gairfowl, being the stateliest, as well as the
Largest of all the Fowls here, and above the Size of a Solan Goose, of a Black
Color, Red about the Eyes, a large White Spot under each Eye, a long broad
Bill; stands stately, his whole Body erected, his Wings short, he Flies not at
all, lays his Egg upon the bare Rock, which, if taken away, he lays no more for
that Year; he is Palmipes, or Whole-Footed, and has the Hatching Spot upon his
Breast, i. e. a bare Spot from which the Feathers have fallen off with the heat
in Hatching; his Egg is twice as big as that of a Solan Goose, and is variously
spotted, Black, Green, and Dark; he comes without regard to any Wind, appears
the first of May, and goes away about the middle of June.

The Solan Goose, as some imagine from the Irish word Sou'l-er, corrupted and
adapted to the Scottish Language, qui oculis irretortis e longinquo respicit
praedam: It equals a Tame Goose in bigness; it is by measure from the tip of
the Bill to the extremity of the Foot, Thirty four Inches long, and to the end
of the Tail, Thirty nine; the Wings extended very long, there being Seventy two
Inches of distance betwixt the extreme tips; its Bill is long, strait, of a
dark Color, a little crooked at the point; behind the Eyes the Skin of the
side of the Head is bare of Feathers; the Ears of a mean Size; the Eyes
Hazel-coloured; it has Four Toes; the Feet and Legs Black as far as they are
bare; the Plumage is like that of a Goose. The Color of the Old ones is White
all over, excepting the extreme tips of the Wings, which are Black, and the top
of the Head, which is Yellow, as some think the Effect of Age. The Young ones
are of a dark brown Color, turning White after they are a Year old; its Egg,
somewhat less than that of a Land-Goofe, small at each end, and casts a thick
scurf, and has little or no Yolk. The Inhabitants are accustomed to drink it
raw, having from Experience found it to be very Pectoral, and Cephalic. The
Solan Geese Hatch by turns; when it returns from its Fishing, carries along
with it Five or Six Herrings in its Gorget, all entire and undigested, upon
whose arrival at the Nest, the Hatching Fowl puts its Head in the Fisher's
Throat, and pulls out the Fish with its Bill as with a Pincer, and that with
very great noise; which I had occasion frequently to observe. They continue to
pluck Grass for their Nests from their coming in March till the Young Fowl is
ready to Fly in August or September, according as the Inhabitants take of leave
the First or Second Eggs. It Is remarkable of them, that they never pluck Grass
but on a Windy day; the reason of which I enquired of the Inhabitants, who
said, that a Windy day is the Solan Goose's Vacation from Fishing, and they
bestow it upon this Employment, which proves fatal to many of them; for after
their fatigue they often fall asleep, and the Inhabitants laying hold on this
opportunity, are ready at hand to knock them on the Head; their Food is
Herring, Mackrels, and Syes; English Hooks are often found in the Stomachs both
of Young and Old Solan Geese, though there be none of this kind used (...) than
the Isles Twenty Leagues distant; the Fish pulling away the Hooks in those
Isles go to St. Kilda, or are carried by the Old Geese thither; whether of the
two the Reader is at liberty to judge.

The Solan Geese are always the surest sign of Herrings, for wherever the one
is seen, the other is always not far off. There is a Tribe of Barren Solan
Geese which have no Nests, and sit upon the bare Rock; these are not the Young
Fowls of an Year Old, whose dark Color would soon distinguish them, but Old
ones, in all things like the rest; these have a Province, as it were, allotted
to them, and are in a separated state from the others, having a Rock Two
hundred Paces distant from all other; neither do they meddle with, or approach
to those Hatching, or any other Fowls; they Sympathize and Fish together; this
being told me by the Inhabitants, was afterward confirmed to me several times
by my own Observation.

The Solan Geese have always some of their Number that keep Sentinel in the
Nightime, and if they are surprised, (as it often happens) all that Flock are
taken one after another; but if the Sentinel be awake at the approach of the
creeping Fowlers, and hear a Noise, it cries softly, Grog, Grog, at which the
Flock move not; but if this Sentinel see or hear the Fowler approaching, he
cries quickly, Bir, Bir, which would seem to import danger, since immediately
after, all the Tribe take Wing, leaving the Fowler empty on the Rock, to return
home re infecta, all his Labor for that Night being spent in vain. Here is a
large Field of Diversion for Apollonius Tyanaeus, who is said to have Traveled
many Kingdoms over, to Learn the Language of Beasts and Birds.

Besides this way of stealing upon them in the Nightime, they are also
catched in common Gins of Horse-Hair, from which they do struggle less to
extricate themselves than any other Fowl, notwithstanding their bigness and
strength; they are also caught in the Herring Loches with a Board set on
purpose to float above Water, up-it a Herring is fixed, which the Goose
perceiving, flies up to a competent height, until he finds himself making a
strait line above the Fish, and then bending his course perpendicularly
piercing the Air, as an Arrow from a Bow, hits the Board, into which he runs
his Bill with all his force irrecoverably, where he is unfortunately taken. The
Solan Goose comes about the middle of March with a South West Wind, warm Snow,
or Rain, and goes away, according as the Inhabitants determine the time, i. e.
the taking away, or leaving its Egg, whether at the First, Second, or Third
time he lays.

The Fulmar, in Bigness equals the Malls of the Second rate; its Wings very
long, the outside of which are of a greyish white Color, the Inside and Breast
all White, a thick Bill Two Inches long, Crooked and Prominent at the end, with
wide Nostrils in the middle of the Bill, all of a pale Color; the upper
Mandible, or Jaw, hangs over the lower on both sides and point, his Feet pale,
not very broad, with sharp Toes, and a back Toe; he picks his Food out of the
Back of live Whales, they say he uses Sorrel with it, for both are found in his
Nest; he lays his Egg ordinarily the First, Second, or Third Day of May; which
is larger than that of a Solan Goose Egg, of a White Color, and very Thin, the
shell so very tender that it breaks in pieces if the Season proves Rainy; when
his Egg is once taken away, he lays no more for that Year, as other Fowls do,
both a Second and Third time; the Young Fowl is brought forth in the middle of
June, and is ready to take Wing before the Twentieth of July; he comes in
November, the sure Messenger of Eviltidings, being always accompanied with
boisterous West Winds, great Snow, Rain, or Hail, and is the only Sea-Fowl that
stays here all the Year round, except the Month of September, and part of
October. The Inhabitants prefer this, whether Young or Old, to all other; the
Old is of a delicate Taste, being a mixture of Fat and Lean; the Flesh White,
no Blood is to be found but only in his Head and Neck; the Young is all Fat,
excepting the Bones, having no Blood but what is in his Head; and when the
Young Fulmar is ready to take Wing, he being approached, ejects a quantity of
pure Oil out at his Bill, and will make sure to hit any that attacks him, in
the Face, though Seven Paces distant; this, they say, he uses for his defense;
but the Inhabitants take care to prevent this, by surprising the Fowl behind,
having for this purpose a Wooden Dish fixed to the end of their Rods, which
they hold before his Bill as he spouts out the Oil; they surprise him also from
behind, by taking hold of his Bill, which they tie with a Thread, and upon
their return home they untie it with a Dish under to receive the Oil; this Oil
is sometimes of a Reddish, sometimes of a Yellow Color, and the Inhabitants
and other Islanders put a great value upon it, and use it as a Catholicon for
Diseases, especially for any Aching in the Bones, Stitches, etc. some in the
adjacent Isles use it as a Purge, others as a Vomiter; it is hot in quality,
and forces its passage through any Wooden Vessel.

The Fulmar is a sure Prognosticator of the West Wind; if he comes to Land,
there is no West Wind to be expected for some time, but if he keeps at Sea, or
goes to Sea from the Land, whether the Wind blow from the South, North, or
East, or whether it is a perfect Calm, his keeping the Sea is always a certain
presage of an approaching West Wind; from this Quarter he is observed to return
with his Prey; his Egg is large as that of a Solan Goose, White in Color,
sharp at one end, somewhat blunt at the other.

The Scraber, so called in St. Kilda; in the Farn Islands, Puffinet; in
Holland, the Greenland Dove; its Bill small, sharp pointed, a little crooked at
the end, and Prominent; it is as large as a Pigeon, its whole Body being Black,
except a White spot on each Wing; his Egg Gray, sharp at one end, blunt at the
other.

It comes in the Month of March, and in the Nightime, without regard to any
Winds; it is always invisible, except in the Night, being all Day either abroad
at Fishing, or all the Day under ground upon its Nest, which it digs very far
under ground, from whence it never comes in Daylight; it picks its Food out of
the live Whale, with which, they say, it uses Sorrel, and both are found in its
Nest. The Young Puffin is Fat as the Young Fulmar, and goes away in August if
its First Egg be spared.

The Lavy, so called by the Inhabitants of St. Kilda; by the Welsh, a Guillem;
it comes near to the bigness of a Duck; its Head, upper-side of the Neck all
downwards of a dark Brown, and White Breast, the Bill strait and sharp pointed;
the upper Chop hangs over the lower; its Feet and Claws are Black.

Its Egg in bigness is near to that of a Goose Egg, sharp at one end, and blunt
at the other; the Color of it is prettily mixed with Green and Black; others
of them are of a pale Color, with Red and Brown Streaks; but this last is very
rare; this Egg for ordinary Food is by the Inhabitants, and others, preferred
above all the Eggs had here: This Fowl comes with a South-West Wind, if Fair,
the Twentieth of February; the time of its going away depends upon the
Inhabitants taking or leaving its First, Second, or Third Egg: If it stays upon
Land for the space of Three Days without intermission, it is a sign of
Southerly Wind and Fair Weather; but if it goes to Sea before the Third expire,
it is then a sign of a Storm.

The Bird, by the Inhabitants called the Falk, the Rasor-Bill in the West of
England, the Awk in the North, the Murre in Cornwall; Alca Hoeri. It is a size
less than the Lavy; its Head, Neck, Back, and Tail, are Black; the inside to
the middle of the Throat, White; the Throat under the Chin of a dusky Black;
beyond the Nostrils in the upper Mandible, or Jaw, there is a furrow deeper
than that in the Coulter Neb, the upper Chop crooked at the end, and hangs over
the lower, both having transverse furrows. It lays its Egg in May, its Young
take Wing the middle of July, if the Inhabitants do not determine its stay
longer, by taking the Egg; which in bigness is next to the Lavy, or Guillem
Egg, and is variously Spotted, sharp at one end, and blunt at the other.

The Bouger, by those in St. Kilda so called; Coulter-Neb by those in the Farn
Islands; and in Cornwall, Pope; it is of the size of a Pidgeon, its Bill is
short, broad, and compressed side-wise, contrary to the Bills of Ducks, of a
Triangular Figure, and ending in a sharp point, the upper Mandible, or Jaw,
Arcuate and Crooked at the point; the Nostrils are long Holes produced by the
Aperture of the Mouth; the Bill is of two Colors; near the Head, of an Ash
Color, and Red toward the point; the Feet are Yellow, the Claws of a dark
Blue; all the Back Black, Breast and Belly White. They Breed in Holes under
ground, and come with a South-West Wind about the Twenty second of March, lay
their Egg the Twenty second of April, and produce the Fowl the Twenty second of
May, if their First Egg be not taken away; it is sharp at one end, and blunt on
the other.

The Assilag is as large as a Lint-White; Black Bill, wide Nostrils at the
upper part, Crooked at the point like the Fulmar's Bill: It comes about the
Twenty second of March, without any regard to Winds, lays its Egg about the
Twentieth of May, and produces the Fowl toward the middle of October, then
goes away about the end of November.

There are Three sorts of Sea-Malls here, the First of a Gray Color, in
proportion near to a Goose: The Second sort of Malls are considerably less, and
of a Gray Color; and the Third sort is a White Mall, less than a Tame Duck;
the Inhabitants call it Reddag; it comes the Fifteenth of April with a
South-West Wind, lays its Egg about the middle of May, and goes away in the
Month of August.

The Tirma, or Sea-Pie, by the Inhabitants called Trilichan, comes in May, goes
away in August; if it comes the beginning of May, it is a sign of a good
Summer; if later, the contrary is observed. This Fowl is Cloven-Footed, and
consequently Swims not.

It is observed of all the Sea-Fowls here, that they are Fatter in time of
Hatching than at other times, the Solan Geese excepted.

Every Fowl lays an Egg Three different times (except the Gair-fowl and Fulmar,
which lay but once); if the First or Second Egg be taken away, every Fowl lays
but one other Egg that Year, except the Sea-Malls, and they ordinarily lay the
Third Egg, whether the First and Second Eggs be taken away, or no.

The Inhabirants observe, That when the April Moon goes far in May, the Fowls
are Ten or Twelve Days later in laying their Eggs, than ordinarily they use to
be.

The Inhabitants likewise say, That of these Fowls, there first come over some
Spies, or Harbingers, especially of the Solan Geese, towering about the Islands
where their Nests are, and that when they have made a Review thereof they Fly
away, and in Two or Three Days after, the whole Tribe are seen coming. Whither
the Fowls Fly, and where they spend their Winter, the Inhabitants are utterly
ignorant of.

The Eggs are found to be of an Astringent and Windy Quality to Strangers, but,
it seems, are not so to the Inhabitants, who are used to Eat them from the
Nest. Our Men upon their arrival Eating greedily of them became Costive and
Feverish, some had the Hemorrhoid Veins swelled; Mr. Campbell and I were at no
small trouble before we could reduce them to their ordinary Temper; we ordered
a Glister for them made of the Roots of Sedges, Fresh Butter, and Salt, which,
being administered, had its wished for effect; the Inhabitants reckoned this an
extraordinary performance, being, it seems, the first of this kind they ever
had occasion to hear of.

They preserve their Eggs commonly in their Stone-Pyramids, scattering the
burnt Ashes of Turf under and about them, to defend them from the Air, dryness
being their only Preservative, and moisture their Corruption; they preserve
them Six, Seven, or Eight Months, as abovesaid; and then they become Appetizing
and Loosening, especially those that begin to turn.

That such a great Number of Wild Fowls are so Tame, as to be easily taken by
the Rods and Gins, is not to be much admired by any who will be at the pains to
consider the reason, which is the great Inclination of Propagating their
Species; so powerful is that (...), or Natural Affection for their Offspring,
that they choose rather to die upon the Egg, or Fowl, than escape with their own
Lives, (which they could do in a Minute) and leave either of these to be
destroyed.

It deserves our consideration to reflect seriously upon the natural Propensity
and Sagacity of these Animals in their Kind; which if compared with many
Rational Creatures, do far outstrip them, and justly obey the Prescript of
their Natures, by living up unto that Instinct that Providence has given them.

CHAP. III.
Of the Inhabitants. Their Pedigree: Complexion: Strength: Diseases: Cures:
Plants: Religion: Notion of Spirits. Festivals: Anniversary Cavalcade:
Chapels: Crucifix: Lots: Marriage: Baptism. Proprietor: Omer: Cubit. Envoy,
his Salary, Entry. Steward's Retinue: His Residence: How far Limited. Tributary
Cake. Mutton furnished by the Officer to the Steward every Sunday. Number of
the Inhabitants: Their Kiln by turns. The Officer: His Precedence: Notion of
Honor: The danger attending this Notion. Dexterity in Climbing. Language.
Habit. Burials. Ale, how Brewed. Fowls preserved. A Calculation of the Solan
Geese consumed by the Inhabitants last Year. Five hundred Stone-Pyramids for
several uses. The Inhabitant's Food. Great lovers of Tobacco. Their Boat, how
nicely divided. Fire-Penny: Pot-Penny. No Money used here. The Rock-Fowl: How
presented by a Lover to his Mistress. The Mistress-Stone. Notions of all
Foreign Objects. Divertisements.

THE Inhabitants of this Isle are Originally Descended of those of the adjacent
Isles, Lewis, Harries, South and North Vist, Skiy: Both Sexes are naturally
very Grave, of a Fair Complexion; such as are not Fair are Natives only for an
Age or two; but their Offspring proves fairer than themselves.

There are Several of them would be reckoned among Beauties of the first Rank,
were they upon a level with others in their Dress.

Both Men and Women are well Proportioned, nothing differing from those of the
Isles and Continent. The present Generation comes short of the last in Strength
and Longevity. They showed us huge big Stones carried by the Fathers of some of
the Inhabitants now living; any of which is a Burden too heavy for any two of
the present Inhabitants to raise from the ground; and this change is all within
the compass of Forty Years. But notwithstanding this, any one Inhabiting St.
Kilda, is always reputed stronger than two of the Inhabitants belonging to the
Isle of Harries, or the adjacent Isles. Those of St. Kilda have generally but
very Thin Beards, and those too do not appear till they arrive at the Age of
Thirty, and in some not till after Thirty five; they have all but a few Hairs
upon the upper Lip, and point of the Chin.

Both Sexes have a Lisp, but more especially the Women, neither of the two
pronouncing the Letters, d, g, or r. I remember a Story of a Craker that Lisped
(Two Years ago), the Boys of the place took notice of, and were pleased to hear
him, and to Ape his Cry; one of the Steward's Men beholding them, enquired the
meaning of their Noise, which he told them was Ridiculous; they returned
answer, That it was worth his while to behold the sport of a Lisping Craker,
whom they Aped; but the Man replied, That they played the Fool, for the Craker
diverted himself in Lisping after them, and charged them with that
Imperfection; the Boys no sooner heard this, but away they ran, and left the
Craker to Cry and Lisp as he pleased.

There are some of both Sexes who have a Genius for Poetry, and are great
admirers of Music: The Trump or Jewish Harp is all the Musical Instrument they
have, which disposes them to Dance mightily. Their Sight is extraordinary good,
and they can discern things at a great distance: They have very good Memories,
and are resolute in their Undertakings, Chaste and Honest, and the Men reputed
Jealous of their Wives. They Argue closely, and with less Passion than other
Islanders, or those Inhabiting the High-lands on the Continent.

They are reputed very Cunning, and there is scarce any Circumventing of them
in Traffic and Bartering; the Voice of one is the Voice of all the rest, they
being all of a piece, their common Interest uniting them firmly together. They
Marry very Young, the Women at about Thirteen or Fourteen Years of Age; and are
nice in examining the Degrees of Consanguinity before they Marry. They give
Suck to their Children for the space of Two Years. The most Ancient Person
among them at present, is not above Eighty Years of Age.

Providence is very favorable to them in this, that they are not infested with
several diseases which are so predominant in the other Parts of the World; the
Distemper that most prevails here, is a Spotted Fever, and that too confined to
one Tribe, to whom this Disease is, as it were, become Hereditary; Others are
liable to Fluxes, Fevers, Stitches, the Spleen; for all which they have but
very few Remedies; to get away their Stitches, they commonly lie upon a warm
Hearth, with the side affected downwards; this they look upon to be almost
infallible for dispelling the Humor, or Wind, that Torments them. The Smallpox
has not been heard of in this Place for several Ages, except in one Instance,
of Two of the Steward's Retinue, who not having been well recovered of it, upon
their Arrival here, infected One Man only.

The Plants produced here, are Lapathum Vulgar, the Common Dock, Scurvy Grass
round, being large as the Palm of the Hand, Mille-Foil, Bursa Pastoris,
Silver-Weed, or Argentine, Plantine, Sage, Chicken-Weed, Sorrel, long, or the
common Sorrel; All-Hail, or Siderites, the Sea-Pinck, Tormentil, the Scurf upon
the Stones, which has a Drying and Healing quality, and is likewise used for
Dying. The Inhabitants are ignorant of the Virtues of these Herbs; they never
had a Potion of Physic given them in their Lives, nor know any thing of
Phlebotomy; a Phisician could not expect his Bread in this Commonwealth.

They have generally good Voices, and sound Lungs; to this the Solan Goose Egg
Supped Raw does not a little contribute; they are seldom troubled with a Cough,
except at the Steward's Landing; which is no less rare, than firmly believed by
the Inhabitants of the adjacent Isles.

Those of St. Kilda, upon the whole, gave me this following account, That they
always contract a Cough upon the Steward's Landing, and it proves a great deal
more troublesome to them in the Nightime, they then distilling a great deal
of Phlegm; this Indisposition continues for some Ten, Twelve, or Fourteen Days;
the most Sovereign Remedy against this Disease, is their great and beloved
Catholicon, the Giben, i. e. the Fat of their Fowls, with which they stuff the
Stomach of the Solan Goose, in fashion of a Pudding; this they put in the
Infusion of Oatmeal, which in their Language they call Brochan; but it is not
so effectual now as at the beginning, because of the frequent use of it. I told
them plainly, That I thought all this Notion of Infection was but a mere fancy,
and that, at least, it could not always hold; at which they seemed offended,
saying, That never any, before the Minister and my self, was heard doubt of the
truth of it; which is plainly demonstrated upon the Landing of every Boat;
adding further, That every Design was always for some End, but here there was
no room for any, where nothing could be proposed; but for Confirmation of the
whole, they appealed to the case of Infants at the Breast, who were likewise
very subject to this Cough, but could not be capable of affecting it, and
therefore, in their Opinion, they were infected by such as Lodged in their
Houses. There were scarce Young or Old in the Isle whom I did not Examine
particularly upon this Head, and all agreed in the Confirmation of it. They add
farther, That when any Foreign Goods are brought thither, then the Cough is of
longer Duration than otherwise. They remark, That if the Fever has been among
those of the Steward's Retinue, though before their Arrival there, some of the
Inhabitants are Infected with it. If any of the Inhabitants of St. Kilda chance
to live, though but a short space, in the Isles of Harries, Skey, or any of the
adjacent Isles, they become Meagre, and contract such a Cough, that the Giben
must be had, or else they must return to their Native Soil. This Giben is more
Sovereign for removing of Coughs, being used by any other Islanders, than those
of, St. Kilda, because they love to have it frequently in their Meat as well as
Drink, by which too frequent use of it, it loses its virtue; it was remarkable,
that after this infected Cough was over, we Strangers, and the Inhabitants of
St. Kilda, making up the Number of about Two hundred and fifty; though we had
frequently assembled upon the occasion of Divine Service, yet neither Young nor
Old among us all did so much as once Cough more.

Some Thirteen Years ago the Leprosy broke out among them, and some of their
Number Died by it; there are Two Families at present laboring under this
Disease. The Symptoms of it are, their Feet begin to fail, their Appetite
declines, their Faces become too Red, and break out in Pimples, they get a
Hoarseness, and their Hair falls off from their Heads, the Crown of it
Exulcerates and Blisters, and lastly, their Beards grow thinner than ordinary.

This Disease may in a large measure be ascribed to their gross Feeding, and
that on those Fat Fowls, as the Fulmar and the Solan Geese; the latter of which
they keep for the space of a whole Year, without Salt or Pepper to preserve
them; these they Eat Roasted or Boiled.

One of these Lepers, being with me one day at the Fulmar-Rock, importuned me
to give him a remedy for his Disease; I began to chide him for his ill Diet in
Feeding so grossly; but finding the poor Fellow ready and implicitly disposed to
do whatever I should enjoin, I bid him take example from the Fulmar, who, they
say, Feeds sometimes on Sorrel; this was a very surprising Advice to him, but
when he considered that the Fulmar required Sorrel to qualify the Whale, he was
the sooner persuaded that his Giben and Goose might require the same; I advised
him further, to abstain from the Giben and Fat Fowls, which was no small
trouble to him, for he loved them exceedingly; I obliged him likewise to mount
the Hill Conager, a Mile in Height, once every Morning and Evening, and he was
very careful to comply with those Injunctions for the space of Three Days; in
which short time he made some advances toward recovering his almost lost
Speech and Appetite, for his Throat was well nigh quite stopped up; he
continued this practice a Week longer, by which means he mended very
considerably; and I left him fully resolved to proceed in this practice, until
he was perfectly restored to his former state of Health. I had the occasion to
observe another of these Lepers rave for some Minutes, and when he was
recovered to his Right Mind, he wrought at his ordinary Employment.

The Inhabitants are Christians, much of the Primitive Temper, neither inclined
to Enthusiasm nor to Popery. They Swear not the Common Oaths that prevail in
the World; when they refuse or deny to give what is asked of them, they do it
with a strong Asseveration, which they express emphatically enough in their
Language to this purpose. You are no more to have it, than that if God had
forbid it; and thus they express the highest degree of passion. They do not so
much as name the Devil once in their lifetimes.

They leave off Working after Twelve of the Clock on Saturday, as being an
ancient. Custom delivered down to them from their Ancestors, and go no more to
it till Monday Morning. They believe in God the Father, the Son, and Holy
Ghost; and a State of Future Happiness and Misery, and that all Events, whether
Good or Bad, are determined by God. They use a set Form of Prayer at the
Hoising of their Sails: They lie down, rise, and begin their Labors in the
Name of God. They have a Notion, that Spirits are embodied; these they fancy to
be locally in Rocks, Hills, and wherever they list in an instant.

There are Three Chapels in this Isle, each of them with one end toward the
East, the other toward the West; the Altar always placed at the East End; the
first of these is called Christ Chapel, near the Village; it is covered and
thatched after the same manner with their Houses; there is a Brazen Crucisix
lies upon the Altar, not exceeding a Foot in length, the Body is completely
done, distended, and having a Crown on, all in the Crucified Posture; they have
it in great Reverence, though they pay no kind of Adoration or Worship to it,
nor do they either handle or see it, except upon the Occasions of Marriage, and
Swearing decisive Oaths, which puts an end to all Strife, and both these
Ceremonies are Publicly performed. The Churchyard is about an Hundred Paces
in Circumference, and is fenced in with a little Stone Wall, within which they
Bury their Dead; they take care to keep the Churchyard perfectly Clean, void
of any kind of Nastiness, and their Cattle have no access to it. The
Inhabitants, Young and Old, come to the Churchyard every Sunday Morning, the
Chapel not being Capacious enough to receive them; here they devoutly say the
Lord's Prayer, Creed, and Ten Commandments.

They observe the Festivals of Christmas, Easter, Good Friday, St. Columba's
Day, and that of All Saints; upon this they have an Anniversary Cavalcade, the
Number of their Horses not exceeding Eighteen; these they Mount by turns,
having neither Saddle nor Bridle of any kind, except a Rope, which Manages the
Horse only on one side; they Ride from the Shore to the House, and then after
each Man has performed his Tour, the Show is at an end. They are very
Charitable to their Poor, of whom there are not at present above Three, and
these carefully provided for, by this little Commonwealth, each particular
Family contributing according to their Ability for their Necessities; their
Condition is enquired into Weekly, or Monthly, as their Occasions serve; but
more especially at the time of their Festivals, they slay some Sheep on purpose
to be distributed among the Poor, with Bread proportionable; they are
Charitable to Strangers in Distress, this they had opportunity to express to a
Company or French and Spaniards who lost their Ship at Rokol in the Year 1686,
and came in, in a Pinnace to St. Kilda, where they were plentifully, supplied
with Barly-Bread, Butter, Cheese, Solan Geese, Eggs, etc. both Seamen and
Inhabitants were Barbarians one to another, the Inhabitants speaking only the
Irish Tongue, to which the French and the Spaniards were altogether Strangers;
upon their Landing they pointed to the West, Naming Rokol to the Inhabitants,
and after that, they pointed downward with their Finger, signifying the
Slinking and Perishing of their Vessel; they showed them Rokol in the Sea Map,
far West off St. Kilda. This, and much more, the Masters of these Ships told to
a Priest in the next Island who understood French. The Inhabitants acquainted
me that the Pinnace which carried the Seamen from Rokol was so very low, that
the Crew added a Foot height of Canvass round it all, and began to Work at it
upon Sunday, at which the Inhabitants were astonished, and being highly
dissatisfied, plucked the Hatchets and other Instruments out of their Hands,
and did not restore them till Monday Morning.

The Inhabitants had occasion to show great kindness to a Boat's Crew that was
driven from the opposite Isle South Wist, whither they themselves were driven
afterward, and where they were treated with no less Civility and Kindness than
the abovementioned had been by them: So that it may be said of them with great
Justice, That their Charity is as Extensive as the Occasions of it.

The Second of these Chapels bears the Name of St. Columba, the Third of St.
Brianan; both Built after the manner of Christ's Chapel; having Churchyards
belonging to them, and they are a Quarter of a Mile distance betwixt each
Chapel.

They told me of a Ship that dropped Anchor in the Mouth of the Bay the
preceding Year, and that the Lowlanders aboard her were not Christians; I
enquired if their Interpreter, who they said spoke bad Irish, had owned this to
be a Truth, they answered, not; but that they knew this by their Practices, and
that in these Three particulars; the First was the Working upon Sunday,
carrying several Boats full of Stones aboard for Ballast; the Second was the
taking away some of their Cows without any return for them, except a few Irish
Copper Pieces; and the Third was, the Attempt made by them to Ravish their
Women, a practice altogether unknown in St. Kilda, where there has not been one
instance of Fornication or Adultery for many Ages before this time; I remember
they told me, that the Bribe offered for Debauching the poor Women, was a piece
of Broad Money, than which there could be nothing less Charming in a place
where the Inhabitants cannot distinguish a Guinea from a Sixpence.

Their Marriages are Celebrated after the following Manner; when any Two of
them have agreed to take one another for Man and Wife, the Officer who presides
over them, summons all the Inhabitants of both Sexes to Christ's Chapel, where
being assembled, he enquires publicly if there be any lawful Impediment why
these Parties should not be joined in the Bond of Matrimony? And if there be no
Objection to the contrary, he then enquires of the Parties if they are resolved
to live together in Weal and Woe, etc. After their Assent, he declares them
Married Persons, and then desires them to Ratify this their Solemn Promise in
the presence of God and the People, in order to which the Crucifix is tendered
to them, and both put their Right Hands upon it, as the Ceremony by which they
Swear Fidelity one to another during their lifetime.

Mr. Campbel, the Minister, Married in this manner Fifteen Pair of the
Inhabitants on the Seventeenth of June, who immediately after their Marriage,
joined in a Country Dance, having only a Bagpipe for their Music, which
pleased them exceedingly.

They Baptize in the following manner; the Parent calls in the Officer, or any
of his Neighbors to Baptize his Child, and another to be Sponsor; he that
performs the Minister's Part being told what the Child's Name is to be, says,
A. B. I Baptize thee to your Father and your Mother, in the Name of the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost; then the Sponsor takes the Child in his Arms, as does his
Wife as Godmother, and ever after this there is a Friendship between the Parent
and the Sponsor, which is esteemed so sacred and inviolable, that no Accident,
how cross soever, is able to set them at variance; and it reconciles such as
have been at Enmity formerly.

This Isle belongs in Property to the Lord of Mack-Leod, Head of one of the
Ancientest Families of Scotland; it is never Farmed, but most commonly bestowed
upon some Favorite, one of his Friends or Followers, who is called Steward of
the Iste. The present Steward's Name is Alexander Mack-Leod, who pays Yearly to
his Master an Acknowledgment of the various Products of this Isle. This Steward
visits St. Kilda every Summer, and upon his Arrival he and his Retinue have all
the Milk in the Isle bestowed on them in a Treat; there is another bestowed on
them upon St. Columba's Day, the Fifteenth of Junes; we had a share of this
Second Treat. The Steward's Retinue consist of Forty, Fifty, or Sixty Persons,
and among them, perhaps, the most Meagre in the Parish are carried thither to
be recruited with good Cheer; but this Retinue is now retrenched, as also some
of their Ancient and unreasonable Exactions.

The Steward lives upon the Charge of the Inhabitants until the time that the
Solan Geese are ready to Fly, which the Inhabitants think long enough; the
Daily Allowance paid by them is very regularly exacted, with regard to their
respective Proportions of Lands and Rocks; there is not a parcel of Men in the
World more scrupulously nice and punctilious in maintaining their Liberties and
Properties than these are, being most Religiously fond of their Ancient Laws
and Statutes; nor will they by any means consent to Alter their first (though
unreasonable) Constitutions; and we had a pregnant Instance of this their
Genius for preserving their Ancient Customs; they have unchangeably continued
their first and Ancient Measures, as the Maile, Amir, and Cubit; this Maile
contains Ten Pecks: The Amir which they at present make use of, is probably the
Hebrew Omer, which contains near Two Pecks; the Cubit, or in their Language,
Lave Keile, i. e. an Hand of Wood, is the distance from the Elbow to the
Finger's ends; this they only use in Measuring their Boats: The Amir, or rather
Half Amir, as they call it, is composed of thin Boards, and as they confess his
been used these Fourscore Years; in which tract of time it is considerably
fallen short of the measure of which it was at first, which they themselves do
not altogether deny; the Steward to compensate this Loss, pretends to a
received Custom of adding the Hand of him that Measures the Corn to the Amir
side, holding some of the Barley above the due Measure, which the Inhabitants
complain of as unreasonable; the Steward to satisfy them, offered to Refer the
Debate to Mr. Campbel's Decision and mine, they themselves being to propose
their Objections, and Two of his Retinue, who were well seen in the Customs of
this place, in time of some of the former Stewards, being appointed to Answer
them, and he promised that he would acquiesce in the Decision, though it should
prove to his Prejudice; but they would not alter that Measure if Mack-Leod did
not expressly, Command the same to be done, being persuaded that he would not in
the least alter that Measure which his and their Ancestors had had in such
Esteem for so many Ages. So greats was their concern for this Amir, that they
unanimously determined to send the Officer as Envoy (according to the Ancient
Custom) to represent their case to Mack-Leod; this was the result of a General
Council, in which the Master of every Family has a Vote, since every Family
pays this Officer an Amir of Barley per Annum, to maintain his Character.

This Officer as such, is obliged to adjust the respective Proportions of
Lands, Grass, and Rocks, and what else could be claimed by virtue of the last
Tack, or Lease, which is never longer than for Three Years, condescended to by
the Steward; nay, heis obliged always to dispute with the Steward for what is
due to any of them, and never to give over until he has obtained his Demand, or
put the Steward into such a Passion, that he gives the Officer at least Three
Strokes with his Cudgel over the Crown of his Head; after these Three Strokes
he has done the utmost that is required of him by their Ancient Customs. I
enquired of the Officer (who told me this passage) what if the Steward give him
but One Blow over the Crown, he answered, That the Inhabitants would not be
satisfied if he did not so far plead as to Irritate the Steward to give both a
Second and a Third Blow; I had the farther curiosity to enquire of the Steward
himself if he was wont to Treat the Officer in this manner; who answered, That
it was an Ancient Custom, which in his short time he had not had occasion to
practice, but if he should, he would not confine himself to the Number of Three
Blows, if the Officer should prove Indiscreet.

The Steward bestows some Acres of Land upon the Officer for serving him and
the Inhabitants; he gives him likewise the Bonnet worn by himself upon his
going out of the Island; the Steward's Wife leaves with the Officer's Wife the
Kerch, or Head-dress worn by her self, and she bestows likewise upon her an
Ounce of Indigo. The Steward has a large Cake of Barley presented to him by the
Officer at every Meal, and it must be made so large as shall be sufficient to
satisfy Three Men at a time, and by way of Eminence it is baked in the Form of
a Triangle, and furrowed Twice round; the Officer is likewise obliged to
furnish the Steward with Mutton, or Beef, to his Dinner every Sunday during his
Residence in the Island.

Notwithstanding these reciprocal acts of Kindness, this Officer must be
allowed to go in quality of an Envoy to Mack-Leod against the Steward, upon
extraordinary Occasions, if the Commonwealth have any Grievances to Redress, as
that of the Amir now depending; but the Commission given him is Limited, the
whole Boat's Crew being joined in Commission with him, and are a Check upon
him, lest his Dependence upon the Steward might be apt to biass him; he makes
his Entry very submissively, taking off his Bonnet at a great distance when he
appears in Mack-Leod's presence, Bowing his Head and Hand low near to the
Ground, his Retinue doing the like behind him one after another, making, as it
were, a Chain; this being their manner of Walking both at Home and Abroad, for
they Walk not abreast as others do; and in making their Purchase among the
Rocks, one leads the Van, and the rest follow.

The Number of People Inhabiting this Isle at present, is about One hundred and
eighty, who in the Steward's absence are Governed by one Donald Mack-Gill-Colm,
as their Meijre, which imports an Officer; this Officer was anciently Chosen,
or at least approved of by the People, before the Steward settled him in his
Office, but now the Stewards have the Nomination of him absolutely; he is
President over them in all their Debates, takes care that the Lots be managed
impartially, that none to whose share they fall may have cause to repine,
whether it be for the Steward's Service, or that of the Commonwealths; the use
of the Lots, together with the Crucifix, do mightily contribute to their Peace
and Quiet, keeping every one within his proper Bounds. It must needs be a very
odd case indeed that falls not within the compals of either of these Two to
determine; when any case happens which does not fall under the Decision of
Lots, and it is capable of being decided only by the Oath of the Parties, then
the Crucifix must determine the matter; and if it should prove to be a case of
the highest Importance, any of them is at liberty to refer it to his
Neighbor's Oath, without any suspicion of Perjury, provided the Ceremony of
touching the Crucifix with their Right Hand be observed; and this is always
publicly performed.

If any Man is guilty of Beating his Neighbor, he is liable to a Fine not
exceeding the Value of Two Shillings Sterling; if any has Beat his Neighbor so
as to draw Blood from him; he is liable to a Fine, but it must not exceed Four
Shillings and Sixpence; these Crimes are complained of by the Officer to the
Steward upon his Arrival, who either exacts the whole, or dispences with the
Fines, as he judges convenient for their future Quiet and Peace.

They have only one common Kiln, which serves them all by turns, as the Lots
fall to their share; he whose Lot happens to be last does not resent it at all.

The Officer by virtue of his Place, is obliged through a point of Honor to be
the First that Lands in the Lesser Isles and Rocks, from whence they carry
their Fowls and Eggs, and not without some trouble too. This Notion of Honor
exposes him to frepuent dangers; and, perhaps, it may not be unpleasant to
describe it as I have seen it practiced; and it is thus; When they have come as
near to the Rock as they think may consist with the safety of the Boat, which
is not a little tossed by the raging of the Sea, those, whose turn then it is,
are employed with Poles to keep off the Boat, that is in great danger, in
regard of the violence of the Waves beating upon the Rock, and they are to
watch the Opportunity of the Calmest Wave; upon the first appearance of which,
the Officer jumps out upon the Rock; if there be any apparent Danger, he ties a
Rope about his Middle, with one end of it fastened to the Boat; if he has
Landed safe, he then fixes his Feet in a secure place, and by the assistance of
this Rope draws up all the Crew to him, except those whose turn it is to look
after the Boat; but if in jumping out he falls into the Sea, (as his fortune is
so to do sometimes) then he is drawn into the Boat again by that part of the
Rope that is so fastened to it, and the next then whose turn it is must try his
fortune, the Officer after his fall being supposed to be sufficiently fatigued,
so that he is not obliged to adventure his Person again to a Second Hazard upon
this occasion, especially he being exposed to the greatest danger that offers
upon their Landing when they return back again to the Isle, where the Sea often
rages, he being obliged then by virtue of his Office to stay in the Boat, after
the whole Crew are Landed, where he must continue employing his Pole, until the
Boat be either brought safe to Land, or else split upon the Rocks.

They furnish themselves with Ropes to carry them through the more inaccessible
Rocks; of these Ropes there are only Three in the whole Island, each of them
Twenty four Fathoms in length; and they are either knit together and lengthned
by tying the one to the other, or used separately as occasion requires; the
chief thing upon which the Strength of these Ropes depends, is Cows Hides
Salted, and cut out in one long piece, this they twist round the ordinary Rope
of Hemp, which secures it from being cut by the Rocks; they join sometimes at
the lower end Two Ropes, one of which they tie about the middle of one Climber,
and another about the middle of another, that these may assist one another in
case of a fall; but the Misfortune is, that sometimes the one happens to pull
down the other, and so both fall into the Sea; but if they escape (as they do
commonly of late) they get an incredible Number of Eggs and Fowls.

The Ropes belong to the Commonwealth, and are not to be used without the
general Consent of all; the Lots determine the Time, Place, and Persons for
using them, they get together in Three Days a much greater Number of Fowls and
Eggs than their Boat is able to carry away, and therefore what is over and
above they leave behind in their Stone-Pyramids: They catch their Fowls with
Gins made of Horse-Hair, these are tied to the end of their Fishing-Rods, with
which the Fowlers creep through the Rocks indiscernably, putting the Noose over
their Heads about their Necks, and so draw them instantly; they use likewise
Hair Gins which they set upon plain Rocks, both the ends fastened by a Stone,
and so catch Forty or Fifty a Day with them.

The Inhabitants, I must tell you, run no small danger in the quest of the
Fowls and Eggs, insomuch that I fear it would be thought an Hyperbole to relate
the Inaccessibleness, Steepness, and Height, of those formidable Rocks which
they venture to climb. I my self have seen some of them Climb up the Corner of
a Rock with their Backs to it, making use only of their Heels and Elbows,
without any other Assistance; and they have this way acquired a Dexterity in
Climbing beyond any I ever yet saw; Necessity has made them apply themselves to
this, and Custom has perfected them in it; so that it is become familiar to
them almost from their Cradles, the young Boys of Three Years Old begin to
Climb the Walls of their Houses: Their frequent Discourses of Climbing,
together with the fatal End of several in the Exercise of it, is the same to
them, as that of Fighting and Killing is with Soldiers, and so is become as
familiar and less formidable to them, than otherwise certainly it would be. I
saw Two Young Men, to whose share the Lots fell in June last, for taking the
Nest of a Hawk (which was in a High Rock above the Sea) bringing home the Hawks
in a few Minutes, without any Assistance at all.

Their Dogs are likewise very dextrous in Climbing and bringing out from their
Holes those Fowls which build their Nests far underground, such as the
Scraber, Puffinet, etc. which they carry in their Teeth to their Masters,
letting them fall upon the ground before them, though asleep.

The Inhabitants speak the Irish Tongue only; they express themselves slowly
but pertinently, and have the same Language with those of Harries and other
Isles, who retain the Irish in its Purity.

Their Habit Anciently was of Sheepskins, which has been wore by several of the
Inhabitants now living; the Men at this day wear a Short Doublet reaching to
their Waste, about that a double Plait of Plad, both ends joined together with
the Bone of a Fulmar; this Plad reaches no further than their Knees, and is
above the Haunches girt about with a Belt of Leather; they wear short Caps of
the same Color and Shape with the Capuchins, but shorter; and on Sundays they
wear Bonnets; some of late have got Breeches, and they are Wide and Open at the
Knees; they wear Cloth Stockins, and go without Shoes in the Summertime; their
Leather is dressed with the Roots of Tormentil.

The Women wear upon their Heads a Linen Dress, strait before, and drawing to
a small point behind below the Shoulders, a Foot and an half in length, and a
Lock of about Sixty Hairs hanging down each Cheek, reaching to their Breasts,
the lower end tied with a Knot; their Plad, which is the upper Garment, is
fastened upon their Breasts with a large round Buckle of Brass in form of a
Circle; the Buckle anciently worn by the Steward's Wives were of Silver, but
the present Steward's Wife makes no use of either this Dress or Buckle. The
Women Inhabiting this Isle wear no Shoes nor Stockins in the Summertime; the
only and ordinary Shoes they wear, are made of the Necks of Solan Geese, which
they cut above the Eyes, the Crown of the Head serves for the Heel, the whole
Skin being cut close at the Breast, which end being sowed, the Foot enters into
it, as into a piece of narrow Stockin; this Shoe does not Wear above Five Days,
and if the Down side be next the Ground, then not above Three or Four Days;
but, however, there is plenty of them, some Thousands being Caught, or, as
they term it, Stolen every March.

Both Sexes wear course Flannel Shirts, which they put off when they go to Bed;
they thicken their Clothes upon Flakes, or Mats of Hay twisted and woven
together in small Ropes; they work hard at this Employment, first making use of
their Hands, and at last of their Feet; and when they are at this work, they
commonly sing all the time, one of their Number acting the part of a Prime
Chantress, whom all the rest follow and Obey.

They put the Faces of their Dead toward the East when they Bury them, and
bewail the Death of their Relations excessively, and upon those Occasions make
doleful Songs; which they call Laments. Upon the news of the late Mack-Leod's
Death, they abandoned their Houses, Mourning Two Days in the Field; they Kill a
Cow, or Sheep, before the Interment, but if it be in the Spring, this Ceremony
then is delayed, because the Cattle are at that time Poor and Lean, but,
however, they are to be Killed as soon as ever they become Fat.

Their ordinary Food is Barley and some Oat-Bread Baked with Water; they Eat all
the Fowls, already described, being dried in their Stone-Houses, without any
Salt or Spice to preserve them; and All their Beef and Mutton is Eaten fresh,
after the same manner they use the Giben, or Fat of their Fowls; this Giben is
by daily Experience found to be a Sovereign Remedy for the Healing of Green
Wounds; it cured a Cancer in an Inhabitant of the Isle of Lewis, and a Fistula
in one Nicholson of Sky, in St. Mary's Parish; this was performed by John
Mack-Lean, Surgeon there: They Boil the Sea-Plants, Dulse, and Slake,
melting the Giben upon them instead of Butter, and upon the Roots of
Silver-Weed and Dock Boiled, and also with their Scurvy Grass stoved, which is
very Purgative, and here it is of an extraordinary Breadth. They use this Giben
with their Fish, and it is become the common Vehicle that conveys all their
Food down their Throats. They are undone for want of Salt, of which as yet they
are but little sensible; they use no set times for their Meals, but are
determined purely by their Appetites.

They use only the Ashes of Sea-Ware for Salting their Cheese, and the shortest
(which grows in the Rocks) is only used by them, that being reckoned the
Mildest.

Their Drink is Water, or Whey, commonly: They Brew Ale but rarely, using the
Juice of Nettle-Roots, which they put in a Dish with a little Barley-Meal
Dough; these Sowens, ( i.e. Flummery) being blended together, produce, good
Yest, which puts their Wort into a Ferment, and makes good Ale, so that when
they Drink plentifully of it, it disposes them to Dance Merrily.

They preserve the Solan Geese in their Pyramids for the space of a Year,
slitting them in the Back, for they have no Salt to keep them with. They have
Built above Five hundred Stone Pyramids for their Fowls, Eggs, etc.

We made particular Enquiry after the Number of Solan Geese consumed by each
Family the Year before we came there, and it amounted to Twenty two thousand
six hundred in the whole Island, which they said was less than they ordinarily
did, a great many being lost by the badness of the Season, and the great
Current into which they must be thrown when they take them, the Rock being of
such an extraordinary Height, that they cannot reach the Boat.

There is one Boat Sixteen Cubits long, which serves the whole Commonwealth; it
is very curiously divided into Apartments proportionable to their Lands and
Rocks; every Individual has his space distinguished to an Hair's breadth, which
his Neighbor cannot encroach so much as to lay an Egg upon it.

Every Partner in Summer provides a large Turf to cover his space of the Boat,
thereby defending it from the Violence of the Sun, which (in its Meridian
Height) reflects most vehemently from the Sea, and Rock, upon which the Boat
lies; at the drawing of it up, both Sexes are employed pulling a long Rope at
the Fore-end; they are determined in uniting their. Strength, by the Crier, who
is therefore excepted from being obliged to draw the Boat.

There is but one Steel and Tinder-Box in all this Commonwealth; the Owner
whereof fails not upon every occasion of striking Fire in the lesser Isles, to
go thither, and exact act Three Eggs, or one of the lesser Fowls from each Man
as a Reward for his service; this by them is called the Fire-Penny, and this
Capitation is very uneasy to them; I bid them try their Crystal with their
Knives, which when they saw it did strike Fire, they were not a little
astonished, admiring at the strangeness of the thing, and at the same time
accusing their own Ignorance, considering the quantity of Crystal growing
under the Rock of their Coast. This Discovery has delivered them from the
Fire-Penny Tax, and so they are no longer liable to it.

They have likewise a Pot-Penny Tax, which is exacted in the same manner as the
Fire-Penny was, but is much more reasonable; for the Pot is carried to the
Inferior Isles for the public use, and is in hazard of being broken; so that
the Owners may justly exact upon this score, since any may venture his Pot when
he pleases. When they have bestowed some Hours in Fowling about the Rocks, and
caught a competent Number, they sit down near the face of it to refresh
themselves, and in the mean time they single out the Fattest of their Fowls,
plucking them bare, which they carry home to their Wives, or Mistresses, as a
great Present, and it is always accepted very kindly from them, and could not
otherwise be, without great Ingratitude, seeing these Men ordinarily expose
themselves to very great danger, if not hazard their Lives, to procure those
Presents for them.

In the face of the Rock, South from the Town, is the famous Stone, known by
the Name of the Mistress-Stone; it resembles a Door exactly, and is in the very
front of this Rock, which is Twenty or Thirty Fathom perpendicular in Height,
the Figure of it being discernable about the distance of a Mile: Upon the
Lintel of this Door, every Batchelor-Wooer is by an Ancient Custom obliged in
honor to give a Specimen of his Affection for the Love of his Mistress, and it
is thus; He is to stand on his Left Foot, having the one half of his Sole over
the Rock, and then he draws the Right Foot further out to the Left, and in this
Posture Bowing, he puts both his Fists further out to the Right Foot; and then
after he has performed this, he has acquired no small Reputation, being always
after it accounted worthy of the finest Mistress in the World: They firmly
believe that this Achievement is always attended with the desired Success.

This being the Custom of the Place, one of the Inhabitants very gravely
desired me to let him know the time limited by me for trying of this piece of
Gallantry before I designed to leave the place, that he might attend me; I told
him this Performance would have a quite contrary effect upon me, by robbing me
both of my Life and Mistress at the same Moment; but he was of a contrary
Opinion, and insisted on the good Fortune attending it; but I must confess all
his Arguments were too weak to make me attempt the Experiment.

They take their measures in going to the lesser Islands from the appearance of
the Heavens; for when it is Clear or Cloudy in such a Quarter, it is a
Prognostic of Wind or Fair Weather; and when the Waves are high on the East
point of the Bay, it is an infallible Sign of a Storm, especially if they
appear very White, even though the Weather be at that time Calm.

If the Waves in the Bay make a noise as they break before they beat upon the
Shore, it is also an infallible forerunner of a West Wind; if a Black Cloud
appears above the South side of the Bay, a South Wind follows some Hours
afterward. It is observed of the Sea betwixt St. Kilda and the Isles Lewis,
Harries, etc. that it rages more with a North Wind, than when it Blows from any
other Quarter. And it is likewise observed to be less raging with the South
Wind than any other.

They know the time of the Day by the Motion of the Sun from one Hill or Rock
to another; upon either of these the Sun is observed to appear at different
times; and when the Sun does not appear, they measure the Day by the Ebbing and
Flowing of the Sea, which they can tell exactly, though they should not see the
Shore for some Days together: Their knowledge of the Tides depends upon the
changes of the Moon, which they likewise observe, and are very nice in it.

They use for their Diversion short Clubs and Balls of Wood; the Sand is a fair
Field for this Sport and Exercise, in which they take great Pleasure and are
very nimble at it; they play for some Eggs, Fowls, Hooks, or Tobacco; and so
eager are they for Victory, that they strip themselves to their Shirts to
obtain it: They use Swimming and Diving, and are very expert in both.

The Women have their Assemblies in the middle of the Village, where they
discourse of their Affairs, but in the mean time employing their Distaff, and
Spinning in order to make their Blankets; they Sing and Jest for Diversion, and
in their way, understand Poetry, and make Rhimes in their Language. Both Men
and Women are very Courteous; as often as they passed by us every Day, they
Saluted us with their ordinary Compliment of God save you; each of them making
their respective Courtesies.

Both Sexes have a great Inclination to Novelty; and, perhaps, any thing may be
thought new with them that is but different from their way of managing Land,
Cattle, Fowls, etc. A parcel of them were always attending the Minister and me,
admiring our Habit, Behavior; and, in a word, all that we did or said was
wonderful in their Esteem; but above all, Writing was the most astonishing to
them; they cannot conceive how it is possible for any Mortal to express the
Conceptions of his Mind in such Black Characters upon White Paper. After they
had with admiration argued upon this Subject, I told them That within the
compass of Two Years or less, if they pleased, they might easily be taught to
Read and Write, but they were not of the Opinion that either of them could be
obtained, at least by them, in an Age.

The Officer in his Embassy in July last, Traveled so far as to Land on the
Continent next to Sky, and it was a long Journey for a Native of St. Kilda so to
do, for scarce any of the Inhabitants ever had the opportunity of Traveling
so, great a way into the World.

They observed many wonderful things in the course of their Travels; but they
have a Notion that Mack-Leod's Family is Equivalent to that of an Imperial
Court, and believe the King to be only Superior to him: They say his Lady wore
such a strange Lowland Dress, that it was impossible for them to describe it;
they admired Glass Windows hugely, and a Looking-Glass to them was a prodigy;
they were amazed when they saw Cloth Hangings put upon a thick Wall of Stone
and Lime, and condemned it as a thing very Vain and Superfluous.

They reckon the Year, Quarter, and Month, as generally is done all Britain
over. They compute the several Periods of Time by the Lives of the Proprietors
and Stewards, of whose great Actions they have a Tradition, of which they
discourse with as great satisfaction, as any Historian reflecting on the
Caesar's, or greatest Generals in the World.

They account Riding one of the greatest pieces of Grandeur here upon Earth,
and told me with a strange admiration, that Mack-Leod did not Travel on foot,
as they supposed all other Men did, and that they had seen several Horses kept
on purpose by him for Riding.

One of their Number Landing in the Isle of Harries, enquired who was the
Proprietor of those Lands? They told him, that it was Mack-Leod, which did not
a little raise his Opinion of him; this Man afterward, when he was in the Isle
of Sky, and had Traveled some Miles there, one Day standing upon an Eminence,
and looking round about him, he fancied he saw a great part of the World, and
then enquired to whom those Lands did belong, and when one of the Company had
acquainted him, that Mack-Leod was Master of those Lands also, the St. Kilda
Man lifting up his Eyes and Hands to Heaven, cried out with admiration, O
Mighty Prine, who art Master of such Vast Territories! This he expressed so
emphatically in the Irish Language, that the Saying from that time became a
Proverb whenever any body would express a Greatness and Plenitude of Power.

One of the things they wondered most at, was the growth of Trees; they thought
the Beauty of the Leaves and Branches admirable, and how they grew to such a
height above Plants, was far above their Conception: One of them marvelling at
it, told me, That the Trees pulled him back as he Traveled through the Woods:
They resolved once to carry some few of them on their Backs to their Boats, and
so to take them to St. Kilda, but upon second thoughts, the length of the
Journey, being through the greatest part of the Isle of Sky, deterred them from
this undertaking, for though they excel others in Strength, yet they are very
bad Travelers on foot, they being but little used to it.

One of their Number having Traveled in the Isle of Sky, to the South part of
it, thought this a prodigious Journey; and seeing in the opposite Continent the
Shire of Inverness, divided from Sky only by a narrow Sea, enquired of the
Company, if that was the Border of England.

One of the St. Kilda Men, after he had taken a pretty large Dose of
Aqua-Vitae, and was become very heavy with it, as he was falling into a Sleep,
and fancying it was to have been his last, expressed to his Companions the
great satisfaction he had in meeting with such an easy passage out of this
World; For, said he, it is attended with no kind of Pain. In short, their
Opinion of Foreign Objects is as remote from the ordinary Sentiments of other
Mankind, as they are themselves from all Foreign Converse.

I must not omit acquainting the Reader, that the Account given of the Seamens
Rudeness to the Inhabitants, has created great prejudices in them against
Seamen in general; and though I endeavored to bring them into some good
Opinion of them, it will not be, I hope, improper here to deliver the Terms
upon which the Inhabitants are resolved to receive Strangers, and no otherwise;
They will not admit of any Number, exceeding Ten, and those too must be
Unarmed, for else the Inhabitants will oppose them with all their might; but if
any Number of them, not exceeding that abovesaid, come Peaceably, and with good
designs, they may expect Water and Fire Gratis, and what else the place
affords, at the easiest rates in the World.

The Inhabitants of St. Kilda, are much, happier than the generality of
Mankind, as being almost the only People in the World who feel the sweetness of
true Liberty: What the Condition of the People in the Golden Age is feigned by
the Poets to be, that theirs really is, I mean, in Innocence and Simplicity,
Purity, Mutual Love and Cordial Friendship, free from solicitous Cares, and
anxious Covetousness; from Envy, Deceit, and Dissimulation; from Ambition and
Pride, and the Consequences that attend them. They are altogether ignorant of
the Vices of Foreigners, and governed by the Dictates of Reason and
Christianity, as it was first delivered to them by those Heroic Souls whose
Zeal moved them to undergo danger and trouble to plant Religion here in one of
the remotest Corners of the World.

There is this only wanting to make them the Happiest People in this Habitable
Globe, viz. That they themselves do not know how happy they are, and how much
they are above the Avarice and Slavery of the rest of Mankind. Their way of
living makes them contemn Gold and Silver, as below the Dignity of Human
Nature; they live by the Munificence of Heaven, and have no Designs upon one
another, but such as are purely suggested by Justice and Benevolence.

There being about Thirty of the Inhabitants one Day together in the Isle Soa,
they espied a Man with a Gray Coat and Plad, in a Shirt, floating on the Sea
upon his Belly, and saw likewise a Mall pecking at his Neck; this Vision
continued above a Quarter of an Hour, and then disappeared; but shortly after,
one of the Spectators chanced to fall into the Sea, and being Drowned,
resembled the forewarning Vision in all things, and the Mall was also seen upon
his Neck; this was told me by the Steward some Years before, and afterward was
confirmed to me by such as were themselves Eyewitnesses of it.

None of the Inhabitants pretended to the Second Sight, except Roderick the
Impostor, and one Woman, and she told her Neighbors that she saw, some Weeks
before our coming, a Boat (different from that of the Steward) with some
Strangers in it, drawing near to their Isle.

An Account of one Roderick, supposed to have bad Conversation with a Familiar
Spirit, and pretending to be Sent by St. John the Baptist with New Revelations
and Discoveries.
AFTER our Landing, the Minister and I (according to our first resolution)
examined the Inhabitants apart by themselves concerning the New pretended
Religion delivered to them by their False Prophet.

All of them, Young as well as Old, both Men and Women, unanimously agreed in
this following Account; They did heartily Congratulate the Minister's Arrival,
and at the same time declared their Abhorrence of the Impostor's Delusions, and
with repeated Instances begged for the Lord's sake that he might be for ever
removed out of the Isle.

This Impostor is a Comely well-proportioned Fellow, Red-hair'd, and exceeding
all the Inhabitants of St. Kilda in Strength, Climbing, etc. He is Illiterate,
and under the same circumstances with his Companions, for he had not so much as
the Advantage of ever seeing any of the Western Isles; all his Converse being
only with the Steward's Retinue, who were as ignorant of Letters as himself.

In the Eighteenth Year of his Age, he took the Liberty of going to Fish on a
Sunday, (a practice altogether unknown in St. Kilda); and he asserts, That in
his return homeward, a Man in Lowland Dress, i. e. a Cloak and Hat, appeared to
him upon the Road; at this unexpected Meeting, Roderick falls flat on the
Ground in great disorder; upon which this Man desired him not to be surprised
at his Presence, for he was John the Baptist immediately come from Heaven with
good Tidings to the Inhabitants of that place, who had been for a long time
kept in Ignorance and Error; that he had Commission to Instruct Roderick in the
Laws of Heaven for the Edification of his Neighbors: Roderick answered, That
he was no way qualified for so great a Charge; the pretended John Baptist
desired him to be of good Courage, for he would instantly make him capable for
his Mission, and then delivered to him the following Scheme, in which he so
mixed the laudable Customs of the Church with his own Diabolical Inventions,
that it became impossible for so Ignorant a People as they, to distinguish the
one from the other.

The First and Principal Command which be imposed upon them, was that of the
Friday's Fast, which he enjoined to be observed with such strictness, as not to
allow one of them to taste any kind of Food before Night, no, not so much as a
Snuff of Tobacco, which they love dearly; this bare Fast, without any Religious
Exercise attending it, was the first Badge and Cognizance of his Followers. He
persuaded the People, that some of their Deceased Neighbors were Nominated
Saints in Heaven, and Advocates for them here who survived; he told, every one
had his respective Advocate; the Anniversary of every Saint was to be
commemorated by every Person under whose Tutelage they were reputed to be. And
this was observed by Treating the Neighbors with a liberal Entertainment of
Beef or Mutton, Fowls, etc. the Impostor himself being always the chief Guest
at the Feast; where a Share of the Entertainment was punctually sent to his
Wife and Children; the Number of Sheep ordinarily consumed on these occasions,
was proportionable to the Ability of him that bestowed them.

He imposed likewise several Penances which they were obliged to submit to,
under the pain of being expelled from the Society of his Fraternity in Worship,
which he pretended to be founded upon no less Authority than that of St. John
the Baptist's, and threatened to inflict the saddest Judgments upon those as
should prove Refractory, and not obey his Injunctions.

The ordinary Penances he laid upon them, were to make them stand in Cold Water
(without regard to the Season, whether Frost or otherwise) during his pleasure;
and if there were any more of them upon whom this Severity was to be Inflicted,
they were to pour Cold Water upon one another's Heads until they had satisfied
his Tyrannical Humor. This Diabolical Severity was Evidence enough, that he
was sent by him who is the Father of Lies, and was a Murderer from the
beginning.

He commanded that every Family should Slay a Sheep upon the Threshold of their
Doors, but a Knife must not so much as touch it, he would have them only make
use of their Crooked Spades for their Instruments to Kill them with; for which,
if duly considered, there is nothing more improper, the Edge with which he
commanded the Sheep's Neck to be cut being almost Half an Inch thick. Now this
was to be done in the Evening, and if either Young or Old had Tasted a bit of
the Meat of it that Night, the equivalent Number of Sheep were to be slain the
following Day, after the former manner.

He forbid the use of the Lord's Prayer, Creed, and Ten Commandments, and
instead of them prescribed Diabolical Forms of his Own. His Prayers and
Rhapsodical Forms were often blended with the Names of God, our Blessed
Savior, and the Immaculate Virgin; he used the Irish word Phersichin, i. e.
Verses, which is not known in St. Kilda, nor in the North-West Isles, except to
such as can Read the Irish Tongue. But that which seems to be most surprising,
in his obscure Prayers, was his mentioning ELI, with the Character of our
Preserver. He used several unintelligible Words in his Prayers, of which he
could not tell the meaning himself; saying only, That he had received them
implicitly from St. John Baptist, and delivered them before his Hearers without
any Explication.

He Taught the Women a Devout Hymn, which he called the Virgin Mary's, as sent
from her; this Hymn was never delivered in public, but always in a private
House, or some remote place where no Eye could see them but that of Heaven; he
persuaded the Innocent Women that it was of such Merit and Efficacy, that any
one who was able to repeat it by heart, would not Die in Childbearing: And
every Woman paid a Sheep to the Impostor for Teaching her this Hymn.

The Place and Manner of Teaching this Hymn afforded him a fair opportunity of
Debauching the simple Women; and this some of their number acknowledged to the
Minister and me upon Examination.

He prescribed to all his Auditory, long Rhimes, which he called Psalms; these
he ordinarily Sung at his Rhapsodical Preachments.

He endeavored to alter the common way of Burying, which was by placing the
Faces of the Dead to the East, and would have persuaded them to place them to
the South, and that he might prevail the more with them so to do, he placed the
Bodies of those of his own Family who happened to Die, facing the South; yet
the Inhabitants would not follow his Example in this, but continued in their
former Practice.

He persuaded the Women, That if in all things they complied with his New
Revelation, they should be undoubtedly carried to Heaven, and that in their
Journey thither they were to pass through the Firmament Riding upon White
Horses. These and many more Ridiculous things he imposed upon the People, of
which this is but an Abstract.

This unhappy Fellow to consecrate his Enterprise, pitched upon a little rising
spot of Ground, which he called John the Baptist's Bush; upon which he said
these Oracles were delivered by John Baptist to him. And this Bush was from
that time forward believed to be Holy Ground, and must not be any further Trod
upon by any of their Cattle, and if by chance one of them happen to touch it,
it must be forthwith slain and eaten by Roderick and the Owners; and if any
proved refractory, and were resolved to spare their Cattle, a most dreadful
Commination was issued out against them, or being thenceforward excluded from
any further Fellowship with him, until they should acknowledge their Faults,
and comply with his Luxurious desires, which to disobey he made them believe
was Damnable. It was reckoned Meritorious if any body had revealed who had
Transgressed the Orders given by him.

This Impostor continued for the space of several Years, without control, to
delude these poor innocent well-meaning People, until at last his Villainous
Design upon the Women was found out, I mean, That he intended to accomplish
under the Mask of the Devout Hymn that he Taught them, and was first discovered
by the Officer's Wife, who by the Impostor was first proselited to his False
Doctrines, and after that he would have Debauched her from her Conjugal
Fidelity. This Woman was so Heroically. Virtuous, as to communicate his lewd
Design to her Husband, who ordered the matter so as to be in another Room hard
by at the same time he supposed Roderick would be coming; there he stays until
this Letcher began to caress his Wife, and then he thought himself obliged
seasonably to appear for her rescue, and boldly reproved the Impostor for his
wicked practices, which were so widely contrary to his Profession, and that
upon the whole it appeared he had no true Mission.

The Impostor was very much surprised at this unexpected and fatal
disappointment, which put him into an extreme disorder, insomuch that he asked
the Officer's Pardon, acknowledging his Crime, and promising never to attempt
the like again. The Officer continued to upbraid him, telling him to his face,
That he was set on by the Devil; that Innocence and Chastity were always the
effects of True Religion, and that the contrary practices were countenanced by
False Prophets; and that now they needed no other proof of his being a
Notorious Deceiver: However the Impostor being had in great Reputation,
prevailed with the Officer to patch up a Friendship with him, who for the
continuance of it, condescended to be the Impostor's Gossip, i. e. Sponsor at
the Baptism of one of his Children; of which Ceremony there is an account
already given: When there is no opportunity of being Sponsor to one another,
and it is necessary to enter into Bonds of Friendship at Baptism; the
Inhabitants of the Western Isles, supplied this Ceremony by Tasting a drop of
each other's Blood.

Notwithstanding this Friendship thus patched up between these Two, the
Impostor's miscarriages got Air, which administered occasion to the most
thinking among them, to doubt very much of his Mission; his Father, who was
reputed a very Honest Man, told him frequently, that he was a Deceiver, and
would come to a fatal end. This Impostor Prophesied that one of the Inhabitants
(whose Name I have forgotten) was to be Killed in a Battle which was to be
fought in the Isle of Harries, within a limited space of time; this poor
unthinking Man relying so much on one whom he thought an infallible Oracle,
ventured more desperately on the Rock than ever before, fancying he could not
fall, but it happened that he tumbled over and was Drowned, at which the
Inhabitants were surprised; however the Impostor continued in the Exercise of
his pretended Mission.

One of the Inhabitants called Muldonich, alias Lewis, Cousin-German to the
Impostor, had an Ewe which brought forth Three Lambs at once, they were seen to
feed upon the Bush pretended to be Sacred, but Lewis would not comply with the
Order for Killing the Sheep, and had the boldness to aver, That it was an
unreasonable piece of Worship to destroy so many Cattle, and deprive the Owners
of their use, adding withal, That he never heard any such thing practiced in
any of the Western Isles upon a Religious account. The Impostor insisted upon
the Heavenly Command, which was to be observed by all his Followers, adding the
dreadful Threatening against such as proved disobedient thereto; but Lewis would
by no means be prevailed upon, choosing rather to be excluded from the pretended
Worship, than to Kill his Sheep.

The simple People looked for no less than a speedy Judgment to befall this
Recusant, but when nothing ensued upon his Disobedience, all of them began to
have a less Veneration for the Impostor than before; nay, some said privately,
that they might as well have ventured to run the same risque with Lewis, for
the preservation of their Cattle.

Notwithstanding all this Villainy, the Impostor continued to maintain his
Authority, until one Night (for it was always at Night that he kept his
pretended Religious Meetings) by a special Providence, a Boy of the Isle of
Harries, called John (who had staid with his Father a Year in St. Kilda, and
was employed in mending of their Boat) happened to go into the House where
Roderick was preaching after his usual manner; the Boy lurked in the dark, and
gave his Father an account of what he had heard, so far as he could remember;
all which the Boy's Father communicated to the Steward upon his Arrival, who
being highly concerned at the Relation given him, carried Roderick along with
him to the Isle of Sky before the late Mack-Leod, who being informed of this
Fellow's Impostures, did forbid him from that time forward to Preach any more
on pain of Death.

This was a great mortification, as well as disappointment to the Impostor, who
was possessed with a fancy, that Mack-Leod would hear him Preach, and expected
no less than to persuade him to become one of his Proselytes, as he has since
confessed.

The Impostor asserts, That every Night after he had assembled the People, he
heard a Voice without, saying, Come you out; which when he heard, he had no
power to stay within; and that after his going forth, John Baptist did meet
him, and Instructed him what he should say to the People at that particular
meeting. He says, That John the Baptist used only to repeat the Discourse to
him once, of all which the Impostor owns he could scarcely remember one
Sentence, and therefore he enquired of John the Baptist how he should behave
himself in this case; and that John the Baptist returned this answer, Go, you
have it; which the Impostor believing, was upon his return able to deliver
fluently all that he had heard, and would continue (after this his way of
Preaching) for several Hours together, until he had lulled most of his Hearers
asleep.

When the abovementioned Earthquake was over, one of the Inhabitants enquired
of the Impostor with admiration, How the Rock was made to tremble? He answered,
That it was the effect of pleasant Music sick played by a Devout Saint in a
Church under ground: His Neighbor owned his love for Music, but heartily
wished never to hear any more of this kind, which carried so great terror along
with it.

The Impostor owned the truth of all this Account, first to the Minister and
me, and then he did the same publicly after Divine Service, in the presence of
all the Inhabitants, and such as were come to that place from the Isle of
Harries. The Minister and Congregation jointly prayed for Repentance and Pardon
to this poor Wretch, which when ended, we carried him and all the Inhabitants
to the Bush pretended to be Sacred; he himself leading the Van, was commanded
to Raze to the Ground a part of that Wall which he had ordered to be built
round the said Bush (which otherwise would in a short time have proved such a
Purgatory, as might have robbed them of all their Goods) which he and the
Inhabitants did in the space of an Hour; we made them scatter the Stones up and
down in the Field, lest their Posterity might see such a Monument of Folly and
Ignorance. We Reproved the Credulous People for complying implicitly with such
Follies and Delusions as were delivered to them by the Impostor; and all of
them with once Voice answered, That what they did was Unaccountable; but seeing
one of their own number and stamp in all respects, endued, as they fancied,
with a powerful faculty of Preaching so fluently and frequently, and pretending
to Converse with John the Baptist, they were induced to believe his Mission
from Heaven, and therefore complied with his Commands without dispute, and the
rather, because he did not change their Laws of Neighborhood.

They do now regret their wandering, and hope that God may pardon their Error,
since what they did was with a design (though a mistaken one) to serve him.

They are now overjoyed to find themselves undeceived, and the Light of the
Gospel restored to them, as it was at first delivered to their Ancestors by the
first Christian Monks, who had gone thither to Instruct them.

This Impostor is a Poet, and also endued with that rare Faculty of enjoying
the Second Sight, which makes it the more probable that he was haunted by a
Familiar Spirit. It has been observed of him, before his Imposture was
discovered, that so often as he was employed by the Steward to go to, or return
from Harries, they were always exposed to the greatest Dangers by violent
Storms, being at one time driven Fifty Leagues to the North-East, and by
special Providence were at last cast upon the little Isle Rona, Twenty Leagues
North-East of Lewis; the Steward's Wife, and all his Crew making their
reflections upon these Dangers since the discovery of his Imposture, could
never be prevailed upon to receive him again into their Boat. They often
entreated Mr. Campbell and me not to admit him into our Boat, but we did not
yield to these Fears, for we received and brought him along with us, and
afterward delivered him to the Steward's Servants in the Isle of Pabby in
Harries, where he remains still in Custody in order to his Trial.

THE END.
ERRATA.
PAge 13. line 3. for tripple read treble. l. 12. for Vilage r. Village. p. 14.
l. 1. for heather r. heath. p. 48. for his r. its, for he r. it. p. 49. l. 2.
for he r. it. p. 56, l. 2. for his r. it l. 3. and 8. for he r. it.

Books Printed for Dan. Brown at the Black Swan and Bible without Temble-Bar.
A Treatise of the Gout, wherein both its Cause and Cure are demonstrably made
appear; to which is added some Medicinal Observations concerning the Cure of
Fevers by the means of Acids.

The Doctrine of Acids in the Cure of Diseases further Asserted, being an
Answer to Dr. F. Tuthill, etc. In which are contained some things relating to
the History of Blood, as also an Attempt to prove what Life is, and that it is
principally supported by Acid and Sulpher, etc.

Both by J. Colbach, a Member of the College of Physicians.
Cursus Osteologicus: Being a Complete Doctrine of the Bones, according to the
Newest and most refined Notions of Anatomy, etc. By Robert Baker, Surgeon.

The Gentleman's Recreation, in Four Parts, viz. Hunting, Hawking, Fowling,
Fishing; wherein these generous Exercises are largely Treated of, and the Terms
of Art for Hunting and Hawking more amply enlarged than heretofore; also the
method and manner of Breeding and Managing a Hunting-Horse; with Sculptures
inserted proper to each Recreation: The Fourth Edition. To which is now added a
perfect Abstract of all the Forest Laws to this time.

Books Printed for Timothy Goodwin.
A Political Essay: Or, Summary Review of the Kings and Government of England
since the Norman Conquest. By W -- P -- ey Esquire.

An Account of Poland, containing a Geographical Description of the Country;
the Manners of the Inhabitants, and the Wars they have been engaged in; the
Constitution of that Government, particularly the manner of Electing and
Crowning their Kings, his Power and Prerogative; with a brief History of the
Tartars. By Monsieur Hautevile, who Resided about Twenty five Years in that
Kingdom. To which is added a Chronology of the Polish Kings, the Abdication of
King John Casimir, and the rise and progress of Socinianism; likewise a
Relation of the chief Passages during the late Inter-regnum, and the Election
and Coronation of the New King Frederic Augustus. The whole comprehending
whatsoever is Curious and worthy of Remark in the former and present State of
Poland.

Lex Parliamentaria: Or, a Treatise of the Law and Customs of the Parliaments
of England. By G. P. Esquire.

Politica Sacra and Civilis: Or, a Model of Civil and Ecclesiastical
Government; wherein besides the positive Doctrine concerning State and Church
in general, are debated, the principal Controversies of the times concerning
the Constitution of the State and Church of England, tending to Righteousness,
Truth, and Peace. By George Lawson, Rector of More in the County of Salop.

Account of Denmark as it was in the Year 1692. Third Edition.

Account of Sueden, together with an Extract of the History of that Kingdom.


