Imprimatur, Apr. 17. 1678.

REMARKS Upon a Late Disingenuous DISCOURSE, Writ by one T. D. Under the
pretense DE CAVSA DEI, And of Answering Mr. John Howe's Letter and Postscript
OF GOD'S PRESCIENCE, etc.

Affirming, as the Protestant Doctrine, That God does by Efficacious Influence
universally move and Determine Men to all their Actions, even to those that are
most Wicked.

By a PROTESTANT.

LONDON, Printed and are to be sold by Christopher Hussy, at the
Flower-de-luce in Little-Brittain. 1678.

REMARKS Upon a Late Disingenuous Discourse WRIT By one T. D. etc.
OF all Vocations to which men addict themselves, or are dedicated, I have
always esteemed that of the Ministry to be the most noble and happy
Employment; as being more peculiarly directed to those two great Ends, the
advancement of God's Glory, and the promoting of Man's Salvation. It has
seemed to me as if they who have chosen, and are set apart for that Work, did,
by the continual opportunity of conversing with their Maker, enjoy a state like
that of Paradise; and in this superior, that they are not also, as Adam, put
in to dress and keep a Garden; but are, or ought to be, exempt from the
necessity of all worldly avocations. Yet, upon nearer consideration, they
likewise appear to partake of the common infelicities of Humane condition. For,
although they do not, as others, eat their Bread, in the sweat of their brows
(which some Divines account to be, though in the Pulpit, undecent,) yet the
study of their brain is more than equivalent; and even the Theological Ground
is so far under the Curse, that no Field runs out more in Thorns and Thistles,
or requires more pains to disincumber it. Such I understand to be those peevish
questions which have overgrown Christianity; wherewith men's minds are only
rent and entangled, but from whence they can no more hope for any wholesome
nourishment, than to gather Grapes from Thorns, or Figgs from Thistles. And (if
I may so far pursue the Allegory) this Curse upon Divinity, as that upon the
Earth, seems to have proceeded also from tasting that forbidden Fruit, of the
Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil. For, in general, many Divines, out of a
vain affectation of Learning, have been tempted into Enquiries too curious
after those things which the Wisdom of God has left impervious to Humane
Understanding, further than they are revealed. And hence, instead of those
allowed and obvious Truths of Faith, Repentance, and the New Creature, (yet
these too have their proper weeds that pester them,) there have sprung up
endless Disputes concerning the unsearchable things of God, and which are
agitated by men, for the most part, with such Virulence and Intricacy, as
manifest the Subtilty and Malice of the Serpent that has seduced them. But,
more particularly, that very Knowledge of Good and Evil, the disquisition of
the Causes from whence, and in what manner they are derived, has been so
grateful to the Controversial, Female, Appetite, that even the Divines have
taken of it as a Fruit to be desired to make them Wise, and given to their
people, and they have both eaten, at the peril of God's Displeasure and their
own Happiness. Whereas that second Chapter of Genesis contains the plain
History of Good and Evil, and (not to mention so many attestations to it of the
Old and New Testament,) what other Comment needs there, for what belongs to
Good, than that, Iam. 1. 17. that it is from God only, That every Good Giving,
and every Perfect Gift descends? And, as to Evil, that also of St. James, is
sufficient conviction, cap. 1. v. 13, 14. Let no man say, when he is tempted, I
was tempted of God; God cannot be tempted with Evil, neither tempts he any
man: But every man is tempted, when he is drawn aside by his own lusts and
enticed. Or that of the same Apostle, cap. 4. v. 1. From whence come Wars and
Fightings among you? (and even that Logomachia, I fear, with which this
question is vexed,) Come they not hence? even from your lusts that fight in
your members. And there is no examining Christian but must find both these
Truths evidently witnessed by his own Conscience.

Nevertheless, the Theologants of former and later times, not content with what
is held forth in Scripture, have attempted to clamber and palm up higher, by
the Philosophy of that School where each of them has first practiced, and have
drawn God's Prescience and Predetermination, upon this occasion, into debate;
arguing upon such points as no man, unless he were Prior and precedent to the
First Cause, can have the Understanding to comprehend and judge of: and most of
them do but say and unsay; and while in words they all deny God to be the
Author of sin, yet in effect, and by the manner of their reasoning, they affirm
it; I therefore, being both apprehensive of the danger in such Arguments, and
more particularly conscious of mine own weakness, shall not presume to
interpose my Opinion in the differences about this matter, further than to say;
That if men by this fansied opening of their Eyes, have attained to see more
clearly, and acknowledge the wickedness of their own Actions, it resembles the
modesty of our First Parents, discerning their Nakedness: But, if men shall
also assert a Predeterminative Concourse of God to our Evil, it seems to have
too much of Original Perverseness, and of that fallen shortness of Reason,
whereby they would have found a Nudity in the Creator, and did implicitly
reject their fault upon him, for the Serpent that He had made, and the Woman
that He had given.

But, if any man there be that can reconcile this Controversy, and so many
more that arise out of it; (for all the most important Doctrines of
Christianity serve on the one side, and all the fiercest questions of Religion
on the other, depending for Truth and Falsehood upon the success of this
Engagement,) if he can extinguish all those Ill Consequences, Dull
Distinctions, and Inconsistent Notions, which have been levied in this quarrel,
and reduce each Party within the due limits of Scripture and Saving Knowledge;
such a person indeed deserves all commendation. And such an one I thought I had
met with, nor yet see reason, notwithstanding all the late attempts upon him,
to alter my Opinion; in a Book entitled; The Reconcileableness of God's
Prescience of the sins of Men, with the Wisdom and Sincerity of his Counsels,
Exhortations; and whatsoever other means He uses to prevent them. In a Letter
to the Honorable Robert Boil, Esquire; and in a Postscript to the late Letter
of the Reconcileableness of God's Prescience, etc. by John How, the Author of
that Letter.

Yet there was one passage in the close of his Letter, p. 154. which seemed, as
I thought; to lay open to censure; where he asked pardon, as having hudled it up
mostly in the intervals of a troublesome long Journey. It seemed a piece too
well elaborate to have been perfected amidst the hurry of the Road, the noise
of Inns, and the Nausea of the Packet-boat. And how could he hope, after saying
this, in so captious an Age as we live, to escape some Reflection? but that at
least men would inquire whether he went by Stage-coach, or on Horseback; both
which are professed enemies to Meditation and Judgment? (for it is propable he
had not that ancient accommodation of Horse-litters, wherein, without any
impediment to their thoughts, men traveled with all the privacy and equipage
of a Closet,) whether he had not lost his way, or fallen among Thieves, and how
he found himself after his Journey? with all the questions that men are subject
to at their arrival home, and which even when asked in civility, yet are
troublesome. He might, had it not been for the jogging, have remembered how
unfortunate most Writers have been in such excuses, and what advantage
ill-natured men have taken to misinterpret them. So he that apologiz'd for
using a Foreign tongue, was told, that no man had prohibited him his Native
Language in his own Country. Others, alleging that they had at the same time a
Fit of the Stone, Gout, or other Distemper, have been taxed, as lying under no
obligation of publishing their Infirmities, but who might however, have cured
themselves of that of Writing. And he that pretended to treat at once of a
Serious, while he was amused with a more Comfortable Importance, was
advertised, that he ought therefore to have so long abstained either from the
one or the other. But, in earnest, this confession of Mr. How Is, is so far from
any such Arrogance, that it rather argues his modesty. For, if some can even in
Riding name all the contrary motions, till they have by memory played out a
Game at Chess, (which was first invented as an emblem of Predetermination) why
should it be more difficult, or less allowable, to one of Mr. How Is abilities,
in the interruptions of travel, to give a Mate also to that question? The worst
therefore that can be said of him, in allusion either to his Letter or his
Journey, is -- at poterat tutior esse domi. Yet seeing this was the greatest
fault that I remarked in reading him over, I would not pass it by without
notice, lest I might have cause to suspect my self of a Partiality, which I
desire not that others should exercise in mine own particular.

But for the rest, whereas the things considerable in all Discourses are the
Subject, the End, the Reasoning, the Method, and the Style; I must profess
that, as far as I understand, I have met with few manual Treatises, that do in
all these respects equal it. For the Subject, it appears in the Title, than
which there was none of greater dignity to be handled, or of greater use, if
rightly explained and comprehended. And no less is that of Predetermination,
which he only treats of collaterally, and upon which therefore, in hope to find
him less prepared, he has been attaqued, as in the Flank, with most vigor.
His End was most commendable, being to make the Paths straight, and remove
those stumbling blocks which the asperity of others had laid in the way to
Heaven; to rectify men's apprehensions concerning God, and leave them without
pretense for negligence in their Duties, or despair of performance; much less
for despite against the Creator. His Arguing then is plain and solid, for
Evidence, rather than Dispute; nor does he either throw the Dust of antique
Distinctions in the eyes of his Readers, to blind them; or yet raise the
Specter of ancient Authors, or conjure their venerable Names, to fright men
out of their senses and understanding; but declares against all the Prejudice
or Advantage by such proceeding, as unlawful Charms, and prohibited Weapons in
the Controversy. His Method thereafter is direct and coherent, his Style
perspicuous and elegant: So that it is in short, a Manly discourse, resembling
much, and expressing the Humane Perfection; in the Harmony of Language, the
Symmetry of Parts, the Strength of Reason, the Excellency of its End, which is
so serious, that it is no defect in the similitude with Man, that the Letter
contains nothing in it suitable to the property of Laughter.

All which put together, and although it does, and must every where partake
also of Humane Imperfection, it might have been hoped capable of that civility
which men, and especially Learned men, but most of all Divines do usually, or
should allow, to one another. That it should not be made ridiculous, being writ
in so good earnest; nor assaulted, being so inoffensive; much less that it
should be defaced, mutilated, stabbed in so many places, and the Author through
it, which is even in writing a kind of Felony. Yet this has been its
misfortune in a Rencounter with an immodest and hectoring Discourse, pretending
to the Title, De Causa Dei: Or a Vindication of the Common Doctrine of
Protestant Divines concerning Predetermination, viz. The Interest of God, as
the First Cause, in all the Actions, as such, of Rational Creatures, from the
Invidious Consequences with which it is burdened, by Mr. John How, in a late
Letter and Postscript of God's Prescience; by T. D. By which first Letters,
seeing it appears that he desires to pass Incognito, I will so far observe good
manners, as to interpret them only The Discourse, heartily wishing that there
were some way of finding it Guilty, without reflecting upon the Author; which I
shall accordingly endeavor, that I may both preserve his, whatsoever, former
Reputation, and leave him a door open to Ingenuity for the future. But The
Discourse justifies it self, as if it had been typified by Paul's withstanding
Peter to his face, when he came to Antioch, (so easy is it to patronize humane
Passions under the pretense of the Cause of God, and Apostolical example) T. D.
p. 23. whereas it rather resembles in the Bravery, though not in the Occasion,
that Exploit of Peter's Matthew. 26. 51, 52. for which our Savior, though done
in his defense, rebuked him. adding, They that take the sword, shall perish by
the sword: And the taking the Pen has seldom better success, if handled in the
same manner. I therefore, having had the leisure to read it over, and thereby
the opportunity of a second Caution, how the unruly Quill is to be managed,
have thought that I could not at present render a better account of that time
to my self or others, than by publishing these Remarks; that, as Mr. How Is
Letter may serve for a Pattern of what is to be imitated, so The Discourse may
remain as a Mark (the best use it can be put to) of what ought to be avoided in
all writing of Controversies, especially by Divines, in those that concern
Religion. The nature of this matter would admit of no better method, than that
the Errors observable should be distinguished under several Heads, to each of
which the particular Instances are referred. The first Article that I prefer
against the Discourse, is;

It Is Trifling and Cavilling about Words, when they affect not the Cause.
First Instance. Mr. How, on purpose to prevent any such idle Practice, had in
the last page of his Postscript, plainly summed up the constant sense both of
that and his Letter which he would abide by. That God does not by an
Efficacious Influence universally move and determine Men to all their Actions,
even those Actions which are most wicked. Here was the Subject ready stated,
against which, if any thing, The Discourse ought to have directly applied. But,
instead of that T. D. p. 1. It says, Mr. How gives us his sense in various
terms, and such as seem repugnant to each other. One while that which he
denies, is a Predeterminative Concurrence, and Predeterminative Concourse;
another while, it is Predetermining Influence, and a Determinative Influence,
and Efficacious Influence. This is the same in T. D. as if Its concurrent
Wherry-men, p. 27. after they had taken in their Fare, should be long pulling
off their Doublets, and then carry a man to another Stairs than they were
directed. The one shows that they had but little heart to their labor; the
other, that they know not the River, unless perhaps they have a design, if they
can find a place convenient to rifle the Passenger. For Mr. How had expressly
pitched upon that one term of Efficacious Influence. But, as for those other
repeated by The Discourse, they were such as Mr. How found in the
Controversy, not of his own making, nor therefore is he accountable for them:
But, however, it was his Ingenuity to mention them; and having done so, to bind
himself to a point, to one Word of the most certain signification, as a place
where any adversary might always be sure to speak with him. Yet It, to find
out matter for Discourse, and to show Its great Reading, tells us, as if that
were the business, what Strangius says, and what Doctor Twisse concerning
Predetermination and Concourse; and again, what Strangius, of the Difference
between Concourse and Influence, p. 2. and says that, as for those two
Phrases, Predeterminative Concurrence, and Predeterminative Concourse, they are
in effect, Contradictie in Adjecto. And so let them be, upon condition that not
Mr. How, (as The Discourse would have it) but the first Inventer my be bound
to answer for it. For the truth is, the Brothers of Dispute do usually so
handle their matter, and refine so far, till they want at last either words to
express their meaning, or meaning to express in words. And so it has faired
with these Imaginers of the Predeterminative Concourse or Concurrence. It Is
very well that this Scene of Debate lies in Oxford (or London) for, upon these
terms, it would be impossible at New Market, where Prae and Con run their
heats, to decide any Match without sending for a Judge to the next University,
and it is less difficult for Pro and Con, or for Con, and Non-con, to set their
Horses together. Yet suppose, as the Discourse affirms, that this
Predeterminative Concourse or Concurrence had been words of Mr. Howe's own
choosing; whereas he on the contrary rejects them for that of Efficacious
Influence, the Impropriety however therein had not been greater, than of that
Phrase which T. D. p. 25. uses, and has right to, Simultaneous Concourse,
which is, if I mistake not, as much as to say, Conconcourse.

The same (if greater be the same) Trifling and Cavilling about Words that
affect not the Cause, it is to say, T. D. p. 2. As for that latter Phrase,
Influence, which Mr. How makes equipollent with the former Concourse in these
words, Post. p. 29. I here affect not the Curiosity to distinguish these two
Terms, as some do; I had rather he should hear Strangius again than me, blaming
his not affecting that Curiosity of Distinction: and then It cites Strangius de
Vol. Dei, lib. 1. c. 11. p. 59. assigning the difference between them. This is
a trivial litigation about words, where the thing intended is sufficiently
understood (or rather is intelligible) and, whether it be said Influence or
Concourse makes no more to the business, than the Impropriety objected to
Predetermining, or previous Concourse, which any indifferent Reader can see to
have been spoken generally, of a priority of the supposed Influence on God's
part, not in Time, but in Nature and Causality. Strangius, indeed, writing a
large Treatise concerning that Subject, distinguished all the Terms more
accurately: But Mr. How, it being there done to his hand, and writing on the
by only two or three pages, had not the space or the occasion to enlarge upon
them. And it is an Infirmity which Mr. How, I observe, is much subject to,
that he seldom uses any notional Terms or Distinctions, where he can make men
comprehend him better without them: And at that indeed he has a singular
faculty. His very saying that he affected not, there, the Curiosity to (
distinguish those two Terms, as some do, shows it: But withal, that he was not
ignorant of them, and that he also could distinguish when he saw reason, and in
time and place convenient. The Discourse might with more cause have accused him
of Ambiguity, and raised scruples about his Curiosity: for that is taken in
many several significations. As for example; sometimes it is used for a
commendable Exquisiteness in things considerable, and worth the labor.
Otherwhiles it is described, Quoties plus Diligentiae quam oportebat impendimus
rebus, vel Nostris, vel Alienis. Nostris, quam minima quaeque disquirimus and
nullius frugis: Alienis, quum de rebus caeterorum occultioribus non satis cum
pudore perscrutamur aut interrogamus. So not Strangius, nor Doctor Twisse, but
Cicero. Which, that I may do equal right to the Discourse in translating
Latin, is to say, That is called Curiosity, when men use an impertinent
Diligence in things relating to themselves or others: To themselves, when they
are busy about every trifle, and what is of no moment: To others, when they
exercise a scrutiny, or ask questions beyond modesty, concerning their private
Affairs. And I had rather It should hear Cicero again, than me blaming It for
this latter sort of Curiosity. Reperiam multos, vel innumerabiles potius, non
tam curiosos, nec tam molestos quam Vos estis. That is; I could find many, or
rather innumerable men, neither so Troublesome, nor so Curious as You are. And
Quintillian explains it further. Est etian quae Parergia vocatur, supervacua,
ut sic dixerim, Operositas: Ut a Diligente Curiosus, and a Religione supestitio
distat, i. e. There is also that which is called Parergia, a superfluous and
laborious Nicety; as a Curious man differs from a Diligent, or Superstition
from Religion. But besides all this, Curiosus signifies an Informer: in which
sense, I suppose, both Mr. How, and T. D. would be loath to accept it. Yet
perhaps I may gratify them in the Authority or Quotation. Suet. Aug. c. 27.
Nam and Pinarium, Equitem Romanum, quum Concionante se, admissa turba
Paganorum, apud Milites, subscribere quaedam animadvertisset, Curiosum and
Speculatorum ratus, coram confodi imperavit. Which Text, if a little helped in
the translating, might serve them to notable purpose: But however so it is,
that, taking the Knight to be a Spy and an Informer, he caused him forthwith to
be slain in his presence. And lastly in the Code, Tit. de Curiosis and
Stationariis: Curiosus is a Postmaster, if Mr. How be disposed at any time to
take another long troublesome Journey, and do not disaffect also that
Curiosity. It had been much more to the purpose to have learnt these several
acceptations of Curiosity, than to have exercised it in the worst sense, in
such needless disquisitions, when a question stated in other terms was in
expectation every minute to be disputed.

But to say that in those words: I here affect not the Curiosity to distinguish
these two Terms of Concourse or Influence, as some do, was to make the latter
Phrase Influence equipollent with the former Concourse is gratis, or rather
ingratiis dictum, and ought not to have been but upon consultation first with
Mr. How, to have had his concurrence; no nor then neither. For should Mr. How
be never so much of opinion, as he seems otherwise, that they are Equipollent,
yet it can never be true that these words do infer it. As suppose that I should
say, I affect not here the Curiosity to distinguish betwixt the Candor and the
Acuteness of The Discourse in this particular, do I therefore think them
Equipollent, or that one of them has not the stronger ingredience? though
indeed there is little of either.

Another (for this has been too pregnant to say a second) Instance to the same
Head is where The Discourse, p. 26. tells us; It is an unaccountable
inadvertency, (for to salve his honor, so I will call it, rather than a slip
of Iudgmemt) to produce Cursing and Swearing for instances of Actions
downright, or for the substance of them Evil, etc. This indeed is Curiosity in
the highest degree of perfection, if (for I must be aware too of such
exactness) there be degrees of Perfection. And an heavy Charge it is, which I
know not whence it could light upon Mr. How, but that the Curious are likewise
given for the most part to be Censorious, where they have no reason. For Mr.
How Post. p. 33, 34. examining an Argument used by some for God's
Predeterminative Concurrence to Wicked Actions, because there are no Actions of
Man on Earth so good, which have not some mixture of sin in them, etc. (see
Postscript, p. 32.) says, This Argument must be thus conceived. That if God
concur by Determinative Influence to the imperfectly good Actions of Faith,
Repentance, Love to himself, Prayer, therefore to the Acts of Enmity against
himself, Cursing, Idolatry, Blasphemy, etc. And is it not a mighty consequence,
if to Actions that are good quoad Substantiam, therefore to such as are in the
Substance of them Evil? We our selves can in a remoter kind concur to the
Actions of others. Because you may afford your self your leading concurrence to
Actions imperfectly good, therefore may you to them that are downright evil?
because to Prayer, therefore to Cursing and Swearing? and then ruin men for
the Actions you induced them to? You Will say God may rather, but sure he can much
less do so than you. How could you be serious in the proposal of this Question?
For this Argument had been proposed by way of question, and I have on purpose
set down Mr. Howe's answer at length, that it might be evident, without further
brangling, how little, I mean how no, cause there was for this Animadversion
upon him, speaking expressly of such Cursing and Swearing only as is Evil Quoad
Substantiam. For certainly those Acts of Enmity against God himself, which Mr.
How there enumerates, Cursing, and then Idolatry, Blasphemy, etc. are, and
were so understood by him, and by all but such as take care to the contrary, as
much Evil in themselves as that Adultery which The Discourse it self owns to be
so, p. 72. because no end or circumstance can make it good. So that this ado is
made for Mr. Howe's not saying Profane Cursing and Swearing: indeed a very
heinous and notorious omission: even as it would be for a man, so often as he
uses the words And or The, not to distinguish or tell his Reader, that he
intends And in an Exegetical sense, or The in an Emphatical; or whether in
their ordinary capacity. How unaccountable soever this Inadvertency were in Mr.
How, it is well The Discourse did, not call our Savior to account, Matthew. 5.
34. for forbidding Swearing in general terms, nor St. James, cap. 5. v. 12. for
the same as to Swearing, or c. 3. v. 9, 10. because the same Apostle does not
there descant upon Cursing more distinctly, and add Profane to its Character.
But had the Discourse done so, it would have been obvious to every man, that
the Pen deserved the same Brand which is set upon the Tongue in that Chapter. I
wonder how in this Lyncean perspicacity It oversaw a more remarkable error of
Mr. Howe's about Actions in their Substance Evil; where in the same pages, 33,
34. he writes it Qoad Substantiam, which could not be Mr. Howe's Inadvertency;
for in that Paragraph he also spells Conseqence and Qestion in the like manner,
and therefore must by the same Consequence as that of Cursing and Swearing,
have been a slip of his Judgment. But, had It continued to be so unmercifully
accurate, Mr. How might perhaps have told It it is own; where p. 27. It
mentions that Evil Act of Adam 's eating a Tree (for I see we are all mortal)
which is a Phrase of very hard Digestion. Other proofs of this Head I reserve
till further occasion, two or three instances upon each, being like so many
Witnesses sufficient for It Is Conviction. The second Article follows.

It Is Ignorance and Confusion about the Matter that is in Controversy.
First Instance. The Discourse, p. 3. says; The Ambiguity of Mr. How 's
Phrases removed, and the sense of them being brought to a certainty, I assert
the Contradictory to his Proposition: the term Efficacious suiting well enough
if Mr. How intend by it an Infallibility of the Event, or the certain
Production of those Actions which God has and Influence upon. Now, for the
better understanding of this, it is fit to observe that Mr. Howe's Proposition
is this; God does not by an Effecacious Influence universally move and
determine Men to all their Actions, even those Actions that are most wicked.
They that assert the Contradictory, must therefore affirm that God does: and
much good may it do them. But The Discourse in the words before cited,
capitulates that Mr. How should by Efficacious intend Infallibility, etc. It
might almost as well have said Transubstantiation, which we shall meet with, p.
35. hereafter.

Now it is indeed fit that a Respondent should gratify his Opponent as far as
may consist with Civility and Safety. But here arises a Case of Conscience;
Whether a man may give another leave, that desires it, to speak Nonsense. I
say no. For Nonsense and Idle words are of the same notion. But if he be one
that I have no power over, and whom I can by no amicable means hinder from
speaking Nonsense, I, after having used all good endeavors, am excused. But
here the Case is stronger, where one shall not only take the Liberty himself,
but oblige me too to speak Nonsense. To this I say, that to the best of my
understanding, I never will, nor ought to do it in respect to any man. Yet no
less a favor, or favors, does The Discourse demand of Mr. How, in requiring
that the term Efficacious may be expounded by Infallibility, that is, in
effect, the most potent Influence by no Influence: For what Influence has
Infallibility upon the Actions of another, or upon any thing? And this, if it
should yet obtain it of Mr. How, yet would consist as ill with his own
following words, or Certain Production; wherein he more than implies that
Infallibility and Certain Production are all one: whereas a man may certainly
and infallibly know what he never produces, and some too, we see, produce what
they never understand. But if The Discourse shall still opiniatre in this
matter, let It, to try how well it suits, strike Efficacious, for experiment,
out of the Question, and insert instead of it, Infallibility and Certain
Production, and then see if there be any sense in it or Grammar.

Second Instance. The Discourse, p. 9. pretends to give a Definition of
Predetermination. Predetermination, It says, is thus defined; A Transient
Action of God, which excites every Creature to Act. Now it is generally known,
that the two most perfect Creatures in all Logic, are a Demonstration and a
Definition. How good The Discourse is at the first shall afterward be
remonstrated. But as to a Definition, it always consists, as being a
Dialectick Animal, of a Body which is the Genus, and a Difference, which is the
Soul of the thing defined; but this will in neither of these appear to be
Perfect or Rational. For the Genus here is Action, and yet a few lines below It
says, that Predetermination is to be conceived of per Modum Principii, under
the Notion of a Principle, or Cause of the Creatures Acting, but Concourse only
per Modum Actionis. Predetermination was but even before under the Genus of
Action, and now of Cause: so that The Discourse has been very liberal indeed
of Body to the Definition, having given it two rather than fail, though
commonly we account such births to be Errors of Nature, and monstrous. Had the
Discourse interposed some pages, it might have only argued a default of Memory;
but this inconsistence at one sight, and before It Is Pen could be taken off,
shows that defect not to have been, as with some persons, recompensed in
Judgment. And then for the Difference that is assigned in this Definition, it
happens here, as usually where there is most Body, that there is least Soul.
For there is nothing else left to be the Difference, but, whereby God excites
every Creature to Act. If this be all, The Discourse might indeed very well
say, p. 7. that Mr. How would be forced to grant Predetermination; for how
could he possibly avoid it, when the Antagonist defines it in Mr. Howe's own
words? who says, Postscript, p. 45. In reference to sinful Actions; by this
Influence God does not only sustain men who do them, and continue to them their
natural faculties and powers whereby they are done; but also, as the first
Mover, so far excites and actuate those powers, as that they are apt and habile
for any congenerous Action, to which they have a natural designation, and
whereto they are not sinfully disinclin'd. Whereby God Excites the Creature to
Act, says The Discourse, whereby God Excites and Actuates those Powers to,
etc. says Mr. How very fully here, and in all other places to the same sense;
so that if The Discourse either understood Mr. How or It self, either Its own
Definition, or the common Question, what place was there left for arguing,
unless to debate for Debates sake? Usually when both parties say the same
thing, there is an end of the discourse, but however of the Dispute: There is
as far as I see, no doubt to be made but Mr. How, as he has, will grant this
Predetermination even without being forced, but yet upon condition, and it is
but reasonable that The Discourse will retract Its own foregoing words, p. 5.
This Act of God is called Predetermination, because it limits the Creature to
this Action rather than to that. This indeed will serve The Discourse for
argument either of Discourse or Dispute with It self; being Definition in
effect against Definition to prevent monstrosity, supplying hereby two Souls to
the two Bodies. But till It be better agreed with it, and can come to a clearer
understanding with It self, no third person needs or can be interessed in the
Contest further than as a Spectator of some strange sight for his money, like
the double Child from Sussex.

Third Instance. The Discourse cites Mr. How, Postscript, p. 41. for having
there said concerning God's exciting Man to act those foregoing words that I
come last from mentioning. But those words are not p. 41. but 45. and the
mistake in the citation is probably any an error only of the Printer's. Though
indeed in that page 41. Mr. How with much perspicuity declares the same Sense
and Opinion which he gives in other expressions, p. 45. For p. 41. he says, It
has been the care and designment of the Divine Wisdom so to order the way of
Dispensation toward the several sorts of Creatures, as not only, not
ordinarily to impose upon them what they could not be patient of, but so as
that their powers and faculties might be put upon the exercises whereof they
were capable, and to provide that neither their Passive capacity should be
overcharged, nor their Active be unimployed. But the words repeated and
excepted against are to be found in his p. 45. and upon them it is that, The
Discourse sixes this unreasonable and ill interpretation and censure; If by
Exciting and Actuating the powers he means that God reduces them to Act, he
has taken a large jump from Durandus to Twisse: and so goes on to prove that
ill-favored and worse conceived suggestion. It ought sufficiently to have
prevented this usage that Mr. How 's Letter, p. 43. has said, That which has
too apparently had greatest actual efficacy with many in asserting
Predetermination, has been the authority of this or that man of reputation,
and the force of that Art of imputing a Doctrine already under a prejudicial
doom to some or other ill-reputed former Writer, I profess not to be skilled in
the use of that sort of Weapons. And therefore, not being himself the
Aggressor, but challenged and defied by another, he ought to have had the
choice of them. What signifies Durandus here, but to call a man ill names
instead of coming to the Point? and what Dr. Twisse, but to wear mail, or bring
a second when Mr. How comes naked and single? It is not what this or that man,
but what Truth says that is to he regarded: what liberty soever The Discourse
here takes to the contrary. It can by no means be made true, that Mr. How by
these words, God as the first Mover so far excites and actuates those powers,
as that they are apt and habile for any congenerous Action; professes himself
of Doctor Twisse 's opinion, no more than that he is of Durandus 's after
having thus declared his own as clearly as it is possible for any man's meaning
to be minuted or explained. For Durandus holds only a mere Conservation of the
Faculty, Doctor Twisse a Predetermination. But Mr. How, to avoid Durandus on
the one hand, says, that in reference to sinful actions (for of these is the
Question) God does not only sustain men who do them, and continue to them their
natural faculties and powers ( which was all Durandus pretended to) but also so
far Excites and actuates those powers as that they are apt and habile for any
congeeruous action, etc. whereas, if he would have spoke with Doctor Twisse, he
must have said, but also excites and actuates those, powers determinately to
this or that action, which would have differed the whole breadth of Heaven from
Mr. How 's Hypothesis. And certainly such an actual influence as Mr. How
describes, added to the Natural Faculty, is, if men look near, very
distinguishable from mere Conservation of that Faculty on the one, and
Predetermination on the other side. For a Faculty conserved, as a Faculty, in
Actu Primo, (as men call it) includes no such hability and present promptitude
in it self to Action, as Mr. How proposes; since then it could never suffer a
Privation of it but what were irrecoverable. Whereas common experience shows
Faculties may be sometimes unapt for Action, and may be supposed always so, if
every moment when they act they be not rendered apt by a superadded Influence,
which may habilitate them for Action, without Determining them to This or That.
So that all the Confusion herein objected to Mr. How, is to be referred to
that Head upon which I have charged it; and the great Iump is no more than what
brainsick Passengers, being carried along by the Wind and Sea, in the
heaving of their Vessel imagine of the Trees and Steeples. For he is still in
the same place, but no man knows whither away The Discourse may be driven, or
what part It is bound to, and whether it do not sail without Steerage, Compass,
or Anchor.

A Fourth Instance of It Is Ignorance and Confusion about the matter in
Controversy, is It Is varying, and that so often and so materially, the Terms
of the Question. First of all, It told us that It asserted the Contradictory of
Mr. Howe's Proposition; which must be therefore by undertaking to prove (as was
said formerly) That God does by Efficacious Influence universally Move and
Determine Men to all their Actions, even those Actions that are most Wicked. T.
D. p. 3. yet immediately after having joined Issue upon this, It has a second
device, p. 4. and better likes Strangius his state of the Question, viz.
Whether God does Determine or Predetermine all Creatures to all and each of
their Actions. And then Thirdly, p. 5. It tells us more fully what the Question
is, and how Its Predetermination is to be understood, explaining it thus
(though not fully enough) viz. an Act of God's by which he limits the Creature
to this Action rather than to that. Such an Act The Discourse has granted at
last, and 'twere to be reasonably expected, that, after having transformed the
Question thus often to Its own understanding and convenience, this Contradictory
at least to Mr. Howe's Proposal should be adhered to as far as it goes, and
maintained: For otherwise what occasion was there, or what employment is there
left for this Spirit of Contradiction? unless to rattle through the Air, make
vain Apparitions, or in a calm day on a sudden to stir up a Tempest. But if
this be The Discourses Anti-proposition, I that intermeddle not as an
Opinionist either way, but endeavor only to comprehend as far as I can It Is
meaning, shall for that purpose put a Case in It Is own terms.

Suppose a man to meet with some afflicting calamity which tends to provoke,
among other his Passions, that of Aversion or Hatred. He considers this or that
man may have contributed to his calamity: He considers also that God may have
had an hand in bringing it upon him: He considers, perhaps, (and is yet
Undetermined, till God at least Determine him) whether to put forth one Act of
Hatred toward this man, or another, toward that man, or another, toward God, or
whether only to hate the Evil it self that afflicts him. (For it cannot be that
he should Hate this man by the same Act of Hatred with which he Hates another
man, nor can he Hate God by the same Act whereby he Hates either of them, or
the afflicting Evil that has befaln him.) At last he is limited to this rather
than another Action, and apprehending with that profane person, 2 King. 6. 33.
Behold this Evil is from the Lord, what should I wait for the Lord any longer?
He pours out his Hatred against God himself. The Question now is, who limits
him to this Action rather than to another? shall we say it is God? The
Discourse, holding the Affirmative, must say it is God. This is indeed a
dreadful representation of the Case, but a true one.

Nor is it therefore to be wondered, the Question being so frightful, that The
Discourse starts and runs away from it so often; and after all this, p. 9.
would forget that Predetermination is an Act by which God limits the Creature
to this Action rather than that, and undertakes to define it, exclusively to
those words, (for the Definition includes the whole nature of the thing
defined) no more but a Transient Action of God which excites every Creature to
Act. And yet Fourthly, Considering that the Cause required no less; after
taking breath, and comforting Its spirits, The Discourse returns again in part
to the Question, telling us in the bottom of the same page, 9. That it is in
plain words whether God does Move men to all their natural Actions, and so to
one rather than another. And thus now we have a fourth State of the Question,
but yet very different from the First; the Affirmative of which was undertaken
to be defended. In short, the main Controversy is about Determining; but this
Fourth Question does not so much as mention it either in word or in sense. For
the Determining in Mr. Howe's Proposition imports and is so expressed, not only
a Moving men, but an Efficacious Moving them. (There are many Motions which may
be Ineffectual.) Nor only a moving them to This Action rather than to That, but
also to do this Wicked Action (for of such is the Controversy) rather than
forbear it. What kind of practice is this? It is a worse thing to adulterate
Truth than Money. The Terms of the Question are the Standard. But at this rate
no man can know what is Meum or Tuum, which is his own Hypothesis, and which
his Adversaries, while what he issued in current sense and weight is returned
him Clipped or Counterfeit. But the observation of this manner of dealing has
put me upon another thought much differing, and which at first perhaps may seem
something extravagant.

The Camel is a beast admirably shaped for Burden, but so lumpish withal,
that nothing can be more inept for feats of Activity. Yet men have therefore
invented how to make it danse, that, by how much unnatural the spectacle might
appear more absurd and ridiculous. Its Keeper leads it upon a Pavement so
thoroughly warmed, that the Creature, not able to escape nor abide it, shifts
first one foot, and then another to relieve it self, and would, if possible,
tread the Air on all four, the ground being too hot for it to stand upon. He in
the mean time traverses and trips about it at a cooler distance, striking some
volunteer Notes on his Egyptian Kit, like a French Dansing-Master. But, knowing
that his Scholar is both in too much pain, and too dull to learn his measures,
he therefore upon, frequent observation accords a tune to its Figure and
Footing, which comes to the fame account. So that, after daily repeating the
Lesson in private, they seem both at last to be agreed upon a new Arabic
Saraband. Having thus far succeeded, he tries next whether what he taught by
torture be not confirmed by custom, and if a cool Hearth may not have the like
effect. The Camel no sooner hears his Fiddle, but, as if it is ears burned with
the music, and it is memory were in it is feet, the Animal bestirs forthwith
it is long legs, and, with many an Antic Motion, and ill-favored Coupe,
gratifies the Masters patience and expectation. When he finds, upon constant
experiment, that it never fails him, he thenceforward makes it public, and,
having compounded with the Master of the Revels, shows it, with great
satisfaction to the Vulgar, every Bartholomew-Fair in Grand-Cairo. I would not
too much vex the similitude, but was run upon this by a resemblance it has
with some, who, not being framed at all for Controversy, and finding the
Question too hot for them, do, by their flinching and shuffling from it,
represent a Disputation, till it is grown habitual to them, and they change
ground as often, and have the fame apprehension of the sound of an Argument, as
the Camel of an Instrument.

And yet the Discourse has a Fifth loose Foot to clap on at need, as if Four
had not sufficed to praevaricate with, p. 11; where It exercises It Is uncouth
nimbleness in syllogizing: but never was any thing more ridiculously awkward.
Mr. How had, Letter p. 35. mentioned an argument used by those who hold the
Affirmative of Predetermination; That it necessarily belongs to the Original
and Fountain-Being to be the First Cause of whatsoever Being, and consequently
that what there is of Positive Being in any the most Wicked Action; must
principally owe it self to the Determinative Productive Influence of this First
and Sovereign Cause, otherwise it would seem that there were some Being that
were neither Primum, nor a Primo. This was as plain and distinctly laid out as
possible, but must for sooth be cast into a Logical Figure, where the
officiousness argues the fraud, as of those who make false Plate imbezilling
part of the Metal, and yet make the Owner pay moreover for the Fashion. This is
the Discourses Syllogism. All Positive Beings are Effects of the First Cause.
All sinull Actions (for, It adds, this is our limitation) are Positive Beings;
Ergo, All sinful Actions, as Actions, are Effects of the First Cause. So that
here, by a Syllogistical Legerdemain, that term so essential in their Argument,
as cited by Mr. How, the Determinative Productive Influence of the First and
Sovereign Cause, is cleanly conveyed away out of sight; the Proposition
undertaken to be maintained, that God does by an Efficacious Influence
universally Move and Determine Men to all their Actions, even those Actions
that are most Wicked; or, as It lately varied, Limits Men to This Action rather
than to That, is turned out of doors by it is own foster-father, the keeping of
it being grown it seems too chargeable; and all now that is inferred is only
that all sinful Actions, as Action, are Effects of the First Cause. And what
is that to the purpose? If Mr. How must neither be allowed the use of his own
Weapons, nor upon the Ground which they both were agreed on, it appears that
his Challenger, notwithstanding all It Is bravades, had no design, or but little
disposition to meet him. The whole of this may in a just sense be granted
without prejudice to Mr. Howe's Cause. For it matters not that they are
Effects, unless it be also said and proved that they are Effects produced by
God's Determinative Influence. Yet how much Powder is spent without doing the
least execution! First a Categorical, then an Hypothetical Syllogism fired at
him, then forces him to distinguish, which is among Disputants next to crying
quarter, but will not give it him; runs him through with three Replies to his
Distinction, and leaves him dead upon the place. While the Proposition is all
this while untoucht, Mr. How is out of Gunshot, and his Adversary (if one
that only skirmishes with himself, deserves to be called so) is afraid to take
aim, and starts merely at the Report of his own Musket. Thus has The
Discourse Five several times altered the Property of the Question; which is my
Fourth Instance of It Is Ignorance and Confusion about the matter in
Controversy; unless it ought to be interpreted as an argument rather of a
strong brain, after so many times, and suddenly turning round, not to have fallen
down senseless.

A Fifth Instance to the same Head, Mr. How, Letter, p. 36, 37. had said, It
seems infinitely to detract from the Perfection of the Ever Blessed God, to
affirm that he was not able to make a Creature of such a Nature, as being
continually sustained by him, and supplied with power every moment suitable to
it is Nature, should be capable of acting, unless what he thus inables he
determine ( that is, for it can mean no less thing, impel) it to do it also. To
this The Discourse replies p. 15. If we should take liberty of judging things
by their appearanee at first sight, without giving our selves the trouble of a
strict Disquisition (take whether you will, the Liberty or the Trouble, only
talk not so magisterially) we mght easily be seduced into an imagination that
it does no less infinitely detract from the Divine Perfection to affirm; that
God was not able to make a Creature of such a Nature, as that it might
continually sustain it self, without a supply of power every moment from God.
For that opinion seems to tie God to a shorter Tedder (how trivial and
irreverently spoken!) than an ingenious Artificer who can raise an Edifice that
shall last many years without any need of his help for reparations. Compare now
these two together, and mark what this Reasoning of The Discourse amounts to.
Mr. How conceives (else it were very hard) that a Creature may Act, being
enabled by a continual supply of power from God every moment. Therefore quoth
It, A Creature may Be, without being sustained or supplied from God any moment.
But this parhaps was only to show how ingenious. It Is first apprehensions, and
how candid are It Is first inclinations; and whether It were easily seduced It
self, or had a mind to seduce others, It likes this conceit so well that It
cannot yet let it go, but subjoyns immediately; And this I the rather take
notice of, because I find it the sentiment of the most acute Suarez, etc. But,
whereas others find their second Thoughts to be the more judicious, It Is
judging thus at First Sight, seems more accurate then It Is Second Seeming:
They, ib. who deny God's immediate operation in every action of the Creature, (
which Mr. How seems to do in his Answer now under discussion) will doubtless
be compelled to deny that the Creature does depend immediately upon the Actual
Influence of God. So It quotes the most acute Suarez. Met. Disp. 20. This is a
most exemplary and Primitive Charity, whereby The Discourse has sold all its
own acuteness to give it to the poor Suarez; so that it has reduced it self to
that desperate and utmost dullness, as herein to say, They who deny what Mr.
How seems by this Answer to do, that is as much as to say, They who suppose
with Mr. How that a Creature may act being enabled by God every moment,
without being impelled, (which he above, and always modestly asserts) will
doubtless be compelled to deny that the Creature depends immediately upon the
Actual Influence of God, which is tantamount in sense, which uses to be the
meaning, as to say, It seems to be denied that the Creature does depend,
because it is affirmed to depend. Ought not Bills to be put up for men affected
with so peculiar a distemper? I cannot in the whole Common Prayer find any that
is proper for this occasion.

Another Instance (for they do so multiply on me in reading, that I forget to
number them, and yet they are so signal in their kind, that they are not to be
omitted) is p. 96. and onwards: the vain attempt to reconcile God's
Predetermining by Efficacious Influence to Wicked Actions with his Wisdom and
Sincerity by the same Mediums that were used by Mr. How to reconcile his
Prescience of them, yet this is undertaken to be done from p. 96. for several
pages forward, and with the same confidence which is always necessary to such
as promise impossibilities. But it is in the mean time an high contempt of all
other men, and presumption of ones own Understanding that can imbolden to such
an Argument. Who is there, unless Adam gave him his Name, but sees the
difference between having an Influence upon Men's Wicked Actions, and having no
Influence, which Prescience, as such, cannot signify him to have hat
foreknows? But nevertheless Mr. How has expressly enough asserted and
explained the Influence God has on all Humane Actions.

For further Instance, see what The Discourse says, p. 61. and so along,
struggling to bring the immediate Concourse, which Mr. How speaks of and
avows, under the same prejudice with Predetermination, which he disclaims and
argues against: For all that idle endeavor might have been saved and prevented
by a small supplement of Understanding or Memory. For Mr. How always
distinguishes (and so might any ordinary capacity for him, should he have
trusted either that or men's common Ingenuity) between Concurring, though never
so Immediately, by an Influence which does but Enable to an Action, and by that
which does Determine to it, or impell. If any man do but carry this about with
him, as Mr. How does through his whole troublesome Journey, it is a certain
remedy against all Gauling, at least by this Argumentation.

One thing I could not but remark here, p. 61. of The Discourse in passing, how
jovial It is and bucksom, which is just the humor of Tyrants, bloodily cruel,
and yet at the same time full of dissoluteness and laughter. I will pause a
little with the Readers leave, and try my skill what answer I can excogitate
for Mr. How, which will not be a common friend to us both (pleasant) as we
have been hitherto one to another, and I hope shall remain notwithstanding this
Public Contest. Dear Damon, doubtless. But I perceive not that Mr. How has
yet had any Contest with you, nor, if I can persuade him, is he likely to have
for the future, but will avoid you for several reasons. Is this your
friendship? what then and how terrible is your Malice? The Ancient Contests of
Friendship, and which made some pairs so illustrious, were which of them should
die for the other, not which should cut the others throat. The utmost that I
have observed upon such Public Contests, or that I think a man is bound to in
Christianity, has been to pardon such a Friend, and bid him do his office.
Here is to be seen or played T. D. indeed, or Amity a la Mode. But go on, This
Distinction is an open Friend to us, and to which therefore upon all fit
occasions we pay our respects. This is prity, and most softly said, as if it
were by the Great Mogul lying upon a silken-bed, and leaning upon Cushions. And
besides, it is a new Invention, being the first time this that ever I heard of a
man that contracted Friendship with a Distinction; but most wise men, (and so I
think should Mr. How,) have been used to distinguish with whom they contract
it. To proceed, speaking of Determination and Concurrence, these are the words;
But that it waits a fitter time to speak out Her mind, She could say that She
conceives not how She can compel the Will, etc. (of this compelling the Will, I
shall have occasion also to speak out my mind hereafter). What use was to be
made of a She in this place, I cannot well Imagine. At last The Discourse grows
perfectly wanton. If immediate Concurence thinks Her self disobliged to
satisfy an inquisitive Curiosity as to the Modus or manner how She joins with
the Creature in an Action to which Sin does necessarily adhere, etc. What would
a man think of this? A Female! An Immediate Concurrence! What sport were here
prepared for that which is by our Moderns called Wit, but is no more than the
luxuriant sterility of Land, nor broken up or manured! In the mean time, if The
Discourse be really at so much ease, as It would seem by this way of talking,
it is but a security of understanding, like that of Conscience wherewith guilty
persons confirm and deceive themselves for the present.

I shall now come to the last Instance of this Article. Not that I want
abundance of more, or might not produce the whole Book in evidence, but because
it were time that I came to some period: And lest The Discourse should think I
avoided It Is main strength, I shall there examine It, where It pretends to no
less than Demonstration. For never was there thing so dreadfully accoutred and
armed Cap-a-pe in Logic, Categorical and Hypothetical Syllogisms, Majors,
Minors, Enthymems, Antecedents, Consequents, Distinctions, Definitions, and now
at last Demonstration, to pin the basket: Terms that good Mr. How as a mere
novice is presumed to be unacquainted with, and so far from being able to
endure the rattling of The Discourses Armor, that as those Roman Legions once
bragged, even the sweaty smell of It Is Armpits would be sufficient to rout
him. But some Creatures are as safe by their weakness, as others by their
strength, from being meddled with by a considerable Adversary. I that cannot
boast of any extraordinary faculty for Disputation, nor yet confess my self
void of common understanding, am therefore the most proper perhaps to try the
force of this Demonstration; and whether The Discourse be not therein as
feeble, as it was lately short in Definition. It p. 25. quotes Mr. How,
Postsc. p. 28. that he does really believe God's Immediate Concourse to all
Actions of his Creatures both Immediatione Virtutis and Suppositi, yet not
Determinative to Wicked Actions; then The Discourse proceeds: We shall
adventure a Demonstration that it implies a Contradiction for God to make a
Creature that can Act without Predetermination, i. e. applying it to Action and
to one rather than to another Action. And it is this, That such a Creature would
be but Ens Secundarium, a Second Being, not (Causa Secunda, a Second Cause, or,
( which is all one) God should be but Ens Primum, not Causa Prima, the First
Being, not the First Cause, which it proves thus; 1. If God does concur only by
Simultaneous (an elegant term of The Discourse's own production) Concourse, and
not by Predetermination, or Previous Motion, then God cannot be the Cause of
the Actions of the Creatures, as they proceed from them: But the Consequent is
absurd, and It presumes Mr. How will not own it. What Mr. How may do, being
thus hard put to it, I will not undertake: but surely there was never any thing
affirmed with less truth or sense than The Discourse here does, that God should
be the Cause of the Actions of the Creatures, as those Actions proceed from
them. One would think the Creatures themselves should be the Causes of the
Actions as they proceed from them; (for how otherwise are they Causes at all of
those Actions?) and God the Cause of those Actions as they proceed from him.
Now how they proceed from him Mr. How has sufficiently shown his own
conception of it, viz. as they are done by a sufficient Influence, which God
Immediately affords to enable the Creature to do them, not to Determine it
thereto. And is not God to be entitled a Causa Prima as well as Ens Primum, in
reference to what is done by his Influence in the way before expressed?
Whereas, if God be the Cause of the Actions of the Creatures, as those Actions
proceed from Them, the Action must be done by his Influence alone, and then he
should not be Causa Prima, because then there were no Causa Secunda. But this
was only sure The Discourses Demonand the next that follows it-stration.

Mr. How had, as before cited, Postsc. p. 28. avowed God's Immediate Concourse
to all Actions of his Creatures, both Immediations Virtutis and Suppositi. Upon
which Concession of his It argues thus (with this prelusory vaunt, p. 26. He is
twice killed that is killed with his own Weapon, so that no less than sudden
Death is to be expected in the case.) If there be an Immediate Concourse, then
there is a Predetermination or putting the Creature upon Action before it Acts:
or else the Creature is the First Mover of it self to Action. This is so
unimaginably dull an argument, that really it requires a proportionable dullness
in the Reader, or an extraordinary acuteness to comprehend it, and how it
should be deduced from Mr. Howe's Concession of Immediate Concourse. For the
argument so put receives not the least strength, not any, from that Concession
of Mr. Howe's, but rather from his Non-concession, and that he has not yielded
enough, and as much as The Discourse would have him, which pretends that
Immediate Concourse alone is not sufficient to exclude the Creature from being
the First Mover of it is own Actions. For, whether Immediate Concourse be
granted, or not granted, the case is all one as to this argument while so much
is not granted whereby an account may be given how God and the Creature join in
one individual Action rather than another, as The Discourse would have it, p.
27. if Mr. How could have been persuaded to be thus Demonstrated out of this
Reason.

The Illustration of It Is plausible Consequence, as it is called p. 27. may
perhaps be noted, and shall hereafter in it is due place, but the Demonstration
carries the Bell away, and I must yet follow it is tinkling. And thus it goes on
p. 27, 28. An account how the particular Actions of any rational Creatures Will
come to be Determined, upon the exclusion of Predetermination, I know none can
be given. And how is thus proved? for sure to affirm it is not Demonstration.
Why, thus. Not by Chance: (unless this saying so be an Instance that it may in
some cases) no body dreamed of any such thing but this was put in, I suppose,
only for more harmony, and to run Division. A good slight it is, by proving
first a thing which no man denies to make it more credible that the argument
upon the Subject in Controversy will be as cogent. For the Question is upon
It Is Second Member, Not by the Creatures Self-determining Power, and here The
Discourses main strength comes upon trial. For that, as such, is indeterminate
as to the Acts to which we conceive it must be some way or other Determined.
Admirably good! so it is indeed till the Creature, as Mr. How conceives, have
Determined it self: and so it will be too if God be to Determine it,
Indeterminate till he have Determined it. But if the Creature do Determine it
self (which if it never do, how does The Discourse call it a Self-determining
Power?) then I hope it is not Indeterminate. So that the whole stress of the
Cause which was to prove that the Creature ( so Influenced and Actuated by God
Immediately for any congenerous Action, as Mr. How has expressed it) cannot
Determine it self, is left in the lurch, and no Demonstration has been given
hitherto, but of that Confusion and Ignorance with which I have charged The
Discourse in this Article, about the matter in Controversy.

But It argues further, p. 28, 29. and, with the same Demonstration, from a
second Concession (it were methinks more ingenuous, to call it a Declaration or
Assertion) of Mr. Howe's of God's Immediate Concourse and Predetermination to
the Production of Good Actions, and the necessity thereof, pretends to infer
the Necessity of God's Immediate Concourse and Predetermination likewise to all
(that is, even to the most Wicked) Actions. But this beside the ridiculousness,
is so odious an undertaking, that any pious man, should he be superior in the
contention, would repent of his Victory; I shall here wave it; but if The
Discourse pride it self herein, I give It the Joy as It deserves.

This Demonstration I had assigned as the last Instance of this Head; but I
think I may be dispensed with to add another, it being an Act of Charity. For
there are yet behind six Aricles more, some of them of a more criminal and
heinous nature than those two that hitherto I have insisted upon.

1. It Is Falsifications and Fictions of what Mr. How has not said.

2. It Is Injurious Perverting of what he has said.

3. It Is Odious Insinuations concerning what there is no color to object
against.

4. It Is Insolent Boasting and Self-applause upon no occasion.

5. It Is Gross Absurdities, Inconsistencies, Self-contradictions, and Unsafe
Expressions.

6. The Wrath and Virulence of It 's spirit. And oftentimes it chances that one
and the same Instance is applicable, and may be reduced to several of these
Heads. But therefore, as often as I can impute any thing which might receive an
higher accusation to It Is Ignorance, Confusion or Dullness (which it is lest in
any man's self-determining power to remedy) I rather choose to state it upon
this more innocent account. And that has been the Cause which has swelled
this Head beyond equality: my intention, being to be briefer on those that
follow. I say therefore, that it is out of Charity that I here attribute It Is
Indifference between the Modus of God's Prescience, and God's supposed
Predetermination to Wicked Actions to It Is stupidity rather than any other
Article, or make a new one for it on purpose. The thing is thus.

Mr. How Letter, p. 47, 48, 49, 50. had, taking notice of an Argument which
some use from God's Prescience for his Predetermination, said, among other
things, very piously; This supposed Indetermination of the Humane Will, in
reference especially to Wicked Actions, is far from being culpable of inferring
that God cannot therefore foreknow them, etc. And after, upon consideration
what others had endeavored toward explaining or perplexing this matter,
modestly adds, For my own part, I can more easily be satisfied to be ignorant
of the Modus or Medium of his Knowledge, while I am sure of the thing, etc. It
cannot therefore be so affrightful a thing to suppose God's Foreknowledge of
the most Contingent Future Actions well to consist with our Ignorance how he
foreknows them, as that we should think it necessary to overturn and mingle
Heaven and Earth rather than admit it. But The Discourse, p. 32, 33. signifies,
and then by quoting some of these words would confirm it, that we need not be
more sollicitous, and are no more concerned to satisfy our selves of the Modus
of Predetermination to sinful Actions, so as to separate them from the
sinfulness of them, (for to hold the Conclusion is with It Demonstration) than
about the Modus of God's Prescience of them. Which must argue (whatever else) a
palpable shortness of discourse to think there is no odds betwixt a thing so
plainly revealed in the Word of God as his Prescience is, and so agreeable to
all rational apprehension, and a Notion so altogether unrevealed as this
universal Predetermination yet appears, and so contrary if not to the whole
scope and design of Divine Revelation, yet to all common understanding and
genuine sense of right Reason. But whenever there shall be so clear proof
made that there is such a thing as The Discourses Predetermination, as may soon
be brought of Prescience, when it shall be as duly stated among the Divine
Attributes, then, and not till then ought men to practice the same devout
resignation of their reasoning about it, as Mr. How has laudably done in that
of Prescience: but in the mean time it may be handled not as Causa Dei, but
Causa Hominis, it is lawful to plead against it, and not to pay men's belief,
but to afford their Charity to its abetters.

There was one called Antipheron, whose name therefore seems rather to have
been given him by the people from a natural defect they observed in him than by
his Godfathers: He had a peculiar shortness of sight, but which turned him to
account, and saved him the expense of sending to Malamocco or Lambeth to the
Glass-house. He needed not so much as contemplate himself in Polyphemus his
mirror, the water. He carried his Looking-glass always with him, the next Air
supplied all, and served him not only to breath, but to see his face in,
without any danger of staining or breaking it. A great convenience thus to be
able every minute to blow himself a new Looking-glass. But how happy were it,
if, what the shortness of his sight, the dullness of men's minds could have the
same effect, to object to them continually their own Image, and make it
unnecessary for others to represent them. Then might The Discourse also have
excused me from this labor, and upon reflection with it self, have discerned
it is own unfitness and ignorance to manage this or any other Controversy.

For want of such an immediate inspection on It Is own defects, It Is natural
undistinctness seems to perceive faults in others, and to find a mote in their
eye, neglects the Beam in It Is own. It overlooks so gross a practice as in it is
p. 47. to translate out of Strangius into English Doctor Twisse's Argumentation
about the same Prescience of God of future Contingencies, undertaking still to
demonstrate, p. 46. (that is the word) that this Foreknowledge depends upon the
Divine Decree, while in the mean time It never gives us, though the Book was in
It Is hand, Strangius his full and articulate answer to it in the same place,
lest any man should know of it; but, to conceal it is own disability for any
reply to it, challenges Mr. How to answer Doctor Twisse's irrefragable
Argument over again. But p. 16. in Mr. How It can find two unpardonable faults
in a man of Learning and Ingenuity.

First, Anticipation, For, he having Letter, p. 36, 37. said, unless he
Determine (that is to say, for it can mean no less thing, Impel,) that is the
word accused, the Creatuue to do it; this is made so heinous, that I thought at
first it had been the Anticipation of the Revenue, but, when all comes to all,
I see it is nothing but the explaining a word of less obvious import by another
more obvious: and nothing is more usual in The Discourse it self, and among men
of Learning. And The Discourse it self adds here in the same minute Impelling,
i. e. Compelling (for that is Mr. How 's sense of the term, as will appear ere
long) which is methinks as early, and a more perverse Anticipation than Mr.
How is unpardonable for, by how much It does by these last words own that
Impel, unless it signify Compel, is allowable, but affirms that in Mr. Howe's
sense it is Compel, as will appear ere long, which is moreover false, and
therefore I will be so subtle as to take out my pardon in time for calling
this Anticipation; for indeed that which neither is, nor ever can appear, ere
long or short (as for Mr. How, to mean Compel) cannot be Anticipated.

But the second unpardonable fault of Mr. Howe's is his immodest begging the
Question: And wherein? I may well call it so (quoth The Discourse) because he
knows we neither can nor will grant his Argument without ruining our
Hypothesis. This is all the proof assigned of his begging the Question. I do
indeed confess that Mr. How was much to blame in urging an Argument to the
ruin of their precious Hypothesis; but I think it falls not under that
Predicament of begging, though this does of robbing the Question: and however
his crime is more excusable, because, in common probability, Mr. How, having
writ his Letter and Postscript before The Discourse replied to him, might be
ignorant that it was It Is dear Hypothesis. For my part I take the very first
Title of the Book de Causa Dei, to be more notoriously guilty both of
Anticipation and Begging the Question, than that Mr. How could have any thing
upon either account herein justly imputed or objected to him.

The third Artice of which I shall Catalogue some, it being endless to
enumerate, all the Instances.

It Is many strange Falsifications and Fictions of what Mr. How has not said,
and then discoursing of them as if they were said.
As for a first Instance. In it is Epistles, p. 10. Mr. How is accused of
having denied God's Immediate Concurrence to all Actions, because Letter p. 36.
he says (not, as The Discourse cites it, it sufficiently salves, but) it may
well be thought sufficiently to salve the rights (and privileges, omitted) of
the first Cause that no Action can be done but by a power derived from it,
which, in reference to forbidden Actions, intelligent Creatures may use or not
use as they please. Is any thing said here that implies any denial of Immediate
Concurrence? Why may not that Power derived be Immediate to the Action? Is any
thing said to the contrary, or which accords not well with what is pretended to
be said ex opposito? But, to make this Accusation good, It conceals another
passage in the very same Paragraph. Besides that it seems infinitely to detract
from the perfection of the Ever Blessed God, to affirm he was not able to make
a Creature of such a nature, as, being continually sustained by him, and
supplied with power every moment suitable to its nature, should be capable of
Acting, unless whatsoever he thus Inables he Determine it to do also. So that
the charge is founded merely upon Mr. How 's not having used the express word
Immediate Concurrence in that sentence, and in concealing disingenuously what
he had expressed, and what fully includes Immediate Concurrence in the sense
that he afterward asserts and explains it, Postsc. p. 28. to be both
Immediatione Virtutis, and Suppositi to all Actions, though not Determinative
to Wicked Actions. Although it would be something ridiculous to say, that The
Discourse read one part of this with It Is eyes shut, and the other part with
It Is eyes open; yet it is more false that Mr. How did there, or any where else
deny God's Immediate Concurrence; and it is the best excuse of which this
(otherwise Forgery) is capable.

Second Instance. It feigns in the same p. 10. that Mr. How has Postsc. P.
39. affirmed Predetermination to all Actions. It were strange if he should, but
pretended to be proved by these his words, The Active Providence of God about
all the Actions of Men, consists not merely in giving them the natural powers,
whereby they can work of themselves, but in a real Influence upon those powers.
This is (to speak the most softly, and indeed more softly than the thing will
admit) an unking Interpretation, after what Mr. How has been quoted to say in
my former Instance: but especially, if The Discourse can or would be pleased to
consider (after It Is invidious and deceitful generality in citing Letter, from
p. 32, to 50. and the Postscript, without assigning one word) that Mr. Howe's
asserting here of God's real Influence upon men's natural powers does not at all
imply that Predetermination, which he there all along opposes. For can there be
no Influence but such as is Determining? He has shown there both may be and
is. How often is there such Influence by the operation of Common Grace as does
not Determine?

Third Instance. In the same p. 10. Because Mr. How has Letter, p. 32. said,
Some Actions of the Creatures are in themselves most malignantly wicked, and
Letter, p. 46. Intrinsecally Evil; therefore It, falsely enough, reproaches him
to have by these words denied that all Actions have in them a Natural Goodness:
Whereas Mr. How here speaks of Actions as they are Morally Evil or Wicked,
that is, as specified by direction to an undue Object. Is not such a specifying
Direction Intrinsecal? Is not the specification of every thing Intrinsecal to
it? And so are not such Actions truly said to be Evil in themselves which so
specified can by no Circumstances be made good. But Postsc. p. 36. (which is
produced to argue him of Inconsistence) he owns that there is not any Action so
sinful, but has some natural good as the substract matter thereof, abstractly
and physically considered, (and yet so they can never be produced by God or
Man, but concreted with their Individuating Circumstances; nor does the
Affirming the one, infer the Denial of the other. If it did, The Discourse it
self has done the same thing, p. 72. Thus some Actions are said to be in
themselves Evil, when they are Evil in regard of their Object, etc. Thus the
Hatred of God and Adultery are in themselves Evil, etc. But I suppose 'twould
judge it hard dealing to say that hereby It denies (though it be an hard saying
to affirm) that natural good which is the substrate matter thereof, and which
always at a dead lift It, has recourse to.

Fourth Instance. From Mr. Howe's having Letter, p. 33. said, Nothing is more
apparently a simple and most strictly natural impossibility, than not to do an
Action whereto the Agent is Determined by an Infinite Power. It Epist. p. 11.
has the ridiculous grosness to charge Mr. How with there affirming that
Predetermination forces the Will; as if nothing could make a thing naturally
impossible to a man but force: he cannot make a new Sun: but what force hinders
him? This is indeed Force, or rather Fraud; for otherwise it is impossible to
deduce it. But whether of them be used against a chosen adversary, makes it
seems no scruple in a Conscience diverted with Disputation.

Another Instance. It calumniates Mr. How, p. 87. to have asserted the
Positivity of Sin, and there calls it, the foundation of his Hypothesis,
proceeding with great pains to disprove it borrows one Argument, to lead him
with, from the most Learned Dr. Barlow, the now renowned Bishop of Lincoln,
urges the Minor, then the Major, and draws up a whole Process, as if it were in
the Spiritual Court, against him, and T. D. were become his Chancellor. There
is none in England, nor especially Mr. How, as I imagine, but would reverence
the Authority of that Excellent Person in all points of Learning or
Controversy. But The Discourse is too bold to make use of his Power without his
Commission, in a Case where Mr. How has not said one word to affirm such
Positivity.

A further Instance. With the same Truth that is Falsehood It feigns, and that
often, that Mr. How by God's having Irresistible Influence upon the Will means
God's Forcing of the Will unto the most Wicked Actions. As for example, p. 39.
from Mr. Howe's, p. 40. Irresistibly, that is in his sense Forcibly. Whereas
Mr. How there objects to his Adversaries, their holding such an Irresistible
Determination of the Will, but Forcing of it no where. Yet at what expense of
Learning, and with how much loss of Ink and Ingenuity does The Discourse argue
that the Will cannot be forced! which Mr. How, having denied that Irresistible
Influence must of necessity disown for it is further absurdity, had he thought
his Adversaries guilty of it. But he appears to have been far from imagining it
of them, nor could any but The Discourse have imputed it to him as his sense,
that God does by Force whatsoever he does Irresistibly. What Law of Reason is
there, or how can The Discourse justify such a Falsification but by Custom?

If that shall be a sufficient Plea, It will never want Instances further to
warrant the Practice. As in this following (Forgery I may not call it, having
to do with such exactness, but) Rasure, Mr. How, having been upon the Argument
of the Will of God concerning those that perish, had Letter p. 12. said, The
Resolve of the Divine Will in this matter, was not concerning the Event, what
he shall do (i. e. abstractly and singly, as these next following words show)
but concerning his Duty what he should, and concerning the connection between
his Duty and his Happiness. Hereupon what does mean The Discourse? p. 116. It
refers to those words of his, p. 112. and recites a further passage of his
Letter, p. 115, 116. to argue them of repugnancy these to the former, but to
that purpose conceals Mr. Howe's last Clause, but concerning his Duty what he
should, and concerning the Connection between his Duty and his Happiness, which
being taken in, as it ought, there could have been no pretense of
Inconsistency. And it adds that Mr. Howe's Answer Letter. p. 116. that
Imperfection is no way imputable to the Divine Will merely for not Effecting
every thing whereto it may have a Real Propension, is no Answer to the
Objection: upon this strange pretense, that, a Real Propension of Will is no
Will, as if it were a thing impossible that Propension should be either
Habitual or Actual.

So also for continual Instance. The Discourse p. 118, 119. feigns a Question
to have been proposed by Mr. How, Whether it be fitting for God efficaciously
to overpower all men into a compliance with the overtures he makes to them in
Common: and then It creates also an Answer for him; It is not fit for God to
overpower men without making any overtures to them at all; and, to make a song
of three parts, judicially decides: the Answer is not fitted to the Question. I
must confess that upon some former experiments I doubted of the Rectitude of
It Is Judgment, but I was not wary enough to suspect a Falsehood, which must be
so notorious, as that there should be no such Question or Answer. But in good
truth none there is that I can find of Mr. Howe's mark. The Question no where
in Terms, but the Answer neither in terms nor sense, nor any thing like it. So
that The Discourse is not to be allowed in any Court either as a Competent
Judge, or a Legal Witness, but may deserve to be tried for this as a Criminal
before any Logick-tribunal. Nor needs there any other Evidence against it for
Conviction, than those very words of Mr. How, that It there has cited. Grace
sometimes shows it self in preventing exertions, and in working so heroically
as none have beforehand [in the neglect of it is ordinary method] any reason to
expect. Letter p. 138. Now look back upon the supposititious Answer, to whom
God makes no overtures at all; Then compare Mr. Howe's words in the neglect of
it is ordinary methods: And now let any man judge of the Honesty of such an
Adversary. For can they be said to neglect God's ordinary methods to whom he
makes no overtures at all? Nor is the second scheme of It Is Question and Answer
which immediately follows any whit better, but guilty of as perfect Forgery as
the first, and so ill contrived, that it neither agrees with the former, nor
with the Book, though pretending to be a true Copy.

And an Instance it is of the same Fraud to feign, p. 119, 120. that Mr. How
in his Letter has, abstractly from the more fit course that God has taken,
determined the unfitness of God's giving grace and salvation to all men.

All that Mr. How has said therein amounts only to assert the course which is
not taken to be less fit, and that God does from the perfect rectitude of his
own nature, take that course which was to be taken most wisely, and do that
which was most congruous and fit to be done, Letter p. 149. What can better
become us than to judge so of the ways that God has pitched upon, and wherein
we have God's own choice to precede and be a guide to our judgment?

I shall conclude this Article with It Is quotation, p. 44. out of Dr. Manton's
Comment on James 1. 13. p. 101. as if that Learned Divine had affirmed the
disputed Predetermination by those words. Many who grant Prescience, deny
Preordination, (viz. quoth The Discourse, the Decree whereof Predetermination
is the execution, so I understand him) lest they should make God the Author of
sin; and It forsooth understands him so, but I hope without any obligation to
better and sincerer judgments. For what one word is there here that can imply
that Preordination to be executed by the way of Predetermination? It is no
wonder if Mr. How be not secure while yet living, when those that are at rest
cannot escape so notorious a practice. This is the same as to cut off a dead
man's hand to subscribe with it to a Forgery. There needed no less it seems
than Doctor Manton's good name, which is like a precious ointment, to give a
better odor to those putid suggestions and expressions of Protestantism grown
of late weary of it self, etc. bestowed on Mr. How on this occasion. And yet
(for it made me curious) there are Witnesses above exception that also Dr.
Manton consented with Mr. How in this point, and expressed a great sense of the
danger of the contrary Opinion. And whenever The Discourse signifies it is
doubt of it, I will undertake to make out their Evidence.

The Fourth Article that naturally succeeds the former Falsifications.

It Is vain, but most injurious Attempts to pervert what Mr. How has said.
As for a First Instance, where p. 45. It represents Mr. Howe's words; Letter
p. 29, 30. to imply an affirmation of a Foreknowledge of Christ's Death
antecedent to God's Decree concerning it. The words are these (which It ushers
in with ( Let us hear if our patience can hear this exercise, whether Mr. How
's gloss upon Act. 4. 28. does not corrupt the Text. If they had known they
would not have crucified the Lord of Glory.) That is, God foreseeing wicked
hands would be prompt and ready for this tragic enterprise, his sovereign
Power, and wise Counsel concurred with his Foreknowledge, so only and not with
less latitude, to define or determine the bounds and limits of that malignity
than to let it proceed unto this execution. What common sense or ordinary
ingenuity could have found less in these words than that Mr. How does therein
at least profess the Foreknowledge and the Decree to have been sunul and
seniel, which is far from affirming the Foreknowledge to be antecedent? But Mr.
How had moreover, immediately before these words cited, said; It was a thing
which God's Hand and Counsel had determined before to be done. But this The
Discourse conceals, lest It self should be detected of such a wilful
perversion, and the better to make Doctor Twisse's censure (which otherwise had
been nothing to the business) take place upon Mr. How p. 46. Those Iesuitical
dictates of the foreseen Determination of the Humane will before God's Decree,
are not the Dictates of Divines Disputing but Dreaming. There was not any
color in Mr. Howe's words for any such imputation; though I doubt not that Mr.
How believes God's Decree in this case to be but suitable to that Agency which
he every where supposes him to have in things of that nature.

A Second Instance of the same dealing is upon Mr. Howe's Assertion, Postsc. p.
28. of God's Immediate Concourse to all Actions of his Creatures. For p. 55.
thence It pretends that it follows, and that Mr. How implies that God affords
men a leading Concurrence to Actions downright Evil. And yet Mr. How had but
Postsc p. 29. explained and limited that concession, saying, The Concourse or
Influence, which I deny not to be Immediate to any Actions, I only deny to be
Determinative as to those which are Wicked. Agreeably to what he says also
Postsc. p. 45. n. 9. But that limitation The Discourse takes not any notice of,
pretending not to understand a difference between inducing men to Actions which
God will reward, and to those for which he will ruin them. And upon this
presumption it falls into the usual fit of boasting vain-gloriously over Mr.
How. For where Perversion may go for Ingenuity, Insolence may also pass for
Reason.

I cannot but observe also how in pursuit of this Subject, because Mr. How
Postsc. p. 35. cited Luke 6. 9. with Hosea 13. 9. to show the difference, and
how much more agreeable it was to the Nature of God to induce men by
Determinative Influence to Imperfectly good Actions which yet lead to Salvation
and Blessedness, taen to such as are downright Evil, and tend to their ruin:
It hereupon p. 58. frames a Chain of Syllogistical Argumentations, all of It Is
own devising, which yet It has the face to father upon Mr. How. I call it the
rather a Chain, because I remember to have read of one who had so singular a
faculty of linking one Lie artificially upon another, that they called him at
Rome by a new Nickname Catena: and the dexterity of The Discourse, in almost as
sinister a quality, might pretend to the same denomination. The Samoiedes wear
Guts about their necks, but swallow them at last down their throats. The same
natural Links serving them first for ornament, and then for nutriment: and were
The Discourse obliged to eat It Is own words, and feed upon It Is own Chain of
Syllogisms, 'twere a diet, though slender and unclean, yet fit enough for a
Barbarian. There is nothing can be more savage and inhumane, than to personate
Mr. How here arguing, If it be unlawful for Man to destroy Life, then it is
unlawful to God. And then, as if it were a formed Dispute, and wherein Mr. How
maintained the Affirmative, It denies the Antecedent, the Consequent, and the
Connection of It Is own (not, as is pretended Mr. Howe's) Enthymeme, and
laboriously proceeds to disprove the whole Argument through the several members.
Let but any man have recourse to that place of the Postsc. p. 35. and consider
whether there be any color thence to suppose that Mr. How intended there, or
gave any occasion for such arguing; and whether all the Blasphemies or Heresies
that ever were invented, might not be imputed to him with as much reason. I
find my self so concerned hereat (not in behalf of Mr. How, but of all common
morality among mankind) that I think fit to repress my self, and rather leave
the Crime to any Readers, or to The Discourses own Censure; for,
notwithstanding this and all It Is other Errors, I conceive It yet to have some
intervals both of Understanding and Conscience.

But a most undecent thing it was for It to trifle in a matter so serious, and
it had been far more becoming to have given a clear account of It Is own Belief
in this point, than to have forged arguments for others, create shadows for It
self to sport with, and to act in one personage the Cause, the Judge, the
Witness, the Plaintiff, and the Defendant. After all those To and Fro 's, Up
and Downs of so many tedious pages that It obliges us to, if we will go along
with it through this particular, might I not in recompense crave leave to be
solemnly and soberly answered upon two or three Questions arising upon this
debate for my own better information? First, whether It do not conscienciously
believe that God does punish men for doing Actions which in such and such
circumstances he has forbidden them to do? Next, whether it be not manifest
that according to It Is opinion God must Determine men to those Actions in those
circumstances, that is in the same circumstances wherein they are done? And
lastly, whether that Determining Influence can be withstood? If It once affirm
all these, as I see no tolerable evasion endeavored, but that It holds them
all pro confesso, how can It with all It Is Logic and Metaphysics extricate It
self from maintaining that absurdity that God ruins men for what he has
induced them to, that is not simply to destroy life (as It vainly strives to
shift off the business) but to destroy it upon such terms? And then how
frivolous will all those Answers, p. 55. and so forward appear to Mr. Howe's
argument mentioned on a former occasion, Postsc. p. 33. 34. We our selves can
in a remoter kind concur to the Actions of others: Yet it does not follow that
because we may afford our Leading Concurrence to Actions imperfectly good, that
therefore we may afford them to afford to those that are downright Evil;
because to Prayer, therefore to Cursing and Swearing, and then ruin men for
the Actions me have induced them to: You Will say, God may rather, but sure he can
much less do so than you. Now The Discourse calls this (and would blame it upon
that account, as comparing God and the Creature) Mr. Howe's argument a Pari:
But it is methinks a Fortiori, and therefore more reverent. If a well-natur'd
man would not do so, it is much more disagreeable to God's Nature.

In all these things Mr. How (and it is that makes me like him the better)
declares his own sense plainly however, while the other never speaks out,
unless to give ill words, and seems to search not for the Truth, but merely for
Contention.

The last Evidence of this Article shall be where It p. 111. takes occasion to
say Mr. How p. 106. professes his dislike of the common distinction of
Voluntas Beneplaciti and Signi, in this present Case [viz. to explain how God
Wills the Salvation of all, and yet only of some] under which such as coined,
and those that have much used it, have only rather (I doubt not) concealed a
good meaning, than expressed an ill one. Thus far it quotes Mr. How, but there
stops and says, the rest is not worth the trouble of transcribing; but I
therefore suspect the more that that it worth it, and out of some cunning fetch
omitted, and shall the rather take that trouble upon me. It seems, I confess,
by it is more obvious aspect, too much to countenance that ignominious slander,
which profane and atheistical dispositions would fasten upon God and the
course of his procedure toward men, etc. as though he only intended to seem
willing of what He really was not; That there was an appearance to which
nothing did subesse. And then why is the latter called Voluntas, unless the
meaning be, he did only Will the Sign, which is false and impious? etc. But
upon the former quotation out of Mr. How, wherein he only excepts against the
Distinction in the present Case, and signifies that a good meaning was intended
by it; The Discourse p. 116. represents him as meaning the same thing with Dr.
Twisse (who also notes the impropriety of the latter member Voluntas Signi, as
improperly called a Will, and only signifying Man's Duty) and blaming himself
yet in blaming him: When Mr. How had in plain words approved the meaning of
the Distinction. The gentlest imagination a man can frame to himself hereof, is
that It Is own brain was perverted before Mr. Howe's intention.

The Fifth Article is,

It Is Odious Insinuations concerning what It has no color to object or except
against.
Of this I shall give three Instances in one Paragraph. T. D. p. 103, 104.
where It pretends first to be at a strange loss for an Antecedent to a Relative
in Mr. Howe's Letter, p. 67. Neither yet was it necessary that effectual care
should be taken they should actually reach all, and be applied to every
individual person. The loss is indeed a strange one, and I condole it. For It
has herein suffered great damage of Eyesight, Understanding, Memory and
Ingenuity, very sensible disasters, and with great difficulty to be repaired.
Mr. Howe's immediate words in the foregoing period were that the Divine Edicts
should be of an Universal tenor as they are, the matter of them being of
Universal concernment, and equally suitable to the common case of all men. Now
add to these words as it follows in that place, Neither yet was it necessary
they should actually reach all, and then say whether any man else would not
have seen that the They here was Relative to the Divine Edicts: beside that the
whole Tract of the foregoing Argument leads and refers continually to them. But
then, when after a long loss It has, casting about even to Postsc. p. 35. and
40. out of love to Mr. How 's person and the Truth, hit it at last to be the
Divine Edicts of which possibly Mr. How meant it, yet then It suggests from
those words of his, Neither yet was it necessary (that is to the purpose Mr.
How was speaking of, the Vindicating of God's Wisdom and Sincerity, as any
sober Reader will easily see) as if they were thought not at all necessary. If
this be candor, what is blackness? It is as much as to say, that, unless it be
necessary for the Vindication of God's Wisdom and Sincerity to provide that
every man should have a Bible and read it, it is no way necessary for man's
salvation.

The Second Instance in the same Paragraph is to quote Mr. How Letter, p. 69.
And thus how easily and even naturally ( by Messengers running from Nation to
Nation, some to communicate, others to enquire after the tidings of the Gospel)
would the Gospel soon have spread it self through the World? and hereupon to
suggest as if Mr. How thought the seeds of the Gospel were in men by nature.
Unless Understanding and Wilful Ignorance be the same thing, no man could have
avoided the sense of the word Naturally here, to be, easily, and of course. But
if that term had been intended in the strict sense (though the mollifying of it
by that particle, even, shows it was not) how could the Inquiry after a thing
new, and said to be of common concernment, be Natural, although the thing it
self were not?

And the Third is; Whereas Mr. How had, Letter, p. 75, 76, 77. enumerated many
Instances of God's Clemency and Bounty to Men in general, and added that, they
might by these understand God to have favorable propensions toward them; and
that though they have offended him, he is not their implacable enemy, and might
by his Goodness be led to Repentance, that hereupon The Discourse p. 104.
having nothing to allege against any particular of what is there said, brings
in Mr. John Goodwin to have writ somewhat of the like import in his Pagans Debt
and Dowry; and the like quotations it cites afterward from Mr. Hoard, which is
all for spite, but nothing to the purpose. Could It have laid down an
Antithesis to any thing that Mr. How here said, it is probable it would have
gone that way to work, and not have used this Pagan invention of baiting Mr.
How in the skins of others; or daubing him over with pitch to serve for
Torch-light, and put out the light of the Gospel. But it is more probable It
would have proceeded both ways; for It Is Zeal for the Truth seems not greater
than It Is Animosity against Mr. How, whencesoever it arises. But It durst not
adventure to say that Mr. How has made Mr. John Goodwin's ill use of this
notion. Had there been any such thing, The Discourse seems not in humor to
have past it over, and that calumnious figure of Meliora Spero, hoping the best
of him, but suggesting the worst, would have been changed to a plain
accusation. If It would have dealt fairly, here was the proper place to have
spoken out, and have told us distinctly It Is own opinion in so weighty a
matter. Does it know what God (though most unobliged) might do to furnish such
with what might be sufficient, if they seriously desired such mercy at his
hands? Will It think It self bound to tear Romans 2. 4. out of It Is Bible,
because John Goodwin has cited it? Or, will It adventure to be the Heathens
Compurgator at the day of Judgment, that they have no more considered the
tendency of the Divine Goodness?

These indeed would have been worthy Achievements, and proper to one of so
great enterprise; but to throw upon Mr. How an undeserved obloquy of other
men's names in this manner, how base a thing, was it? considering besides how
It Is own name (though hitherto studiously concealed,) might in the vicissitude
of humane affairs, serve men hereafter for a more infamous quotation.

I shall add no more than p. 108. It Is citing Mr. Howe's Letter, p. 89, 90.
That which God's declarations do amount to is, etc. that, if they which finally
perish, neglect to attend to those external discoveries of the Word, etc. they
are not to expect he should overpower them by a strong hand, and save them
against the concontinual disinclination of their own Wills, upon which It
says, I am not able to make sense of the last words, for I understand not what
overcoming by a strong hand (in a sinner's case) God can make use of that
leaves the Will under disinclination to Satvation. What reason or occasion do
Mr. Howe's words give for making this puzzle? Could it not understand that some
men are so unreasonable as to expect Salvation, while yet at the same time they
are disaffected to the means of it? And that some, because they dislike the
ordinary means, please themselves with an hope that God will at last cast use
some extraordinary, to overcome that disaffection?

The Sixth Article.

It Is most unseemly and insolent boastings and self-applauses upon no occasion.
Yet therefore the more frequent, as his killing Mr. How with his own weapon,
p. 26. in It Is Argument about Mr. Howe's two Concessions, the vanity whereof as
to the first I have before noted: And now as to what he brags of against the
second as a Triumphant Evidence, I shall no less show It Is impertinency. The
Argument is It Is own, p. 30. If it be the Indetermination of the Power to
Individual Actions that makes an Excitation of them, to one rather than to
another, necessary. Stay here: It takes this for granted, and as it is in it
self destitute of strength, so It leaves it very unkindly without any proof or
assistance to shift as well as it can. Whereas It knows that it is said on the
opposite part, That it is not Indetermination merely (which the
Self-determining power of the Will can remove) but aversion to good Actions
(which gracious Habits do lessen, but not remove) that makes God's holy
Determining Influence necessary. Now let it go on, and the possibility of
Action contained in the Powers that makes the reducing of that possibility to
Action no less necessary to good Actions: If there be any sense in this, it is
very recondite, and would require a spirit that can discover hidden treasure;
Can Possibility of Action make Action necessary? It must be as false as it is
true, that an Argument can be drawn from Power to Act, affirmatively. Indeed,
should it have said, where there is only a possibility of Action, that
possibility must be reduced to Action, before there can be any Action, it were
true, but then it is one of these things that are Nimus vera, and which it is
ridiculous to put into any proposition, much more where it is to no purpose. As
here it is manifestly to none; for we are still left as uncertain, as if no
such thing had been said, what it is that must reduce that possibility to
Action. But that it should be added no less necessary to good Actions, is
beyond the power of Witchcraft to understand what it should mean here. Does it
pretend to be discoursing with any one that thought Determination to good
Actions less necessary? I thought it is present part was to oppose one that said
it was more necessary. And yet this most insignificant Scheme of Discourse is
shut up with a Quod erat Demonstrandum, and with the Phantastry of claiming to
it evidence equal to what the Apostles words carry, Rom, 11. 36. For it was to
those words that My. Howe's Letter, p. 62. gave those lofty Epithets of
Triumphant Evidence, which The Discourse cavils at, and borrows, with no mind
to restore them, to adorn the street-pageantry of this pitiful Argument.

Another Instance may be It Is Jovial rant, p. 37. What is now become of Mr.
How 's thin Sophistry, and collusive Ambiguity? etc. It is necessary to read
upon this occasion from It Is p. 32. l. 12. at least to p. 37. l. 14. for it is
too long to insert here such a parcel of stuff, but there you may have it. It Is
business here is to defend the Predeterminers Opinion against the charge of
God's necessitating men to sin, and of attempting to alleviate it by God's
being above Law, but Man under it. Let me conjure any Reader by the most potent
charms of persuasion, by all that is ridiculous in It Is whole Book, or in mine,
but to peruse at leisure how miserably those points are there along managed. It
owns at first that it is an hard Province to answer to all the Objections, then
softens it, as fire mollifies clay, and at last, after having confessed and
begged, comes off with that glorious exaltation over Mr. Howe's thin Sophistry.
It were needless to exemplify all the like passages, where it arrogates
Commendation to it self beyond what any friend, and vilifies Mr. How below
what any other enemy would offer at both equally undeserved.

The Seventh Article.

It Is very gross Absurdities, Self-contradictions, and Inconsistencies, to
which may be added diverse unsafe Expressions, not a little reflecting on God
and Religion.
As first p. 18. It discourses concerning the security of good Angels by God's
determining Influence, which no man that I know will quarrel for, and by which
I doubt not it supposes their Immutability, but p. 20. speaking of Man, It
says, that God made him Mutable (and how could he do otherwise, unless he
should have made him a God?) what then, does it conceive that the good Angels
are Gods? Such like was It Is absurdity, p. 27. of the necessity of
Predetermination, because God's Immediate Concourse could not determine Adam's
Will. Than which, what can be more notorious? the Controversy being, Whether
God does determine Men to Wicked Actions, but It Is Argument to this Effect;
That, if God do not determine Men to such Wicked Actions by Concourse, he does
it, as elsewhere it calls it, by Precourse. Whereas it should have known the
thing denied by Mr. How to be, that God does by Efficacious Influence
determine to them at all. And so It Is Argumentation there signifies only that
if God do not detertermine to them, he does determine to them.

A third Instance is where p. 40. Mr. How having Letter p. 17. 47. said that
the Argument from the pretended Impossibilty of God's foreknowing Sinful
Actions, if he did not determine the Agent to them, will not infer, that if he
determine not to them, he cannot foreknow them, but only that we are left
ignorant of the way. It collects thence p. 41. (and thinks Mr. How has much
overshot himself) that he universally denies our knowledge of the way how God
foretells future Contingencies. Whereas Mr. How Letter p. 35. stated their
Argument in express words, that it were otherwise impossible God should
foreknow the Sinful Actions of men, and here 47. only says, the Argument
infers so much and no more, as to Wicked Actions, yet It makes this an
universal denial as to all Actions: Hereby it is easy to judge, which of the
two is the better Archer, or came nearer the mark, which shot home, and which
over.

That for a Fourth is what you please for to call it, p. 70. but a pretty
innocent thing of the like nature Irresistible Imports, It says, A Relation of
the Action of the Agent to some resistance, which is pleasant, by how much
impossible to imagine how that which cannot be resisted imports that which is
resisted.

But this p. 76. is a most refined absurdity, while in the same place It taunts
Mr. How for gratifying his own unscholastick humor. Something is said to be
Impossible respectively, as if a man will fly that he should have wings. But
this among duller men has hitherto been thought an instance of what is quite
contrary, to wit, of Hypothetical Necessity. And if It should find It self
hereafter obliged to fly from It Is adversary, I suppose that It would think a
pair of wings to be pertinent and highly convenient, if not necessary.

I have before upon occasion, and in passing, noted how he undertakes to prove
that there are no Actions of free Agents Evil in themselves, when nevertheless
it had p. 72. affirmed the hatred of God and Adultery to be in themselves Evil.

Such is that too elsewhere touched, p. 63. where it cites Mr. How, Postsc. p.
36. intimating that some Actions are Evil quoad Substantiam, that is, morally
Evil or Wicked; and It would have it to be a Contradiction to own that any such
have natural good in them. How wisely? As if it were not possible for the same
Action to be morally Evil, and naturally Good. Or did It never hear of the
Substance of an Act in the moral sense? And does not a forbidden Action use to
be called Evil in the Substance of it? When, if the Action be not forbidden,
but commanded, and only the undue manner or end forbidden, as in It Is own
Instance of Almsgiving for vainglory, it is said to be Good, quoad
Substantian? It is to be wondered that it summoned not here it is Logic to prove
that an Action has no Substance; but that would have spoiled It Is Learned Note
that follows, where Mr. How, Postsc. p. 36. to the Question, Is there any
Action so sinful, that has not not some natural Good as the substrate matter
thereof? Answers, True, and what, shall it therefore be inferred, that God must
by a Determinative Influence produce every such Action whatsoever reason there
be against it? One might better argue thence the necessity of his producing
every hour a new World, in which there would be a great deal more of Positive
Entity, and natural Goodness. It hereupon undertakes p. 65. to prove that there
is as much Entity and natural Goodness in a sinful Action, as there would be in
Myriads of Worlds, should God create every hour a new World; and says, that to
deny this were unworthy a Philosopher: and It Is proof is, If Substantia non
recipit magis and minut, or if Ens and bonum sit convertibile, then an Action
has as much Entity as a World.

But how much does It reflect upon God and that Religious sense which we ought
to cherish of him, p. 27. when it makes God to have determined Innocent Adam's
Will to the choice of eating the fruit that was forbidden him? This seemed so
horrid at first, that It self startles a little at it, interposing in a
Parenthesis ( suppose before the Prohibition past upon it) and yet, because
It Is cause required no less, and appetite gathers with eating, it takes courage
afterward to assert God's Predetermination of Adam's Will to the Act of eating,
which was not till after the Prohibition: and to Illustrate (as it pretends) so
black a thing, it parallels God's moving him to that Act rather than to
another, with a Writing-Master's directing his Scholars hand. If the Cause be
not to be defended upon better terms than so, what Christian but would rather
wish he had never known Writing-Master, than to subscribe such an Opinion; and
that God should make an innocent Creature in this manner to do a sorbidden Act,
for which so dreadful a vengeance was to ensue upon him and his posterity?

No less pregnant with impious absurdity is it to assert p. 29, 30. the equal
necessity of Predetermining Influence to Wicked Actions as to Good; and that
dangerous Insinuation, p. 19. that God's promises convey no right to them to
whom they are made, For, it is a ruled case, it says, in the Schools, that God
cannot properly be said a Debtor to his Creatures; and then adds of It Is own,
no not when he has passed a Promise to them, and pursues this so far as to
say, if he should (to suppose an Impossibility) which, considering what follows
had been therefore better omitted, break his word, he would be but Mendax, non
Injustus, and puts it too in English, a Liar, not Unjust. What dispensation
have some men to speak at this rate, or what dangerous points do they run
themselves upon, and their Readers? I remember there is a Picture before that
Ruler of the Case his Book with this Addition, been scripsisti de me Dive
Thomas. But let God be True and Just to his word, and every man (that says
otherwise) a Liar.

For the last I shall only transcribe a few lines of it is idle Harangue, p. 35.
in which I know not whether the malice against Mr. How, or irreverence toward
our Savior do predominate through the whole absurdity. We might also observe
upon his Rhetorical Amplifications of his Argument, that he seems to be no
ill-willer to Transubstantiation: for if the natural notions of God's Goodness
should be infinitely dearer to us than our senses, I see not why the notion of
God's sincerity that he means as he speaks, should not challenge a share in our
Indearments, and so why hoc: est corpus meum, should not assure us that the
bread is transubstantiated, though our senses, etc. join in a Common Testimony
against it. Viciously and wantonly said, as if God, wheresoever he speaks in a
figure, were guilty of Insincerity.

The Eighth and last Article against The Discourse, shall be The Virulence of
It Is Spirit.

Whereof one Instance may fuffice, p. 122. where, closing the Book, It says,
that Mr. How 's Doctrine opens a wide door for Atheism, and reckons him by
strong Implication, among those who acknowledge God in Words, but deny him in
Deed: Whereas, what is it that Mr. How has denied, but that God does
determine men by Efficacious Influence to those very Actions which he forbids,
and for which he will punish them?

But I spare my hand, The Discourse all along boiling over, foaming, frothing
and casting forth the like expressions, which I refrain to enumerate, that I
may not incur the fate of him that stirs the Indians Poison-pot, who when he
falls down dead with the steam and stench, they then throw the doors open, and
dip their Arrows.

I Should now therefore have concluded, were there not something yet in It Is
Prefatory Epistle so fordid, that I reserved it for behind, as the most proper
place it could be applied to. Nor shall I therein only have marshalled it
according to It Is dignity, but do hope moreover, as the Head of the Viper is a
specific against It Is Venom; so to find out a Remedy against the Book in the
Preface; wherein it shows so peculiar a malice and despite to Mr. How, and
insinuates the same to the Reader, as requires a particular Preservative. And,
had I not already been at the pains of the foregoing Remarks, here was, I see,
a more compendious occasion, but sufficient to have administered me the same
observations. For all the other faults that I have objected against the bulk of
The Discourse might as easily have been discovered in It Is Preface, as a good
Physiognomist can by the Moles in the face assign all those that are upon any
other part of the body: But among them all It Is superlative Dullness is here
especially the more manifest (as usually happens in such cases) by how much It
endeavors most at Acuteness and Elegancy; so palpable, that even It self could
not be wholly insensible of it: but p. 3, 4. feelingly confesses both in Latin
and English, that in reading Mr. Howe's Letter and Postscript, Obstupuit
steteruntque Comae; and a double Astonishment under which It labored: This
doubtless it was, like the disaffections derived from the Head to the Nerves,
which propagated that horrid stupidity that I have already noted through It Is
whole Treatise. But that Quality is here so exalted, Nature it seems, having
given It that Torpor for a Defense) that in touching it thus lightly, I
perceive a numness to strike up through my Pen into my Faculties, and shall
therefore point at some particulars, rather than adventure to handle them.

Mr. How had in passing, Postsc. p. 22. glanced upon an improper redundance of
words used by a former Adversary. The Divine Independent Will of God; as he
might with good reason take notice of it, being as much sense as to have said
the Humane Dependent Will of Man. But hereupon The Discourse p. 9. having for
revenge turned over his whole Letter and Postscript to find out the like
absurdities, highly gratulates It self in three Instances, but all of them
curtaild from the coherence to make for the purpose. One Letter p. 42. In which
sense how manifest it is that the perfect (all this omitted) Rectitude of God's
own holy gracious Nature (is an eternal Law to him omitted.) The second; Letter
p. 59. God satisfies himself in himself, and takes highest complacency in the
perfect Goodness, Congruity, and (all this omitted) Rectitude of his own most
holy Will and Way; and for these Mr. How is arraigned upon a Crime, by a Greek
word of Law called Pleonasme. The third is Actions Malignantly Wicked (which
The Discourse says is the same as Wickedly Wicked) Postscript p. 22. and 32.
as It quotes, but is in Letter; 32. and here, It leaves out also the word most,
which would have spoiled the exception taken against it; for what Mr. How
there says is, even those Actions that are in themselves most malignantly
wicked. Are there not some Actions, some Men, more malignantly wicked than
others? Or will The Discourse apply It Is old end of Latin here -- aliquando
bonus dormitat Homerus to Paulus, Romans 7. 13. sin, exceedingly sinful? It was
time therefore in all reason to conclude this exercise with saying; But these
are childish Criminations, unfit to be bandied from hand to hand by sober
persons; owning It self at once to have been guilty herein of an Intemperate,
Inept, and Unmanly kind of procedure.

Neither can I pass by unregarded that new Invention of rearing up Pillars to
men's Infamy; but which have sometimes, and may now also, turned to the disgrace
of the Architect. It cuts out p. 10, 11. several Lines here and there, out of
the whole Letter and Postscript, to post them up in Columns, and Mr. How upon
them as a common notorious Self-contradicter: Whereas, if any man will take the
pains to restore those sentences to their first situation and coherence, (as I
have formerly done) there will not be found the least Inconsistency in them:
But if this Practice be allowable, there is not any Chapter in the Bible out of
which It may not with the same integrity extract either Blasphemy or Nonsense;
though I am far from suspecting The Discourse of such an undertaking. For
indeed It assigns the True Reason, (and fit to be inscribed over the Portico)
non est ingenii mei hosce nudos dissolvere, and as faithfully translates it; I
have not the wit to untie these knots, which is now the third public
Confession of of It Is stupidity, in the Preface. Yet will I not do It the
affront to ascribe it either to It Is Modesty, Ingenuity, or Self-Conviction;
for It intended them doubtless all to the contrary. Only the same Dullness, that
first occasioned It Is errors and mistakes, did likewise lead It to these
ominous expressions, and like those that discern not the Back from the Edge, to
wound It self in cutting at the Adversary.

It Is Dullness therefore, or as it is expressed p. 8. the consciousness of It 's
own disabilities, being so often attested under It Is own hand, and to which, if
necessary, It might have another Thousand Witnesses, I shall not further pall
my Reader on this Subject, but return rather from this digression to my first
design of obviating that in the Preface, which has all the marks upon it of
Malice, except the Wit wherewith that vice is more usually accompanied. Of that
the very Title is an Argument. De Causa Dei, or a Vindication of the Common
Doctrine of Protestant Divines concerning Predetermination, etc. from the
Invidious Consequences with which it is burdened by Mr. John How, in a late
Letter and Postscript of God's Prescience. By T. D. Who would have thought that
T. D. should have become the Defender of the Faith, or that the Cause of God
were so forlorn, as to be reduced to the necessity of such a Champion. It seems
much rather to be the Fallacy of Non Causa pro Causa, and usurped only the
better to prepossess against Mr. How such, Readers as would be amused by the
Frontispiece. The Cause of God! Turn I beseech you It Is whole Book over, and
show me any thing of that Decorum with which that should have been managed.
What is there to be found of that Gravity, Humility, Meekness, Piety or Charity
requisite to so glorious a pretense? (Graces wherewith God usually assists
those that undertake his quarrel, and with which Mr. How on all occasions
appears to be abundantly supplied.) But a perpetual eructation there is of
humane Passions, a vain ostentation of mistaken Learning, and a causeless
Picking of Controversy.

To that Title, under which Mr. How is so injuriously proscribed, succeeds
forsooth an Epistle Dedicatory, To the Reverend Mr. John How, Author of the
late Letter and Postscript of God's Prescience. An additional Civility and
Compellation invented by The Discourse only for greater mockery. And a manyfine
words It bestows upon him at first, to miscall him presently with the more
Emphasis, praises the Author, and then the Book; but no otherwise then, as a
person to be degraded is brought forth in public attired in all his
Formalities, to be stripped of them again with further Ignominy.

Nay, even Mr. Boil himself cannot wholly escape It Is Commendation: which I do
not object as if any thing could be well said of him that is not due to his
merit. But there are a kind of Sorcerers that praise where they intend to do
most mischief. And the Occasion, the Place, the Manner, the Person that gives
the Commendation make always a difference, and cause a great alteration in
that matter. Nor is it less here. For, Mr. How having taken the Pen on this
Subject, as The Discourse also observes, upon that honorable Gentleman's
command, the officious mentioning of Mr. Boil p. 1. seems as if It had a mind
too to try his mettle; or at least would reproach him for having employed one
so unfit for the service, and that was to be so shamefully (or rather
shamelesly) treated for his performance.

But the sum of all It Is Malice, whereby It endeavors to outlaw Mr. How,
not only from Mr. Boyle's patronage, but from all Protestant protection, is to
represent him under a Popish Vizard. As p. 2. Old Popish Arguments dressed up
A-la-mode. An averment of the Old Popish Calumny. An Affidavit of a Pontificial
Accusation. Trampling p. 4. on the Venerable Dust, which was sometimes animated
by truly heroic souls, and bore the names of Zuinglius, Calvin, Beza, Penkins,
Pemble, Twisse, Davenant, Ames, etc. Then p. 12. still objects to him the
opinion of Durandus, though Mr. How had in his Postscript so fully vindicated
himself against it, that his first Accuser has let it fall out of perfect
ingenuity. Draws a parallel between his and the Papists Arguments against
Predetermination. And p. 13. erects another pair of Columns to that purpose,
betwixt which Mr. How is to look out as through a Pillary. Afthis p. 14. says,
the point under debate between It and Mr. How, is a stated Controversy
between the Papists and Protestants. Gives It self a little pleasure mixed with
disdain, that because there was no Smith to be found throughout all the Land of
Israel, he was fain to go down to the Philistines to sharpen his Ax and his
Mattock, 1 Samuel 13. 19, 20. Imitates Bradwardins Piety, therefore intituling
It Is Book de Causa Dei, the Cause of God being that which It designs to secure
from the impetuous Assaults of its' Adversaries, among which It is heartily
sorry Mr. How should be numbered as to this instance. This kind of proceeding
does argue rather the strength of Malice, than of the Cause. For although we
live under a rational jealousy always of Popery, yet whatsoever is said by
any Author of that persuasion, is not forthwith therefore to be clamorously
rejected. Have not there constantly been among them, men fit to be owned for
Holy Life, Good Sense, Great Learning? And in many points we agree with them,
and shall in all, whenever Our Eyes shall be shut, or Theirs shall be opened.
The Discourse had indeed done something to the purpose, could It have shown the
Doctrine of Predetermination to be one of those Discriminating Causes upon
which we have made a separation from that Church, that it is an Article of
Faith in which our Creeds differ, and that it were a fit Test to be imposed
upon them in order to their more speedy Conviction.

Which last, if It can bring about for them, so that they may be acquitted upon
Renouncing this Doctrine imputed to them, (instead of the Transubstantiation,
(which Mr. How too escaped so narrowly.) I presume they would, notwithstanding
all the Popery, take it for an high obligation. For indeed, whereas The
Discourse affirms this of Predetermination to be a stated Controversy betwixt
the Papists and the Protestants; the Papists against, the Protetestants for it;
there is not through It Is whole Book a more notorious Falsehood. For this Debate
arose first among the Papists, some of them being of one, others of the
contrary Opinion; so that the Controversy was stated betwixt themselves. But
that which is now T. D's. was first the Dominican Doctrine; and I wonder
therefore the less if It continue herein the Dominican Spirit. Since, and from
that original, the same Argument has indeed been also diffused among the
Protestasts, and they likewise have differed about it with one another; but it
was never taken, in holding it either way, to be the Protestant Character. The
Predeterminative Concourse is not to be found in any Confession of the several
Reformed Churches; But this matter has been left entire to every man's best
Judgment, and one Party is as much Papist in it as the others What two men of
equal Capacity can argue against Predetermination, but they must have the same
Apprehensions in some measure, in matters so obvious? and it ought not to be
improved to eithers prejudice, no more than for two to speak the same words in
discoursing of one subject. Charron, whose Wisdom, p. 1. Bradwardine, whose
Piety, p. 14. and especially, Caesar Borgia, whose Chalk, p. 15. T. D. makes
use of, were none of the best Protestants: And yet I am far from taxing It
therefore of Popery, or giving my self a little pleasure mixed with disdain,
that it was fain to go down to them to sharpen It Is How or It Is Mattock. Let
It rather solace It self in that Lordly posture of mind; nor will I envy It;
especially, seeing to take that satisfaction in a thing which. It makes so
Criminous, is the only Joy of which I think the Evil Spirits are capable.

And as to It Is saying, p. 2. that Mr. How a verse the Old Popish Calumny, that
by the Protestant Doctrine God is made the Author of Sin. And p. 4. that he
tramples upon the venerable dust, etc. of Zuinglius, Calvin, Beza, Perkins,
Pemble, Davenant, Twisse, Ames, etc. it proceeds from the same malice, and may
therefore receive the same answer: For I have shown, first, that this
Predetermination is not the stated Doctrine of Protestants, nor has there yet
any General Council of them been held, where T. D. has presided: but if there
should at any time hereafter, It is so unhappy and singular in expressing It Is
sense, in this matter, that I much fear lest the Plurality of Votes should
affix the dangerous Greek name to It Is Religion. And as to those Worthies whom
It cites by rote, It draws them indeed within the reach of both Old and New
Calumny, by pretending they were of It Is Opinion; whereas one may safely affirm
at adventure, that they were all of them too well enlightened to have ever
thought or spoken after It Is manner. What it may have extorted from them by
Necromancy, I know not; but they had not the happiness to have read It Is De
Causa Dei in their lifetime: Nor do I think that Death corrupts men's Minds as
their Bodies. Of these, whom The Discourse enumerates, Calvin and Beza, have
been reproachfully charged by Bellarmine and other Romanists, as making God the
Author of Sin, but yet there is not to be found in all their works an assertion
of God's Determinative Concurrence. How far some of the rest of them have taken
scope on this subject, I have no obligation here more than The Discourse, to
particularize: neither did Mr. How name any man, as being the fairer way by
much, arguing only against the Opinion. But seeing T. D. has made bold with
Bishop Davenant, I will ask no better: For that truly venerable, dust, which It
has stirred will fly in T. D. eyes; if I be not mistaken. Dissert de
Predestinatione and Reprobatione, it is thus, Deus, Agens ex Deoreto
Praedestinationis, operatur haec priora (scil. Fidem, Sanctitatem,
Perseverantiam) per Influxum Gratiae Efficacis, As ex Decreto Reprobationis
nihil agit quo Deterior efficiatur Reprobatus -- That is, for it is well worth
the translating: God, acting according to his Decree of Predestination, works
these things in the first place, (to wit, Faith, Holiness, and Perseverance) by
the Influence of Efficacious Graces; but, according to his Decree of
Reprobation he acts nothing by which the Reprobate should be made worse.
Methinks, as T. D. will have the Bishop to be of It Is, so, in all reason, It
should be also of the Bishop's Opinion, and if It intends no more, as Mr. How
no less than is here said, I cannot see why there might not be an end of The
Discourse, and of this Controversy.

But however, I hope that I may have done a good work, if upon sight of these
unexpected Remarques, Mr. How, though fitted doubtless for a much better and
fuller Reply, would deliberate before he makes this Adversary so considerable
as to blot Paper on It Is occasion. Let It, in the mean time, venditate all It Is
Streetadages, It Is odd ends of Latin, It Is broken shreds of Poets, and It Is
musty lumber of Schoolmen. Let It enjoy the ingenuity of having unprovoked
fallen upon a person, whose parts It acknowledged, for whom It had such an
Affection, with whom It had so many years Academical Society, and so long
friendship: but whom It now must number among God's Adversaries. Let It value
It self upon these things: for all these considerations do heighten the Price
of an Assassinate. But may Mr. How still continue his Sobriety, Simplicity,
and Equality of Temper: glorifying God rather in the exercise of Practical
Christian Virtues, than affecting the honor of a speculative Question. But if
he had a mind to be Vindictive, there is no way to despite the Adversary more
sensibly, than, as clamorous women, by giving them no answer. Till men grow
into a better humor, and learn to treat of Divinity more civilly, they are
unfit for conversation.

Another, I see, who is now his Third Aggressor, has already assaulted him,
though less barbarously, in a Letter to a Friend, etc. Yet even he introduces
his Book with Job 13. 7. Will thou speak wickedly for God, and talk deceitfully
for him? What shall Mr. How do in this Case? Is the Bible therefore to be
turned into a Libel? and shall he search the Scriptures to find out a Text
equally cutting? He need not go far, were he of that mind, to retaliate. How
easy were the parallel betwixt Job's three Friends (to whom those words were
spoken) and three such comfortable Gentlemen! And why may not Mr. How nick
them as well out of Job, c. 12. v. 3, 4. But I have understanding as well as
you; I am not inferior to you; yea who knows not such things as these? I am
as one mocked of his neighbor, who calls upon God, and he answers him. The
just upright man is laughed to scorn. Or, if he would be yet severer, the same,
chap. 13. v. 4, 5. will hit them home. But ye are Forgers of Lies; ye are all
Physicians of no value. O that you would altogether hold your peace, and it
should be your Wisdom. And then at last, to determine the whole Dispute, He
might conclude with Job 42. 7. The Lord said to Eliphaz the Temanite, My wrath
is kindled against thee, and against thy two Friends; for ye have not spoken of
me the thing that is right as my servant Job has. After all which, what more
seasonable, in order to Reconciliation, than the verse following? Go to my
servant Job, unto offer up for your selves a burnt offering, and my servant Job
shall pray for you (for him will I accept;) lest I deal with you after your
folly, in that you have not spoken of me the thing that is right, as my servant
Job has. But the Word of God is not so to be turned into the Repraach of Man,
though the Allusion may seem never so happy; nor have I instanced thus far,
otherwise than to show the frivolousness, though too usual of that Practice.

But therefore I would advise Mr. How, though not to that excusable sullenness
and silence, with which some have chastised the World for having used them
unworthily; nor to that tacit contempt of his Adversaries, in which he were
hitherto justifiable; yet, that, having made a laudable Attempt, of which
several good men are it seems not capable, he would, for peace sake, either
wholly surcease this contest, or forbear at least till they have all done. For
it is more easy to deal with them all than single; and, were they once
imbodied, come to a consistence among themselves, or had agreed who should
speak for them, they had right to his Answer. But until then, Mr. How is no
more obliged in whatsoever is called Honor, Reason, or Conscience, than if
every hair of T. D. that stands an end, should demand particular satisfaction.
It is the same for a Divine, as he, to turn Common Disputant, as for an
Architect to saw Timber, or cleave Loggs, which, though he may sometimes do for
health or exercise, yet to be constant at it, were to debase and neglect his
Vocation. Mr. How has work enough cut out of a nobler nature, in his Living
Temple, in which, like that of Solomon, there is neither Hammer, nor Axe, nor
any Tool of Iron to be heard, 1 King. 6. 8. nothing that can offend, all to
edify. And this I heartily wish that he may accomplish: But therefore, as he
has not hitherto sought, so that he would avoid all Contention; lest, as
David, for having been a man of blood, was forbid to build the Temple, 1 Chronicles.
22. 8. so he, as being a man of Controversy.

As for my self, I expect in this litigious Age, that some or other will Sue me
for having Trespassed thus far on Theological Ground: But I have this for my
plea, that I stepped over on no other Reason than (which any man legally may
do) to hinder one Divine from offering violence to another. And, if I should be
molested on that account, I doubt not but some of the Protestant Clergy will be
ready therefore to give me the like Assistance.

FINIS.
ERRATA'S.
PAge 8. l. 14. lie, p. 24. l. 11. speculatorem, p. 36. l. 5. actuates, p. 38.
l. 7. leave out, any, p. 43. l. 6. port, p. 82. l. 15. Articles; last line
Epistle, p. 87. l. 2. substrate; p. 88. l. 21. load; p. 9. l. 10. me, p. 95. l.
1. the, p. 100. 1. 18. then.


