MILES CHRISTIANVS, A SERMON Preached to the ARTILLERY-COMPANY.

October 16. 1673.

AT St. Michaels in Cornhill.

By Charles Mason. D. D.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Took Bookseller, at the Ship in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXIII.

To my most Honored Friends.
Sr. John Robinson Knight and Baroronet, Lieutenant of his Majesty's Tower of
London, Alderman and President of the Artillery Company. Sr. Joseph Sheldon
Knight and Alderman, Vice President. Sr. Thomas Player Knight, Leader. Colonel
John Mews, Treasurer. Stewards.
Major Nathaniel Brooks. Captain John Cairie. Major Henry Steed. Captain John
Eaton. Cap. Edward Beeker. Cap. Peter Rich. Cap. Richard VVinche. Cap. Richard
Kinsey.

And to the whole Court of Assistants, Field Officers, Captains, and Gentlemen
in that Famous and Hohourable Society.
SIRS,
I Am prevented in most excuses, for publishing this which I scarcely dare call
a Sermon. I cannot plead special command nor yet importunity, it was but a
modest Request, which had therefore the force of a Precept with me, because I
am told that my Trumpet was not shrill enough to be heard by those at a
distance, I wanted the new invention, or they an Otocousticon, however under
your Protection I must plead the privilege of a Trumpeter to pass without
molestation.

Your obliged Servant Charles Mason.

Nil aut in voluptate solidum aut in Virtute munitum, ubi timor infestat, Lord
Bacon. Augm. Scientiarum. Lib. 6.
Miles Christianus.
A SERMON Preached to the Artillery-Company.
October. 16. 1673.
2. Tim. 2.3. Thou therefore endure hardness as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ.


OUr dearest Lord and Savior, though Prince of that Peace, which he thought
the best tidings at his birth, the best Salutation after his rising from the
Grave, the best Legacy and farewell before his ascension, yet says Matt. 10.34.
I am not come to send peace but a sword.

And the practice of most, is such, as if they were not a prediction of what
would come to pass, but an express commission to take up arms in any cause, as
if those to be entered into Christ his Service, were to be baptized with the
waters of strife, or to receive Catalins Sacrament of blood, as if Christ had
said to his Disciples, as Abner to his and Joabs Soldiers, let the young men
now arise and play before us. 2 Samuel 2. but indeed the chief valor Christ then
exhorted Christians to, was practice, such as St. Paul incites his Livetenant
Timothy to, in the words of my Text. Thou therefore etc. As then the ancients
before they joynd battle, did make some observations from the heavens, so it
will not be amiss to take up some signal notes by the way.

1. All the Advance the first Commanders in Christian warfare gave to those
listed in Christ's Service, was (as to this life) a promise of persecution. And
was ever any Army raised on such terms? This is that Invincible Argument for
the truth of the Christian cause, that Impregnable fort which can neither be
stormed, underminded, starved, nor betrayed. The Sinews of this war were not an
earthly treasure, Heaven was their Magazine, Storehouse and Granary, like those
who fought for Israel against Sisera, they took no gain of money, they fought
from heaven. Judge. 5.19.20.

2. Note Christ and his Commanders put no duty on the meanest Soldiers under
them, but what they themselves exemplified, not like Peter the Hermit in the
holy war, which he had promoted (pretending a Commission from God) but when
they were to join battle, with the Enemy, fell to the Rear, saying. Fall on you
stout and Valiant men of might,
For it is our parts to pray, and yours to fight.


But rather as the brave Corvinus who comprehended the Sum of all Roman
eloquence to Soldiers in two words; viz. Sequimini me follow me. Or Iphicrates
the Grecian General, who being to march against an Enemy in an extreme cold
night, that he might be a President of hard-ship, threw off his upper garment,
and went as thinly clad, as the meanest under his Command. Or Cato, when he was
to conduct the broken forces of Pompey through the Scorcht Sands of Lybia,
invited his Soldiers to follow him into a place where Corn and Wine were never
seen, into a dry wilderness encompassed with horror round about; because he
would not deceive them with false hopes, or concealed fears.

3. Since our Christian State styled a warfare, (though Similitudes do rather
illustrate then teach) yet, since there must be an agreement between the things
compared at least in the main, less cannot he intimated then, 1, that in the
Christian warfare Discipline is necessary, and as no Armies can subsist without
it, so neither can the Church Militant. And as the ancient Romans prevailed
more by strict observance of Martial rules, then either by their Valor or
Justice of their cause. For the latter they pretended none but a dream, that
Rome should be the head City of the whole world; so it is with Rome, Christian
it is a dream of Supremacy confidently affirmed, and obeying the word of
command, that carries on their work, and being kept under the same strictness
of Discipline, which Severus the Emperor used in his Armies, which being
encampt by Orchards and Vineyards touched not an Apple or Grape, as if they had
not been men of the sword but of the gown, not Soliders, but Senators. Or
Brutus who spared not his own Sons, though but Abetters in a conspiracy against
the City. And Manlius Torquatus, whose severity is gone into a Proverb, who
slew his Son for fighting without command though Victorious. Strict Discipline
and close order are like the Scales of the Leviaethan, or a Coat of mail not
penetrable by an easy impression.

2. Though all who have given their names to Christ, are by profession his
Soldiers, yet all are not equally concerned in point of honor. The word Thou
Signalizes Timothy, who was under St. Paul Governor of Ephesus, the prime
Metropolis of Asia, yet he must endure hardness, and be Valiant for the truth,
for

1. Fear in a Commander is very contagious, it may quickly infect an whole
Army; shall such a man as I fly? said Nehemiah, had he given the word for it,
it would have past through the whole body as lightning.

2. They, who are most eminent in Christ his service, those the great Enemy
soonest Attachs, the most faithful and best resolved, he does not trouble
himself with those who fight against Christ under his own banners, and drive on
with the fury of Jehu, as if they would take Hell by Violence, but if he can
conquer an eminent, worthy, a conspicuous Champion for Christ, for this he
builds his Arches, erects his Trophies, and sings Victorta. Let this suffice
for Survey of the outworks. I shall proceed in this Order.

1. Give you the definition of Valor by natures light.

2. Show how it is improved by Christ his Discipline, from whence will flow a
third

3. That there is much Valor required to be a true Christian, that a Coward
cannot be an honest man, much less a good Soldier of Jesus Christ. Provided
that what is spoken be applied to our Spiritual warfare.

1. The greatest Master of reason defines fortitude to be a mean between fear
and confidence Arist. Eth lib 3. Cap 11. but then he seems to confine it too
much, as if there were no Valor at Sea as well as at Land, and in suffering as
well as actions. Again, we fear many things in which usually Valor is not
exercised, as Infamy, which a true Valiant man fears more than death it self;
for honor is his aim, nor will he for life forfeit the end of his calling. Nor
is it any death that fortitude despises, but that which is usherd in by a most
glorious and beautiful danger, which the ancient Blazoners of Valor set forth
in Pallas armed with Helmet and Spear; and such a beauty as proclaimed her
Divinity. But then this mettle must be attended by two.

1. Wisdom (of which Pallas was styled the Goddess) otherwise it is but the
Valor of Jobs Horse, who laughs at the Rattling of the Spear, while his neck is
clothed with Thunder, he paweth in the valley, and rejoices in his strength
Job 39. and seems to be sensible of honor, but is only inspired by martial
Music, to Act as an Enthusiast, he knows not what. Common eyes Judge of Valor
as they do of fencers or Wrestlers, who if they come on Robustuously, and put
forward with a great deal of Violence are Judged the braver men, when many
times their own rudeness is the cause of their disgrace, and a slight touch of
the Adversary gives all that boisterous force a shameful foil. But a true Son
of honor observes all the circumstances that make an action great and glorious,
therefore keeps the mean, neither declines danger when he is concerned, nor is
he confident where no hope. He that fears not an evil that vastly exceeds all
his powers to grapple with, that opposes himself to an Inundation, and scorns
to fly from an earthquake, such an one says Arist: is (...) wants a name,
unless we may call him a Desperado, or in our language a phanatick Imitator of
true zeal. The Philosopher calls him (...) that is a bold daring coward, as
wanting prudence and tolerancy, the chief ingredients into well weighed
fortitude. About the same Object then are conversant the Coward, the Desperate,
and truly Valiant, the first in defect, Second in excess, but the third
carries himself with Mediocrity between them, he neither fears danger nor does
he anticipate it. When deliberately engaged, acts as our earthly fires raging
and consuming, but before, like that heavenly gentle and cherishing. Most
excellent is that of Pliny Epist. lib 1 Epist 22. Impetu quodam ad mortem
currere commune cum multis etc; to run hastily to death is common to many, but
to make choice of life or death as reason and counsel shall dictate, is proper
to great and generous minds. But to fly to death to avoid poverty, shame,
captivity, is not fortitude but softness and Delicacy to choose death; not as
more honorable, but as a refuge from that he counts a greater evil. He that
can endure a condition of life far worse then death, is far more brave and
resolute, then he who seeks for shelter in a grave. Cato therefore must be
disbanded from the number of the truly Valiant, for he died for fear of death,
became of slave to avoid Captivity, and rather then grace Caesar's triumph would
fall a sacrifice to his own envy and narrowness of Spirit. He that cannot
suffer as well as act, has neither breast plate nor headpiece, has but
brutish Valor at best, which is not guided by reason but anger and blind
appetite. Such may be (...) but not (...) fighters but not truly Valiant says
Arist. for the leaven and ferment of all actions is wisdom, in which respect
it is said, Tanti est exercitus quanti Imperator, an Army is to be valued
according to their general. It was the parable of the forementioned Iphicrates,
that an Army of Hearts with a Lion Captain, would be able to vanquish an Army of
Lions, who had but an Heart for their Leader. A wise conduct gives this
assurance to Soldiers, that they shall not die like fools, nor be cast away
prodigally. The Second attendant on true Valor is magnanimity, as inseparable
from it as heat from fire. Now the magnanimous man is one, who being worthy of
great things truly estimates his abilities. This greatness of mind (says
Arist.) is as beauty in a tall, well proportioned body; such only can be called
proper, though lesser may be neet, and elegant. He that is acted by this Spirit
has honor for his aim, the greatest of external goods, therefore we give it
unto God. Now he that is thus qualified must needs scorn any thing that is
infamous, as fraud, injustice, breach of trust, lying, equivocation, collusion
etc: for all these proceed from cowardice and baseness of mind, therefore the
Ancient Comoedians, assigned all fallacious parts to Slaves as to a Davus or a
Simo, who like the Fox in the Fable plays all the prancks and deceitful
stratagems. Again, base concealments are from fear, therefore he dissembles
not, so is cruelty, (for who more fearful then Tyrants.) Therefore the truly
magnanimous is merciful, gives the fairest Quarter, does not punish with death
those who surrender upon mercy, rather raises the prostrate, melts him with
kindness, as knowing that he who conquers by force only, such does but half the
man. Ahabs pardoning of Benhadad 1 King. 20 (if God had not otherwise
appointed) was worthy of the highest Elogy. But Sesostris the Egyptian King who
commanded his Chariot to be drawn by four Captive Princes betrayed a rank,
insolent Spirit, unworthy of his footman or basest groom. How far more brave
was our Richard the first, who being shot at the Siege of Chaluz; and Bertram,
who did it, being afterward taken and brought before him, who boldly justified
the action in service of his Country; the brave Prince, not only caused him to
be set at liberty, but gave him an hundred Shillings sterling. In this he came
near to David who pardoned the curses and reproaches of Shimei (which wounded
deeper a generous Spirit then any Sword can) yet after his Victory he forgave
him on this account, that he was that day King of Israel 2 King. 19.22.

One more Royal example of Clemency we have at home (I think not to be paralled
by any History) who, God like, has not only pardoned Penitents but advanced
them to glory. But the coward never thinks himself safe while his enemy lives,
therefore with trembling hands sheds the blood of warm peace.

But the truly magnanimous cannot be revengeful, is not mindful of injuries,
but rather despises them, nor of contumelies, for he is secure of his honor,
scorns to detract from an enemy, flatters not Princes, for this is servile and
illiberal, and therefore is the most faithful Counselor to his Sovereign on
the same ground that Princes are said to learn no art so truly as
Horseman-ship. For the generous steed is no flatterer, he will throw a Prince
as soon as his groom. Again, he designs all his actions for the public good.
Julius Caesar failed in this, minded not the common welfare, but made himself
the Center of all his projections, though he knew not only how to conduct an
Army, but to mould it to his mind, and to infuse into it his own Genius, yet
all this ended in Self, the only Universal Monarch and Generalissimo of the
whole world. In a word, he is no admirer of any thing the world can propose,
except honor, nor is he transported with glory, because he knows it is due; his
Sail is no more than he can bear, counts nothing profitable that is not
honorable, consults his Reputation in all undertakings, and against base
actions is brim full of Indignation. This description belongs to Commanders in
chief, respectively to those under their power.

Now from what has been said I infer.

1. Against the great Alexander, that he was at best but a succesful Murderer,
a Victorious Robber, nor was he truly great, but as great Earthquakes, great
fires, great Plagues, great inundations: what he did proceeded not from true
fortitude, but audacity; nor was he truly magnanimous but a ranting Hector.

2. Brought to this Test how many thousands whose names have gone out with a
mighty noise into the Universe, are found no better then malefactors condemned
to the gibbet, and all the Execution they did in the field deserves not so much
praise, as that performed by the Minister of Justice. Only this is the
difference; Success guilds the basest actions, and stops all mouths, but those
of the Valiant, who call all sins by their names, as well those which are
clothed in Scarlet, as those which are hanged in chains. Prophet Isa. Cap
46.12 Speak of such as are stout-hearted, but far from Righteousness. Such may
be scourges in Gods hand to chastise Nations with, as the King of Babylon Isa.
14 and the Assyrian, whom he calls the Rod of his Anger Isa. 10. though he
meant not so verse. 7 but overruled he was by the Lord of Host. The Emperors
Arms bearing an Eagle with two Heads, and in one beak a thunder bolt, and the
other a branch of palm, with this motto (...), each in his time is a fit emblem
of Divine government, he has thunderbolts for the rebellious, and palms for the
righteous; and for this he makes use of men as the faulconer does of the enmity
of birds, for his own end. But far they are from that fortitude which natural
reason approves, much more from that which is regulated by the precepts of our
Savior. Who then is the Soldier of Jesus Christ? take his Character in these
particulars.

1. Is that in my Text, he has learnt to endure hardness, a soft head is not
fit for an Helmet, not a tender hand for a Gantlet, such are an easy prey, as
those of Laish Judge. 18. who lay basking in the Sun and were surprizd by the
Danites, and still the Northern hardy Nations have been as goads in their
sides, who were' Sons of pleasure.

Caesar gives three reasons in his Commentaries for the valor of the Belgae.

1. They were furthest from Provence, where soft court-ship was practiced.

2. They dwelt upon a Sea not frequented by such as brought in foreign
allurements to pleasure.

3. They bordered on the Germans, a warlike Nation. These reasons made them
endure hard-ship, necessary both for Spiritual and Temporal warfare.

The delicacies of Capua destroyed Annibal after he had overcome the Romans at
Canna. Nothing can be solid that is Soft.

He is not like to endure much hardship, who is already almost dissolved into
jelly.

Such an one will not endure any powder but that of Cyprus, his bed of Honor
must be stuffed with Down, covered with Quilt, and hanged with Silken
streamers. Yet this is he that is most Valiant after the fight, as the
Ephramites after Gideons Victory were very angry because not called to the
battle Judge. 8. This is he that pays his debts with a Bastinado, and kills
thousands with a law-bone of an Ass. This is he that is most forward to
unsheath his Sword for a gilded fly called a Mistress, and if he receives an
hurt in the Duel, the poor effeminate wretch lies trembling under the hand of
the Surgeon, being circumcised for his Oinah, and now he must have more
attendance then a Lady that lies in; the door must not Creek, nor one puffed of
Wind be admitted, all must tread softly, as the feet of time, least they
disturb this Son of Thunder.

2. A true Christian Soldier takes not that for a badg of honor, which the
Roman slaves were condemned to, to fight Duels, he counts it no diminution to
his Valor to fear Gods laws and the Kings; nor to do that for a slight and
extravagant word or a Capritch of Wit, which perhaps he would not do for God,
the King, or the whole world.

3. A good Christian man at Arms cannot be a Soldier of fortune, such an one
seeds on Iron, like an Estridg, and is an enemy not to any one party, but to
humane Society; like a common Barreter at law, he lives by Quarrels, and
whereas a Christian Soldier seeks peace by war, as the Surgeon does health
by excision, he fights against peace it self, and would, if he could, destroy
it, and therefore an Indictment ought to be brought in against him, as against
the professed Atheist, in the name of mankind, but the Soldier of Christ makes
peace his aim, as that man in Zenophon, who having lifted up his hand to strike
his enemy, in obedience to the word of Command, let it fall again, and was
ready to embrace him, and turned his deadly fewd into Friend-ship.

As he that is of all Religions is truly of none, so he cannot be a true friend
to any cause, that will fight in any Engagement. Therefore in the forth,

4. Place he will as far as he may, know the justice of the cause he fights for.

Conscience of guilt abates courage, rebates the edge of the Sword, and makes
the Gun recoyl on the breast of him that discharges it. As is the man, such is
his strength, and as is the cause such is the man, he that knowingly fights man
in an unjust cause, says with the Heathen. Flectere Si nequeam Superos
Acheronta movebo, Appeals not to the Lord of Host, but to the Prince of
darkness. Therefore in the fifth.

5. Place the means must be just as well as the cause, Though Strategems in war
may be lawful, yet not to obtain a Victory by falsehood, and breach of those
laws which are national and ought to be kept inviolable, for without them there
can be no peace, the end of war.

So in Spirituals we may not do evil that good may come of it, for this is to
fetch fire from Hell to put to that Sacrifice we offer unto God, as those who
baptized the Indians in their own blood, and made them converts to the grave,
for his sake who came to save, not to destroy.

6. The Persons must be just that engage in any cause, otherwise they fight
against Christ under his own colors, and he is wounded in the house of his
Friends.

David indeed had the refuse of the People to follow him, such as were in debt
and malcontents 1 Samuel 22.2. but as God makes the Devil himself to serve his
end, so Princes may Employ such not to Command but obey.

But they who will do God and their King good Service, must first get the
Victory over themselves, and as that Prince is not in case for a foreign war,
who has civil combustions at home; so he is fittest to go out against an enemy
who has peace in his own breast. There is one who writes the History of the
Turks, says, though Monsters in peace, yet in war vitia deponunt they lay
aside their sins, but then he adds Christiani assumunt Christians take up these
sins, which they lay down, O most bitter reproach, and such as ought to cover
us with confusion of face.

7. A Christian Soldier goes not out in his own strength, it is not an Arm of
flesh can do the work, though it could break a bow of Steel, not a mighty Army
without the Lord of Host, for the Moabites were vanquished with a shadow 2 King.
3.22. Goliath by a stone and a little stripling.

History tells us of many Armies lost by mistake, and of Victories gained not
by Valor, but by fear and cowardice.

Rome, which was the head City then of the whole known world, was lost by a
slight moment turning the Scale, in the last battle between Caesar and the
younger Pompey; for King Bogud, an Auxiliary on Pompeys side (when Caesar gave
the day for lost) wheeling about with his Brigade to Seize on Caesar's Camp,
where his Treasure lay, it was by his own party mistaken for a flig^t, and
followed by the enemy to such advantage, as gained the day; from whence the
Historians concludes Consilia non dant homines rebus sed res hominibus, men do
not so much counsel things as things them. But a superior light teaches us,
that God disposes of men and their Counsels; therefore we must remember that
all battles are an appeal to God, without whom all humane confidence is blind
folly, which falls foul upon it self, such was the presumption of the Pompeians
before the first battle with Caesar, they cast dice for all the offices in
Rome, and for all Caesar's Estate, not by might, nor by strength, as the Angel
told Zech. Cap. 4.6. and St Paul gives us a compendious reason for it of him,
and through him, and to him are all things. Romans 11.36.

And thus it is in Spirituals, God has promised Heaven to the humble and meek,
Typified by the Land of promise, which was gained not by humane power, but by
Gods gift. Nor will deepest Counsels prevail where God opposes.

Achitophel was hamperd in his own Policy. Gods peculiar hand is not in any
Subject of humane contemplation, so signal and conspicuous as in war, for
contingencies are there most frequent; and the rarest conjunction in the world
is Valor with wisdom. Therefore in actions best managed, there is reason to
assign more to providence then conduct; and the great Julius Caesar after four
and twenty pitched fields, was forced to acknowledge this. Captains may call
counsels, but God determines, they may order their men as they please, but it is
God disposes. We have a signal instance for this 2 King. 19. in Sennacherib no
man of a more Gyant-like confidence, who looked as if he would scatter
Hezekiahs forces with his eyes, and spoke as if he would dispell them with his
breath, yet God put his hook into his nostrils, and dragged that furious Monster
into his own Country, there to fall by his own bowels, in the house of his
false Gods.

As all finite powers must be Subject to Gods omnipotency, so all wisdom of
man to his omnisciency. Yet.

8. Will not the Victory be obtained without endeavors and wise Councels? for
God delights not either in fools, sluggards, or cowards. Our strength is not to
sit still as it was Is. 30.7. not to stand still and see the Salvation of the
Lord as in the times of Joshua. The rule is so to prepare, as if God stood
Neuter, so to rely on God, as if no help from man. Thus in Spirituals, we must
work out our Salvation with fear and trembling, but withal humbly acknowledge,
that it is God that works in us both to will and to do. Phil. 2.12.13.

9. A Christian Commander aws his Soldiers more by the dignity of his Person
than his power, and those under him fear more to be cowards, than to encounter
the fiercest Enemy.

10. A Christian Soldier never stands neuter, when Religion, peace and welfare
of the Nation are concerned, so the lukewarm in Religion are condemned. Rev.
3.15.

Such deserve Metus Fufetius his punishment, Commander mander he was of the
Albans, who having by League engaged for the Romans stood at a distance,
expecting the event between them and their enemies, therefore in the Close, was
drawn in pieces and shared between them.

Lastly, as no factious Spirit can be a good member of the Church Militant, so
no Christian Soldier will be a mutineer, but will say with the brave Sanyard,
rather then he will make commotion for want of pay, he would feed on one Arm,
and fight with the other. From all which it follows, that there is much Valor
required to be a true Christian, that a coward cannot be an honest man, much
less a Soldier of Jesus Christ. The same courage that enabled the Primitive
Christians to break through the first ranks, made them pass through all the
Pikes, which the three great Generals had placed against them, these are the
world, flesh, and the Devil. Against this Triple league are we engaged, when we
first enter into the Church Militant; a bare declaration for Christ was in the
first age a point of highest Valor.

But now the front of that Battle, which only was dreadful to them is turned
in, to show to us to profess Christ is now no more danger than what is in the
Artillery-yard.

They were the Desperate Forlorn-hope, we enjoy the price of their blood, but
our care must be, least we be underminded, or betrayed by that peace we enjoy.
This must be done by keeping peace in ou^ own breasts, for there is a warlike
opposition between Body and Soul, and as civil war is of all most miserable, so
in the same breast is a conflict between passions and conscience, or if the
former be quiet as in deep security, mistaken for peace, if without a good
conscience, they are rather hushed then composed. It Is a peace dishonorable, or
rather a war wrapped up in the name of peace, a Conspiracy of Soldiers against
their Commander of Slaves, against their Lord Subjects, against their
Sovereign, such as Tully dissuaded the Romans from, when he said to make peace
with M. Antony was to compound for their Slavery.

Now it is fear that is the great disturber of reason and conscience, from this
fear only, least Poverty should come upon us as an Armed man, arise all these
Locusts, as from the infernal Pit, frauds, lies, cheats, perjuries, base and
Servile flatteries, Treasons, and most sins against our Brother arise from
Cowardice. For when men dare not trust Gods conduct in their affairs, they
betake themselves to doublings and redoubts. Fear made Pilate deliver Christ
against his conscience, and so he became a worse Slave to Caesar, then the
common Hangman is in Execution of justice.

And most sins against the first Fable are from perverse fear, this was the
Mother of superstition and Idolatry amongst the Heathens: hence they had their
placatory sacrifice to such Gods as might do them harm, and Propitiatory to
those from whom they expected any good. It Is fear makes the ranting Atheist
deny accounts in the next World, he dares not stand to a Trial, and fears least
his pleasures should be distrubed with sad thoughts, and as the Ancient taught
by the Druides, that those who died for their Country should live again,
scorned to spare that life which should return, so he whose All is terminated
in the body, must needs be overawed by fear from all great and glorious
actions, tending to the public good. For such an one whose hopes end here is
for Neros (...) would be willing all the world should perish with himself; or
could be content to live alone, though there were none extant but himself on
the face of the earth; so he may be freed from that fear which alone he says,
Unites men in humane Society. Such a one may brave it a while, as the Leviathan
in the deep, but must needs be of an abject and Cowardly Spirit under
pressures, for as those who make Dwarfs by art, keep them under by bodily
restraints, such an effect have streits on servile Spirits, they become base
and degenerous, but they have a contrary effect on the Noble and generous. St.
Paul's confinement enlarged his heart because the Gospel was not bound. 2 Timothy
2.9. how full of God and heavenly fire was that glorious Champion for the cause
of Christ, the Sun in all his course saw not one more emulous with himself, for
the common good, he fought, as if he had only assumed his body, and was no more
concerned in it, then if it had been an upper garment, or that mantle which
Elias dropped, ascending in his fiery Chariot. To Conclude, the first we find
excluded from heaven are the Cowards Revelat. 21.8. and none but the Valiant
can take heaven by Violence.

Such are more then Conquerors, others may be Slaves to their own Victories, as
that Roman Emperor, who riding in triumph cast his eye upon a Captive beauty,
and presently became a Vassal to his own Prisoner; but the Christian Soldier
pursues his Victory, stays not to enjoy it, and having done all, hangs up his
Trophies in the Temple, ascribes all to the great Captain of our Salvation,
even Jesus Christ the Righteous; to whom with the Father and Blessed Spirit, be
all honor and Glory, now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

