THE REHEARSAL TRANSPROSED: Or, Animadversions upon a Late BOOK, Entitled, A
PREFACE SHOWING What Grounds there are of Fears and Jealousies of Popery.

The Second Edition, Corrected.

LONDON, Printed by A. B. for the Assings of John Calvin and Theodore Beza, at
the Sign of the Kings Indulgence, on the South side of the Lake Lemans, 1672.

Animadversions upon the Preface to Bishop Bramhall's Vindication, etc.
THe Author of this Presace had first writ a Discourse of Ecclesiastical
Policy; after that, A Defense and Continuation of the Ecclesiastical Policy;
and there he concludes his Epistle to the Reader in these words: But if this be
the Tenance I must undergo for the wantonness of my Pen, to answer the
impertinent and sl^nder Exceptions of every peevish and disingenuo^s Caviller;
Reader I am reformed from my (...) of scribbling, and do here beartily bid thee
an Eternal Farewell. Now this Expression lies open to his own Dilemma against
the Nonconformists confessing in their prayers to God such heinons Enormities.
For if he will not accept his own Charge, his Modesty is all impudent and
counterfeit: Or, if he will acknowledge it, why then he had been before, and
did still remain upon Record, the same lewd, wanton, and incontinent Scribler.

But however, I hoped he had been a Clergyman of Honor, and that when herein
the World and he himself were now so ^ully agreed in the (...) of his Writings,
he would have kept his Word; or at least that his Pen would not, so soon have
created us a disturbance of the fame nature, and so far manifested how
indifferent he is as to the business either of Truth or Eternity. But the
Author, alas, instead of his own, was fallen now into Amaryllis's Dilemma: I
perceive the Gentleman has traveled by his remembering Chi lava la testa al
asino perde il sapone, and therefore hope I may without Pedantry quote the
words in her own whining Italian)

S'il peccar e si dolce e'l non peccar si necessario,
O troppo imperfetta Natura che ripugnia la Leg.
O troppo dura Leg che Natura offendi.
If to scrible be so sweet, and not to scrible be so necessary;
O too frail inclination, that contradicts Obligagation:
O too severe Obligation, that offendest Inclination.
For all his Promise to wait no more, I durst always have laid Ten pound to a
Crown on Natures side. And occordingly he has now blessed us with, as he calls
it, A Preface, showing what Grounds there are of Fears and Jealousies of Popery.

It will not be unpleasant to hear him begin his Story. The ensuing Treatise of
Bishop Bramhall's being somewhat superannuated, the Bookseller was very
sollicitous to have it set off with some Preface that might recommend it to the
Genius os the Age, and reconcile it to the present juncture of Affairs. A
pretty task indeed: That is as much as to say, to trick up the good old Bishop
in a yellow Coif and a Bulls-head, that he may be fit for the public, and
appear in fashion. In the mean time it is what I always presgaed: From a Writer
of Book^, our Author is already dwinled to a Preface-monger, and from Prefaces
I am confident he may in a short time be improved to endite Tickets for the
Bear-Garden. But the Bookseller I see was a cunning Fellow, and knew his Man.
For who so proper as a young Priest to sacrifice to the Genius of the Age; yea,
though his Conscience were the Offering? And none more ready to nick a juncture
of Affairs than a malapart Chaplain; though not one indeed of a hundred but
dislocates them in the handling. And yet our Author is very maidenly, and
condescends to his Bookseller not without some reluctance, as being, forsooth,
first of all none of the most zealous Patrons of the Press.

Though he has so lately forfeited his Credit, yet herein I dare believe him:
For the Press has ought him a shame a long time, and is but now beginning to
pay of the Debt. The Press (that villainous Engine) invented much about the same
time with the Reformation, that has done more mischief to the Discipline of
our Church, than all the Doctrine can make amends for, 'Twas an happy time when
all Learning was in Manuscript, and some little Officer, like out Author, did
keep the Keys of the Library. When the Clergy needed no more knowledge than to
read the Liturgy, and the Laity no more Clerkship than to save them from
Hanging. But now since Printing came into the World, such is the mischief that
a Man cannot write a Book but presently he is answered. Could the Press but
once be conjured to obey only an Imprimatur, our Author might not disdain
perhaps to be one of its most zealous Patrons. There have been ways found out
to banish Ministers, to fine not only the People, but even the Grounds and
Fields where they assembled in Conventicles, But no Art yet could prevent these
seditious meetings of Letters. Two or three brawny Fellows in a Corner, with
mere Ink and Elbow-grease, do more harm than an hundred Systematical Divines
with their ^weaty Preaching. And, which is a strange thing, the very Spunges,
which one would think should rather deface and blot out the whole Book, and
were anciently used to that purpose, are become now the Instruments to make
things legible. Their ugly Printing-Letters, that look but like so many
rottenTeeth, How often have they been pulled out by B. and L. the
P^blick-Tooth-drawers! and yet these rascally Operators of the Press have got a
trick to fasten them again in a few minutes, that they grow as firm a Set, and
as biting and talkative as ever. O Printing! how have thou disturbed the Peace
of Mankind! that Lead, when molded into Bullets, is not so mortal as when
sounded into Letters! There was a mistake sure in the Story of Cadmus; and the
Serpe^ts Teeth which he sowed, were nothing else bu^ the Letters which he
invented. The first Essay that was made toward this Art, was in single
Characters upon Iron, wherewit^ of old they stigmatized Slaves and remarkable
Offenders; and it was of good use sometimes to brand a Schismatic, But a bulky
Dutchman diverted it quite from its first Institution, and contriving those
innumerable Syntagmes of Alpha^ets, has pestred the World ever since with the
gross Bodies of their German Divinity. One would have thought in Reason that a
Dutchman at least might have contented himself only with the Wine Press.

But, next of all, our Author, beside his aversion from the Press, alleges,
that he is as much concerned as De-Wit - or any of the High and Mighty
Burgomasters, in matters of a closer and more comfortable importance to himself
and his own Affairs. And yet whoever shall take the pains to read over his
Preface, will find that it intermeddles with the King, the Succession, the
Privy Council, Popery, Atheism, Bishops, Ecclesiastical Government, and above
all with Nonconformity, and J. O. A man would wonder what this thing should be
of a closer importance, But being more comfortable too, I conclude it must be
one of these three things; either his Salvation, or a Benefice, or a Female.
Now as to Salvation he could not be so much concerned for that care was over;
there has been a course taken to insure all thar are on his bottom, And he is
yet surer of a Benefice; or else his Patrons must be very ungrateful. He cannot
have deserved less than a Prebend for his first Book, a Sine-cure for his
second, and for this third a Rectorship, although it were that of Malmsbury.
Why, thenof necessity it must be a Female. For that I confess might have been a
sufficient excuse from writing of Prefaces, and against the importunity of the
Bookseller. 'Twas fit that all business should have given place to the work of
Propagation. Nor was there any thing that could more closely import him, than
that the Race and Family of the Railers should be perpetuared among Mankind.
Who could in Reason expect that a Man should in the same moments undertake the
labor of an Author and a Father? Nevertheless, he says, he could not but
yield so far as to improve every fragment of time that he could get into his
own disposal, to gratify the Importunity of the Bookseller. Was ever Civility
graduated up and inhanc'd to such a value! His Mistress her self could not have
endeared a Favor so nicely, nor granted it with more sweetness.

Was the Bookseller more Impotunate, or the Author more Courteous?

The Author was the Pink of Courtesy, the Bookseller the Bur of Importunity.

And so, not being able to shake him off, this, he says, has brought forth
this Preface, such an one as it is; for how it will prove, he himself neither
is, nor (till it is too late) ever shall be a competent Judge, in that it must
be ravished out of his hands before his thoughts can possibly be cool enough to
revive or correct the Indecencies either of its style or contrivance. He is now
growing a very Enthusiast himself. No Nonconformist-Minister, as it seems,
could have spoke more extempore. I see he is not so civil to his Readers as he
was to his Bookseller: and so A. C. and James Collins be gratified, he cares
not how much the rest of the World be disobliged. Some Man that had Iess right
to be fastidious and confident, would, before he exposed himself in public,
both have cooled his Thoughts, and corrected his Indecencies: or should have
considered whether it were necessary or wholesome that he should write at all.
Forasmuch as one of the Ancient Sophists (they were a kind of Orators of his
Form) killed himself with declaiming while he had a Bone in his Throat, and J.
O. was still in being. Put up your Trumpery good noble Marquess. But there was
no holding him. Thus it must be, and no better, when a man's Fancy is up, and
his Breeches are down; when the Mind and the Body make contrary Assignations,
and he has both a Bookseller at once and a Mistress to satisfy; Like
Archimedes, into the Street he runs out naked with his Invention. And truly, if
at any time, we might now pardon this Extravagance and Rapture of our Author,
when he was pearch'd upon the highest Pinnacle of Ecclesiastical Felicity, being
ready at once to assuage his Concupisence, and wreek his Malice.

But yet he knows not which way his Mind will work it self and its thoughts.
This is Bays the Second. -- It Is no matter for the Plot -- The Intrigo was out
of his dead -- But you will apprehend it better when you see it. Or rather, he is
like Bays his Actors, that could not guess what humor they were to be in:
whether angry, melancholy, merry, or in Love. Nay insomuch that he says, he
is neither Prophet nor Astrologer enough to for etel. Never Man certainly was
so unaquainted with himself. And, indeed, it is part of his discretion to avoid
his acquaintance and tell him as little of his mind as may be: for he is a
dangerous felllow. But I must ask his pardon if I treat him too homely. It is
his own fault that misled me at first, by concealing his quality under such
vulgarcomparisons as De-Wit and the Burgomasters. I now see it all along; This
can be noless a man than Prince Vol^cicius himself, in dispute betwixt his
Boots which way his mind will work it self; whether Love shall detain him with
his closer Importance, Parthenope, whose Mother, Sir, sells Ale by the Town
Wall: or Honor shall carry him to head the Army that lies concealed for him at
Knightsbridge, and to encounter J. O.

Go on cries Honor: tender Love says Nay.
Honor aloud commands, Pluck both Boots on.
But safer Love does whisper, put on none.
And so now when it comes that he is not Prophet nor Astrologer enough to
foretell what he will do, it is just,

For as bright Day, with black approach of Night,
Contending, makes a doubtful puzzling Light;
So does my Honor and my Love together,
Puzzle me so, I am resolved on neither.
Yet no Astrologer could possibly have more advantage and opportunity to make a
Judgment. For he knew the very minute of the Conception of his Preface, which
was immediately upon his Majesty's issuing his Declaration of Indulgence to
Tender Consciences. Nor could he be ignorant of the moment when it was brought
forth. And I can so far refresh his memory, that it came out in the Dog-dayes,

-- the Season hot, and She too near: (...) mighty Love! J. O. will be undone,
According to the Rule in Davenant's Ephemerides; But the ^eads which at this
moment, and under the present. Schemes and Aspects of the Heavens he intends to
treat of (pure Sidropdel) are these two: First, Something of the Treatise it
self. Secondly, of the seasonableness of its publication! and this, unless his
Humor jade him ('it is come to a Dog-trot already) will lead him further into
the Argument as it relates to the present state of things, and from thence it is
odds but he shall take occasion to bestow some Animadversions upon one J. O.
There Is no trusting him. He doubtless knew from the beginning what he intended.
And so too all his story of the Bookseller, and all the Volo Nola's, and
shall-I shall-I's bebetwixt them, was nothing but fooling: And he now all along
owns himself to be the Publisher, and alleges the slighter and the main
reasons that induced him. Would he had told us so at first; for then he had
saved me thus much of my labor. Though as it chances, it lights not amiss on
our Author, whose delicate stomach could not brook that J. O. should say, he
had prevailed with himself much against his inclination, to bestow a few (and
those idle) hours upon examining his Book: and yet he himself stumbles so
notoriosly upon the very same Fault at his own threshold,

But now from this Preamble he falls into his Peface to Bishop Bramhal, though
indeed like Bays his Prologue, that would have served as well for an Epilogue,
I do not see but the Preface might have past as well for a Postscript, or the
headstal for a Crooper. And our Authors Divinity might have gone to Push- Pin
with the Bishop, which of their two Treatises was the Procatarctical Cause os
both their Edition. For, as they are coupled together, to say the Truth, it is
not discernable, as in some Animals, whether their motion begin at the head or
the tail: whether the Author made his Preface sor Bishop Bramhal's dear sake,
or whether he published the Bishop's Treatise for sake of his own dear Preface.
For my own part I think it reasonable that the Bishop and our Author, should
(like fair Gamsters at Leap-frog) stand and skip in their turns; and however
our Author got it for once, yet if the Bookseller should ever be sollicitous
for a Second Edition, that then the Bishops Book should have the Precedence.

But besore I commit my self to the dangerous dep^hs of his Discourse, which I
am now upon the brink of, I would with his leave make a motion; that instead of
Author, I may henceforth indifferently call him Mr. Bays as often as I shall see
occasion. And that first, because he has no Name or at least will not own it,
though he himself writes under the greatest security, and gives us the first
Letters of other Men's Names before he be asked them. Secondly, because he is I
perceive a lover of Elegancy, of Style and can endure no man's Tautologies but
his own, and therefore I would not distaste him with too frequent repetition of
one word. But chiefly, because Mr. Bays and he do very much Symbolize; in
their understandingt, in their expressions, in their humor, in their contempt
and quarrelling of all others, though of their own Profession. Because, our
Divine, the Author, manages his contest with the same prudence and civility,
which the Players and Poets have practiced of late in their several Divisions.
And lastly, because both their Talents do peculiarly ly in exposing and
personating the Nonconformists. I would therefore give our Author a Name, the
memory of which may perpetually excite him to the exercise and highest
improvement of that Virtue. For, our Cicero does not yet equal our Roscius, and
one turn of Lacy's face has more Ecclesiastical Policy in it, than all the
Books of our Author put together. Besides, to say Mr. Bays is more civil than
to say Villain and Caitiff, though these indeed are more tuant. And, to
conclude; The Irrefragable Doctor of School Divinity, page 460. of his Defense;
determining concerning Symbollical Ceremonies, ha^h warranted me that not only
Governors, but any thing else, may have power to appropriate new names to
things, without having absolute authority over the things themselves. And
therefore henceforward, seeing I am on such sure Ground, Author, or Mr. Bays,
whether I please. Now, having had our Dance, let us advance to our more serious
Counsels.

And first, Our Author begins with a Panegyric upon Bishop Bramhal; a Person
whom my age had not given me leave to be acquainted with, nor my good fortune
led me to converse with his Writings: but for whom I had collected a deep
Reverence from the general Reputation he carried, beside the Veneration due to
the Place he filled in the Church of England. So that our Author having a mind
to show us some proof of his Good Nature, and that his Eloquence laid not all
in Satyr and Invectives, could not, in ny opinion, have fixed upon a fitter
subject of commendation. And therefore, I could have wished for my own sake,
that I had missed this occasion of being more fully informed of some Bishop's
Principles, whereby I have lost part of that pleasure which I had so long
enjoyed in thinking well of so considerable a Person. But however, I recreate
my self with believing that my simple judgment cannot, beyond my intention,
abate any thing of his just value with others. And seeing he is long since
dead, which I knew but lately, and now learn it with regret, I am the more
obliged to repair in my self whatsoever breaches of his Credit, by that
additional Civility which consecrates the Ashes of the Deceased. But by this
means I am come to discern how it was possible for our Author to speak a good
word for any man. The Bishop was expired, and his Writings jump much with our
Author. So that if you have a mind to die, or to be of his Party, (there are but
these two Conditions) you may perhaps be rendered capable of his Charity. And
then write what you will, he will make you a Preface that shall recommend you
and it to the Genius of the Age, and reconcile it to the Juncture of Affairs.
But truly he has acquitted himself herein so ill-favour'dly to the Bistop,
that I do not think it so much worth to gain his approbation; and I had rather
live and enjoy mine own Opinion, than be so treated For, beside his reflection
on the Bishop, and the whole Age he lived in; that he was, as far as the
prejudice of the, Age would permit him, an acute Philosopher (which is a
sufficient taste of Mr. Bays his Arrogance, that no Man, no Age can be so
perfect but must abide his Censure, and of the officious virulence of his
Humor, which infuses it self, by a malignant remark, that (but for this acuter
Philosopher) no man else would have thought of, into the Praises of him whom he
most. intended to celebrate) if, I say, beside this, you consider the most
elaborate and studious Periods of his Commendation, you find it at best very
rediculous, By the Language he seems to transcribe out of the Grand Cyrus and
Cassandra, but the Exploits to have borrowed out of the Knight of the Sun, and
King Arthur. For in a luscious and effeminate Style he gives him such a
Termagant Character, as must either sright or turn the stomach of any Reader;
Being of a brave and enterprising temper, of an active and sprightly mind, he
was always busied either in contriving or performing great D^signs. Well, Mr.
Bays, I suppose by this, that he might have been an overmatch to the Bishop of
Cullen and the Bishop of Strasburg In another place, He finished all the
glorious Designs that he undertook. This might have become the Bishop of
Munster before he had raised the Siege from Groningen. As he was able to
accomplish the most gallant attempts, so he was always ready not only to
justisie their Innocence, but to make good their Bravery. I was too prodigal of
my Bishops at first, and now have never another lest in the Gazette, which is
to our Authors Magazine. His Reputation and Innocence were both Arm or of Proof
against Tories and Presbyterians. But methinks Mr. Bays having to do with such
dangerous Enemies, you should have furnished him too with some weapon of
Offense, a good old Fox, like that of another Hero, his Contemporary in Action
upon the Scene of Ireland, of whom it was sung.

Down by his side be wore a sword of price,
Keen as a Frost, glazed like a new made Ice:
That cracks men shell'd in Steel in a less trice,
Than Squirrels Nuts, or the Highlanders Lice.
Then he says; ' it is true the Church of Ireland was the largest Scene of his
Actions; but yet there in a little time, he wrought out such wondrous
Alterations and so exceeding all belief, as may convince us that he had a mind
large and active enough to have managed the Roman Empire at its greatest
extent. This indeed of our Author's is Great: and yet it reaches not a strain
of his fellow- Pendets in the History of the Mogol: where he tells Dancehment
Kan, When you put your foot in the Stirrup, and when you march upon Horseback
in the front of the Cavalry, the Earth trembles under your feet, the eight
Elephants that hold it on their heads not being able to support it. But enough
of this Trafh.

Beside that it is the, highest indecorum for a Divine to write in such a style
as this [partPlay-Book and part Romance] concerning a Reverend Bishop; these
improbable Elogies too are of the greatest disservice to their own design, and
do in effect diminish always the Person whom they pretend to magnify. Any
worthy Man may pass through the World unquestioned and safe with a moderate
Recommendation; but when he is thus set off, and bedawb'd with Rhetoric, and
embroder'd so thick that you cannot discern the Ground, it awakens naturally
(and not altogether unjustly) Interest, Curiosity and Envy. For all men pretend
a share in Reputation, and love not to see it engrossed and (...), and are
subject to enquire, (as of great Estates suddenly got) whether he came by all
this honestly, or of what credit the Person is that tells the Story? And the
same has happened as to this Bishop, while our Author attributes to him such
Atchievments, which to one that could believe the Legend of Captain Jones,
might not be incredble. I have heard that there was indeed such a Captain, an
honest brave fellow: but a Wag that had a mind to be merry with him, has quite
spoiled his History. Had our Author epitomized the Legend of sixty six Books de
Virtutibus Sancti Patricii (I mean not the Ingenious Writer of the Friendly
Debates, but St, Patrick the Irish Bishop) he could not have promised us
greater Miracles. And it is well for him that he has escaped the fate of
Secundinus, who (as Josselin relates it) acquainting Patrick that he was
inspired to compose something in his Commendation, the Bshiop foretold the
Author should die as soon as 'twas perfected. Which so done, so happened. I am
sure our Author had dyed no other death but of this his own Preface, and a
surfeit upon Bishop Bramhall, if the swelling of Truth could have choked him.
He tells us, I remember somewhere, that this same Bishop of Derry said, the
Scots had a civil expression for these Improvers of Verity, that they are good
Company; and I shall say nothing severer, than that our Author speaks the
language of a Lover, and so may claim some pardon, if the habit and excess of
his Courtship do as yet give a tincture to his discourse upon more ordinary
Subjects. For I would not by any means be mistaken, as if I thought our Author
so sharp set, or so necessitated that he should make a dead Bishop his (...);
so far from that, that he has taken such a course, that if the Bishop were
alive, he would be out of love with himself. He has, like those frightfull
Looking-glasses, made for sport, represented him in such bloated lineaments,
as, I am confident, if he could see his face in it, he would break the Glass.
For, hence it falls out too, that men seeing the Bishop furbish'd up in so
martial accoutrements, like another Odo Bishop of Baieux, and having never
before heard of his prowess, begin to reflect what Giants he defeated and what
Damsels he rescued. Serious Men consider whether he were engaged in the conduct
of the Irish Army, and to have brought it over upon England, for the Imputation
of which the Earl of Strafford his Patron so undeservedly suffered. But none
knows any thing ofit. Others think it is not to be taken literally, but the
wonderful and unheard of Alterations that he wrought out in Ireland, are meant
of some Reformation that he made there in things of his own Function. But then
men ask again, how he comes to have all the honor of it, and whether all the
while that great Bishop usher, his Metropolitan, were unconcerned? For even in
Ecclesiastical Combats, how instrumental soever the Captain has been, the
General usually carries away the honor of the Action. But the good Primate was
engaged in Designs of lesser moment, and was writing his de Primordiis
Ecclesiae Britanicae, and the Story of Pelagius our Countryman. He, honest man,
was deep gone in Grubstreet and Polemmical (...), and troubled with Fits of
Modern Orthodoxy. He satisfied himself with being admired by the blue and white
Aprons, and pointed at by the more (...) Tankard Bearers. Nay, which is worst
of all, he undertook to abate of our Episcopal Grandeur, and condescended (...)
to reduce the Ceremonious Discipline in these Nations to the (...) Simplicity.
What then was this that Bishop Brambal did! Did he like a Protestant Apostle,
in one day convert thousands of the Irish Papists? The contrary is evident, by
the Irish Rebellion and Massacre, which, notwithstanding his Public Employment
and great Abilities, happened in his time So that after all our Authors
bombast, when we have searched all over, we find our selves bilk'd in our ^on:
and he has erected him, like a St Christopher in the Popish Churches, as big
as ten Porters and yet only employed to sweat under the burden of an Infant.

All that appears of him is, first, that he busied himself about a Catholic
(...) among the Churches of Christendom. But as to this, our Author himself
says, that he was not so vain, or so presuming as to hope to see it (...) in
his day^s. And yet but two pages before he told us that the Bishop finished all
the glorious designs which he undertook But this Design of his he draws our in
such a circuit of words, that it is better taking it from the Bishop himself,
who speaks more plainly always and much more to the purpose. And he says, page
(...). of his Vindication, My design is rather to reconcile the Popish Party to
the Church of England, than the (...) of England to the Pope. And how he
manages it, I had rather any man would learn by reading over his own Book, than
that I should be thought to misrepresent him, which I might, unless I
tarnscribed the whole. But in sum it seems to me that he is upon his own
single judgment too liberal of the Public, and that he retrenches both on our
part more than he has Authority for, and grants more to the Popish than they
can of right pretend to. It is however indeed a most glorious Design, to
reconcile all the Churches to one Doctrine and Communion (though some that
meddle in it do it chiefly in order to fetter men straighter under the formal
bondage of fictitious Discipline;) but it is a thing rather to be wished and
prayed for, than to be expected from these kind of endeavors. It is so large a
Field, that no man can see to the end of it: and all that have adventured to
travel it, have been bewildred. That Man must have a vast opinion of his own
sufficiency, that can think he may by his Oratory or Reason, either in his own
time, or at any of our Author's more happy juncture of Affairs, so far persuade
and fascinate the RomanChurch, having by a regular contexture of continued
Policy for so many Ages interwoven it self with the Secular Interest, and made
it self necessary to most Princes, and having at last erected a Throne of
infallibility over their Consciences, as to prevail with her to submit a Power
and Empire so acquired and established in Compromise to the Arbitration of an
humble Proposer. God only in his own time, and by the inscrutable methods of
his Providence is able to effect that Alteration: though I think too he has
signified in part by what means he intends to accomplish it, and to range so
considerable a Church and once so exemplary, into Primitive Unity and Christian
Order. In the mean time such (...) are sit (...) pregnant Scholars that have
nothing else to do, to go big with for forty years, and may qualify them to
discourse with Princes and Statesmen at their leisure; but I never saw that
they came to use or possibility, No more than that of Alexanders Architect, who
proposed to make him a Statue of the Mountain Achos (and that was no Molehil)
and among other things, that Statue to carry in its hand a great habitable
City. But the Surveyor was gravelled, being asked whence that City should be
supplied with Water. I would only have asked the Bishop, when he had carved and
hammered the Romists and Protestants into one Colossian-Church, how we should
have done as to matter of Bibles. For the Bishop, p. 117. complains that
unqualified people should have a promiscuous License to read the Scriptures:
and you may guess thence, if he had moreover the Pope to friend, how the Laity
should have been used. There have been attempts in former Ages to dig through
the Separating Istmos of Peloponnesus; and another to make communication
between the Red Sea and the Mediterranean: both more easy than to cut this
Ecclesiastic Canal, and yet both laid by, partly upon the difficulty of doing
it, and partly upon the inconveniences if it had been effected. I must confess
freely, yet I ask pardon for the presumption, that I cannot look upon these
undertaking Churchmen, however otherwise of excellent Prudence and Learning,
but as men struck with a Notio, and crazed on that side of their head. And so I
think even the Bishop had much better have busied himself in Peaching in his
own Diocese, and disarming the Papists of their Arguments, instead of rebating
our weapons? than in taking an Ecumenical care upon him, which none called him
to, and, as appears by the sequel, none conn'd him thanks for. But if he were
so great a Politicion as I have heard, and indeed believe him to have been,
methinks he should in the first place have contrived how we might live well
with our Protestant Neighbors, and to have united us in one body under the
King of England, as Head of the Protestant Interest, which might have rendered
us more considerable, and put us into a more likely posture to have reduced the
Church of Rome to Reason. For the most leading Party of the English Clergy in
his time retained such a Pontifical stiffness toward the Foreign Divines, that
it puts me in mind of Austine the Monk, when he came into Kent, not deigning to
rise up to the British or give them the hand, and could scarce afford their
Churches either Communion or Charity, or common Civility. So that it is not to
be wondered if they also on their parts looked upon our Models of Accommodation
with the same jealousy that the British Christians had as Austin's Design, to
unite them first to (that is under) the Savons, and then deliver them both over
bound to the Papal Government and Ceremonies. But seeing hereby our hands were
weakened, and there was no probability of arriving so near the end of the work,
as to a consent among Protestants abroad; had the Bishop but gone that step, to
have reconciled the Ecclesiastical Differences in our own Nations, and that we
might have stood firm at home before we had taken such a Jump Beyond Sea, it
would have been a Performance worthy of his Wisdom. For at that time the
Ecclesiastical Rigours here were in the highest ferment, and the Church in
being arrayed it self against the peaceable Dissenters only in some points of
Worship. And what great Undertaking could we be ripe for abroad, while so
divided at home? or what fruit expected from the labor of those Mediating
Divines in weighty matters, who were not yet past Suckingbottle; but seemed to
place all the business of Chri stianity in persecuting men for their
Consciences, differing from them in smaller metters? How ridiculous must we be
to the Church of Rome to interpose in her Affairs, and force our Mediation upon
her; when besides our ill correspondence with Foreign Protestants, she must
observe our weakness within our selves, that we could not, or would not step
over a straw, though for the perpetual settlement and security of our Church
and Nation? She might well look upon us as those that probably might be forced
at some time by our folly to call her into our assistance (for with no Weapons
or Arguments but what are fetched out of (...) Arsenals, can the Ceremonial
Controversy be rightly defended) but never could she consider us as of such
Authority or Wisdom, as to give Balance to her Counsels. But this was far from
Bishop Bramhall's thoughts; who, so he might (like Caesar) manage the Roman
Empire at its utmost extent, had quite forgot what would conduce to (...) Peace
of his own Province and Country. For, p. 57. he settles this Maxim as a Truth,
That second Reformations are commonly like Metal upon Metal, which is false
Heraldry. Where, by the way, it is a wonder that our Author in enumerating the
Bioshp's perfections in Divinity, Law, History, and Philosophy, neglected this
peculiar gift he had in Heraldry; and omitted to tell us that his (...) was
large enough to have animated the Kingdoms of Garter and (...) at their
greatest dimensions. But, beside what I have said already in relation to this
Project upon Rome, there is this more, (...) I confess was below Bishop
Brumhall's reflection, and was indeed fit only sor some vulgar Politician, or
the Commissioners of Scotland about the (...) Union: Whether it would not have
succeeded, as in the consolidation of Kingdoms, where the Greatest swallows
down the Less; so also in Church-Coalition, that though the Pope had
condescended (which the Bishop owns to be his Right) to be only a Patriarch,
(...) he would have (...) up the Patriarchate os Lambeth to his
Mornings-draught, like an Egg in Muscadine. And then there is another Danger
always when things come once to a Treaty, that beside the debates of Reason,
there is a better way of tampering to bring Men over that have a Power to
(...). And so who knows in such a Treaty with Rome, if the Alps (as it is
probable) would not have come over to England, as the Bishop designed it,
England might not have been obliged, lying so commodious for Navigation, to
undertake a Voyage to Civita Vechia; But what though we should have made all
the Advances imaginable, it would have been to no purpose: and nothing less
than an entire and total resignation of the Protestant Cause would have
contented her. For the Church of Rome is so well satisfied of her own
sufsiciency, and has so much more wit than we had in Bishop (...) days, or
seem to have yet learned; that it would have succeeded just as at the Council
of Trent. For there, though many Divines of the greatest Sincerity and
Learning, endeavored a Reformation, yet no more could be obtained of her than
the Nonconformists got of those of the Church of of England at the Conference
of Worcester-House. But on the contrary, all her Excesses and Errors were
further rivited and confirmed, and that great Machine of her Ecclesiastical
Policy there perfected.

So that this Enterprise of Bishop Bramhall's, being so ill laid and so
unseasonable, deserves rather an Excuse than a Commendation. And all that can
be gathered besides out of our Author concerning him is of little better value
for he says indeed, that he was a zealous and resolute Assertor of the Public
Rites and Solemnities of the Church. But those things, being only matters of
external neatness, could never merit the Trophies that our Author erects him.
For neither can a Justice of Peace for his severity about Dirt-baskets deserve
a Statue. And as for his expunging some dear and darling Articles from the
Ptotestant Cause, it is, as far as I can perceive, only his substituting some
Arminian Tenets (which I name so, not for reproach, but for difference) instead
of the Calvinian Doctrines. But this too could not challenge all these
Triumphal Ornaments in which he installs him: For, (...) suppose these were but
mere mistakes on either side, for want of being (as the Bishop says page 134.)
scholastically stated; and that he, with a distinction of School-Theologie,
could have smoothed over and plained away these knots though they have been
much harder.

For the rest, which he leaves to seek for, and I meet casually with in the
Bishop's own Book; I find him to have been doubtless a very good-natured
Gentleman. Page 160. He has much respect for poor Readers; and page 161. He
judges that i^ they come short of Preachers in point of Effu^acy, yet they have
the advantage of Preachers as to point of Security. And page 163. He commends
the care taken by the Canons that the meanest C^re of Souls should have formal
Sermons at least four times every year. page 155. He maintains the public
Sports on the Lord's Day by the Proclamation to that purpose, and the Example of
the Reformed Churches Beyond Sea: and for the public Dances of our Youth upon
Country-Greens on Sundays, after the duties of the day, he sees nothing in then
but innocent, and agreeable to that under-foot of people. And page 117. (which
I quoted before) he takes the promiscuous License to unqualified persons to
read the Scriptures, far more prejudicial, nay, more pernicious, than the
over-rigorous, restraint of the Romanists. And indeed, all along he complies
much for peacesake, and judiciously shows us wherein our separation from the
Church of Rome is not warrantable. But although I cannot warrant any man who
hence took occasion to traduce him of Popery, the contrary of which is evident,
yet neither is it to be wondered, if he did hereby lie under sometimpuration,
which he might otherwise have avoided. Neither can I be so hard-hearted as our
Author in the Nonconformists case of Discipline to think it were better that
he, or a hundred more Divines of his temper should suffer, though innocent, in
their Reputation, than that we should come under a possibility of losing our
Relgion. For as they (the Bishop and I hope most of his Party) did not intend
it so, neither could they have effected it. But he could not expect to enjoy
his Imagination without the annoyances incident to such as dwell in the middle
story: the Pots from above, and the smoke from below. And those Churches which
are seated nearer upon the Frontire of Popery, did naturally and well if they
took Alarm at the March. For, in fact, that incomparable Person Grotius did yet
make a Bridge for the Enemy to come over; or at least laid some of our most
considerable Passes open to them and unregarded: a crime something like what
his Son De Groot (here is Gazotte again for you) and his Son-in-law Mombas have
been charged with. And, as to the Bishop himself, his Friend; an Accusatory
Spirit would desire no better play than he gives in his, own Vindication, But
that is neither my business nor Humor: and whatsoever may have glanced upon him
was directed only to our Author; for publishing that Book, which the Bishop
himself had thought fit to conceal, and for his impertinent efflorescence of
Rhetoric upon so mean Topics, in so choice and copious a Subject as Bishop
Bramhal.

Yet though the Bishop prudently undertook a Design, which he hoped not to
accomplish in his own days, our Author, however, was something wiser, and has
made sure to obtain his end. For the Bishop's Honor was the furthest thing
from his thoughts, and he has managed that part so, that I have accounted it a
work of some Piety to vindicate his Memory from so scurvy a commendation. But
the Author's end was only railing; He could never have induced himself to
praise one man but in order to ^ail on another. He never oils his Hone but that
he may whet his Razor; and that not to shave, but to cut men's throats. And
whoever will take the pains to compare, will find, that as it is his only end;
so his best, nay his only talent is railing. So that he has, while he pretends
so much for the good Bishop, used him but for a Stalking-horse till he might
come within shot of the Foreign Divines and the Nonconformists. The other was
only a copy of his countenance: But look to your selves, my Masters; forin so
venomous a malice, courtesy is always fatal. Under color of some men's having
taxed the Bishop, he flies out into a furious Debauch, and breaks the Windows,
if he could, would raze the foundations of all the Protestant Churches beyond
Sea: but for all men at home of their persuasion, if he meet them in the dark
he runs them through. He usurps to himself the Authority of the Church of
England, who is so well bred, that if he would have allowed her to speak, she
would doubtless have treated more civilly those over whom she pretends no
Jurisdiction: and under the names of Germany and Geneva, he rallies and rails
at the whole Protestancy of Europe. For you are mistaken in our Author (but I
have worn him threadbare) if you think he designs to enter the Lists where he
has but one man to combat. Mr. Bays ye know, prefers that one quality of
fighting single with whole Armies, before all the moral Virtuesput together.
And yet I assure you, he has several times obliged moral Virtue so highly,
that she ows him a good turn whenever she can meet him. But it is a brave
thing to be the Ecclesiastical Draw-Can-Sir; He kills whole Nations, he kills
Friend and Foe; Hungary, Transv^lvania, Bohemia, Poland, Savoy, France, the
Netherlands, Denmark, Sweden, and a great part of the Church of England, and
all Scotland (for these, beside many more, he mocks under the title of Germany
and Geneva) may perhaps rouse our Mastiff, and make up a Danger worthy of his
Courage. A man would guess that this Giant had promised h^s Comfortable
Importance, a Simarre of the beards of all the Orthodox Theologues in
Christendom. But I wonder how he comes to be Prolocutor of the Church of
England! For he talks at that rate, as if he were a Synodical Individuum; Nay,
if he had a fifth Council in his belly he could not dictate more dogmatically.
There had been indeed, as I have heard, about the days of Bishoy (...), a sort
of Divines here of that Leaven, who being dead, I cover their names, if not for
healths sake, yet for decedcy, who never could speak of the first Reformers
with any patience; who pruned themselves in the peculiar Virulency of their
Pens, and so they might say a tart thing concerning the Foreign Churches, cared
not what obloquy they cast upon the histo ry, or the profession of Religion.
And those me^ undertook likewise to vent their Wit and (...) Choler under the
style of the Church of England and were indeed so far owned by her, that wha^
preferments were in her own disposal, she ra^ there conferred upon them. And now
when the^ were gone off the Stage, there is risen up (...) Spiritual Mr. Bays;
who having assumed to him^ self an incongruous Plurality of Ecclesiastical Of^
fices, one the most severe, of Penitentiary U^ niversal to the Reformed
Churches; the other most ridiculous, of Buffoon-General to the Church of
England, may be henceforth capable of an^ other Promotion. And not being
content to en^ joy his own folly, he has taken two others into Partnership; as
fit for his design, as those tw^ that clubb'd with Mahomet in making the (...)
an: who by perverse Wit and Representatio^ might travesteere the Scripture, and
render (...) the careful and serious part of Religion odio^ and contemptible.
But, lest I might be mistake as to the Persons I mention, I will assure the
Reader that I intend not Huddibras: For he is man of the other Robe, and his
excelleut tha^ has taken a ^ight far above these Whiflers: tha^ whoever
dislikes the choice of his Subject, ca^ not but commend his Performance, and
calculat^ if on so b^rren a Theme he were so copious, wha^ admirable sport he
would have made with an Ec^ clesiastical Politician. But for a Daw-Divine not
only to foul his own Nest in England, bu^ to pull in pieces the Nests of those
beyond (...) it is that which I think uncedent and of very ill ex^ ample. There
is not indeed much danger, (...) Book, his Letter, and his Preface being writ
in En^ glish, that they should pass abroad: but, if they (...) printed upon
incombustible Paper, or by reason of the many Avocations of our Church they may
escape a Censure, yet it is likely they may dye at home, the common fate of such
Treatises amongst the more judicious Oyl-men and Grocers. Unless Mr. Bays be
so far in love with his own Whelp, that, as a Modern Lady, he will be at the
charge of translating his Works into Latin, transmitting them to the
Universities, and dedicating them in the Vaticane. But, should they unhappily
get vent abroad (as I hear some are already sent over for curiosity) what
scandal, what heart-burning and animosity must it raise against our Church:
unless they chance to take it right at first, and limit the Provocation within
the Author. And then, what can he expect in return of his Civility, but that
the Complement which passed betwixt. Arminius and Baudius should concenter upon
him, that he is both Opprobrium Academiae, and Pestis Ecclesiae. For they will
see at the first that his Books come not out under public Authority, or
recommendation: but only as things of Buffoonery do commonly, they carry with
them their own Imprimatur; But I hope he has considered Mr. L. in private, and
paid his Fees.) Neither will the Gravity therefore of their Judgments take
the measures, I hope, either of the Education at our Universities, or of the
Spirit of our Divines, or of the Prudence, Piety, and Doctrine of the Church of
England, from such an Interlooper. Those Gardens of ours use to bear much
better fruit. There may happen sometimes an ill Year, or there may be such a
Crab-stock as cannot by all ingrafting be corrected. But generally it proves
otherwise. Once perhaps in a hundred years there may arise such a Prodigy in
the University (where all Men else learn better Arts and better Manners) and
from thence may creep into the Church (where the Teachers at least ought to
(...) well instructed in the knowledge and practice (...) Christianity) so
prodigious a Person I say may (...) there be hatched, as snall neither know or
(...) how to behave himself to God or Man; and (...) having never seen the
receptacle of Grace or (...) science at an Anatomical Disfection, may (...)
therefore that there is no such matter, or no (...) obligation among
Christians; who shall (...) the Scripture it self, unless it will conform to
(...) Interpretation; who shall strive to put the (...) into Blood, and animate
Princes to be the (...) tioners of their own Subjects for well-doing. A^ this
is possible; but comes to pass as rarely and (...) as long periods in our
Climate, as the birth of false Prophet. But unluckily, in this fatal Year
Seventy two, among all the Calamities that (...) logers foretell, this also has
befaln us. I would not hereby confirm his vanity, as if I also belie^ ed that
any Scheme of Heaven did influence (...) actions, or that he were so
considerable as (...) the Comet under which they say we yet labou^ had
sore-boded the appearance of his Preface. (...) no: though he be a creature
most noxious, (...) he is more despicable. A Comet is of far (...) quality, and
has other kind of employment. (...) though we call it an Hairy-Star, it
affords (...) prognostic of what breeds there: but the (...) strologer that
would discern our Author and (...) business, must lay by his Telescope, and use
a (...) croscope. You may find him still in Mr. Calvin head. Poor Mr. Calvin
and Bishop Bramhal, (...) crime did you dye guilty of, that you cannot (...)
quiet in your Graves, but must be conjured up (...) the Stage as often as Mr.
Bays will ferret you? (...) which of you two are most unfortunate I (...)
determine; whether the Bishop in being alway^ ^ourted, or the Presbyter in
being always railed (...). But in good earnest I think Mr. Calvin has the
better of it. For, though an ill man cannot by ^rasing confer honor, nor by
reproaching fix (...) ignominy, and so they may seem on equal terms; yet there
is more in it: for at the same time that we may imagine what is said by such an
Author to be false, we conceive the contrary to be ^rue. What he says of him
indeed in this place did not come very well in; for Calvin writ nothing against
Bishop Bramhal, and therefore here it amounts to no more than that his Spirit
forsooth had propagated an original Waspishness and salse Orthodoxy amongst all
his Followers. But if you look in other pages of his Book, and particularly
Page 663. of his Defense, you never saw such a Scarcrow as he makes him. There
sprang up a mighty Bramble on the South Side the Lake Lemane, that (such is the
rankness of the soil) spread and flourished with such a sudden growth, that
partly by the industry of his Agents abroad, and partly by its own
indefatigable pains and pragmaticalness it quite overran the whole Reformation
-- You must conceive that Mr. Bays was all this while in an Ecstasy in Dodona's
Grove; or else here is strange work, worse than explicating a Post, or
examining a Pillar. A Bramble that had Agents abroad, and it self an
indefatigable Bramble. But straight our Bramble is transformed to a Man, and he
makes a Chair of Infallibility for himself, out of his own Bramble Timber. Yet
all this while we know not his Name. One would suspect it might be a Bishop
Bramble. But then he made himself both Pope and Emperor too of the greatest
part of the Reformed World. How near does this come to his commendation of
Bishop Bramhal before? For our Author seems copious, but is indeed very poor of
expression: and, as smiling and frowning are performed in the face with the
same muscles very little altered; so the changing of a line or two in Mr. Bays
at any time, will make the same thing serve for a Panegyric or a Philippick.
But what do you think of this Man? Could Mistress Mopsa her self have furnished
you with a more pleasant and worshipful Tale? It wants nothing of perfection,
but that it does not begin with Once upon a time? Which Master Bays, according
to his Accuracy, if he had thought on it, would never have omitted. Yet some
Critical People, who will exact Truth in Falsehood, and tax up an old-wife's
Fable to the punctuality of History, where blaming him the other day for placing
this Bramble on the South Side of the Lake Leman^. I said, it was well and
wisely done that he chose a South Sun for the better and more sudden growth of
such a Fruit-Tree. Ay, said they, but he means Calvin by the Bram ble; and the
rank Soil on the South Side the Lake Lemane is the City of Geneva, situate (as
he would have it) on the South Side of that Lake. Now it is strange that he,
having traveled so well should not have observed that the Lake lies East and
West, and that Geneva is built at the West end of it. Pis^, said I, that is no
such great matter, and, as Master Bays has it upon another occasion, Whether
it be so or no, the fortunes of Caesar and the Roman Empire are not concerned
in it. One of the Company would not let that pass, but told us if we looked in
Caesar's Commentaries, we should find their fortunes were concerned, for it was
the Helvetian Passage, and many mistakes might have risen in the marching of
the Army. Why then, replied I again, Whether it be East, West, North, or South,
there is neither Vice nor Idolatry in it, and the Ecclesiastical Politician may
command you to believe it, and you are bound to acquiesce in his Judgment,
whatsoever may be your private Opinion. Another, to continue the mirth,
answered, That yet there might ^e some Religious Consideration in building a
Town East and West, or North and South, and 'twas not (...) thing so
indifferent as men thought it: but because in the Church of England, where the
Table is set Altar wise, the Minister is nevertheless obliged to stand at the
Northend (though it be the Northend of the Table) it was fit to place the
Geneva Presbyter in diametrical opposition to him upon the South Side of the
Lake. But this we all took for a cold conceir, and not enough matured. I, that
was still upon the doubtful and excusing part, said, That to give the right
situation of a Town, it was necessary first to know in what position the
Gentleman's head then was when he made his Obseavation, and that might cause a
great diversity, as much as this came to. Yes, replied my next neighbor: or,
perhaps some roguing Boy that managed the Puppets, turned the City wrong, and
so disoccidented our Geographer. It was grown almost as good as a Play among
us: and at last they all concluded that Geneva had sold Mr. Bays a Bargain, as
the Moon served the Earth in the Rehearsal, and in good sooth had turned her
breech on him. But this, I doubt not, Mr. Bays will bring himself off with
Honor: but that which sticks with me is, that our Author having undertaken to
make Calvin and Geneva ridicule, has not pursued it to so high a point as the
Subject would have afforded. First, he might have taken the name of the beast
Calvinus, and of that have given the Anagram, Lucianus. Next, I would have
turned him inside outward, and have made him Usinulca. That was a good (...)
name to have frighted Children with. Then he should have been a Bram^ ^till,
av, an indefatigable Bramble too: but after (...) have continued (for in such a
Book a passage in a Play is clear gain, and a (...) loss if omitted) and upon
that Bramble Reasons grew^s plentiful as Black-berries, but both (...), and
they stained all the white Aprons so, that there was no getting of it out. And
then, to make a fuller description of the place, he should have added; That
near to the City of roaring Lions there was a Lake, and that Lake was all of
Brimstone, but stored with overgrown Trouts, which Trouts spawned
Presbyterians, and those spawned the Millecantons of all other Fanatics. That
this Shoal of Presbyterians Landed at Geneva, and devoured all the Bishops of
Geneva's Capons, which are of the greatest size of any in the Reformed World.
And ever since their mouths have been so in relish that the Presbyterians are
in all parts the very Canibals of Capons: in so much, that if Princes do not
take care, the race of Capons is in danger to be totally extinquished. But that
the River Rhosne was so sober and intelligent, that its Waters would not mix
with this Lake perilous, but ran sheere through, without ever touching it: Nay,
such is its apprehension lest the Lake should overtake it, that the River dives
it self under ground, till the Lake has lost the scent: and yet when it rises
again, imagining that the Lake is still at its heels, it runs on so impetuously
that it chooses rather to pass through the roaring Lions, and never thinks it
self safe till it has taken sanctuary at the Popes Town of vinion. He might
too have proved that Calvin made himself Pope and Emperor, because the City of
Geneva stamps upon its Coin the two-headed Imperial Eagle. And, to have given
us the u^most Terror, he might have considered the Alliance and Vicinity of
Geneva to the Canton of Bern, the Arms of which City is the Bear, (and an
Argument in Heraldry, even Bishop Bramhal himself being Judge, might have also
held in Divinity) and therefore they keep under the Town-hoose constantly a
whole Den of Bears. So that there was never a more dangerous situation, nor any
thing so carefully to be avoided by all Travelers in their wits, as Geneva:
the Lions on one side, and the Bears on the other. This Story would have been
Nuts to Mother Midnight, and was fit to have been imbellished with Mr. Bays
his Allegorical Eloquence. And all that he says either by sits and girds of
Calvin, or in his justest Narratives, has less foundation in Nature: and is
indeed twice incredible, first in the mattet related, and then because Mr.
Bays it comes from: or, to express it shorter, because of the Tale and the
Tales man. He is not yet come to that Authority, but that his Dogmatical Ipse
Dixits may rather be a reason why we should not believe him. If Master Bays
will speak os Controversy; let him enter into a regular Disputation concerning
these Calvinian Tenets, and not write an History. Or, if he will give us the
History of Calvin, let him at the same time produee his Authors. And whether
History or Controversy, let him be pleased so long to abate of the exuberancy
of his Fancy and Wit; to dispense with his Ornaments and superfluencies of
Invention and Satyr, and then a man may consider whether he may belie^e his
Story, and submit to his Argument. But in the mean time (for all he pleads in
page 97. of his Defense) it looks all so like subterfuge and inveagling; it is
so nauseating and teadious a task, that no man thinks he ows the Author so much
service as to find out the reason of his own Categoricalness for him. One may
beat the Bush a whole day; but ast^r so much labor shall, for all game, only
spring a Butterfly, or start an Hedghog. Insomuch that I am ever and anon
disputing with my self whether Mr. Bays be indeed so ill-natured a person as
some would have him, and do not rather innocently write these things (as he
professes page 4. of his Presact (so exceeding all belief, that he may make
himself and the company merry. I sometimes could think that he intends no harm
either to Public or Private, but only rails contentedly to himself and his
Muses; That he seeks only his own diversion, and charge his Gun with Wind but
to shoot at the Air. Or that, like Boys, so he may make a great Paper-Kite of
his own Letter of 850. pages, and his Preface of an h^ndred, he has no further
design upon the Poultry of the Village. But he takes care that I shall never be
long deceived with that pleasing imagination: and though his Hyperboles and
Impossibilities can have only a ridiculous effect, he will be sure to manisest
that he had a selonious intention. He would take it ill if we should not value
him as an Enemy of Mankind: and like a raging Indian (for in Europe it was
never before practiced) he runs a Mucke (as they call it there) stabbing every
man he meets, till himself be knocked on the head. This here is the least
pernicious of all his mischiess: though it be no less in this and all his other
Books, than to make the German Protestancy a reproachful Proverb, and to turn
Geneva and Calvin into a Common Place of Railing. I had always heard that
Calvin was a good Scholar, and an honest Divine. I have indeed read that he
spoke something contemptuosly of our Liturgy: Sunt in illo Libro quaedam
tolerabiles ineptiae. But that was a Sin which we may charitably suppose he
repented of on his deathbed. And if Mr. Bays had some just quarrel to him on
that or other account, yet for Divinities (...) he needed not thus have made a
constant (...) place of his Grave. And as for Geneva I never perceived before
but that it was a very laudable City, that there grew an excellent Grape on the
South side of the Lake Leman, that a man might make good cheer there, and there
was a Pallmal, and one might shoot with the Athalet, or play at Courtboule on
Sundays. What was here to inrage our Author so that he must raze the Fort of
St. Katherine, and attempt with the same success a second Escalade? But the
difficulty of the Enterprise doubtless provoked his courage, and the honor he
might win made the justice of his Quarrel. He knew that not only the
Commonwealth of Switzerland, but the King of France, the King of Spain, and
the Duke of Savoy would enter the lists for the common preservation of the
place: and therefore though it be otherwise but a petty Town, he disdained not
where the Race was to be run by Monarchs, to exercise his footmanship. But is
it not a great pity to see a man in the flower of his age, and the vigor of
his studies, to fall into such a distraction, That his head runs upon nothing
but Roman Empire and Ecclesiastical Policy? This happens by his growing too
early acquainted with Don Q^ixot, and reading the Bible too late, so that the
first impressions being most strong, and mixing with the last, as more novel,
have made such a medly (...) his brain pan that he is become a mad Priest,
which of all the sorts is the most (...). Hence it is that you shall hear him
anon instructing Princes, like Sancho, how to govern his (...): as he is busied
at present in (...) the (...) of Germany and Geneva. Had he no Friends to have
given him good Counsel before his Understanding were quite unsettled? or if
there were none near, why did not men call in the neighbors and send for the
Parson of the Parish to persuade with him in time, but let it run on thus till
he is fit for nothing but Bedlam or Hogsdon? However thought it be a particular
damage, it may tend to a general advantage,. and young students will I hope by
his example learn to beware hence-forward of overweening Presumption and
preposterous Ambition. For this Gentleman, as I have heard, after he had read
Don Quixot and the Bible, besides such School-Books as were necessary for his
age, was sent early to the University: and there studied hard, and in a short
time became a competent Rhetorician, and no ill Disputant. He had learnt how to
erect a Thesis. and to defend it Pro or Con with a serviceable distinction:
while the Truth (as his Camarade Mr. Bays has it on another occasion.

Before a full Pot of Ale you can swallow,
Was here with a whoop and gone with a hallow,
And so thinking himself now ripe and qualified for the greatest Undertakings,
and highest Fortune, he therefore exchanged the narrowness of the Uuiversity
for the Town; But coming out of the confinement of the Square-cap and the
Qurdrangle into the open Air, the World began to turn round with him: which he
imagined, though it were his own giddiness, to be nothing less than the
Quadrature of the Circler. This accident concurring so happily to increase the
good opinion which he naturally had of himself, he thenceforward applied to
gain a like reputation with others. He followed the Town life, haunted the best
companies; and, to polish himself from any Pedantick roughness; he read and saw
the Plays, with much care and more proficiency than most of the Auditory. But
all this while he forgot not ^he main-chance, but hearing of a vacancy with a
Noble man, he clapped in, and easily obtained to be his, Chaplain. From that
day you may take the date of his Preserments and his Ruin. For having soon
wrought himself dexteriously into his Patrons favor, by short Graces and
Sermons, and a mimical way of drolling upon the Puritans, which he knew would
take both at Chapel and Table; he gained a great Authority likewise among all
the domestics. They all listened to him as an Oracle: and they allowed him by
common consent, to have not only all the Divinity, but more wit too than all
the rest of the family put together. This thing alone elevated him exceedingly
in his own conceit, and raised his Hypocondria into the Region of the brain:
that his head swelled like any bladder with wind and vapor. But after he was
stretched to such a height in his own fancy, that he could not look down from
top to toe but his Eyes dazzled at the Precipice of his Stature; there feil out,
or in, another natural chance which pushed him headlong. For being of an
amorous Complexion, and finding himself (as I told you) the Cock-Divine and the
Cock-wit of the Family, he took the (...) to walk among the Hens and thought it
was not impolitick to establish his new acquired Reputation upon the
Gentlewomens side. And they that perceived he was a Rising Man, and of pleasant
Conversation, dividing his Day among them into Canonical hours, of reading now
the Common Prayer, and now the Romances; were very much taken with him. The
Sympathy of Silk began to stir and attract the Tippet to the Petticoat and the
Petticoat toward the Tipper. The innocent Ladies found a strange unquietness in
their minds, and could not distinguish whether it were Love or Devotion.
Neither was he wanting on his part to carry on the Work; but shisted himself
every day with a clean Surplice, and, as often as he had occasion to bow, he
directed his Reverence toward the Gentlewomens Pew. Till having before had
enough of the Libertine, and undertaken his Calling only for pref^rment; he was
transported now with the Sanctity of his office, even to ecstasy: and like the
Bishop over Maud^in College Altar, or like Maudlin de la Croix, he was seen in
his Prayers to be lifted up sometimes in the Air, and once particularly so high
that he cracked his scul against the Chapel Ceiling. I do not hear for all
this that he had ever practiced upon the Honor of the Ladies, but that he
preserved always the Civility of a Platonic Knight Errant. For all this
Courtship had no other operation than to make him still more in love with
himself: and if he frequented their company, it was only to speculate his own
Baby in their Eyes. But being thus, without Competitor or Rival, the Darling of
both Sexes in the Family and his own Minion; he grew beyond all measure elated,
and that crack of his Scull, as in broken LookingGlasses, multiplied him in
self-conceit and imagination.

Having fixed his Genter in this Nobleman's House, he thought he could now move
and govern the whole Earth with the same facility. Nothing now would serve him
but he must be a madman in print, and write a Book of Ecclesiastical Policy.
There he distribu^es all the Territories of Conscience into the Princes
Province, and makes the Hierarchy to be but Bishops of the Air: and talks at
such an extravagant rate in things of higher concernment, that the Reader will
avow that in the whole discourse he had not one lucid interval. This Book he
was so bent upon, that he sat up late at nights, and wanting sleep, and
drinking sometimes Wine to animate his Fancy, it increased his Distemper.
Beside that too he had the misfortune to have two Friends, who being both also
out of their wits, and of the same though something a calmer phrensy, spurred
him on perpetually with commendation. But when his Book was once come out, and
he saw himself an Author; that some of the Gallants of the Town laid by the new
Tune and the Tay, tay, tarry, to quote some of his impertinencies; that his
Title page was posted and pasted up at every avenue next under the Play for
that afternoon at the Kings or the Dukes House: the Vainglory of this totally
confounded him. He lost all the little remains of his understanding,, and his
Cerebellum was so dried up that there was more brrins in a Walnut and both
their Shells were alike thin and brittle. The King of France that lost his wits,
had not near so many unlucky circumstances to occasion it: and in the last of
all there is some Similitude. For, as a negligent Page that rode behind and
carried the Kings Lance, let it fall on his head, the King being in Armor, and
the day hot, which so disordered him that he never recovered it: so this
Gentleman, in the Dog Days, straggling by Temple Bar, in a massy Cassock and
Surcingle, and taking the opportunity at once to piss and admire the Title Page
of his Book; a tall Servant of his, one J. O. that was not so careful as he
should be, or whether he did it of purpose, lets another book of four hundred
leaves fall upon his head; which meeting with the former fracture in his
Cranium, and all the concurrent Accidentk already mentioned, has utterly undone
him. And so in conclusion his Madness has formed it self into a perfect
Lycanthropy. He does so severely believe himself to be a Wolf, that his speech
is all turned into howling, yelling, and barking: and if there were any Sheep
here, you should see him pull out their throats and suck the blood. Alas, that
a sweet Gentleman, and so hopeful, should miscarry! for want of Cattle here,
you find him raving now against all the Calvinists of England, and worrying the
whole Flock of them. For how can they hope to escape his chaps and his paws
better than those of Germany and Geneva; of which he is so hungry, that he has
scratched up even their dead bodies out of their Graves to prey upon? And yet
this is nothing if you saw him in the height of his fits: but he has so beaten
and spent himself before, that he is out of breath at present; and though you
may discover the same fury, yet it wants of the same vigor. But however you see
enough of him, my Masters, to make you beware, I hope, of valuing too high, and
trusting too far to your own Abilities.

It were a wild thing for me to Squire it aster this Knight, and accomprny him
here through all his Extravagancies against our Calvinists. You find nothing
but Orthodoxy, Systems, and Syntagms, (...) Theology, Subtilties and (...).
Demosthenes; Tankardbearers; (...); Controversial: General terms without
foundation or reason assigned. That they seem lik words of Cabal, and have no
significance till they be decipe.'d. Or, you would think he were playing at
Substantives and Adj^ctives. And all that rationally can be gathered from what
he says, is, that the Man is mad. But if you would supply his meaning with
^our imagination, as if he spoke sense and to some determinate purpose; it is
very strange that, conceiving himself to be the Champion of the Church of
England, he should bid such a general defiance to the Calvinists. For, he
knows, or perhaps I may better say he did know before this Phrensy had
subverted both his Understanding and Memory, that most of our ancient, and many
of the later Bishops nearer our times, did both hold and maintain those
Doctrines which he traduces under that byword. And the contrary Opinions were
even in Bishop Prideaux's time accounted so novel, that, being then public
Professor of Divinity, he thought fit to tax Doctor Heylin at the Commencement
for his new fangled Divinity: Cujus, says he, in the very words of promotion,
te Doctorem Creo. He knew likewise that of our present Bishops, though one had
leisure formerly to write a Rationale of the Ceremonies and Lituygie, and
another a Treatise of the Holiness of Lent; yet that most of them, and it is to
be supposed all, have studied other Contoversies, and at another rate than Mr.
Bays his Lead can fathom. And as I know none of them that has published any
Treatise against the Calvinian tenets, so I have the Honor to be acquainted
with some of them who are in tirely of that judgment, and differ nothing but,
as of good reason, in the point of (...). And as for that, Bishop. Bramhal page
61. has proved that Calvin himself was of the Episcopal persuasion. So that I
see no reason why Mr. Bays should here and every where be such an enemy to
Controversial skill, or the Calvinists. But I perceive it is for Bishop,
Bramhall's sake here that all the Tribe must suffer. This Bays is not a good
Dog: for he runs at a whole flock of Sheep, when Mr. B. was the Deer whom he
had in view from the beginning. However having foiled himself so long with
every thing he meets, after him now he goes, and will never leave till he has
run him down Poor Mr. B. I find that when he was a Boy, he plucked Bishop
Bramhall's Sloes, and eat his (...); and now, when he is as superannuated as
the Bishop's book, he must be whipped (...), there is no remedy. And yet I have
heard, and Mr. Bays himself seems to intimate as much, that how-ever he might
in his younger years have mistaken, yet that even as early as Bishop Bramhall's
Discourse, he began to retract: and that as for all his sins against the Church
of England, he has in foam la^We Treatises cried Peccavy with a Witness. But
Mr. Bays does not this now look like Sorcery and Extortion, which of all
crimes you purge your self from so often without an Accuser? For first; where^
the old Bishop was at rest, and had under his last Pillow laid by all cares and
contests of this lower World; you by your Necromancy have disturbed him, and
raised his Ghost to persecute and haunt Mr. B. whom doubtless at his death he
had pardoned. But if you called him upto ^sk some Questions too concerning your
Ecclesiastical Policy, as I am apt to suppose, I doubt you had no better Answer
than in the Song:

Art thou forlorn of God, and come to me?
What can I tell thee then but misery?
And then as for Extortion; who but such an Hebrew Jew as you, would, after an
honest man had made so full and voluntary Restitution, not yet have been
satisfied without so many Pounds of his flesh over into the bargain? Though J.
O. be in a desperate condition, yet methinks Mr. B. not being past Grace,
should not neither have been past Mercy. Are there no terms of Pradon, Mr.
Bays? is there no time for (...); but, after so ample a confeffion as he has
made, must he now be hanged too to make good the Proverb? It puts me in mind of
a Story in the time of the Guelphs and Ghibilines, whom I perceive Mr. Bays
has heard of of: They were two Factions in Italy, of which the G^elphs were
for the Pope, and the Ghibilines (...) the Emperor; and these were for many
years carried on and somented with much animosity, ^o the great disturbance of
Christendom. Which of these two were the Nonconformists in those days I can no
more determine, than which of our Parties here at home is now Schismatical. But
so (...) they were to one another, that the Historian said they took care to
differ in the least circumstances of any humane action: and as those that have
the Masons Word, secretly discern one another; so in the peeling or cutting but
of an Onion, a Gu^lp and vice versa would at first sight have distinguished a
Ghibiline. Now one of this latter sort coming at Rome to Confession upon
Ashwednesday, the Pope or the Penitentiary sprinkling Ashes on the Man's head
with the usual ceremony, instead of pronouncing Memento homo quod Cinis es and
in Cinerem reverteris, changed it to Memento homo quod Ghibilinus es, etc And
even thus it fares with Mr. B. who though he should creep on his knees up the
whole Stairs of Scholastic (...), I am confident neither he, nor any of his
Party, shall by Mr. Bays his good will ever be absolved. And therefore truly
if I were in Mr. B's case if I could not have my Confession back again, yet it
should be a warning unto me not without better grounds to be so coming and so
good natured for the future. But whatever he do, I hope others will consider
what ufage they are like to find at Mr. Bays hand, and not suffer themselves
by the touch of his Penitential Rod to be transformed into Beasts, even into
(...), as here he has done with Mr. B. I have in deed wondered often at this
Bays his insolence, who summons in all the World, and preaches up only this
Repentance: and so frequently in his Books he calls for Testimonies, Signal
Marks, Public Acknowledgment, Satisfaction, Recantation, and I know not what.
He that has made the passage to Heaven so easy that one may fly ehither
without Grace (as Gonzales to the Moon only by help of his Gansas) he that has
(...) its narrow paths from those Labyrinths which J. O. and Mr. B. have
planted; this Overseer of God's Highways (if I may with reverence speak it)
who has paved a broad Ca^sway with Moral Virtue through his Kingdom; he
methinks should not have made the process of Loyalty more difficult than that
of Salvation. What Signal Marks, what Testimonies would he have of this
Conversion? Every man cannot, as he has done write an Ecclesiastical Policy, a
Defense: a Preface: and some, if they could, would not do it after his manner;
least instead of obliging thereby the King and the Church, it should be a
Testimony to the contrary. Neither, unless men have better Principles of
Allegiance at home, are they likely to be reduced by Mr. Bays his way of
persuasion. He is the first Minister of the Gospel that ever had it in his
Commission to rail at all Nations. And, though it has been long practiced, I
never observed any great success by reviling men into Conformity. I have heard
that Charms may even envite the Moon out of Heaven, but I never could see her
moved by the R^etorick of barking. I think it ought to be highly penal for any
man to impose other conditions upon his Majesty's good Subjects than the King
expects, or the Law requires. When you have done all, you must yet appear
before Mr. Bays his Tribunal, and he has a new Test yet to put you to. I must
confess at this rate the Nonconformists deserve some Compassion: that after
they have done or suffered legally and to the utmost, they must still be
subjected to the w^nd of a Verger, or to the wanton lash of every Pedant; that
they must run the (...), or down with their breeches as (...) as he wants the
prospect of a more pleasing Nudidity. But I think they may choose whether they
will submit or no to his Jurisdiction. Let them but (as I hope they do) fear
God, honor the King, preserve their Consciences, follow their Trades, and look
to their Chimnies; and they need not fear Mr, Bays and all his Malice. But
after he has sufficiently insulted over Mr. B's ignorance and vanity, with
other Complements of the like nature, in recompense of that candor and civility
which he acknowledges him ta have now learnt toward Church of England, Mr.
Bays forgeting what had past long since betwixt him and the Bookseller) says
in excuse of his severity, that this Treatise was not published to impair Mr.
B's esteem in the least but for a correction of his scribbling humor, and to
warn their Rat-Divines that are perpetually nibling and gnauing other men's
Writings. Now I must confess Mr. Bays this is a very handsome Welcome to Mr.
B. that was come so far to see you, and doutless upon this encouragement he
will visit you often. This is an admirable dexterity our Author has (I wish I
could learn it) to correct a man's scribbling humor without impairing in the
least his reputation. He is as courteous as Lightning, and can melt the Sword
without ever hurting the Scabbard. But as for their Rat-Divines, I wonder they
are not all poisoned with nibling at his Writings, he has strewed so much
Arsenick in every leaf. But however, methinks he should not not have grudged
them so slender a sustenance. For though there was a Sow in Arcadia so fat and
insensible that she suffered a Rats nest in her buttock, and they had both Diet
and Lodging in the same Gammon; yet it is not every Rats good fortune to be so
well provided. And for Push-pinDivinity, I confess it is a new term of Art, I
shall henceforward take notice of it, but I am afraid in general it does not
tend much to the reputation of the Faculty.

And now, though he told us at the beginning, that the Bookseller was the main
reason of publishing this Book of the Bishop and his own Preface, he tells us
that the main reason of its publication was to give some check to their present
disingenuity, that is to say to that of J. O, And J. O. be it at present. He is
come so much nearer however to the Truth, though we shall find ere we have done
that there is still a mainer reason. Wnen I first took notice of this
misunderstanding betwixt Mr. Bays and J. O I considered whether it were not
Execution day with the Latin Alphabet: whether all the Letters were not to
suffer in the same manner, except C. only, which (having been the mark of
Condemnation) might have a pardon to serve for the Executioner. I began to
repent of my Undertaking, being afraid that the Quarrel was with the wole
Cris-CrosRow, and that we must fight it out through all the Squadrons of the
Vowels, the Mutes, the Semi-vowels, and the Liquids. I foresaw a sore and
endless labor, and a battle the longest that ever was read of; being probable
to continue as long as one Letter was left alive, or there were any use of
Reading. Therefore, to spare mine own pains, and prevent Ink-shed, I was
advising the Letters to go before Mr. Bales, or any other his Majesty's
Justices of the Peace, to swear that they were in danger of their. Lives, and
desire that Mr Bays might be bound to the Good-behaviour. But after this I had
another Fancy, and that not altogether unreasonable; that Mr. Bays had, only
for health and exercise-sake, drawn J. O. by chance out of the number of the
rest, to try how he could rail at a Letter, and that he might be well in breath
upon any occasion of greater consequence For, how perfect soever a man may have
been in any Science, yet without continual practice he will find a sensible
decay of his faculty. Hence also, and upon the same natural ground, it is the
wisdom of Cats to whet their Claws against the Chairs and Hangings, in
mediation of the next R^t they are to encounter. And I am confident that Mr.
Bays by this way has brought himself into so good railing case, that pick
what Letter you will out of the Alphabet, he is able to write an Epistle upon
it of 723 pages (I have now told them right) to the Author of the Friendly
Debates.

Now though this had very much of probability, I had yet a further Conjecture:
that this J. O. was a Talisman, signed under some peculiar influence of the
Heavenly bodies, and that the Fate of Mr. Bays was bound up within it. Whether
it be so or no I know not: but this I am assured of, without the help either of
Syderal Magic or Judicial Astrology, that when J and O are in Conjunction,
they do more certainly than any of the Planets forbode that a great
Ecclesiastical Politician shall that Year run mad. I confess after all this,
when I was come to the dregs of my fancy (for we all have our infirmities,
and Mr. Bays his Defense was but the blewJohn of his Ecclesiastical Policy,
and this Preface the Tap-droppings of his Defense) I reflected whether Mr.
Bays having no particular cause of indignation against the Let^ers, there
might not have been a mistake of the Printer, and that they were to be read in
one word Io that use to go before Paean: that is in English a Triumph before
the Victory Or whether it alluded to (...) that we read of at School, the
Daughter of Inachus; and that as Juno p^rsecuted the Heifer, so this was an
He-Cow, that is to say a Bull to be baited by Mr. Bays the Thunderer. But
these being Conceits too trivial, though a Ragoust fit enough sor Mr. Bays his
palate, I was sorced moreover to quit them, remarking that it was an J
Consonant. And I plainly at last perceived that this J. O. was a very Man as
any of us are, and had a Head, and a Mouth with Tongue and Teeth in it, and
Hands with singers and Nails upon the^: Nay, that he could read and write, and
speak as well as I, or Master Bays, either of us. When I once found this, the
business appeared more serious, and I was willing to see what was the matter
that so much exasperated Mr. Bays, who is a Person, as he says himself, of
such a tame and softly humor, and so cold a complexion, that be thinks himself
scarce capable of hot and passionate impressi^ns. I concluded that necessarily
there must be some extraordinary Accident and Occaon that could alter so good a
Nature. For I saw that he pursued J. O. if not from, Post to Pillar, yet from
Pillar to Post, and I diserned all along the Footsteps of a most inveterate and
implacable Malice. As often as he does but name those two first Letters, he is,
like the Island of Fayal on fire in three^ore and ten places.

You see, Mr. Bays, that I too have improved my wit with reading the Gazettes.
Were you of that Fellows diet here abour Town, that epicurizes upon burning
Coals, drinks healths in scalding Brimstone, scraunches the Glasses for his
Desert, and draws his breath through glowing Tobacco-pipes. Nay to say a thing
yet greater; had you never tasted other sustenance than the Focus of burning
Glasses, you could not show more flame than you do always upon that subject.
And yet one would think that even from the little sports, with your comfortable
importance after Supder, you should have learnt when J. O. came into play, to
love your Love with an J. because he is Judicious, though you hate your Love
with an J, because he is jealous: and then to love your Love with an O. because
he is Oraculous, though you hate your Love with an O. because he is Obscure: Is
it not strange, that in those most benign minutes of a Man's life, when the
Stars smile, the Birds sing, the Winds whisper, the Fountains warble, the Trees
blossom, and uuiversal Nature seems to invite it self to the Bridal; when the
Lion pulls in his Claws and the Aspick lays by its Poison, and all the most
noxious Creatures grow amorusly innocent: that even then, Mr. Bays alone
should not be able to refrain his Malignity? As you love your self, Madam, let
him not come near you. He has been fed all his life with Vipers instead of
Lampres, and Scorpions for Crayfish: and if at any time he eat Chickens they
had been cramb'd with Spiders, till he (...) so invenomed his whole substance
that it is much safer to bed with a Mountebank befoe he has taken his Antidote.
But it cannot be any vulgar furnace that has chafed so cool a Salamander. It Is
not the strewing of Cowitch in his Genial-Bed that could thus disquiet him, the
first night. And therefore let us take the Candle and see whether there be not
some body underneath that has cut the Bed-Cords, There was a worthy Divine,
not many years dead, who in his younger time being of a facetious and unlucky
humor, was commonly known by the name of Tom Triplet. He was brought up at
Pauls-School, under a (...) Master, Dr. Gill, and from thence he went to the
UuiversityThere he took liberty (as it is usual with those that are emancipated
from School) to tell Tales, and make the Discipline ridiculous under which he
was bred. But, not suspecting the Doctor's intelligence, coming once to Town,
he went in full School to give him a Visit, and expected no Iess than to get a
Play-day for his former acquaintance. But, instead of that, he found himself
horsed up in a trice; though he appealed in vain to the Privileges of the
(...), pleaded Adultus, and invoked the mercy of the Spectators. Nor was he let
down till the Master had planted a Grove of Birch in his back side, fot the
Terror and puplick Example of all Wags that divulg the Secrets of Priscian and
make merry with their Teachers. This stuck so with Triplet, that all his
lifetime he never forgave the Doctor, but sent him every Newyears-tide an
Anniversary Ballad to a new Tune, and so in his turn avenged himself of his
jerking Pedagogue.

Now when I observed that of late years Mr. Bays had regularly spawned his
Books; in 1670. the Ecclesiastical Policy; in 1671. the Defense of the
Ecclesiastical Policy; and now in 1672 this Preface to Biwop Bramhal, and that
they were writ in a style so vindictive and poynant, that they wanted nothing
but rhyme to be right Tom Triplet; and that their edge bore always upon J. O.
either in broad meanings or in plain terms; I begun to suspect that where there
was so great resemblance in the Effects, there might be some parallel in
Effects, there might be some parallel in their Causes. For though the Peeks of
Players among themselves, or of Poet against Poet, or of a ConformistDivine
against a Nonconformist, are dangerous, and of late times have caused great
disturbance; yet I never remarked so irreconcilable a spirit as that of Boys
against their Schoolmasters or Tutors. The quarrels of their Education have an
influence upon their Memories and Understandings for ever after. They cannot
speak of their Teachers with any patience or civility; and their discourse is
never so flippant, nor their Wirs so fluent as when you put them upon that
Theme. Nay, I have heard old Men, otherwise, sober, peaceable and good-natured,
who never could forgive Osbolstone, as the younger are still inveighing against
Dr. Busby. It were well that both old and young would reform this vice, and
consider how easy a thing it is upon particular grudges, and as they conceived
out of a just (...), to slip either into (...) petulancy of inveterate
uncharitableness. And had there not been something of this in his own case, I
am confident Mr. Bays in his Ecclesiastical Policy, in order to the public
peace and security of the Government, could not have failed to admonish Princes
to beware of this growing evil, and to brandish the Public Rods if not the
Axes against the Boys, to teach them better manners. And he would have assured
them that they might have done it with all safety, notwithstanding that there
were in proportion an hundred Boys against one Preceptor. But therefore is it
not possible that J. O. and Mr Bays have known one another formerly in the
University; and that (as in Seniority there is a kind of Magistracy) Bays
being yet young J. O. conceived himself in those days to be his Superior, and
exercised an Academical Jurisdiction or Dominion over him. Now whether J. O.
might not be too severe upon him there for all men are prone to be cogent and
supercilious when they are in Office) or whether Mr. Bays might not make some
little escapes and excursions there (as young men are apt to do when they are
got together) that I know not, and rather believe the contrary. But that is
certain that the young Wits in the Universities have always an animosity
against the Doctors, and take a reculiar felicity in having a lucky hit at any
of them. I rather suppose that after Mr Bays had changed the place, and his
condition, to be the Noblemans Chaplain, that he might commit some exorbitance
in J. O's opinion, or preach or write something to J. O's reproach, and
published the Secrets of the Holy Brotherhood: and that J. O. having got him
within his reach, did therefore (figuratively speaking)

-- Instead of Maid Jilian
Take up his Malepillian,
And whipped him like a baggage --
as Tom Triplet expresses it. This might well (...) Mr. Bays his Choler, who,
considering himself to be now in Holy Orders, and conceiving that he had been
as safe as in a Sanctuary under his Patrons protection, must needs take it ill
io be handled so irreverently. If it were thus in Fact, and that J. O. might
presume too much upon his former Authority to give him Correction; yet it is
the more excusable, if Mr. Bays had on his part been guilty of so much (...).
For though a man may be allowed once in his life to change his Party, and the
whole Scene of his Affairs, either for his safety or preferment; (...), though
every man be obliged to change an hundred times backward and forward, if his
Judgment be so weak and variable; ye there are some drudgeries that no man of
Honor would put himself upon, and but few submit to if they were imposed. As
suppose one had thought fit to pass over from one persuasion of the Christian
Religion unto another; he would not choose to spit thrice at every Article that
he relinquished to curse solemnly his Father and Mother for having educated him
in those Opinions, to animate his pnew abquaintances to the massacring of his
former Camarades. These are businesses that can only be expected from a
Renegade of Argier or Tunis; to over-doe in expiation, and gain better credence
of being a sincere Musulman. And truly, though I can scarcely (...) that Mr.
Bays has so mean and desperate intentions, which yet his words seem too often
to manifest the Offices however which he undertakes are almost as
dishonorable. For he hathso studied and improved their J(...) as he calls it,
heard their Sermons and prayers so attentively, searched the Scriptures so
narrowly, that a man may justly suspect he had formerly set up J. O's
Profession, and having the language so perfectly, has upon this juncture of
affears betaken himself to turn Spy and Inteligencer; and it is evident that he
has traveled the Country for that purpose. So that I cannot resemble him
better than to that Politic Engine who about two years ago was employed by
some of Oxford as a Missionary among the Nonconformists of the adjacent
Counties? and, upon design, either gathered a Congregation of his own, or
preached amongst others, till having got all their Names, he threw off the
Vizard, and appeared in his Colors, an honest Infromer. But I would not have
any man take Mr. Bays his Fanatical Geography for authentic, lest he should
be as far misled, as in the situation of Geneva. It suffices that Mr. Bays
has done therein as much as served to his purpose, and mixed probability
enough for such as know not better, and whose ears are of a just bore for his
fable.

But I. O. being of age and parts sufficient either to manage or to neglect
this Quarrel, I shall as far as possible decline the mentioning of him, seeing
I have too upon (further intelligence and consideration) found that he was not
the person whom Mr. Bays principally intended. For, the truth of it is, the
King was the Person concerned from the beginn^ng.

His Majesty before his most happy and miraculous Restoration, had sent over a
Declaration of his Indelgence to tender Consciencee in Ecclesiastical Matters.
Which, as it was doubtless the real Result of the last Advice left Him by his
glorious Father, and of his own consummate Prudence and natural Benignity; so
at his Return he religiously observed and promoted it as far as the Passions
and Influences of the contrary Party would give leave. For, whereas among all
the decent Circumstances of his welcome Return, the Providence of God had so
cooperated with the duty of his Subjects, that so glorious an Action should
neither be soiled with the blood of Victory, nor lessened by any capitulations
of Treaty, so not to be wanting on his part in courtesy, as I may say, to so
happy a conjucture, He imposed upon himself an Oblivion of former offenses, and
his Indulgence in Ecclesiastical affairs. And to royal and generous minds do
stipulations are so binding as their own voluntary promises: nor is it to be
wondered if they hold those Conditions that they put upon themselves the most
inviolable. He therefote carried the Act of Oblivion and Indemnity through:
that Party who had suffered vastly in the late Cumbustions not refusing to
imitate his Generosity, but throwing all their particular Losses and
Resentments into the Public Reckoning. But when it came to the Ecclesiastical
Part, the accomplishment of which only remained behind to have perfected his
Majesty's felicity, the business I warrant you should not go so, (as I shall
have occasion to say more par^icularly.) For, though I am sorry to speak it,
yet it is a sad truth, that the Animosities and Obstinacy of some of the Clergy
have in all Ages been the greatest Obstacle to the Clemency, Prudence and good
Intentions of Princes, and the Establishment of their Affairs. His Majesty
therefore expected a better season, and having at last rid himself of a great
Minister of state who had headed this Interest, he now proceeded plainly to
recommend to his Parliment effectually and with repeated instances, the
Consideration of tender Consciences, After the Kings last representing of this
matter to the Parliament, Mr. Bays took so much time as was necessary for the
maturing of so accurate a Book which was to be the standard of Government for
all future Ages, and he was happily delivered in 1670 of his Ecclesiastical
Policy. And though he thought fit in this first Book to treat his Majesty more
tenderly than in those that followed, yet even in this he does all along use
great liber^y and pr^sumption. Nor can what he objects, (...) ^2, (...) weak
Consciences, take place so (...) them as upon himself: who, while his Prince
might expect his Compliance, does give him Counsel, advises him how to govern
the Kingdom, blames and corrects the Laws, and tells him how this and the other
might be mended. But that I may not involve the thing in generals, but
represent undeniably Mr. Bays his performance in this undertaking, I shall
without Art write down his own words and his own quod Scripsi Scripsi, as they
ly naked to the view of every Reader.

The grand Thesis upon which he stakes not only all his own Divinity and
Policy, his Reputation, Preferment, and Conscience, of most of which he has no
reason to be prodigal; but even the Crowns and Fate of Princes, and the
Liberties, Lives and Estates, and, which is more, the Consciences of their
Subjects, which are too valuable to be trusted in his disposal, is this,
page-10. That it is absolutely necessary to the peace and government of the
World, that the supreme Magistrate of every Commonwealth should be vested with
a power to govern and conduct the Consciences of Subjects in affairs of
Religion. And p 12 he explains himself more fully that Unless Princes have
Power to hind their Subjects to that Religion that they apprehend most
advantageous to public peace and tranquillity and restrain those religious
mistakes that tend to its subversion, they are no better than Statues and
Images of Authority. Page 13. A Prince is endued with a Power to conduct
Religion, and that must be subject to his Dominion as well as all other Affairs
of State. P. 20. If Princes should forgo their Sovereignty over men's
Censciences in matter of Religion, they leave themselves less power than is
absolutely necessary, And in brief: The suprea^ Government of every
Commonwealth, wherever it is lodged, must of necessity be universal,
absolute, and uncontrollable in all affairs whatsoever that concern the
Interests of Mankind and the ends of Government. P, 32. He in whom the Supreme
Power resides, having Authority to assign to every Subject his proper function,
and among others these of the Priesthood; the exercise thereof as he has power
to transfer upon others, so he may if he please reserve it to himself. P. 33.
Our Savior came not to uns^ttle the Foundations of Government, but left the
Government of the World in the same condition he found it, P. 34. The
Government of Religion was vested in Princes by an antecedent right to christ.
-- This being the Magisterial and main Point that he maintains, the rest of his
Assertions may be reckoned as Corollaries to this Thesis, and without which
indeed such an unlimeted Maxim can never be justified. Therefore, to make a
Conscience fit for the no^se, he says, P. 89. Men may think of things according
to their own persuasions, and assert the freedom of their judgments against all
the Powers of the Earth. This is the Prerogative of the Mind of Man within its
own Dominions, its Kingdom is intellectual, etc. Whilst Conscience acts within
its proper sphere, the Civil Power is so far from doing it violence, that it
never can. P. 92. Mankind have the same natural right to Liberty of Conscience
in matters of Religious Worship as in Affairs of Justice and Honesty; that is
to say, a Liberty of Judgment, but not of Practice. And in the same pagehe
determins Christian Liberty to be founded upon the Reasonableness of this
Principle. P 308. In cases and disputes of Public concernment, Private men are
not properly sui Juris, They have no power Over their own actions: they are not
to be directed by their own judgments, or determined by their own wills, but by
the commands and determinations of the public Conscience; and if there be any
sin in the Command, he that imposed it shall answer for it, and not I whose
whole duty it is to obey. The Commands of Authority will warrant my Obedience,
my Oobedience will hollow, or at least excuse my action, and so secure me from
sin, if not from error; and in all doubtful and disput able cases, it is better
to err with Authority than to be in the right against it: not only because the
danger of a little error (and so it is if it be disputable) is outweighed by
the importance of the great duty of Obedience, etc.

Another of his Corollaries is, That God has appointed (p. 80.) the
Magistrates to be his Trustees upon Earth, and his Officials to act and
determine in Moral Virtues and Pious Devotions according to all accidents and
emergencies of affairs: to assign new particulars of the Divine Law; to declare
new bounds of right and: wrong, which the Law of God neither does nor can
limit. P. 69. Moral Virtue being the most material and useful part of all
Religion, is also the ut^ost end of all its other duties. P. 76. All Religion
must of necessity ^e resolved into Entbusiasm or Morality. The former is mere
Imposture; and therefore all that is true must be reduced to the latter. Having
thus enabled the Prince, dispensed with Conscience, and sitted up a Moral
Religion for that Conscience; to show how much those. Moral Virtues are to be
valued, P. 53. of the Preface to his Ecclesi^stical Policy he affi^ms that it is
absolutely nec^ssary to the peace and happiness of Kingdoms, that there be set
up a more severe Government over Men's Consciences and Religious Persuasions,
than over their Vices and Immortallities. And Page 55. of the same, that
Princes may with less hazard give liberty to men's Vices and Debaucheries than
their Consciences. But for what belongs particularly to the use of their Power
in Religion; he first (p. 56. of his Book) says, that the Protestant
Reformation has not been able to resettle Princes in their full and natural
rights in reference to its concerns: p. 58. most Protestant Princes have been
frighted, not to say hectored out of the exercise of their Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction. p. 271. if Princes will he resolute (and if they will govern ^o
they must be) they may easily make the most stuborn Conscience bend to their
resolutions. p. 221. Princes must be sure to bind on at first their
Ecclesiastical Laws with the straightest knot, and afterward keep them in
force by the soverity of their execution, 223. speaking of honest and well
meaning men: So easy is it for men to deserve to be punishment for their
Consciences, that there is no Nation in the World, in which were Government
rightly understood and duly managed, mistakes and abuses of Religion would not
supply the Galls with vastly greater numbers than Villainy. P. 54. of the
Preface to Ecclesiast. Policy. Of all Villains the well-meaning Zealot is the
most dangerous. p. 49. The Fanatic- Party in Country Towns and Villages
arises not (to speak within compass) above the proportion of one to twenty.
Whilst the Public Peace and settlement is so unluckily defe^ted by quarrels
and mutinies of Religion, to erect and create new Trading Combinations, is only
to build so many Nests of Faction and Sedit^, etc. For it is Notorious that
there is not any sort of People so inclinable to Seditious practices as the
Trading part of a Nation. And now through many as material Passages might be
heaped up out of his Book on all those and other as tender Subjects, I shall
conclude this imperfect enumeration with one Corallary more, to which indeed
his grand Thesis and all the superstructures are subordinate and accommodated.
P. 166. Princes cannot pluck a pin out of the Church, but the State immediately
shakes and totters. This is the Syntagm of Mr. Bays his Divinity, and System
of his Policy: The Principles of which confine upon the Territories of
Malmsbury, and the style, as far as his Wit would give him leave, imitates that
Language: But the Arrogance and Dictature with which he imposes it on the
World, surpasses by far the presumption either of Gondibert or Leviathan. For
he had indeed a very Politic fetch or two that might have made a much wiser
man then he, more confident. For he imagined first of all, that he had
perfectly secured himself from any man's answering him: not so much upon the
true reason, that is, because indeed so paltry a Book did not deserve an
Answer; as because he had so confounded the Question with differing terms and
contradictory expressions, that he might upon occasion affirm whatsoever he
denied, or deny whatsoever he affirmed. And then besides, because he had so
entangled the matter of Conscience with the Magistrates Power, that he supposed
no man could handle it thoroughly without bringing himself within the Statute of
treasonable words, and at least a Praemunire. But last of all, because he
thought that whosoever answered him must for certain be of a contrary Judgment,
and he that was of a contrary Judgment should be a Fanatic; and if one of them
presumed to be meddling, then Mr. Bays (as all Divines have a Non-^bstance to
the (...) Ceciltanum, and ^o the Act of Oblivion and Indemnity) would either
burn that, or tear it in pieces. Being so well fortified on this side upon the
other he took himself to be impregnable. His Majesty must needs take it kindly
that he gave him so great an accession of Territory, and, lest he should not be
thought rightly to understand Government, nay lest Mr. Bays by virtue of p.
171. should not think him fit to govern, he could not in prudence and safety
but submit to his Admonition and instructions. But if he would not, Mr. Bays
knew ay that he did, how to be even with him and would write another Book that
should do his business. For, the same Power that had given the Prince that
Authority could also revoke it.

But let us see theresore what success the whole Contrivance met with, or what
it deserved. For, after things have been aid with all the depth of humhne
Policy there happens lightly some ugly little contrary accident from some
quarter or other of Heaven, that frustrates and renders all ridiculous.

And here, for brevity and distinction sake, I must make use of the same
privilege by which I call him Mr. Bays, to denominate also his several
Aphorisms or Hypotheses: and let him take car^ whether or no they be
significant.

1. The Unlimited Magistrate. 2. The Public Conscience. 3. Moral Grace. 4.
Debauchery Tolerated. 5. Persecution recommended. And lastly, Pushpin Divinity.

And now, though I intend not to be longer than the nature of Avimadversions
requires, (this also being but collateral to my work of exam ning the Preface,
and having been so abundantly performed already) yet neither can I proceed well
without some Preface. For as I am oblged to ask pardon if I speak of serious
things ridiculously; so I must now heg excuse if I should hap to discourse of
ridiculous things seriously. But I shall, so far as possible, observe decorum,
and, w^atever I talk of, not commit such an Absurdity, as to be grave with a
Busfoon. But the principal cause of my Apology is, because I see I am drawn in
to mention Kings and Princes, and even our own; whom, as I think with all duty
and reverence, so I avoid ^peaking of either in jest or earnest, lest by reason
of my private condition and breeding, I should, though most unwillingly, trip
in a word, or fail in the mannerliness os an expression. But Mr. Bays, because
Princes sometimes hear men of his quality play their part, or preach a Sermon,
grows so insolent that he thinks himsels fit to be their Governor. So
dangerous it is to let such creatures be too familiar. They know not their
distance, and like the Ass in the Fable, because they see the Spaniel play with
their Masters Legs, they think themselves privileged to paw and ramp upon his
Shoulders. Yet though I must follow his track now I am in, I hope I shall not
write after his Copy.

As sor his first Hypothesis of the Unlimited Magistrate, I must for this once
do him right, that after I had read in his 12th. page, that Princes have power
to bind their Subjects to that Religion they apprehend most advantageous to
public Peace and Tra^quility; a long time after, not as I remember till page
82. when he bethought himself better, he says, No Rites nor Ceremonies can be
esteemed unlawful in the Worship of God, unless they tend to deba^ch men either
in their practices or their conceptions of the Deity. But no man is in
Ingenuity obliged to do him that service for the suture; neither yet does that
limitation bind up or interpret what he before so loosly affirmed- However take
all along the Power of the Magistrate as he has stated it; I am confident if
Bishop Bramhall were alive (who could no more forbear Grotius, than Mr. Bays
could the Bishop, notwithstanding their sriendship) he would bestow the same
Censure upon him that he does upon (...), p. 18. When I read his Book of the
Right of the (...) Ma^estrate in Sacred things, he seemed to me to come too
near an Erastian, and to lessen the power of the Keys too much, which Christ
left as a legacy to his Church. It may be he did write that before he was come
to full maturity of judgment: and some other things, I do not say after he was
superannuated. but without that due deliberation which he uses at other times;
(wherein a man may desire Mr. Bays in Mr. Ba yes) Or it it may be some things
may be changed in his Book, as I have been told by one os his nearest friends,
and that we shall shortly see a more Authentic Edition of all his Works, This
is certain, that some of those things which I dislike, were not his own
judgment after he was come to maturity in Theological matter. And had Mr. Bays
(as he ought to have done) carried his Book to any os the present Bishops or
their Chaplains, for a License to print it, I cannot conceive that he could
have obtained it in better terms than what I have collected out of the 108.
page of his Answerer: Notwithstanding the old Pleas of the Jus Divinum of
Episcopacy, of Example and Direction Apostolical of a Parity of Reason between
the condition of the Church whilst under Extraordinary Officers, and whilst
under Ordinary, of the power of the Church to appoint Ceremonies for Decency
and Order, of the pattern of the Churches of old; (all which under Protestation
are reserved till the first opportunity.) I have upon reading of this Book,
found that it may be of use (...) the present (...) of Affairs, and therefore
let it be printed. And as I think, he has disobliged the Clergy of England in
this matter; so I believe the favor that he does his Majesty is not eqvivalent
to that damage. For that I may, with Mr. Bays his leave, profane Ben John
son, though the gravest Divines should be his Flat^erers; he has a very quick
sense, (shall I profane Horace too in the same period?)

Hunc male si palpere (...) undique tutus.

If one stroke him ilfavouredly, he has a terrible way of kicking, and will
fling you to the Stable-door; but is himself safe on every side. He knows it is
all but that you may get into the Saddle again; and that the Priest may ride
him, though it be to a Precipiece. He therefore contents himself with the Power
that he has inherited from his Royal Progenitors Kings and Queens of England,
and as it is declared by Parliament, and is not to be trepanned into another
kind of Tenure of Dominion to be held at Mr. Bays his pleasure, and depend
upon the strength only of his Argument. But (that I may not offend in Latin too
frequently? he considers that by not assumining a Deity to himself, he becomes
secure and worthy of his Government. There are lightly about the Courts of
Princes a sort of Projectors for Concealed Lands, to which they entitle the
King to beg them for themselves: and yet generally they get not much by it,
but are exceeding vexatious to the Subject. And even such an one is this Bays
with his Project of a Concealed Power, that most Princes as ee says have not
yet rightly understood; but whereof the King is so little enamored, that I am
confident, were it not for prolling and momolesting the People, his Majesty
would give Mr. Bays the Patent sor it, and let him make his best on it, after
he has paid the Fees to my Lord Keeper

But one thing I must confess is very pleasant, and he has past an high
Complement upon his Majesty in it: that he may, if he please, reserve the
Priesthood and the Exercise of it to himself. Now this iudeed is surpr^sing;
but this only troubles me, how his Majesty would look in all the Sacerdotal
habiliments, and the Pontifical Wardrobe. I am asraid the King would find
himself incommoded with all that furniture upon his back, and would scarce
reconcile himself to wear even the Lawn-sleeves and the Surplice. But what:
even Charles the fifth, as I have rerd, was at his Inauguration by the Pope,
content to be vested, according to the Roman Ceremonial, in the habit of a
Deacon: and a man would not scruple too much the formality of the dress in
order to Empire.

But one thing I dou^t Mr, Bays did not well consider; that, if the King may
discharge the Function of the Prest-hood, he may too (and it is all the reason
in the world assume the Revenue. It would be the best Subsidy that ever was
voluntarily given by the Clergy. But truly otherwise, I do not see but that the
King does lead a more unblamable Conversation, and takes more care of Souls
than many of them, and understands their office much better, and deserves
something already sor the pains he has taken.

The next is Public Conscience. For as to men's private Consciences he has
made them very inconsiderable, and reading what he says of them with some
attention, I only found this new and important Discovery and great Privilege
of Christian Liberty, thar Thought is free. We are howexer obliged to him for
that, seeing by consequence we think of him what we pleaser And thii he says a
man may assert against all the powers of the Earth: and indeed with much reason
and to great purpose; seeing, as he also alleges, the Civil Power is so far
srom doing violence to that liberty, that it never can, But yet if the freedom
of thoughts be in not lying open to discovery, there have been ways of
compelling men to discover them; or, if the freedom consist in retaining their
judgments when so manifested, that also has been made penal. And I doubt not
but beside Oaths and Renunciations, and Assents and Consents, Mr. Bays if he
were searched, has twenty other tests and picklocks in his pocket. Would Mr.
Bays then persuade men to assert this against all the Powers of the Earth? I
would ask in what manner? To say the truth I do not like him, and would wish
the Nonconformists to be upon their guard, lest he trapan them first by this
means into a Plot, and then preach, and so hang them: If Mr. Bays meant
otherwise in this matter, I confess my stupidity, and the fault is most his
own, who should have writ to the capacity of vulgar Read^rs. He cuts indeed and
saulters in this discourse, which is no good sign, persuading men that they
may, and ought to practice against their Consciences, where the Commands of the
Magistrate intervenes. None of them denies that it is their duty, where their
Judgments or Consciences cannot comply with what is enjoined, that they ought
in obedience patiently to suffer; but further they have not learned. I dare say
that the Casual Divinity of the Jesuits is all through as Orthodox as this
Maxim of our Authors: and as the Opinion is brutish, so the Consequences are
Develish. To make it therefore go down more glibly, he says, that ' it is better
to err with Authority, than to he in the right against it in all doubtful
disputable cases: because the great duty of Obedience outweighs the danger of a
little error, (and tittle it is if it be disputable.) I cannot understand the
truth of this reasoning; that whatsoever is disputable is little; for even the
most important matters are subject to controversy: And besides, things are
little or great according to the Eyes or Understandings of several men; and
however, a man would suffer something rather than commit that little error
against his Conscience, which must render him an Hypocrite to God, and a Knave
amongst Men. The Commands (he says) and Determinations of the public
Conscience ought to carry it; and if there be any fin in the Command, be that
imposed it shall answer for it, and not I whose duty it is to obey; (And mark)
the commands of Authority will warrant my Obedience, my Obedience will hallow,
or at least excuse my action, and so secure me from sin if not frfm error; and
so you are welcome Gentlemen. Truly a very fair and conscionable Reckoning! So
far is this from hallowing the Action, that I dare say it will, if followed
home, lead only to all that sanctified Villainy, for the invention of which we
are beholden to the Author. But let him have the honor of it; for he is the
first Divine that ever taught Christians how another man's sin could confer an
Imputative Righteousness upon all Mankind that shall follow and comply with it
Though the Subject made me ferious, yet I could not read the expression without
laughter: My Obedience will hallow, or at least excuse my Action. So
inconsiderable a difference he seems to make betwixt those terms, That if ever
our Author come for his merits to be a Bishop, a man might almost adventure
instead of Consecrated o say that he was Excused.

The third is Moral Grace. And whoever is not satisfied with those passages of
his concerning it, before quoted, may find enough where he discourses it at
large, even to surfeit. I cannot make either less or more of it than that. he
overturns the whole fabric of Christianity, and Power of Religion. For my
part, if Grace be resolved into Mortality, I think a man may almost as well
make God too to be only a Notional and Moral Existence.

And white-apron'd Amaryllis was of that opinion:

Ma tu Sanctissima Honest a che sola sei D' alma ben nata inviolabil Nume. But
thou most holy Honesty, that only art the inviolable Deity of the well-born
Soul. And so too was the Mortal Poet: (for why may not I too bring out my Latin
shreds as well as he is,

Quaesitum ad fontem solos deducere vorpos)
Nullum Numen abest fi sit Prudentis --
There is no need of a Deity where there is Prudence; or, if you will, wheae
there is Ecclesiastical Policy.

But so far I must do Mr. Bays right, that to my best observation, if Prudence
had been God, Bays had been a most damnable Atheist. Or, perhaps only an
Idolater of their number, concerning whom he adds in the next line

-- sed te
Nos facimus Fortuna Deam Caeloque locamus.
But we make thee Fortune a Goddess, and place thee in Heaven. However I cannot
but be sorry that he has undertaken this desperate vocation, when, there are
twenty other honest and painful ways wherein he might have got a Living, and
made Fortune propitious. But he cares not upon what Argument or how dangerous
he runs to show his ambitious Activity: whereas those that will dance upon
Ropes, do lightly some time or other break their neks. And I have heard that
even the Turk, every day he was to mount the Hig^-Rope, took leave of h^s
Comfortable Importance as if he should never see her more. But this is a matter
foreign to my Judicature, and therefore I leave him to be trayed by any Jury
of Divines: and, that he may have all right done him, let half of them be
School-Divines and the other moity Systematical, and let him except against as
many as the Law allows, and so, God send him a good deliverance. But I am
afraid he will never come off.

The fourth is Debauchery tolerated. For supposing as he does, that it is better
and safer to give a Toleration to men's Debaucheries than to their Religious
Per^wasions, it amounts to the same reckoning. This is a very ill way of
discoursing; and that a greater seve^ity ought to be exercised over men's
Consciences than over their Vices and Immoralities. For it argues too much
indiscretion by avoiding one evil to run up into the contrary extreme. And
Debauched Persons will be readyhence conclude, although it be a perverse way of
reasoning, That where the Severity ought to be less. (...) Crime is less also:
^ay, even-that the more the^ are deba^ch'd, it is (...) that the Punishment
should stil^ (...) in (...); but however, tha^ it were (...) and unadvisable to
(...) and (...) on the R^ligious hand, lest they should (...) greater
penalties. Mr. Bays would have done much better had he sing led out the Theme
of Religion, He might have loaded it with all the truth whieh that subject
would bear; I would allow him that Rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft,
though that text of Scripture will scarce admit his interpretation. He could
not have declaimed more sharply than I, or any honest men else, would upon
occasion against all those who under pretense of Conscience raise War, or
create public Disturbances. But Comparisons of Vice are dangerous, and though
he should do this without design, yet, while he aggravates upon Religion, and
puts it in balance, he does so far alleviate and encourage Debauchery. And
moreover (which to be sure is against his design) he does hereby more confirm
the austerer sort of Sinners, and furnishes them with a more ^pecious Color
and stronger Argument. It had been better Policy to instruct the Magistrate
that there is no readier way to shame these out of their Religious Niceties
than by improving Men's Morals. But, as he handles it never was there any point
more unseasonably exposed; at such a time, when there is so general a
depravation of Manners, that even those who contribute toward it do yet
complain of it; and though they cannot reform their practice, yet feel the
effects, and tremble under the apprehension of the Consequences. It were easy
here to show a man's r^ading, and to discourse out of History che causes of the
decay and ruin of Mr. Bays his Roman Empire, when as the Moralist has it,

-- saevior armis

Luxuria incubuit, Victumque (...) Orbem.

And descending to those Times since Christianity was in the Throne, it is
demonstrable that sor one War upon a Fanatical or Religious account, there have
been an 100. occasioned by the thirst of Glory and Empirethat has inflamed
some great Prince to invade his Neighbors. And more have sprung from the
Contentiousness and Ambition of some of the Clergy; But the most of all from
the Corruption of Manners, and always fatal Debauchery. It exhausts the
Estates of private persons, and makes them fit for nothing but the Highway or
an Army. It debases the spirits and weakens the vigor of any Nation; at once
indisposing them for war, and rendering them incapable of Peace. For, if they
escape intestine troubles, which would certainly follow when they had left
themselves by their prodigality or intemperance, no other means of subsistence
but by preying upon one another; then must they either to get a maintenance,
pick a quarrel with some other Nation, wherein they are sure to be worsted; or
else (which more frequently happens) some neighboring Prince that understands
Government takes them at the advantage, and, if they do not like ripe Fruit
fall into his lap, it is but shaking the Tree once or twice, and he is sure of
them. Where the Horses are, like those of the Sybarites, taught to dance, the
Enemy need only learn the Tune and bring the Fiddles. But therefore (as far as
I understand) his Majesty to obviate and prevent these inconveniences in his
Kingdoms, has on the one hand never refused a just War; that so he might take
down our Grease and Luxury, and keep the English Courage in breath and
exercise: and on the other, (though himself most constantly addicted to the
Church of England) has thought fit to grant some liberty to all other Sober
People, (and longer than the are soy God forbid they should have it) thereby to
give more temper and allay to the commhn end notorious Debauchery.

But Mr. Bays nevertheless is for his fifth: Persecution recommended: and he
does it to the purpose. Julian himself, who I think was first a Reader, and
held forth in the Christian Churches before he turned Apostate and then
Persecutor, could not have outdone him either in Irony or Cruelty. Only it is
God's mercy that Mr. Bays is not Emperor. You have seen how he inveighs
against Trade: That whilst men's Consciences are acted by such peevish and
ungovernable Principles, to erect Trading Combinations is but to build so many
Nests of Faction and Sedition. Lay up your Ships, my Maers, set Bills on your
Shop-doors, shut up the Custom-House; and why not ajourn the Term, mure up
Westminster Hall, leave Plowing and Sowing, and keep a dismal Holy Day through
the Nation; for Mr. Bays is out of humor. But I assure you it is no jesting
matter. For he has in one place taken a List of the Fanatic Ministers, whom
he recons to be but a hundr^d Systematical Divines: though I believe the
Bartlemew-Register or the March-Licenses would make them about an hundred and
three or an hundred and four, or so: But this is but for rounder number and
breaks no square. And then for their People, either they live in greater
Societies of men (he means the City of London and the other Cities and
Towns-Corporate, but expresses it so to prevent some inconvenience that might
betide him but there their noise is greater than their number. Or else in
Country Towns and Villages, where they arise not above the proportion of one to
twenty. It were not unwisely done indeed if he could persuade the the
Magistrate that all the Fanatics have but one neck, so that he might cut off
Nonconformity at one blow. I suppose the Nonconformists value themselves,
though upon their Conscience, and not their Numbers: but they would do well to
be watchful, lest he have taken a List of their Names as well as their Number,
and have set Crosses upon all their Doors against there should be occasion. But
till that happy juncture, when Mr. Bays shall be avenged of his new Enemies,
the wealthy Fanatics, (which is soon done too, for he says, there are but few
of them men of Estates or Interest) he is-contented that they should only be
exposed (they are his own expressions) to the Pillories, Whipping-posts,
Galleys, Rods and Axes,; and moreover and above, to all other Punishments
whatsoever, provided they be of a severer nature than those that are inflicted
on men for their immoralities. O more than human Clemency! I suppose the
Division betwixt Immoralities and Conscience is universal; and whatsoever is
wicked or penal is comprehended within their Territories. So that although a
man should be guilty of all th^se heinous enormities which are not to be named
among Christians, beside all lesser Peccadillo's expressly against the ten
Commandments, or such other part of the Divine Law as shall be of the
Magistrates making, he shall be in a better condition, and more gently handled,
tha^ a well-meaning Zelot; For this is the man that Mr. Bays says is of all
villains the most dangerous: (even more dangerous it se^ms than a malicious and
^meaning Zelot) this is he whom in all Kingdoms where Government is rightly
understood, he would have ^demned to the Galleys for his mistastakes and abuses
of Religion. Although the other punishments are more severe, yet this being
more new and unacquainted, I cannot pass it by without some reflection. For I
considered what Princes make use of Galleys. The first that occurred to me was
the Turk, who according to Bays his maxim, has established Mahometism among
his Subjects, as the Religion that he apprehends most advantageous to public
peace and settlement. Now in his Empire the Christians only are guilty of those
Religious mistak^s that tend to the subversion of Mahometism: So that he
understands Government rightly in chaining the Christians to the Car. But then
in Christendom, all that I could think of were the King of France, the King of
Spain, the Knights of (...), the (...), and the rest of the Italian (...). And
these all have bound their Subjects to the Romish Religion as most
advantageous. But these people, their Galleys with Immoral Fellows and
Debauchees: whereas the Protestants, being their Fanatics and mistakers in
Religion, should have been their Ciurma. But it is to be hoped these Princes
will take advice and understand it better for the future. And then at last I
remembered that his Majesty too (...) one Gally lately built, but I dare say it
is not with that intention: and our Panaticks, though few, are so many, that
one will not serve. But therefore if Mr. Bays and his Partners would be at the
charge to build the King a whole Squadron for this use, I know not but it might
(...) very well (for we delight in Novelties) and (...) would be a singular
obligation to Sir John (...) Dutel, who might have some pretense to be (...)
neral of his Majesty's (...). But so much (...) that. Yet in the mean time I
cannot but (...) Mr. Bays his courage; who knowing how (...) a Villain a
well-meaning Zelot is, and (...) ing calculated to a man how many of them there
(...) in the whole Nation, yet dares thus openly stimulate the Magistrate
against them, and talk of nothing less, but much more than Pillories,
whipping-posts, Galleys and Axes in this manner. It is sure some sign (and if
he knew not so much he would scarce adventure) of the peaceableness of their
Principles, and of that restraint under which their tender Consciences hold
them, when nevertheless he may walk night and and day in safety; though it were
so easy a thing to deifie the Divine after the ancient manner, and no man be
the (...). But that which I confess would vex me most, were I either an ill or
a well-meaning Zealot, would be, after all to hear him (as he frequertly does)
sneering at me in an ironical harangue, to persuade me, forsooth, to take all
patiertly for Conscience Sake, and the (...) example of Mankind: Nay, to
wheedle one almost to make himself away to save the Hangman a labor. It was
indeed rear that (...) in the Primitive times, and the tired Magistrates asked
them, whether they had not Ha'ters and Rivers and Precipices, if they were so
greedy of Suffering? But, by the good leave of your ^lence, we are not come to
that yet. Non tibi sed Petro: or rather, sed Regi. The Nonconformists have
suffered as well as any men in the World, and could do so still if it were his
Majesty's pleasure. (...) Duty to God has hallowed, and their Duty to the
Magistrate has excused both their Pain and Ignominy. To dye by a noble hand is
some satisfaction: But when His Majesty, for Reasons best known to Himself,
has been graciously pleased to (...) of your Rigors, I hope Mr. Bays that we
shall (...) see when you have a mind to (...) with your Comfortable Importance
that the Entrem ses shall be of a Fanatics Giblets: nor that a Nonconformists
head must be whipped off s (...) as your nose drivles. It Is sufficient, Sir, we
know your Inclination, we know your Abilities, and we know your Lodging: And
when there is any further occasion you will doubtless be sent for. For, to say
the truth, this Bays is an excellent Tool, and more useful than ten other men.
I will undertake that he shall, rather than fail, be the Trepanner, the
Informer, the Witness, the Attorney, the Judge; and, if the Nonconformist need
the benefit of his Book, he shall be Ordinary too, and say he is an ignorant
fellosh, non legit: and then, to do him the last Christian office, he would be
his Hangman. In the mean time, let him enjoy it in speculation, secure of all
the Employments when they shall fall. For I know no Gentleman that will take
any of them out of his hands, although it be an age wherein men cannot well
support their quality, without some accession from the public: and for the
ordinary sort of People, they are, I know not by what disaster, besotted and
abandoned to Fanaticism. So that Mr. Bays must either do it himself in person,
or constitute the chief Magistrate to be his Deputy. But Princes do indeed
understand themselves better most of them, and do neither think it so safe to
entrust a Clergyman with their Authority, nor decent for themselves to do the
drudgery of the Clergy, That would have past in the days (...) Saint Dominick:
but when even the Inquisition has lost its edge in the Popish Countries, there
is little appearance it should be set up in England: It were a worthy
Spectacle, were it not? to see his Majesty like the Governor in Synesius,
busied in his Cabinet among those Engines whose very names are so hard that it
is some torture to name them; the Podostrabae, the Dactylethrae, the (...), the
Rhinolabides, the Cheilostrophia, devising as (...) say there are particular
Diseases, so a peculiar Ra (...) for every Limb and Member of a Christians
Body. Or, would he (with all (...) be it spoken) (...) his Kingdom of England
for that of Macassar? where the great Alcanum of Government is the cultivating
of a Garden of Poyionous Plants, and preparing thence a (...), in which the
Prince (...) a Dart that where it does but draw blood, rots the person
immediately to pieces; and his Office is with that to be the Executioner of his
Subjects. God be praised his Majesty is far of another temper: and he is wise,
though some men be malicious.

But Mr. Bays his sixth, is that which I call his Push^ Divinity. For he would
persuade Princes that there cannot a Pin be pulled out of the Church, but the
State immediately totters. That is strange. And yet I have seen many a Pin
pulled out upon occasion, and yet not so much as the Church it self hach
wagg'd. It is true indeed, and we have had sad experiments of it, that some
Clergymen have been so (...) that they have rather exposed the State (...)
ruin, than they would part with a Pin, I will not say out of their Church, but
out of their Sleeve. There is nothing, more natural then for the Ivy to be of
opinion that the Oak cannot stand without its support: or, seeing we are got
into Ivy, that the Church cannot hold up longer than It underprops the Walls:
whereas it is a sneaking insinuating Imp, scarce better than Bindweed, that
sucks the Tree dry, and moulders the building where it catches. But what, pray
Mr. Bays, is this Pin in Pallas's Buckler? Why it is foam Ceremony or other,
that is indifferent in its own nature, that has no antecedent necessity but
only as commanded, that signifies (...) in it self, but what the (...)
pleases, that even by the Church which commands it, is declared to have nothing
of Religion in it, and that is in it self of (...) great moment or consequence,
only it is absolutely necessary that Governors should enjoin it to avoid the
evils that would follow if it were not determined. Very well, Mr. Bays. This I
see will keep cold: anon perhaps I may have a stomach. But I must take care
lest I swallow your Pin.

Here we have had the Titles, and some short Rehearsal of Mr. Bays his six
P^ays. Not but that, should we disvalise him, he has to my knowledge a hundred
more as good in his budget: but really I consult mine own repose. But now among
friends, was there ever any thing so monstrous? You see what a man may come to
with Divinity and High-feeding. There is a scurvy disease, which though some
derive from America, others tell a story that the Genoues^s in their Wars with
Venice took some of their Noblemen, whom they cut to pieces and barrel'd up
like Tunny, and so maliciously vented it to the Venetians, who eating it
ignorantly, broke out in those nasty botches and ugly symptoms, that are not
curable but by Mercury What I relate it for is out of no further intention, nor
is there any more similitude than that the mind too has its Nodes sometimes,
and the Style its Baboes, and that I doubt before Mr. Bays can be rid of'm, he
must pass through the Grand Cure and a dry Diet.

And now it is high time that I resume the thread of my for^er History
concerning Mr. Bays his Books in relation to his Majesty. I do not find that
the Ecclesiastical Policy found more acceptance than could be ^^^ected from so
judicious a Prince: nor do I perceive that he was ever considered of at a
Promotion of Bishops, nor that he has the reversion of the Archbishopric of
Canterbury. But if he have not by marri^ge barred his way; and it should ever
fall to his lot, I am resolved instead of his Grace to call him always his
Morality. But as he got no Preferment that I know of at Court (though his
Patron doubtless having many things in his gift, did abundantly recompense him)
so he mist no less of his aim as to the Reformation of
Ecclesiastical-Government upon his principles. But still, what he complains of
page 20. the Ecclesiastical Laws Were either weak^ned through want of
Execution, or in a manner cancelled by the opposition of Civil Constitutions.
For, beside what in England, where all things went on at the same rate, in the
neighboring Kingdom of Scotland there were I know not how many Mas John's
restored in one day to the work of their Ministry, and a door opened whereby
all the rest might come in for the future, and all this by his Majesty's
Commission. Nay, I think there was (a thing of very ill example) an Archbishop
turned out of his Sea for some Misdemeanor or other. I have not been curious
after his name nor his crime, because as much as possible I would not expose
the nakedness of any person so eminent formerly in the Church. But henceforward
the King fell into disgrace with Mr. Bays, and any one that had eyes might
discern that our Author did not afford his Majesty that Countenance and Favor
which he has formerly enjoyed. So that a Book too of J. O's happening
mischievously to come out at the same season, Upon pretense of answering that,
he resolved to make his Majesty feel the effects of his displeasure. So that he
set Pen to Paper again, and having kept his Midwife of the Friendly Debate by
him all the time of his pregnancy for fear of miscarrying, he was at last
happily delivered of his second Child, the Defense of the Ecclesiastical
Policy, in the year 1671. It was a very lusty Baby, and twice as big as the
former, and (which some observed as an ill sign, and that if it lived it would
prove a great Tyrant) it had, when born, all the Teeth, as perfect as ever you
saw in any man's Head. But I do not reckon much upon those ominous criticismes.
For there was partly a natural cause in it, Mr. Bays having gone so many
months, more than the Civil Laws allows for the utmost term of legitimation,
that it was no wonder if the Brat were at its birth more forward than others
usually are. And indeed Mr. Bays was so provident against abortion, and
careful for some reasons that the Child should cry, that the only question in
Town (though without much cause, for truly 'twas very like him) was, whether it
was not spurious or suppositious. But Allegories and Raillery and hard words
appear in this his second Book, and what I quoted before out of Bishop Bramhal,
p. 18. with allusion to our Author, is here fallen out as exactly true as if it
had been expressly calculated for Bays his Meridian. He finds himself to have
come too near, nay to have far outgone an Erastian, That he had writ his
Ecclesiastical Policy before he was come to maturity of Judgment, that one
might desire Mr. Bays in Mr. Bays, that something had been changed in his Book.
That a more authentic Edition was necessary, that some things which he had
said before, were not his Judgment after he was come to maturity in Theological
matters.

I will not herein too much insist upon his Reply where his Answerer asks him
pertinently enough to his grand Thesis, what was then become of their old ^lea
of Jus Divinum? Why, says he, must you prescribe me what I shall write?
Perhaps my next Book shall be of that Subject. For, perhaps he said so only for
evasion, being old excellent at parrying and fencing. Though I have good reason
to believe that we may shortly see some Piece of his upon that Theme, and in
defense of an Aphorism of a great Prelate in the (...) King's time, That the
King had no more to do in Ecclesiastical Matters, than Jack that rubbed his
Horses h^els. For Mr. Bays is so enterprising you know, Lo^k to it, i will do it.
He has face enough to say or unsay any thing, and it is his privilege, what the
School-Divines deny to be even within the power of the Almighty, to make
Contradictions true. An evidence of which (though I reserve the further
instances to another occasion that draws near) does plainly appear in what I
now principal^y urge, to show how dangerous a thing it is for his Majesty and
all other Princes to lofe Mr. B^s his favor. For whereas he had all along in
his first Book treated them like a company of Ignorants, and that did not
understand Government, (but that is pardonable in Mr. Bays) in this his
second, now that they will not do as he would have them, when he had given them
Power and Instructions how to be wiser for the future, He casts them quite off
like men that were desperate. He had, you know, p. 35. of his first Book and in
other places, vested them with an universal and unlimited Power, and
uncontrollable in the Government of Religion (that is, over men's Consciences)
but now in his second, to make them an example to all incorrigible and
ungrateful persons, he strips and disrobes them again of all those Regal
Ornaments that he had superinduced upon them, and leaves them good Princes in
qu^po (...) he found 'm, ^o shift for themselves in the wide World as well as
they can. Do but read his own words, p. 237. of his Defense, parag. 5. and sure
you will be of my mind. To vest the Supreme Magistrate in an unlimited and
uncontrollable Power, is clearly to defeat the Efficacy and Ob^igatory force of
all his Laws, that cannot possibly have any binding virtue upon the minds of
men, when they have no other inducement to obedience but only to avoid the
penalty. But if the Supreme Power be abs^ute and unlimi^, it does for that very
reason remove and evacuate: all other Obligations, for otherwise it is
restrained and conditional; and if men lie under no other impulsion than of the
Law it self, they lie under no other obligation than that of prudence and
self-in^est, and it remains entirely in the choi^e of their own discretion
whether they shall or shall not obey, and then there is neither Government nor
Obligation to Obedience; and the Principle o men's Compliance with the mind of
t^ir Superif ours, is not the declaration of their will and pleasure, but
purely the determination of their own judgments; and therefore it is necessary
for the security of Government, though for nothing else, to set bounds to its
jurisdiction; Otherwise, like the Roman Empire, etc. I know it would be
difficult to quote twenty lines in Mr. Bays, but we should encounter with the
Roman Empire. But observe how laboriously here he has asserted and proved that
all he had said in his first Book was a mee^ mistake before he were come to
years of discretion. For as in Law a Man is not accounted so till he has
completed 21, and it is but the la^ minute of that ^ime that makes him his own
Man, (as to all things but Conscience I mean, for as to that many are never sui
Juris) so though the distance of Bays his Books was but betwixt 1670 and 1671,
yet a year, nay an instant at any time of a man's life may make him wiser, and
he has, like all other fruits, his annual maturity. It was so long since as
1670. p. 33. that this Universal Unlimited and Uncontrollable Power was the
natural right of Princes (...) to Christ, firmly established by the unalterabls
Dictates of Natural Reason, Universal Practice, and consent of Nations, that
the Scripture rather (...) than asserts the Ecclesiastical (and so the Civil)
Jurisdiction of Princes. 'Twas in 1670. p. 10. That it was absolutely
necessary; and p. 12. that Princes (...) that power to bind their Su^cts to
that Relegion that they apprehend most advantageous to Public^ Peace, etc. So
that they derive their title from Eternal Necessity, which the Moralists say
the Gods themselves can not impeach. His Majesty may lay by his Dieu and make
use only of his Mon Droit: He has a Patent for his Kingdom under the
Broad-Seal of Nature, and next under that, and immediately (...) Christ, is
over all Persons and in all Causes as well Ecclesiastical as Civil (and over all
men's Consciences) within his Majesty's Realms and Dominions Supreme Head and
Governor. It Is true, the Author sometimes for fashion-sake speaks in that Book
of Religion and of a Deity, but his Principles do necessarily, if not in terms,
make the Princes Power Paramount to both those, and if he may by his
uncontrollable and unlimited universal Authority introduce what Religion, he
may of consequence what Deity also he pleases. Or, if there were no Deity, yet
there must be some Relgion, that being an Engine most advantageous for Public
Peace and Tranquillity. This was in 1670. But by 1671. you see the case is
altered. Even one night has made some men gray. And now p. 238. of his second
Book, he has made Princes accountable, ay and to so severe an Auditor as God
himself. The Thrones of Princes are established upon the Dominion of God And p
241. ' It Is no part of the Princes concernment to institute rules of Moral Good
and Evil, that is the care and the Pre^ogative of a Superior Lawgiver. And p.
260. he owns that if the Subjects can plead a clear and undoubted preingagement
to that higher Authority, they have a liberty to remonstrate to the equity of
their Laws. I do not like this Remonstrating nor these Remonstrants. I wish
again that Mr. Bays would tell us what ^e means by ^he term, and where it will
end, whether he would have the Fanatics remonstrate: but they are wary, and
ashamed of what they have done in former times of that nature: or whether he
himself has a mind to remonstrate, because the Fanatics are tolerated. That
is the thing, that is the business of this whole Book: and knowing that there
is a clear and undoubted preingagement to the higher Authority of Nature and
Necessity, if the King will persist in tolerating these people, who knows after
remonstrating, what Mr. Bays will do next? But now in sum what shall we say
of this man, and how had the King been served if he had followed Bayes's
advice; and assumed the power of his first Book? He had run himself into a fine
Praemunire, when now after all he comes to be made accountable to God, nay even
to his Subjects. And by this means it happens, though it were beyond Mr. Bays
his forcast, and I dare ^ay he, would rather have given the Prince again a
power antecedent to Christ, and to bring in what Religion he please; he has
obliged him to as tender a Conscience as any of his Christian subjects, and
then good night to Ecclesiastical Policy. I have herein endeavored the utmost
ingenuity toward Mr. Bays, for he has laid himself open but to too many
disadvantages already, so that I need not, I would not press him beyond
measure, but to my best understanding, and if I fail I even ask him pardon, I
do him right. It Is true, that being distracted betwixt his desire that the
Consciences of men should be persecuted, and his anger at Princes that will not
be advised, he confounds himself every where in his reasonings, that you can
hardly distinguish which is the Whoop and which is the Holla, and he makes
Indentures on each fide of the way wheresoever he goes. But no man that is
so^er will follow him, lest some Justice of Peace should make him pay his five
shillings, beside the scandal; and it is apparent to every one what he drives
at. But were this otherwise, I can spare it, and it is s^fficient ^o my purpose
that I do thus historically deduce the reason of his setting forth his Books,
and show that it was plainly to remonstrate against the power of his Prince,
and the (...) that he has taken of governing; to set his Majesty at variance
not only with his Subjects, but with himself, and to raise a Civil-Wa^ in his
Intellectual Kingdom, betwixt his controulable and his uncontrollable
Jurisdiction. And because, having to do with a wise man, as Mr. Bays is, one
may often gather more of his mind out of a word that ^rops casually, than out
of his whole watchful and serious discourse, when he is talking of matters of
Policy (...) that require caution; I cannot slight one passage of Mr. Bays,
page 656. Where raging bitterly against all the Presbyterians and other Sects,
and as much against the allowing them any Tenderness, Liberty, Toleration or
Indulgence, he concludes thus, Tenderness and Indulgence to such men, were to
nourish Vipers in our own Bowels, and the most sottish neglect of our own quiet
and security, and we should deserve to perish with the dishonor of
Sardanapalus. Now this of Sardanapalus I remember some little thing ever ^ince
I read, I think it was my Justine; and I would not willingly be such a Fool as
to make a dangerous (...) that h^s no foundation. For if Mr. Bays in the
Preface of his Defense, to excuse his long (...) before it were brought forth,
places it partly upon his recreations: I know not why much more a Prince should
not be willing to enjoy the (...) of this life, as well, as to do the common
(...). But I am thinking what Mr. (...) meant by it; for every similitude must
have, though not all, yet some likeness: Now I am sure there were no
Nonconformists and ^byterians in Sardan^lus his days, I am ^re also that
Sardanapalus was no Clergy man, that he was no ^ject; but he was one of the
(...) Crea^ures, that instead of ^cising his Ecclesiastical power delighted in
spinning; till some body come in on the sudden, and ca^ching him at it, cut his
th^d. Come it is better we left this Argument and the Company too, for you see
the (...), you see the Sentence: and who ^er (...) be, there is some Prince or
other whom Mr. (...) will have to perish. That p. 641. i^ indeed not so severe,
but it is pretty well; where, on the same ^ind of Subject, (...) the Prince
against those people, he says, That Prince that h^th f^lt the (...) these
(...), if aft^ that (...) shall be per^ to regard their fair (...) at such
(...) they (...) power, without other evident and unquestionable tokens of
their conversion, deserves to be King of the Night. Now for this matter, I
believe Mr. Bays knows that his Majesty has received such eviden^ and
unquestionable tokens of Loyalty from the Non-conformists; otherwise his own
Loyalty wo^ld have hindered him from daring to use that expression.

And now I should continue my History to his third Book in hand, the Preface to
Bishop Bramhal. But having his second Book still before me, I could not but
look a little further into it, to see how he has left matters standing betwixt
himself and his Answerer. And first I lighted on that place where he strives to
disintangle himself from what he had said about Trade in his former Book. Here
therefore he defies the whole Fanatic world to discover one Syllable that
tends to its discouragement. Let us put it upon that issue, and by this one
example take the pattern of his ingenuity in all his other contests. Whoop, Mr.
Bays, page 49. with what conscience does the Answerer tell the people that I
have reprelented all Tradesmen as seditious, when it is so notorious (...) on^y
suppose that some of them may be tainted with Seditious Principles? If I should
affirm that when the Nobility or Clergy are possessed with Principles that
incline to Rebellion and disloyal practices, they are of all Rebels the most
dangerous, should I be thought to impeach them of Treason and Rebellion? Holla,
Mr. Bays! But in the 49th. page of your first Book you say expressly, For it is
notorious that there is not any sort of people so inclinable to Seditious
Practices as the Trading part of a Nation. Is this the same thing now? and how
does this Defense take off the Object^on? And yet he tears and insults and
declaims as if he had the Truth on his side. At last he strives to bring
himself off and salve the matter in the same page 49. With, In brief it is not
the rich Citizen, but the Wealthy Fanati^k that I have branded for an (...)
Beast, and that not as Wealthy but as Fanatic. Subtle Distinguisher! I see if
we give him but Rope enough what he will come to. Mr. Bays; many as proper a
man as your self has marched up Holborn for distinguishing betwixt the Wealth
and the Fanatic: and moreover let me tell you, Fanatic Money has no Ear-mark.

So concerning the Magistrates power in Religion, wherein his Answerer had
remarked some unsafe passages: Whoop Mr. Bays! P. 12: of his first Book before
quoted: Unless Princes have power to bind their Subjects to what Religion they
apprehend most advantageous, etc. they are no better than Statues of Authority.
Holla Bays. Page 467. of the second Book: This bold Calumny I have already I
hope compe^ently enough discovered and detested. Yet he repeats this
fundamental Forgery in all places, so that his whole Book is but one huge Lie
400 pages long. Judge now who is the Forger; And yet he roars too here as if he
would mix Heaven and Earth together. But you may spare your raving, you will
never claw it off as long as your name is Bays.

So his Answerer it seems having p. 85. said, that Bays confines the whole
Duty of Conscience to the inward thoughts and persuasions of the mind, over
which the Magistrate has no power at all: Whoop Bays, page 89. of his first
Book, Let all matters of mere Conscience, whether purely moral or religious, be
subject to Conscience only, i. e. Let men think of things according to their
own persuasions, and assert the Freedom of their Judgments against all the
Powers of the Earth. This is the Prerogative of the mind of man within its own
Dominions its Kingdom is intellectual, etc. P. 91. Liberty of Conscience is
internal and invisible, and confined to the minds and judgments of men; and
while Conscience acts within its proper sphere, the Civil power is so far from
doing it Violence, that it never can. Holla Bays p. 229 of his Second Book,
This in down right English is a shameless Lie. Sir, you must pardon my
rudeness, for I will assure you, after Long Meditation, I could not devise a
more pertinent answer to so bold an one as this. I believe you Mr. Bays: You
meditated long, some twelve months at least; and you could not devise any
other answer, and in good earnest he has not attempted to give any other
answer. I confess it is no extraordinory Conceit, but it is the best Repartee, my
barren Fancy was able to suggest to me upon so rude an occasion. Well Mr.
Bays! I see it must come to a quarrel; for thus the Hectors use to do, and to
give the Lie at adventure, when they have a mind to try a man's Courage. But I
have often known them dye on the spot.

So his Answerer p. 134 having taxed him for his speaking against an expression
in the Act of Parliament of 5 to Eliz. concerning the Wednesday Fast. Whoop
Bays page (...). of his first Book. The Act for the Wednesday Fast the
Jujunium Cecilianum (our Ecclesiastical Poli^ician is the better States man of
the two by far, and may make sport with Cecill when he pleases) was injoynd
with this clause of Exception, That if any person should affirm it to be
imposed with an intention to bind the Conscience, he should be punished as
spreader of false News. So careful was the supreme Magistrate in those days
not to impose upon the Conscience; and the Wisdom of it is confirmed by the
experience of our time: When so eminent a Divine, as I mentioned before,
thought fit to write (...) whole Volumne concerning the Holiness of LENT;
though, if I be not deceived, this Doctrine too i^ prohibited by Act of
Parliament, under the same Penalty. But, says Bays there, The matter i^deed
of this Law was not of any great moment, but this Declaration annexed to it
proved of a satal and (...) Consequence. It Is very well worth reading at large:
but in short the Consequence (or the occasion it is no matter when I have to do
with Bays) was, that Princes how peremptory soever they have been in asserting
the Rights of their Supreme Power, in Civil Affairs, they have been forced to
seem modest and diffident in the exercise of their Ecclesiastical Supremacy.
Now, Holla, Bays. p. 298. of his Second Book. To what purpose does he so
briskly taunt me for thwarting mine own principles, because I have censured the
impertinency of a reedless Provision in an Act of Parliament. Observe, these
are not the Answerers but Bays his own words; whereby you may see with what
Reverence and Duty he uses to speak of his Superiors and their Actions, when
they are not so happy as to please him. I may obey the Law, though I may be of
a different persuasion from the Lawgivers in an Opinion remote and impertinent
to the matter of the Law it self: nay, I may condemn the wisdom of enacting
it, and yet at the same time think my self to lie under an indispensable
Obligation to obey it: for the formal reason of its obligatory power (as any
Casuist will inform him) is not the Judgment and Opinion of the Lawgiver, but
the Declaration of his Will and Pleasure. Very good and sound Mr. Bays: but
here you have opened a passage; and this is as imper^t in you and more
dangerous than what you blamed in that Act, that the Non-Conformists may speak
against your Ecclesiastical Laws; for their Casuists then tell them that, they
lying under an indisp^sable obligation not to conform to some of them, do
fulfill and satisfy their Obedience in submitting to the penalty.

I looked further into what he s^ith in defense of the ^gistrates assuming the
Priesthood; what for his Scheme of moral Grace; what to palliate his irreverent
expressions concerning our Blessed Savio^r and the Holy Spirit; what of all
other mat^ers obj^cted by his Answerer: and if you will believe me; but I had
much rather the Reader would take the pains to examine all himse^f, there is
scarce any thing but slender trifling unworthy of a Logician, and beastly
railing unbecoming any man, much more a Divine. At last, having readit all
through with some attention, I resolved, having failed so of any thing
material, to try my fortune whether it might be more lucky, and to open the
Book in several places as it chanced. But, whereas they say that in the Sorts
Virgilianae, wheresoever you light you will find something that will hit and is
proper to your intention; on the contrary here, th^re was not any leaf that I
met with but had something impertinent, so that I resolved to give it over.
This only I observed upon the whole, that he does treat his Answerer the most
b^sely and ingratefully that ever man did. For, whereas in his whole first Book
there was not one sound principle, and scarce any thing in the second, but what
the Answerer had given him occasion to amend and rectify if he had
understanding; after so great an obligation he handles him with more rudeness
than is imaginable. I know it may be said in Mr. Bays his defense, that in
this his second Book he has made his matters in many places much worse then
they were before. But I say that was Bays his want of understanding, and that
he knew not how to take hold of so charitable an opportunity as was offered
him, and 'twas none of the Answerers fault. There are amongst men some that do
not study always the true rules of Wisdom and Honesty, but delight in a
perverse kind of Cunning, which sometimes may take for a while and attain their
design, but most usually it fails in the end and has a foul farewell. And such
are all Mr. Bays his Plots. In all his Writings he does so confound terms, he
leaps cross, he has more doubles (nay triples and quadruples) than any Hare,
so that he thinks himself secure of the Hun^ers. And in this second Book, even
the length of it was some Policy. For you must know it is all but an Epistle to
the Author of the Friendly Debate; and thought he with himself, who has so
much leisure from his own affairs, that he will read a Letter of another man's
b^siness of eight hundred pages? But yet, thought he again, (and I could be
content they did read it) in all matters of Argument I will so muddle my self
in Ink, that there shall be no ca^ching no finding me; and besides I will speak
always with so Magisterial a confidence, that no modest man (and most ingenious
persons are so) shall so much as quet^h at me, but be beat out of Countenance:
and plain men shall think that I durst not talk at such a rate but that I have
a Commission. I will first, said he in his heart, like a stout Vagrant, beg,
and if that will not do, I will command the Question, and as soon as I have got
it, I will so alter the property and put on another Periwig, that I defy them
all for discovering me or ever finding it again. This, beside all the lock and
advantage that I have the Non-conf^rmists upon since the late times; and though
they were born since, and have taken more sober Principles, it shall be all one
for that matter. And then for Oratory and Railing, let Bays alone. This
contrivance is indeed all the strength of Mr. Bays his Argument, and as he
said, (how properly let the Reader judge) page 69. before quoted, that Mo^al
Virtue is not only the most material and usefulpart of all Religion, but the
ultimate end of all its other Duties: So, Railing is not only the most
material and useful part of his Religion, his Reason, his Oratory, and his
Practice; but the ultimate end of this and all his otherBooks. Otherwise he i^
neither so strongly fortified nor so well guarded, but that without any
Ceremony of Trenches or Approaches, you may at the very fir^ march up to his
Counters-scarp without danger. He puts me in mind of the incorrigible Scold,
that though she was duck'd over head and ears under water, yet stretched up her
hands with her two thumb-nails in the Nit-cracking posture, or with two fingers
divaricated, to call the man still in that Language Lousy Rascal and Cuckold.
But indeed, when I consider how miserable a wratch his Answerer has rendered
him, and yet how he persists still, and more to rail and revile him; I can
liken it to nothing better betwixt them, than to what I have seen with some
pleasure the hawking at the Magpy. The poor bird understand^ very well the
terrible pounces of that Vulture: b^ therefore she chatters amain most (...),
and spread^ and cocks her tail, so that one that first saw and heard the sport,
would think that she insulted over the Hawk in that chatter, and she (...) her
train in token of courage and victory: when, alas, '(...) her fear all, and
another way of crying the Hawk m^cy, and to the end that the Hawk finding
nothing but tail and feather to strike at, she may so perhaps shelter her body.

Therefore I think there is noth^g in my way that hinders me, but that I may
now go on to the History of this M. B^yes his third Book, the Preface to Bishop
Bramhall, and to what Juncture of Affairs it was reconciled. His Majesty
(perhaps upon Mr. Bays his frequent Admonitions, both in his first and second
Book, that Princes should be more attentive and confident in exercising their
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, though, I rather believe, he never designed to
read a line in him, but what he did herein, was only the result of his own good
understanding) resol^ed to make some clear trial how the Non-conformists could
bear themselves under some Liberty of Conscience. And accordingly he issued on
March the 15th 1671. His Gracious Declaration of Indulgence, of which I wish
His Majesty and the Kingdom much joy, and as far as my slender judgment can
divine, dare augurate and presage mutual Felici^y, and that what ever humane
Accident may happen (I fear not (...) Bays foresees) they will, they can never
have cause ^ent this Action or its Consequences. But here (...) Bays finding
^at the King had so vigorously exerted his Ecclesiastical Power, but to a
purpose quite contrary to what Mr. Bays had always intended, he grew terrible
angry at the King and his Privy Council: so that hereupon he started, as
himself says, into many warm and glowing Meditations: his heart burnt and the
fire kindled, and that heated him into all this wild and rambling talk (as some
will be forward enough to call it) though he hopes it is not altogether idle,
and whether it be or be not, he has now neither leisure nor patience to
examine. This he confesses upon his best recollection, in the last page of this
Preface: Whereupon I cannot but animadvert, as in my first page, that this too
lies open to his Dilemma against the Non-conformists Prayers: for if he will
not accept his own Charge, his modesty is all impudent and c^unterfeit: If he
does acknowledge it, he is an hotheaded Incendiary; and a wild rambling
talker, and in part, if not altogether, an idle fellow. Really I cannot but
pity him, and look upon him as under some great disturbance and dispondency of
mind. that this with some other scattering pas^ages here and there, argues him
to be in as ill a ca^e as Ti^erius was in his distracted Le^ter to the Senate:
There wants nothing of it but the Dii Deaeque me perdant wishing, Let the Gods
and the Goddesses confound him worse than he finds himself to be every day
confounded. But that I may not l^se my thread. Upon occasion of this his
Majesty's Gracious Decla^tion, and against it, he writes this his third Bo^ the
Preface to Bis^op Bramhad, and accordingly w^ unhappily delivered of it in June
(I had forgot,) or July, in 16^2. For he did not go his (...) time of it, but
miscarried; partly by a fright from J. O. and partly by a fall he had upon a
Closer ^portance. But of (...) his three Bolts this was the soone^ shot, and
(...) it is uo wonder if he mis^ his mark, (...) no care where his ar^ow
glanced. But what he says of his Majesty and his Cou^cil, being toward the
latter end of his Discourse, (...) forced to defer that a little, because,
there being no method at all in his wild rambling talk; must either tread just
on in his footsteps, or else I sha^ be in a perpetual maze, and never know when
I co^ to my journeys end.

And here I cannot altogether escape the mentioning of J. O. again, whom
(though I have shown the he was not the main cause of publishing Bays (...)
Books) yet he singles out, and on his pretense (...) down all the
Nonconformists; this being, as he imagined, the safest way by which he might
proce^ first to undermine and then blow up his Majesti^ gracious Declaration.
And this indeed is the le^ immethodical part in the whole Discourse. For (...)
he undertakes to defend, that Railing is not only lawful, but expedient.
Secondly, that though he ha^ Railed, the person he spoke of ought (...) to have
^ken notice of it. And Thirdly, that he did not Rai^ As to these things I do
not much trouble my my (...) nor interest my self in the least in J. O.'s (...)
no otherwise than if he were John a Nokes, and heard him ra^l'd at by John a
Styles: Nor yet wou^ I concern my self unnecessarily in any man behalf Knowing
that it is better being at the beginning of Feast, than to come in at the latter
end of a Fray. For (...) so (...) should, as often it happens in such Rencoun^
(...) only draw Mr. Bays, but J. O. too upon my back, I should have made a
sweet business on it for my self.

Now as to the Lawfulness and Expedience of Railing; were it not that I do
really make Conscience of using Scripture with such a drolling Companion as Mr.
Bays, I could overload him thence both with Authority and Example. Nor is it
worth ones while to teach him out of other Authors and the best precedents of
the kind, how he, being a Christian and (...) Divine, ouht to have carried
himself. But I cannot but remark his Insolence, and how bold he makes upon this
Argument, p. 88. of his Second Book, with the Memories of those great Persons
there enumerated, several of whom, and particularly my Lord Verulam, I could
quote to his confusion, upon a contrary and much better account. So far am I
from repenting my severity toward them, that I am tempted rather to applaud it
by the Glorious examples of the greatest Wits of our Nation, King James,
Archbishop Whitgift, Archbishop Bancroft, Bishop Andrews, Bishop Bilson,
Bishop Montegue, Bishop Bramhal, Sir Walter Rawleigh, Lord Bacon, etc. and he
might have added Mr. Tarlton with as good pretense to this honor as himself.
The Niches are yet empty in the Old Exchange; pray let us speak to the
Statuary, that, next to King James's we may have B^yes his Effigies. For such
great Wits are Princes fellows, at least when dead. At this rate there is not a
Scold at Bi^gsgate but may defend her self by the p^ttern of King James and
Archbishop Whitgift, etc. Yet this is passable, if you consider our man. But
that is most intolerable p. 17. of the Preface to hi^ first Book, where he
justifies his debauched way of writing by parallel to our Blessed Savior. And
I cannot but with some aw reflect how near the punishmen^ was to the offense;
when having undertaken so prof^ an Argument, he was in the very instant so
infatuate^ as to say that Christ was not only in an hot fit of Ze^ but in a
seeming Fury too and transport of Passion. But however, seeing he has brought
us so good Vouchers, let us suppose what is not to be supposed, that Railing is
lawful. Whether it be expedient or no will yet be a new question. And I think
Mr. Bays, when he has had time to cool his thoughts, may be trusted yet with
that consideration, and to compute whether the good that he has done by
Railling do countervail the damage which both he in particular and the Cause he
labors, have suffered by it. For in my observation, if we meet with an
Argument in the Streets, both Men, Women, and Boys, that are the Auditory, do
usually give it on the modester side, and conclude, that he that rails most has
the least reason.

For the second, Where he would prove that though he had railed, yet his
Answerer J. O. ought not to have taken notice of it, nor those of the party who
are under the same condemnation, but that he should have abstracted and kept
close to the Argument, I must confess it is a very secure and wholesome way of
railing. And allowing this, he has good reason to find fault with his
Answerer, (...) he does, for turring (...) his Book, though without turning it
over I know (...) how he could have answered him, but with his Hat, (...) with
Mum. But for ought I can see in that only answer which is to his first Book, he
has been obedient and abstracted the Argument sufficien^; and (...) he has
been any where severe upon him, he has done it more cleanly, and much more
like a Gentleman, and it has been only in showing the necessary infeferences
that must follow upon the Authors Maxim^ and unsound principles. But as to any
answer to Bay^ his second Book or this third, for ought I can see J. O. sleeps
upon both Ears.

To this third undertaking, to show that he has (...) railed; (...) shail not
say any thing more, but let it (...) judged by the Company, and to them let it
be referred. But in my poor opinion I rever saw a man through all his three Books
in so high a Salivation.

And therefore, till I meet with something more serious, I will take a walk in
the Garden and gather some of Mr. Bays his Flowers. Or I might more properly
have said I will go see Bedlam and p^k straws with our Madman. First he says,
that some that pretend a great interest in the holy Brotherhood, upon every
slight accident are beating up the Drums against the Pope and Po^ish Plots;
they discry Po^ery in every common and usual chance, and a C^imny cannot take
fire in the City or Suburbs but they are immediately crying Jesuits and
Firebals. I understand you, Sir. This, Mr. Bays is your Prologue, that is to
be spoke by Thunder and Lightning. I am loud Thunder, brisk Ligh ning I. I
strike men down. (...) fire the Town -- Lo^k to it We Will doot Mr, Bays, it is
something darg rous meddling with th^se matters. As innocent persons as your
self, have (...) the fury of the wild multitude, when such a Calamity has
disordered them. And after your late Severity against Tradesmen, it had been
better you had not touched the fire. Take heed lest the Reasons which sparkle,
forsooth, in your Discourse have not set their Chimnyes on fire. None accuses
you, what you make s^ort with, of burring the Ships at Chatham, much less of
blowing up the Thames. But you ought to be careful, lest having so newly
distinguished bet^t the Fanatic and his Wealth, they should say, That you are
distinguishing now betwixt the Fa^icks and their Houses These things are too
edged to be jested with: if you did but consider that not only the Holy
Brotherhood, but the So^er and intelligent Citizens are equally involved in
these sad Accidents. And in that ^mentable Conflagration (which was so
terrible, that though so many years ago, it is yet fresh in men's memories, and
besides, is yearly by Act of Parliament observed with due Humiliation and
Solemnity.) It was not Trade only and Merchandise suffered, which you call
their Diana; and was not so much to be considered; But St. Paul's too was burnt,
which ^he Historians tell us was Diana's Temple.

The next thing is more directly levelled at J. O. for having in some latter
Book used those words, We cannot conform to Arminianism or Socinianism on the
one hand, or Popery on the other. What the Answerer meant by those words, I
concern not my self. Only I cannot but say, That there is a very great neglect
somewhere; wheresoever the Inspection of Books is Iodged, that at least the
Socinian Books are tolerated and sell as openly as the Bible. But Bays turns
all into Mirth, He might as well have added all the -isms (...) the Old
Testament, Perizzitism, Hittitism, Jebusitism, Hivitism, etc.

No, Mr. Bays, that need not; and though this indeed is a very pretty Conceit,
and 'twere pity it should have been lost; yet I can tell you a better way. For,
if rhiming be the business, and you are so good at tagging of points in a
Garret, there is another word that will do it better, and for which, I know not
how truly, you tax your Answerer too here, as if he said, The Church of England
were desperately Schismatical, because the Independents are resolved one and
all, to continue separate from her Communion. Therefore let Schism, (...) you
please rhyme to - (...). And though no man is obliged to produce the Authority
of the greatest Wits of the Nation to justify a Rhyme, yet for your ^ear sake,
Mr. Bays, I will this once supererogate. The first shall be your good friend
Bishop (...), ^ho among many other memorable Pa^ages, whi^ ^elieve were (...)
^on that he never thought fit (...) print his own Book; p. 101. teaches us,
not absurdly, that It was not the (...) Opinions of the Church of Rome, but the
obtruding them by Laws upon other Churches, which warranted a Separation. But
if this will not do, Vous ave^ Doctor Th^rndikes Deposition in print, for he,
I hear, is lately dead. The Church of England in separating from the Church of
Rome, (...) guilty of Schism before God. I have not the Book by me, but I am
sure it is heartily recited as I have (...) it. Then (to show too that there is
a King on this side) his present Majesty's Father in his Declaration (...)
1628. affirms that a Book, entitled, Appello Caesarem or an Appeal to Caesar,
and published in the year 1625. by Richard Montague then Batcheler of Divinity,
and now Bishop of Chichester had op^ned the way to these Schisms and Divisions
which have since ensued in the Church, and that therefore for the redress and
remedy thereof, and for the satisfaction of the Consciences of his good People,
he had not only by public Proclamation called in that Book, which ministered
matter of offense, but to prevent the like danger for the future, reprinted the
Articles of Religion, established in the time of Queen Elizabeth of Famous
Memory: and by a Declaration, before those Articles, did restrain all Opinions
to the Sense of those Articles, that nothing might be left for private Fancies
and Innovations, etc. And if this will not amount fully, I shall conclude with
a Villainous Pam^let that I met with the other day; but of which a great (...)
indeed was the Author. And, whereas Mr. Bays (...) always desying the
Nonconformists with Mr, (...) Ecclesiastical (...), and the Friendly Debate, I
(...) of (...), 'though I have a great Reverence for Mr. Hooker, who in some
things did answer himself, That this little Book, of not full eight leaves,
has shut that Ecclesiastical Polity, and Mr. Bayes's too, out of doors: But
for the Friendly D^bate, I must confess, that is una^swerable. It Is one Mr.
Hales of Eaton; a most learned Divire, and one of the (...) of E^and, and most
remarkable for his Suffer ^gs in the late time^, and his Christian Patience
under them. And I re^kon it not one of the least (...) of that Age, that so
eminent a Person should have been by the Iniquity of the ^es reduced to those
necessities under which he lived; as I account it no small honor to have grown
up into some part of his Acquaintance, and conversed a while with the living
remains of one of the clearest heads and best prepared breasts in Christendom.
That which I speak of is his little Treatise of Schism, which though I had read
many years ago, was quite out of n y mind, till Loccasionally light upon it at a
(...) stall. I hope it will not be tedious, though I write (...) few (and yet
whatsoever I ^mit, I shall have left behind more) material Passages. Schissm is
one of those Theological Scarcrows with which they who use to uphold a party in
Religion, use to fright away such, as making inquiry into it are ready to
relinquish and op^ose it, if it appear either erroneous or suspicious. Schism
is, if we would define it, an unnecessary separation of: Christians from that
part of the Visible Church of which they were once members. Some reverencing
Antiqu^y more than needs, have suffered themselves to be scared with imputation
of Schism more than needs. Nothing absolves men from the guilt of S^sm, (...)
true and unpretended Conscience. But the Judgments of the A^cients many times
(to speak most gent^y) are justly to be (...). (...) the cause of (...) is
^essary, ^ere not he (...) separates, but he that is the cause of (...) the
Schismatic. Where the occasion of Separation is unnecessary, neither side can
be excused from guilt of Schism. But who shall be the Judge? That is a point of
great difficulty, because it carries fire in the Ta^l of it: for it brings with
it a piece of Doctrine which is seldom pleasing to Superiors. You shall find
that all Schisms have crept into the Church by one of these three ways, either
upon matter of Fact, or upon matter of Opinion, or point of Ambition. For the
first, I call that matter of Fact, when something (...) required to be done by
us, which either we know or strongly ^ct to be unlawful. Where he instances in
the old great Controversy about EASTER. For it being upon error taken for
necessary that an Easter must be kept, and upon worse than error (for it was no
less than a point of Judaism forced upon the Church) thought further necesseary
that the ground of the time for the Feast, must be the Rule left by (...) to
the Jews: there (...) a stout Question, Whether 'twas to be celebrated with the
Jews on the fourteenth Moon, or the Sunday following. This caused as great a
Combustion as ever was; the West separating and refusing Communion with the
East for many years together. Here I cannot see bus all the world were
Schismatics, excepting only that we charitably suppose to excuse them from it,
that all parties did what they did out of Conscience. A thing which befell them
by the ignorance, for I will not say the malice of their guides; and that
through the just judgment of God, because, through floth and blind obedience,
men exa^ed not the things they were taught, but like beasts of burden
patiently couched down, and indifferently underwent all whatsoever their
Superiors laid upon them. If the discretion of the chiefest guides of the
Church did, in a point so trivial, so inconsiderable, so mainly fail them, Can
we without the imputation of great grossness and folly, think so poor-spirited
persons competent Judges of the Questions now on foot betwixt the Churches?
Where, or among whom, or how many the Church shall be, it is a thing
indifferent: What if those to whom the Execution of the public Service i^
committed, do something, either unseemingly or suspicious, or peradventure
unlawful; what if the Garments they wear be censured, nay, indeed be
suspicious. What if the gesture or adoration to be used to the Altars, as now
we have learned to speak? What if the Homilist have preached or delivered any
Doctrine, of the truth of which we are not well persuaded, (a thing which very
often falls out) yet, for all this, we may not separate, except we be
constrained personally to bear a part in it our selves. Nothing can be a just
cause of refusing Communion in Schism, that concerns Fact, but only to require
the execution of some unlawful or s^spected Act. For, not only in Reason, but
in Religion too, that Maxim admits of no release, Cautissimi cujusque
praeceptum, qued duobitas ne feceris: That whatsoever you doubt of, that you in
no case do. He instances then in the Second Council of Nice, where, says he,
the Sy^od it self was the Schismatical party in the point of using the Images,
which, seith he, all acknowledge unnecessary, most do suspect, and many hold
utterly unlawful: Can then the injoining of such a thing be ought else but an
abuse? Can the refusal of Communion here be thought any other thing than Duty?
Here, or upon the like occasion to separate, may perad venture bring personal
troub^e or danger, against which it concerns any honest man to have Pect^
(...). Then of Schism from Opini^n; Prayer, Confession, Thanksgiving, Reading
of Scripture, Administration of Sacraments in the plainest and the simplest
manner, were matter enough to furnish out a sufficient Liturgy, though nothing
either of private Opinion or of Church Pomp, of Garments, of prescribed
Gestures, of Imagery, of Music, of matter concerning the Dead, of many
Superflu ities which creep into the Church, under the name of Order and Decency
did interpose it self. To charge Churches and Liturgies with things unnecessary
was the first beginning of Superstition. If the Fathers and special Guides of
the Church would be a little sparing in incumbring Churches with S^perfluities,
or not over-rigid either in reviving obsolete customs, or imposing new: there
would be far less cause of Schism or Supersti^ion; and all the inconvenience
likely to ensue, would be but this, They should in so doing yield a little to
the imbecility of their inferiors; a thing which Saint Paul would never have
refused to do. It is alike, unlawful to make profession of known or suspected
fal^hood, as to put in practice unlawful or s^spected Actions. The third thing
I named for matter of Schism was Ambition, I mean Episcopal Ambition; One head
of which, is one Bishops claiming Supremacy over another, which, as it has
been from time to time a great Trespass against the Churches Peace, so it is
now the final ruin of it. For they do but abuse themselves and others, who
would persuade us that Bishops by Christ's Institution have any Superiority over
other men further than positive Order agreed upon among Christians has
pre^cribed. Time has taken leave, sometimes, to fix this name of CONVENTICLES
upon good and honest Meetings. Though open Assemblies are required, yet, at all
times while men are (...) pious, all Meetings of men for mutual help of (...)
and Devotion, wheresoever, and by whomsoever celebrated, where permitted
without exception. In times of manifest Corruption and Perseru-tion, wherein
Religious Assembling is dangerous, Private Meetings, howsoever besides Public^
Order, are not only lawful, but they are of necessity and duty. All pi^us
Assemblies, in times of Persecution and Corruption, howsoever practiced, are
indeed, or rather alone, the Lawful Congregations: and Public Ass^mblies,
though according to form of Law, are, indeed, nothing else but RIOTS and
CONVENTICLES, if they be stained with Corruption and Superstition. Do you not
see now, Mr. Bays, that you needed not have gone so for a word, when you might
have had it in the Neighborhood? If there be any Coherence le^t in your Scull,
you can^ but perceive that I have brought you Authority e^ to pr^ve that Schism
(for the reason we may discourse another time) does at least rhyme to Ism. But
you have a peculiar delight and selicity, (which no man (...) you) in
Scripture-Drollery, nothing less (...) taste to your Palate wherea^ otherwise
you (...) so far in Italy, that you could not escape the Ti^les of some Books
which would have served your turn as well, Ca^dinalism, N^potism, Putanism, if
you were in a Parox (...) of the Ism's.

When I had ^rit this, and undergone so grateful a P. (...) for no less than
that I had transcribed before cut of ^ur Author; I could not upon compariug
them both together, but reflect most seriously upon the difference of their two
ways of Discoursing. I could not but admire that Majesty and Beauty which sits
upon the forehead- of masculine Truth and generous Honesty: but no less detest
the Deformity of falsehood disguised in all its Ornaments. How much another
thing it is to hear him speak, that has cleared himself from forth and growns,
and who suffers neither Sloth nor Fear, nor Ambition, nor any other tempting
Spirit of that nature to abuse him, from one, who as Mr. Hales expresses it,
makes Christianity lackque to Ambition; How wretchedly, the one to uphold his
Fiction, must incite Princes to Persecution and Tyranny, degrade Grace to
Morality, debauch Conscience against its own Principles, distort and
mis-interpret the Scripture, fill the world with Blood, Execution, and
Massacre; while the other needs and requires no more but a peaceable and
unprejudicate Soul, and the native simplicity of a Christian-spirit! And me
thinks, if our Author had any spark of Virtue unextinguished, he should, upon
considering these together, retire into his Closet, and there lament and pine
away for his desperate folly; for the disgrace he has, as far as in him is,
brought upon the Church of England by such an undertaking, and for the eternal
shame to which he has hereby coudemn'd his own memory.

I ask you heartily pardon, Mr. Bays, for treating you against Decorum here,
with so much gravity. It Is possible I may not trouble you above once or twice
more in the like nature; but so often at least, I hope, one may in the writing
of a whole Book, have leave to be serious. Your next Flower, and that indeed is
a sweet one, Dear Heart, how could I hug and kiss thee for all this Love and
Sweetness? Fie, ^y, Mr. Bays, Is this the Language of a Divine, and to be used,
as you ometimes express it, in the fa^ of the Sun? Who can escape from thinking
that you are adream'd of your Comfortable Importance? These are (as the Moral
Sa^ calls them in the claenl est manner the thing would bare) Words left
betwixt the Sheets: Some body might take it ill that you should misapply your
Courtship to an Enemy. But in the Roman Empire it was the privilege of the
Hangman to deflour a Virgin before Execution. But, sweet Mr. Bays, (for I know
you do nothing without a precedent of some of the greatest wits of the Nation,)
whose example had you for this seeming Transport of a gentler Passion.

Then comes, Welfare poor Macedo for a modest Fool. This I know is matter of
Gazette, which is as Canonical as Ecclisiastical Policy. Therefore I have the
less to say to it. Only, I could wish that there were some severer Laws against
such Villains who raise so false and scandalous reports of worthy Gentlemen;
And that men might not be suffered to walk the streets in so confident a garb,
who commit those Assassinates upon the reputation of deserving persons.

Here follows a sore Charge: that the Answerer had without any provocation, in
a public and solemn way, undertak^n the D^fence of the Fanatic Cause. Here,
indeed Mr. Bays, You have reason, and you might have had as just a quarrel
against whosoever had undertaken it. For, your design and hope was from the
beginning, that no man would have a^swered you in a public and solemn way; and
nothing would vex a. wise man, as you are, more than to have his intention and
Counsel frustrated. When you have ranged all your forces in battle, when you
have placed your Canon, when you have sounded a charge, and given the word to
fall on upon the whole Party; if you could then persuade every particular
person of'm, that you gave him no Provocation, I confess, Mr. Bays, this were
an excellent and a new way of your inventing to conquer single, ('it is your
Moral Virtue) whole Armies. And so the admiring Dr^ve might stand gaping till
one by one, you had cut a^l their throats. But, (...). Bays, I cannot discern
but that you gave him as much Provocation in your first Book, as he has you in
his Evangelical Love, Church Peace and Unity, which is the pretense of your
issuing this Preface.

For, having for your Dear sake (beside many other troubles that I have
undertaken, without your giving me any Provoration) sought out and perused that
Book too, I do not find you any where personally concerned, but as you have, it
seems upon some conviction, assumed to your self some vices or errors against
which he speaks in general, and with some modesty. But for the rest, you say
upon full perusal, you find not one Syllable to the purpose, beside a perpetual
Repetition of the old out-worn story of Unscriptural Ceremonies, and some
frequent whinings, and sometimes ^avings, etc. Now to see the dullness of some
men's Capacities above others. I upon this occasion, begun, I know not how it
came, at p. 127. And thence read on to the end of his Book. And from thence I
turned to the beginning and continued to p. 127. and could not all along,
observe any thing but what was very pertinent to the matter in hand. But this
is your way of excusing your self from replying to things that yet you will be
meddling with, and nibling at: and it is besides a pretty knack (the
Non-conformists have it not alone) of frighting or discouraging sober people
from reading those dangerous Trea^ises, which might contribute to their better
i^formation. I cannot but observe, Mr. Bays, this admirable way (like fat Sir
John Falstasse's singular dexterity in sinking) that you have of answering
whole Books or Discourses, how ^ithy and knotty soever, in a line or two, nay
sometimes with a word. So it fares with this B^ok of the Answerers. So with a
Book or Discourse of his, I know not, of the Morality of the Lords Day; which
is answered by a Septonary Portion in the Hebdomadal Revolution. So, whether
Book or Discourse (...) also know not of the Self-evid^ncing light of the
Scripture, where Bays ^ffers (and i^ (...) strange) to produce as good proofs
for it out of (...) Alcoran. So I showed you where he answers De^ with (...).
And one thing more comes into my^mind; where, after he has blunder'd a great
while to bring himself off the Magistrates exercis^ng the Pristh^od in his ^wn
person, he concludes wi^h an irresistible defense against his Answerer, This is
suitable to the Genius of his i^genuity, and betraies him as ^uch as the word
INTANGLEMENT, which it the Shiboleth of all his Writings. So he defeats all the
gross bodies of Orthodoxy with calling them Sys^emes and Syntagmes. So you know
he answers all the Controversial Books of the Calvinists that ever have been
written, with the Tale of Robin Hood, and the migh^y Bramble on the South Side
of the Lake L^man. Mr. Bay^s, You cannot enough esteem and esteem this Faculty.
For, next to your single beating whole A^mies, I do ^ot know any Virtue that
you have need of so often, or that will upon trial be found more useful.

And to this succeeds another Flower, I am sure, though I can scarce smell ^ut
the sense of it. But it is Printed in a distinct Character, and that is always
a cer^ain sign of a Flower. For our Booksellers have many Arts to make us
yield to their importunity: and among the rest, they promise us, (...) at it
s^all be Printed in fine Paper, and in a very large and fair Let^er; that it
shall be very well examined that there be no Errata; that wheresoever there is
a pretty Conceit, it shall be marked out in another Character. But my greatest
care was that when I quoted a^y Serten^e or word of our Author's, it might be
so discernable, ^lest I should go for a Plagiary. And I am much offended to see
that in several places he has not kept ^ouch with me. The Word of Mr. Payes's
that he has here made notorious, is Categoricalness: and I obs^rve that
wheresoever there comes a word of that termir (...) shows it the ^ame honor;
as if he had a mind to make Bays a Collar of N^sses. What the mystery is, I
cannot so easily imagine; no more than of Shiboleth and Intangl^ment. But I
doubt Mr. Bays is sick of mary complicated Diseases; or to keep to our ^hime,
Sicknesses. He is troubled ^ot only with the Ismes but the Nesses. He might, if
he had pleased, here t^o to have showed his wit, as he did in the others, and
have told us of Sheern^ss, Dorgioness, Innerness, and Cathness. But he might
very well have ^mitted it in this place, knowing how well he had acquitteed
himself in another, and out of the Scripture too, which gives his wit the
highest relish. It Is p. 72. of his first Book, where, to prove that the fruit^
of the Spirit are ^o more than Morality, he quotes Saint Paul, Gal. 5. ^2.
Where the Apostle enumerates them; Love, Joy, Peace, Patience, Gentleness,
Goodness, Faith, Me^kness, and T^mperance, but our Author tra^slates Joy to
Cheerfulness, Peace to Peaceablen^ss: faith to faithfulness. What Ignorance, or
rat^er, what Forgery is this of Scripture and Religion? Who is there of the
Systematical, German Geneva, Orthodox Divines, but could have taught him
better? who is there of the Sober, Intelligent, Episcepal Divines of the Church
of England, but would ab^or this Interpretation? Yet, when his Answerer, I see,
^bjects this to him, p. 200. Bays, like a dexterous Sch^lastical Disputant, it
being told him, That Joy is not ^ress, but that Spiritual Joy which is
unspeakable; that Peace is not Peaceable^ess in his Sense, but that Peace of
God which through Jesus Christ is wrought in the bearts of Believers by the
Holy Ghost; and that Faith in God is there intended, ^ot faithfulness in our
Duties, Trusts or, ^ffices: What does he do? p. 337. He very ingenu^usly and
wisely, when he is to answer, quite forgets that Faith was (...): and, having
suppressed that, as to the rest he wipes his M^uth, and rubs his Forehead, and
says the Cavil is but a little one, and the Fortune of Cae^ar and the Roman
Empire depend ^ot upon it, and therefore be will not trouble the Reader with a
Critical Account of the reason of his Translation. No, don't Mr. Bays, It Is
very we^l; let it alone. But, though not the Fortunes of Caesar and the Roman
Empire, I doubt there is something more depends upon it, if it be matter of
Salvation. And I am afraid besides, that there may a curse too belong to him
who shall knowingly add or diminish in the Scripture. Do you think Bishop
Bramhall himself, if he had seen this, could have abstained (p. 117. before
quoted,) from telling our Author, That the promis^uous License given to people
qualified or unqualifi^d, not only to read but to interpret the Scriptures
according to their private spirits or ^articular fancies, without regard either
to the Anal^gy of Faith, which they understand not, or to the Int^rpretation of
the Doctors of former Ages, is more preju^icial (I might bett^r say) pernicious
both to whole So^, than the over-rigorous restraint of the Romanists.

The next is a piece of Mirth, on occasion of some discourse of the An^werers,
about the Morality of the the Lord's Day: Where it seems he uses some hard
words, which I am naturally an enemy to; but might be done of purpose to keep
the Co^roversy from the white-Apro^s, within the white Surplices, to be more
learnedly debated. But this fares no better than all the rest. There is no kind
of Morality, I see but Ray^s will try to debauch it: Oh what ^difying Doctrine,
says be, is this to the Whit^-(...) (...) and doubtl^ss they would with the
Jews, so^r roast themselves, than a small joint of (...) upon the Sacred Day of
Rest. Now, I do not, neither, I believe, does Bays himself know any of them
that are thus superstitious. So that Mr. Bays might, if he had pleased, have
spared his jibing ^t that day, which has m^re sacredness in it by far than
many, nay than any of those things he pleads for. But when men are once Adepti
and have attained Bays his height, and Divinity at least is rightly
understood, they have a Privilege it seems, not only to play and make merry on
the Sabbath day, but with it.

After this I walked a great way through bushes and brambles before I could
find another Flower: but then I met with two upon one stalk; on occasion of hi^
Answers having said someting of the day of Judgment when men should be
accountable. Ob, says he, We shall be sure to be accounted with at the day of
Judgment; and again, Ah sweet day, when these people of God shall once for all,
to their unspeakable Comfort and support, wreak their eternal Revenge upon
their reprobate Enemies. This puts me in mind of another expression of our
Authors ^luding too this way. It Is an easy matter by this dancing and capering
humor to perpetuate all the Controversies in the world, how plainly soever
determinable, to the coming of Elias: and after this rate shall the Barbers
basin remain Mambrino's helmet; and the Asses Panel a furniture for the Great
Horse, till the day of Judgment. Now, good Mr. Bays, I am one that desire to
be very well resolved in these things; and though not much indeed, yet I
attribute something to your judgment. Pray tell us in good earnest, what you
think of these things, that we may know how to take our measure of living
accordingly. For, ^f indeed there be no Judgment, no account for what is done
here below, I have lost a great deal of precious time, that I might have
enjoyed in one of the fruits of you^ spirit, that is Chearfu^ss. How many good
^ests have I balk'd, even in writing this book, lest I should be brought to
answer for every profane and idle word! How frequent opportunities have I mist
in my life of ge^iality and pleasure, and fulfilling Nature in all its ends!
How have you frighted the Magistrate in vain, from exercising hi^ uncontrolable
Ecclesiastical Power, with the fear of an afterreckoning to God Almighty! And
how have you, p. 238. defeated the obligatory force of all his Laws, and set
his Subjects at liberty from all obligations to the duty of Obedience: for they
lie under no Obligation, you say then, but of Prudence and Self-interest. But
unless there has been some error in our education, and we have been seasoned
with ill Books at first, so that we can never lose the impression, there is
some such matter, and the Governor had reason, when he trembled to hear Saint
Paul discoursing of that Subject. The Fanatical Book of Martyrs (for we will
not with some call the Bible so) tell^ us some old Stories of persons that have
been cired by some of them to appear at such a day, and that by dying at the
same prefixed, they have saved their Reconnoissances. And in the Scot^h History
we read of a great Cardinal that was so summoned by poor Mr. G^ichard, and yet
could not help it, but he must take that long and sad journey of Death to
answer at the Grand Assizes. If therefore there be such a thing. I would not
for fear, and if there be not, yet I would not fear good luck sake, set that
terrible day at defiance, or make too me^y with it. It Is possible that the
Nonconformists many of them may be too censorious of others, and too confident
of their own Integrity. Others of them are more temperate, and perhaps
destitute of all humane redress against their sufferings: Some of those make
rash Chanlenges, and the other just Appeals to appear at that dreadful
Tribunal. In the mean time, it is not for you to be both the Enemy and their
Judge. Much less does it ^fit you, because perhaps they speak too sillily or
demurely of it, or too breaving and confidently, therefore to make a mere
mockery of the whole ^usiness of that supre^e Judge and Judicature. And one
thing I will say more, though slighter; that, though I am not so far gone as
Campanella was in the efficacy of words, and the magi^k of the face, and pronur
ciation, Yet I marked how your Answerer looked when he spoke of the day of
Judgment. Very gravely, I assure you, and yet without any depressing or
eral^ing his Supercil^um's: And I have most often observed that ferious words
have produced serious Effects.

I have, by this time methinks, gathered enough: nor are there many more left,
unless I should go for a Flower to the Du^ghil, which, he says, is his only
Magazin. And this being an expression which he has several times used (for no
Nonconformist repeats so often) I cannot but remark, that besides his natural
Talent, Mr. Bays has been very industrious, and neg^ected no opportunity of
acquiring a perfection of railing. For this is a phrase borrowed from a modern
Author lately dead, and I suppose Bays had given him a Bond for repayment at
the day that he spoke of so lately.

There are indeed several others at which I am forced to stop my nose. For by
the smell, any man may discern they grew upon a ranker soil, than that on the
South Side of the Lake Lemane, even upon the bank of the Thames in the Meadow
of Billingsgate: as that of the Lie, which, he says, no Gentleman, much less a
Div^ve, ought to put up. Now if this were to be tried by a Court Martial of the
Brothers of the Blade, It Is to be considered whether it were the downright
Lie, or whether it were only the Lie by Interpretation. For in the disputes of
the Schools there is nothing more usual, than Hoc est ^rum. Hoc est salsum. But
this passes without any blemish of honor on either side, and so far it is from
any obligation to a Challenge or a Duel, that it never comes to be decided, so
much as by the Study-door key. But quod restat probandum does the business
without demanding other satisfaction. Then, if it were the downright Lie; it
is to be examined who gave the Lve first: for that alters the case. And last of
all (but which is indeed upon a quarrel the least material point, yet, it too
comes under some consideration.) which of the two was in the right, and which
of them spoke truth, and which lied. These are all things to be discussed in
their proper places. For I do not observe that the Answerer gave Bays the
downright Lie. But I find that Bays gave him the Lie first in terms. And as
to the Truth of the things controverted and alleged, there needs no more than
the depositions that I formerly transcribed concerning Bays his own words. But
all this is only a Scene out of Bays his Rebearsal.

Villain, thou lie, --
-- Arm, arm, Valerio arm,
The Lie no flesh can bear I trow.
And then as to the Success of the Combat

-- They fly, they fly
Who first did give the Lie.
For that of Caitife, and other Provocations that are proper for the same
Court, I will not meddle further. And for the being past Grace and so past
Mercy; I shall only observe that the Church of England is much obliged to Mr.
Bays, for having proved that Nonconformity is the Sin against the Holy Ghost.

There remains but one Flower more that I have a mind to. But that indeed is a
Rapper. It Is a Flower of the Sun, and might alone serve both for a Staff and a
Nose-gay for any Noble-man's Porter. Symbolicalness is the very Essence of
Paganism, Superstition and Idolatry. They will and ought sooner to broyl in
Smithfield, than submit to such Abominations of the Strumpet and the Beast.
It Is the very Potion wherewith the Scarlet-Where made drunk the Kings of the
Earth. Heliogabalus and Bishop Bonner loved it like Clary and Eggs, and always
made it their mornings-draught upon burning days; and it is not to be doubted
but the seven Vials of Wrath that were to be poured out upon the Nations of the
Earth under the Reign of Antichrist were filled with Symbolical Extracts and
Spirits: With more such stuff which I omit. This is I confess a pretty Posy for
the Nose of such a Divine. Doctor Baily's Romance of the Wall-Flower had
nothing comparable to it. And I question, whether, as well as Mr. Bays loves
preferment, yet though he had lived in the Primitive Church, he would not as
Heliodorus Bishop of Trissa, I take it, that renounced his Bishopric rather
than his Title to the History of Theagenes and Chariclia, have done in like
manner: nay, and have delivered up his Bible too into the bargain, before he
would quit the honor of so excellent a piece of Drollery. This is surely the
Bill of Fare, not at the Ordination-Dinner at the Nags-head, but of the
Excusation-Dinner at the Cock; and never did Divine make so good Cheer of Owens
Peas-porridge and Scrinture. Good Mr. Bays, or Mr. T^der, or Mr. Cartwright
(not the Nonconformist Cartwright, that was you say (as some others too of
your acquaintance) converted: but the Player in the Rehearsal) this Divinity I
doubt was the Bacchus of your Thigh, and not the Pallas of your Brain.

Here it is that after so great an excess of Wit, he thinks fit to take a Julep
and resettle his Brain, and the Government. He grows as serious as it is
possible f^r a madman^, and pretends to sum up the whole state of the
Controversy with the Nonconformists, And to be sure he will make the story as
plausible for himself as he may: But therefore it was that I have before so
particulurly quoted and bound him up with his own Words as fast as such a (...)
could be pinioned. For he is as waxen as the first matter, and no Form comes
amiss to him. Every change of Posture does either alter his opinion or vary the
expression by which we should judge of it: and sitting he is of one mind, and
standing of another. Therefore I take my self the less concerned, to fight with
a Windmill like Quixote: or to whip a Gig as boys do, or with the Lacqueys at
Charing Cross or Lincolns-Innfields to play at the Wheel of Fortune, lest I
should fall into the hands of my Lord Chief Justice, or Sir Edmond Godfroy. The
truth is in short, and let Bays make more or less of it if he can; Bays had
at first built up such a stupendous Magistrate, as never was of God's making.
He had put all Princes upon the Rack to stretch them to his dimension. And, as
a straight line continued grows a Circle, he had given them so infinite a Power
that it was extended unto Impotency. For though he found it not, till it was
too late in the Cause; yet he felt it all along (which is the understanding of
Brutes) in the Effect. For, hence it is that he so often complains, that
Princes knew not aright that Supremacy over Consciences, to which they were so
lately, since their deserting the Church of Rome, restored. That in most
Nations. Government was not rightly understood, and many expressions of that
Nature: Whereas indeed the matter is that Princes have always found that
uncontrollable Government over CONSCIENCE to be both unsafe and unpracticable.
He had run himself here to a stand, and, and perceived that there was a God,
there was Scripture; the Magistrate himself had a Conscierce, and must take
care that he did not ixjoin thirgs apparently evil. Being at a stop here, he
would therefore try how he could play the Broker on the Subject side^ and no
Pimp did ever enter into seriouser disputation to vitia^ an innocent Virgin,
than he to debauch their Consciences. And to harden their unpracticed modesty,
he imboldens them by his own example, showing them the experiment upon his own
Corscience first. But a^er all, he finds himself again at the same stand here
and and is run up to the Wall by an Angel: God, and Scripture, and Consc^ence
will not let him go further: (...) he owns, that if the Magistrate injoins
things apparert'y evil, the Subject may have liberty to re^. What shall he do
then? for it is too glorious an enterprise to b^ abandoned at the first
rebuffe. Why he gives us a new Translation of the Bible, and a new Commentary.
He says that Tenderness of Conicience might be allowed in a Church to be
constitu^, not in a Church constituted already. That Tenderness of Conscience
and Scandal are Ignorance, Pride and Obstmacy. He says, the Nonconformists
should communicate with him till they have clear evidence that it is evil. This
is a civil way indeed of gaining the question, to persuade men that are
unsatisfied, to be satisfied till they be dissatisfied. He threat^s, he rails,
he jeers them, if it were possible, out of all their Consciences and Honesty;
and finding that will not do, he cails out the Magistrate, tells him, these men
are not fit-to live, there can be no security of Government while they are in
being: bring out the Pillories, Whipping-po^s, Galleys, Rods and A^es (...)
(which are (...) ultima (...), a Clergy-mans ^last Argument, ay, and ^is first
teo:) (...) pull in pieces all the Tradi^g Corporations, those Nests of Faction
and Sedition. This is a faithful account of the sum and intention of all hi^
undertaking, for which I confefs, he was as picked a man as could have been
employed or found out in a whole Kingdom: but it is so much too hard a Task for
any man to archieve, that no Goose but would grow giddy with it.

Fo whereas he reduces the whole Controversy to a matter of two or three
Symbolical Ceremonies (and if there be nothing else, more the shame of those
that keep such a pudder) it is very well worth observing how he ha^h behaved
himself, and how come off in this Dispute. It seems that the Conformists d^fine
a Sacrament to be an Outward visib^e Sign of an Inward Spiritual Grace. It
seems that the Sacraments are usually called in the Greek Symbola. It seems
further that some of the Nonconformists, under the name therefore of Symbolical
Ceremonies, dispute the lawsulness of those that are by our Church inj^yned,
whereby the Nonconformists can only intend that these Ceremonies are so
applied, as if they were of a Sacramental nature and institution, and that
^erefore they are unlawful. Our Authors Answeer handling this Argument, does
among other things ^ake use of a pertinent Passage in Saint Austin, Signa ^uum
ad res divinas perti^t Sacramenta appellantur. What does Mr. Bays in this
case? for it went hard ^ith him. Why, as good luck would have it, not being
willing that so great a Politician, to the irrepa^able damage of the Church,
shonld yet be destroy^d, J. O. had forgot to quote the Book and Page. Now
though you send a man the length of your Weapon, and nam^ your Second; Ye^ Mr.
Bays being, as you see (...), admirably read in the Laws of (...), knew that
unless the Time and Place be appointed, there is no danger. He says therefore,
p, 452. of his second Book, that he should have advantage on his side, if he
should lay odds with him, that there is no such passage in all the Volumns of
Saint Austin. -- But however, that it is neither civil nor ingenuous to trouble
him with such Objections, as he cannot answer without reading over eight or ten
large Volumns in Folio. It was too much to expect from one of so much business,
good Augustulus:

Quum tot sustineas and tanta negotia solus;
Res Sacras Armis tuteris, Moribus ornes,
Legibus emendes --
S Which may be thus translated: When you alone have the Ceremonies to defend
with Whipping-posts, Rods and Axes; when you have Grace to turn into Morality;
when you have the Act of Oblivion and Indemnity and the Ecclesiastical
Declaration of March to tear in pieces; it were unreasonable and too much to
the damage of the public to put you on such an Employment. I ask your pardon,
Mr. Bays, for this Paraphrase and Digression: for I perceive I am even hardened
in my Latin, and am prone to use it without fear or reverence. But, Mr. Bays,
there might have been a remedy for this, had you pleased. Where then were all
your Leaf-Turners? a sort of poor Readers you as well as Bishop Bramhal ought
to have some Reverence for, having made so much use of them to gather materials
for your Structures and Superstructures. I cannot be persuaded, for all this,
but that he know^ it well enough, the passage being so remarkable in it self,
and so dirtyed with the Nonconformists thumbs, that he could not possibly miss
it: and I doubt he does but laugh at me now when, to save him a labor, I tell
him in the simplicity of my heart, that even I my self met with it in Ep. (...)
ad Marcellinum, and the words these, N^mis autem longum est convenienter
disputare de (...) fignorum quae cum ad res divinas pertinent Sacram^nta
appellantur. But whether there be such a place or no, he has no mind that his
Answerer sho^d make use of it: nor of the Schoolmen, whom before he had owned
for the Authors of the Church of England's (...); but would bind up the
Answerer to the Law only and the Gospel. And now Mr. Bays says he will be of
the School-mens opinion as long as they sp^ak Sense and no longer, (and so I
believe of Saint Aus^'s) that is to say, so long as they will serve his ^urn:
for all Politicians shake men ^ff when they have no more use of'm, or find them
to (...) the design. But, Mr. Bays why may not your Answerer or any man else
quote St. Austin, as well as you may the Scri^re? I am su^e there is less
danger of perverting the place, or of mis-interpretation. And though perhaps a
Nonconsormist may value the Authority of the Bib^e above that of the Fat^ers;
yet the Welsh have a Proverb, that the Bible and a Stone do well together:
meaning perhaps, that if one miss the other will hit. You, that are a Duellist,
know how great a bravery it is to gain your. Ee^emys Sword, and that there is
no more home-thrust in dispu^ation, th^n the Argumentum ad hominem. So that if
your Adversary fell upon you with one of your own Fathers, it was gallant^y
done on his part; and no less wi^ely on yours to fence in this m^nner, and us^
all your shifts (...) put it by. For you too, Mr. Bays, do know, no man
better, that it is not at all times safe nor honorable to be of a Fathers
opinion.

Having escaped this danger; he grows, nor can I blame him, exceeding merry:
and insults heavily over Symbolical wheresoever he meets with it, for in his
Answerer I find it not. But wheresoever 'twas it serves to good purpose. For no
man would imagine that he could have received so universal a Defeat, and appear
in so good humor. A terrible Disputant he is, when he has set up an hard word
to be his Opponent; It Is a very wholesome thing he knows, and prolongs life:
for all the while he can keep up this ball, he may decline the Question. But
the poor Word is sure to be mumbled and mowsled to purpose, and to be made an
example. But let us, with Mr. Bays his leave, examine the thing for once a
little closer. The Non-conformists, as I took notice before, do object to some
of the Rites of the Church of England, under the name of Symbolical or
significant Ceremonies. They observe the Church of England does in the
discourse of Ceremonies printed before the Common Prayer Book, declare that the
retaining of those Ceremonies, is not only as they serve for decent Order and
Godly Discipline; but as they are apt to stir up the dull mind of man to the
remembrance of his duty to God, by some special and notable significancy,
whereby he may be edified. They further observe the Church of England's
definition of a Sacrament: That it is an outward visible sign of an inward
spiritual Grace. They find these Ceremonies, so constituted, imposed upon them
by Authority; and more-over, according to our Authors principle, made a new
part of the Divine Law. They therefore quarrel and except against these under
the notion of Sacraments, and insist that the Church is not empowered to
institute such Ceremonies under such obligations and penalties as they are
imposed. Or, if you will, in stead of Church you may say rather the Magistrates:
for as much as our Author has pro hac vice delivered the Keys and the whole
power of the House into his hands.

Now the Author having got them at this lock, cries Victory. Nothing less will
serve him than a three days triumph, as if he had conquered Europe, Asia, and
Africa, and let him have a fourth day added, if he please, over the Terra
Incognita of Geneva. There is no end of his Ostentation and Pageantry: and the
dejected Non-conformists follow the wheels of his Chariot, to be led afterward
to the Prison and there executed. He had said p. 446. of his Second Book, Here
Cartwright begun his Objection, and here he was immediately checked in his
Carrear by Whitgift (you might Mr. Author, for respect sake have called him at
leaft Mr. if not Archbishop Whitgift) who told him plainly, he could not be
ignorant that to the making of a Sacrament, besides the external Element, there
is required a Commandment of God in his Word that it should be done, and a
promise annexed to it, whereof the Sacrament is a Seal. And in pursuance
hereof, p 447. our Author says, Here then I fix my foot, and dare him to his
teeth, to prove that any thing can be capable of the nature or office of
Sacraments that is not established by Divine Institution and upon Promise of
Divine Acceptance. Upon the confidence of this Argument it is that he Hectors
and Achillezes all the Non-conformists out of the pit in this Preface. This is
the Sword that was consecrated first upon the Altar, and thence presented to
the Champions of the Church in all Ages. This is that with which Archbishop
Whitgift gave Cartwright his death's wound: and laid the Puritan Reformation a
gasping. This is the weapon wherewith Master Hooker gained those lasting and
eternal Trophies over that baffled Cause. This is that with which Bishop
Bramhal wrought those wonderful things that exceeded all belief. This has been
transmitted successively to the Writer of the Friendly Debate, and to this our
Author. It is in conclusion the Curta^^ of our Church. It Is Sir Salomon's
sword, Cock of as many men as it has been drawn against. Woe wo^ the man that
comes in the way of so dead-doing a tooll, and when weilded with the arm of
such a Scanderbag as our Author. The Non-conformists had need desire a Truce to
bury their dead. Nay there are none left alive to desire it: but they are slain
every mother's Son of them. Yet perhaps they are but stounded and may revive
again. For I do not see all this while, that any of them have written, as a
great Prelate of ours, a Book of Seven Sacraments: or attempted to prove that
those Symbolical Ceremonies are indeed Sacraments. Nothing less. It Is that
which they most labor against, and they complain that these things should be
imposed on them with so high Penalty, as want nothing of a Sacramental nature
but Divine Institution. And because an Humane Institution is herein made an
equal force to a Divine Institution, therefore it is that they are agrieved.
All that they mean, or could mean, as far as I or any man can perceive, is only
that these Ceremonies are a kind of Anti-Sacraments, and so obtruded upon the
Church, that without condescending to these additional Inventions, no man is to
be admitted to partake of the true Sacraments which were of Christ's
appointing. For, without the Sign of the Cross, our Church will not receive any
one to Baptism, as also without kneeling no man is suffered to come to the
Communion. So that methinks, our Author and his partners have wounded
themselves only with this Argument: and have had as little occasion here to
sing their Te Deum's, as the R^man Emperor had to triumph over the Ocean,
because he had gathered Periwinkles and Scallop shells on the Beach. For the
Author may transform their reasonings as often as he pleases (even as often as he
does his own, or the Sctiptures): but this is indeed their Fort out of which
(...) do not see they are likely to be beat with all our Authors Canon: that no
such new Conditions ought to be imposed upon Christians by a less than Divine
Authority, and unto which if they do not submit, though against their
Consciences, they shall therefore be dep^ived of Communion with the Church. And
I wonder that our Author could not observe any thing in the Discourse of I
vargel call (...), that was to the purpose, beside a perpetual repetition, of
the outworn story of unscriptural Ceremonies, and a peculiar uncouthness and
obscurity of style; when as this Plea is there for so many pages distinctly and
vigorously i^sisted on. For it is a childish thing (how high soever our Author
magnifies himself in this way of reasoning) either to demand from the
Non-conformists a pattern of their Worship from the Scripture, who affect
therein a Simplicity, free from all exterio^ circumstances, but such as are
natural or customary: or else to require of them some particular command
against the Cross, or kneeling, and such like Ceremonies, which in the time of
the Apostles and many Ages after were never thought of. But therefore general
and applicable Rules of Scripture they urge as directions to the Conscience;
unto which our Author gives no satisfactory Solution, but by superseding and
extinguishing the Conscience, or exposing it to the severest penalties. But
here I say then is their main exception, that things indifferent, and that have
no proper signature, or significancy to that purpose, should by command be made
necessary conditions of ChurchCommunion. I have many times wished for
peaceableness-sake that they had a greater latitude; but if unless they should
stretch their Consciences till they tear again, they cannot conform, what
remedy? For I must confess that Christians have a better Right and Title to the
Church, and to the Ordinances of God there, than the Author has to his
Surplice. And that Right is so undoubted and ancient, that it is not to be
innovated upon by humane restrictions and capitulations.

Bishop Bramhall p. 141. says, I do profess to all the World, that the
transforming of indifferent Opinions into ^ssary Articles of Faith, has been
that Insana Laurus, or cursed Bay Tree, the cause of all our brawling and
contention. That which he saw in matter of Doctrine he would not discern in
Discipline, whereas this among us, the transform^ng of things, at best
indifferent, into necessary points of practice, has been of as ill
consequence. And (to reform a little my seriousness) (...) shall not let this
pass without taking notice that you Mr. Bays, being the most extravagant
person in this matter that ever I heard of, as I have shown, you are mad, and
so the Insana Laurus; so I wish you may not prove that cursed Bay Tree too, as
the Bishop translates it. If you had thought of this, perhaps we might have
mi^ed both the Bishops Book and your Preface; for you see that sometimes no Man
has a worse friend than he brings from home.

It is ^ue, and very piously done, that our Church does declare that the
kneeling at the Lords Supper is not enjoined for adoration of those Elements,
and concerning the other Ceremoni^s as before. But the Romanists (from whom we
have them, and who said of old, we would come to feed on their Meat, as well as
eat of their Porridge) do offer us here many a fair declaration, and
distinction in very weighty matters, to which nevertheless the Conscience of
our Church has not complied. But in this particular matter of kneeling, which
came in first with the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, the Romish Church do
reproach us sense in the Bread and Wine, do yet pay (...) or other the same
adoration. Suppose the Anti^t ^agans had declared to the Primitive Christians,
that ^he offering of some grains of Incense was only to per^ume the room, or
that the delivering up of their Bibles, was but for preserving the Book more
carefully. Do you think the Christians would have palliated so (...), and
colluded with their Consciences? Men are 100 prone ^o err on that hand. In the
last King's ^ime, some eminent Persons of our Clergy made an open defection to
the Church of Rome. One, and he yet certainly a Protestant, and that has
deserved well of that cause, writ the Book of Seven Sacraments. One in the
Church at present, though certainly no less a Protestant, could not abstain
from arguing the Holiness of Lent: Doctor Thorndike lately dead, left for his
Epitaph, Hic jacet c^pus Herberti Thoradike Praebendarij hujus Eccle^ qui vivus
veram Reformatae Ec^lesia rationem and modum precibus studiisque prosequebatur,
and nevertheless he adds, Tu Lector requi^m ei and beatam in Christo
resurrectionem precare. Which thing I do thus sparingly set down, only to show
the danger of inventive piety; and if Men come once to add new devices to the
Scripture, how easily they slide on into Super^tition. Therefore, although the
Church do consider her self so much as not to alter her Mode (...) the fancy of
others, yet I cannot see why she ought to exclude those from Communion, whose
weaker consciences cannot for fear of scandal step further. For the
Non-conformists, as to these Declarations of our Church against the Reverence
to the Creatures of Bread and Wine, and concerning the other Ceremonies as
before, will be ready to think they have as (...) against the clause, That
whosoever should atfirm the Wednesday Fast to be imposed with an intention to
bind the Conscience, should be punished like the spreaders of falso news; which
is, says a learned Prelate plainly to them that understand it, to evacuate the
whole Law. For all human Power being derived from God, and bound upon our
Conscinces by his Power, not by Man, he that faith it shall not bind the
Conscience, says it shall be no Law, it shall have no Authority from God, and
then it has none at all; and if it be not tied upon the Conseience, then to
break it is no sin, and then to keep it is no duty. So that a Law without such
an intention is a contradiction. It is a Law only which binds if we please, and
we may obey when we have a mind to it, and to so much we are tied before the
Constitution. But then if by such a Declaration it was meant, that to keep such
Fasting-days was no part of a direct Commandment from God, that is, God had not
required them by himself immediately, and so it was abstracting from that Law
no duty Evangelical, it had been below the wisdom of the Contrivers of it, no
man petends it, (...) man says it, no man thinks it, and they might as well
have declared that that laiw was none of the ten Commandments, p. 59 of his
first Book.

So much pains does that learned Prelate of his take (who ever he was) to prove
a whole Parliament of England. Coxcombs. Now I say that th^se Ecclesia^ical
Laws, with such Declarations concerning the Ceremonies by them (...), might,
muta^is mutandis, be taxed upon the same Top^k. But I love not that task, and
shall rather leave it to Mr. Bays to paraphrase his learnd Prelate. For he is
very good at correcting the (...) of Laws and Lawgivers, and though this work
indeed be not for (...) turn at present, yet it may be for the future. And I
have heard a good Engineer say, That he never (...) any place so, but that he
reserved a feeble point, by which he knew how to take it, if there were
occasion.

I know a medicine for Mr. Bays his Hiccough (it is but naming J. O.) but I
cannot tell certainly, though I have a shrewd guess what is the cause of it.
For indeed all his Arguments here are so abrupt and short, that I cannot liken
them better, considering too that ^requent and perpetual repetition. Such as
this, Why may not the Sovereign Power bestow this Privilege upon Ceremony, and
Custom, by virtue of its prerogative? What greater Immorality is there in them
when determined by the Command and Institution of the Prince, than when by the
consent and institution of the people? This the Tap-lash of what he said, p.
100. When the Civil Magistrate takes upon him to determine any particular Forms
of outward Worship, it is of no worse Consequence than if he should go about to
define the signification of all words used in the Worship of God. And p. 108.
of his first Book. So that all the Magistrates power of instituting significant
Cerem-onies, etc. can be no more ^rpation upon the CONSCIENCES of Men, than if
the Sovereign Authority should take upon it self, as some Princes have done, to
define the signification of words. And afterward: The same gesture, and
actions are indifferently capable of signifying either honor or contumely: and
so words; and therefore it is necessary their signification should be determined
etc. It Is all very well worth reading. p. 441. of his Second Book. It Is no
other usurpation upon their Subjects Consciences than if he should take upon
him to refine their Language, and determine the proper signification of all
phrases employed in Divine Worship, as well as in Trades, Ar^s and Sciences. p.
461. of the same; Once we will so far gratify the tenderness of their
Consciences and curiosity of their Fancies, as to promise never to ascribe any
other significancy to things than what himself is here content to bestow upon
words. And 462. of the same. So that you see, my Comparison between the
signification of Words and Ceremonies stands firm as the Pillars of the Earth,
and the Foundations of our Faith. Mr. Bays might I see, have spared Sir
Salomon's Sword of the Divine Institution of the Sacraments. Here is the
terriblest weapon in all his Armory; and therefore I perceive, reserved by our
Duellist for the last onset. And, I who am a great well-wisher to the Pillars
of the Earth, or the eight Elephants, lest we should have an Earthquake; and
much more a Servant to the Kiag's Prerogative, lest we should all fall into
consusion; and perfectly devoted to the Foundations of our Faith, lest we
should run out into Popery or Paganism; have no heart to ^his encounter: lest
if I should prove that the Magistrates absolute unlimited and uncontrolable
Power does not extend to define the signification of all words, I should
thereby not only be the occasion of all those mischiefs mentioned, but, which
is of far more dismal Importance, the loss of two or three so significant
Ceremonies. But though I therefore will not dispute against that Flower of the
Princes Crown, yet I hope that without doing much harm, I may observe that for
the most part they left it to the people, and seldom themselves exercised it.
And even Augustus Casar, though he was so great an Emperor, and so valiant a
man in his own person, was used to fly from a new word though it were single,
as studiously as a Mariner would avoid a Rock for fear of splitting. The
differences of one Syllable in the same word has madeas considerable a
Controversy as most have been in the Church, betwi^t the Homousians and the
Hamoiousions. One letter in the name of Beans in Languedoc, one party calling
them Faves; and the other Haves; as the transposition only of a letter another
time in the name of a Goat, by some called Crabe, and by others Cabre, was the
loss of more men's lives than the distinguishing but by an Aspiration in
Shiboleth upon the like occasion. So that if a man would be learnedly
impertinent, he might enlarge here to show that '^is as dangerous to take a man
by the tongue, as a bear by the tooth. And had I a mind to play the Politician,
like Mr. Bays, upon so pleasant and copious a Subject, I would demonstrate
that though the imposition of Ceremonies has bred much mischief in the world,
yet (shall I not venture too upon one word once for a trial) such a Penetration
or Transubstantiation of Language would throw all into Rebellion and Anarchy,
would shake the Crowns of all Princes, and reduce the World into a second
Babel. Therefore, Mr. Bays, I doubt you were not well advised to make so close
an Analogy betwi^ imposing of significant words and significant Ceremonies: for
I fear the Argument may be improved against you, and that Princes finding that
of words so impracticable, and of ill consequence, will conclude that of
Ceremonies to be no less pernicious. And the Nonconformists (who are great
Traders you know, in Scripture, and therefore thrown out of the Temple) will be
certainly on your back. For they will appropriate your pregnant Text of Let all
things be done decently and in order, to preaching or praying in an unknown
Tongue, which such an imposition of words would be: and then, to keep you to
your Similitude, they will say too that yours are all Latin Ceremonies, and
the Congregation does not understand them. But were not (...) Dominion of words
so dangerous (for how many millions of men did it cost your Roman Empire to
attain it!) Yet it was very unmannerly in you to assign to Princes, who have
enough beside, so mean a trouble. When you gave them leave to exercise the
Priesthood in person, that was something to the purpose; That was both
Honorable, and something belongs to it that would have helped to bear the
charge. But this Mint of words will never quit cost, nor pay for the coynage.
This is such a drudgery; that rather than undergo it, I dare say, there is no
Prince but would resign to you so Pedantical a Sovereignty. I cannot but think
how full that Princes head must be of Proclamations. For, if he published but
once a Proclamation to that purpose, he must forthwith set our another to stamp
and declare the signification of all the words contained in it, and then
another to appoint the meaning of all the words in this, and so on: that here
is work cut out in one Paper of State for the whole Privy Council, both
Secretaries of State, and all the Clerks of the Council, for one Kings Reign,
and in infinitum. But, I cannot but wonder, knowing how ambitious Mr. Bays is
of the power over words, and jealous of his own Prerogative of refining
Language, how he came to be so liberal of it to the Prince: Why, the same thing
that induced him to give the Prince a power an^ecedent and independent to
Christ, and to establish what Religion he pleased, etc. Nothing but his spite
against the Nonconformists. I know not that thing in the world, except a Jest,
that he would not part with to be satisfied in that particular. He hoped
doub^less by holding up this Maxim; to obtain that the words of the declaration
of Mar^ 15. should be understood by contraries You may well think he expected
no less an equivalent, he would never (...) have permitted the Prince even to
define the signification of all words used in the Worship of God, and to
determine the proper signification of all Phrases employed in Divine Worship^
Nay, Mr. Bays, if it be come to that, and you will surrender your Liturgy to
the Prince, I know not what you mean; for it is bound up with your Bible. Was it
ever heard that that Book so sacred, and in which there could not one error be
found by all the Presbyterians at the Worcester-House-Conference, should, upon
so uncertain a prospect, be now abandoned so far as that every word and Phrase
in it may receive a new and ^ontrary signification! But the King for ought I
see likes it well as it is (and therefore I do so too). Yet in case His Majesty
should ever think fit to reform it, and because such kind of work is usually
referred back to some of the Clergy; I would gladly put in a Caveat, that our
Author may in no ca e be one of them. For it is known that Mr, Bays is subject
to a distemper; and who knows but when he is in a fit, as he made such mad
alterations of the f^uit of the Spirit in the Epistle for the day, he may as
w^ll in^ert in some other part of the Service, Welfare poor Macedo for a
modest Fool; and then, Oh how I hug the, Dear heart, for this l and pretend
that the Supreme Magistrate should stamp upon it a signification sacred and
serious. I would not have spoken so severely of him, but that his more labored
periods, as he calls them, are so often filled with much bolder and more
unwholesome translations. But however that he may not at his better intervals
be wholly unemployed in the work of ^lniformity, I should recommend to him
rather to turn the Liturgy and the Rationale into the Universal Language, and
so in time the whole world might come to be of his par^sh.

When he was drawn t^us low, did not (...) you, stand need of tilting? He had
done much more service to the Cause, had he laid by all those cheating
Argumentations, and dealt heartily, like the good Arch Deacon not long since
dead; who went about both Court and Country, preaching upon the Clok^ left at
Troas, and the Books, but especially ^he Parchments. The honest Man had found
out there the whole Liturgy, the Canonical habits, and all the Equipage of a
Conformist. This was something to the matter in hand, to produce Apostolical
Example and Authority: And much more to the purpose than that beaten Text of
doing all things decently and in order.

One Argument I con^ess remains still behind, and that will justify any thing.
It Is that which I called lately Rationem Ultimam Cleri; Force, Law, Execution,
or what you will have it. I would not be mistaken, as though I hereby meant the
body of the English Clergy, who have been ever since the Reformation (I say it
without disparagement to the Foraign Churches) of- the Eminentest for Divinity
and Piety in all Christendom. And as far am I from censuring, under this title,
the Bishops of England, sor whose Function, their Learning, their Persons I
have too deep a veneration to speak any thing of them irreverently. But those
that I intend only, are a particular bran of persons, who will in spite of
Fate be accounted the Church of England, and to show they are Pluralists, never
write in a modester Style than We, We; nay, even these, several of them, are
Men of parts sufficient to deserve a Rank among the Teachers and Governots of
the Church. Only what Bishop Bram^al faith of Grotius his defect in School
Divinity;

Unam hoc maceror and doleo tibi deesse.
I may apply to their excess and rigo^r in matter of Discipline. They want all
consideration, all moderation in those things; and I never heard of any of them
at any time, who, if they got into Power or Office, did ever make the least
experiment or overture toward the peace of the Church and Nation they lived
in. They are the Politic Would be's of the Clergy. Not Bishops, but Men that
have a mind to be Bishops, and that will do any thing in the World to compass
it. And, though Princes have always a particular mark upon these Men, and value
them no more than they deserve, yet I know not very well, or perhaps I do know,
how it oftentimes happens that they come to be advanced. They are Men of a
fi^ry nature, that must always be uppermost, and so they may increase their own
Slendor, care nor though they (...) all on flame about them. You would think
the same day that they took up Divinity they divested themselves of Humanity,
and so they may procure and execute a Law against the Non-conformists, that
they had forgot the Gospel. They cannot endure that Humility, that Meekness,
that strictness of Manners and Conversation, which is the true way of gaining
Reputation and Authority to the Clergy; much less can they content themselves
with the ordinary and comfortable provis sion that is made for the Ministry:
But, having wholly calculated themselves for Preferment, and Grandeur, know or
practice no other means to make themselves venerable but by Ceremony and
Severity. Whereas the highest advantage of promotion is the opportunity of
condescension, and the greatest dignity in our Church can but raise them to the
Title of Your Grace, which is in the Latin Vestra Clementia. But of all these,
none are so eager and virulent, as some, who having had relation to the late
times, have got access to Ecclesiastical Fortune, and are resolved to make
their best of her. For so, of all Beasts, none are so fierce and cruel as those
that have been taught once by hunger to prey upon their own kind; as of all
Men, none are so inhumane as the Canibals. But whether this be the true way of
ingra^iating themselves with a generous and discerning Prince, I meddle not;
nor whether it be an ingenuous practice toward thosewhom they have been
formerly acquainted with: but whatsoever they think themselves obliged to for
the approving of their new Loyalty; I rather commend. That which astonishes me,
and only raises my indignation is, that of all sorts of Men this kind of Clergy
should always be, and have been for the most precipitate, brutish, and
fanguinary Counsels. The former Civil War cannot make them wise, nor his
Majesty's happy Return, good natured; but they are still for running things up
unto the same extremes. The softness of the Universities where they have been
bred, the gentleness of Christianity, in which they have been nurtured, has
but exasperated their nature; and they seem to have contracted no Idea of
wisdom, but what they learnt at School, the Pedantry of Whipping. They take
themselves qualified to Preach the Gospel, and no less to intermeddle in
affairs of State: Though the reach of their Divinity is but to persecution, and
an Inquis^on is the heig^t of their Policy.

And you Mr. Bays, had you lived in the days of Augustus Caesar (be not
^andalized, for why may you not bring sixteen hundred years, as well as five
(...) into one of your Plays) would not you have made, think you, an excellent
Privy Coun^ellour? His Father too was murdered. Or, (to come nearer both to our
times, and your resemblance of the late War, which you trumpet always in the
Ear of his Majesty) had you happened in the time of Henry the fourth of France,
should not you have done well in the Cabinet? His Predecessor too was
assassinated. No, Mr. Bays, you would not have been for their purpose: They
took other measures of Government, and accordingly it succeeded with them. And
His Majesty, whose Genius has much of both those Princes, and who derives half
of the Blood in his Veins from the latter, will in all probability not be so
forward to hearken to your advice as to follow their example. For these Kings,
Mr. Bays, how negligent soever or ignorant you take'm to be, have, I doubt, a
shrewd understanding with them. It Is a Trade, that God be thanked, neither you
nor I are of, and therefore we are not so competent Judges of their Actions. I
my se^ have oftentimes seen them, some of them, do strange things, and
unreasonable in my opinion, and yet a little while, or sometimes many years
after, I have sound that all the men in the world could not have contrived any
thing better. It Is not with them as with you. You have but one Cure of Souls,
or perhaps two, as being a Noblemans Chaplain, to look after: And if you make
Conscience of discharging them as you ought, you would find you had work
sufficient, without wri^ing your Ecc^esiastical Policies. But they are the
Incumbents of whole Kingdoms, and the Rectorship of the Common people, the
Nobility, and even of the Clergy, whom you are prone to affirm when possessed
with principles that incline to rebe^ion and disloyal parctices, to be of all
R^bels the most dangerous, p. 49. the care I say of all these, rests upon them.
So that they are fain to condescend to many things for peacesake, and the quiet
of Mankind, that your proud heart would break before it would bend to. They do
not think fit to require any thing that is impossible, unnecessary, or wanton,
of their people; but are fain to consider the very temper of the Climate in
which they live, the Constitution and Laws under which they have been formerly
bred, and upon all occasions to give them good words, and humor them like
Children. They reflect upon the Histories of former times, and the present
Transactions to regulate themselves by in every circumstance. They have heard
that one of your Roman Emperors, when his Captain of the Lifeguard came for
the Word, by giving it unhandsomly, received a Dagger. They observe how the
Parliament of Poland will be their Kings Tailor, and among other reasons,
because he would not wear their Mode, have suffered the Turk enter, as coming
nearer their Fashion. Nay, that even Al^xander the Great had almost lo^t all he
had conquered by forcing his Subjects to conform to the Persian habit. That the
King of Spain, when upon a Progress he enters B^scai, is pleased to ride with
one Leg naked, and above all to take care that there be not a Bishop in his
Retinue. So their people will pay their Taxes in good Gold and Silver, they
demand no Subsidy of so many bushel of Fleas, lest they should (...) same
answer with the Tyrant, that the Subject could not furnish that quantity, and
besides they would be leaping out still before they could be measured, and
should they fine the people for nonpayment, they reckon there would be little
got by distraining. They have (...) a certain Queen being desired to give a
Town-Seal to one of (...), lighting from Horse, sat down naked on the Snow,
and left them that Impression, and though it caused no disturbance, but all the
Towv-Leases are Letters-Pattents; Kings do not approve the Example. That the
late Queen of Sweden did her self no good with saying, Io (...) voglio (...)
Bestie but afterward resigned. That the occasion of the revolt of Switzerland
from the Emperor and its turning Comm^ wealth, was only the imposing of a Civil
Ceremony by Capricious Governor, who set up a Pole in the highway, with a Cap
upon the top of it, to which he would have all Passengers be uncovered, and
doobeysance. One sturdy Swi^, that would not conform; thereupon overturned the
Government, is it is at large in History. That the King of (...) lost Flanders
chiefly upon introducing the Inquisi^on. And you now Mr. Bays will think
these, and (...) h^ndred more that I could tell you, but idle stor^s, and yet
Kings can tell how to make use of 'm. And hence it is that instead of assuming
your unhopable jurisdiction, they are so satisfied with the abundance of their
power, that they rather think meet to abate os its exercise by their
diseretion. The gre^er fortune is, they are content to to use the less
extra^gancy. But because I see, Mr. Bays, you are a little deaf on this ear I
will talk somewhat closer to you. In this v^ry matter of Ceremonies, which you
are so bent upon, (...), your mi^d is always running (...), when you should be
(...), (...) not you think that the King (...) every word you said, although he
never gave your Book (...) reading? That you sey, that the Clause 50 (...). of
the Wed^day-Fast has been the original of all the Puritan-Disorder^ (...) is
now reduced only to two or three Symbolical Ceremonies. That these Ceremonies
are things indifferent-in their own nature, and have no antecedent necessity,
but only bind as they are commanded. That they fignifie nothing in themselves
but what the Commander pleases. That the Church it self declares that there is
nothing of Religion or adoration in them. That they are no parts of Religious
Worship. That they are only Circumstances. That the imposing of a significant
Ceremony, is no more than to impose fignificancy upon a word. That there is not
a word of any of these Ceremonies in the Scriptures. That they are in
themselves of no great moment and consequence, but it is absolutely necessary
that Government should in^oyn them, to avoid the evil that would follow if they
were not determined: and that there cannot be a Pin pulled out of the Church,
but the State immediately totters. Do not you think that the King has
considered all these things? I believe he has; and perhaps, as you have minced
the matter, he may well think the Nonconformists have very nice Stomachs, that
they cannot digest such chopp'd ^ay: But on the other side, he must needs take
you to be very strange men, to (...) these in fpite down the throats of any
Christian. If a man have an Antipathy against any thing, the Company is
generally so civil, as to re^rain the use of it, however not to press it upon
the person. If a man be fick or weak the Pope grants a Dispensation from Lent,
or Fasting days: ay, and from many a thing that strikes deeper in his
Religion. If one have got a cold, their betters will force them to be covered.
There is no end of Similitudes: but I am led into them by your calling these
Ceremonies, Pins of the curious, and that is se^led (God be prai^ed) pretty
fast in his Throne, to try for experiment, whether the pulling out of one of
these Pins would make the State totter. But, Mr. Bays, there is more in it.
It Is matter of Conscience: and if Kings do, out of discretion, connive at the
other infirmities of their People; If great perfons do out of civility
condescend to their inferiors; and if all men out of common humanity do yield
to the weaker; Will your Clergy only be the men, who, in an affair of
Conscience, and where perhaps it is you are in the wrong, be the only
hard-hearted and inflexible Tyrants; and not only so, but instigate and provoke
Princes to be the Ministers of your cruelty? But, I say, Princes, as far as I
can take the height of things so far above me, must needs have other thoughts,
and are past such boys-play to stake their Crowns against your Pins. They do
not think fit to command things unnecesfary, and where the profit cannot
countervail the hazard. But above all they consider, that God has instated them
in the Government of Mankind, with that encumbrance (if it may so be called) of
reason, and that encumbrance upon Reason of (...). That he might have given
them as large an extent of ground and other kind of cattle for their Subjects:
but it had been a melancholy Empire to have been only supreme Grasiers and
Sovereign Shepherds. And therefore, though the laziness of that brutal
magistracy might have been more secure, yet the difficulty of this does make it
more honorable That men therefore are to be dealt with reasonably: and
conscientious men by Conscience. That even Law is force, and the execution of
that Law a greater Violence; and therefore with a rational creature not to be
used but upon the utmost extremity. That ^ ral punishments do never reach the
offender, but the innocent suffers for the gui^ty. That the mind is in the hand
of God, and cannot correct those pe^swasions which upon the best of it natural
capacity it has collected: So that it too, though erroneous, is so far
innocent. That the Prince therefore, by how much God has endued him with a
clearer reason, and by consequence with a more enlightened judgment, ought the
rather to take heed lest by punishing Conscience, he violate not only his own,
but the Divine Majesty. But as to that Mr. Bays, which you still inculcate of
the late War, and its horrid Catastrophe, which you will needs have to be upon
a religious account: It Is four and twenty years ago, and after an Act of
Oblivion; and for ought I can see, it had been as seasonable to have shown
Casars bloody Coat, or Thomas a Beckets bloody Rochet. The chief of the
offenders have long since made satisfaction to Justice; and the whole Nation
has been swept sufficiently of late years by those terrible scourges of
Heaven: So that methinks you might in all this while have satiated your
mischievous appetite. Whatsoever you suffered in those times, his Majesty who
had much the greater loss, knowing that the memory of his Glorious Father will
always be preserved, is the best Judge how long the revenge o^ght to be
pursued. But if indeed out of your superlative care of his Majesty and your
Living, you are afraid of some new disturbance of the same nature, let me so
far satisfy you as I am satisfied. The Non-conformists say that they are bound
in conscience to act as far as they can, and for the rest to suffer to the
utmost. But because though they do mean honestly, it is so hard a Chapter for
one that thinks himself in the right to suffer extremities patiently, that some
think it impossible; I say next, that it is very seldom seen that in the same
age, a Civil War, after such an interval, has been raised again upon the same
pretenses: But Men are also weary, that he would be knocked on the head that
should raise the first disturbance of the same nature. A new War must have,
like a Book that would sell, a new Title.

I am ashamed Mr. Bays that you put me on talking thus impertinently, (for
Policy in us is so). Therefore to be short, the King has so indulged and
obliged the Non-conformists by his late mercy, that if there were any such
Knave, there can be no such Fool among them, that would ever lift up an ill
thought against him. And for you Mr. Bays he is assured of your Loyalty, so
that I think you may enjoy your Living very peaceably, which I know is all your
business. 'Twas well replied of the English man in Edward the Fourths time, to
the French man that asked him insulting, When they should see us there again?
When your sins are greater than ours. There are as many occasions of War, as
there are Vices i^ a Nation: And therefore it concerns a Prince to be watchful
on all hands. But should Kings remember an injury as long as you implacable
Divines do, or should we take up Arms upon your Becks, because your
E^clesiastical Policy is answered, to revenge your quarrel, the World would
never be at quiet. Therefore Mr. Bays, let all those things of former times
alone, and mind your own business; for Kings, believe me, as they have Royal
understandings, so have G^ntlemens memories. And now, Master Bays, I think it
is time to ^ake my leave, having troubled you with so long a (...). Only
before I quit this matter, because I ^lo not love to be accounted singular in
my opinion, (...) will add the judgment of one Author, and that (...)
pertinent as I could pick out to our purpose. I have observed that not only
other Princes, but Queen Elizabeth too has the misfortune to be much but of
your favor. But for what reason I cannot pos^ibly imagine; for none ever
deserved better as to ^he thing of Uniformity, unless it be the ill luck she
had to pass that impertinent Clause in the Act of the fifth of Elizabeth, of
the Jejunium Cecilianun. You cannot, for her sake, endure the Wit or Learning
of her ^imes, but say, page 94. of your second Book, Though this trifling
Artifice of sprinkling little fragments of Wit, and Poetry might have passed
for Wit and Learning in the days of Queen Elizabeth, yet to men of Learning,
Reading and Ingenuity, their vulgar use has sullied their luster, and abated
their value. This is indeed, Mr. Bays, a very labored period, and prepared by
you, I believe, on purpose as a model of the wit and Eloquence of your days.
But not only so; but page 483. of the same Book, I think you call her in
derision, and most spightfully and unmannerly, plain Old Elsibeth. And those
that knew her humor, think yon could not have disobliged her more than in
^iling her so; both as a Woman, which Sex never love to be thought old, and as
a Queen who was jealous, lest Men should therefore talk of the succession.
Besides the irreverent nickname you give ^er, that you might as well have
presumed to call her Queen Bess, or Bold Bettrice. Now to the end that that
Queen of famous Memory may have a little Female revenge upon you, and to give
you a rast of the Wit and Learning even of her times; I will sprinkle here one
Fragment, which not being a Scholar-like saying of ancient Poet or Philosopher,
but of a Reverend Divine, I hope, Master Bays, may be less displeasing to you.
The Man is Park^r, not Robert Parker, who writ another Treat^se of
Ecclesiastical Policy, and the Book de Cruce^, for which if they had ^atch'd
him, he had possibly gone to the Gallows, or at least the Gallyes. For he was
one of those well-meaning Zealots, that are of all Villains the most dangerous.
But it is the Archbishop of Canterbury, Parker, (For if I named him before
without addition, 'twas what I learnt of you speaking of ^hitgift) He in his
Book de Antiquitatibus Ec-^clesiae Britannicae, page 47. speaking of the
slaughter of the Monks of Bangor, and so many Christians more, upon the
instigation of Austin the the Monk, who stirred up Ethilbert King of Kent
against them, because they would not receive the Romish Ceremonies; uses these
words, Et sane illa prima de Romany Ritibus indu^ndis per Aug^stinum tunc
excitata contentio, quae non nisi clade and sanguine innocentium Brittannorum
poterat extingui; ad nostra recentiora tempora, cum simili pernicie cadeque
Christiano^um pervenit. Cum ^nim illis gloriosis ceremoniis a pura Primitivae
Ecclesiae simplicitate recesserunt, non de vit^ sanctitate, de Evangelij
praedicatione, de spiritus sancti vi and consolatio^e multum laborabant; sed
novas indies altercationes de novis ritibus per Papas singulos additis, qui
neminem tam excelso gradu dignum qui aliquid. ceremoniosi non dicam, monstrosi
inauditi and inusitati non adjecisset; instituebant. Suggestaque and scholas
fabulis rixisque suis implebant. Nam prima Ecclesiae species simplicior and
integro and interno Dei cultu, ab ipso Verbo praescripto, nec vestibus
splendidis nec magnificis structuris decorata, nec auro, argento gemmisque
fulgens fuit: Et si liceat his exterioribus ut modo animum ab illo interiori
and integro Dei cultu non abducant; Curiosis and morosis ritibus ab illa
prim^va and recta simplicitate Evangelica degeneravit. Illa autem in Romana
Ecclesia rituum multitudo ad immensum illius magni Augustini Hipponensis
Episcopi temporibus creverat: ut questus sit Christianorum in Ceremoniis and
ritibus duriorem quam Judaeorum, qui (...) tempus Libertatis non agnoverint,
Legalibus tamen sarcinis non humanis praesumptionibus subjiciebanter; nam
paucioribus in divino cultu quam Christiani Ceremonii^ ^tebantur. Qui si
sensisset quantus deinde per singulos Papas coacervatus cumulus accessit, modam
Christia^um credo ipse statuisset; qui hoc malum tunc in Eccle^ viderat.
Videmus enim ab illa ceremoniarum con^entione nedum Ecclesiam esse vacuam; quin
^omines ^lioquin docti atque pii de vestibus and hujusmodi nugis ad huc, rixoso
magis and militari, quam aut (...) aut Christiano more inter se digladiantur.
These words do run direct against the Genius of some men that contributed not a
little to the late Rebellion, and, though so long since writ, do so exactly
describe that evil spirit with which some men (...) even in these times
postest, who seem desirous upon the same grounds to put all things in
com^ustion, that I think them very well worth the la^our of translating. [And
indeed, that first con^ention then raised by Augustine about the introducing of
the Romish Ceremonies, which could not be quenched but by the blood and
slaughter of ^he innocent Britains; has been continued e'n to our later times,
with the like mischief and murder of Christians. For when once by those
gloriou^ Ceremonies they forsook the pure simplicity of the Primitive Church,
they did nor much troubl^ themselves about Holiness of Life, the preachin^ of
the Gospel, the efficacy and comfort of the Holy Spirit: but they fell every
day into ne^ squab les about new-^angled Ceremonies added (...) every Pope, who
reckoned no man worthy of (...) high a degree but such as invented somewhat,
(...) will not say Ceremonious, but monstrous, unhea^ of, and before
unpractised; and they filled the Schools and the Pulpits with their Fables
(...) brawling of such matters, For the first beau^y (...) the Church had more
of simplicity and plainnes^, and was neither adorned with splendid vestmen^ nor
magnificent structures, nor shined with gol^ silver, and precious stones; bt
with the into and inward worship of God, as it was by Chri^ himself prescribed,
Although it may be lawful (...) ^se these external things, so they do not lead
the mind astray from that more inward and inti^ Worship of God; by those
curious and crab^ Rites it degenerated from that ancient and right (...)
vangelical simplicity. But that multitude of (...) in the Romish Church, had
unmeasurably increased in the times of that great Augustine the Bishop of
Hippo, in so much that he complain^ that the condition of Christians, as to
Rites an^ Ceremonies, was then harder than that of the Jews; who although they
did not discern the ti^ of their Liberty, yet were only subjected to Leg^
burdens, instituted first by God himself, nor (...) humane Presumptions, For
they used fewer (...) ^emonies in the Worship of God, than Christi^ Who, if he
could have foreseen how great a (...) of them was afterward piled up, and
added by (...) several Popes, he himself doubtless would have restrained it
within Christian measure, having already perceived this growing evil in the
Church. For we see, that even yet the Church is not free from that contention:
but men, otherwise learned and pious, do still cut and flash about Vestments
and such kind of tri^les, rather in a swashbuck-ler and Hectoring way, than
either like Philosophers or like Christians.]

Now Mr. Bays, I doubt you must be put to the trouble of writing another
Preface against this Archbishop. For nothing in your Answerer's Treatise of
Evangelical Love does so gird or aim at you, for ought I can see, or at those
whom you call the Church of England, as this Passage. But the last period does
so plainly delineate you to the life, that what St. Austine did not presage,
the Bishop seems to have foreseen most distinctly. It Is ^ust your way of
writing all along in this matter. You bring nothing sound or solid. Only you
think you have got the Great Secret, or the Philosophers ^tone of Railing, and
I believe it, you have so ^ultiplied it in Projection: and as they into Gold,
so you turn every thing you meet with into Railing. And yet the Secret is not
great, nor the Pro^ long or dificult, if a man would study it, and make a trade
on it. Every Scold has it naturally. It is but crying Whore first, and having
the (...) word, and whatsoever the other says, cry, Oh ^hese are your Nonconfor
mist's tricks, Oh you ^ave learnt this of the Puritans in Grubstreet. O^ ^ou
white-aprond Gossip. For indeed, I never ^aw provident a fetch: you have taken
in before ^and of all the Posts of railing, and so beset all (...) Topics of
just crimination, foreseeing where (...) are feeble, that if this trick would
pass, it were ^possible to open ones mouth to find the least sault with you.
For in your first Chapter of your Second Book, beside what you do always in an
hundred places when you are at a loss, you have spent almost an hundred Pages
upon a Character of the Fanatic deportment toward all Adversaries. And then on
the other side, you have so engrossed and bought up all the Ammunition of
Railing, searched every corner in the Bible, and Don Quixot for Powder, that
you thought, not unreasonably, that that there was not one shot left for a
Fanatic, But truth, you see, cannot want words: and she laugh too sometimes
when she speaks, and rather than all fail too, be serious. But what will you
say to that of the Archbishops, than either like Philosophers or like
Christians? For the excellency of your Logic, Philosophy and Christianity in
all your Books, is either, as in Conscience, to take away the subject of the
question: or, as in the Magistrate, having gotten one absurdity, to raise (...)
thousand more from it. So that, except the manufacture and labor of your
periods, you have done no more than any School boy could have done on the same
terms. And so, Mr. Bays, Goodnight.

And now Good Morrow Mr. Bays; For though it seems so little a time and that
you are now gen^ to bed, it has been a whole live-long night, and you have
tossed up and down in many a troublesome dream, and are but just now awaked at
the Title page of your book: A Preface showing wh^ grounds there are of fears
and jealousies of Poper^ It is something artificially couched, but looks, (...)
if it did allow, that there are some grounds (...) fears and jealousies of that
nature. But here (...) words it, a Consideration what likelihood, or how (...)
danger there is of the return of Popery into this Nati^ ^ad he not come to this
at last, I should have thought I had been all this while reading a Chapter in
Mountagu^'s Essays; where you find sometimes scarce one word in the discourse
of the matter held forth in the Title. But now indeed he takes up this Argument
and debates it to purpose. For I had before begun to show that he had writ not
only his two former Books but especially too this Preface, with an evil eye and
aim at his Majesty, and the measures he had taken of Government. And whoever
will take the pains to read here, will soon be of my mind. His Majesty had I
said, the 15th of March 1671. issued his Declaration of Indulgence to tender
Consciences. He, on the contrary, issues out thereupon, all in have and as fast
as he could write, this his Remonstrance or Manifesto against Indulgence to
tender Consciences: and to make his Majesty's proceedings more odious, stirs up
this seditious matter, of what probability there is of Popery.

And this he discourses, to be sure, in his own imagination very cunningly. For
he knows that there was an Act of Parliament in this Kings Reign with a greater
penalty than that of 50 Eliz. of spreading false News, against reports of this
nature. And therefore, he resolves to handle it so^ warily, that he himself
might escape, but might draw others that should answer him, within the danger
of that Act, and that he may lay the crime at their doors. But, notwithstanding
all his slights and L'gerdemain, it does eno^gh detect his malice and ill
intention to his Majestios Government, that he should take this occasion,
altogether foreign and unseasonable, to raise a public and solemn discourse
through the whole Nation, concerning a matter the most odious and dangerous
that could be exposed. So that now, no man can look at the wall, no man can
pass by a Booksellers stall, but^ he must see A Preface showing what GROUNDS
ther^ are for FEARS and JEALOUSIES of POPERY.

It had been something a safer and more dutiful way of writing, A Preface
showing the CAUSELESNESS of the Fears and Jealousies of POPERY. For I do not
think it will excuse a Witch, to say, That she conjured up a Spirit only that
she might lay it, nor can there be a more dexterou^ and malicious way of
calumny, than by making a needless Apology for another, in a criminal subject.
As, suppose I should write a Preface showing what Grounds there are of Fears
and Jealousies of Bays his being and Atheist. But this is exactly our Authors
method and way of contrivance; whereby more effectually by far than by any
flying Coffeehouse tattle, he traduces the State, and by Printing so pernicious
a question, fills all men's mouths, and beats out all men's eyes with the
probability of the return of POPERY. Had he heard any that malignly and
officiously talked to such a purpose, it had been the part of one so prudent as
he is, not to have continued the Discourse. Had he (as he has a great gift
that way) picked up out of any man's talk or writing, matter whereof to make an
ill story; there was a better and more r^gular way o^ proceeding, had he meant
honestly to his Majesty's Government, to have prevented the evil, and to have
brought the offender to punishment. He should have gone to one of the
Secretaries of State, or to some other of his Majesty's Privy Council, and have
given them Information. But, in stead of that, I am afraid that in the survey
of this business, we shall find, that even some of them are either accused, or
shrewdly marked out with a Character of our Authors displeasure. Therefore, I
will now come nearer to his ma^ter in hand, although it concerns me to be
careful of coming too near, nor shall I dwell too long upon so jealous and
impertinent a subject.

To consider what likelihood or how much danger there is of the return of
Popery into this Nation. The ^he very first word is; For my part I know none.
Very well considered. Why then, M^. B^yes, I must tell you, that if I had
Printed a Book or Preface upon that Argument, I should have thought my self, at
least a Fool for my labor. The next considerer is mine Enemy; I mean he is an
Enemy to the State, whoever shall foment such discourses without any likelihood
or danger. Yet Mr. Bays you know, I have for a good while had no great opinion
of your Integrity; neither here. I doubt you prevaricate a little with some
body. For I suppose you cannot be ignorant that some of your superiors of your
Robe did, upon the publishing that Declaration, give the word, and deliver
Orders through their ecclesiastical Camp, to beat up the Pulpit-drums against
Popery. Nay, even so much that there was care taken too for arming the poor
Readers, that though they came short of Preachers in point of efficacy, yet
they might be enabled to do something in point of common Security. So that,
though for so many years, those your superiors had forgot there was any such
thing in the Nation as a Popish Recusant, though Polemical and Controversial
Divinity had for so long been hung up in the Halls, like the rusty obsolete
Armor of our Ancestors, for monuments of Antiquity; and for desision rather
than service; all on a sudden (as if the 15th of March had been the 5th of
November) happy was he that cold climb up first to get down one of the old
Cuirasses, or an Habergeon that had been wor^ in the days of Queen Elizabeth.
Great variety there was and heavy do. Some clapped it on all rusty as it was,
others fell of oyling and furbishing their armor: Some pissed in their
Barrels, others spit in their Pans, to scowr them. Here you might see one put
on his Helmet the wrong way: there one Buckle on a back in place of a breast.
Some by mistake catched up a Socinian Arminian Argument, and some a Popish to
figh^ a Popish. Here a Dwarf lost in the accoutrements of a Giant: there a
Don-Quixot in an equipage of differing pieces, and of several Parishes. Never
was there such Incongruity and Nonconformity in their furniture. One ran to
borrow a Sword of Calvin. This man for a Musket from Beza: that for a
Bandeleers even from Keckerman. But when they came to seek Match, and Bullet,
and Power, there was none to be had. The Fanatics had bought it all up, and
made them pay for it most unconscionably, and through the nose. And no less
sport was it to see their Leaders. Few could tell how to give the word of
Command, nor understood to dr^ll a Company: They were as unexpert as their
Soldiers awkward: and the whole was as pleasant a spectacle, as the exercising
of the Train'd-bands in -- shire. But Mr. Bays (for I believe you do nothing
but upon common advice) either this was all intended but for a false alarm,
and was only for a pretense to take arms against the Fanatics (which you might
have done without raising all this din and obloquy against the State and
disquieting his Majesty's good Subjects:) or else you did really think (and who
can help misappreliensions?) that you did know some likelihood or danger of the
return of Popery I crave you mercy Mr Bays, I took you a little short. For my
part I know none, you say, but the Nonconsormists boisterous and unreasonable
opposition to the Church of England.

This I confess has some weight in it. For truly before I knew none too, I was
of your Opinion Mr. Bays, and believed that Popery could never return into
England again, but by some very sinister accident This expression of mine is
something uncou^h, and therefore because I love to give you satisfaction in all
things Mr. Bays, I will acquaint you with my reason of using it. Henry the
fourth of France, his Majesty's Grandfather, lived (you know) in the days of
Queen Elizabeth. Now the wit of France and England, as you may have observed,
is much of the same mode, und has at all times gone much after the same
current Rate and Standard; only there has been some little difference in the
alloy, and advantage or disadvantage in the exchange according to men's
occasions. Now Henry the fourth, was (you know too) a Prince like Bishop
Bramhall, of a brave and enterprising temper, and had a mind large and active
enough to have managed the Roman Empire at its utmost extent; and particularly
( as far as the prejudice of the age ( Old Elsibeths Age) would permit him) he
was very witty and facetious, and the Courtiers strove to humor him always
in it, and increase the mirth. So one night after supper he gave a Subject
(which recreation did well enough in those times, but were now insipid) upon
which, like ^oyes at Westminster, they should make French Verse extempore. The
Subject was, Un Accident sinistre. Straight answers, I know not whether 'twas
Bassampierre or Obigne:

Un sinistre Accident and un Accident sinistre;
De veoir un P^ere Capuchin chevaucher un Ministre.
For when I said, to see Popery return here, would be a very sinister accident;
I was just thinking upon that story; the Verses, to humor them in translation,
being only this,

O what a trick unlucky, and how unlucky a trick,
To see friend Doctor Patrick, bestrid by Father Patrick!
Which seemed to me, would be the most improbable and preposterous spectacle
that ever was seen; and more rediculous for a sight, than the Friendly Debate
is for a Book. And yet if Popery come in, this must be, and worse.

But now I see there is some danger by the Nonconsormists opposition to the
Church of England, And now your business is all fixed. The Fanatics are ready
at hand to bear the blame of all things. Many a good job have I seen done in my
time upon pretense of the Fanatics. I do not think Mr. Bays ever breaks his
shins, but it is by stumbling upon a Fanatic. And how shall they bring in
Popery? why th^s, three ways. First, By creating disorders and disturbances in
the State, Secondly, By the assistance of Atheism and Irreligion. Thirdly, By
joining with crafty and sacrilegious Statesmen in confederacy. Now here I
remark two things. One, that however you do not find that the Fanatics are
inclinable to Popery, only they may accommodate it by creating disturbances in
the State. Another is, that I see these Gentlemen, the Fanatics, the Atheists,
and the Sacrilegious Statesmen are not yet acquainted; but you have appointed
them a meeting (I believe it must be at your Lodging, or no where;) and I hope
you will treat them handsomely. But I think it was not so wisely done, nor very
honestly, Mr. Bays, to lay so dangerous a Plot as this; and instruct men that
are strangers yet to one another, how to contrive together such a Conspiracy.
But first to your first.

The Fanatics you say may probably raise disturbance in the State. For they
are so little friends to the present Government, that their enmity to that is
one of the main Grounds of their quarrel to the Church. But now, though I must
confess it is very much to your purpose, if you could persuade men so, I think
you are clear out, and misrepresent here the whole matter. For I know of no
enmity they have to the Church it self, but what it was in her power always to
have remedied, and so it is still. But such as you it is that have always
strove by your leasings to keep up a strangeness and misunderstanding betwixt
the King and his people; and all the mischief that has come on it does lie much
at your door.

Whereas they, as all the rest of mankind, are men for their own ends too: And
no sooner has the King shown them this late favor, but you Mr. Bays, and
your partners reproach them for being too much friends to the P^erogative. And
no less would they be to the Church, had they ever at any age in any time found
her in a treatable temper. I know nothing they demand, but what is so far from
doing you any harm, that it would only make you better. But that indeed is the
harm, that is the thing you are afraid of Here our Author divides the discourse
into a great Elogy of the Church of England; that if he were making her Funeral
Sermon, he could not say more in her commendation; and a contrary invective
against the Nonconformists, upon whom (as if all he had said before had been
nothing) he unloads his whole Leystal, and dresseth them up all in Sambenitas,
painted with all the flames and Devil^ in Hell, to be led to the place of
Execution, and there burnt to ashes. Nevertheless, I find on either side only
the natural effect of such Hyperboles and Oratory, that is, not to be believed.
The Church of England (I mean as it is by Law Established, lest you should
think I equivocate) has such a stock of solid and deserved Reputation that it
is more than you (Mr. Bays) can spoil or deface by all the Pedantry of your
commendation. Only there is that party of the Clergy, that I not long ago
described, and who will always presume to be the only Church of England, who
have been a perpetual Eyesore, that I may not say a Canker and Gangreen in so
perfect a beauty. And, as it joys my heart to hear any thing well said of her;
so I must confess, it stirs my choler, when I hear those men pride and boast
themselves under the Mask of her Authority. Neither did I therefore approve of
an expression you here use: The Power of Princes would be a very precarious
thing without the assistance of Ecclesiastics, and all Government does and
must ow its quiet and continuance to the Churches Patronage That is as much as
to say, That but for the assistance of your Ecclesiastical Policy, Princes
might go a begging: and that the Church, that is you, have the Juspatronatus of
the Kingdom, and may present whom you think fitting to the Crown of England.
This is indeed something like the return of Popery; and right

Petra dedit Petro, Petrus diadema Rudolpho.
The Crown were surely well helped up, if it were to be held at your
convenience, and the Emperor must lead the Patriarchs Ass all his lifetime.
And little better do I like your We may rest satisfied in the present security
of the Church of England, under the Pro^ection of a wise and gracious Prince:
especially when besides the impregnable confidence that we have from his own
Inclination, it is so manifest, that he never can forsake it either in Honor
or Interest. This is a pretty way of cokesing indeed, while you are all this
while cutting the grass under his feet, and animating the people against the
exercise of his Ecclesiastical Supremacy. Men are not so plainhearted; but they
can see through this oblique Rhetorication and Sophistry. If there be no danger
in his time of taking a Pin out of the Church (for that it is you intended) why
do you then speak of it in his time, but that you mean mischief? but here you
do not only mow the grass under his feet, but you take the pillow from under
his head. But should it ever happen that any King of England should be
prevailed with to deliver up the Church, he bad as good at the same time resign
up his Crown. This is pretty plain dealing, and you have doubtless secured
hereby that Princes favor: I should have thought it better Courtship in a
Divine, to have said, O King, Live for ever. But I see Mr. Bays, that you and
your Partners are very necessary men, and it were dangerous disobliging you.
But in this imprudent and nauseous discourse, you have all along appropriated
or impropriated all the Loyalty from the Nobility, the Gentry, and the
Commonalty, and dedicated it to the Church; So, I doubtyou are a little too
immoderate against the body, of the Nonconformists. You represent them, to a
man, to be all of them of Republican Principles, most pestilent and, eo nomine,
enemies to Monarchy; Traitors and Rebels; such miscreants as never was in the
world before, and fit to be packed out of it with the first convenience. And, I
observe, that all the Argument of your Books is but very frivolous and trivial:
only the memory of the late War serves for demonstration, and the detestable
sentence and execution, of his lute Majesty, is represented again upon the
Scaffold; and you having been, I suspect, better acquainted with Parliament
Declarations formerly upon another account, do now apply and turn them all over
to prove that the late War was wholly upon a Fanatical Cause, and the
dissenting party do still go big with the same Monster. I grew hereupon much
displeased with my own ignorance of the occasion of those Troubles so near our
own times, and betook my self to get the best Information concerning them, to
the end that I might, If it appeared so, decline the dangerous acquaintance of
the Nonconformists, some of whom I had taken for honest men, nor therefore
avoided their Company. But I took care nevertheless, not to receive Impressions
from any of their party; but to gather my lights from the most impartial
Authorities that I could meet with. And I think I am now partly prepared to
give you, Mr. Bays, some better satisfaction in this matter. And because you
are a dangerous person, I shall as little as possible, say any thing of my own,
but speak too before good Witnesses. First of all therefore, I will without
farther Ceremony, fall upon you with the but-end of another Archbishop. It Is
the Archbishop of Canterbury, Abbot, in the Narrative under his own hand
concerning his disgrace at Court in the time of his late Majesty. I shall only
in the way demand excuse, if, contrary to my fashion, the names of some eminent
persons in our Church long since dead, be revived here under no very good
character; and most particularly that of Archbishop Laud, who, if for nothing
else, yet for his learned Book against Fisher, deserved for another Fate than
he met with, and ought not now to be mentioned without due honour^ But those
names having so many years since escaped the Press, it is not in my power to
conceal them; and I believe Archbishop Abbot did not write but upon good
Consideration.

This I have premised for my own Satisfaction, and I will add one thing more,
Mr. Bays, for yours. That whereas the things now to be alleged relate much to
some Impositions of Money in the late King's time, that were carried on by the
Clergy; I know you will be ready to carp at that, as if the Nonconformists had,
and would be always enemies to the Kings supply. Whereas, Mr. ^ayes, if I can
do the Nonconformists no good, I am resolved I will do them no harm, nor desire
that they should lie under any imputation on my account. For I write by my own
advice, and what I shall allege concerning the Clergies intermedling with
supplies, is upon a particular aversion, that I have upon good Reason, against
their disposing of our Money. And Mr. Bays I will acquaint you with the
Reason, which is this. It Is not very many years ago that I used to play at
Picket; and there was a Gentleman of your Robe, a Dignitary of Lincoln, very
well known and remembered in the Ordinaries, but being not long ^ince dead, I
will save his name. Now I used to play Pieces, and this Gentleman would always
go half a Crown with me, and so all the while he sat on my hand he very
honestly gave the Sign, so that I was always sure to lose. I afterward
discovered it, but of all the money that ever I was cheated of in my life, none
ever vexed me so, as what I lost by his occasion. And ever since, I have born a
great grudge against their fingring of any thing that belongs to me. And I have
been told, and showed the place where the man dwelt in the late King's time
near Hampton Court, that there was one that used to rob on the highway, in the
habit of a Bishop, and all his fellows rid too in Canonical Coats. And I can
but fancy how it madded those, that would have perhaps been content to relieve
an honest Gentleman in distress, or however would have been less grieved to be
robbed by such an ^ne, to see themselves so Episcopally pillaged. Neither must
it be less displeasing always to the G^ntry and ^ommonalty of England, that
the Clergy (as you do M^. Bays) should tell them that they are never sui
Juris, not only as to their Consciences, bu^ even as to their Purses; and you
should pretend to have this Power of the Keys too, where they lock their Money.
Nay, I dare almost aver upon my best observation, that there never was, nor
ever will be a Parliament in England, that could or can refuse the King
supplies propo^ionable to his occasions, without any need of recou^se to
extraordinary ways; but for the pick^hankness of the Clergy, who will always
p^sume to have the thanks and honor of it, nay, and are ready always to
obstruct the Parliamentary Aids, unless they may have their own little project
pass too into the ba^gain, and they may be g^atified with some new
Ecclesiastical Power, or some new Law against the Fanatics. This is the naked
truth of the matter. Whereas English men always love to see how their money
goes, and if the^e be any interest or profit to be got by it, to receive it
themselves. Therefore Mr. Bays I will go on with my business not fearing all
the mischief that you can make of it.

There was, says he, one Sibthorp, who not being so much as Bachelor of Arts,
by the means of Doctor Pierce Vice-Chancelor of Oxford, got to beconfer'd upon
him the title of Doctor. This Man was Vicar of Brackley in Northamptonshire,
and has another Benefice. This Man preaching at Northampton, had taught, that
Princes had power to put Poll-money upon their Subjects heads. He being a man
of a low fortune, conceived the putting his Sermon in Print might gain favor
at Count, and raise his fortune higher. It was at the same time that the
business of the Loan was on foot. In the same Sermon he called that Loan a
Tribute, Taught that the Kings duty is first to direct and make Laws. That
noting may excuse the subject from active obedience, but what is against the
Law of God or Nature, or impossible; that all Antiquity was absolutely for
absolute obedience in all civil and temporal things. And the imposing of
Pollmonie by Princes, he justified out of St. Matthew: And in the matter of the
Loan, What a Speech is this, says the Bishop, he observes the forwardness of
the Papists to offer double. For this Sermon was sent to the Bishop from Court,
and he required to License it, not under his Chaplin, but his own hand. But he,
not being satisfied of the Doctrine delivered, sent back his reasons why he
thought not fit to give his app^obation, and unto these Bishop Laud, who was in
this whole business, and a rising Man at Court, undertook an answer. His life
in Oxford, faith Archbishop Abbot, was to pick quarrels, in the Lectures of
public Readers, and to advertise them to the Bifhop of Durham that he might
fill the Ears of King James, with discontent against the honest men that took
pains in their places, and settled the Truth (which he called Puritanism) in
their Auditors. He made it his work to see what Books were in the Press, and
and to look over Epistles Dedicatory, and Prefaces to the Reader, to see what
faults might be found. 'Twas an observation what a sweet man this was like to
be, that the first observable act he did, was the marrying of the Earl of D. to
the Lady R. when she had another Husband a Nobleman, and diverse Children by
him. Here he tells how, for this very cause, King James would not a great while
endure him, 'till he yielded at last to Bishop Williams his importunity, whom
notwithstanding he straight strove to undermine, and did it at last to purpose:
for says the Ar^hbishop Verily, such is his undermining nature, that he will
under-work any man in the World, so he may gain by it. He called in the Bishop
of Durham, Rochester, and Oxford, tried men for such a purpose, to the
answering of my Reasons, and the whole style of the Speech, runs We, We. In my
memory, Doctor Harsnet then Bishop of Chichester, and now of Norwich ( as he
came afterward to be Archbishop of York) preached at White Hall upon, Give
unto Caes^r the things that are Caesar's; a Sermon that was afterward burned,
teaching that Goods and Money were Caesar's, and so the Kings: Whereupon King
James told the Lords and Commons that he had failed in not adding according to
the Laws and Customs of the Country wherein they did live. But Sibthorp was
for absolutely absolute. ^o that if the King had sent to me for all my Money
and Good^, and so to the Clergy I must by Sibthorps proportion send him all. If
the King should send to the City of London to command all their wealth, they
were bound to do it. I know the King is so gracious he will attempt no such
matter; but if he do it not, the defect is not in these flattering Divines.
Then he says, reflecting again upon the Loan which Sibthorp called a Tribute.
I am sorry at heart, the King's Gracious Majesty should rest so great a
Building on so weak a Foundation, the Treatise being so ^lender, and without
substance, but that proceeded from an hungry Man. Then he speaks of his own
case as to the Licensing this Book, in parallel to the Earl of Essex his
divorce; which to give it more authority, was to be ratified judicially by the
Archbishop. He concludes how finally he refused his approbation to this Sermon,
and says, it was thereupon carried to the Bishop of London, who gave a great
and stately allowance of it, the good man not being willing that any thing
should stick with him that came from Court, as appears by a Book commonly
called the seven Sacraments, which was allowed by his Lordship with all the
errors, which have been since expunged. And he adds a pretty story of one
Doctor Woral, the Bishop of London's Chaplain, ^olar good enough, but a free
fellow-like man, and of no very tender Conscience, who before it was Lic^nsed
by the Bishop, Sibthorps Sermon being brought to him, hand over head approved
it, and subscribed his nam^. But afterward he^ring more of it, went to a
Counsel at the Temple, who told him, that by that Book there was no Meum nor
Tuum left in England, and if ever the Tide turned, be might come to be hanged
for it, and thereupon Woral Woral scr^ped out his name again, and left it to
his Lord to License. Then the Archbishop takes notice of the instructions for
that Loan. Those that refused, to be sent for Soldiers to the King of Denmark.
Oaths to be administered with whom they had conference; and who dissuaded them,
such persons to be sent to prison, etc. He says that he had complained thrice
of Mountagues Arminian Book, to no purpose: Cosins put out his Book of seven
Sacraments (strange things) but I knew nothing of it, but as it pleased my Ld
of Durham and the Bp of Bath, so it went. In conclusion, the good Archbishop
for refusing the License of Sibthorps Sermons, was, by the underworking of his
adversaries, first commanded from Lambeth, and confined to his house in Kent,
and afterward sequestered, and a Commission passe^ to exercise the Archie
piscopall Jurisdiction to the Bishops of London, Durham, Rochester, Oxford, and
Bishop Laud (who from thence arose in time to be the Archbishop.) If I had
leisure how easy a thing it were for to extract out of the Narrative a just
parallel of our Author, even almost upon all points? but I am now upon a more
serious subject; and therefore shall leave the Application to his own
ingenuity, and the good intelligence of the Reader.

About the same time (for I am speaking within the circle of 20 30, and 40.
Caroli) that this Book of Sibthorps, called Apostolical Obedience, was Printed,
there came out another of the same stamp, Entitled Religion and Allegiance, by
one Doctor Manwaring. It was the substance of two Sermons preached by him at
Whitehall, beside what of the same nature at his own parish of Saint Giles,
Therein he delivered for truth, That the King is not bound to observe the Laws
of the Realm concerning the Subjects Rights and Liberties, but that his Royal
word and command in imposing Loans and Taxes without common consent in
Parliament, does oblige the Subjects Conscience upon pain of eternal Damnation,
That those who refused to pay this Loan, offended against the Law of God, and
the Kings supreme Authority, and became guilty of Impiety, Disloyalty and
Rebellion. That the Authority of Parliament was not necessary for raising of
Aids and Subsidies, and the slow proceedings of such great Assemblies were not
fitted for the supply of the states urgent necessities, but would rather
produ^e sundry impediments to the just designs of Princes. And after he had
been questioned for this doctrine, nevertheless he preached again, That the
King had right to order all as to him should seem good, without any man's
consent. That the King might, in time of necessity demand Aid, and if the
Subject did not supply him, the King might justly avenge it. That the Propri^ty
of Estate and Goods was ordinarily in the subject, but extraordinarily in the
King: that in case of the King's need, he has right to dispose them. He had
besides, entering into comparison, called the refusers of the Loan, temporal
Recusants, and said, the same disobedience that they, ( the Papists as they
then called them) practice in spirituals, that or worse, some of our side, if
ours they be, dare to practice in temporals. And he aggravated further upon
them under the resemblance of Turks, Jews, Corah, Dat^an and Abiram which last,
said he, might as well liken themselves to the three Children; or Theudas and
Judas, the two Incendiaries in the days of Caesar's tribute, might as well
pretend their Cause to be like that of the Maccabees, as what the Refusers
alleged in their own defense.

I should not have been so large in these particulars, had they been only
single and volatile Sermons, but because this was then the Doctrine of those
persons that pretended to be the Church of England. The whole Quire sung that
Tuno, and instead of the Common Law of England, and the Statutes of Parliament,
that part of the Clergy had invented these Ecclesiastical Laws, which
according to their predominancy, were sure to be put in Execution. So that
between their own Revenue, which must be held Jure Divine, as every thing else
that belonged to them, and the P^ince's that was Jure Regio, they had not left
an inch o^ propriety for ^he Subject, It seemed that they had granted
themselves Letters of Reprisal against the Laity, for the losses of the Church
under Henry the Eight, and that they would make a greater havoc upon their
Temporalities in retaliation. And indeed, having many times since pondered with
my greatest and earnest impartiality, what could be the true reason of the
spleen that they manifested in those days, on the one hand against the
Puritans, and on the other against the Gentry, (far it was come, they tell me,
to Jack Gentleman) I could not devise any cause, but that the Puritans had ever
since the Reformation, obstructed that laziness and splendour which they enjoyed
under the Popes Supremacy, and the gentry had (sacrilegiously) divided the
Abby-Lands, and other (...) morsels of the Church at the Dissolu^ion, and now
was the time to be revenged on them.

While therefore the Kingdom was turned into a Prison, upon occasion of this
Ecclesiastical Lo^ and many of the eminentest of the Gentry of England were
under (...), they thought it seasonable to recover once again their ancient
Glory, and to Magnificate the Church with triumphant Pomp and Ceremony. The
three Ceremonies that have the Countenance of Law, would not sussice, but they
were all upon new (...), and happy was he that was endued with that capacity,
for he was sure before all others to be pre^'d. I here was a second Service,
the Table se^ Altar wise, and to be called the Altar, Candles, Crucisixes,
Paintings, Imagery, Copes, bowing to the East, bowing to the Altar, and so many
several Cringes and Genuflexions, that a man unpractised stood in need to
entertain both a Dancing Ma^er and a Remem brancer. And though these things
were very uncouth to English Proteslants who naturally affects a plainness of
fashion, especially in sacred things; yet, if those Gentlemen (...) have
contented themselves with their own Formalitie, the Innovation had been more
excusable. But many of these Additions, and to be sure, all that had any color
of Law, were so imposed and pressed upon others, that a great part of the Nation
was ^'n put as it were to Fine and Ransom upon this account. What Censures,
what Excommunications, what Deprivations, what Imprisonments? I cannot
represent the misery and desolation, as it has been represented to me. But
wearied out at home, many thousands of his Majesty's Subjects, to his and the
Nations great loss, thought themselves constrained to seek another habitation,
and every Country, even though it were among Savages and Caniballs, appeared
more hospitable to them than their own.

And, although I have been told by those that have seen both, that our Church
did even then exceed the Romish in Ceremonies and Decorations; and indeed,
several of our Church did thereby frequently mistake their way, and from a (...)
kind of Worship, fell into the Roman Religion; yet I cannot upon my best
judgment believe, that that party had generally a design to alter the Religion
so far, but rather to set up a new kind of Papa^y of their own, here in
England. And it seemed they had, to that purpose, provided themselves of a new
Religion in Holland. It was Arminianism, which though it were the Republican
Opinion there, and lo odious to King James, that it helped on the death of
Barnevelt, yet now they undertook to accomodate it to Monarchy and Episcopacy.
And the choice seemed not imprudent. For on the one hand, it was removed at so
moderate a distance from Popery, that they should not disoblige the Papists
more than formerly, neither yet could the Puritans, with justice reproach these
men, as Romish Catholics; and yet, on the other hand, they knew it was so
contrary to the ancient reformed Doctrine of the Church of England, that the
Puritans would never embrace it, and so they should gain this pretense further
to keep up that convenient and necessary Quarrel against Nonconformity. And
accordingly it happened, so that here again was a new Shiboleth. And the
Calvinists were all studiously discountenanced, and none but an Arminian was
judged capable and qualified for employment in the Church. And though the King
did declare, as I have before mentioned, that Mountague's ( Arminian) Book had
been the occasion of the Schisms in the Church; yet care was immediately taken,
by those of the same Robe and Pa^ty, that he should be the more rewarded and
advanced. As also it was in Manwarings Case: who though by Censure in
Parliament made incapable of any Ecclesiastical Preferment, was straight made
Rector of Stamford-River^ in Essex, with a Dispensation to hold too his Living
in St. Giles's. And all dexterity was practiced to propagate the same Opinions,
and to suppress all Writings or Discourses to the contrary.

So that those who were of understanding in those days tell me, that a man
would wonder to have heard their kind of preachings. How in stead of the
practical Doctrine which tends to the reforming of men's Lives and Manners, all
their Sermons were a very Mash of Arminian Subtilties, of Ceremonies and
Decency, and of Manwaring, and Sibthorpianism brewed together, besides that in
their conversation they thought fit to take some more license the better to
dis-(...) themselves from the Puritans. And though there needed nothing more to
make them unacceptable to the sober part of the Nation, yet moreover they were
(...) exceeding p^agmaticall, so intolerably ambitious, and so desperately
proud, that scarce any Gentleman might come near the Tail of their MulesAnd
many things I perceive of that nature, do even yet stick upon the stomachs of
the Old Gentlemen ^f those tim^s. For the English have been always very tender
of their Religion, their Liberty, their Propriety, and (I was going to say) no
less of their Reputation. Neither yet do I speak of these things with passion,
considering at more (...) how natural it is for men to desire to be in Office;
and no less natural to grow proud and intractable in Office; and the less a
Clergy man is so, the more he deserves to be commended. Bu^ these things before
mentioned, grew yet higher, after that Bishop Laud wa^ once not only exalted to
the Sea of Canterbury, but to be chief Minister. Happy had it been for the
King, happy for the Nation, and happy for himself, had he never climbed that
Pinnacle. For whether it be or no, that the Clergy are not so well fitted by
Education, as others for Political affairs, I know not; though I should rather
think they have advantage above others, and even if they would but keep to
their Bibles, might make the best Ministers of State in the world; yet it is
generally observed that things miscarry under their Government. If their be any
Counsel more precipitate, more violent, more rigorous, more extreme than other,
that is theirs. Truly I think the reason that God does not bless them in Aff^s
of State, is, because he never intended them for that employment. Or if
Government, and the preaching of the Gospel, may well concur in the same
person, God therefore frustra^s him, be cause though knowing better, he seeks
and ma nages his greatness by the losser and meaner Maxims. I am confident the
Bishop studied to do both God and his Majesty good service, but alas how
utterly was he mistaken. Though so learned, so pious, so wise a Man, he seemed
to know nothing beyond Ceremonies, Arminianism, and Manwaring. With that he
begun, and with that ended, and thereby deformed the whole reign of the best
Prince that ever weilded the English Scepter.

For his late Majesty being a Prince truly pious and Religious, was thereby the
more inc^ined to esteem and favor the Clergy. And thence though himself of a
most exquisite understanding, yet he could not trust it better than in their
keeping. Whereas every man is best in his own Post, and so the Preacher in the
Pulpit. But he that will do the Clergyes druggery, must look for his reward in
another world. For they having gained this Ascendent upon him, resolved what
ever became on it to make their best of him; and having made the whole business
of State their Arminian Ja gles, and the Persecution for Ceremonies, did for
recompense assign him that imaginary absolute Government, upon which Rock we
all ^uined.

For now was come the last part of the Archbishops indiscretion; who having
strained those strings so hig here, and all at the same time, which no wise man
ever did; he moreover had a mind to try the same dangerous Experiment in
Scotland, and sent thither the Book of the English Liturgy, to be imposed upon
them. What followed thereupon, is yet within the compass of most Men's memories.
And how the War broke out, and then to be sure H^ll's brook loose. Whether it
were a War of Relig^on, or of Liberty, is not worth the labor ^o enquire.
Which soever was at the ^op, the other was at the bottom; but upon con^dering
all, I think the Cause was too good to have been fought for. Men ought to have
trusted God; they ought and might have trusted the King with that whole matter.
The Arms of the Church are Pray^rs and Tears, the Arms of the Subjects are
Patience and Petitions. The King himself being of so accurate and piercing a
judgment, would soon have felt where it stuck, For men may spare their pains
where Nature is at work, and the world will not go the faster for our driving.
Even as his present Majesty's happy Rest^uration did it self, so all things
el^e happen in their best and proper time, without any need of our
officiousness.

But after all the fatal consequences of that Rebe^lion, which can only serve
as Sea-marks unto wise Princes to avoid the Causes, shall this sort of Men
still vindicate themselves as the most zealous Assertors of the Rights of
Princes? They are but at the best well-meaning Zealots. Shall, to decline so
pernicious Counsels, and to provide better for the quiet of Government be
traduced as the Author does here, under these odious terms of forsaking the
Church, and delivering up the Church? Shall these Men always presume to usur^
to themselves that venerable style of the Church of England? God for^id. The
Ind^pendents at that rate would have so many distinct Congregations as they.
There would be Sibthorps Church, and Manwarings Church, and Montagues Church,
and a whole Bed-roll more, whom for decencies-sake I abstain from naming. And
every man that could invent a new Opinion, or a new Ceremony, or a new Tax,
should be a new Church of England.

Neither, as far as I can discern, have this sort of the Clergy since his (...)
return, given him better encouragements to steer by their Compass. I am told,
that preparatory to that, they had frequent meetings in the City, I know not
whether in Grubstreet, with the Divin^s of the other party, and that there in
their Feasts of Love, they promis^d to forget all former Offenses, to lay by
all Animosities, that there should be a new Heaven, and a new Earth, all
Meekness, Chari^y, and Condescension. His Majesty I am sure sent over his
Gracious Declaration of Liberty to tender Consciences and upon his coming over,
seconded it with his Commission under the broad Seal, for a Conference betwixt
the two parties, to prepare things for an Accommodation, that he might confirm,
it by his Royal Authority. Hereupon what do they? Notwithstanding this happy
Conjucture of his Majesty's Restoration, which had put all men into so good a
humor, that upon a little moderation temper of things, the Nonconformists
could not have stuck out; some of these men so contrived it, that there should
not be the least abatement to bring them off with Conscience, and (which
infinuates into all men) some little Reputation. But to the contrary; several
unnecessary additions were made, only because they knew they would be more
ingrate^ull and (...) to the Noncon^ormists. I remember one in the Let any,
where to False Doctrine and Her^, they added Schism, though it were to spoil
the Music and cadence of the period; but these things were the best. To show
that they were men like others, even cunning men, revengeful men, they drilled
things on, till they might procure a Law, wherein besides all the Conformity
that had been of former times enacted, there might be some new Conditions
imposed on those that should have or hold any Church Livings, such as they
assured themselves, that rather than swallow, the Nonconformists would disgorge
all their Benefic^. And accordingly it succeeded; several thousands of those
Ministers being upon one memorable day outed of their subsistence. His Majesty
in the meantime, although they had thus far prevail^d to frustrate his Royal
Intentions, had reinstated the Church in all its former Revenues, Dignities,
Advantages, so far from the Authors mischievous aspe^sion of ever thingking of
converting them to his own use, that he restored them free from what was due to
him by Law upon their first admission. So careful was he, because all
Government must owe its quiet and continuance to the Churches Patronage, to pay
them, even what they ought. But I have observed, that if a man be in the
Churches debt once, it is very hard to get an acquaintance: And these men never
think they have their full Rights, unless they Reign. What would they have had
more? They roul'd on a flood of (...), and yet in matter of a Lease, would make
no difference betwixt a Nonconfo^mist, and one of their own fellow sufferers,
who had ventu^'d his life, and spent his ^state for the King's service. They
were (...) to Pa^liament, and to take their places with the King and the
Nobility. They had a new Liturgy ^o their own hearts desire; And to cumulate
all this happ^ness, they had this new Law against the Fanatics. All they had
that could be devised in the World to make a Clergyman good natured.

Nevertheless after all their former suffering^ and after all these new
enjoyments and acqu^sitions, they have proceeded still in the same tra^k. The
matrer of Ceremonies, to be sure, has not only exercised their ancient rigor
and severity but has been a main ingredient of their public Discourses, of
their Sermons, of their Writings. I could not (though I do not make it my work
after (...) great example, to look over Epis^les De^icators) but observe by
chance the Title page of a Book 'to^herday, as an E^bleme how much some of the^
do neglect the Scripture in respect to their darling Ceremonies. A Rationale
upon the Book of CommonPrayer of the Church of England, by A Sparrow D. D.
Bishop of Exon. With the Form of Conse^ration of a Church or Chapel, and of
the place of Christian Buri^t. By Lancelot Andrews late Lord Bishop of
Winchester. Sold by Robert Pawlet at the Sign of the Bible in Chancery Lane.
These surely are worthy cares for the Fathers of the Church.

But to let these things alone; How have they of late years demeaned themselves
to his Majesty, although our Author urges their immediate dependence on the
King to be a great obligation he has upon their Loyalty and Fidelity? I have
heard that some of them, when a great Minister of State grew burdensome to his
Majesty and the Nation, stood almost in defiance of his Majesty's good
pleasure, and fought it out to the uttermost in his defense. I have been told
that some of them in a matter of Divorce, wherein his Majesty desired that
justice might be done to the party agriev'd opposed him vigorously, though they
made bold too with a point of Conscience in the Case, and went against the
judgment of the best Divines of all parties. It has been observed, that
whenever his Majesty has had the most urgent occasions for supply, others of
them have made it their business to trinkle with the Members of Parliament, for
obstructing it, unless the King would buy it with a new Law against the
Fanatics. And hence it is that the wisdom of his Majesty and the Parliament
must be exposed to after Ages for such a Supoeer^eation of Acts in his Reign
about the same business. And no sooner ean his Maje^ty upon his own best
Reasons try to obviate this inconvenience, but our Author, who had before
ourshot Sibthorp and Manwaring in their own Bows, is now for retrenching his
Authority, and moreover calumniates the State with a likelihood, and the
Re^sons thereof of the return of Popery into this Nation. And this has been
his first Method by the Fanatics raising disturbance: whereupon if I have
raked farther into things than I would have done, the Author's indiseretion
will, I hope, excuse me, and gather all the blame for reviving those things
which were to be buried in Oblivion. But, by what appears, I cannot see that
there is any probability of disturbance in the State, but by men of his spirit
and principles.

The second way whereby the Fanatic party, he says, may at last work the
ruin of the Church, is by combining with the Atheists, for their Union is like
the mixture of Nitre and Charcoal, it carries all before it without mercy or
resistance. So it seems, when you have made Gun-power of the Atheists and
Fanatics, we are like to be blown up with Popery. And so will the Larks too.
But his zeal spends it self most against the Atheists, because they use to jear
the Parsons. That they may do, and no Atheists neither. For really, while
Clergy men will, having so serious an office, play the Drols and the
Boon-companions, and make merry with the Scriptures, not only among themselves,
but in Gentlemen's company, it is impossible but that they should meet with, at
least, an unlucky Repartee sometimes, and grow by degrees to be a tail, and
contempt to the people. Nay, even that which our Athour always magnifies, the
Reputation, the Interest, the seculiar grandeur of the Church, is indeed the
very thing which renders them rediculous to many, and looks as improper and
buffoonish, as to have seen the Porter lately in the good Doctors Cassock and
Girdle. For, so they tell me, that there are no where more Atheists than at
Rome, because men seeing that Princely garb and pomp of the Clergy, and
observing the life and manners, think therefore the meaner of Religion. For
certainly, the Reputation and Interest of the Clergy, was first gained by
abstracting themselves from the world, attending their Callings, Humility,
strictness of Doctrine, and the same strictness in Conversation; and things are
best preserved by the same means they were at first attained. But if our Author
had been as concerned against Atheism, as he is against their ^isrespect of
his function, he should have been content that the Fanatic Preachers might
have spent some of their Pulpit sweat upon the Atheists, and made a noise in
their ^ars, about Faith, Communion with God, attendance upon Ordinances, which
he himself jea^ at so pleasantly. Neither do I like upon the same reasons his
manner of Discourse with the Atheists, where he complains that ours are not
like those good Atheists of formertimes, who never did thrust themselves into
public car^s and concerns, minding nothing but Love, Wine, and Poetry. Nor in
another place, Put the case the Clergy were Cheats and Juglers, yet it must be
allowed they are necessary Instruments of State to aw the common People into
fear and obedience, because nothing else can so effectually inslave them ('it is
this it seems our Author would be at) as the fear of invisible powers, and the
dismal apprehensions of the world to come: and for this very reason, though
there were no other, it is fit they should be allowed the same honor and
respect, as would be acknowledged their due, if they were sincere and honest
men. No Atheist could have said better. How mendicant a cause has he here made
of it; they will say, they see where the shoo wrings him, and that though this
be some ingenuity in him, yet it is but little Policy. Nay. perhaps they will
say, that they are no Atheists neither, but only, I know not by what Fate,
every day, one or other of the Clergy does, or says, some so redi^ulous and
foolish thing, or some so pretty accident befalls tha^ that in our Authors
words, a man must be very spl^tick that can refrain from laughter. I would have
quoted the page here, but that the Author has, I think for evasion sake,
omitted to number them in this whole Preface. But whether there be any (...) or
no, which I question nore than Witches, I do not for all this, take our Author
to be one, though some would conclude it ou^ of his Principles, others out of
his Expressions. Yet really, I think ^e has done that sort of men so much
service in his Books, by his ill handling, and while he personates one party,
making all Religion re^iculous, that they will never be able to requi^e him but
in the same manner. He has ope^ed them a whole Treasure of words and
sentences, universally applicable; where they may ri^e or ^huse things, which
their pitti^ul wit, as ^e call^ it, would never have been able to invent and
flourish. But truly, as the simple Parliment 5^ Eliz. never imagined what
cons^quence that clause in the Wednesday (...) would have to Puri^anism,
neither did he what his Per^ds would have to Atheism; and yet though he is so
more excusable, I hope, I may have the same leave on him, as he on that
Parlia^nt, ^o censure his Impertinence. To cl^se this; I know a Lady that chid
her Master of the Horse for correcting the Page that had sworn a great Oath.
For, says she, The ^oy did therein show only the (...) of his Courage, and his
acknowledgment of a (...). And indeed, he ^ath approved his Religion, and
justified himself from Atheism much after the same manner.

The third way and last (which I being tired, am very gl^d of) by which the
Fanatics may raise Disturbances, and so intraduce Popery, is by joining crafty
and sacrilegious Statesmen into the Confederacy. But really here he does speak
concerning King, and Counselors, at such a rate, and describe and characterize
some men so, whomsoever he intends, that though I know there are no such, I
dare not touch, it is too h^zardous. It Is true he passes his Complement
ill-favouredly enough. The Church has at present an impregnable affiance in the
wisdom, etc. of so gracious a Prince, that is not capable of such Counsels,
should they be suggested to him: though certainly no man that is worthy to be
admitted to his Majestrus Favor or Privacy; can be supposed so foolhardy or
presumptuous as to offer such weak and dishonorable Advice to so wise and able
a Prince; Yet Princes are mortal, and if ever hereafter, (and some time or
other it must happen) the Crown should chance to settle upon a young and
unexperienced head, this is usually the first thing in which such Princes are
abused by their Keepers and Guardians, etc. But this Complement is no better at
best, than if discoursing with a man of another, I should take him by the
Beard. Upon such occasions in company, we use to ask, Sir, Whom d^ you mean? I
am sure our Author takes it always for granted, that his Answerer intends him
upon more indefinite and less direct provocations. But our Author does even
personate some men as speaking at present against the Church, They will intagle
your affairs, endanger your safety; hazard your Crown. All the reward you shall
have to compensate your misfortunes, by following Church Counsels, shall be
that a few Church men, or such like people, shall cry you up for a Saint or a
Martyr. Still your, your, as if it were a close discourse unto his Majesty
himself. Though if these were the wor^ that they said, or that the Author
fathers upon them, I wish the King might never have better Counselors about
him. But if the Author be secure, for the present, in his Majesty's Reign,
fear^ not Popery, not forsaking ^he Church not assuming the Church Revenues,
why is he so provident? why put things in men's heads they never thought of?
why stir such an odious, seditious, impertinent, unseasonable discourse? why
take this very minute of t^me, but that he has mischief, to say no worse, in
his heart? He had no such remote conceit (for all his talk) of an Infant coming
to the Crown. He is not so weak but knows too much, and is too well instructed,
to speak to so little purpose. That would have been like a set of Elsibeth
Players, that in the Country having worn out and over acted all the Plays they
brought with them from London, laid their wits together to make a new one of
their own. No less man than Julius Caesar was the Argument; and one of the
chief parts was Moses, persuading Julius Caesar not to make War against his own
Country, nor pass Rubico^. If our Author did not speak of our present times
(to do which nevertheless had been sufficiently false and absurd) but writ all
this merely out of his Providence for after ages, I shall no more call him
Bays, for he is just such a second Moses. I ask pardon, if I have said too
much, but I shall deserve none, if I meddle any further with so improbable and
dangerous a business,

To conclude, the Author gives us one ground more, and perhaps more Seditiously
insinuated than any of the former; that is, if it should so prove, that is, if
the Fanatics by their wanton and unreasonable opposition to the ingenious and
moderate Discipline of the Church of England, shall give their Governors too
much reason to suspect that they are never to be (...) in order by a milder,
and more gentle Government than that of the Church of Rome, and force them at
last to scourge them into better manners, with the Briars and Thorns of their
Discipline. It seems then that the Discipline contended about, is worth such an
alteration. It seems that he knows something more than I did believe of the
Design in the late times before the War Whom does he mean by our Governors?
the King; No, for he is a single person. The Parliament, or the Bishops.

I have now done, after I have (which is I think due) given the Reader, and the
Author a short account how I came to write this Book, and in this manner. First
of all, I was offended at the presumption and arrogance of his style; whereas
there is nothing either of Wit, or Eloquence in all his Books, worthy of a
Readers, and more unfit for his own, taking notice of, Then his infinite
Tautology was bur^ensome, which seemed like marching a Company round a Hill
upon a pay-day so often, till if the Muster master were not attentive, they
might r^ceive the pay of a Regim^nt. All the variety of his Treat is Pork (he
knows the story) but so little disguised by good Cookery, that it discovers the
miserableness; or rather the penury of the Host. When I observed how he
inveighs against the Trading part of the Nation, I thought he deserved to be
within the five mile Act, and not to come within that distance of any
Corporation. I could not patiently see how irrevorently he treated Kings and
P^inces, as if they had been no better then King Phys and King Ush of B^anford
I thought his profanation of the Scripture intolerable; For though he alleges
that it is only in order to show how it was misapplyed by the (...), he might
have done that too, and yet preserved the Dignity and Beverence of those S^cred
Writings, which he has not done; but on the contrary, he hat^ in what is
properly his own, taken the most of all his Ornaments, and (...) thence in
(...) s^urrilous and sacrilegious s^ile; insomuch that were it honest, I will
undertake out of him to make a better, than is a more ridicul^s and (...) book,
than all the Friendly Debates bound up together. Me thought I never saw a more
bold and wicked attempt, than that of reducing Grace, and making it a mere
Fable, of which he gives us the Moral. I was sorry to see that even Prayer
could not be admitted to be a Virtue, having though hitherto it had been a
Grace, and a peculiar gift of the Spirit; But I considered, that that Prayer
ought to be discouraged, in order to prefer the Licargy. He seemed to speak so
little like a Divine in all those matters, that the Poet might as well have
pre^ended to be the Bishop Davenant, and that description of the Poets of
Prayer and Praise was better than out Au^hors on the same Subject^ Canto the
6th, where he likens Prays to the Ocean;

For Prayer the ^^^an is where diver^^^ Men steer their course each to a
several coast,
Where all our interests so discordant lie, That half beg winds, by which the
rest are lost.
And Praise he compares to the Union of Fanatics and Atheists, etc. that is
Gunpowd^r; Praise (...) Devotion fit for mighty minds, etc.

Its utmost force, like Powder, is unknown. And though weak Kings excess of
praise may fear,
(...) when it is here, like Powder, dangerous grown, Heavens vault receives,
what would the Palcae tear,
Indeed all Astragen appeared to me the better Scheme of Religion. But it is
unnecessary here to recapitulate all, one by one, what I have in the former
Discourse taken notice cf. I shall only add, what gave, if not the greattest,
yea the last impulse to my writing. I had observed in his first Book, P- 57-
that he had said Some pert and pragmatical Divines, had filled the world with a
Buzze and Noise of the Divine Spirit; which seemed to me so horribly
irreverent, as if he had taken similitude from the Hum and Buz of the Humble
Be in the Rehearsal.

In the same Book, I have before mentioned, that most unsafe passage of our
Savior, being not only in an hot fit of zeal, but in a seeming fury and
transport (...) Passion. And striving to unhook (...) hence. P. 152. of his
Second Book, Swallows it deeper, saying, Our blessed Savior did in that action
take upon him the Person and Privilege of a Jewish Zealot. Take upon him the
Person, that is Personam in^. And what part did he play? Of a Jewish Zealot.

The Second Person of the Trinity (may I repeat these things without offense)
to take upon him the Person of a Jewish Zealot, that is, of a notorious Rogue
and Cut Throat.

This seemed to proceed from too slight an Apprehension and Knowledge of the
Duty we owe to our Savior. And last of all, in this Preface, as before quoted,
he says, the Nonconformist Preachers do spend most of their Pulpit-sweat in
making a noise about Communion with God. So that there is not one Person of the
Trinity that he has not done despite to: and lest he should have distinct
Communion with the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost, for which he mocks his
Answerer; he has spoken evil distinctly of the Father, distinctly of the Son,
and distinctly of the Holy Ghost. That only remained behind, wherein our Author
might surpass the Character given to Aretine, a famous man of his Faculty.

Qui giace ill Aretino
Chi de tutti mal disse (...) d' Adido
Ma di questo si sensa perch no'l conobbe.
Here lies Aretine,
Who spoke evil of all, except God only,
But of this he begs excuse, because he did not know him.
And now I have done. And I shall think my self largely recompensed for this
trouble, if any one that has been formerly of another mind, shall learn by
this Example, that it is not impossible to be merry and angry as long time as I
have been Writing, without profaning and violating those things (...) are and
ought to be most sacred.

FINIS.

