S'too him Bays: Or Some OBSERVATIONS Upon the HUMOR of Writing Rehearsal's
Transprosed.

-- and Hanc Veniam petimusque damusque vicissim.
OXON: Printed in the Year 1673.

ADVERTISEMENT.
The Reader will take notice, that it is the Second Impression of the Rehearsal
Transprosed to which these Animadversions are directed ^ for, not being much
curious of such things, it was but lately that I happened upon the Book.

SOME OBSERVATIONS Upon the Humor of Writing Rehearsal's Transprosed.
TO begin with your Title: The Rehearsal Transprosed. It Intimates the Author
has imitated the Rehearsal, for which you think good to make a Play of the
Author. It rests therefore to be examined, whether He be Bays in a Preface, or
you the fool in the Play.

I come to the bottom of your Title Page -- At the sign of the Kings
Indulgence, on the South Side of the Lake of Lemane, and sold -- In Chancery
Lane. Amongst the Lawers? will it sell best there? Why, you don't think the
Lincoln's Inn, and Temple-wits, will take the Rehearsal Transprosed for a Case
of Alienation, or Observations upon a Preface for A Book of Reports. Upon my
word they don't like your Jesting with Plays so near them. Somebody may
Transprose Ignoramus shortly at this Rate too, and, then, who knows where the
Stone may light at last? As for the Lake of Lemane I Will suppose it a Standing
water, and so may Tarry till I come to it again by and by. Then I shall exanine
its Situation, and see if there be a North, or a South, or a Blind side
belonging to it. But, -- At the sign of the Kings Indulgence: It Is true, He
has given you one, but I don't think He looks upon it for civilly or indeed
craftily done of you, to be at every turn Quoting Him on this fashion for it
upon Needless, or Buffoon occasions: You know in Scripture such and such things
were permitted the Jews for the Hardness of their Hearts. Should they now ever
and anon have been Rallying Moses for his Condescentions? had they not as good
have told him in Plain Hebrew that, the Hardness of their Hearts had been too
Hard for Him? But, to the business.

Your book begins (for a lucky hit) with a Dilemma you say you have caught the
Author in of his own making; For, if he will not accept his own Charge, his
modesty (say you) is all impudent. Call you this Catching him in a Dilemma?
Pray, what^s the meaning of Impudent Modesty? Is your Design to Convince, or to
Pose us? We are Modest people, and shall remember Alonzo Tiveria as well as we
can, but we would not be put altogether to submit to your Arguments by
believing in your words. We cannot always (as you desire) expound a Pillar, or
Explicate a Post: besides, one would think you had been told often enough of
Particular and Universal Round Quadrangle; that a man ought not to talk like a
Ninny-hammer but when it were evidently Courteous and Gent, or Tuant, or Great.
But if this be still a Dilemma, thou art the unluckyest Disputant in the world;
for thou pretendest to argue for General Liberty, and concludest for nothing
but mere Lutheranism: for Impudent Modesty is the very Doctrine of
Consubstantiation. Yet happy, happy thou! (since thou must needs Transprose)
have had the fortune to light upon the Rehearsal; for, since people will be so
idle as ( at first dash you see) to ask, what signify's Impudent Modesty? Thou
may there find an Answer which no Schoolman but Bays ever light upon, and,
may tell them, Nay pray Sirs, have a little patience: Godsookers you will spoil
all my Transprosal. Why it is impossible to answer every impertinent Question
you ask. But, for all this, I know his Majesty does not intend his Toleration
shall extend to Nonconformity in Sense also: and therefore, for this time I
will tie you to that Ceremony of the Church of England, as to Speak it.

But, to proceed: you hoped (ay, and I dare say would have lost your ten pound
wager on the Condition) that He, nor nobody else would have written any more in
behalf of the King of Englands Rights (for all your being sure you had the Keys
of Transprosing;) but he has, that there are Grounds for Fears and jealousies
of Popery. And pray, are there not? Since the Popish Interest (as your self
make anon appear) is founded chiefly upon Keeping the people in Ignorance; and
some of the wisest of them are so Ignorant already as to talk of Impudent
Modesty; yet if such kind of Terms seem necessary for the Ends you use them,
then Oh too frail Reason that contradicts Transprosal! But let us see; what is
the mischief the Author is going to do? To trick up Bishop Bramhal in a yellow
Coif, and a Bulls Head? What sense the Author can be said to trick him up in a
Bull's Head in, I confess, I do not understand. But, your Conceits are all so
easy and familiar that I am confident you mean something by it.

You fall next upon the unfortunate Invention that Printing has proved to be,
That Villainous Engine the Press and Reformation being invented much about the
same time. Prithee leave fooling, and tell us what thou art. Ieer the whole
Reformation? All that are not Romanists? I have heard there was a certain
Counselor, that when he had pleaded a long while the Judge asked him, who he
was for, Plaintiff or Defendent? But, thou make Our Case worse; Thou abusest
thy Clients. At this rate we must wish you would write express in defense of
Popery, for the credit of the Protestant Religion.

But you say, 'Twas happy when all Learning was in Manuscript, and some little
Officer like the Author kept the Keys of the Library: I doubt you will find him a
great Officer by and by, and the Door of his Preface so well kept, that it will
be past your Skill to pick the Lock. And, there was a time (another happy time)
when the Clergy needed no more Knowledge then to read the Liturgy.

(The Wound was great because it was but small)
Thou Had been a Bishop needed none at all.
Nor the Laity more Clerkship then to then to save them from Hanging. It Is
Sung, you might let point of Clerkship alone, having been your self sometime
beholding to it: But, no more of that.

You say next, the Mischief of Printing is, that, now if a man write a Book
presently he is answered: Here you must give us leave to distinguish betwixt
Transprosing and Answering. It Is plain some Persons are presently Transprosed,
but we cannot perceive that any of the Principal things they say are Answered.

Next you fall upon B. and L. and call them Public Tooth-Drawers (no doubt you
mean Printing's Tooth-Drawers:) For Public Tooth-Drawers signifies no more
then Tooth-Drawer, and were Tautology, like Public Shoemaker or Public
Cobbler; now you do not mean they are literally Tooth-Drawers, for that would
spoil the Sense of your Allegory; wherefore you have mistaken your self, and
these things when B. and L. meet with, They expunge or stop them: and then,
They are indeed (in your sense) Printing's Tooth-Drawers.

But, the Dutchman (you say) ought to have been contented with a Wine press:
Had it been a Churne or a Cheese-press, you had said something; but if there be
scarce a Bunch of Grapes (much less one Vineyard) in all Holland, why should
the Dutchman be so contented with a Wine Press? would you serve him as the
Wench served her Master, and only show him Le trou par ou a pass son Vin? Or,
do you think (because he loves a Dram of the Bottle) that every time he was
fudled he would imagine it was a Sluice, or some newer kind of Engine to defend
His Country.

But now, we come to a horrible business: The Author had said (as Tra^sprosal
tells me) that He was employed about matters of more comfortable importance.
Now this Comfortable importance (says Trans) was one of three things, ( vide)
and that which he pitches upon of the three to be it, is a Female: and, when he
has done (like a Wise-Acres) He makes nothing of it. There is only an immodest
Barbarian's way of being good Company, in the Paragraph, that speaks of
Britches being down: Paw, There is a thing in our Land, and it is known by the
name of Pitch; this Pitch ( as thou should know) defiles: So does the Style
thou writest. Did Hudibras talk thus when he said, -- The Modern's hence
approve.
The use of Rosemary in Love.


But I see your Talent does not consist in Talking. Rosemary, but in railing at
Bays, for which you will never deserve any of that, but, A great deal of
Rosemary for your pains.

And now I am come to these words: But He (the Author) knows not which way his
mind will work it self. This Expression sets Trans's head so a working, that
you would ^hink it would never have done. He works a Quarter of the Rehearsal
(especially, poor Volscius for doubting whether he had best pull on the other
boot, or leave off work) almost off of it is legs. Sir William D' Avenant but
offered to speak of warm weather, and He makes him Sweat for it; and Sydrophel
for being a piece of an Astrologer, He Is resolved shall never have good luck
after.

Why, This is Whipping Tom, and ten times worse then the Schoolmaster of
Paul's he talks of: for He -- Takes up all their Mayle-Pillians. Then, in
conclusion, he ownes that his Friend I. O. (after such another Dispute) had
prevailed with himself, and, much against his Inclination, to Write too. So
that Bays did but imitate Him: Though Trans had not done like Trans (it seems)
if he had Omitted (as far as in him lies) to make ridiculous all the Three.

But, all this is but hanging forth a Picture, and sounding a Call. Now step
in, for the monster himself begins. He comes to Mr. -- Preface to Bishop
Brambal. Take notice only by the way that a Headstal will serve a Monster for a
Crupper, and you pass on to the next Room where you shall see one asking leave
to call the Author Bays. I don't find that any body gives it him; so he
ventures to do it of himself; but, for several Reasons; and, they are the best
that ever I heard.

He has no good faculty at being brief and tedious; therefore (to save Tyring)
the sum in short is this: He begins to apprehend that his Wit and Invention may
fail him, and therefore thinks necessary to provide himself early of a
Nickname to take breath withal against he comes to be Iaded. Just (methinks)
like Bartholmew-Cokes -- Who sat in the Stocks Numps, Ha! Who, with that one
word only Rehearsed again and again absolutely ranspros'd Numps. But if this
does not give satisfaction, he will derive his Authority (which Resolute Bat
would have scorned now) out of St. Thomas, who (says Trans) says, that not only
Governors, but any thing else, may give Names. Sure, St. Thomas's words (for I
have him not all without Book) are not, [ or any thing] for every thing (for
example a Gooses's Quill) cannot speak; but, any Person may give Names: Well, be
it Person then. Why though any person may Give, he does not say, they may Call
Names. Now if I am mistaken, pray when you have leisure to reward me for my
pains. Call me any thing so you do not call me Spade. However I think it is by
this plain, That such Mistaking and Perverting Sophisters as you ought not to
be suffered to read the Scripture, nor indeed the Schoolmen neither. But now,
to the Monster of Londonderry.

And first, (that his Testimony may pass with the less prejudice against he
comes with a whole Booth fall of Eloquence to describe him) he begins with
telling you that, He had formerly collected a deep Reverence for him, but He
has now parted with part of the pleasure he enjoyed in thinking well of Him;
yet till He recreates himself with believing, that his simple Judgment will
make no bo^y think the worse of Him, and we recreate our selves friend (I doubt
this Book will teach me to talk affectedly) in believing so too. But, since He
is not dead, I am the more obliged to repair in my self whatever Breaches of
his Credit, by that Additional Civility which consecrates the Ashes of the
Deceased. Heaven blessed us! what have we hear? You talk of Bays the 2d. and a
luscious and effeminate Style; Why here is a very Syrrup of Additional Civility,
besides Orice-powder of the Ashes of the Dead. However, if this Syrrup and
Powder will make a Cement to repair the Breaches of the Bishop's credit, I am
satisfied. Toleration, is that a Reward for such an Orator? Why give him but a
Trowel to help Imboss and fret the Flowers of his Rhetorical Mortar, when he
Apologizes, Panegyricks, or Transproses, and I Will undertake He shall deserve a
Resignation o^ Merry Andrew's and Puncinello's Patents, and to have all
Lincoln's Inn Fields and Charing Cross to himself.

But I must dispatch, for I see He Is making Paul's work on it already, and here is
as many Leaves almost as there are Windows and Doors in Salisbury Church, and
all to prove, That the Bishop was a weak man, and laid an unfeisable Design. I
beg your pardon; not All to prove, for most of them indeed do but as good as
repeat one another.

But, before we proceed with the Bishop, He must have a fling at Bays; and
then, He will upon the Bishop again, and after, (if one Bawble or other do not
come in his way) at Bays again, as before: So that I can hardly tell when I am
answering, or, wherefore, or, for whom. For he manages this whole Discourse
just like Jack, that was left at home to roast the Goose; When he was turning
the Spit he remembered he had the Spig^^ in his hand, and when he was run to
stop the Barrel, he remembered he had left Dogs in the Kitchen: But, betwixt
both, with his extraordinary Diligence, and care of every thing, when the
Company came from Church, there was neither Meat, nor Drink left for Dinner.

Well, this Bays we are speaking of having famed the Bishop for bravery, Trans
says he should have furnished him with a Sword like Bishop Odo's, which was like
an other (Irish) Clergy-man's, which was as like a Nut-Cracker (for -- it
Cracked men clad in Steel) as the men that were Cracked, (as he tells me that
is cracked) were like Nuts. It is there described however (that the Bishop
might not mistake it seems) at large, in four Wild-Irish (I think) Verses. He
might as well have took, Ay by His side he wore a long Pavade,
And of his Sword full trenchant was the Blade.


Out of Chaucer (for they are better) but, I believe he durst not look in him
for fear of meeting with the Plow man's Tale.

But let a man behave himself how he will with his Whineard, He gets no
Commendations of Bays, but upon two Conditions: That he dye, or be of his
Party. Which I think is as much as to say, that He rejoices at no bodies
success that is against him, not will Preach at nobodies Funeral till they be
Dead. But when he does, He will do it for Exploits which He will take out of
the Knight of the Sun. Why Trans, is every thing that is Heroically done
applicable to every Body? Suppose you were past that which you may chance to
come to; I mean, suppose you were Dead. If I should say, Living He fought like
Mad, or Drunk
For Dame Religion as for Punck.


Were this Commending the Author of the Rehearsal Transprosed? It is not, it is
not: They abuse you only (and so you ought to understand it) whoever (dead or
alive) does but offer to Glance at you with such an Expression.

But Bays gives the Bishop such improbable Elogies, that He had dyed the death
of Secundinus if the swelling of Truth would have choked him: Why Trans, art
thou mad? if the Elogies were not true, what hurt would the swelling of Truth
have done Bays? but if they were, how horribly is all thou have said swelled
with Lies? But I perceive you think it would have been dangerous if you had
done otherwise. Truth might have choked you. Nay then I Will never blame your
Railing at them both: Defaming the Church, and pretending to be only for
Toleration; for, I would have no man Guilty of his own death. But passing this,
what News? Why, while Bishop Bramhal was doing Feats in Ireland, Bishop Usher
busied himself in Grubstreet about Modern Orthodoxy. I acknowledge this
Expression to be nice and smart; But I understand it not originally your own:
What the Bishop busied himself about, was Refuting pretty ancient Error. So you
endeavor by applying it here to abuse at once but the Bishop, the World, and
the Author.

But is there no more? Yes, Bays represents Bishop Bramhal like St.
Christopher: who, though as big as big as ten Porters, sweats under the burden
of an Infant. Why then he means your Book: Which though it every where
sufficiently discover the Infant; yet the Title above all shows the Child could
not so much as speak plain.

But to be serious* Bishop Bramhal (you say) endeavored to make a Catholic
agreement amongst the Churches of Christendom: Why are not you now endeavoring
to make every body (if you could) Nonconformists? But it was a most
presumptuous thing to think he could persuade and fascinate (are these two all
one? then all you persuade are bewitched.) The Roman Church, which by a regular
Contexture of Policy has interwoven itself with the Secular Interest, and made
it self necessary to most Princes: and at last erected a Throne of
Infallibility over the Conscience. Now I perceive whom I am to speak to. Why,
Mon Pere, has she showed any more Policy then other Princes who have lost half
what they had? But she has made her self necessary to most Princes. You do not
mean sure so necessary, that they must let Her serve them in spite of their
Teeths.

But she has erected a Throne of Infallibility over the Conscience: Do thou
take this to be the first of April when (they say) folks send fools of Errands?
We have searched the Pope's Person for this Infallibility; but we find him ever
and anon asking Placet, or Non placet? of his Conclave of Cardinals. They both
give the way to a General Council. Lastly, your Writers say, It is in the Body
of the whole Catholic Church. I can liken our Journey to nothing so much as
the employment one finds in a Fortune-book: Where the first Chance sends you to
the Philosopher Pythagoras; He bids you Go to King Prian, and He to King Pipin;
at last you come to the Oracle, and when a man is there, He is told perhaps He
shall have two Wives, or else his Wife miscarry of her first Child.

But because I would be perfectly satisfied before I ventured to deliver my
opinion of this; I went to Lylly, and desired Him if he could, that He would
give me some Information. So he told me, there was one indeed that was of such
a Stature, such a Complexion, pretty well-spoken, grievous long-winded, and he
was indeed a person that was (Bating Errors) infallible. But as for the
Alteration which you say you think God has signified in part what means he
will accomplish it by; it is a sly Insinuation, and the answer consists only
in taking notice of it. But the Bishops project remains still as likely to go
on as yours. And whereas you ask if he had hammered the Romanists and
Protestants into one Coloss^an Church (that is Quibble round) Now then shall the
people do for Bibles? Since the Bishop would not have unqualify'd people read
the Scriptures. Why, they might have Bibles of the Doway Translation, which
look like Bibles enough to satisfy them, yet are (you know) clean another
thing. Again, you bring the Church of Rome to observe our weakness, that we
should think of uniting our Neighbors, who cannot agree together at home.

Why, and we (if you will have it) observe Hers too in the same kind^ That she
should send her Missions to ^he Indies, China, and the An^ipodes, affecting a
Government ^ver Nations so remote, that she must direct her Dispatches -- To
our Dearly beloved, etc. In Aethiopia, their Children, or Grandchildren, for a
Generation or two must die at least before ^he Letter can be delivered.
Otherwise as to our own Differences, I Will ^ell you one piece of my mind without
your giving me cause: And that is, I confess I think it a simple thing for
Frogs and Mice to fall out till there be no Kites. But forsooth, the Ceremonial
Controversy amongst us can be defended by no Arguments but what are fetched
out of the Pope's Arsenal. We don't desire to defend the Controversy, but to
end it. But would the Popes Arsonal be so kind? Poor Arsenal! It Is pity it was
not better stored with Arguments against Pillars too, when the French
Ambassador was lately used there with so little Ceremony. But thou make the
strangest Piece of the Pope, that keeps his Argum^^^ in a Castle, and his
Artillery in an I^^horn. Rather then have betray this, the Church of England
should have defended themselves with the^ old Arguments out of Scripture still,
if they would (had I been you) before I would have told them where the^ may
have better.

But now we come to that that (...) material indeed, and highly necessary I
promise you for Statesmen to consider, that is, whether if the Design of Union
had gone on, England would not have undertook a Voyage (...) Civita Vecchia?
Truly the Bishop was much overseen in not thinking of this* for, if the Pope
loves Eggs in Musc^^dine so well (as you say) for his mornings Draught, (whose
person you shall not find me speak so unreverendly of while he is a Great
Prince;) no doubt Rome would presently have turned a Loadstone, and England a
piece of Iron, and ( lying so commodious for Navigation) if the Alps would not
have come hither (as you say is probable) have sailed over them. And happy then
would have been for us rather to have been tempted abraod at Wapping, and sold
by Good Spirits to St. Christopher's or the Barbadoe's; yet as if Rome's Throne
were not infallible, or both sayls and reason insufficient for so short a Cut
you say, besides the debates of that there is a better way of tampering to
bring men over that have a power to conclude. Admit your Tribe have that way,
are you such a fool to confess it? You bring a fair suspicion upon whoever
obliges you.

But the Church of Rome has so much more wit then we had in Bishop Br^^hal's
days, or seem to have yet learned: Whom do you mean here by We? if you mean
your self, and your Nonconforming Brethren; truly We the King and Church of
England have nothing to say against it: and they are beholding to you. But if
you mean by We that have not learned more Wit yet, all that are not
Non-Conformists: It is a Ioke upon Tolera^^^^ made by your self, being your
grateful return to his Majesty for it.

But, the Bishops design was ill laid, though p. 36. (I must make riddance of
you, nothing but the same again and again? This is talking upon Beads rather
then Transprosing) it seems He had not the Art of Tampering: Yet, page 38.
Doubtless he was a good natured Gentleman (your Reason^ are better here then
those for Bayes's Name) but yet He dwelt in the middle Story with Pots above,
and Smoke below, (p. 39.) and so could not expect (his Imagination was so
good) to enjoy his Imagination, without the Annoyances incident -- to
Additional Civility, and so forth: On my word this is a shrewd imputation to
the Bishop, That He lived in the middle Story. However it seems his Servants
had a good time on it, for below were Pipes and Toleration; above were Pots and
Toleration. While the worthy Master (like a liv^ng Emblem of the Church he was
a Member of, whose sober, yet decent Government, equally recedes from the
Clownish Devotions of some who hardly serve God with Civility, and the near
Comical Fantasticness of others) sat with honor, but without Pride, calm, and
composed, in the middle Story. But what Temper in a Prince, what moderation in
Government can ever satisfy People, who (when you have said all) must be
protected as well as indulged, and taught as well as list'ned to, if that which
best answers all ends, suits with both Interests, must be scorned, and excepted
against, our middle Story? But, I see where the Shoo most pinches; The Smoke
being below, and the Pots above, we have neither Drink nor Tobacco; and so, can
bid a Non Conformist welcome if he should come to our Chamber. You have some
reason I confess to be little Zealous for these: For as there is nothing mo^e
illustrates the Doctrine of New-Light then a Pipe, so no Arsenal affords mo^^
plenty of Arguments, then a Fot for Liberty.

You proceed, yet though the Bishop prudently undertook a design which (...)
hoped not to accomplish in his own days: It was some Judgment however to
measure the difficulty of an enterprise. But thou art hoping to accomplish a
Uniform inconformity by the mere assistance of impudent modesty: I doubt that
will be a pretty while a doing too, wherefore you had better sure have kept to
the Pot of good Ale, which so soon can be swallowed; for, Hac neque sum usquam,
nec possum esse profecto.


But now, breath a little, here^ some variety: He falls upon Bays again; and
for what do you think? Not for saying, He had parted with the pleasure of
thinking well of Him; calling Him crazed, and undertaking Churchman, saying He
dwel't in the middle Story; or, prudently laid a design he hoped not to live to
see accomplished: but, for dishonouring and abusing the Bishop, -- Where Honor
was the furthest from his thoughts, and whom he used for a stalking Horse. I
render my Cause (as the Sword men would have it) for fear I should not be
credited. He taxes him farther with being severe to the other Reformed
Churches: Still, he does not call him Ugly old Woman, nor challenge him of his
sin^, being false to his own. Then comes your Pat-applications out of the
Rehearsal again, of which there are and will be so many, that the Play will
seem rather Transcribed, then Transp^os'd. Now he calls Bays the Spiritual
Draw-Can-Sir over Hungary, Transylvania, Bohemia, Poland, six Countries more,
and many more (he says) besides, and a great part of England too. Of all whose
Beards He will make his Comfortable Importance Simarrs. Truly Trans, as to his
being Draw-can-Sir; I say, for England what if he be? Has not your Rome one
too for Italy, Spain, France, Purgatory, Germany, etc. that would be so for
Hungary, Transylvania, Bohemia, etc. a great part of England, and the rest of
it, and all but the Margin of Mercator's Map? yet, I hope not to make Simarrs
of then beards. Though, by the way, Friars might do well to leave shaving; if
there be any Jealousy, hair is employed to make Comfortable Importances
Simarrs: Nay, and then the Women may make themselves Fig Leaves of it too (for
ought I know.) Transprose me that.

As for his being Penitentiary U^^versal to the other Churches, and Buffoon
General to our own: For the first, that would be no Employment in this case,
for Conformists don't nee^ to Repent, and Nonconformists never do: And for
Buffoon -- I see no reason but we may be permitted to write Transprosal^s as
well as your self.

But now Ware-hawk! You say the Author took in a couple in Partnership to help
him: Why then he is no Draw-can-Sir again. That Is some good news for Hungary,
Transylvania, Bohemia, Popland, etc. Now I remember me you have often borrowed
of the Gazette. You have acknowledged the Debt. Troth being you are come to
Condition, send them this Intelligence, and Pay them.

But these two Assistants (as you represent them) prove (like Loiola in
Ignati^s his Conclave, who was indeed the verier Lucifer himself) to be ten
times worse Conformists then Bays, if he had been Draw-can-Sir; (such another
slip may un-Bayes him too; look to it.) For, they are as fit for his Design as
those two that club^d with Mahumet to make the Alcoran, and by a perverse wit
and Representation might Travesteere the Scripture, and render the serious part
(it seems you don't look upon it to be all so) of Religion contemptible. Why,
sure you have not denied one another fair Quarter all along Gentlemen, have you? I
cannot imagine what should provoke, or where He could learn this Language,
except he had it out of the Alcoran, or learned it of old Joan; nay, then even
at it I faith; at your Mother you Rogue, y^^ Rascal, and let Ursula defend the
Rehearsal for me.

He strikes immediately upon another, and perhaps a worse Shelf: He desires the
World to take notice, that he does not mean Hudibras to be one of these that
had a hand in M^* -- Book. Now have at you again Trans. If you think the World
(but for your Advancement) would think Hudibras had a hand in it, then (for all
this Copy of your Countenance) you do think your self, that it is an Excellent
Piece: Or, if you think it a simple on^, the Complement is worse to Hudibras
that way: For why should you think the World would think (had they not your
Advertisement) Hudibras had a hand in a simple Book? However you do well to
endeavor to satisfy that Author, that (how blunderingly soever you understand
your own notions) you intend him no Dis-respect; for though he has fallen first
upon true blue, you don't know but he may chance to make either Ralpho or
Ignatius the Colonel next time, should he be disobliged.

Your next Expression of a Daw-Divine derides the Faculty (what needs that?)
not the person. Cannot you call whom you please Sir Roger without calling
whoever is a Divine a Sir John Daw? One should make fine work, if as you
compare a Divine to a Daw, I should compare the Throne, or Chair of
Infallibility to his Nest: But Non tali auxilio, nec Defensoribus istis.


And so, as to such scandalous and dangerous discouse as this, I once more take
my leave of you, and bid your Transprosership heartily farewell.

But the Author writes without a Name or Imprimatur. Of the first you might
better have taxed him if you had told him your own: and for the other, I
promise you I Will have one now if I can get it. And since you call the Licensers
Toothdrawers, if he that shall happen to oblige me in the case, will give it me
as I would have him, instead of Nihil reperio bonis moribus, etc. contrarium,
he shall say, In sign that this is Sooth.
I bite it with my Gang tooth.
And that I hope will please you.

Here follows a whole leaf that belongs to Ursula; and so he brings you to
Astrology, and Comets, and says you cannot by a Tellescope, but you may with a
Microscope see the Author in Heaven-Inn* Calvin's head. I never saw any thing so
like Doll in her Fit. Certainly the Rabbis and Heathen Greeks are come at last
-- to teach the people of Great Britain; for these are Stars in story that none
see nor look at. Poor Calvin indeed, that cannot lie quiet in his grave, but
must have somebody in his head, every time that any body has a Maggot in
theirs. But now to the Bramble and Lake of Lemane;! did not, nor no man alive I
think would have thought, after all this Cracking, that you had caught the
Author placing Geneva on the South side of the Lake of Lemane; but that he had
said such a thing in some such plain and apparent manner, that no excuse could
have been made, no gloss nor interpretation have palliated it: but upon taking
more heedful notice: for ought I see you do but quote Sir Thomas again. For all
that the Authors words (by you cited) say is, That a Bramble spr^^g up on the
South side of the Lake of Lemane, -- whose soil was rank, etc. Why must all the
place either of Calvin's birth, which he may mean by Springing up; or that he
ever lived and taught in, needs be the Town of Geneva? You cannot prove he was
any Parish-child of the place, or bound Prentice (like some of your Brethren)
in it, till he was fit for the Ministry. Now with your Critical people, th^^
will exact truth from falsehood, go on* Ay but, said they; and Nay but, say we.
This was a cold conceit, and not enough matur'd; that is another it self. At
last comes the main argument; Geneva had turned her britch upon him. Why though
some men have turned round, you did not find they all sailed to Civita V^cchia:
no more does it follow that Geneva (except she skipt over the Lake) must change
from North to South, the place of her Relative Situation. Hence however he says
a Good Wit might have deduced certain Theses; as first that the Author designed
to make Calvin and Geneva ridicule, (that is a dainty word.) Next, that he might
have Transprosed his Name, and turned Geneva's to Roaring Lions. Thirdly, that
the Presbyterians were spawned. (Gentlemen, take this for a Warning piece; if
you are wise look before you, and if you are men disdain the Affront.) Item,
that the River Rhesne grew sober, and that there are Bears in Bern.

Would it not burst any man now to be crammed (like Daniels Idol) with such
Pitch and Hair as this? Why certainly thou ^^ingest these Pagan Periods (as I
suspected in your fourteen leaves about Bishop Bramhall) ever and anon in our
way; out of the same design that the Turks, they say, will sacrifice a Forlorn
of twenty or thirty thousand men, merely to blunt the edge of the Christians
Swords against they come to the Main Battle. I Will swear it works its effect
upon me; for thou have and shall escape many an Observation that might easily be
made, because I cant dig and delve, nor write Commentaries upon Tom Thumb for
my living. To pass therefore more of what you call Mother Midnights Nuts, the
next true-bred Period ends with your saying The Author runs a Muck: why then I
would advise Bishop Odo, and Bishop Munster, the Bishops of Stratzbourgh and
Colloigne, to girt on their swords; and poor Bishop Usher and Bishop Bramhall
to get out of the way; for your Bishops are the only people I find in danger
when any body runs a Muck.

But the Crocodile (they say) weeps when a man is slain, though for his own
Table; and this tender heart sobs another whole Page for the Credit of Calvin;
which (as he says) is attacqu'd by Bays: Then, he laments the Author's own
weaknesses, and his being fit for nothing but Bed^am, or H^gsden. Then gives an
^ccount of his Education, and writes ^wo Verses more out of the Rehearsal, ^ll
such pitiful stuff, and so tedious, that I must be excused; for if He ^as any
thing that is pretty well said, ^n relation to Coffee houseness, and Dis^ursive
fancy, yet all is so ill as it ^elates to Judgment that knows when it has
done well, and said enough, that I must leave (both here and elsewher.) the
burden of the Song to the Reader; and Him to find that it does its own work it
self.) After this the Author comes to Town, and gets one that loved Drolling to
his Master (if all Masters did so, thou would never get a place.) The
Author's Hypochondria, (where is your hat and your leg to Hudibras?) got up into
his brain, and His head swelled like -- ee'ne what you please. In this Family he
walked amongst the Innocent Hens, bowed toward their p^w, till -- He left them
as Innocent as he found them; with which Libertinage he was so transported,
that (there being much more of the same still) I wish all Fops at old Nick.

But Lycanthropie (I must take notice of that for the pain it cost me.) He says
the Author has contracted the Distemper of Lycanthropy; in so much that if
there were any sheep here (to wit, in the 68 Page of the Rehearsal Transprosed)
you should see him pull, and suck. Now I tell you Auditors, that I have looked
in Thomas his Dictionary, and I find Lycanthropy indeed a sort of melancholy
humor with which the parties that are affected Howl; but, that they believe
themselves Wolves, is more then He knows. And I was the rather induced to
misdoubt it, because I suppose Trans does not think himself a Plant-animal; nor
for all his repeating and imitating the Rehearsal, really believe himself to be
Bays. But to something else: Doctor P. yet again? Well I see I must have
the other Tug at him, for I would willingly show you him in a Telescope, though I
cannot in a Microscope if I die for it, (He Is too big already.) Dr. P. (I say)
taxed Dr. H. for having Newfangled Divinity (like yours) but, Created him
Doctor of Divinity, or ours. Bays is an Enemy to Controversial skill, or the
Calvinists. Does he call them any where Controversial Fishes? Bays persecuted
Germany, taking it to be Mr. B. for which fault, if he should raise up Bishop
Bramhal's Ghost, it would be angry (as it had reason) and rebuke him for it (he
shows you how) in Rhyme. Then comes, once upon a Time, the Guelfs and
Gibbelines; which of them were the Nonconformists in those days he can no more
determine, then which of us here at home (you see He Is none of Us) are now
Schismatical: then he says Bays will not forgive Mr. B. nor (for all our Jesting)
be Penitentiary Universal. Hey ho! Then, he blames him for Preaching upon
nothing but that particular Repentance, which it seems he had chosen
particularly for his Subject. He speaks of the Name of God with Reverence
literally, but implicitly, wholly without it, Baye^ is the first Minister that
has Commission (...) Rail against all Nations; but, take notice it is void,
because it never was sealed by St. Thomas. Britches again: So often fumbling
with them? What, ar't a Tailor? Marry pray -- He b^n't worse. Gentlemen, have a
care of your Pockets. Let folks fear God, Honor the King, Look to their
Chimneys: There Is Piety, Remarkable respect for his Majesty, and an End of the
wittyest froth of five of his Leaves more. Skip soundly, and you come to a huge
deal of Sport about I. O. and, the Letters of the Alphabet, Fighting through
Squadrons of Mutes, Semi-vowels (does any man know what they be?) and Liquids.
With these Bays, he says, keeps himself in exercise, as Cats whet their Cla^s
against they encounter Rats: He had heard of Elephants whetting their Teeth,
but forgetting He is not now talking of Elephants Teeth, he says Cats whet
their Claws. They do not, they do not: They only claw the Hangings sometimes
to stretch themselves, as I am assured by a Lancashire witch, that was One.

Now pick what letter you will, etc. but I Will swear I am ashamed to let any
body know (when this was the Entertainment) that I stayed longer in the
Company. Wherefore, to pass quietly (without noise) as I can by such Dull nuts
as Io Poean, The Focus of Burning Glasses, (I meant to Ieer, but I see, I need
only repeat him;) The Stars smiling, and the Fountains warbling; nay, and Tom
Triplet too; -- Quis enim tam durus ut in Te?


We come now at last to be told that I. O. (He has served this whole Campaigne
for, betrayed the Enemies Design to the Rats, and tormented the poor Letters
worse then the Arrantest Dunce that ever made Acrostick, Telestick, or Anagram)
that I. O. I say (though, like his Cousen Bartholomew, Trans could not pass by
any shop, but He must be buying) was not the Person Bays intended, but the
King. Now, it begins to work: His Majesty before his happy and miraculous
Restoration. How, if you had begun thus? Scarce had the ruddy Aurora risen
from the Bed of the aged Titan, when, etc. But please your self: Only, I would
not willingly be tired at the very beginning of a Speech. Well -- Sent over a
Declaration of his Indulgence to Tender Consciences; but* before the
Toleration, which is now passed, came out, Bays put out his Ecclesiastical
Policy, in which, the Grand Thesis, upon which He Stakes the Fates of Princes,
and Conscience of Subjects (to pass by your fiddle faddles) is This: That, it
is absolutely necessary to the Peace and Government of the World, That the
Supreme: Magistrate of every Commonwealth should be vested with a power to
Govern, and Conduct the Consciences of Subjects in Affairs of Religion. This
(say you) being the Magisterial and main Point, the rest of his Assertions may
be reckoned as Corollaries, without which it can never be justified.

First, I confess I never heard before that Corollaries prove the matter that
precedes, but that Justifies the Corollaries: He had the notions in his head (
jumbled together) about Corollaries, and Postulat's; and either could not find
what the thing he meant to speak of was, or if he knew that which was the right
name to call it by, because (t'should seem) it was not in His Iustine. I have
been wondering all this while why he said the Author's Preface would serve for a
Postscript to the Bishop's book. Now my Dream is out; for I see he understands
that a Consequence may Play at leap frog with a Proposition, and that which is
a Postulat one may calla Corollary. If this World hold, there is hopes we may
baffle the Irrefragable Doctor, and the Master of Subtilities both by and by.

After some more Citations ou^ of the Author Trans says: Having (...) enabled
the Prince (that is) proved his Assertion by Corollaries, dispensed with
Conscience, and fitted up a Moral Religion, (this is all impertinent now to the
course of an Argument) he (the Author) shows next how much those moral vert^^^
are to be valued; Affirming that it is (...) necessary Princes should set up a
stricter Go^vernment over men's Consciences and Per^swasions: And that it is
less hazardous (...) give Liberty to their Vices, then to (...) Consciences.

Why, this shows only how much the want of these Virtues is to be (...) valued,
not how much they are to (...) valued. Thou always provest ^li^d I expected to
have heard what they would have given us: and if a (...) should have got
something by being a Good Subject. Go on; But for what belongs to the use of
their Power (I thought you had meant the utility or usefulness of it, Exercise
of their power (and be whipped) then) -- If Princes will be Resolute, etc. Come,
welfare mine Host of the Taberd -- Thou do naught but spend (...), I tell
thee friend thou shall no longer rhyme.

Next, he speaks of well meaning men, who Bays says, may be punished if they
do contrary to what they are bid, for all their meaning. In conclusion he cites
one Corollary more to which the Grand Thesis it self ((...) says) is
subordinate. (There are two kinds of subordination, one in order to Proof, the
other, in order to Profit* You shall not slink (...) from being bold to what is
in order to Proof* though letting you do so would be in order both ways to you^
Pr^^^^* The Corollary i^ -- If Pr^^^s pl^^^ a (...) of the Church, the (...)
presently T^^ters. I say then Bays does not lay down this in order to proving
(as a Corollary) his Thesis. But all this now (as I told you) is impertinent to
the Canvassing that point where he left* which is -- The Grand Thesis. Only I
have traced his long maze of words, and dodging thus punctually (for I never
intended to make a business of Him) to see if I could find how the King was
glanced at, but perhaps we may come to it by and by. In the interim he
concludes once more, this is the syntagm of Bays his Divinity, (...) the
system of his Policy, the Principles of which confine upon the Territorys of
Malmsbury.

You have been at it once before as a Rectory, then I passed it: now look to it
self as a Frontier. Thou art the imprudent'st* Champion for For^i^ Jurisdiction
or Toleration (choose you which) that ever I knew. Cannot you let that Book
alone? we should forget if you would but hold your Tongue, why it is the only thing
that is as great a Hudibras to your Church, as Hudibras is a Leviathan to the
Presbyterians.

Now comes a great deal of rambling Invective against Bays for endeavoring to
Couch his business so, as (by intangling matter of Conscience with the
Magistrates Power) no body should dare to meddle with it. Why if he does, that
does not concern you, for you are far enough from so much as handling the
Question, yet for ought I see.

We proceed; Bays being fortified (with that Intanglement) on one side, took
himself to be impregnable on the other, since His Majesty must needs take it
kindly that He gave him such an accession of Territory, and That what? That
Bays showed him He ought to submit to His Instructions, lest by virtue of Page
271. Bays should not think him fit to Govern: For still, this the King must
take kindly too, or we cannot look that Bays should expect (by virtue of your
^^ference) to be impregnable on both sides; if that which you say is in Page
271. be true, which I don't belie^e, and shall not make a Journey to look. I
suppose the Book (...) e^^ant for any body that please to satisfy themselves.
And so I conclude this, with saying that in respect of any words of His which I
observe by you set down in this Book (for your Qu^tation of p. 271. (contrary
to your Custom) recites none.) I see no reason for your saying -- The King is
the person (in any indecent way) intended by Bays from the beginning.

Well then we come to what Bays has said, and something we are sure of: That
is, the before repeated Thesis, which is a Universal Proposition, and none of
them meddle with any particular persons Actions. Therefore it is only to be
inqired of such an one whether it be true or no. Under the Title of unlimited
Magistrate He undertakes to Examine the Matter.

And first, he puts off his Cap, and salutes the Company (as Tumblers do before
they begin) excusing himself by reason of his private fortune and Education.
Truly, we have not seen either over much Learning nor Manners yet, (as to the
Education;) and for your Fortune I Will look a little further before I believe
it is (in earnest) so bad as you make it. But if thou be'st a poor Scholar,
let us see if there be any hopes of thy coming to ought that is good that way.
Thou art Respondent. Bays argues thus.

Princes ought not to forgo that Sovereignty which is absolutely necessary to
Govern. The Sovereignty over men's Consciences is such. Ergo, One would think
now He should deny the Minor, and let Bays go on, and (if he did not know his
way) lose himself: Or else find some fault ( ex vi Formae) in the syllogism:
not a bit of either does He: But first starting another Proposition of Bayes's,
That no Rites or Ceremonies can be esteemed unlawful, unless they tend to
Debau^^ men in their Practice or Conceptions of the Deity: Upon which Trans
Infert (that is not thy business still) that if the Other be true, no man is (in
Ingenuity) bound to do God that service (which we deny to follow too:) but let
that pass.

To the Grand Argument; which we have made such a Grand do about, and which is
or should be the Grand Subject and Conquest of this Grand Book^ instead of
Answering He turns Opp^nent; and praemising that the King has a terrible way of
Kicking, and will fling you to the Stable door; that He k^ows all is, but that
the Priest may ri^e him (fine Language) th^ugh to a Precipice:) Only tells you
first, That he is confi^e^t if Bishop Bramhal were alive he would rebuke Bays
for it. Secondly, That no Bishop, nor any of their Chaplains would have
Licensed his Book without certain Non-Obstantes. Thirdly, That the King (though
they be his Right) does not love to hear of concealed Lands. Whoever can find
any more, let them take it for the Discovery.

Now would any one believe that this man had read St. Thomas? Nay, or Jack
Seton, or Burgersdicius: why he does not know what Arguing is, He does not so
much as Confute him with Not. He only Imitates the School Master, that when
the Child desired to know what was the English of such a word, asked him who
washed his face. Go Bays, go; what do you Dispute with a Durty face?

Now I begin to take him for a Quaker, for as broken and Mystical Logic is a
sign of Infallibility, so having none at all, is (in earnest) a sign of a man's
private Fortune and Education. Tell him of Modes, Figures and Syllogism^: he
has a Toleration for that, and will tell you again, They are all but Forms
invented by Aristotle, who may have been some Primate or Metropolitan Bishop
(for ought he knows) under Alexander the Great.

Nay Trans if you leave his Foundation standing thus firm, you may make an
Egregious ^lay with the rest of your Whinny-whanneys; but where is the Plot? So
even go thy ways with thy Public Conscience,
Moral Virtue,
Debauchery Tolerated,
Persecution Recommended, and thy mere, mere
Pushpin Divinity.


So by this, I think you may guess the Reason why I told you, that though some
are presently Transprosed, we cannot perceive their ^rand Thesis is (by your
turning Oponent) Answered.

Hang serious Counsel, I Will to the Dance again if there be any more Music.
White Apron'd Ameril^^! are you ^o near? I must take you out by my ^roth:
What Is your Dance? The Rehearsal Transprosed. The Blockheads don't know it by
that name, Madam. Play the New Figary. So -- But now what make you here* Has
C^ris^^ coverted you to appear against Moral Grace? No forsooth, I came only
to oblige Squire Ralph^, and be a witness for the Orthodo^eness of what do you
cal't. Your Servant Madam. It Is well though you spoke Italian, for I should
never have known you by your White apron: And Do You hear? have a care you come
no more in this Company: They Will make you leave your Santissima Honesta, to talk
like Nanna and Pippa; (but I shall not repeat their discourse out of the famous
Giornate.)

But let us see, who have we next? Iuvenal? No, here is none but two poor
Thredbare Verses of his that have been Quotation-worn (I Will count as exact as
Trans) 732. times since Montag^^ Essays. What Is here, a third too?

-- Te facimus Fortuna Deam.
Why this is worse Rash then them all, besides so Haled in, and so
Phlegmatickly applied, that I wonder your Overseers at the the Lake of Lemane
did not correct it. Your right Topers now, when a friend begins to flag at the
latter end of a day, use to Rouse him up again, and cry -- Brother, you are not
Merry. What did you write this Strain by your self all alone?

But let us see, what is next? Oh he rails at Bays: Rail on, how he Preaches
(about Debauchery Tolerated) like -- Him that a Monk would be; Ordains Lucan
too. Good Doctrine no doubt, and true; but not as recommended as a Consequence
to Two and three make five. Ergo, as if I should tell a man (I name no body) He
ought not to give ill Language, Jest with Sacred things, talk Ribaldry, and the
like, because Bays walked amongst Innocent Hens; and Amarillis her Apron was
pure white: Whereas the reason in truth is, because it is Profane, Scurrilous,
and Simple.

His next Head is Persecution Recommended. Here he compares Bays to the
Emperor Julian, and Bishopsgate-street to Butcher-r^w in such lamentable
Threnothriambicks, that you would think Nineve were going to be Destroy^d
immediately.

-- Quis talia fando,
Mirmidonum Dolopumve, etc. --
Temperet a lachrymis?
But will he eat your Children Trans? What would you give for a Public Tooth
drawer now? Or your own, and Mrs. Abigails -- For take his (...) and pluck them
out; but let us see, what Joyn^ does he begin at? -- You have seen how he (the
A^hor) inveighs against Trading Combinations: Therefore Farmers lay by your
Plows, Lawyers Adjourn the Terms, Landlords set Bills on your Shop doors: These
are all Trading Combinations, or Trans sees no reason why the Part^es concerned
should not Mistake as well as He, and think them so. But that that most Muses
me, is this* When a man sees a Bill on a Shop dorr, he commonly says This shop
is to be Le^s: Now how will it be^ a means to destroy Trading, to ^ell people
where they may have Shops?

But it is no I^sting matter he assures us* for Bays has taken a List of all
the Fanatic Ministers and their people: Why so Trans, by your leave for all
that ^ are all the Fanatic Ministers Tradesmen? O^, most every body that goes
to Law or to Plow hereafter be judged a Fanatic? Or is it still a Jesting
matter? or no matter at all: Since for ought I perceive neither you, nor I can
very well tell what matter this can any way be to the the other.

But Bays would expose well meaning Zealot's to the Galleys: That Is a horrid
thing indeed, to condemn them all for Sforzato's for only -- Poisoning
Cardinal Bembo's Cook. For Trans his part He, seems condemned to be transported
already: He Is roving to Turkey, Malta and Port^ Longone to look for Galleys. I
suppose (if the Brethren must row) He would find the Quakers a Vessel which may
be called the Joseph and Mary: but (for his own part) the Santa Teresa, or St.
John of Jerusalem will serve Him; And if Bays and his partners will make the
Galley*, the King has already up a Squadron. -- It will be singular Obligation
to the General of them, and (no less) to his Linsey-woolsey Ciurma, provided He
may be called Saint John Ana-Baptist Du Tell. For that will be as good as a What
cheer? and gratify all parties; both Father Trans's and John of Leyden's
together.

But I don't like your way of Jesting (if it be so) that follows: Where
remembering some sort of people (for it is no less) how daring things some of
their Persuasion have formerly resolved, you after intimate How easy a thing
it were to Deifie the Divine after the ancient manner, and no man (you say) be
the wiser: Which hint to them you pursue with aggravating Bays his unkindness
for them. That He frequently sneer's at them in an Ironical manner: That his
Entre-messes must be of their Giblets and their Heads his Handkerchief, and
then conclude (as to another purpose) We know your Inclination, and we know
your Lodging. I pass by the rest of the the Declamation; for as to Rigor and
Cruelty, I have told you Mine, and I presume Mr. Bayes's Abborrency of it
already. Now for you so much to distrust the good effects your own Book may
produce: Or, however set your Dogs at people (you know some are Heady enough)
and get a man assassinated without your own appearing in it, if you can; is
such a thing that I am confident your own Party (whoever they be) scorn to owe
more then their Liberty to such an Expedient: And I have heard the Person we
both pretend to serve, has refused his Crown it self when it was often offered
Him, if he would have permitted such an Action. For my part, I can very hardly
forbear running you up here with Terms you would be as loath to hear, as unable to
Disown that you Deserved them. But to something else.

The next passage in you, is that you tell us this is an Age wherein men cannot
well support their Quality without some Accession from the Public. Oh! are you
Begging? I thought I should smoke you: Is it come to this in truth?

Subdola tenduntur crassis mode ^etia Turdis.
Because you are so good at Translating Verbatim, to show we can match you at
that too, take it thus, He wanted Food and Linen: So he took
Toleration for his Seam-stress, and his Cook.


And then he cries out like King Harry in Shakespeare, My Conscience! My
Conscience! He has not the Conscience to see himself want: and it is pity he
should (while there is any Monoye de Cordelier) He is so Religious.

There needs little more be said to the rest, the reason why is given already:
Only whereas upon the Authors saying, If a pin be pulled out of the Church,
etc. and mentioning Pushpin Divinity, you say you will have a care you don't
swallow the pin. The pin (it seems) is in the Church: So we will ease you of that
care, by keeping you from Swallowing Her.

I think I have answered all your Quidlibet's; if not, Remember the Thesis,
Trans. Now does it come in my head that this would make a Burden for a Song.
Your performance deserves richly to be Recorded: It Is a Dull thing to be
always Transcribing other peoples Verses as you do: Troth lets even try once
what We can do our selves. Ho! The Wine press. Give me a Glass of Champaigne.
There was a Wight,
And He was no Knight,
And he took Pen in hand:
He writ so well,
He did excel,
Most Quakers in the Land.
He Transprosed Plays,
And he hoped that Bays
He could bring to the Roman Danc^.
Now hands all.

But I pray remember the Thesis, the Thesis,
Remember the Thesis Trans.
Is not that very well now? I Ca^ I Will be Bays my self now I think on it, and
have it sung next time Love in a Nunnery is Acted.

And now I make account I have done my business, and completely answered your
Book: There are not above 200 pages or so left. But after the Memorable Battle
of Thesis, there is no body needs take any more notice of any thing you say as
pretending to Argue: It Is but crying -- Hus redi, and mecum contend sub illo.


And therefore henceforth (as it fell out after the Chivy-Chase Engagement)
Your Logic must rue that is unborn,
The Bickering of that Day.


So now we will go on, only to make an end of Christmas (as they say:) and first,
I find you cannot forget a Grudging till the cold weather be over, and to show
us a man need not be idle when he kept his Chamber, you give us a Punctual
account at large of the Rise and Cure of the F. Pox. We don't doubt but you
have Conversed with a Surgeon. But Mr. Bays will see you recover well
before he venture to follow your Directions.

But (say you) To resume the former History concerning the Author's Books, He
has not been considered, nor got no Preferment (by writing) for his pains, Oh!
you would discourage us that way from Patronizing this* Cause any further if
you could, would you? Why Trans I Will tell thee, for my part, whether ever I get
any thing or no, I will scorn to beg in Print, and take an occasion when there
is none to say, Good people, A Gentleman of your side cannot well support his
Quality without some Accession from the Public. Then as for the success his
Books have: I don't know what success an Argument can have if that be none,
that they show themselves forced as cunningly as they can to slip by, who
pretend to Answer it. And so I think you do I. O. no great Courtesy neither,
in repeating nothing of him but his asking what was become of the old Plea of
Ius Divinum? For it is as much as to say, that He did not go about (which in
this respect was his Place) To answer neither. I never saw the Gentleman^s
Book, and so don't determine there is nothing in it more to the purpose he may
write for then this Question.

But Trans, I will say something for thee still, though thou have not done what
thou should, that is, Answered; thou have done what thou could. Thou have
chatter'd hideously, and spread thy Tail at the Hawk like thine own Magpie.
Thou have mudded (as thou call it) the matter with Ink like any Sepia; and
(like thy Tailors Wife) thou have held up thy Thumbs at him in the very
Ducking-stool. Thou wantedst nothing but a Good cause, for thou have
sufficiently showed a voluble tongue; and may pretend still if thou will for
me, That her were as good a Shentleman as the best of them if her horse would
but go.

After this he falls to quoting several passages in the Authors books, to show
the Authors Principles thwa^^ one another. He begins about Magistrates power.
To this I need only keep where I was, and tell you, that if the grand Th^sis
stand firm what^ver Consequences are legitimately deduced from that, are good
and true, whatever become of the rest: and that your going about thus to
confound us with a deal of stuff that does not belong to the way you should
handle the Question, is but like Gipseys toling us on with a ramble of words,
till we have forgot our selves at last, and then they pick our pockets. However
to please you, to your first whole side of Citation, which ends in -- Therefore
it is necessary for the security of Government, to set bounds to its
Jurisdiction. I answer, it is bounded by being subordinate to the will of God;
and so I believe the Author answers too, though you found it not so convenient
(I suppose) to continue on your quotation till he came to showing in what
manner he explains himself. Now though that does indeed oblige the Magistrate
to as tender a conscience (as you say) as any of his Subjects; yet it does not
take away the Magistrates power he pleads for, and so you may go Hoop (as you
do) and Holla with your rest.

Now comes Transprosal to be agreeved that the Author had said, A Prince that
sottishly neglects his Security deserved to Perish like Sardanapalus. Whereupon
he says, He knows not why a Prince should not be willing to enjoy the Innocent
Comforts of this life, as well as do the Common Drudgeries: Truly, nor I
neither, nor any Honest man else: But how comes this in upon the Author's
naming Sardanapalus? Was Sardanapalus his Sloth and Effeminacy Innocent
Comfort? Or would you have every Prince enjoy such as were Sarnadapalus's?

Thou do meanly aim now at making some poor and wretched Complement. Fie for
shame, show thus in Print what you would condescend to do (if any body would
employ you) rather then a Gentleman should (...) from the Public wherewithal
to support his Quality!

But now he must see how matter^ stand betwixt the Author and His Answerer,
(any thing in the World Trans, but undertaking to Answer your self may be
safe.) Go to then. His Answerer had objected, that Bays had represented all
Tradesmen as Seditio^s. The Author reply's, He only supposed some Tradesmen
tainted with Sediti^^^ Principles: Trans will show He contradicts himself, and
having quoted those words cries, Holla Bays in the 49 page, etc. you say, no
sort of people are so inclinable to seditious practices as the Trading part of
a Nation: Upon which he wisely asks, Is this the same thing now? No* sure; but
Bays never told you he never talked but one thing all his life.

But do these two deserve to be brought to confront one another as contraries;
or does either confess the Accusation? What should one talk further to a
Corollary-maker for? So in his further Quotations about Magistrates power,
Inward Conscience, (that is a pure word too; I wonder who inventd throwing away
Butter upon basting of fat meat.) Can you tell me where a man may buy a piece
of Red Scarlet to make a Coat for his outward back? And the Wednesday Act he
seems sometimes to leave out, otherwhile to subjoyn words of the Authors, that
are not, nor never were intended, as I guess to be Relatives to the matter he
cites before; or else he will not, or does not understand how that which he
represents for contrary is consistent, as it really is. Here follows but two
leaves and a half of most dissolute and groundless Invective, that Railing is
the most material part of Bays his Religion, his ^e^son, his Oratory, his
Practice, and the ultimate end of all his books* For thy part, if this be the
way of Triump^ing I believe it will be a most scan^al^^ thing ere long to get a
victory.

There is nothing in my way that hinders me, and so I may now go on to the
Preface to Bishop Bramhall. I believe the Reader has forgot any such thing was
ever mentioned. You should have placed your Title Page here. Well, the King
puts out his Declaration of Indulgence, March the 15th. -- 71. Upon which Bays
fell into many war^ and glowing Meditations, which occasioned his writing this
Preface. First, here Trans brings his Dilemm^ again. You should have mended it
though, or got a new one; for take my word this has a hurt -- in the Fiddle.
Next, he calls Bays Incendiary, Idle Fellow: (You are a Sh^d, and a Whit, and
a very Tim.) Give him no more Ale; he shall not have a drop more. But, what
Bays says of His Majesty and the Council (being toward the later end of his
Discourse) I am forced to defer that a little, (he defers that which he is not
come to) lest there being no method in it, I should be in a perpetual maze, and
never know when I am at my Iourney's end. Marry that is a provident care indeed
for a Madman; for thou show plainly enough, I think, that thou art in a
maze already. He continues; And here I cannot altogether escape the mentioning
of I. O. again: Is this Going on to the Preface? Do thou take I. O. to be
the Preface to Bishop Bramhall? Prithee tell me in plain words, and other folks
too that never read word of any of your writings, when you come to it with your
Going on, and say, Hic incipit the Rehearsal Transprosed, or Animadversions
upon a late book entitled a Preface, etc. Now must I run, I see, to I. O. and
a Garden of Flowers, and never know but that I also am in a (...) there, and
that I. O. may be a Thief, or a Gardner, or -- knows who but -- Why this is
Lardella's Funeral On then Rabbi Harpocrates. He (the Author) singles I. O.
out, and (...) pretense runs down all the Non conf^^^ists: This being (as he
imagined) the safest way to undermine and blow up (...) Majesty's Declaration.
If he had run down His Majesty's Declaration, he had undermined and blown up
all the No^ conformists: but to run down the No^ conformists, I suppose is not
to undermine or blow up, but to take away the subject of His Majesty's
Declaration.

The next thing in the Garden o^ Preface (if they be all one) is, th^^ Bays,
you say, undertakes to prove, that Railing is both lawful and expedient, Now
this you say (but that you make a conscience of doing it) you could prove a sin
by Scripture if you would* No doubt it requires a great Doctor to do it. But
why should you make a conscience (if any holds it lawful to rail) to convince
him by Scripture that it is not? Nor is it worth ones while to teach him out of
other Authors. What confute him neither way? Why then it seems if he does hold
it lawful to rail, he may hold it still if he will for Trans. What art thou
doing? or what would thou do? You say you could quote a place out of my Lord
Verulam to his confusion; why don't you? It is not that where he distinguishes
betwixt Idola Tribus and Idola Specus, is it? If it be, you are much in the
right for forbearing; for that would explain to us how, though all your Tribe
have a large faculty at mistakes and railing; yet you may have an extraordinary
gift that way beyond them all, and a particular cran^y by your self. Now this
comes of your crying I know what I know. Therefore pray next time either tell
us down right what you would be at, or else -- I ^ad suppose the whole Play.

But I must shorten a little, and not take notice of every thing, out of tender
consideration (by what I now suffer) of the patience and pains of my gentle
Reader: Otherwise it would be a shorter Penance to enjoin the reading of the
whole Book of Martyrs; then this, of such a one Martyr, as it were an easy
thing in every line almost to make of you.

But now you will take a walk in the Garden, and gather some of Bayes's
flowers: I would not advise you to smell on them though, for they are all
Roses, and grow upon that that may chance prick your nostrils, mark else. The
first you observe, is that Bays says, Several of the Non-conformists
themselves, if a Chimney but take fire in the City, are immediately crying
Jesuits and Firehals: To which you Reply, I understand you, Sir. Why, does
Bays suspect you to be a Jesuit? I Will assure you I only suspect there is one
that may be of that Religion, that is a Coxcomb. I don't desire to reflect upon
any Societies of men. It is not just nor civil, and besides foreign to my
Matter, and therefore I would not be so understood; but, else the World may
distinguish if they please betwixt some of that Order, that deserve esteem upon
the true account of their Wit; and others (if you be one) that have nothing to
show but a troublesome Industry, and their being indeed -- Indefatigable
Brambles. So walk on: And next you seem very tender that the people should cry
out Jesuits and Popish plots upon accidents: and I say too, God forbid that any
man (be he of what Religion soever) should be accused wrongfully: But as for
any course I see you take to make folks wiser, you had better (in my opinion)
have passed this Flower by, but perhaps you could not. But whereas you say next
(speaking to the Author) Take heed the Reasons which sparkle in your your
Discourse have not set their Chimneys on fire. I must observe, this is
something that is darkly said, and seems to intimate more then my Skill dares
attempt the explaining.

After this you say, Socinian Books sell as openly as the Bible. Since you an
so well versed amongst the Booksellers, Pray what is the price of an Answer that
contains only a Question? What never a word? What time of day is it? Nor that
neither. Why, you have not forsworn ever making an Answer to any thing again
have you? Thou art just like the fellow, that when he had told the Senate he
saw Iulia ascend to Heaven, Et pro tam bono Nuntio nemo illi credidisset, swore
he would never tell any body again for his part, if he saw a man killed in the
open Market place. However that honest Gentlemen may not be at a loss; they may
please to know, that I never looked after the Rehearsal Transprosed, till I
heard it was come to 18 d. again. I find it very dear; but if they please to
stay a while, I suppose they may have it ^'r long for 2 d. or 3 d. or a Groat
at most.

The next Flower we come to, is the Termination Ism; Whereupon you take
occasion as cunningly as you can under pretense of Riming to it, first to show
the Church of England is guilty of Schism; and secondly that those who separate
from Her are not. You need not have troubled your self about the former, if
your Design be only Toleration and the latter: For the reasons you bring for
this stand upon their own Bases, and borrow not their Strength from Her Example
of having first separated from Rome. But, Trans, I smell thee as rank as a Fox;
otherwise I could have spared taking notice of the Church of Rome. The Pope is
a Worthy Prince, and lives in Italy, and long may He live and enjoy his health
at Castle Gundolpho, before ever I Will begin to disturb him first: But if
Cardinal Chigi covets Bansted Mutton, and Colchester Oysters, and cannot be
contented with Muscadine and Eggs, but must have Mornings Draughts out of our
Herefordshire Red-streak and Kentish Pipins; in this case I must (like Friar
John) take up Arms for my Vineyard, and if I catch him there (as sure as his
Cap's made of wool) I Will knock him down with a Hop-pole. Therefore pray hence
forward let alone my Mistress, for if you come to fooling with Her, I must
hedge my Bet, and be revenged (if I can) upon your Wife.

But to your Arguments, and first to the latter: Your Author Mr. Hales divides
his Discourse of Schism (you say) into two main Branches; The Cause of it, and
the Occasion of it. The Occasion he again subdivides, but upon the whole upon
this Head he asks, Who shall be Judge? Now say we) Let that question be asked
not only of who gives the occasion of Schism, but of who gives the Cause also;
or (if you please) of whether it be a Cause or no. You will perhaps find no
body but the Magistrate is proper Judge of either. Now (to do you a Courtesy
Trans) if you think this very same answer be not a sufficient reason to warrant
our Separation from Rome also, (Reserving still like you, that I know what I
know) at this time for shortness sake I will trouble you with no other. And if
you had thought good, I might have had your mind in as short a compass as I
have told you mine. And so you have indeed (in less then seven leaves) proved
(as you say) that Schism rimes to Ism, and just nothing else.

Now, for having undergone this grateful Penance (He means done the meritorious
Act) of transcribing these Citations, He exults and Cackles like any Hen, that
were just come off her Nest after laying; in so affected a Style and
nonsensical Phrase, (as Masculine Truth, and Falsehood deformed by Ornaments)
that his Commendations of Mr. Hales prove more simple, then his Railing at
Bays; and the whole Speech worse (if worse can be) then that about Additional
Civility: and when he has done (for fear no body should think he could be such
a fool) expressly tells us, He was Serious.

Here follows a fond Expression, which it is easy to apprehend the Prefacer
used as repeating words of the Persons whom he answered: Yet Trans could not
make less then a whole side of it; but I shall. Next, Welcome poor Macedo: What
the Ioke of that is I don't know.

Next he undertakes the Patronage of I. O. whose Quarrel (but a few leaves
since) he said He Interested himself no more in then, if He were John a Nokes,
and rayled at by John a Styles. The meaning was (it seems) He cares not for him
as of any Religion; but for him or any body else that will but oppose the
Church of England. Now will I nick thee here, Trans, worse then any where in
all my Book: For thy business is only to Foment our unhappy Differences; and I
will not speak one word neither against I. O. nor to that Controversy.

How simply do you next sneer at such things for Flowers as are printed in
Books in distinct Characters? Is not your own Book full of them? A man is put
to a hard shift for a conceit, if for having it He must Jeer himself: Then you
pursue, (for you always run on upon any scent) and bring in, telling us the
advantages Booksellers may set out Books withal, as fine paper, large fair
Letter, Calves Leather Covers, etc. Though this (as it happens) is the only
useful thing your Book teaches; being very necessary Information for us young
Authors, and so truly I thank you Lovingly, and I Will take a Copy of this. But
the word he now finds thus marked in the Preface is Categoricalness. Ism (it
seems) is lost, but there is another Rattle for the Child like Sheerness,
Dongioness, Innerness, and Cathness: So he falls a Playing with Ness. Now for
all your witty Conceit, this does but come from the Nesses, Tudes and Ty's of
Malmsbury (Odi Imitatores) which have this difference: That they were first His
own, secondly New, thirdly Brief. But yours are -- another Nation of
Tartarians, as you may see in my Cutter of Colemanstreet Transprosed Page the
84th. just at this place.

But in pursuance: Bays having translated Peace, Gal. 5, etc. into
Peaceableness, etc. He asks which of the Systematical, German, Geneva, Orthodox
Divines (Do you understand him beloved, you that are his Brethren? You see he
distinguishes you all from the Orthodox) nay of the Sober (here I Am sure he
held his Handkerchief before his face to hide his laughing) Intelligent,
Episcopal Divines could not (how simple soever you are all) have taught him
better then such Forgery or Ignorance as this? The reason is plain, for we
shall but be laid by the heels if we don't keep the Peace; but to require
Peaceableness of us, is to exact our being really good and worthy men; and
that is worse then a Penal Law.

Here he takes an occasion from the Day of Iudgment's having been mentioned
betwixt I. O. and the Prefacer, (in which was no occasion to do thus) to talk
himself very lightly of it: Ironically cites Proofs of it out of what he calls
the Fanatical Book of Martyrs, and the Scotch History. This Discourse takes up
two leaves in him; but I shall prosecute it no further.

Then he comes to Point of Honor, and treats nicely (taking no notice whom he
imitates) of the Lu: More Quotations out of the Rehearsal; -- They fly, they
fly,
Who first did give the lie.
Truly you are mistaken, thy are only gone to dinner.

Next we come to Symbolicalness; which you tax the Author for having described
in several extravagant fashions: I know not with what Fidelity you have either
collected, or do present them to us. I confess I am no Approver of swelling nor
harsh expressions: But whereas you say this Symbolicalness is a flower, nay a
flower of the Sun, made at the Cock or Nags-head; I say it is pity neither of
those houses had the Sun for their Sign, that you might have been in the right*
But having not, I can see little but that if it be a flower of the Sun, it is
the strangest of the kind that ever the Sun saw, for it grows upon a mere
imaginary or no ground at all.

But Mr. Bays, or Mr. Thunder, or Mr. Cartwright; why Mr. Trans, or Mr.
Toleration, or Mr. Guy Faux, he is not ashamed to be called Player by him that
calls Preaching Playing his part: and if you call him as many Names as
Philippus, Aureolus, Theophrastus, Paracelsus, Bombast of Hohenheim, he will be
still ready to make an answer to Satan, Lucifer, Beelzebub, Leviathan, Abaddon.

Well, we have now seen the last flower, and so here is an end of the Garden I
think; we will suppose it at least, De been esse. The next thing thou tellest us
is, that thou have labored and moil'd like any poor Philistin in binding up
this Sampson with his own words, as fast (you say) as such a Proteus could be
pinioned. It seems then you begin to perceive he is loose again already. He is
so; but the reason (you Goose) is, not because he is Proteus, but because your
Cords were slight ones, and the Knots slipped. You should have cut off his Beard,
and have made a Simarr of it, and then you had had him sure. Well, but Trans
fain would do something though; and let Bays make more or less of it if he
can. Why you have been defying him all this while, have you not? Are you
resolved now you can fend no longer, nor prove no longer, nor bind no longer,
to threaten him still as you are running away, and part like Borgio: Backward
on Goltho many a look he cast,
And through his eyes his sparkling anger flamed.


It Is true no man can hinder you from knowing what you know, and talking to
your self however. Well, Your business, Abel? Princes have always found the
Government over Conscience unsafe and unpracticable. Oh, are you come? Their
Right to such a Government stands firm then after all. Then Trans, as for the
unsafeness of it, if uncontrollable liberty prove safe, All Is well. But as for
its unpracticableness, I beg your pardon for that. Would His Majesty would
please to command me any harder matter; if I did not do it, I Would nere answer
Transprosal more.

This next leaf belongs to Ursula, Mol Gifford, and the Father of Lies; let
them even agree together about sharing it amongst them.

The Miscellany ends in your saving, Bayes's design was so much too hard for a
man, that it would have giddied any Goose. I never heard so much said for the
C^^dit of Geese, before: Are Geese brains so much better settled then, then
ours?

Let me ask you one question more if you please, for this seems to hint
something above common observation. Do you every time you find a knotty place,
that is more difficult then ordinary in Bayes's Preface, repair to some Goose
or other to help you answer it? It was proper, and natural I confess, to
associate with Geese when you were at the Lake of Lemane, and I suspected
nothing then because of the place. And it did not methought look so much like
advising or consulting, but only like padling in a Dish of Tea, or over a Cup
of Coffee together: But is it not rather to prepare an excuse for your self
against you have occasion, that you make this Comparison? by which you may make
a Grand Thesis for your self too, to wit, That a Goose is the ablest man. From
whence you may deduce Corollaries at pleasure, and (if any body excepts
against what you say) prove it is irrefragable, and all perfect Transprosal;
because no Goose could have done it better. Nay then I Will help you a little,
but it must be by a Quibble: You know I have one with you; you owe me Colossian
Church: So now take one of mine, and then happily we may continue to trade on by
Bill of Exchange hereafter. Why the business is, I think, You say nothing to
the Prefacer worth a rush; besides, your book has a puzling Title: therefore
now you have proved a Goose is the wisest and most solid thing, I would have
you talk no more of a Rehearsal Transprosed, or go to oppose Animadversions to
a late Book, etc. but an Answer, Since though she but hiss, and we cannot
understand her;
Yet still you will have gi'n him a Goose for his Gander.


If this ( strictly speaking) be no Quibble, but a Pun now; excuse me, for you
understand these things better then I: but I am sure its no Corollary.

Now we will pass to the Point you pretend to be most Zealous for, you (...)
page 209. That some of the Nonconformists under the name of symbolical
Ceremonies, dispute the Lawfulness of those which are by our Church enjoined;
whereby (now mark) say you) They can only intend that these Ceremonies are so
applied, as if they were of a Sacramental Nature and Institution; and that
therefore they are unlawful. You add further, that the Author's Answerer
(handling this Place) makes use of a Pertinent passage in St. Austin; Signa,
cum ad res divinas pertinent, Sacramenta vocantur. I don't intend to meddle
with any body but your self, for I will not make more holes then I mend:
(Possibly the other Nonconformists and we may come to agree kindly together for
all this.) But Trans my Foe is thy self; whom you see I shrewdly suspect to
care for neither of us. So then, that which I am going to reply to is, your
commending that passage in St. Austin as Pertinent to the precedent Matter.
Take notice you have first said, The Nonconformists can only intend our
Ceremonies are so applied as if they were of a Sacramental nature: What you
mean by Applied, you explain where you say, This is it they complain of, that
they are imposed upon them with so high a Penalty, etc. and by your Conclusion;
But here I say is their main Exception, that things Indifferent, etc. should be
made (by reason of equal Penalty with neglect of Sacraments) necessary
conditions of Church Communion. So that all the Nonconformists (in your
understanding) go about to prove, is only the unreasonableness or unlawfulness
of the Penalty. And you your self acknowledge that our Ceremonies are
Indifferent things. Now if after all you commend this Text as in order to its
proving our Ceremonies to be Sacraments: You give your self the, what is it? Oh,
-- The word no flesh can bear. But if you commend it as pertinent to prove the
Penalty unlawful, you talk nonsense, for it does not at all concern Matter of
Penalty; and so it is neither way a Pertinent, but an Impertinent passage; and
you might as well have commended the Pertinency of the Cover of St. Austins
Book. But your aim (I see every where) is but to keep up the Iangle amongst us
as long as you can, and (it seems) we are not a little distracted already: For
there are two Books (whilst I am now writing) come out against you; and the
second finds fault with the first: And if there be e're an addle Headed fellow
to follow this, ten to one but he picks one hole or another in us all Three;
but men of sense sure will have more Wit, and if they do write, mind their
Business. I am come now where the Quotation I meet is certainly one of the
Sor^es Virgilianae you speak of, for your own self: -- Cum Tot sustineas, and
tanta Negotia solus;
for thou see I leave all (and will) upon thy own back. But I must take
notice now of your Apologizing here (as several times you have done before) for
your so often speaking Latin. You being now (forsooth) even hardened in it. I
must tell you I have sometimes heard men ta^k Latin Pedantically, but you
excuse yours so affectedly, that I must say you are the first that ever I saw
Pedantically decline speaking it. If your Latin Citations are pertinent, they
need not be excused; if they are not, they cannot be. So pray trouble us no more
like my Lady would be, with -- My breeding has not been so course -- To offend
with Pertinacy, (we do believe it) -- You may believe it, etc. for Latin or no
Latin you are like to get but little here; besides, The Plot stands still, and
the Grand Thesis is all this while you are Courtesying, taking its pleasure
near Lambeth in a Gundalo.

This ramble of yours ends in the Author's knowing it is not always safe nor
Honorable to be of a Father's Opinion. You don't mean to bring your Proofs out
of St. Thomas, or St Austin do you?

I shall not speak a word ( ex professo) about their Controversy, who affect
in their Worship a simplicity free from all External Circumstances, but such as
are Natural or Customary; which I am now come to, Nempe superba manet Babylon
spolianda Troph^is.


If you can find any thing formerly said that touches them, either by
Implication or Consequence, much good do you: And so you may take me for one of
them my self if you please, I am sure you are not that say, they foul St.
Austin with their Thumbs, etc. And so I skip both good, bad, and indifferent
from this place to your Citation out of Bishop Bramhal; whose Ashes (by your
leave) shall not be Consecrated in the Form you do it: As if That which he saw
in matter of Doctrine, he would not see in matter of Discipline: No certainly,
nor He could not, except his Name had been Cinna; -- Quod non est Cinna videre
potest.


At last, you wish the Author may not prove An accursed Bay Tree: And He wishes
that you may not turn to a Huge Elephant, but -- I hope there is no danger.

You are deadly sly in your next Paragraph (...) Our Church (you say) does
piously declare, that Kneeling at the Lords Supper is not for Adoration of
those Elements; and so of the other Ceremonies, etc. But the Romanists (this is
your Roman Emp^re too, Trans, that comes in as often as you well cau) from
whence we have them (who have Wine from the Canary's, and Plums from Z^^t) and
who said of old, we would come to feed of their meat, as well as eat of their
P^rridge, (Oh! This is the Alteration belike, that you like a Minor Prophet
under them, said, You think God has signified by what means he will effect) do
offer us here many a fair distinction and Declaration in very weighty matters:
To which nevertheless the Conscience of our Church has not complied. And thus
on. Now I think it is plain enough whose cause you are Pleading, but I will not
bind you in such cords as you bound the Prefacer: for I see well enough what
hole you will slip out at, if I should charge you here too home. You will but
cry like Falstaff, (when the Prince asked him if he had said he was a
Sneak-Cup). Did I Bardol? You cannot deny, but you will own nothing. Wherefore
passing the rest of your Good morrow's (which are as many as you could tell how
to sum up) I come to the end, where you innocently conclude; Which things I do
thus sparingly set down, only to show the Danger of Inventive Piety.

Why truly, Trans, and I will be very civil to you, and (since you say that is
your sole reason) I will not deny it. But then I expect you should be so civil
to me as to acknowledge that I (neither) do not present, and hint these things
as absolutely concluding that you are neither Roman Catholic, or Jesuit, or
Design Popery; but only to show the danger there may possibly be, of being
wheedled and overreached, and cheated under many a man's pretending to be
Conscientious, only against Cruelty, and for a Brotherly and Christian
Tenderness to one another.

To your long business about the Clause to the Wednesday Act, and its binding
the Conscience or no, I answer, it does not bind as Gods immediate commands do,
but it does as He commands us to obey the Magistrate, who has power to enjoin
it.

But I find my self run into a World of Seriousness; who (as I am a Virgin)
never intended at first to meddle with any thing of you but that which thou
would have us take to be Wit: But when I find you come to forget: Play with
me, but hurt me not: Jest with me, but shame me not. You see what a troublesome
Alteration you have brought upon the Company: You might have writ Plays,
Governed the Coffeehouse, drunk your Glass of Wine; nay, more too, and I had
never contradicted you: But if you must needs talk of Conscience, cry
Conformists have Bull's-heads, and Nonconformists Durty Thumbs, and tire a
body's heart out with a Bramble, and the Lake of Lemane: Why it is as bad as
giving us the Que ditez vous? And I must cry then, Brother George hold my Band;
and At you, if you were as big as Paul's Steeple.

Now I begin to grow sick again, for I am looking to see what is next in thy
book. Well, I will not put my self out of humor any more, if troppo imperfetta
natura can possibly bear it. Mr. Bays his Hiccough: Well said; have thou any
skill in that? I cannot tell certainly, though I have a shrewd guess what is
the cause of it: He Will poison him by Heaven. You are just as good a Doctor as
the Farrier turned Physician. Why, is the Circulation of the Hypochondria into
the Brain, the usus partium of Mr. Hales's clear head, and prepared breast, and
the Receptacle of Grace or Conscience in the Anatomical Dissection, come to
this? Must he be put in a pit-hole, and have his Ashes consecrated, and all for
the Hiccough? Where Is the Nostrum you kept so close in my L. Bacon? never a
miracle ex vita Sancti Patricii, or Pallas to turn him into a Banques,
(smelling to Bread cures sneezing) to help the Hiccough? See, see, good now:
May be Spirit of Symbolicalness, or Assa foetida, may bring him again. No
remedy? Well, I Will besworn you killed him: He could never have died of this,
but that you broke his heart with answering his Thesis. But since he is gone,
Farewell, poor Mac^d^. Let Us see what he has left behind him -- This is the
Tap-lash of what he said page 110. How? Sure you mistake: Every body gives
Burned wine at Funerals. -- When the Civil Magistrate takes upon him to
determine any particular Forms, etc. What do thou tell me (like Mosca) --
Turkey Carpets nine, is page 108. page 441. page 461. and page 462. a true
Inventory? Why, here is nothing bequeathed but the dominion over the
significations of ^^ds, and the King is sole Executor. ^ome, Trans, the truth
of it is, He does but make fools of us both all this while; and I pity thee
most, because thou do not understand it. Does not the King go in Masquerade
sometimes? and is not he then a Turk, or a Spaniard, or Bishop Bramball, or
what he please? Well, now is it not a great deal more to change a man, then to
change a word? Very well then: why now this is the main thing, etc. and that
which Bays (on his part too) principally insists upon, that because Masquerade
is in fashion in Winter, therefore our Ceremonies are not Symbolical; and
therefore never beat your brains about it: Let Henry the Fourth and Augustus
Caesar alone; for this is a plain Dilemma, (and say that I told you) that nere
a Popish Independent nor Systematical Jesuit of them both can answer. You may
think upon it; but so much at present for the Universal language.

But when he was drawn thus low, did he not think you stand in need of Tilting?
A while since your Style was, This is the taplash of, etc. and that the Blew
John of Asher; (for the Kings unhoopable-ness, perhaps the Subject might fairly
lead a man to the conceit (without his having ever been a Butler, or something
near it) if not the expression.) Now you are at drawn low and tilting: and in
all these places it is the very matter of your Fancy and Invention. The like
vulgar way of conceit I observe about Britches, and Sine cure, and several
other places. Well, upon all this whatever you are now, I Am sure you give one
cause to suspect, you have had formerly but really some private Fortune and
Education. But still, what manner of wit is there in this? Bays had said the
King may define the significations of words: You say, When he was drawn thus
low, etc. How low? You and any body may see his Argument is so good, that you
dare not so much as cast an eye toward opposing it in carn^st You pour indeed a
flood of words upon it; but they have no more life in them all then so much
Tap-lash, or (as I should say) then Dead Beer. But He had better have laid by
these Argumentations, and imitated the Deacon, etc. Why, you had better have
let the Argumentation alone, except you could have refuted it better, and not
be altogether Contemptor famae, and thrust your self in at every place that is
not teneable. Just like that unfortunate Son as Labienus; -- Nunquam Roma
fortuna sine i^^o Succubuit.


But the Deacon (you say) had been much more to the purpose then that beaten
Text, Let all things be done decently and in order. Was this the Text he
deserved Tilting for bringing? Bring you but as good a one, and let them call
it Tilting, or Broaching, you will not fear but it will give those their
belly-full that go about to swallow it. Therefore pray call it no more beaten
Text, for it is a beating Text, and that every body can see plain enough so
long as they are sober.

He comes next to -- Ratio ultima Cleri; and makes a very pathetical Speech
against Whipping: and if there had been any Isms or Nesses belonging to it, he
had done it (I suppose) in Rhyme, and as well as Tom Triplet himself. Prithee
who defends this Military part of Religion? Quis unquam Herculem vituper avit?
Who is Busbys Scholar that rails against his Master now? But there are men of a
fiery nature, which I know not very well, or perhaps I do know, (and perhaps
you don't know; for we will have it if the last word stands) that are sometimes
preferred, and come to the Title of Your Grace: Why, what an Hebrew Jew art
thou to rail all this while against the King's giving us the Significations of
words, and come now thy self to tell us, that that signify's in Latin Vestra
Clementia? Therefore leave your prating about a Discerning Prince, for He
know's what is Latin for Your Grace without your telling him. But the softness
of the University, the gentleness of Christianity, the Fountain's warbling at
Rosamond's Well, and The Winds whispering (since he was born) at Shot-over, and
The Universal Bridal of Nature (in which he was Nurtured;) should have softened
him. Ponite ante oculos: I do not ask only (Harry) where thou spendest thy
time, but also in what Company? For though the Camomil, etc. well: Cedite
Romani Scriptores, cedite Graii.
for my part, He has absolutely melted my heart, and I could even weep at so
Uncomfortable an Importance, like Sir Roger, for hard Abigail, or Mr. Tall boy
for Mrs. Bridget.

And you Mr. Bays, had you lived in the days of Augustus Caesar: (what if he
had lived in the days of Augustus Caesar, He would not have been an old man by
this time, would He?) Would not you have made an Excellent Privy Counselor? Is
that it? Troth Trans this is a point indeed I never knew before: Would I had
lived then too my self, if people for living in Augustus Caesar's days, must
needs be Privy Counsellor's. But Henry the Fourth took other measures of
Government, and accordingly it succeeded with him. (I doubt you forget your
self here Trans) and His Majesty (in probability) will not be so forward to
hearken to Bays his advice, as to follow their Example: How? Follow Henry the
Fourth his Example? I am no Lawyer to know what it is, or else I should here
cry out Treason.

But Kings have a shrewd understanding, and so do not think fit to require any
thing of their Subjects that is impossible; (Marry that is a shrewd sign of a
shrewd understanding, to think nothing fit that is impossible) and are fain
upon all occasions to give the people good words, (would you would learn that
Quality.) They observe how the Parliament of Poland will be their Kings Tailor;
(but they I have much ado to take measure of an unlimited Magistrate.) But
though a certain Queen sat down naked upon the Snow, Kings do not approve the
Example: (No sure, a bottle of Wine in Ice is better behalf.) And you now Mr.
Bays will think these and a hundred more which I could tell you, (what a deal
of rif-raf is in thy poor Noddle?) idle Stories; and yet Kings can tell how to
make use of 'em. Why then you are no good Subject that you don't tell 'em all:
The King ought to be informed of all that conduces to Public Good.

And hence it is, that in stead of assuming your unhoopable Jurisdiction: (Why,
is all the difference betwixt Kings and their Subjects that they are Tun's of
Heidlebergh, and these but Vinegar barrels?) the greater their Fortune is, they
are content to use the less Extravagancy. Oh horrible! Did you ever hear the
like To conclude all this Categorical, Mechanical, Political, Apodictical
Speech with intimating, That Kings are a Company of Extravagant men, only The
greater their power is, they are content to use (forsooth) the less
Extravagancy.

The next Peroration says, that the Pope grants the weak a Dispensation from
Lent and Fasting-days; Ay, and many a thing that strikes deeper in his
Religion. And would you have us do as the Pope does? You know we have our
Ceremonies from the Romanists, be careful what you do. You are damned without
remedy if you conform to them.

But here comes the pleasantest thing certainly that ever was penned: He says,
It would almost Tempt a Prince that is Curious, and pretty well settled, to try
(for Experiment) whether the pulling one of these Pins out of the Church would
make the State Totter or no. I will not say when our Savior was Tempted to
fall down and Worship upon promise of all the Kingdoms in the World, it had
been a good Experiment to have tried and seen whether the Promiser would have
been as good as his word. But I am sure it would bring little Credit to
Philosophers, if because some Physicians affirm, that a person executed may be
recovered to life again, so he ben't quite cold; I say if any Virtuoso should
Hang himself to Try. But if you are for these kind of Experiments in earnest
Trans, I wish you may never have a worse Doctor afterward, then he that cured
the Hiccough.

But Mr. Bays, there is more in it; it is matter of conscience: Well remembered;
and in troth this conscience I feared I should have heard no more on it, for we
have not had it in our thought methinks a great while. Why the argument for
condesc^^tion to Conscience is a fortiori: If the King never minds what T --
says; and Lords keep off their very Hats but to save a new Periwig; Will the
Clergy only, etc? I tell thee they will, they will, Trans; and therefore thou
had as good put up thy Pipes, and say nothing to them.

But, I say Princes (so far as I can take the height of things so far above me)
why, thou can not; they are Objects neither for a Telescope nor Microscope
must needs have other thoughts: Why, and they may have the same too for all the
Euclid you pretend to. Yet now he comes to tell us what they think; That God
might have given them other kind of cattle for their Sub^ects* and have made
them Supreme Graziers. Supreme Grazier (by the way) Friend is Nonsense; for a
Grazier is not a Grazier of Graziers, nor a Shepherd a Shepherd of Shepherds:
w^ll, but what do Kings think? (I Will be a Turk for once, and expect Revelations
from a man that is mad.) That in case their Subjects had been all Beasts, the
laziness of that Brutal Magistracy might have been more secure. First,
questionless no King in the world ever had so Roving a Head as to Philosophize
upon this Notion. And secondly, to think that one Man amongst a whole Country
of Beasts, wild and tame, should be more secure for being lazy. I Will be a
Christian again, for I cannot believe it.

But I am come now to the ingeniousest Argument for Toleration in all thy book;
The Body is in the power of the Mind, so that corporal punishments do never
reach the Offender, but the Innocent suffers for the guilty. This is a kind of
Transprosal of the Ballad of the Colchester Quaker, where Lay what you can
Of Brother Greens outward man,
The Saint is uninfected.
Why in this case (because I confess I cannot answer it) I Will even slink a
the other side the Hedge once like you, and oppose thus; Anima cujusque est
quisq^^. Now if Bays only falls upon your bones, he may claw you and taw you,
and rub you and sub you, till heart ache, and you cannot complain he is either of
a fiery nature, or for sang^inary councils, or that he so much as ever touched
you; and so you may take the -- Non quod odio habeam, sed quod amem, (at any
time) with a Spartan Resolution.

But now to Case of conscience again. You say the Non conformists say, that
they are bound in conscience to act as far as they can; and for the rest; to
suffer to the utmost. You add presently, They mean honestly: and on my word
it is well you do so; for these words in termini^ may mean any thing. But Kings
have Royal Understandings, and Gentlemen's Memories: No doubt of it; and may
they long be preserved, I say, and neither of them ever destroy the other.

Next comes a wise Descant upon Queen Elizabeth's days, and a long Citation out
of Bishop Parker. Thou had better have left out some of it, and told us what
my Lord Bacon said: There had been a great deal less tedeousness in a little of
one and a little of the other; and how little soever that could have proved, I
dare say, they would have been both equally to the purpose.

But now, ware the Application; These words do run so directly against the
Genius of some m^n: Ay, of all that love short and sweet, etc. Here he does
relate how the Church of Rome brought in by Degrees innumerable burdensome,
and useless Ceremonies; (to do him right) he seems to tax Her for it; but for
all this, for my part, Mulieri ne credas, ne mortu^ quidem. So he very gravely
cried, The Engish Clergy have been the most eminent for Divinity and Piety
since the Reformation; yet otherwise he laughs both at that and them, and says
Printing has brought more mischief to Discipline, then all their Doctrine can
make a mends for, etc. But let me keep on in humor: ('It Is having a care of my
self, I am troubled with the Spleen.) Bays he says has got the Philosopher's
Stone for Railing: Well, if there be one Philosopher's Stone for Gold, and
another for Railing, would I had them both. But he has taken all the Posts of
Railing: The Posts of Railing? Why, he never confuted you with a Cudgel, did
he? but he has bought up all the Ammunition of Railing, and searched every
Corner of the Bible and Don Quixot for Powder. The Prophanest wretch alive
would but have said, he had rak^d Hell and skim'd the Devil for it. But to make
the Bible a Magazin of the the same Ammunition with Don Quixot, can evince
nothing in the Earth, but your ^^ld pretensions, and show the World (as you
say) There Is more in it, it is matter of Conscience that you write for.

I am come now to your handling Bays his Grouuds for Fears and Iealousies, or
(which it seems you less start at) his likelihood or danger of the Return of
Popery. Though you have been bountiful, and given Bays three Names, I see you
are clearly for taking away these four words. Thou art in as sad a case about
Popery, as the King and no King: if those words Brother and Sister were but
away, you two might make a Match. I will not much meddle with disturbing your
Nuptials; but let us see what Sport shall we have at the Wedding^ -- Un sinistre
Accident; That Is Ominious, and a Couple of smutty French Verses upon it: Is
this your b^est Epithalmium? I doubt that may be as Ominous too; for since you
will have them Translated, I think they may be properer (then your way) done
thus: Un sinistra accident, Un Accident sinistre.
That she should prove a Wench, a Nonconformist calls a Sister.
Good morrow, Mr. Bridegroom, Good morrow.

But no sooner Married, but presently grow's Jealous; but of what think you?
Why lest any body should think Popery is designed indeed, whereupon he falls to
taking a World of pains to clear the Point. Take heed; our Granam's -- had a
notable saying, That Jealousy is a sign of Love. And there was one told me,
that when Epiectetus lined his Gown with Fox-skin, He charged the Tailor not to
let so much as one hair of it be seen on the outside, for that (quoth he)
would spoil all.

But you used to haunt the Ordinary: Come away then, a Merry Tale is worth all:
You used to haunt the Ordinary, and you played at Picquet -- Pieces. ('It Was
done like a Gentleman; and I think it very material that you omitted not to
inform us thus particularly.) A Gentleman of the Robe used to go something with
you, and looked in your hand. In fine, you lost your Money; and so you imagine
He gave the Sign. To see what a case you were in when you had lost your Money!
You suspected your friends when you had none near you. Now do I believe rather
the Gentleman was your friend; and only looked in your hand (as we do) to see
if you did not Oversee, and Play a Knave when you should Play a King. However
would you forsake the Church for this? You should rather have forsook the
Ordinary; for it is a senseless thing for being angry with the Royal Game of
Picquet, to turn Nonconformist, and Play at Knave out of Doors.

But there was one that robbed folks near Hampton Court in a Bishops Habit.
Prithee Trans: -- N'a il pas a Paris des Filoux
Et de Mine, and de Taille aussi bonne que vous?


Can the Clergy help that? or would thou have us all strip our selves naked,
and sit down in the Snow, lest if we wear any Clothes Thieves should learn what
Habits to Rob in?

Next comes a long Story of Dr. Sibthorp, not a word to the purpose; for Bays
his Doctrine (if you would please to understand it) is not the same with His,
nor Manwaring's neither. But thou art more refractory than D^me Plyant, that
would not understand the Count when he spoke Spanish; and if I could speak any,
I would tell you so in Spanish; Carvous non vogliate entendre plano Anglese.

Then follows a matter of Eleven leaves more about mere Ragione del non Stat^.
How shall I do to crowd in all into five lines? or rather, how shall I do to
finish five good ones out on it? Here Is Ammunition good store if you talk of
Ammunition: But it is all of Rusty Murrious, old Bow's and Targets. His late
Majesty (he says) though a Prince of Exquisite understanding) enjoyed but an
Imaginary absolute Government, and but by the Bishops Assignment neither. Here
No body was importunate, but the Author was Courteous.


The present Clergymen have had (some of them) Private Meetings (he knows not
whether in Grubstreet or no) with the Divines of the other Party, promising to
lay by all Animosities (you must suppose they went in Coaches then, for he told
you before, these were the men that would never step one step, but to run
things up to Extremity's.) Yet after, (to show how Inveterate a thing those
endeavors of Reconcilement, were he says, His Majesty gave Commmission under
the Great Seal for a Conference betwixt the two parties, to prepare things for
an Accommodation: I have much ado to restrain Troppo imperfetta natura, and
canvase no further this Speech of Sc^^o of Mantua. What does not he sc^ap^ up?
Commends none for being in the Right upon a Debate, but blames all when any are
in the wrong. Cries they preferred Manwaring for giving the King all: after
accuses them for the persons that constantly obstruct the Kings Parliamentary
Supplies. I am weary on it: Let Us see, I hope our sport is not at at an end;
I Would fain have a little more of the other. Well, I know a Lady that would not
have her Lacquay chi^d for Swearing, because she said it showed courage, and
his acknowledgment of a Deity. By such a way as this Bays vindicates himself,
and shows he is no Atheist. Puh; this is no Jest:: this is Abomination. I know
a Lady shall dispute the business with you and your Lady too, and that is Madam
Ursula.

But thou art grown very dull, Trans, (I observe) of late; thou have not met
the Parson again since at the Ordinary, have thou? There was a jovial Ioyner,
that haunted the Comb-makers, (and sure you two could not but know one another)
that when he had lost 30 or 40 pounds, would have light a man home at midnight
as merrily for 3 pence, as if he had won both Chaplain, Preface, and all the
Books in England. Bear up, Man; I Will speak to Mr. Dreyden, and he shall help
thee to a Comrade that is an Artist against the next time; and you two shall --
Top upon 'em.

Or is it upon any other score that thou art thus down? Why if there be Fears
and Iealousies of Popery, there is nobody will take thee for Bellarmine. Bays
distinguishes (you know) betwixt the Wealth and the Phanatick; and so he will do
too betwixt the Wit and the Papist: and if there be never so many Penal Acts,
there is nobody will meddle with Paul the simple. Besides, who can accuse you
for either Preacher or Disputant? The most they can make of thee is but a
Nunti^; for thou do indeed mentiri pro patria sufficiently. But, still that
Quality is Sacred; and therefore do you but only (as they say at N^^ga^e)
Plead you Rogue as I bid you, and I warrant thee come off jure gentium.

Wherefore, since we are now so near, let us pass Rubicon merrily: for though
Moses dissuaded Caesar, yet He does not hinder any of us: and if it were the
Hellespont, I hope one might go drink a Pot with Parthenope after so long a
Journey.

Well, I have looked to the End, and see it is in vain to spur, for thou art
quite tired, and set (in a kind of a hard Trot) to give us solemnly the
Reasons that occasioned thy Writing. Why Trans you must know that we take our
selves to have very good reason to suspect that you writ this Book, but one
Reason, and that is, for a Reason that was Given you. For it seems to me (thou
go on so lumpishly every where) that thou were merely dragged to it, after a
much wiser man (as I am informed) had refused the Employment. But Madam D'
Olonne could not refuse Paget when his Letter argued from so undeniable a Maxim
as 2000 Pistols; and so you condescended at last to talk of Kings and Princes,
notwithstanding your private Fortune and Education, and Your Thoughts (as well
as Bays his) resolved which way to work themselves, when you saw Arguments
produced for it. That were not merely symbolical.

But le'ts see, what are thy Reasons? First, you were offended at Bayes's
Arrogant Style; since there is nothing (you say) in it worth his own taking
notice of. Why, Trans, this is the strangest Reason that ever I heard, that it
should be pity that a man that writes simply should be so fond as to like his
work: I should think rather 'twere pity but he should be condemned for his
pains to the stupidity of never knowing what an Ass he had made himself. So
that you and I differ clearly (though we are both (I see) Tenderhearted) in
application of our Charity: For in your case now I am content you should think
you have done very well still.

Next, His infinite Tautology was burdensome: Marry come up. A small T^^e then
about Bishop Bramhal, a Manual of the Letters of the Alphabet, a Parenthesis of
seven sides out of Mr. Hales, the old Legend (twice over) of Austin the Monk,
and the Novel's of Sibthorp and Manwaring, and Manwaring and Sibthorp, I
warrant Tire no body. Why thy whole Book consists of nothing but Long Distichs;
though I believe thou would make any man glad of a Seat upon hearing but a
Dimeter of thine: Nay thou can do it in less compass then Impudent Modesty.

Your Third reason, is your Exception against him, because All the Variety of
his Treat is Pork. Here thou do abuse the word Variety abominably. Your
friend Henry the Fourth would not have pardoned you if you had persuaded him
that Chapon Boullis was Variety, and Ven^^ would sooner have sworn by Stix when
-- By Love's sweetest part Variety she swore. Then this, if it must be
Castrated into Conformity with your understanding; nay thou debauchest the very
Age too, for thou bring Love it self, which should be a Divine thing, and
the noblest passion of an Heroic mind to mere -- Boar beckons Pig^hog will it
thou be mine? When thou offerest to say, all the Variety of the Treat is Pork.
You talk of Bayes's miserableness? you are more miserable; for you destroy the
very notion of Variety, and so I don't wonder at your being a Jew, etc. by
Consequence being offended with Pork.

But you add cunningly -- You know the Story. Prithee if Bays himself does
know it, what is that to us? You have set our mouths a watering, and now you
take away the Meat: But though we ben't worthy, methinks you might have had the
manners to have told it, that the King at least might know it; who you say, Can
make use of all these things. Therefore pray out with it, and (since I have as
great a Concern for the Ships as you pretend for Galleys) if you have any more
about Beef and Peason, let us have them too; for the Pork and they being
digested in a convenient Memorial together, (but I must pen it then, for the
Fleet will not have Stowage enough for the very Paper if it be left to thee)
possibly His Majesty may make use of it indeed, and find out some Cheaper way
for Victualling the Navy.

After this comes Eight Verses out of Gondibert. Treat thee Quoth a? if ever I
Treat thee with Pork, I Will swear the Hog shall have his Skin on: I see show
thee but Victuals, and thou will it carry away as much as will serve six men in
thy Handkerchief. You object Signing (in Baptism) with the Cross is made a
necessary Condition of Church Communion? I believe the reason why you are
separated in truth is, because no body dares let you come to their Christning;
and so you uuderstanding the words Astragon, But those that may have more, yet
will have less:
Wiser then Nature, make her kindness vain;
to be meant of Eating: No marvel if you think his Discourse the better Scheme
of Religion.

After this he forces himself to talk Relig^ously again: He had almost forgot
who he was to be for. On my conscience I might have writ for them as well as
thee; but it would have looked so like Masculine Truth, and Falsehood deformed
by Ornaments, that I resolved (like a good man) to be for Feminine Truth, and
set nothing but my own best face upon it to -- win fair Lady. But having been so
well paid for his Gibbelineship, he gives them one more Acquittance, (since the
rest will scarce prove a Discharge) here at the end of his book for their
money. Do, good People; if you have any thing more to be engrossed, or
Petitions to draw, or need any further Instructions how to go on like Fools,
here is one that you shall have very fair dealing with: he will keep touch, and
receive all you bring him in open Market, though he commit it to never so close
a Coffer, or private Till when you are gone.

But now I have done: And a pious end thou have made, (I Will say that for thee)
but no body that hoped to have a Reprieve ever spun out time at last as thou
have done: nay and the Decorum on it is, he dies too with an Exhortation in his
mouth. That people will learn (by his Example) to be Angry and Merry. Merry
ar't say thou? Methinks thou take more pains then any Horse: Let any man
but look and see how hard thou art set. Why since the Magisterium of the Grand
Thesis is gone in Fum^, thou art come to desire to save but any small matter.
Though it would but cure the Itch, and so fall'st to tyring if thou can at
least scrue Bays his words to purport, but that he made our Savior a Player.
Now Mode and Figure, Enthymeme, Sorites and Corollary. You shall see how (
betwixt two Stools) he does it. To put on the person of, etc. is Induere
Personam (as sure Trans, as Your Grace is Vestra Clementia.) Then comes -- What
part did he Play? How? This is a Saltus, ( bona ingenia saltant;) you should
have proceeded with saying Induere Personam, was to Act; and (if any body
believed that) then have asked your Question. Come, you had all this out of the
Answerer of Salmasius: and your way had been to have transcribed the whole side
again just as it lay: For I see thou can not tell how to apply it. Thou will
make both all the High Sheriffs and Ambassadors in Chris^endom Players, as thou
handlest the matter: and in truth, I believe, though they should be angry, they
cannot choose but be merry, to see how much in the simplicity of thy heart thou
do it. And now this last strangling for more breath is the way thou would
persuade us thou art Merry: So to cracked Pipe and broken Tabor,
In Me^riment Clowns Drudge and Labor.


Thou had much better have let these after drops of thy Manna alone, and all
thy reasons too, since we might have possibly took it for some amends if thou
had only told us in short -- That is as well as I can do. Thou shall see
I Will do Politickly now, and give no reason, except that I had nothing else to
do, and End so. Only since thou would needs bestow a thing like an Epitaph
upon the Author, to show I will not be behindhand with Apollo in Courtesy if
you like it, take you this:

Here lies Transprosal,
That Writ a Book he could not name,
And Answered the Prefacer to Bishop Bramhall
Without Replying a word.
So I pray remember the Thesis, the Thesis,
Remember the Thesis, Trans.
FINIS.
By reason of the Authors being in the Country, these Errata have happened.
Page 21. line 16. read, have two husbands, or else miscarry of his first
child. p. 22. l. 12. r. Quibble would be. p. 25. l. 5. abroad r. aboard. p. 27.
l. 23. r. cannot bid. p. 29. l. 7. r. Whose Honor. p. 32. l. 13. r. Out you
Rascal. l. 23. advancement r. advertisement. p. 25. l. 17. r. I did not. p. 36.
l. 2.. r. St. Thomas. p. 40. l. 4. r. endless fops. l. 8. after Lycanthropy
add, for he believes himself a wolf; l. 12. r. Auditores. p. 44. l. 12. after
only add, I have heard that so often, and. p. 91. l. 21. r. Anser. p. 99. l.
21. r. either. p. 101. l. 21. after cause of it add, O'ds S'deins! you have a
shrewd guess, and you cannot tell the cause of it. p. 119. l. 11. finish r.
furnish.


