A FRIENDLY ADMONITION: OR, Good Counsel TO THE Roman Catholics IN THIS
KINGDOM.

By MARTIN MASON.



Printed in the Year, 1662.

A friendly Admonition; or, good Counsel to the Roman Catholics in this
Kingdom.
SHall I need to tell you that this small Transcript in the tenderness of my
love is sent unto you? Or, can you believe me that in the integrity of my soul
for the good of yours, this friendly Admonition is thus published by me? If so,
then possibly it may meet with a kind reception from you: But, however, I must
deal plainly with you; and when I have cleared my Conscience to you, (whether
you hear or forbear) I shall be clear of you in the day of the Lord.

Ever since Cain contracted upon himself the innocent blood of his Brother
Abel, the Seed of Innocence has suffered wrong and injury, and met with
Persecution from the spirit of Enmity. The truth of this Assertion is so clear
to the wisest of you, that I need not trouble my self to prove it to you.

That the Church of Christ is of a Lamb-like Spirit, clothed with Innocence,
Meekness, Love, Pity and Compassion to all people, the wise in heart amongst
you cannot but acknowledge. so, I send you, said Christ, as Sheep amongst
Wolves. And were not they harmless Sheep indeed? and did they not meet with
many Wolves? Did ever any of the true Followers of the lamb put on a wolvish
spirit, or use carnal violence to win a Convert? Or, did ever external
compulsion convert a Sinner unto God? Are not the Tares and the Wheat to grow
together? etc. Is it not an undeniable Truth, That which is not of Faith, is
sin; and Faith is the gift of God? Is not conversion of a soul from sin, the
inward work of the Spirit of God? Can any thing draw the mind to God, but the
holy Spirit of God? Did ever Persecution obtain its desired end, and bring a
blessing upon the Persecutors?

These things premised, let me expostulate a little further ^ith you:

Have you not formerly been in a suffering-state your selves more or less
concerning the exercise of your Consciences toward God? has not the Rod of
Authority heretofore been held over you, and a bridle to you? Have not some of
the Laws seemed to discountenance you? Are there not yet penal Laws in being
(though little made use of) against you? Did you not count it hard measure when
the yoke of the Prelates was upon you? Did you not earnestly and submissively
then plead for Liberty to tender Consciences? would you not then have been
pectorally glad of that Indulgence which the Clemency of the King now
vouchsafes unto you? Was it not then esteemed a Persecution by you, when the
Laws at any time were put in execution against you? How ordinary was it with
you to plead for Toleration? and now that you have it, can you not therewith be
contented? Be not so ungrateful unto God, nor so unworthy to your King, as to
slight the Mercies of the Lord, and abuse the Favor of your Prince. What, must
you needs monopolize Caesar to your selves? must the Sun shine upon no ground
but your own? How comes it that you are or would be esteemed so transcendently
deserving of that Royal Privilege above all other People? Certainly, God
intends it not to the best of the sons of men. Is it not Favor sufficient for
you, that Caesar smiles upon you, but you must turn his frowns toward us, and
set the edge of his Authority against an Innocent People? Is not his suspention
of the penal Laws against you, a large demonstration of his Princely Favor to
you? What, will nothing but the Throne content you? Certainly, that will set
the affections of many thousands in the Nation against you: O that there were
more true Humility amongst you, that the Wisdom of God were with you, that this
Ambitious Itch were taken from you, and the pure Love and Innocence of the Lamb
of God more abounded in you. Certainly, it would be far safer for you to rest
where you are, than to rise up and fall; for God will make War with Amalek to
all Generations.

Never shall any People prosper who use Persecution, and seek to establish
their Religion by a carnal Compulsion. Conscience is Christ's Throne; Kings and
Lovers do not use to love Corrivals: Be wise therefore in time, and take not
too much upon you, lest that which you have be taken from you: Say not within
your selves, the Strength of the Nation now is for us, Come, let us enrich our
selves in the Ruins of the People; for though the God of our Innocence may
suffer you for a season to mount a little higher than yet you are; yea, if he
should give you the necks of your enemies, the proud Prelates and Presbyters,
to tread upon, yet know this assuredly, if your intentions be to build Sion
with blood, and force all others to bend unto you, your design will deceive
you, the blood-thirsty spirit is not of God, nor shall such as are guided by it
live out half their days: That spirit which seeks its own honor more than
the Praise of God, ever meets with blastings instead of blessings from God. You
need not go far for a proof of this Assertion. How many Over-turnings has this
Nation witnessed within these thirty years, and all because Iniquity has
abounded, God has been dishonored, Solemn Engagements to God (for Christian
Liberty to his People) violated, and tender Consciences oppressed? and shall
the same (if not greater) sins lie at your door, and the destroying Angel not
enter into your houses, if you repent not and give Glory to God? If you find it
so, then you may say there is no God in Israel.

This therefore I have to say unto you, and O that my words might be wisely
pondered by you, and get a good entrance into you.

Let not vain imaginations any longer deceive you, for as sure as the Grapes of
Sodom, and the Fruits of Gomorrah are found amongst you, the hand of God will
overtake you: Let his Witness search you; and if he spared not others that are
gone before you for their Treachery to God, and Oppressing of his People, think
not you, whose Idolatries and Sins be equal with, or surmonnt theirs (for where
you have Power, your little Fingers are heavier than their Loins) to escape
divine Justice; for God will reckon with you, and render a Reward unto you
according to your Deeds: I say, be not deceived, God will not be mocked; such
as you sow, such shall you reap: When therefore you are in the height of your
strength, let not Wisdom and Moderation be strangers to you, nor a furious
Spirit of Revenge be active in you: Happy would it be for you, could you
conquer in Love, first your own unreasonable wills, and then with innocence,
love, and patience, win the Affections of the People: Could you be as well
contented to give Toleration to tender Consciences, as not long since you were
willing to take it for your selves, how easily and how honorably might you
enjoy it? and till then, however you may feed your selves with conceits and
fancies, God's peace in your Consciences will never be your portion: If you
attempt the Ruin of his innocent People, you will be found fighting against
God, and engage him to make War with you, and will not he be too Potent for
you? Surely destruction and misery without mercy will be their lot whose
delight is in cruelty.

Therefore take warning in time and be awakened: Desist from all cruel
Enterprises; turn your minds to the royal Seed of God in your own Consciences,
and hearken to the holy dictates of God's holy Oracle in your hearts; Bow in
time and bend unto it, lest for your disobedience you be broken by it; Break
off the chains of Iniquity, wherewith the Enemy of your Souls does imbondage
you; Wash you, make you clean, believe in the Light of Jesus while it is with
you, that he may be a Savior to you; That which condemns sin in you, would
overcome sin for you, would you but turn at the Reproof which comes from the
Spirit of the Lord in your own hearts: Could you truly witness true victory
over sin, that would be more honorable than the conquest of a Kingdom: Oh!
that you would put on the holy Armor of God, then would you be a royal Camp
indeed, an harmless, holy, and an honorable People. It would be safer for you
to seek Reconcilement with God, and to live at peace with all men than seek to
lord it over all men in the exercise of their Consciences toward God; so would
the Prayers and Tears of God's People mount up to the Throne of Mercy for you,
and be of greater force and efficacy with the Lord on your behalf than all your
Masses are, or yet, poor Souls, you are aware of.

And as for that innocent, despised, yet noble-minded People, reproachfully
called Quakers, there is no evil in their hearts toward you, nor toward any
of the Children of men; but in the integrity of their Souls, they desire God
may be merciful unto you, who through ignorance add unto their Afflictions, not
knowing what you do: Therefore, let not your hearts be filled with prejudice
against them, nor your ears too open to receive, nor your hearts too ready to
believe mis-reports concerning them; When you find them really in Rebellion
against good Government, do not spare them; but all then, I warn you, in the
Name of the Lord, do not oppress them, nor in the secret of your hearts
conspire to be the ruin of them, but be filled with Christian love, innocence,
and meekness toward them; for I am bold to testify for them, they are as dear
unto the Lord as the apple of his eye, and that Soul that troubles or
persecutes them for the exercise of their Consciences to God, shall feel the
indignation of God.

And if ever the Lord suffer you, for the sins of the People, to make use of
your Armor, and be a Rod to them that are better than your selves, delight not
in Cruelty, but love Mercy, and be clothed with Pity and Compassion toward
all men, when it is in your power, that you may find mercy when your work is
done, for you will have need of it; therefore glory not in your own strength,
nor think not to make the Consciences of the Innocent bow unto you, because
their Persons are liable to be afflicted by you; for though such may suffer
under you, yet can their Innocence never be conquered by you: for Jesus has
chosen us, and we have chosen Him as our General in our holy harmless War
against the Man of Sin, the Mystery of Iniquity, wherein our Weapons are not
carnal: But in the Kingdom of our Consciences, neither Pope nor King shall
come, but Christ; yet to Caesar we can give the things that are Caesar's; and to
none but God, the things that are Gods.

Had Charles no worser Enemies than I,
Charles, by the Hand of Man, should never die.
Thus have I in the integrity of my heart, breathed a little of my Love unto
you, and laid good Counsel before you; what remains but that I leave it with
you, and breath in secret to the Lord for you, that if it be his good will and
pleasure, the words of sound Wisdom may take place with you, and not be
slighted or: rejected by you; Happy were it for you, could you delight in
Innocence, and love that noble Seed in your selves, which counsels you to
depart from Iniquity, and would have you do to all men as you would have all
men do unto you, so would the blessing of God be upon you, his delight would be
to exalt you, and he would cloth you with honor in the sight of the People.
But if his own dear Seed in you still be under-valued, and its good counsel be
set at naught, or slighted by you, and your sins preferred above that which
would overcome sin for you; if instead of meekness you act with fury and
madness; if you think to make the Consciences of the Righteous bow unto you,
shame and confusion will assuredly fall upon, and an ill savor you will be
unto all Generations.

Lincoln, 10th day, 9th Month, 1662. MARTIN MASON.

THE END.

