Mr. Andrew Marvells CHARACTER OF POPERY.

January 17. 1688/9.
This may be Printed.

ROB. MIDGLEY.



LONDON, Printed for RICHARD BALDWIN, next the Black Bull, in the Old-Bailey.
MDCLXXXIX.

Mr. Andrew Marvell's Character of Popery.
WE do not find that God ever owned above two Religions in the World, the one
of Ceremonies, the other without. The first dictated to Moses by God himself;
which tho it consisted of several peculiar Rites, Oblations and Ceremonies, yet
was their Institution grounded upon Reason, being either Remembrances of their
Deliverances, or Types and Significations of the great Sacrifice which was to
come, insomuch that God did not require of the Jews to have any other Gods but
him, but for a particular Reason.

The second Religion was that which the coequal Son of God first taught in
Judea, and commanded his Disciples to spread over the World. A Religion Plain
and Simple, and, as I may say, without Welt or Guard, but so full of Truth and
Syncerity, so full of virtuous Precepts, all tending to make Men happy both in
this and the other Life, that it may truly be said to have descended from
Heaven, and to have bin the untainted Doctrine of a most perfect Deity. Now as
no Governtment can subsist without Religion; we thought our selves the most
happy People in the World, when once reformed, not only to the Protestant
Religion, which is that which comes nearest to the Rules of Sacred Institution,
but to the most refined Exercise of the Protestant Religion, now practiced in
the World; Wherein there is neither Defect of Devotion, nor redundances of
Superstition, a Decency with Gravity, a Decorum avoiding the Moroseness of a
Clownish Behavior to the Sovereign of Heaven. No Superstitious assuming to its
self a Sanctity above others, but a Piety and Charity grounded upon and
warranted by Scripture, without which all Religion is but a seeming, and no
true Religion.

For this Reason it was, that the Author of this ensuing Paper, a Person of no
less Piety and Learning then Sharpness of Wit and Soundness of Judgment, wrote
with such an Abhorrence as he does of the Popish Religion, if it may deserve to
be called a Religion, as the Gentleman well observes; and that he labored to
set it forth in its proper Colors, as if he had intended it as his last Legacy
to this Nation, to show how ruinous it would be to us, should we be again
compelled to embrace it; and with the Dog be constrained to return to our
former Vomit: And as it were prophetically to let us understand what a
Deliverance God has bin pleased to bless us withal, in so lately freeing the
Kingdom from that Inundation of Antichristian Pomp and Vanity, and Cheats of
Romish Superstition, which was about to have overwhelmed it. It Is true, the
touches are bold; but it is a Description to the Life: And bold Strokes in
Painting are many times more grateful to the Eye and Master-like, than the
smooth Touches of an effeminate Pencil. For which Reason it was thought
expedient to abstract these few Pages from the rest of the Treatise, and to
hang them up in the Face of the Nation, as the most lively Picture of the
Sensuality, Vanity and Treachery of the Romish Profession. The Words themselves
are these. In short, says he, there is nothing comes nearer in Government to
the Divine Perfection, then where the Monarch, as with us, enjoys a Capacity of
doing all the Good imaginable to Mankind, under disabilities to all that is
evil.

And as we are thus happy in the Constitution of our State, so are we yet more
blessed in that of our Church; being free from that Romish Yoke, which so great
a part of Christendom do yet draw and labor under, That Popery is such a thing
as cannot, but for want of a Word to express it, be called a Religion: Nor is
it to be mentioned with that Civility which is otherwise decent to be used, in
speaking of the Differences of Human Opinion about Divine Matters. Were it
either open Judaism, or plain Turkery, or honest Paganism, there is yet a
certain Bona Fides in the most extravagant Belief, and Sincerity of an
erroneous Profession may render it more pardonable: But this is a Compound of
all the Three, an Extract of whatsoever is most Ridiculous and Impious in them,
incorporated with more peculiar Absurdities of its own, in which those were
deficient; and all this deliberately contrived, knowingly carried on by the
bold Imposture of Priests, under the Name of Christianity. The Wisdom of this
fifth Religion, this last and insolentest Attempt upon the Credulity of Mankind
seems to me (though not ignorant otherwise of Times, Degrees and Methods of its
Progress) principally to have confisted in their owning the Scriptures to be
the Word of God, and the Rule of Faith and Manners, but in prohibiting of the
same time their common Use, or the Reading of them in public Churches, but in
a Latin Translation to the Vulgar: There being no better or more rational way
to frustrate the very Design of the great Institutor of Christianity, who first
planted it by the extraordinary Gift of Tongues, then to forbid the use even of
the ordinary Languages. For having thus a Book, which is universally avowed to
be of Divine Authority, but sequestring it only into such Hands as were
entrusted in the Cheat, they had the Opportunity to Vitiate, Suppress or
Interpret to their own profit those Records by which the poor People hold their
Salvation. And this necessary Point being once gained, there was thence forward
nothing so monstrous to Reason, so abhorring from Morality, or so contrary to
Scripture which they might not in Prudence adventure on. The Idolatry (for alas
it is neither better nor worse) of Adoring and Praying to Saints and Angels, of
Worshipping Pictures, Images and Relics, incredible Miracles and palpable
Fables to promote that Veneration. The whole Liturgy and Worship of the Blessed
Virgin. The saying of Pater noster's and Creeds, to the honor of Saints, and
of Ave Mary's too, not to her Honor, but of others. The Public Service, which
they can spare to God among so many Competitors, in an unknown Tongue; and
entangled with such Vestments, Consecrations, Exorcismes, Whisperings,
Sprinklings Censings and Fantastical Rites, Gesticulations, and Removals, so
unbeseeming a Christian Office, that it represents rather the Pranks and
Ceremonies of Juglers and Conjurers, the Refusal of the Cup to the Laity. The
Necessity of the Priests Intention to make any of their Sacraments effectual.
Debarring their Clergy from Marriage. Interdicting of Meats. Auricular
Confession and Absolution, as with them practiced. Penances, Pilgrimages,
Purgatory, and Prayer for the Dead. But above all their other Devices, that
Transubstantial Salacisme, whereby that glorified Body, which at the same time
they allow to be in Heaven, is Sold again, and Crucified daily upon all the
Altars of their Communion. For God indeed may now and then do a Miracle, but a
Romish Priest can, it seems, work in one Moment a thousand Impossibilities.
Thus by a new and antiscriptural Belief, compiled of Terrors to the Fancy,
Contradictions to Sense, and Impositions on the Understanding, their Laity have
turned Tenants for their Souls, and in consequence Tributary for their Estates
to a more than Omnipotent Priesthood.

I must indeed do them that Right to avow, That out of equitable Consideration,
and recompense of so faithful a Slavery, they have discharged the People from
all other Services and dependence, infranchised them from all Duty to God or
Man; insomuch that their severer and more learned Divines, their Governors of
Conscience, have so well instructed them in all the Arts of Circumventing their
Neighbor, and of Colluding with Heaven; that were the Scholars as apt as their
Teachers, there would have been long since an end of all either true Piety or
common Honesty; and nothing left among them but authorized Hypocrisy,
Licentiousness and Knavery; had not the natural Worth of the better sort, and
the good Simplicity of the Meaner, in great measure preserved them. For
nothing, indeed, but an extraordinary Temper and Ingenuity of Spirit, and that
too assisted by a Diviner Influence, could possibly restrain those within any
the Terms or Laws of Humanity, who at the same time own the Doctrine of their
Casuits, or the Authority of the Pope, as it is by him claimed and exercised.
He by his Indulgences delivers Souls out of the Pains of the other World: So
that who would refuse to be vicious here, upon so good Security. He by his
Dispensatian annuls Contracts betwixt Man and Man, dissolves Oaths between
Princes, or betwixt them and their People, and gives Allowance in Cases which
God and Nature prohibits. He, as Clerk of the Spiritual Market, has set a Rate
upon all Crime: The more flagitious they are and abominable, the better
Commodities, and Men pay only an higher Price as for greater Rarities. So that
it seems as if the Commands of God had been invented merely to erect an Office
for the Pope; the worse Christians Men are, the better Customers: And this Rome
does by the same Policy People its Church, as the Pagan Rome did the City, by
opening a Sanctuary to all Malefactors. And why not, if his Power be indeed of
such Virtue and Extent, as is by him challenged? That he is the Ruler over
Angels Purgatory and Hell. That his Tribunal and Gods are all one. That all
that God, he can do, Clave non errant, and what he does is as God, and not as
Man. That he is the Universal Head of the Church, the sole Interpreter of
Scripture, and Judge of Controversy. That he is above General Councils. That
his Power is Absolute, and his Decrees infallible. That he can change the very
Nature of things, making what is Just to be Unjust, and what is Vice to be
Virtue. That all Laws are in the Cabinet of his Breast. That he can Dispense
with the New Testament to the great Injury of the Devils. That he is still
Monarch of this World, and that he can dispose of Kingdoms and Empires as he
pleases. Which things being granted, that Style of Optimum, Maximum, and
Supremum Numen in Terris, or that of Dominus Deus noster, Papa, was no such
extraordinary stroke of Courtship, as we reckoned: But it was rather a great
clownishness in him that treated so mighty a Prince under the simple Title of
Vice-Deus. The Exercise of his Dominion is in all Poins suitable to this his
Pretense. He antiquates the Precepts of Christ, as things only of good Advice,
not commanded: But makes it a Mortal Sin, even to doubt of any part of his own
Religion, and demands, under Pain of Damnation, the Subjection of all
Christians to his Papal Authority: The denying of two things so Reasonable as
blind Obedience to his Power, and an Implicit Faith to his Doctrine, being the
most unpardonable Crime under his Dispensation. He has indeed of late been
somewhat more retentive than formerly, as to his Faculty of disposing of
Kingdoms, the thing not having succeeded well with him in some Instances: But
he lays the same claim still, continues the same Inclination, and though Velvet
Headed has the more Itch to be Pushing. And however in order to any occasion
he keeps himself in breath always by cursing one Prince or other upon every
Maunday Thursday: Nor is there any, whether Prince or Nation, that Dissents
from his Usurpations, but are marked out under the Notion of Heretics to Ruin
and Destruction, whenever he shall give the Signal. That Word of Heresy
misapplyed, has served him for so many Ages to justify all the Executions,
Assassmations, Wars, Massacres and Devastations, whereby his Faith has been
propagated; of which our Times also have not wanted Examples, and more is to be
expected for the future. For by how much any thing is more false and
unreasonable, it requires more Cruelty to establish it: And to introduce that
which is absurd, there must be somewhat done that is barbarous. But nothing of
any Sect in Religion can be more recommended by all these Qualities than the
Papacy. The Pagans are excusable by their natural Darkness, without Revelation.
The Jews are tolerable, who see not beyond the Old Testament. Mahomet was so
honest as to own what he would be at, that he himself was the greatest Prophet,
and that his was a Religion of the Sword. So that these were all, as I may say,
of another Allegiance, and if Enemies, yet not Traitors: But the Pope avowing
Christianity by Profession, does in Doctrine and Practice renounce it: And
presuming to be the only Catholic, does persecute those to the Death, who dare
worship the Author of their Religion, instead of his pretended Vicegerent.

And yet there is nothing more evident, notwithstanding his most notorious
Forgeries, and Falsification of all Writers, than that the Pope was for several
Hundred of Years an honest Bishop, as other Men are, and never so much as
dreamed upon the seven Hills, of that Universal Power, which he is now come to,
Nay, was the first that opposed any such Pretention. But some of them, at last,
growing wiser, by foisting a counterfeit Donation of Constantine, and wresting
another Donation from our Savior, advanced themselves in a Weak, Ignorant and
Credulous Age, to that Temporal and Spiritual Principality that they are now
seized of; Tu es Petrus, and super hanc Petram, adificabo Ecclesiam meam. Never
was a Bishopric and a Verse of Scripture so improved by good Management. Thus,
by exercising in the Quality of Christ's Vicar, the public Function, under an
invisible Prince, the Pope, like the Mayors of the Palace, has set his Master
aside, and delivered the Government over to a new Line of Papal Succession. But
who can, unless wilfully, be ignorant what wretched Doings, what Bribery, what
Ambition there are, how long the Church is without an Head, upon every Vacancy,
till among the Crew of bandying Cardinals, the Holy Ghost has declared for a
Pope of the French or Spanish Faction. It is a Succession like that of the
Egyptian Ox (the living Idol of that Country) who dying, or being made away by
the Priests, there was a solemn and general Mourning, for want of a Deity;
until in their Conclave they had found out another Beast with the very same
Marks as the former. whom they themselves adored, and with great Jubilee
brought forth to the People to Worship. Nor was that Election a grosser
Reproach to Human Reason than this is also to Christianity. Surely it is the
greatest Miracle of the Romish Church, that it should still continue, and that
in all the Time the Gates of Heaven should not prevail against it.

It is almost unconceivable, how Princes can yet suffer a Power so Pernic ous,
and Doctrine so destructive to all Government. That so great a part of the Land
should be alienated aad condemned to, as they call it, Pious Uses. That such
millions of their People, as the Clergy, should, by remaining unmarried, either
frustrate Human Naiure, if they live chastely, or, if otherwise, adulterate it.
That they should be privileged from all Labor, all public Service, and
exempt from the Power of all Secular Jurisdiction. That they, being all bound
by strict Oaths and Vows of Obedience to the Pope, should evacuate the Fealty
due to the Sovereign. Nay, that not only the Clergy but their whole People, if
of the Romish Persuasion, should be obliged to rebel at any time upon the Popes
Pleasure. And yet how many of the neighboring Princes are content, or do choose
to reign upon those Conditions; which being so dishonorable and dangerous,
surely some great and more weighty Reason does cause them submit. Whether it be
out of personal Fear, having heard perhaps of several Attempts which the blind
Obedience of Popish Zelotes has executed against their Princes. Or, whether
aiming at a more absolute and tyrannical Government, they think it still to be
the Case of Boniface and Phocas (an usurping Emperor, and an usurping Bishop)
and that, as other Cheats, this also is best to be managed by Confederacy.

But, as far as I can apprehend, there is more of Sloth than Policy on the
Princes side in this whole matter: And all that Pretense of inslaving Men, by
the assistance of Religion more easily, is neither more nor less, than when the
Bramine, by having the first night of the Bride, assures himself of her
Devotion for the future, and makes her more fit for the Husband.

FINIS.

